AN EXPL
SHAYKH AL-ISLAM IBN TAYMIYYAH'S

INTRODUCTION
TO THE PRINCIPLES OF

Jersir

BAM) EXILANATION By
Sosy SHAYKH MUHAMMAD IBN SALIH AL-UTHAYMIN

Table of Contents

THEO ‏ا‎ [1 12 1212121 1 7

The Prophet (3) Explained the Meanings of the Qur’an
to his Companions ......scseseeseseseseeeesereeseeseeeneeenenenes 25

Differences of Opinion amongst the Predecessors in
the Exegesis of the ‏عملم ممم مولومل 8106.060 تا‎ 35

The Two Categories of Differences in the Exegesis of
the Qur’dn Relating to the SOULCE ‏ململ‎ 81

The Second Category: Differences in Tafsir Relating
to Reasoning and Deductions.....scssserereeeerenees 111

Exegesis of the Qur’an with the Qur’an, and Exegesis

with the Sunrah ‏ممم لومعم ممعم عمل ملم‎ 155
Exegesis of the Qur’dn with the Statements of the
121212001010000 169
Exegesis of the Qur’an Based on Intellect............ 173

A Summary of ‘An Introduction to the Principles of
Tafsir’ ‏65ب-ب ج 7 7 ج0077 + + < 2< 2 2< ااا‎ 189

199 ا
PUBLISHER’S NOTE

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

Alhamdulillah, it gives us great pleasure to present the new edition
of An Introduction to the Principles of Tafsir by the illustrious
scholar, Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah. This new edition is
now also accompanied by an explanation of the original work
by the great scholar, Shaykh Muhammad ibn Salih al-Uthaymin.
It is hoped that this explanation will better allow the reader to
understand and comprehend this important work.

In order to distinguish the original text from the explanation,
a two colour system has been employed throughout the book;
the original text is in burgundy with the explanation in black.
Whenever the original text is quoted within the explanation, this
is also coloured in burgundy for ease of reading.

We ask Allah, the Most High, to make this work beneficial and
to shower His mercy upon the two authors.

Al-Hidaayah Publishing & Distribution Ltd
CHAPTER 1
‏لهي‎

Introduction

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

All praise is due to Allah. We seck His assistance and His
forgiveness. We seek refuge in Allah from the evil of ourselves
and the evil of our actions. Whomsoever Allah guides none can
misguide him, and whomsoever Allah misguides none can guide
him.

I bear witness that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah
alone, without partner. 1 bear witness that Muhammad is His
slave and Messenger. May the peace and blessings of Allah be

upon him,

This sermon is known as the khutbah al-hajjah. It is delivered
before a person wishes to discuss a need of his, whether that
need is marriage, a worldly need or a religious need. This is why
it is called khutbah al-hajjah (the sermon of need). We shall now
explain some parts of this sermon.

Whomsoever Allah guides none can misguide him. This statement
clearly shows that whomsoever Allah has decreed guidance for
none has the ability to misguide him or remove him from the
guidance which he has been blessed with.

...and whomsoever He misguides none can guide him. Similarly,
whomsoever Allah has decreed misguidance for none has the
ability to guide him.

I bear witness. The reason this testification is in the singular
tense as opposed to the plural ‘we’ found at the beginning of the
sermon, is due to the singular tense being more appropriate when
discussing the unity and oneness of Allah, the Most High.
I have been asked by a number of brothers to author an
introduction to the exegesis of the Qur’an, comprising of
comprehensive principles which will assist one in understanding
its meanings as well as differentiating between the wrath and all
kinds of falsehood indicating in all of the above the criterion to
be used in this.

Here, the author! mentions the reason which led him to author
this book; that reason being he was requested to do so. An author
either pens a book due to him realising that there is a need for
such a topic to be discussed, or there may be another reason,
such as him being asked to do so. Therefore, in the first instance,
he is addressing a need, and in the second he is responding to a
request. Indeed, if a scholar realises that people are in need of
knowledge in a particular field, then he must address this need
and author works in this field. This is so that people are fully
aware of the rulings and are able to worship Allah upon clear
guidance and understanding.

‘The author says ‘comprehensive principles’. Qawa’id is the plural
of q@idab [principle] and it means the foundation of something.
This is where the saying ‘qawa’id al-bayt’ (‘the foundations of
a house’| is derived from. Therefore, these are the principles
and foundations which assist one in understanding the Qur’an
and the principles of the exegesis of the Qur’an. This is because
understanding the Qur’an is one of the three reasons for which
it was revealed.

The Qur'an was revealed for three reasons: to worship Allah by
reciting it, to understand its meanings and to act according to
it. This is why the companions ‏(ك)‎ would not pass ten verses
until they had completely understood and acted upon them. They
would say: ‘So we learnt the Qur’an, knowledge and action all
together.’

"i.e, Shaykh ul-Islim Ibn Taymiyyah.

The recitation of the Qur’an in and of itself is not too difficult;
this is why it is recited by the scholar, the student and the general
folk. As for understanding the Qur’an, this requires knowledge
and contemplation. The third level of acting according to its
teachings is the most difficult upon a person, for one is required
to strive in order to do what is necessary from believing in its
teachings, then obeying its commandments and refraining from
its prohibitions. Contemplate over this verse:

acon

+ 3 :

OM

(This is) a blessed Book which We have revealed to you,
that they might reflect over its verses and that those of
understanding would be reminded.

Strah Sad, 38:29

ie. so that we may clarify to you the necessity of understanding
the Qur’an and acting according to it.

His statement ‘which will assist one in understanding its meanings’
emphasises that which has preceded, for the exegesis of the Qur’an
and understanding its meanings are similar to one another. It can
be said that the exegesis of the Qur’an includes its meanings, its
wisdoms and mysteries, for the Qur’dn has meanings, and these
meanings and rulings contain in them wisdom and mysteries. On
the opposite hand, it can also be claimed that the exegesis refers
to other than the meanings. The exegesis is what is apparent from
the words, and the meanings refer to what is being intended. We
will give some examples of this Insha Allah.

The exegesis refers to the explanation of the words, such as
explaining one word by using another as is done in a dictionary.
For example, in the verse:

201

Gis

TOCAG Gor eye Boe

ean ae

10
...or your Lord should come or that there come some of the
signs of your Lord? The Day that some of the signs of your
Lord will come no soul will benefit from its faith ...
Surah al-An‘am, 6:158

Its literal explanation would be for example: the day on which
some of the signs showing the power of Allah come..., whereas the
actual intended meaning refers to the sun rising from the west. As
such, here there is a difference between the literal explanation and
the intended explanation. This is why the Qur'an is explained on
both fronts: a literal explanation and an explanation referring to
the intended meaning, and these two explanations are sometimes
synonymous and at other times they differ.

...as well as differentiating between the truth and all kinds of
falsehood. The author mentions here that the exegesis of the
Qur'an is of two types: that which is taken from religious sources
and that which is taken from the intellect. However, it is important
that the second type (intellectual) does not contradict the first
type, due to textual exegesis having precedence over intellectual
exegesis. The reason for this precedence is that the intellect can
sometimes be overcome with doubts and desires which prevent it
from reaching the truth, whereas this is not the case with religious
sources. It should also be noted that religious texts can at times
also possess weak narrations, such as Israelite traditions, or weak
and fabricated hadiths, all of which are present in some works
of tafsir. Therefore, it is important to know how to differentiate
between the truth and all kinds of falsehood.

Indicating in all of the above the criterion to be used in this.
This criterion can either be taken from religious texts or from
the intellect, for intellectual proof can be used when explaining
the Quran so long as it does not oppose religious texts. If this
is borne in mind, there is no doubt that the intellect has a great
bearing in understanding the Qur'an. It is for this reason that
Allah orders us in many verses of the Qur’an to contemplate
and to think. Rather in the statement of Allah “that they may
reflect over its verses,” there is a clear indication showing that
this reflection is achieved by the human intellect.

11
The books of Qur’anic exegesis contain both good and bad,
apparent falsehood and clear truth. Knowledge is either a text
which is received from an infallible source, or a saying backed by
a clear proof. As for all else, then it is either false and rejected, or
doubtful so its truthfulness or falsehood cannot be ascertained.

Knowledge is either a text which is received from an infallible
source, meaning the Prophet (3). Or a saying backed by a clear
proof, referring to the sayings of the companions, their students
(tabi‘in) and subsequent scholars. However, these sayings must
be supported by evidences from religious texts or intellectual
proofs; for this reason we accept analogy (qiyds) as evidence.

The above should also be taken as a general principle for real
knowledge. Knowledge is based upon texts received from an
infallible source, or a saying supported by evidence. All else
is either false and thereby rejected or doubtful and as such we
remain silent regarding its authenticity or lack thereof. This
paragraph [of the author’s] also has a certain rhythmical tone to
it, and so long as this is not overdone then without a doubt this
tone beautifies the speech. This is why it can also be found at
times in the speech of the Prophet (3).

As for all else - This refers to everything else apart from a text
received from an infallible source or a saying supported by
evidence. Then it is either false and rejected - This is mentioned
here as being the opposite to a text received from an infallible
source. Or doubtful so its truthfulness or falsehood cannot be
ascertained. This means we remain silent concerning it.

In conclusion, there are three categories: the first is that which
you know to be authentic. The second is that which you know
to be false. The third is that which one remains silent on, due to
there being no clear indication showing whether it is from the
first or second category. Therefore, the first category is accepted.
The second is rejected and the third is not judged.

12

The Muslim Nation (Ummah) greatly needs to understand the
Qur’an which is the firm rope of Allah, the wise reminder and the
straight path. Evil desires will never corrupt it. Wicked tongues
will never distort it. Continuously studying it will never cause it
to fade and its miracles will never cease.

Here the author (may Allah have mercy upon him) comments
that people are in need of understanding the Book of Allah. This
is something clear and apparent for they have been ordered to
follow this Book. Were a person ordered to follow a book written
by a man he would need to study and familiarise himself with it.
What then, if this is the Book of Allah, the Most High?

The author then uses a number of attributes with which he
describes the Qur’an. He says: Which is the firm rope of Allah.
It is the firm rope of Allah, as He is the one who revealed it.
The word rope (habl) linguistically refers to that which is used in
order to reach something or somewhere else. Furthermore, it is
mentioned as being the rope of Allah as it leads to Him.

The second description is ‘the wise reminder’, This description is
taken from the verse:

5 ‏لز المكر‎ Me Been’
This is what We recite to you, [O Muhammad], of [Our] verses

and the precise [and wise] message [i.e. the Qur’an].
Sirah Al-‘Imran, 3:58

So the Qur’an is a reminder and an honour for those who hold
onto it and recite it.

And indeed, it is a remembrance for you and your people.
Stirah al-Zukhruf, 43:44

13

This refers to it being an honour. It is also wise as it contains in
its rulings and teachings ultimate wisdom. And the straight path,
i.e. a path which is not crooked.

Evil desires will never corrupt it. No matter how great the evil
desires of mankind are they will never corrupt it. Rather, it is
complete and everlasting despite all efforts to corrupt it. It is
guidance.

Wicked tongues will never distort it. The Qur’dn was revealed
in the pure Arabic language and so can never be distorted. Even
non-Arabs recite it in Arabic which is why the words of the
Qur’an can never be translated.”

Continuously studying it will never cause it to fade. Irrespective
of how many times it is repeated, it is as if one has never read
it. On the other hand, if one was to repeatedly read a poem or
sermon written by the most eloquent person it would eventually
become boring. Even though certain chapters of the Qur’an are
often repeated in a single prayer one does not become fed up
with them. This is from the great signs of Allah present in the

Qur'an.

And its miracles will never cease. This is for the one who has been
granted understanding of the Qur’an; he is able to appreciate
its great and hidden meanings. As for the one who turns away
from it, he may never witness a single miracle in it. So here the
description is of the Qur’an and not the reciter.

2 Translator’s note: The available translations of the Qur'an are translations of the meanings.
‘The miracle of the Que’an is such that it is unique in its language and eloquence and so
cannot be directly translated.

14
The scholars will never be able to reach its depths. Whoever
utters it has spoken the truth. Whoever acts according to it
will be rewarded. Whoever rules by it has been just. Whoever
calls to it has been guided to the straight path. And whosoever
arrogantly leaves it will be destroyed. And whosoever seeks
guidance elsewhere will be misguided.

All of the above descriptions hold true; the one who ponders will
realise this. The scholars will never be satisfied that they have
studied it sufficiently. The more a person learns about Allah and
His religion the more he loves the Qur’an. You find such a person
constantly pondering and contemplating over the Quran, whilst
studying or walking, at any time or place.

Also, whoever utters it has spoken the truth. This is because it is
the most truthful and honest of speech. If for example, a person
says that the disbelievers in the Hereafter will be in the Hellfire, he
has spoken the truth, as this is what is mentioned in the Qur’an.

Whoever acts according to it will be rewarded, i.e. he will be
rewarded for his actions.

Whoever rules by it has been just. This applies to general rulings
or rulings between people. So, if one were to say: ‘dead animals
are unlawful to eat’ then he is just, as this and other rulings are
to be found in the Qur’an. Whoever says:

So whoever has assaulted you, then assault him in the same way
that he has assaulted you.
Stirah al-Bagarah, 2:194

Such a person has also spoken the truth.

‎‘Translator’s note: This is referring to those animals that have died without being‏ د
‎sacrificed.‏

‎15

Whoever calls to it has been guided to the straight path. This
means that Allah has guided such an individual, for one who
calls to the Qur’an has been guided to the straight path. As for
one who calls to his own desires then he will be misguided. This
is why the author also states: And whosoever seeks guidance
elsewhere will be misguided.

And whosoever arrogantly leaves it will be destroyed. This peril

and destruction does not necessarily have to take place in this
world, but it can also be in the Hereafter.

16
Allah says:
baw be tebe
‏كدر‎ eee fy 2 ‏4د‎ cag ‏ويس عدم‎ oe
FEA ORM SABE eS
Cate wee eke ME
aise Kotha diic Hos

١

أقَى © ةَلرَبَ ترق عوَوَقَدَفْثْسرا 4

And if there should come to you guidance from Me - then
whoever follows My guidance will neither go astray [in the
world] nor suffer [in the Hereafter]. And whoever turns away
from My remembrance - indeed, he will have a depressed [i.e.
difficult] life, and We will gather [i.e. raise] him on the Day of
Resurrection blind. He will say, “My Lord, why bave you raised
me blind while I was [once] seeing?” [Allah] will say, “Thus did
Our signs come to you, and you forgot [i.e. disregarded] them;
and thus will you this Day be forgotten.”

Strah Ta-Ha, 20:123-126

...will neither go astray [in the world] nor suffer [in the Hereafter].
This verse means that he will not go astray regarding his knowledge,
nor will he suffer in his actions. Another explanation is he will
not go astray in this world, nor will he suffer in the Hereafter, and
each interpretation alludes to the other. However, misguidance
is normally referred to as being the opposite of knowledge and
guidance, and suffering is the opposite of happiness.

And whoever turns away from My remembrance - indeed, he
will have a depressed ‏.عن‎ difficult] life, and We will gather fi.e.
raise] him on the Day of Resurrection blind. It is said that a
‘depressed life’ refers to the punishment of the grave; the grave
will continue to constrict until one’s body is twisted. Others state
that this ‘depressed life’ will be in this world, and even though
he may apparently show signs of happiness, his heart will be ina
state of depression and constriction. Allah says:

17

0000

و ‎oe‏ لع ‎oe‏ سر دقر ل رع لم عع

So whoever Allah wants to guide - He expands his breast to
[contain] Islam; and whoever He wants to misguide - He makes
his breast tight and constricted as though he were climbing into

the sky.
Stirah al-An‘am, 6:125

He, the Most High, also states:

ee eam pase che ot ‏مر‎ ee eee
as BI Sot be Le
ME, ‏لل ع ع‎

Whoever does righteousness, whether male or female, while he
is a believer - We will surely cause him to live a good life.
Surah al-Nahl, 16:97

This last verse shows that whoever’s condition is not as mentioned
then their life will not be good and pleasant.

..and We will gather [i.e. raise] him on the Day of Resurrection
blind. This blindness is both literal and metaphorical. This is why
such a person will question:

“My Lord, why have you raised me blind while I was [once]
seeing?” [Allah] will say, “Thus did Our signs come to you and
you forgot [i.e. disregarded] them”, meaning you ignored them
and chose not to act according to them. As a result of that: and
thus will you this Day be forgotten.

The point being made here is that in holding fast to the Qur’an
one achieves happiness in this life and the next, and the one
holding onto it will neither go astray nor will he suffer. On the
other hand, turning away from it is a cause of depression and
sorrow in this world and in the Hereafter.

18
And He says:

2865555 i ETE S
AGB ieee sre ‏ميك‎
‎Siecle ABs ‏وخر هم‎ A

2
...there has come to you Our Messenger making clear to you
much of what you used to conceal of the Scripture and over-

looking much.* There has come to you from Allah a light and
a clear Book [i.e. the Qur'an]. By which Allah guides those
who pursue His pleasure to the ways of peace and brings them

out from darkness into the light, by His permission, and guides
them to a straight path.
Sirah al-Ma’idah, 5:15-16

This Qur’an is divine revelation and it is the cause for guidance
by the permission of Allah. The one who is guided by it is he who
pursues that which pleases Allah, as Allah says:

A guidance for those who are conscious of Allah [i.e. have
piety]
Sirah al-Baqarah, 2:2

And Allah says:

iss

j res are

O mankind, there has come to you instruction from your Lord
and healing for what is in the breasts and guidance and mercy

+ ie. of your sin in that regard.

19

for the believers.
Stirah Yiinus, 10:57

In the second of the two verses mentioned by the author, Allah
says: By which Allah guides those who pursue His pleasure to
the ways of peace. He mentions ways or paths (sibul) as a plural
even though there is only one path which leads to Him, as is
mentioned in the verse:

ANAS 27 pba biel ‏وَأَنَ‎

Ate GS

And, [moreover], this is My path, which is straight, so follow it;
and do not follow [other] ways; for you will be separated from
His way.

Sirah al-An‘Gm, 6:153

Therefore the correct way to combine the two verses is to say:
The true path is only one. However it is divided into branches
and divisions, such as the prayer, charity, fasting, pilgrimage,
1024, being good to others, joining the ties of kinship and so
on. These are many smaller paths which all merge into one main
path. We also don’t say ‘paths’ [in the plural] when referring
to Islam. Rather an adjective is attached showing the intended
meaning, as is done in the verse: ‘the ways of peace.’ The ways of
peace refer to Islam.

..and brings them out from darkness into the light. This is
metaphorical. The darkness referred to here is a darkness of
ignorance and intent. The darkness of ignorance points to
that person who has no knowledge, and the darkness of intent
refers to the one who possesses knowledge but does not wish to
believe in it and act according to it. Opposing that is the light of
knowledge and action.

20
ate thy ‏يه‎ tees cn

Ord yard ior re

Alif Lam Ra. [This is] a Book which We have revealed to you,
[O Muhammad], that you might bring mankind out of darkness
into the light by permission of their Lord - to the path of the
Exalted in Might, the Praiseworthy. Allah, to whom belongs
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth.
Stirah Ibrahim, 14:1-2

These verses are similar to the previous in their meaning, but
there is an added benefit to be derived here. That benefit is the
validity of ascribing something to its known cause, as is in the
verse: that you might bring mankind out, referring to the Prophet
(3%). This is stated even though the One who truly brings them out
of this darkness is Allah, which is why He adds: by permission
of their Lord, in order to ensure that everyone knows that the
cause (i.e. the Prophet (38)) does not achieve the desired result of
his own accord.

Therefore, to ascribe something to its known cause is permissible.
This is mentioned in both the Qur’an and the Sunnah. This is
allowed so long as that cause is known through the shari‘ah or
can be witnesses or sensed. However, it is important to note that
when one believes in these causes he must also believe that these
causes have no power in and of themselves, but rather they exist
with the permission of Allah.

..the Praiseworthy, i.e. that Allah is deserving of all praise for

His attributes and actions, and He praises His servants who are
worthy of such praise.

21

Allah says:
‏وَكَدَِكَ و‎

Ae
re
2
ae
&
.
Ra

: ‏ا‎
‎Bolin ‏تدك رط‎
CAD SAIN “Slatasgcatae

And thus We have revealed to you an inspiration of Our com-
mand [i.e. the Qur'an]. You did not know what is the Book
or [what is} faith, but We made it a light by which We guide

whom We will of Our servants. And indeed, [O Muhammad],
you guide to a straight path. The path of Allah, to whom be-

longs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth.
Unquestionably, to Allah do [all] matters evolve [i.e. return].
Sarah al-Shiira, 42:52-53

Thave written this introduction and made it brief, full of beneficial
points by the blessing of Allah. Allah alone guides to the path of
righteousness.

And thus We have revealed to you an inspiration of Our
command. The inspiration here refers to the Qur’an. It is called
an inspiration because it is the source of life for the heart and
soul, and for the body too. The one who is guided by it will enjoy
a complete life in this world and the Hereafter.

..an inspiration of Our command, i.e. that which We command
and reveal. This is also a proof that the Qur’an is not created, as
Allah mentions in another verse:

Yt, srt

ZA SINT

Unquestionably, His is the creation and the command
Surah al-A‘raf, 7:54

22

In this verse Allah separates the creation from His command,
and as mentioned in the previous verse the Qur’an is from
the command and not the creation. As such the Qur’an is not
created.

You did not know what is the Book or {what is] faith. This means
the Prophet (3) was not aware of what the Book or faith was
before he received divine revelation.

.-but We made it a light by which We guide whom We will of
Our servants. This inspiration we cause to inspire and become a
guiding light for those who We wish to guide from Our servants.
‘Servants’ is a general term signifying that it is not known whom
Allah wishes to guide by this Qur’an. However, one of the
previous verses mentioned by the author indicates that they are
those who seek Allah’s pleasure.

And indeed, [O Muhammad], you guide to a straight path. Notice
how in the first part of this verse Allah says ‘We guide’ and at
the end of this verse how He states ‘you guide’. The difference
between the two forms of guidance is that the Prophet (38) shows
the way, like a guide upon a path, but it is Allah who gives
that person the ability to seek guidance in the first place. So the
Prophet (#) guides to Allah, but he does not choose whom he
guides, as Allah says:

woh oes

Sa NG sae Vali}
Indeed, [O Mubammad], you do not guide whom you like
Sirah al-Qasag, 28:56

Rather, the Prophet (+) guides to the straight path.

The path of Allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens
and whatever is on the earth. In this verse the path is described
as belonging to Allah, whereas in Surah al-Fatibah the path is
described as being ‘The path of those upon whom You have
bestowed favour’. There is no contradiction between the two.

23
It is the path of Allah as He is the One who placed it and it
ultimately leads to Him. It is also referred to as being the path of
the people as they are the ones who tread upon it. Hence, both
descriptions are correct each in their own context.

Unquestionably, to Allah do [all] matters evolve [i.e. return]. In
this verse ‘matters’ means all the affairs of this life and the next;
religious and worldly. All of these affairs will return to Allah. For
this reason, there is no respite for the creation except in turning
to their Lord in all of their affairs. Allah says:

And in anything over which you disagree - its ruling is [to be
referred] to Allah
Stirah al-Shiira, 42:10

Regarding the worldly affairs, Allah says:
AG ds Behe ce Bde ceed
SAG AAT FIRE SL
5 ‏و‎ ‘peed A 504
Say, “In whose hand is the realm of all things - and He protects
while none can protect against Him - if you should know?”

They will say, “[All belongs] to Allah.”
Sirah al-Mu’mintin, 23:88-89

The word ala [unquestionably] in Arabic emphasises that these
affairs return to Allah alone and to none else.

Ihave written this introduction and made it brief, full of beneficial

points by the blessing of Allah. Allah alone guides to the path of
righteousness.

24
CHAPTER 2
The Prophet (38) Explained the
Meanings of the Qur’an to his
Companions

It is obligatory to know that the Prophet (38) explained to his
companions the meanings of the Qur’an just as he taught its
words. The following statement of Allah includes both:

...that you may make clear to the people what was sent down
to them
Sirah al-Nahl, 16:44

Similar to this verse is another:

ميته

Then upon Us is its clarification [to you].
Sirah al-Qiyamah, 75:19

This verse also includes both aspects: teaching its meanings as
well as its words. In this there is a clear refutation against those
who claim that the Prophet (4%) did not explain the Names and
Attributes of Allah. This claim implies that the Prophet (3) is
either ignorant and did not know the meanings, or he knew the
meanings but did not reveal them thus deceiving the people.

25

Abii ‘Abdul-Rahman ‏“تتسهات5-لد‎ said: “It has been related to us
by those who used to teach us to read the Qur’an, the likes of
‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’iid’ and other than them,
that when learning from the Prophet (38) they would not proceed
past ten verses until they had learnt what was contained in them
of knowledge and action. They said: ‘So we learnt the Qur’an,
knowledge and action all at once.’ This is why it would take
them some time to memorise a single si#rah.”

Anas* said: “If a man from amongst us was able to memorise
Bagarah and Al-‘Imran he would gain respect in our eyes.”?

Such a person would be greatly respected among them, for they
would not memorise anything they had not understood. If such a
person had memorised both the words and meanings of Bagarah
and Al-Imran, he would have truly amassed a great amount of
knowledge.

* Abii ‘Abdul-Rahmin ‘Abdullah ibn Habib al-Sulami, an eminent successor (t@i7) of Kiifah
and a reliable transmitter of hadith.

© Abii ‘Abdul-Rabman ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud, died 32 AH. He was one of the earliest six
to embrace Isiim and was in the service of the Prophet for many years. He was the most
knowledgeable companion on the Qur'an. ‘Umar, the second Caliph, sent him to Kifah to
teach Qur’an, where he also served as a judge.

7 Collected by Ibn Abii Shaybah, vol. 6, p. 117.

* Anas ibn Malik, died 93 AH. One of the ten most prolific transmitters of hadith, he entered
the service of the Prophet as a young boy and was with him for ten years.

* Musnad Abmad.

26

Ibn ‘Umar? spent a number of years - it is said eight years -

in the memorisation of Sirah al-Baqarah. This is reported by

Malik.!" All of this is as a result of the saying of Allah:
Ahrens tat M aed Ager $8

OM
(This is) a blessed Book which We have revealed to you,
that they might reflect over its verses and that those of

understanding would be reminded.
Sirah $ad, 38:29

And His statements:

Then do they not reflect upon the Qur’an
Sirah Muhammad, 47:24

sage
Then have they not reflected over the word
Sirah Mu’miniin, 23:68

Therefore it is not possible to contemplate over the Qur’an
without first understanding its meanings. Allah, the Most High,
also says:

© ‏تارتف علخ تق‎
Indeed, We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur’an that you

might understand
Sirah Yiisuf, 12:2

"© ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, died 74 AH. He was one of the most outstanding,
young companions, and a learned scholar known for his piety and strict imitation of
Prophetic practices. He distinguished himself as a narcator of hadith, next only to the most
prolific narrator, Abi Hurayrah.

د١‎ Muwatta Malik, ‏.م‎ 205. Malik ibn Anas, died 179 AH. He was the founder of the Maliki
school of figh and was the leading scholar of hadith of Madinah in his time.

27
(This is) a blessed Book which We have revealed to you, that they
might reflect over its verses. The blessing of the Qur’an is in its
recitation, its comprehension and acting according to it. Likewise,
its blessings extend to the effect it has upon the heart in increasing
faith (iman), learning about Allah, His names, attributes and
rulings. Likewise, it includes the effects it has upon nations, as
it has opened the east and the west. Those who hold onto it gain
honour and power over all others, as well as possessing pure
intentions, a correct methodology and happiness in this world
and the Hereafter. Thus, the Qur’an has many blessings which
cannot be enumerated.

..that they might reflect over its verses and that those of
understanding would be reminded. In the conclusion of this verse
there is praise for the one whom the Qur’an is a reminder; such a
person is praised as having intelligence.

Then do they not reflect upon the Qur’an. This verse encourages
reflecting over the Qur’an, for Allah has censured those who do
not ponder over it. Then have they not reflected over the Word.
‘The Word’ here is also referring to the Qur’an. The remainder
of this verse continues: “Then have they not reflected over the
Word [i.e. the Quran], or has there come to them that which
had not come to their forefathers? Or did they not know their
Messenger, so they are towards him disacknowledging?”

Indeed, We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur’an that you might
understand. The Qur’an was revealed in the Arabic language so
that the Arabs could understand and comprehend it. Were it to
have been revealed in a foreign language it would not have been
understood.

28
Itis well known that the purpose of speech is not just to understand
the words being spoken, but the intended meanings behind those
words too. If this is the case with normal speech, then the Qur’an
is more befitting of this. Likewise, it is also the custom of people
when they are studying in a certain field such as medicine or
mathematics that they seek to understand it. This is more so with
the speech of Allah which is their source of protection, success
and happiness, as well as the backbone of their worldly and
religious affairs.

This is true. If for example, we were to take the book 224 al-
Mustaqni‘? and just read it without seeking to understand it we
would not benefit much. Similarly, if we were to just simply read
books on medicine or chemistry without understanding them,
again the benefit would be minimal. For this reason, whenever
people read such books they seek to understand them and have
them explained.

The Qur’an does not differ in this respect just because one is
rewarded for its recitation, Rather, the Qur’an has two sides
to it, the first being an act of worship and the second being to
implement its teachings. The first can be achieved by reciting
the Qur’an. The second includes the reason for which it was
revealed:

OS Sey alte)

...that they might reflect over its verses and that those of under-
standing would be reminded

This aspect is lost if a person does not understand the meanings
of the Qur’an.

2 Translator’s note: A figh text based upon the Hanbali school of law.

29

For this reason, the companions rarely differed regarding
the exegesis of the Qur’an. This difference occurred more in
the time of their students (tabi‘in) but was still considerably
less when compared to later generations. In short, the more
noble a generation was, the more profound their knowledge,
understanding and unity.

The companions rarely differed over the exegesis of the Qur’an
due to two reasons:

The First: The Qur’an was revealed in their pure language during
their time, so they best understood its meanings. Then, over time
people’s understanding of the language changed.

The Second: Their intentions were sincere and pure. None of
them were trying to gain support for their own causes or ideas.
Rather, each one of them would support the truth no matter
where he found it, to the extent, that the leader (khalifah) would
change his ruling based upon the truth a woman would remind
him of. He would not unjustly claim that because he was the ruler
he may do as he pleases. For these two reasons the companions
differed little in their understanding of the speech of Allah.

During the time of their students, the tabi’iin, the two above
reasons were still present. What changed was that during this
time many lands were conquered, and as a result Arabic and
foreign languages mixed. This is why it has been mentioned that
the first authorial work in Arabic grammar (nabw) took place
during the time of ‘Ali (4).

At the same time, people’s desires increased and trials became
rife. People began to call to their own ideas and theories, to the
extent that fighting and killing occurred between the Muslims.
For this reason, they differed more than the companions did. The
further the generations became from the time of prophethood,
the greater the trials which struck them and the more visible the

30

confusion between truth and falsehood. As we witness in our
time, every mosque has a scholar who considers himself to be
Ibn Taymiyyah, and every camp in Mina possesses someone who
believes he is Ahmad ibn Hanbal or al-Shafi‘T!

Due to this, you will find that a religious matter which previously
had one or two opinions now has many. This is because knowledge
is rare and desires are rampant. The result of this is that there is
much division and confusion and very little unity.

31
From among the tabi‘in are those who studied the whole of the
Qur’an from the companions. Mujahid’ said: “I read the whole
Qur’an to Ibn ‘Abbas'* stopping him at the end of every verse,
asking him concerning it.” This is why al-Thawri'’ would say:
“If you read the exegesis of Mujahid then that is sufficient for
you.” For this reason, scholars such as al-Shafi‘t,'® Bukhari'” and
Imam Ahmad" would heavily rely upon his narrations.

The point here is that the tabi‘in studied the exegesis of the
Qur’an from the companions just as they took from them the
Prophetic Sunnah. They would also comment on the Qur'an
using their deductions basing them on other evidences just as
they did with the badiths of the Prophet (%).

The students of the companions would increase in their
commentary and deductions, more so than the companions. The
reason for this being the occurrence of new matters which were
not present during the time of the Prophet (38).

‎Mujahid ibn Jabr al-Makki, died 104 AH. He was the most eminent student of the great‏ فد
‎commentator of the Que'an, Ibn ‘Abbas.‏

‎“Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas, died 68 AH. He was one of the most eminent scholars of the Que'ain
amongst the companions, known as the commentator of the Que’Rn, He is also the fourth
most prolific narrator of hadith.

‎' Abu ‘Abdullah Sufyan ibn Masriiq al-Thawri, died 161 AH, He was known as amir al-
mu’minin fil-hadith (leader of the faithful in hadith]. He was born and brought up in Kiifah
and refused the post of judge offered to him by Mansiir and thereafter lived in Makkah and
Madinah.

‎6 Muhammad ibn Idris al-Sha6'T, one of the four founders of the schools of figh, died
204 AH. He was born in Syria, raised in Makkah and went to study under Imam Malik in
Madinah, He later settled in Egypt.

‎Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Ibrahim al-Bukhart, died 256 AH, is the most outstanding
compiler of hadith, His famous work known as Si ‘al-Bukbavi is the most authentic
collection of hadit

‎1" Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal, died 241 AH. He was born in Marwa and raised in
Baghdad. He is famously known for his legal school, his collection of hadith and his defense
of the views of the salaf on issues of faith.

‎32

Therefore, whenever something new arose and there was no clear
text regarding it, the scholars of that time would have to deduce
its ruling based upon the Qur’an and Sunnah, for neither of these
sources discusses every particular event which will take place
until the Day of Judgement. Discussing every such event would
have caused the Qur’an to be a hundred times its current size.
Furthermore, it would have discussed affairs which were yet to
take place, such as cheques, banks, insurance policies etc. which
would have caused confusion for earlier generations. Rather,
whenever a new matter arises the scholars are able to deduce
its rulings based upon the general principles of the Qur’dan and
Sunnah.

33
34
CHAPTER 3

لعشم

Differences of Opinion amongst the
Predecessors in the Exegesis of the Qur’an:
A Difference of Variation

The predecessors differed little in the exegesis of the Qur’an,
however they differed considerably more in issues related to
rulings (abkam). Whenever they do differ in the exegesis of the
Qur’an it is more a difference of variation than contradiction.
This is of two categories:

Here the author asserts that differences amongst the predecessors
in the exegesis of the Qur’an may occur, but it is significantly
less than their differences in rulings. The reason for this is that
exegesis revolves around explaining words, their meanings and
what is intended by them, and this is something in which there is
not much difference. In contrast to this, rulings are based upon
deduction and analogy, so differences are considerably more so
than in tafsir, due to a contrast in the levels of knowledge and
understanding.

We have previously mentioned the difference between the
explanation of the words of the Qur’an and their meanings,
and the fact that they are not necessarily one and the same.
Explanation of the words is done by using other words to clarify
the meaning of that particular word, whereas explanation of

35

the meanings refers to the intended purpose behind those words
depending upon the context and other such things.

The distinction between a difference of variation and a difference
of contradiction is that in the latter one is unable to reconcile
between the two sayings, for two contradictory saying cannot be
reconciled. On the other hand, in a difference of variation one
is able to reconcile the two sayings, for each saying mentions a
different type, but both types belong to the same category, and as
such, they are not contradictory. The author will now give some
examples highlighting this.

36
The first: The expression of one and the same idea by using
different words, such as them referring to the same concept by
one mentioning a particular aspect concerning it and the other
mentioning another aspect. These explanations are like using
equivalent names which lie between synonyms and antonyms.

The author categorises a difference in variation into two:

The First Category: This is when the predecessors discuss the
same concept but use alternative wordings. So each one alludes
to a particular aspect of that word and expounds upon it, whilst
still speaking about one and the same concept. An example of this
is that one refers to a sword as being made of fine steel (hind);
another describes it as sharp (sarim), and a third as something
which cuts and maims. In reality, this is not a difference as all are
referring to the sword.

Another example is if one says a ghadanfar is a lion; a second
says it is a large cat and a third describes it as a predatory animal.
This is what the author means by his statement: The expression
of one and the same idea by using different words, such as them
referring to the same concept by one mentioning a particular
aspect concerning it and the other mentioning another aspect.

These explanations are like using equivalent names which lie
between synonyms and antonyms. This is a slightly ambiguous
statement but I think he is referring to something else. Synonyms
have a similar meaning, whereas antonyms have separate
meanings. So these alternative words are similar as they refer to
the same concept and idea, but separate in that they each use a
different method in explaining that concept or word.

37

For example, it is said whilst mentioning alternative names for
‘sword’: ‘sarim’ and ‘muhind’, Similar to this are the names of
Allah, the names of the Prophet (3) and the names of the Qur’an.
The names of Allah all refer to Him, the Most High.

The names of Allah, the Most High, are many in number but
they all refer to the same being. They are synonymous as they all
refer to Allah, and are different in that they refer to Him by using
a particular attribute which also possesses a certain meaning.
Similar to this are the names of the Messenger (3). Likewise,
the Qur’an is also referred to as the ‘Criterion’ and the ‘Divine
Revelation’, but all these names even though they are different in
their words refer to the same thing.

38

Therefore, supplicating to Him using one of His names is not
contradictory to supplicating to Him using another name. Rather,
it is as Allah has mentioned:
SAMA RCRA Eanes
Say, “Call upon Allah or call upon the Most Merciful [al-
Rahman]. Whichever [name] you call - to Him belong the best
names.”
Sirah al-lsra’, 17:110

Each of His names refers to Allah Himself as well as the attribute
which that name possesses. For example, the All-Knowing refers
to Allah and the attribute of knowledge. The All-Powerful refers
to Allah and the attribute of power. The Most Merciful refers to
Allah and the attribute of mercy.

These three names mentioned here as examples are synonymous
as they all refer to Allah. At the same time, they differ in the sense
that one refers to knowledge, the second to power and the third
to the mercy of Allah.

39

Whosoever rejects that these names point to attributes are from
those who claim to only accept the apparent [i.e. literalists]. They
have made a claim similar to the extreme Batiniyyah Qaramitah
who state: ‘It is not said that He is living or not living.’ They
negate both opposites. This group does not reject words such
as pronouns; they only deny the attributes which these names
possess. Whosoever agrees with their extreme views in this
respect has conformed to the way of the Batiniyyah, and this is
not the place to expand upon this topic.

Due to the authors great expertise in this field, he has mentioned
this point.

Regarding the names of Allah, people are divided into three
groups. The first group has made them simply names, void of
any meanings. The second group has affirmed the names and
the attributes they possess. The third group claims: ‘We do not
state that He is living nor that He is not living, so we reject both.’
This group is the Batiniyyah. Their argument is that life and
death cannot be affirmed or negated except for the one that it is
applicable to, and this is not applicable to Allah. Similarly, a wall
is not described as being dead or alive.

In response to this argument we say: This claim that life and
death can only be ascribed to one that it is applicable to is futile,
for Allah describes idols as being dead, and not living:

‎ge 7 3d fee‏ اس عرم لخر

‏يت يتويد ذف ‎SARE SATS‏
رمي

‎And those they invoke other than Allah create nothing, and
they [themselves] are created. They are, [in fact], dead.
Sirah al-Nabl, 16:19-20

‎They used to worship objects such as trees and stones. Hence, the
Qur’an has refuted this statement of theirs.

‎40

As for their argument: ‘If we say Allah is alive we compare Him
to the living, and if we say He is dead we compare Him to the
dead.’ We respond by saying that instead you have compared
Him to inanimate objects such as stones.

Furthermore, even if for the sake of argument we were to accept
this, you further state that Allah is neither existent nor non-
existent. Denying both of these aspects is something which leads
to the impossible which no intellectual person will accept, for
such a claim leads to denying both opposites. If one is lifted then
the other must be present. Also, to claim that to describe Allah
as existent or non-existent is atheism makes no sense, for this
instead leads to Him being something which is imaginary. This is
the belief of the Batiniyyah.

The first of these three groups are the Mu‘tazilah and the literalists
who affirm the names without any meaning. They say that He is
All-Hearing without hearing, All-Knowing without knowledge,
Merciful without mercy and so on. This is similar to the one
who is called Muhammad [literally the praiseworthy one] but he
possesses no praiseworthy characteristics or ‘Abdullah [the slave
of Allah] even though he disbelieves in Him. Hence these names
simply point out those people who possess these names. They
claim that the names of Allah are similar to this.

This last paragraph mentioned by the author is not relevant to

the topic at hand. The only significance is that the names of Allah
are mentioned many times throughout the Qur’an.

41
The point being that every single name of Allah refers to Him
and the attributes that name possesses. By necessity, it also refers
to the attributes which other names may possess.

Each name refers to the attributes it possesses as well as other
attributes which can be derived from other names by necessity.
For example, the name ‘the Creator’ refers to Allah and the
attribute of creating. By necessity it also implies the attribute of
knowledge present in the name ‘the All-Knowing’ and power
which is present in the name ‘the All-Powerful.’ The ‘Creator’
implies both the attribute of knowledge and power because one
cannot create without possessing knowledge, power and ability.
This is why Allah states:

‎i Meas‏ 6 داه
‎eo OK LOSS cA Koeat‏

‎It is Allah who has created seven heavens and of the earth, the
like of them. [His] command descends among them so you may
know that Allah is over all things competent and that Allah has
encompassed all things in knowledge.
Surah al-Talag, 65:12

‎This is something well known and accepted, for if someone
wanted to construct a device he would not be able to do so unless
he possessed the relevant knowledge and had the necessary
physical ability.

‎42

Similar to this are the names of the Prophet (3) such as:
Muhammad, Ahmad, al-Mabiy [the one who extinguishes], al-
Hashir [the one who gathers] and al-‘Aqib [the last prophet].
Likewise, the names of the Qur’an include: al-Furgan [the
criterion], al-Huda [the guide], al-Shifa’ [the cure], al-Bayan [the
clarification] and al-Kitab [the Book].

If the intention of the questioner is to pinpoint an object, it can
be described by using any name so long as it is understood to
refer to that particular object. This description may be in the
form of a noun or an attribute. For example, the one who asks
concerning the verse:
AOA
CS3IENSS
And whosoever turns away from My remembrance
Sirah Ta-Ha, 4

What is the remembrance? The answer is: ‘It is the Qur’an’ or
‘It is His divinely revealed Books.’ The word remembrance is a
noun, and a noun is either attached to the subject [the one who
remembers] or the object [what is being remembered]. Therefore,
the remembrance of Allah in relation to the second meaning
is like the statement: Subban Allah [All glory be to Allah],
Alhamdulillah (All praise is for Allah], La ilaha illallab [none has
the right to be worshipped but Allah] and Allabu Akbar [Allah
is the greatest]. In relation to the first meaning [i.e. the subject] it
refers to the one who is remembering His speech, and this is what
is being referred to in this verse.

This is further supported by the verse which precedes this verse:

2568 4 ey veg

AOE

43
And if there should come to you guidance from Me - then who-
ever follows My guidance will neither go astray [in the world]
nor suffer [in the Hereafter].

Surah Ta-Ha, 20:123

His guidance is that which He has revealed. Allah then states:

va e747
ne SBMS SE
8

He will say, “My Lord, why have you raised me blind while 1
was [once] seeing?” [Allah] will say, “Thus did Our signs come
to you, and you forgot [i.e. disregarded] them; and thus will you

this Day be forgotten.”
Stirah Ta-Ha, 20:125-126

The point being that what is intended by the remembrance is His
revealed speech or the remembrance of that speech by the servant.
Therefore, whether it is said: ‘My remembrance’ means ‘My
Book’ or ‘My speech’ or ‘My guidance’, the intended meaning is
one and the same.

Here, the author (may Allah have mercy upon him) is saying:
If the questioner - who is asking concerning the exegesis of a
particular verse — wishes to refer to something, he may refer to it
using any name so long as that name is known to represent what
he is describing. For example, if one were to ask: What docs
the following verse mean: “And whosoever turns away from
My remembrance”? Does this mean whosoever turns away from
the remembrance of Allah or whosoever turns away from the
remembrance which I revealed?

The answer to this question is that it can refer to both. It can refer
to the remembrance of Allah, as Allah says:

44

And establish the prayer for My remembrance
Sirah Ta-Ha, 4

ie. so that you may remember Me via the prayer. Similarly,
the verse can be referring to the remembrance Allah revealed
which is the Qur’an. The latter of the two meanings is stronger
considering the context. Allah states in the previous verse: “And
if there should come to you guidance from Me - then whoever
follows My guidance will neither go astray [in the world] nor
suffer [in the Hereafter]”. The guidance in this verse refers to the
revelation. “And whosoever turns away from My remembrance”.
The reason as to why it is called guidance in the former verse
and remembrance in the latter is because this guidance which He
revealed contains a reminder and a warning for mankind.

If in this previous example one asked about the meaning of the
word ‘remembrance’ and was told it means saying Subhan Allah
(All glory be to Allah), Albamdulillab (All praise is for Allah)
and Allabu Akbar (Allah is the greatest) then this is a correct
explanation. Likewise if one said the word ‘remembrance’ refers
to that which Allah has revealed from the Books then this is also
a correct explanation, for the word ‘remembrance’ correctly
signifies both meanings. This is what a difference of expression
is. The first interpretation does not contradict the second as that
which Allah revealed necessitates His remembrance.

45
However, if the intention of the questioner is to learn about
the attribute which that name also connotes, then an added
explanation must also be given. For example, it is possible for
one to ask concerning the names of Allah: al-Quddis (the Pure),
al-Salam (the Perfect), al-Mu’min (the Bestower of Faith) even
though one knows that these names refer to Allah but he wishes
to inquire about these specific attributes.

If one were to ask: ‘Who is al-Quddis?’ The response would be:
‘Allah.’ This differs however, from the one who asks: ‘What does
al-Quddiis mean?’ In response to this question one must explain
the meaning of this word.

46

If that which has preceded is clear, one realises that it is often the
case that the predecessors (salaf) would describe something using
a name which points to the object being referred to; at the same
time this name may also contain an attribute not present in its
other names. Just as the Prophet (3) is described as: al-Hashir,
al-Mabiy and al-‘Aqib, and Allah is al-Ghaftir and al-Rabim.
All these names refer to one and the same thing but each also
contains a unique attribute.

This is a possible third answer to the question: Who is al-
Quddis? The response is that He is the Knower of the witnessed
and the unseen, or He is the One whose mercy envelopes all
things, or He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. In this answer
it is understood that I am referring to Allah, but it is done by
mentioning a name which contains an attribute not present in the
name being asked about.

Therefore, if the questioner asks: Who is al-Quddits? one may
respond by saying that ‘He is severe in punishment to those who
disobey Him’, wishing to emphasise this attribute in order to
remind the questioner of this aspect as he happens to be a person
indulging in sin. On the other hand if a person is in a weak and
fearful state, the answer to the previous question posed can be:
‘He is as His servant thinks of Him’, in order to encourage that
person to think good of Allah.

In conclusion then there are three types which we have discussed:
The first being an explanation of what is intended by that word.
The second type is the meaning that it comprises. The third type
is to use another name which mentions a different attribute.

47

It is well-known that this is not a difference of contradiction
as some people mistakenly think. For example, what does the
‘straight path’ refer to? Some scholars mention it is to follow the
Qur’an due to the statement of the Prophet (38), “The Qur'an is
the firm rope of Allah, the wise reminder and the straight path.”"°
Others have stated that the straight path refers to Islam due to the
hadith of the Prophet (38) narrated by al-Nawwas ibn Sam“n:

“Allah has set forth the parable of a straight path; on either side
of this path there is a wall in which there are open doors and
upon these doors are curtains. There is a man calling from the
top of the road and another from above the road. He said: The
straight path is Islam. The walls are the boundaries of Allab. The
open doors are the prohibitions. The caller from the top of the
road is the Book of Allah, and the caller from above the road
is the admonisher from Allah which every believer hears in his
heart.”*°

So both of the explanations mentioned for the ‘straight path’ are
in reality the same, as the religion of Islam is to follow the Qur’an.
However each description points to a particular aspect not present
in the other description. The word ‘path’ also signifies a third
meaning. Similar to this are all the other explanations given for
the ‘straight path’, that it is al-Sunnah wal Jama‘ah, or the path
of worship, or it is obedience to Allah and His Messenger (38). All
of these explanations refer to one and the same thing; however
each one chooses to describe it using a particular attribute.

We have already mentioned that if some of the salaf explain a
word by one meaning and others explain it by another meaning,
and that word comprises both meanings then this is a difference
in expression. Therefore in the verse “Guide us to the straight
path”, a path linguistically is a large way. In this verse it is

 Sunan al-Tirmidbi, no. 2906.
20 Ibid, no. 2859.

48

explained as being Islam or the Qur’an, the author supported
each of the two sayings with evidence from the Sunnah. Both
of the sayings are not contradictory as Islam is what is in the
Qur'an. As such, this is a difference in expression as each of the
sayings does not oppose or negate the other.

49
The second category:?'! To mention by way of example and
illustration some aspects of the general term being referred to, in
order to draw the attention of the listener to the type of thing that
is being referred to and not to completely define the boundaries
of the word. Thus, if a non-Arab asked about the word khubz
(bread) and was shown a raghif (a loaf of bread), this illustrates
to that person that similar things are known as khubz, not that
this particular loaf alone can be described as such.

In this example a non-Arab asks: ‘What is khubz?’ If one were
to reply: ‘Khubz is something round in shape, made from wheat
which is grounded and mixed with water and then made into
dough,’ such an explanation would not be sufficient. However,
if you were to show a person a piece of bread then he would not
believe that this was the only bread available in the whole world,
but he would understand that this is an example of what is being
referred to. Furthermore, he would then be able to go to a shop
and buy some bread. Thus, this description of bread is not meant
to be an absolute definition which cannot be changed, but just
an example.

21 Le, the second of the two categories in the difference of variation.

50

51

An example of this is the Qur’anic verse:

‎ates SHEE‏ مْطَفبِنَامنْعبَادياً

‎ATE IC‏ دناه

‎Then We caused to inherit the Book those We have chosen of
Our servants, and among them is he who wrongs himself (i.e.
sins], and among them is he who is moderate, and among them
is he who is foremost in good deeds by the permission of Allah.
Stirah Fatir, 35:32

‎Those who have been chosen by Allah refers to the Muslims, for
the last Book which was revealed was this Qur’an.

Those who wrong themselves are those who do not perform
the obligatory duties and embark upon that which has been
prohibited. The moderate are those who fulfil their obligations
and refrain from prohibitions. Those who are foremost are the
ones who not only do that which is obligated upon them but
perform optional acts too. Thus, the moderate will be the people
on the right, and the foremost will be the foremost; those who
are brought near [to Allah].

Furthermore, each one of these three can be described by the
way in which they perform a certain act. It can be said that the
foremost are those who pray their daily prayers at their proper
time, the moderate are those who pray within the allotted
duration, and those who wrong themselves are those who delay
the prayer until the time is about to pass. Likewise it can be said
that these three types of people are also mentioned in Sarah al-
Bagarah, the good-doer is mentioned as being charitable, the
wrong-doer deals in usury and the just busies himself in trade,
so with regards to wealth people are generous, just or oppressive.
Thus, the foremost are those who are generous by not only
fulfilling the obligatory act but also giving extra. The oppressive
are those who deal in usury or refuse to pay the Zakah, and the
moderate are those who give Zakah but do not deal in usury.

Therefore, each saying mentions something which is already
present in the verse; it is merely stressed in order to draw attention
to that particular aspect of the verse by way of example. For
defining something by way of illustration or example can be much
easier than defining something with an absolute definition.

It is the case that examples better clarify the intended meaning
of something, more so than the actual definition. If for example
you were asked: What is a camel? And you were to reply: It is a
large bodied animal, possessing a long neck, humps and a short
tail; a person may still be ambiguous regarding the camel. Even
if he was then to pass by one he would still doubt whether or not
it was actually a camel, as other animals may be similar to it. If

52

on the other hand, he was given an example of what the camel
looked like, it would instantly become clear.

For this reason, many scholars of figh (jurisprudence) - may
Allah have mercy upon them - define terms with their rulings.
For instance they say, an obligatory act is that which causes the
doer to be rewarded, and the one who leaves it is entitled to
punishment. This is clearer than stating an obligatory act is that
which the shari‘ah has ordered by necessity.

The point being that the salaf explained the verse mentioned by
the author by saying that the one who oppresses himself is he
who delays the prayer beyond its time. The moderate one is he
who prays it within its allotted duration and the foremost are
those who pray it at its earliest time, or to be more precise its
proper time, so as to include those prayers which it is better to
delay such as ‘Isha’.

Someone else could explain the above verse with another act
such as Zakah. The formeost are those who give Zakah as well
as optional charity. The moderate are those who just give the
obligatory Zakah, and the oppressive are those who don’t give
the Zakah. These two explanations of the above verse are not
contradictory, for each one mentions something which the verse
implies, even though the verse is much more general and includes
all in which one can be moderate, foremost or oppressive.

53
One’s intellect can easily relate to an example of something, just
as it understands what bread is when it is shown a loaf. From this
category is also the statement: The reason this verse was revealed
was due to such and such, especially if it was due to a person.
This is the case with the background regarding the revelation of
certain verses.

For example, they state that the verse concerning zihar? was
revealed concerning the wife of Aws ibn al-Samit. The verse of
li Gn?3 was revealed concerning ‘Uwaymir al-‘Ajlani or Hilal ibn
Umayyah, and the verse of kalalah™ was revealed in the case of
Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah. Similarly, the verse:

NINE Se Sats

And judge, [O Muhammad], between them by what Allab has
revealed
Stirah al-Ma’idah, 5:49

was revealed during the incident of Banit Qurayzah and Bani
Nadir. The verse:

BEES . ‏ومو‎ AR 27

ومن يولهم يوميز ‎err‏

And whoever turns his back to them on such a day
Stirah al-Anfal, 8:16

was revealed concerning [the battle of] Badr. Likewise, the
verse:

‎Sy‏ احَصَ رحد الْمَوتُ

‎22 Translator’s note: See Sirah al-Mujadilah, 58:1-4,
» Translator’s note: See Sirah al-Nur, 24:6-9.

‎24 Translator’s note: See Sirah al-Nisa’, 4:176.

‎54
...testimony [should be taken] among you when death ap-
proaches one of you
Sirah al-Ma’idah, 5:106

was revealed in the story of Tamim al-Dari and ‘Adiyy ibn Bada’,
Also, the statement of Abt Ayytib about the verse:

...and do not throw [yourselves] with your [own] hands into
destruction
Sirah al-Baqarah, 2:195

‘It was revealed concerning us: the Ansar.’ There are many
such examples where it is mentioned that a certain verse was
revealed concerning the polytheists of Makkah or the Jews and
Christians, or concerning a group of believers. The purpose of
such statements is not to insinuate that these verses only pertained
to these people and no one else; this would not be said by a
Muslim or an intelligent person.

The only point of difference is concerning a general term which
is used in a particular case; is it limited to that case or not? None
of the Muslim scholars infer that the general terms present in the
Qur’an and Sunnah only pertain to those specific people about
whom those verses were revealed. Rather, the most that can be
said is that such said verses apply to all those who are similar to
that person for which the verse was revealed, and the wording is
not generalised to the limits to which the language allows.

This saying is the correct opinion, i.e. that it includes all those
who are in a similar position to that person about whom the verse
was revealed. An example of this is the saying of the Prophet (3):
“It is not from piety to fast while travelling.”*’ The wording of

25 Sahih al-Bukhari, no. 1946, and Sahih Muslim, no. 1115.

5S

this hadith is general; however it is specific to this situation and
to such a person.

Does this then mean that it was only relevant to that specific
person about whom the hadith is discussing? The author states
that this is not claimed by any of the Muslims. Does it mean
that it is specific to that type of person; one who finds himself
in a similar situation? This is possible if we know the exact
circumstances which surrounded the incident.

Therefore, if we take the general wording of this hadith the
meaning is: It is not from piety to fast while travelling, irrespective
of whether or not fasting will cause hardship. If we were to
specify this hadith to a particular person, then the meaning is
that it is not from piety for that specific person to fast. This is
also a wrong interpretation as the author mentions. The third
possibility is to state that it is not from piety to fast for a person
who finds himself in a similar situation to the one in the hadith,
ive. he finds hardship and difficulty in fasting. This third saying is
the middle ground and the correct opinion.

The point being made is that to search for the reason and to use
that as the basis for deducing the ruling is better than to simply
generalise. There is a difference between saying “It is not from
piety,” and saying, “Piety is not to fast.” The former statement
implies that what is not from piety is from sin. However, if
someone does not wish to take the rukhsah [legal permission]
then he is not sinful, except if he believes he is not in need of the
ease which Allah has allowed him to take. If on the other hand he
acknowledges this easy route and thanks Allah for it but prefers
to fast then that is another matter.

56
Any verse which was revealed for a particular reason, especially
if the verse is an order or a prohibition, not only includes that
particular person for whom it was revealed but all those similar
to him. This is also the case if the verse is praising or censuring
someone.

Knowledge of the reasons for which a verse was revealed assists
one in understanding that verse, for knowledge of the cause
helps to bring about knowledge of the result. For this reason, the
stronger of the two opinions concerning a person who forgets
the oath he took is that one returns to the reason which caused
him to take the oath in the first place. What caused it and what
factors led to it?

Similarly, if the intention of the one who divorced is not known
then we return to the reason which led him to divorce. For
example, if a man saw another man with his wife and divorced
her because of that, then later realised that it was her brother
then the divorce does not count. It was as if he was saying I am
divorcing you because you were with a foreign man.

Likewise, if one takes an oath by Allah that he will not visit
someone, because he has been told that so and so is a sinner, and
then he later finds out that he is not, then he can visit him and no
expiation is due. The reason for this is that it is as if the person
placed a condition on his oath, i.e. I will not visit so and so as
long as he is a sinner, and when it becomes clear that he is not
a sinner he may visit him as the condition is like a clause. This
is a general principle which can be used in oaths and divorces.
However this differs from the one who says: ‘I swear by Allah
I will never visit so and so for any reason whatsoever,’ because
here the person has made his intention quite clear. If he was to
then go and visit that person he would have broken his oath.
Thus, the rule is: every word which is based upon a reason and
then that reason is removed is void.

57

In what the author is discussing, the verse or the hadith is
the result. For example, the reason why the verse of liGm was
revealed was due to Hilal ibn Umayyah accusing his wife of
having relations with Shurayk ibn Sahma’, so this was the reason
and the result was that certain verses were revealed concerning
this, So the meaning of a verse or hadith can remain hidden until
we know the background and the reason behind it.

58
Their statement: ‘This verse was revealed due to such and such’
can sometimes mean that this was the reason the verse was
revealed.

The author often digresses in his books. Here, he has digressed in
order to mention the different expressions used when discussing
the reasons for revelation (asba@b al-nuziil). They are of three
types:

The first expression is: ‘Such and such happened, so the following
verse was revealed.’ The second expression which may be used:
‘The reason such and such verse was revealed was because of
such and such.’ The third: ‘The verse was revealed due to such
and such.’

The second of the three expressions is explicit in mentioning the
reason. The first expression is also apparent in its reference to the
reason of revelation even if it is not explicit. The third expression
is probable; it can either be referring to the meaning of the verse
or to the reason of revelation.

Hence, the three types of expressions which are used to describe

the reason for the revelation of a verse can be classed as: explicit,
apparent and probable.

59

It can also imply that this meaning is also present in the verse
even if it is not the reason for its revelation, i.e. the meaning of
this verse is such and such. The scholars have differed regarding
the statement of a companion: ‘This verse was revealed due to
such and such.’ Does this statement count as being a prophetic
narration just as if the companion was to narrate the incident
as it took place, or is it considered an explanation which the
companion gives himself and not a [prophetic] narration? Al-
Bukhari considered it to be a narration whereas others did not.
The majority of books containing narrations fall into the latter
category such as Musnad Ahmad. If on the other hand, the
companion describes the incident as a narration then all agree
that it is a narration.

If this statement of the companion is considered to be a narration
this suggests it took place during the time of the Prophet (3),
so the verse was revealed in order to explain an incident and its
rulings. If we don’t consider it to be a narration then it becomes
his explanation (tafsir) of the verse, and as such it may be correct
or others may oppose his views.

60

If this is known and one states: “This verse was revealed due to
this,’ this does not contradict a similar statement from someone
else, so long as the word can include both meanings as we have
explained when discussing tafsir by way of example. Likewise, if
one mentions a reason for which the verse was revealed and then
another mentions a different reason, it is possible that both are
speaking the truth and that the verse was revealed after a number
of incidents took place, or the verse was revealed twice, on each
occasion for a different reason.

The first reason is more likely. If more than one person mentions a
reason for the revelation of a verse either explicitly or apparently
as has been previously stated, does this mean that the reasons are
different but the result [i.e. the verse] is one? Or is it possible that
the reasons are multiple and the result is also multiple, and that
the verse was revealed for two separate reasons? The first is more
likely, for a verse to be revealed more than once is against the
norm. Thus all reasons and incidents took place before this as it
is possible that a number of incidents preceded the revelation of
a verse. It is also rare, if not incorrect for one verse to be revealed
more than once. However, it is mentioned that Sarah al-Fatibah
was revealed once in Makkah and then again in Madinah, and
Allah knows best.

The point being stressed here is that if there is more than one
reason which explicitly states the background of a verse then it
can mean one of two things: Firstly that the reasons are multiple
and one verse was revealed, or the reasons were multiple and so
was the revelation of the verse. This is only if both statements are
explicit. However, if one is apparent and the other is probable,
then we obviously give precedence to the apparent statement.
Likewise, if one statement is explicit and another apparent,
priority is given to the explicit. In such a case, the explicit
statement is taken as being the reason for revelation and the
apparent statement is considered to be referring to the meaning
of the verse. An example of this can be given in the verse:

61

SA ppc eh IO ALIS
So woe to those who pray. [But] who are heedless of their

prayer
Sirah al-Ma‘tin, 107:4-5

It can be said that this verse was revealed concerning those who
delay the prayer beyond its time. This statement does not mean
that delaying the prayer was the reason for its revelation but that
it is what the verse is referring to. Hence, such a statement is an
explanation of the verse.

62
These two different categories of tafsir which we have just
mentioned - variation in names and attributes or different
categories and types with which they are described such as
illustrations - are the two most predominant types of tafsir found
among the predecessors which may be thought of as differences
in opinion.

An example of difference in names and attributes are the different
names which can be given to a sword as previously mentioned.
Difference in illustration and example can be taken from the
verse: “and among them is he who wrongs himself |i.e. sins], and
among them is he who is moderate, and among them is he who
is foremost in good deeds,” where the example has been given of
the prayer and charity.

63

Another type of difference which can be found is where we have
ambiguous words. This can be done in two ways. Firstly, it is
ambiguous because it has a number of meanings in the language
such as the word ‘gaswarah’ which can refer to a shooter or a
lion, and the word “as‘asa’ which can refer to both the advent
and departure of the night.

An ambiguous word is a single word which possesses a number
of meanings, such as the word ‘gaswarah’ which can refer to a
shooter or a lion. Allah states:

OM ‏ردن‎ )2( tL ates Ph

As if they were alarmed donkeys. Fleeing from a lion.
Stirah al-Muddaththir, 74:50-51

Wild donkeys flee from hunters and domestic donkeys flee from
predators such as lions. Thus, some scholars have stated this
word refers to a hunter whilst others say it refers to a lion, and so
long as the word implies both meanings without contradiction,
there is no harm in applying both meanings.

Likewise in the verse:

OSB BO 2G JN

And by the night as it closes in. And by the dawn when it
breathes.
Sirah al-Takwir, 81:17-18

Again here some scholars have said that “as‘asa’ is the beginning
of the night whilst others have said it is the end of the night. Thus,
the word carries both meanings unless there is an indication to
show that one meaning is preferred over the other in this context.
Therefore, either Allah is taking an oath by the beginning and
end of the night in this verse, or just by the beginning. If we take
into consideration the next verse which shows the contrast as it
mentions the dawn which is the end of the night, this indicates

64

that the more appropriate meaning in this context is the beginning
of the night. Another example of an ambiguous word which is
used in the Qur’an is ‘gar” which can refer to the monthly cycle
of a woman or the state of purity which follows the end of such
acycle.

65
[The second way it can be ambiguous] is because even though
the word originally only has one meaning, it denotes one of two
different types or one of two things such as a pronominal subject
which at times can refer to a number of things, like in the verse:

OGLE ADIGE

Then he approached and descended. And was at a distance of
two bow lengths or nearer
Sirah al-Najm, 53:8-9

Allah says:
Goce cot ‏مقع‎ seh TIRE cde By oo ote A
CIs bot OA NSOLRIE ‏دو‎
‎RAM LE IFHOIM LE ‏نداب‎
‎One of soundness. And he rose to [his] true form. While he was
in the higher [part of the] horizon. Then he approached and
descended. And was at a distance of two bow lengths or nearer.

And He revealed to His servant what He revealed.
Stirah al-Najm, 53:6-10

The pronominal subject in ‘Then he approached’ refers to Jibril,
whereas in the last verse mentioned [He] refers to Allah. This is
the most correct opinion.”

‎Translator's Note: Here Shaykh Ibn ‘Uthaymin is mentioning one of the opinions regarding‏ “د
‎the explanation of these verses. The point being stressed here is that the pronominal subject‏
‎in both verses is ‘he’, burt in one it refers to the angel Jibril and in the other it refers to Allah.‏
‎This shows how one word can refer to two things. For this reason the scholars may differ‏
‎over the explanation of a verse due to the presence of such similar words.‏

‎66

Other similar words include: al-fajr (the day-break), ‏#مطعله‎ (the
even), al-watr (the odd) and laydlin ‘ashar (the ten nights). It is
possible that these words have the meanings the salaf gave to
them, or their meanings could be otherwise.

The first is the case when a verse is revealed twice, once for
one reason and then again due to another reason, or because
of an ambiguous word where both meanings can be correctly
applied. This is the opinion of the majority of the scholars of
the Maliki, Shafi'i and Hanbali schools of thought as well as
many theologians. The other case is where one word has only
one meaning making it general so long as there is nothing which
specifies its meaning. If both meanings are permitted then this
will fall into the second category.

The author is discussing another type of difference which is present;
that is when one word can have two possible meanings. He then
mentions that such a word is due to one of two reasons:

Firstly: When the word has multiple meanings, such as the word

“qyn’.

Secondly: When the word only has one meaning but can refer
to one of two things. Such a word originally has one meaning,
such as insan (human), bajar (rock), shams (sun), gamar (moon)
etc, The author then mentions that such a word can refer to one
of its two types. Even though this is rare, it is determined by the
context in which the word is placed.

For example the word ‘ma‘a’ which literally means ‘with’ has
only one meaning which denotes companionship, however this
companionship can be of types depending upon the context in
which it is found. If you were to say: ‘Water with milk’ this refers
to a mixture, whereas: ‘a wife with her husband’ implies that
it is a companionship of marriage, and if you were to say: ‘a
general with his troops’ this refers to his leadership, not that he
is constantly in their company. Thus, even though this word has

67

one meaning which is companionship, the type of companionship
can differ depending upon the context.

Similar to this are the pronominal subjects mentioned by the
author. If there is a difference of opinion regarding what they
are referring to, we say: If the word can correctly be upheld with
both meanings then this is a difference in variation, otherwise it
is a contradiction. The author also questions as to whether or not
both meanings of an ambiguous word can be applied, i.e. both
meanings used? The answer is that this is allowed so long as the
two meanings do not negate one another. We have already given
an example of this with the word ‘qaswarah’ which can mean
hunter or lion. There is no indication which gives one meaning
preference over the other, and the two meanings do not negate
each other. Therefore both can be correctly applied.

On the other hand, if there was a contradiction between the
two meanings then it is not possible to apply them both. For
example, the word ‏عمو"‎ means menses or the state of purity
which follows the menses. Since the two meanings cannot both
be correctly applied as they each contradict the other and imply
different rulings, both meanings cannot be correct.

Likewise, in the hadith: “Whosoever leaves [i.e. for the Jum‘ah
prayer] in the first hour...”"? The word ‘rawab’ can refer to
leaving in general or leaving after midday. Since the two meanings
cannot both be correctly applied in this hadith, both cannot be
used. One implies that you do not leave for the prayer until after
midday soon after which the imam begins his sermon. The other
meaning implies that one can leave at any time after sunrise.

The verses of Sirah al-Fajr state: “By the dawn. And the ten
nights.” Some scholars say the ten nights refer to the last ten of
Ramadan, while others insist they refer to the first ten of Dhul-
Hijjah. Also, the next verse: “And [by] the even [number] and

‎Muwatta Malik, vol. 1, p. 101.‏ جد

‎68
the odd.” Some say that the ‘odd number’ refers to Allah, based
upon the hadith: “Indeed, Allah is an odd number [i.e. One].”**
The ‘even number’ refers to the creation due to the verse:

eee
‏لكوت‎
‎And of all things We created two mates [i.e. counterparts]; per-

haps you will remember.
Sirah al-Dhariyat, 51:49

Other scholars state that the ‘even and odd’ refer to numbers,
as all creation is either an odd or even number. In reality, both
meanings can be correctly applied.

Likewise, prayer is also an odd number. The night prayer is
concluded by the witr prayer [an odd number of rak‘ahs] and the
daylight prayers are also concluded by a witr (odd) prayer which
is Maghrib. Thus, having prayers which have an even number
of rak‘ahs [such as Zubr and ‘Asr] does not negate there being
an odd numbered prayer such as Maghrib, as the Prophet (3)
described it: “It is the odd prayer of the day.””? The Prophet (3)
also said: “When one of you fears the morning is about to enter
then let him pray one and it will be a witr for that which he has
prayed.”* In conclusion, both meanings can be correctly applied
to this verse as they do not contradict one another.

2» Sahih al-Bukbari, ‏.مه‎ 6410, Sabib Muslim, no. 2677.
» Sunan al-Tirmidhi, no. 552.

‎Sabib al-Bukbari, no. 472, Sabib Muslim, no. 749.‏ «د

‎69
Another statement of theirs which is commonly thought to be
a difference of opinion, is when they express an opinion each
using a different choice of words. These words are similar in their
connotations but not synonymous. There are very few words in
the Arabic language which are synonymous; this is even rarer in
the Qur’an if not non-existent. It is rare to express the exact same
meaning using two sets of words; at best, the meanings will be
approximate. This is from the miracles of the Qur’an.

Here, the author states that there are very few synonyms in the
Arabic language. A synonym is two words having the exact same
meaning in every sense. This statement is correct as it relates to
meanings. As for objects, then many objects possess names which
are synonymous [i.e. they refer to the same object]. For example,
there are many names for a lion and a cat. Even though this is
rare when it comes to meanings it is still present and cannot be
denied, as grain and wheat are synonymous.

In terms of the Qur’an, there is no word which can be substituted
for another. However some people believe that the word ‘shakk’
in the verse:

ALAN owas
‏في شك مما أنزلناإليِك‎
So if you are in doubt, [O Muhammad], about that which We

have revealed to you
Sirah Yinus, 10:94

is exactly synonymous with the word ‘rayb’ in the verse:

لاه

about which there is no doubt, a guidance for those conscious
of Allah.
Stirah al-Bagarah, 2

However this is not the case as will be mentioned by the author.
Therefore, to have two words which are synonymous in every

sense is rare or non-existent.

70

If one were to say regarding the verse:
‏ده 4غ ع )هد سكودء‎
9 ‏يَوَمتعُورْالسَملدمورا‎
‎On the Day the heaven will sway with the circular motion
Stirah al-Tiir, 52:9

that ‘maw?’ is a movement it would be a similar meaning but not
exact, as the word means a quick, silent movement. Likewise, to
say ‘waby’ (revelation) means to inform, or that the verse ‘We
have revealed to you’ means ‘We sent down’, or that the verse:
4 ‏دوه« سن ع جر نل‎
And We conveyed to the Children of Israel
Stirah al-Isra’, 17:4

means ‘We taught’. In all of these examples the substitute words
are similar in meaning but not exact. Revelation is quick and
secret and not just a way of informing. Conveying is much more
specific than simply teaching as it involves information and
revelation. It is common for the Arabs to attach a verb to another
verb by using the preposition of the latter.

The author is stressing the point that all the words which have
been mentioned as substitutes, ‘mawr’ as movement, revelation
as information, convey as taught etc. are all approximate in their
meanings and not exact.

It is common for the Arabs to attach a verb to another verb by
using the preposition of the latter. This is when one verb possesses
the meaning of another and so the preposition of one can be used
by the other. One of the clearest examples of this is the verse:

Otay ‏سن‎ are -
abel cre
A spring of which the [righteous] servants of Allah will drink
Sirah al-Insan, 76:6

71

The word ‘drink’ also connotes the meaning of quenching thirst;
it is not conceivable that they drink using the spring but rather
using a cup. Therefore, some state the word ‘bib@ in the verse
means ‘from’ [i.e. they drink from the spring]; while others
state it means they quench their thirst from this spring. Hence,
the verb here explicitly mentions drinking and also suggests
another meaning which is the quenching of thirst, both using the
preposition ‘biha@’.

72
From here, we can see the mistake made by those who substitute
certain words with others, as they do in the verse:
ee Tae es Aone ‏ده‎
‎[David] said, “He has certainly wronged you in demanding
your ewe [in addition] to his ewes...”
Stirah Sad, 38:24

substituting ‘in addition to’ with ‘with his ewes’.
Likewise, in the verse:
5 eee
Meola

Who are my supporters for [the cause of] Allah
Stirah |-Imran, 3:52

‘For the cause of has been substituted with ‘with Allah’ and so
on.

The correct opinion is that of the grammarians of the Basrah
School who state that it is a case of implication. Thus, the demand
for the ewe implied taking and adding it to his ewes.

The scholars of Arabic grammar have differed in the case of a
verb which is attached to a preposition which it would normally
not be attached to. The correct opinion as mentioned is that the
verb must then possess the meaning of another verb which would
use such a preposition. Therefore, in the first verse, the demand
for the ewe is not simply a demand, rather it is a demand to add
this ewe to the others, so the preposition ‘i/@ (to) is correct and
is not changed to ‘ma‘a’ (with). Likewise, in the second verse, the
word ‘il@ (to) is not changed to ‘ma‘a’ (with), [ie. who are my
supporters with Allah], rather the meaning is ‘who, along with
me, will turn in repentance to Him.’ For the supporters of Allah
are those who worship Him and repent to Him, as He states:

73

ae

‎Palrowen‏ واتقوه

‎Turning in repentance to Him, and fear Him
Strah al-Riim, 30:31

‎74
Another example is the verse:

And indeed, they were about to tempt you away from that
which We revealed to you
Sirah al-Isra’, 3

tee
‏وإنذكادوا‎

Tempt implies the meaning they prevent and divert you. Also
{included in this is the following] verse:

And We aided [i.e. saved] him from the people who denied Our

signs
Stirah al-Anbiya’, 21:77

Aided also implies the meaning we saved and rescued. Likewise,
another example is the verse:

othe ere
...from which the servants of Allah drink
Sirah al-Insan, 76:6

Drinking implies the meaning of quenching one’s thirst. Such
examples are abundant.

Why is it that we make the verb imply an added meaning instead
of changing the meaning of the preposition in order to fit that
verb? The reason is that this allows us to give the verb an added
meaning which makes it clearer.

As an example of this we can take the verse:
2 ee he ‏4س‎
‎Opp ehcsc
A supplicant asked concerning a punishment bound to happen

Stirah al-Ma‘@rij, 70:1

75

If we held the opinion that we change the preposition, the meaning
would become: ‘A supplicant asked about a punishment...”
However, with the opinion we have chosen the meaning becomes:
‘A supplicant asked concerning...’ ie. he was concerned and
wished to know more about this impending punishment.

76
Likewise, whosoever says that ‘rayb’ means ‘shakk’ has only
given an approximate meaning, for the word ‘rayb’ implies
internal unrest and turmoil as is in the hadith: “Leave that which
is doubtful for that which is not doubtful.”*' As well as the hadith
in which the Prophet (3) passed by a deer with its head between
its legs and said: “None of you disturb [yuriyb] it.” Therefore,
just as certainty implies inner peace and tranquillity its opposite,
doubt, implies internal unrest and turmoil. On the other hand,
the word ‘shakk’ does not possess the same implications.

Also, in the statement of Allah: “That Book” which is normally
stated as meaning ‘This Book’ is another example of an
approximate meaning. Even though what is being referred to in
both statements is the Qur’an, to point to something which is close
by saying ‘this’ does not give the same implications and meanings
as that which is referred to as being far and absent [which is
implied by saying ‘that’. Similarly, the word ‘Book’ is used
here instead of ‘Qur’an’ as it implies that it is comprehensively
compiled, whereas the word ‘Qur’an’ implies it is apparent and
read. Such differences in language are present in the Qur'an.

Here, the author - may Allah have mercy upon him — mentions
how sometimes the scholars explain a word by using another
word which is approximate to it, not synonymous. This may be
done in order to help clarify the intended meaning. The example
given is “That Book” which can be explained as ‘This Qur’an’.
Such an explanation is only meant to be approximate and not
synonymous as the different words have different connotations.

‎Collected by al-Bukhari.‏ اد

‎* Sunan al-Nas@i, no. 2817.

‎77

If one were to say that the word in the Qur’an “an tubsala
means to be imprisoned, and another says it is to be bailed, this
is not a contradictory difference, for the one imprisoned may or
may not be bailed, so this is an approximate explanation.

To gather these varying sayings and opinions of the salaf is very
beneficial. By gathering all these opinions one will have a clearer
understanding of the intended meaning, much more so than if he
were to just collect a saying or two.

This is because their varying statements concerning a single word
enable a person to understand all the meanings that particular
word implies. The most comprehensive book which gathers this
is the Tafsir of Ibn Jarir {al-Tabari] (may Allah have mercy upon
him), as he has managed to gather these sayings like none other.
Tafsir Ibn Kathir is also similar in this regard as it is considered
to be a summary of Tafsir al-Tabari. When they come to the
explanation of a verse they mention who said what, the number
of scholars who said that along with the chain of narration. The
author mentions that such a collection of sayings is beneficial in
ascertaining the meaning of the verse.

78

Even with all the above, there exist genuine differences of
opinion amongst the Salaf, such as their differences in matters
of jurisprudence. However, essential knowledge which everyone
requires is known to all; the lay person and the elite. Examples
of this include the number of daily prayers, the number of units
(rak‘abs) in each prayer and their timings. Also known are the
items on which zakdt is levied and their minimum amounts,
which is the month of Ramadan, how to perform tawaf, the
standing in ‘Arafat, stoning the pillars, where a person dons on
the ibram etc.

Furthermore, the difference of opinion which existed amongst
the companions in issues such as the shares of the grandfather
and brothers® [in inheritance] and musharrakah,™ rarely occur
in the majority of inheritance rulings. Rather, most people only
need to know about the shares of the ascendants, descendants,
siblings and spouses. Indeed Allah revealed three detailed verses
concerning inheritance. In the first, He mentioned the ascendants
and descendants. In the second, He mentioned the relatives who
have prescribed shares such as the spouses and maternal brother.
He mentioned in the third the relatives that have no prescribed
shares and they are the full or paternal brothers. Cases in which
the paternal grandfather and brothers meet are rare. This is why
the first such reported instance in Islam took place after the death
of the Prophet (3).

This difference of opinion may occur due to relevant
evidences being hidden, overlooked, not being known or being
misunderstood, or due to one favouring an opposing opinion.
The purpose here is to briefly allude to this point and not to
expound upon it.

‎Translator’s note: If the father of the deceased is also dead, and the deceased is survived by‏ فد
‎his paternal grandfather and full or paternal brothers, the scholars have differed concerning‏
‎the shares which they receive. Some of the scholars state that the grandfather shares the estate‏
‎with the brothers whilst others have said that the grandfather prevents the brothers from‏
‎inheriting, just as the father would.‏

‎Translator’s note: This is when the deceased is survived by a husband, mother, two or more‏ لد
‎maternal brothers and any number of full brothers.‏

‎79
The author (may Allah have mercy upon him) states here the
reasons which may cause a difference of opinion; however these
causes are not meant to be comprehensive, as this can be found
in another of the author’s works: Raf‘ al-Malam ‘an al-A’imat al-
A‘lam (Removing the Blame from the Great Scholars).

Here he states, ‘due to relevant evidences being hidden’, i.e. the
scholar doesn’t believe it is an evidence for that particular issue, so
even though he came across the evidence, it didn’t seem relevant
to the issue at hand. Likewise, the evidence may be ‘overlooked’,
meaning that even though he knew of the evidence he forgot it.
If it is due to not being heard then that scholar was unaware of
the evidence, or the difference may be due to misunderstanding,
the texts. The final cause mentioned here is due to the scholar
knowing of the evidence, but due to another reason he avoids
implementing it, such as the text being general and the scholar
finding something which specifies it, or the text being limited in
its application.

Whoever wishes to expound upon this topic should return to the
author’s work in this subject: Raf al-Malam ‘an al-A’imat al-
A‘lam and also our book which is a summary of the authors with
clearer examples: Differences of opinion amongst the scholars -
Their causes and our position towards them.

‎Available in English, published by al-Hidaayah Publishing and Distribution.‏ كد

‎80
CHAPTER 4

——

The Two Categories of Differences in
the Exegesis of the Qur’an Relating to
the Source: Narrations and Deductions

Differences in the exegesis can be of two types: The source of
the first is narrations and the other type is derived from different
means, for knowledge is either a truthful narration, or a correct
deduction, and the narrations either originate from one who is
infallible or one who is not.

Here, we will discuss these narrations irrespective of whether
they stem from an infallible authority or not; this is the first
category. At times, we are able to distinguish between authentic
and weak narrations and at times we are unable to do so. This
latter part whose authenticity we cannot ascertain, for the most
is unbeneficial and to delve into it is unnecessary.

As for that knowledge which is essential to the Muslims, then
Allah has placed for them sufficient signs showing them the truth.
An example of that which is unbeneficial and has no clear evidence
is the difference regarding the colour of the dog belonging to the
companions of the cave. Similar to this is the difference regarding
which part of the cow was used to strike the slain man.

Also included in this are the measurements of the ark of Nth,
and the type of wood used.

81
This is correct. Differing over the colour of the dog of the
companions of the cave possesses no benefit, whether it was
red, white or black it is unbeneficial to us and we have no way
of correctly ascertaining this, unless we use Israelite traditions
(Isr@iliyyin), and these traditions are not trustworthy. Therefore,
there is no benefit in this and its colour makes no difference.

Similarly, another example is the part of the cow used by Musa
to strike the slain man in the verse:

fe 0102
So We said, “Strike him |i.e. the slain man] with part of it.”
Sarah al-Baqarah, 2:73

Is the part being referred to the arm, leg, neck or head? There is
no way to ascertain this.

[Concerning the ark of Nuh] there is no benefit in knowing where
the wood came from or what type it was, did it come from the
tamarisk or was it teal? What was its height, length and width?
All of this is unbeneficial.

82
Similar to this is the name of the boy killed by Khidr etc. All
this can only be ascertained from narrations. That which is
authentically narrated from the Prophet (38) in this regard, such
as the name of the companion of Misa being Khidr® is accepted.
As for other than this, such as that which is taken from the People
of the Book, like the narrations of Ka‘b, Wahb, Muhammad ibn
Ishaq?” and others who take from them, one cannot accept or
reject these narrations except with clear proof.

It is reported in the Sahih that the Prophet (%) said: “If the
People of the Book narrate to you then do not attest to their
truthfulness nor reject them, rather say we believe in Allab and
His Messengers. Otherwise you may reject something truthful or
attest to something false.”**

Likewise, if narrations of the tabi‘an - irrespective of whether or
not they are taken from the People of the Book - differ then some
of their sayings do not hold greater weight and authority than
others. Rather, authentic narrations from the companions in this
regard are more reliable than narrations from their students, as
it is a stronger possibility that the companion heard his opinion
from the Prophet (3) or from another of the companions who in
turn heard it from the Prophet (8). Furthermore, the companions’
narrations from the People of the Book are less than that of the
tabifin.

‎See Sahib al-Bukhari, no. 74 and Sabib Muslim, no. 2380.‏ »د

‎» Katb al-Ahbar, lived at the time of the companions. He narrated prophetic hadith from the
companions, and they narrated from him stories of the Prophets. He died in Hams in the year
324813 during the Caliphate of ‘Uthman.

‎Wahb ibn Munabbih was born towards the end of the Caliphate of ‘Uthman, He narrated
from ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Umar, and in turn was narrated by ‘Amr ibn Dinar
and his contemporaries. He became judge of San‘a and was known for quoting Israelite
traditions. He authored a book on the topic of qadr and later retracted it. Other than this,
he was considered to be trustworthy in his narrations, and his narrations from his brother
Hamam are collected in the two Sabibs. He died in the year 114AH.

‎Muhammad ibn Ishaq, a scholar specialising in history and battles. Ibn Ma‘in said:
Trustworthy but not sufficient on his own, Abmad said: His hadith are sound. He died in
the year ISIAH.

‎*8 See Sahib al-Bukhari, no. 4485.

‎83
Therefore, when a companion adamantly holds an opinion, it
is not thought that he has taken this opinion from the People
of the Book, especially since they were forbidden from believing
them. The point being, such differences [in opinion] in which one
cannot ascertain what is authentic and what is weak is just as
unbeneficial as narrating a hadith in which one cannot ascertain
its authenticity.

As for the first category in which one is able to establish the
authenticity of a narration, this is possible - and all praise is for
Allah — in those matters which are essential. Many narrations in
tafsir, hadith and expeditions concerning the Prophet (38) and
other Prophets are false as they contradict authentic narrations.
This is the case with narrations and what is deduced by other
methods.

The point being, there are clear signs showing the authenticity
or weakness of those narrations which are essential and required
by the Muslims. It is also known that many narrations in tafsir
are similar to narrations about expeditions and history. This
is why Imam Ahmad said: “Three things contain no chain of
narration (isnad): tafsir, expeditions and history.” This is because
the majority of narrations are marasil,° such as that which is
mentioned by ‘Urwah ibn Zubayr,"° al-Sha‘bi,"’ al-Zuhri,”

» Translator’s note: The definition of mursal will be given by Shaykh Iba “Uthaymin
shortly,

© Urwah was one of the seven jutists of Madinah. He was born in the year 29 AH and died
in the year 93 AH. He took his knowledge from his aunt ‘A’ishah, ‘All, Muhammad ibn
Aslam and Abii Hurayrah. He was one who stayed away from trials, a trustworthy scholar.

4١ He is ‘Amir ibn Sharhbil al-Sha‘bi, died in the year 103 AH, This great imam met five
hundred companions and was a judge for ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz, He is from the teachers of
Ibn Sirin, A‘mash and Shu'bah. Al-Fajali said: His mursal hadith are authentic.

* He is Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Shihab al-Zubri; born in the year 50 AH and died in the
year 124 AH. He was one of the great scholars of the Hijiiz and Sham, He was the first to pen
in the field of hadith at the request of ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz, and would say about himself:
‘Thave never forgotten anything I've memorised’. He was from the teachers of Imam Malik,
Layth and their contemporaries.

84
Musa ibn ‘Uqbah,* Ibn Ishaq, and those who came after them
such as Yahya ibn Sa‘id,"" Walid ibn Muslim,** al-Waqidi** and
others who authored in history and expeditions. Indeed, the most
knowledgeable of people concerning military expeditions are the
people of Madinah, then Sham and then Iraq.

This is an important point of benefit. People from a certain place
or a certain group may be more knowledgeable than others in a
particular field or subject. Therefore, if you are asked: Who is
the most knowledgeable about military expeditions? The answer
is as the author stated: The people of Madinah, followed by the
people of Sham and then the people of Iraq. The author further
comments upon this by saying:

© Masa ibn ‘Ugbah was one of the oldest historians of Madinah, He learnt from ‘Urwah
ibn Zubayr and ‘Algamah ibn Waqqis. Malik said about him: ‘Take the narrations of Ibn
‘Uqbah concerning the expeditions, for he was trustworthy and his narrations are the most
authentic’. He died during the Caliphate of ‘Abdul-Malik.

4 Yahya ibn Sa‘id ibn Abin ibn Sa‘id, the bafiz. He learnt from his father, Hisham ibn
“Urwah and Ibn Jurayh. His students include his son, Said ibn Yabya, Imam Abmad, Ishaq
and Ibn Ma‘in. He died in the year 194 AH.

‎AL-Walid ibn Muslim, Abul-‘Abbas, the scholar of Damascus. From amongst his teachers‏ كه
‎are Muhammad ibn ‘Ajlan, Hisham ibn Hassan and al-Awza‘7. His students include Imam‏
‎Ahmad, Ishaq and Ibn Madyan. He died in the year 195 AH.‏

‎4 Aba ‘Abdullah Muhammad ibn ‘Umar ibn Waqid al-Wagidi, he was one of the great
scholars, the judge of Iraq. He studied under Ibn ‘Ajlan, Ibn Jurayh and Malik and he taught
the likes of Ibn Sa‘d and Ahmad ibn Mansi. He was a scholar in expeditions, biographies
and conquests. Ibrahim al-Harbi said: ‘He is the trustworthy representative for Islam;
however the scholars of hadith do not rate him as highly in narrations’. He died in the year
207 AH.

‎85

The people of Madinah are the most knowledgeable in this as
the expeditions took place among them. The people of Sham are
known for their military and tactical skills, and due to this they
possess an understanding of these matters which others don’t.
For this reason, people revere Abt Ishaq’s book on this topic,
and consider al-Awza‘t” to be more knowledgeable in this field
than other scholars.

The author here has made special mention of Abii Ishaq al-Fizart
and al-Awza‘T.

© ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn ‘Ame al-Awza‘7, he was one of the great scholars of the Muslims, a
role-model in his knowledge and understanding in Sham. He studied under the likes of ‘Ata’,
Ibn Sirin and Qatadah, and taught many of the scholars of hadith and jurisprudence of his
time. Ishaq ibn Rahawayh said: ‘If Aw23‘I, Thawri and Malik agree on something then it is
the Sunnab’, He died in the year 175 AH.

86

As for tafsir, then the most knowledgeable of people in this field
are the people of Makkah. The reason for this is that they are the
students of Ibn ‘Abbas, like Mujahid,** ‘Ata’ ibn Abii Rabah”?
and ‘Ikrimah,* and others such as Tawiis,*! Abii Sha‘tha’? and
Sa‘id ibn Jubayr. Likewise it includes the people of Kiifah who
are from the students of ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘td.

The author (may the mercy of Allah be upon him) states: The
most knowledgeable of people regarding tafsir are the people
of Makkah, just as the people of Madinah are knowledgeable
in military expeditions. The reason for this is that people like
Mujahid and ‘Ata’ were students of Ibn ‘Abbas (2).

4 Mujahid ibn Jabr al-Makki, the freed slave of al-Sa’ib ibn al-Sa’ib. He was born in the
year 21 AH, and died while in prostration in the year 102 AH. He studied under Ibn ‘Abbas,
Umm Salamah, Abi Hurayrah and Jabir, and was teacher of the likes of ‘Ikrimah, ‘Ata’ and
Qatadah. Ibn Ma‘in and Abi Zur‘ah both classed him as trustworthy. It is narrated that he
went through the Qur’an with Ibn ‘Abbas three times.

© ‘Ata’ ibn Abii Rabab was originally from Yemen, He moved to Makkah and excelled in
jurisprudence, and was the leading authority of his time in Makkah, Inn ‘Abbas would say:
‏ناملا"‎ come to me even though among you is ‘Ara’. He died in 114 AH.

50 Tkrimah the freed slave of Ibn ‘Abbas. Al-Sha‘bi said: ‘There is no one left more
knowledgeable about the Book of Allah than ‘Ikrimah’. He passed away in the year 105
AH.

‎Tawiis ibn Kaysdn was also originally from Yemen. He met fifty of the companions, and‏ اك
‎became one of the great scholars. He also studied with some of the great students of the‏
‎companions. Ibn ‘Abbas said: ‘Indeed, I think ‘Tawas is from the people of Paradise’. He died‏
‎in the year 106 AH.‏

‎© His full name is Jabir ibn Zayd al-Azdi al-Bas¢i. Ibn ‘Abbas said about him: “He is from the
scholars’, He died in the year 93 AH.

‎87

Some of these [mentioned above] are distinguished scholars.
From the scholars of Madinah who specialised in tafsir is Zayd
ibn Aslam.® His students include Imam Malik, and his own son
‘Abdul-Rahman. ‘Abdul-Rahman was the teacher of ‘Abdullah
ibn Wahb.

Mursal hadith which are reported by many narrators to the extent
that there can be no chance of intentional or incidental collusion
between the narrators, are without doubt authentic. A narration
can be authentic and correct, or false in which the narrator
intentionally lied or made a mistake. If we can establish that it is
free of lies and mistakes then it is undoubtedly authentic.

Are mursal hadith authentic and correct or not? A mursal hadith
is when the one narrating from the Prophet (38) did not hear
from him, whether it is a companion or a 2251. For example, if
Muhammad ibn Abii Bakr narrated a hadith from the Prophet
(3%) we would class it as mursal. He never heard from him as
he was born in the year of the Farewell Pilgrimage. Despite this
being the case the scholars state the »ursal hadith of companions
is sufficient as evidence. As for the tabi‘iin, it differs from person
to person; some are accepted while others are not. As for those
who are known to only narrate from companions such as 4
ibn al-Mussayib, who it is said only narrates mursal hadith from
Abt Hurayrah, then his mursal is authentic. However, those
not of this stature must have each of their narrations taken on
its individual merit. If the narration has a number of narrators
and it has been accepted then it is also classed as authentic. An
example of this is the hadith of ‘Amr ibn Hazm that the Prophet
(%) wrote a letter to the people of Yemen instructing them in
matters of blood money and Zakdt, and in it he wrote: “Let none
except those in a state of purity touch the Qur’an.”*

‎Zayd ibn Aslam died in 136 AH. He was a very distinguished scholar of the Qur’an from‏ ذه
‎among the students of Ubayy ibn Kab.‏

‎See Muwatta’ Malik, vol. 1, p. 199.

‎88

Therefore, if a hadith has been narrated from two or more
chains and it is known that the narrators did not conspire in its
differences, and that it is not possible to agree on such a thing
incidentally, the narration is classed as authentic. It is like a
person who mentions an incident which took place, explaining
in detail what was said and done, and then another person who
cannot have conspired with the first mentions the exact same
story in detail. It is known that on the whole the story is true. If
they had conspired to lie about the story or had mistakenly done
so, it would not be conceivable that they would agree on all the
details, as without collusion such a thing would be impossible.

It is possible that a person may compose a verse of poetry and
another happens to also compose the same verse, or one tells
a particular lie which happens to be the same lie another tells
without having colluded with the first. However, if a person was
to compose a lengthy poem containing all types of rhythmical
styles and techniques, it is not possible that someone else would
compose the exact same poem with the same words and meanings,
rather it is known that the latter took from the former. Likewise,
if someone mentions a long narration containing much detail
and another person narrates the same thing, then the latter either
colluded with the former, or he copied him, or else the narration is
true. Using this method it is possible to determine the authenticity
of narrations which are reported through different transmissions,
even though each individual narration is not sufficient on its own
due to a missing link present or the weakness of a narrator.

The author (may Allah have mercy upon him) states that if a
mursal hadith has been reported with a number of different chains
of narration, and there is no collusion or accidental agreement
possible then the narration is classified as authentic. He then
gave an example of this: A person narrates an incident to you
mentioning details such as what was said and done, and who was
present, however you do not deem such a person trustworthy.
Then a second person came and narrated the same incident with
the same details, and you know that he cannot have colluded

89

with the first, and then a third and fourth also come with the
same story. Even if each individual was not trustworthy on his
own, the fact that they have all agreed on such a lengthy story
signifies that it is true.

If on the other hand, it was a short story which was narrated
by a number of people, and the narrators are not trustworthy
then it is possible that they may have collaborated with one
another. For example, if they wish to deceive people, one may
claim that a missile landed in a certain place without giving any
precise details, and another may also come with the same general
story. It is possible here that such a story was planned in order
to deceive. However, a lengthy and detailed description would
be more convincing, unless we know that the narrators colluded
with another.

This is briefly what the author has mentioned here. He is
stressing how a mursal hadith due to its different chains may
become authentic. In terms of a mursal hadith, all the narrators
are attributing the hadith to the Prophet (#8), and the fact they
all agree on this makes it more likely that it is indeed a prophetic
hadith, as it is not plausible that the likes of these narrators would
all attribute something to the Prophet (38) without any basis.

Also note that the author emphasises the above as being something
which people can relate to, and does not use intellect as the basis
of his reasoning but rather the norm and custom of people. This
is because matters such as narrations are not judged by intellect,
as Ibn Hajar mentions.

90
However this method cannot be used in pinpointing the accuracy
of words and details; the accuracy of such things must be
established via another method.

The above mentioned method alluded to by the author is not
sufficient in guaranteeing the accuracy of words and details, rather
a more authentic method must be employed for such things.

Here, the author is not discussing mursal hadith, but incidents
and narrations in general. Accuracy in words and details must
be established using an authentic method. Therefore, the general
outline of the incident can be validated via this method, but the
accuracy of the details requires a more stringent method.

91

Thus, the battle of Badr has been established by recurring
narrations. It is established that it took place before the battle of
Uhud. Furthermore, it is also established that Hamzah, ‘Ali and
Abii ‘Ubaydah had a duel with ‘Utbah, Shaybah and Walid, that
‘Ali killed Walid, and Hamzah killed his opponent. However
there is a difference [of opinion] over who his opponent was, was
it ‘Utbah or Shaybah?

This is an essential principal to remember, and is very beneficial
in determining the truthfulness of narrations in hadith, tafsir and
military expeditions, and what people said or did. For this reason,
if a prophetic hadith has been narrated with two different chains,
and it is known that one narrator did not collaborate with the
other, we can be certain that the narration is true. This is even
more so if the narrators are those who would not intentionally
lie, rather the most that is feared for them is that they may make
a mistake or forget.

The one who is familiar with companions such as Ibn Mas‘tid,
Ubayy ibn Ka‘b,*> Ibn ‘Umar, Jabir,* Abi 521077 and Abt
Hurayrah** would know that they would never intentionally
ascribe a lie to the Prophet (38), let alone those who are greater in
status than them. This is similar to a person who knows another
well due to his extensive experiences with him. He knows he
would not steal, ambush or give false testimonies.

This can also be said about the tabi‘fin of Madinah, Makkah,
Sham and Basrah. Whoever is familiar with the likes of Abi

‎Ubayy ibn K‘ab al-Angari, one of the scribes of the Qur'an who later taught it in Madinah,‏ كك
‎He died during the reign of ‘Umar.‏

‎Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah, died 78 AH. He was one of the most prolific transmitters of hadith.‏ »د

‎* Abii Sa‘id Sa‘d ibn Malik al-Khudri, one of the companions who was constantly in the
service of the Prophet at different times and a prolific narrator of hadith.

‎Abii Hurayrah, died 58 AH, He was the greatest narrator of hadith; his narrations number‏ "د
‎well over a thousand.‏

‎92
Salih al-Samman,® al-A‘raj, Sulayman ibn Yasar,“! Zayd ibn
Aslam and their contemporaries will know that they would
not purposefully ascribe lies to the Prophet (#5), let alone those
scholars who are greater than them such as Muhammad ibn
Sirin,® al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyib,™
‘Alqamah,® al-Aswad® and others.

Rather what is feared is that they may have made errors, as
mistakes and forgetfulness often affect people. However, certain
scholars are known to be far from this. This is known about the
likes of al-Sha‘bi, al-Zuhri, ‘Urwah, Qatadah® and al-Thawri,®*
especially al-Zuhri and al-Thawri in their times. It is said: ‘Indeed,

» His name is Dhakwan, He narrated from some of the companions, A‘mash narrated a
thousand hadith from him. Imam Ahmad said concerning, him: ‘very trustworthy’. He died
in the year 101 AH.

© ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn Hurmuz, the reciter. He studied under some of the companions. His
students include al-Zuhri, Muhammad ibn Muslim and Abu Zinad. Imam al-Bukhari stated:
“The most authentic of chains are Abii Zindd from al-A‘raj from Abi Hurayrah’. He died in
‘Alexandria in the year 117 AH.

4 He was one of the seven jurists of Madinah, He was the teacher of Qatadab, al-Zuhri and
“Amr ibn Shu‘ayb. He died around the year 100 AH at the age of 73.

© Muhammad ibn Sirin was the freed slave of Anas. He studied under some of the companions
and taught a number of leading tabi‘tn. Ibn Sa‘d said: “He was trustworthy, a distinguished
and geeat scholar and jurist, possessing vast knowledge’. He died in the year 110AH.

© The grandson of Abi Bakr and one of the seven jurists of Madinah. Abii Zinad said: ‘I
have never seen anyone more knowledgeable of the Sunnah than him’, He died in the year
106 AH.

 Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyib, one of the leading, most distinguished and most knowledgeable
scholars of the tabi‘. ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar said: ‘He is, by Allah, one who is followed."
Abii Hatim said: ‘The most trustworthy narrator from Abi Hurayrah.’ He died in the year
93 AH.

© ‘Algamah ibn Qays al-Nakha‘F; he narrated from the four rightly guided caliphs and their
generation, He died in the year 62 AH.

> Al-Aswad ibn Yazid ibn Qays, he was a student of Ibn Mas‘td, ‘A’ishah and Ab Musa. It
is said he would finish the Qur'an every two nights, and that he performed Hajj eighty times.
He died in the year 74 AH,

© QatSdah ibn Difamah al-Basri. He narrated from Anas, Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyib and Ibn
Sirin, He died in the year 117 AH.

 Sufyan al-Thawri al-Kifi. He was one of the great scholars known for his memorisation,
knowledge and piety. He passed away in the year 161 AH.

93
Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri rarely erred even though he narrated many
hadiths.’

The point here is that if a hadith has been narrated from two
different chains without collaboration, then it cannot be a
mistake or a lie. A lengthy story cannot be one big mistake; rather
parts of it may contain errors. Therefore, if a person narrates a
long and detailed story, and another narrates exactly the same
story without collusion then both stories cannot be a mistake,
just as they cannot be lies. As such, the mistakes which occur
can be concerning certain details within the story, like the hadith
in which the Prophet (#) bought a camel from Jabir. Whoever
contemplates the different chains of the hadith will realise that the
hadith is authentic, even though the narrations differ concerning
the exact price of the camel.

We have already mentioned this point. The accuracy of details
within a story must be established via a more authentic and
trustworthy method.

94

This is also explained by al-Bukhari in his Sabih, for the majority
of what is in Bukhari and Muslim can be ascribed to the Prophet
(3) with certainty, as it is of this calibre, and the Ummah has
accepted it as such, and the whole Muslim nation cannot unite
upon error. For if a hadith is a lie but the Ummah accepts it as
truthful, they have in essence accepted a lie. This is unity upon
error and is impossible. Without unity and consensus it is possible
that a narration contains a mistake or lie, just as this is possible
in an analogy in which the truth may be in the opposite of what
we believed. However, once unity is achieved upon a matter, we
affirm its wording and meaning.

This is clear, for sometimes you may come across a hadith and
know that the meaning is such and such, but there is a slight
possibility that there is another implicit meaning which is
being referred to. However, once consensus is reached that the
intended meaning is the apparent one; the implicit meaning can
be disregarded as the Ummah does not unite upon error.

For example, the difference in narrations over the exact price
of Jabir’s camel does not cause the hadith to become disordered
(mudtarib),® as this disorder is not in the basis of the hadith but
in some of the details which ultimately do not have an effect
on the overall hadith. Similar to this is the difference present in
the hadith of Fudalah ibn ‘Ubayd concerning the price of the
necklace; was it twelve din@rs, or more or less? This difference
also has no bearing as it does not affect the basis of the story.

© ‘Translator’s note: This is a hadith on which a number of reports with the same strength
differ; thus, neither compromise nor abrogation can be applied.

9S

For this reason, the majority of scholars from all of the different
schools of thought agree that if a hadith reported with a single
narrator in its chain of narration is accepted or approved by
action then it is sufficient as evidence. This is mentioned by the
authors of Usil al-Figh (principles of jurisprudence) from all
the schools of figh: the students of Abi Hanifah, Malik, 66
and Ahmad. This opinion is opposed by a minority of latter time
scholars who chose the opinion of some theologians. However,
the majority of theologians agree with the jurists, scholars of
hadith and predecessors on this.

This is the opinion of the majority of Ash‘arite scholars such as
Abii Ishag and Ibn Fawrak.” Ibn al-Baqillani is the one who held
the opposing opinion, and was followed by Abul-Ma‘ali,”! Aba
Hamid,” Ibn ‘Aqil,”’ [bn al-Jawzi,” Ibn al-Khatib,’> al- Amadi”
and others. The first opinion is also supported by Abi: Hamid,
Abu al-Tayyib, Abu Ishaq and their likes from the Shafi school,
Qadi ‘Abdul-Wahhab and his likes from the Maliki school, Shams
ul-Din al-Sarakhsi and others from the Hanafi school, and Abii
Ya‘la, Abul-Khattab, and Abul-Hasan from the Hanbali school.

Here, the author has made mention of the scholars of all four
madhabs, and this shows his vast knowledge in various fields. This

* Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Isfahant, died 406 AH. He was an Ash'ari scholar in theology
who followed the Shafi" school of law.

7! Abul-Ma‘ali ‘Abdul-Malik al-Juwayni famously known as Imam al-Haramayn. He died in
478 AH and was the teacher of Imam al-Ghavzali.

” Abt Hamid al-Ghazil, the famous scholar noted for his many works in various disciplines,
especially known for his criticism of Greek philosophy and the defense of the Islamic faith.

7Ali ibn ‘Aqil, died 513 AH, He was a great Hanbali scholar from Baghdad.

> Abul-Farj, ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn al-Jawzi who died in 597 AH. He was a great Hanbali
scholar and a prolific writer. His works exceed three hundred volumes.

75 Ahmad ibn ‘Ali, commonly known as al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, died in 463 AH. He was
most famous for his history of Baghdad in fourteen volumes.

© Abul-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Amadi. He was born and raised in Baghdad, taught in

Egypt and later died in Damascus in 631 AH.

96

issue is an issue which pertains to the principles of jurisprudence
and the science of hadith. If a narration with a single narrator
is accepted or acted upon, does that then signify certainty and
knowledge regarding that narration? There is a difference of
opinion regarding this as the author mentions; the majority hold
the opinion that it is sufficient. Ibn Hajar states that it is only
sufficient as evidence when there are signs which attest to this,
and this is the correct opinion.

No one doubts that the Prophet (#) said: “Verily, actions are only
judged by their intentions, and for everyone is that which they
intended,””’ even though its chain possesses a single narrator.
Likewise, we don’t doubt that the Prophet (3) said: “Whoever
performs an action [whose basis] is not from us will have it
rejected,”’* even though it has only a single narrator in its chain.
Even though these and similar hadiths only have single narrators
in their chains, they are sufficient as evidence due to their many
supporting evidences and due to the Ummah accepting them.

” Sahih al-Bukhari, no. 1 and Sabib Muslim, no. 1907,
* Sabib Muslim, ‏.مد‎

97
If consensus upon a narration is sufficient in establishing it, then
the consensus which is applicable is that of the scholars of hadith.
Just as consensus in practical rulings is sought with the scholars
who specialise in orders, prohibitions and recommendations, so
is the case with this.

The author here is stressing that the consensus sought in each field
is with the specialists of that field. In the science of hadith we seek
the consensus of the scholars of hadith, so if those scholars agree
that a narration with a single narrator in its chain is sufficient as
evidence when accepted by the Ummah and supported by other
signs, then we pay no attention to others [outside this speciality]
who may oppose this opinion. Likewise, the consensus sought in
rulings - what is obligatory, prohibited, recommended, disliked
etc. — is with the scholars who specialise in this, i.e. the jurists.
Similarly, in grammatical issues consensus is sought with the
grammarians, and so on.

The reason for this is that a specialist in a field is more
knowledgeable in that field than others. Therefore, a jurist does
not know about the consensus of grammarians, or the scholars of
hadith etc. Therefore, we apply the consensus of the scholars of
each field in their field. If the jurists claim that a narration with a
single narrator in its chain is not sufficient as evidence, we ignore
this opposition; rather we seek the consensus of the scholars of
badith in this issue.

98

The point being made is that a narration possessing multiple
transmissions in which no collusion or agreement is possible,
is sufficient in establishing the content narrated. This is more
beneficial when one is aware of the state of the narrators.

If, for example, a grammarian was to state: ‘The scholars have
agreed upon the obligation of covering the ‘awrab in the prayer,”
we would reply that this is not your speciality. Rather mention
the different grammatical positions of verbs etc. and we will agree
with this. This is why the author mentions: This is more beneficial
when one is aware of the state of the narrators, meaning is the
one who is narrating from the jurists, grammarians or scholars of
principles of jurisprudence?

99

In this regard, one may benefit from the narrations of an unknown
narrator or one possessing bad memory, or a mursal hadith. For
this reason the scholars would write down such narrations and
say: ‘What can’t be used as evidence itself may be used in order
to support another evidence’. Imam Ahmad would state: ‘I may
write the narrations of a man in order to consider them.’ He then
gave ‘Abdullah ibn Lahiy‘ah, the Egyptian judge as an example
of such a man. He was a pious man who narrated many hadiths,
but when his books were burnt, his later narrations had mistakes
in them, so he was a narrator who was considered and used to
support others. He is often compared to al-Layth ibn Sa‘d;”
Layth was a trustworthy authority and imam.

Here, the statement of Imam Ahmad is mentioned, ‘I may write
the narrations of a man in order to consider them,’ To consider
them here does not mean to use them as evidence, but to use them
as supporting evidences. Ibn Hajar said: ‘To consider is to follow
the different narrations.’ Here we have two terms, a shahid and a
mutabi‘. A shahid is when we use a different hadith with a different
chain of narration as supporting evidence for the hadith we wish
to support. A mutabi‘ takes place in the same chain of narration,
meaning that a narrator is supported by another narrator in his
narration. For example, if an untrustworthy narrator narrated
from al-Zuhri, and al-Zuhri is trustworthy, we must look for
another person who will support the untrustworthy narrator in
his narration from al-Zuhri. If we find a strong narrator then he
is used to support the first. The example of a shabid would be
when we find a different narration other than al-Zuhri’s which
states the same as his narration. This is what is being referred to
in Imam Ahmad’s statement: ‘...in order to consider them,’ i.e.
in order to consider whether there is a shahid or mutabi‘ which
supports this narration.

» Abul-Harith al-Layth ibn S‘ad, died 175 AH. He was the most famous scholar of Egypt in
his time. He was also a fagih of some eminence being classed as more proficient than Imam.
Malik by al-Shafi.

100

This is the reason why Imam Ahmad often uses the narration
of ‘Abdullah ibn Lahiy‘ah in his Musnad. Whoever heard from
him before his books were burnt is considered to be strong in
terms of evidence. Whoever heard from him after his books were
burnt, his narrations are doubtful and not trustworthy, as the
state of this imam changed after this incident. If we are unable
to determine whether the one narrating from Ibn Lahiy‘ah heard
from him before or after his books were burnt, we cease to pass
judgement. However, the narrations of the second category are
considered to be wrong.

101
Just as they use the hadiths of the one with bad memory as
supporting evidence, they may also classify the hadith of a
trustworthy and reliable narrator as weak due to apparent and
clear errors found in some narrations. This is known as the
science of “lal al-badith (the hidden defects in hadith), and is one
of the most noble and advanced sciences in the field of hadith.
This is when one who is usually trustworthy and reliable makes
an error in his narrations, and his error has become known.

It is known that the Prophet (3) married Maymiinah whilst he
was not in a state of ibram,*° and that he prayed two rak‘abs
inside the Ka‘bah.*! The narrations of Ibn ‘Abbas which state that
he (38) married whilst in a state of ipra@m* and that he did not
pray inside the Ka‘bah are mistaken. Likewise, it is also known
that the Prophet (#) only performed four ‘Umrahs,® and that the
statement of [bn ‘Umar which claims he made ‘Umrah in Rajab
is also mistaken.

Even though these are all trustworthy narrators, no one is safe
from making mistakes. Therefore, the Prophet (3%) married
Mayminah whilst not in the state of ibram, as this was attested
to by Maymiinah herself, and by Abti Rafi‘ who was the emissary
between the two. Likewise, the narration which mentions that
he prayed inside the Ka‘bah is also established. The opposing
narration of Ibn ‘Abbas at the most, implies he had no knowledge
of this event.

Similarly, it is also established that the Prophet (%) performed
four Umrahs. The ‘Umrah of Hudaybiyyah, the ‘Umrah of Qada’,
the ‘Umrah from Ji‘irranah and the ‘Umrah performed with his
farewell Hajj. These are the only four “Umrahs he performed.
The statement of Ibn ‘Umar that he also performed ‘Umrah in
Rajab is a mistake which he made.

© Sunan al-Tirmidbi, no. 841.

* Collected by Ahmad in al-Musnad.

® Sabih al-Bukbari, no. 4258 and Sahib Muslim, no. 1410.
® Sabih al-Bukbari, no. 1775 and 1776.

102

It is also well known that the Prophet ‏(قة)‎ performed tamattu‘ in
a state of security during his farewell Hajj. Thus, the narration
in which ‘Uthman said to ‘Ali; ‘We were in a state of fear on that
day’ is also mistaken.

‘Uthman () did not see the validity of tamattu‘. Thus he stated
that the only reason the Prophet (3%) performed it was due to
being in a state of fear. However this is incorrect, as the Prophet
(#) performed tamattu‘ whilst being as safe as one can be.

™ Sahib Muslim, no. 1223.

103

Another example of this is what is reported in some narrations in
Sabib al-Bukhari: “The Hellfire will not be full until Allah creates
another creation for it.” This is also a narration which contains
a mistake.

This example is also known to contain a mistake, and that is that
after the inhabitants of the Fire have entered into it, there will
still remain some space in it, so Allah will create another creation
in order to fill it. This is incorrect. The Fire will continue to be
filled and will continue to say: ‘Is there more?’ until Allah places
His foot over it. Then it will constrict and say ‘Enough, enough.”
Furthermore, if Allah was to create another creation just to fill
the Fire with them this would contradict His justice and mercy.
Therefore, it is realised that this narration is incorrect even if
it is present in Sabih al-Bukb@ri, and the narrator has made a
mistake.

104

People are of two extremes in this issue. A group of scholastic
theologians and their likes who are unfamiliar with the science
of hadith and its scholars, do not differentiate between authentic
and weak narrations. This causes them to doubt the authenticity
of hadiths even though they are classified as authentic by the
scholars of this science. The other group claims to follow badiths
wherever they find a wording narrated by a trustworthy person, or
a hadith which appears to be authentic, considering it to be from
among those hadiths whose authenticity has been established by
the scholars. Even if they contradict a well known and authentic
hadith, they will instead revert to facile interpretations or insist
it is an evidence for a certain issue even though the scholars of
hadith consider it to be incorrect.

This last statement by the author is something which many
people fall into today. You find people depending upon the
apparent chain of narration, correcting badiths without focusing
on those hadiths which are considered to be like the mountains
of the Sunnah. This is an issue I am constantly warning about: If
hadiths which are not found in the well known books of hadith
— even if they have an apparent authentic chain of narration -
contradict hadiths which are found in such books and have been
widely accepted, then the former should not be depended upon.
Therefore, we do not only rely upon the chain of narration in
determining the authenticity of a hadith. Rather all these issues
must be judged using the general principles of the sharfah. Here,
the author clarifies that the chain of narration of a hadith may be
authentic but the text of the hadith inauthentic. Likewise, certain
people who claim to have knowledge in the field of hadith, and
claim to be scholars of this science, depend upon such hadiths
which even though apparently authentic contradict those hadiths
which are far more established and more widely accepted.

105

Just as there are signs by which one can come to know and
establish that a hadith is truthful, there are signs which also point
to a hadith being a fabrication. An example of this is what is
narrated by the fabricators and people of innovation in certain
matters of superiority (fada’il), such as the hadith concerning the
day of ‘Ashiira’ which states that whoever prays two rak‘ahs will
receive the reward of such and such prophets.

In the books of tafsir many such fabrications exist. An example
of this is the hadith narrated by al-Tha‘labi, al-Wahidi and al-
Zamakhshari regarding the superiority of the chapters of the
Qur’an. These are fabricated by the agreement of the scholars.
Al-Tha‘labi himself was a good and pious man, but he was like a
wood gatherer at night. He would copy whatever he found in the
books of tafsir, whether authentic, weak or fabricated.

A wood gatherer at night does not distinguish between dry and
moist wood, or even what may be wood or a snake; he just
gathers what he finds.

106

Al-Wahidi was his companion and was more knowledgeable
than him in the Arabic language, but more distant in terms
of following the pious predecessors. Al-Baghawi’s tafsir is a
summary of al-Tha‘labi’s. However, he preserved his book from
fabricated hadiths and innovated opinions often found in other
books of tafsir.

This is a review of these books by Shaykh ul-Islam (may Allah
have mercy upon him); he mentioned the books of al-Tha‘labi,
al-Wahidi and al-Baghawi. The summary being that al-Baghawi’s
tafsir is the best of the three.

If one were to ask: ‘Does mentioning the chain of a narration
of a fabricated hadith vindicate placing it in a book of tafsir?’ I
would reply that even though this frees him from blame, it should
still be avoided. This is with regards to fabricated hadiths; weak
hadiths are a lighter matter. However fabricated hadiths should
be avoided.

107

Examples include the many hadiths mentioning that the basmalah
is said aloud, and the long hadith of ‘Ali where he gave his ring
in charity whilst praying. These are considered fabricated by the
agreement of the scholars.

The shaykh is referring to the lengthy hadith of ‘Ali, which is
narrated via several transmissions and collected by al-Tabari and
others in the exegesis of the verse:

Your ally is none but Allah and His Messenger and those who
have believed - those who establish prayer and give zakah, and
they bow [in worship].

Strah al-Ma’idah, 5:55

The narration is that a poor man passed by ‘Ali (#) whilst he
was bowing (in ruki‘), so he gave him his ring and this verse was
revealed, Ibn Kathir said concerning these narrations: ‘Absolutely
none of these narrations are authentic due to their weak chains and
unknown narrators.’ Ahmad Shakir said regarding the narration
found in al-Tabari: ‘None of these narrations are sufficient as
evidence.’ The author considers them to be fabricated, i.e. lies
ascribed to the Prophet (38).

‎Tafsir al-Tabari, vol. 4, pp. 628-629.‏ ك5

‎108

This also includes what is narrated regarding the verse:
Vara ata
JO
...and for every people is a guide.
Stirah al-Ra‘d, 13:7

Some state that it refers to ‘Ali.

Be BBR 27

وتعيها أذنوعية

...and [that] a conscious ear would be conscious of it.
Sirah al-Haqqah, 69:12

It has also been said that this also refers to ‘Ali.

It seems that this is the explanation given by the Rafidah, for
they are the ones who normally concoct such notions. There is
no doubt that every nation has a guide, but it is not just ‘Alt.
Allah has made it easy for each nation to have a guide, and at the
head of them are the Messengers. “...And [that] a conscious ear
would be conscious of it,” includes every ear which harkens and
understands what is being said.

A similar narration [to that which the author has mentioned] is
what is reported by Ibn Jarir, Ibn Mardawayh and Abii Nu‘aym
from the narration of Ibn ‘Abbas, that when the verse “Indeed,
you are only a warner and for every people is a guide,” was
revealed, the Prophet (3) placed his hand on his chest and said:
‘Lam the warner.’ He then pointed to ‘Ali and said: ‘You are the
guide © ‘Ali; those guided will be guided through you.’ Ibn
Kathir said: ‘This hadith contains grave errors in it.’*”

% Tafsir al-Tabari.

® Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol. 2, p. 550.

109

110
CHAPTER 5
Se

The Second Category: Differences
in Tafsir Relating to Reasoning and
Deductions

The second of the two categories in which differences occur
relates to reasoning and deduction as opposed to narrations.
Most mistakes which occur in tafsir are as a result of two things
which appeared after the generation of the companions, their
students (tabi‘fin) and those who followed them in righteousness.
For this reason, you will not find any of these two things in the
exegesis and commentaries of those noble scholars, the likes of
“Abdul-Razzaq,** Waki‘, ‘Abd ibn Humayd,” ‘Abdul-Rahman
ibn Ibrahim Duhaym, Imam Ahmad, Ishaq ibn Rahawayh,”! Baqi

« He was ‘Abdul-Razzaq ibn Hamam ibn Naf‘ al-Humayrt al-an‘ani, one of the great
scholars and memorizers. He studied under Ibn Jucayj, Hisham ibn Hassan, Thawr ibn
Yazid, Ma‘mar and Malik. His students included many noteworthy scholars who would
travel to study with him. He was born in the year 126 AH and died in the year 211 AH.

© Waki ibn al-Jarrah ibn Mulayh al-Kafi, a great scholar and student of Hisham ibn ‘Urwah,
Ibn ‘Awn and Shu‘bah, He was from the teachers of Imam Ahmad who said concerning
him: ‘T have not seen his likes in knowledge, memorization and accuracy; on top of that he
possessed piety and god-fearingness.’ He died in the year 196 AH.

% ‘Abd ibn Humayd ibn Nasr al-Kassi, from the teachers of Muslim and al-Tirmidhi. [bn
Hajar said in Tagrib: ‘A teustworthy memorizer.’ He passed away in the year 249 AH.

‎Aba Muhammad Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Rahawayh, died 238 AH. He was the most‏ اد
‎outstanding scholar of hadith and figh in Khurasin during his time.‏

‎111
ibn Mukhlid,” Abii Bakr ibn al-Mundhir, Sufyan ibn Uyaynah,”
Sunayd, Ibn Jarir,” Ibn Abt Hatim,® Abu Sa‘id al-Ashajj, Aba
‘Abdullah ibn Majah®’ and Ibn Mardawayh.

The first problem which arose was people believing in certain
ideologies and then interpreting the Qur’an to fit those ideologies.
The second problem was a group of people who interpreted
the Qur'an just as an average Arabic speaker would, without
considering from whom these words came, to whom it was
revealed and who they were addressing.

Therefore, the first group of people held certain beliefs and
ideologies, and then wanted to use the words of the Qur’an
to support their ideologies. This was in both issues of belief as
well as in practical rulings. As such, you will find a person who
holds a certain belief, trying to change the meanings of the divine
texts in order to support his views, whether this is regarding the
names and attributes of Allah, matters of tawhid or other similar
matters.

For example a person will say, ‘In my opinion, it is allowed for
one to seek closeness to Allah (tawassul) even via the jinn and
devils. The proof for this is the verse: “O you who believe! Fear
Allah and seek the means [of nearness] to Him”®’ so | may seek

” Abi ‘Abdul-Rabman Baqi, a Spanish scholar who died in 276 AH. He was born in Cordoba
and travelled to Makkah, Madinah, Egypt, Syria and Iraq.

® Sufyan ibn Uyaynah ibn Maymin, died 198 AH. He was born in Kifah but later settled in
Makkah. He was a well-known transmitter of hadith.

° Abii Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, died 310 AH. He was a great historian, an
eminent jursist and an outstanding commentator of the Qur’an, He was born in Tabristan
and later settled in Baghdad where he died.

% ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn Aba Hitim al-Razt, died 327 AH. He was a scholar and critic of
hadith who penned many works,

"» Muhammad ibn ‏لتعملا‎ ibn Majah, died 273 AH. He is the compiler of the sixth most
authentic collection of hadith.

7 Stirah al-Ma’idah, 5:35.

112

nearness to Him by any means necessary.’ Similarly, he may
deny the attributes of Allah using as evidence the verse: “There is
nothing like unto Him”® claiming that by affirming an attribute
he has inadvertently likened Allah to His creation. By holding
such views that individual then interprets the Qur’an to support
those views.

The second group of people did not possess any preconceived
views, rather they interpreted the Qur’an literally, without
considering from whom these words originated; Allah, or to
whom they were revealed; the Prophet (3), or who they were
addressing; the ones to whom the Prophet (#) was sent. They
only saw the Qur’an in a very literal way; this is also incorrect.
Everyone agrees that speech can vary in meaning depending upon
who is speaking and to whom his words are being addressed.

An example of this is that if a nobleman was to identify a fault
in you, and the same fault was also identified by a person of very
low social standing, the criticism of the former would have a
greater impact than the criticism of the latter. Even though both
identified the same fault, the words of a nobleman hold greater
weight. Another example of this is if you were to say to someone:
‘I swear you are a small man.’ This statement would be deemed
as praise if the one being addressed is a boy. At the same time,
the statement would be dispraise to a fully grown and intellectual
man. Therefore, words hold different connotations depending on
who one is addressing. Certain people only interpret the meanings
of the Qur’an and hadith literally without taking into account the
speaker, audience and other similar factors.

°% Stirah al-Shiird, 42:11.

113
The first group concentrated on meanings that suited them without
paying any attention to the real implications and contexts of the
verses. The second group concentrated on the words and how
they were used by the Arabs and disregarded the context of the
verses. This group also mistakenly interprets words of the Arabic
language thinking that their interpretations are linguistically
correct. The first group also falls into this error, but more so
[their error is that] as they are incorrect in the interpretations
they give to the meanings of the Qur’an; the other group is also
guilty of this. The first group prefers to concentrate on meanings
and the other group places emphasis on words.

It is obligatory upon a person that when he looks at a word he
also considers the different contexts attached to that word, such
as the speaker and the audience etc. This is something well known
as even ones facial expressions can have an impact. A person
who speaks with a harsh tone, redness in his eyes, puffed cheeks
and a temper is not similar to one who speaks with calmness and
gentleness. The first throws off sparks whilst the second does
not.

Here, the author (may Allah have mercy upon him) has mentioned
two categories of people. A group who consider the meanings
but twist them to support their own beliefs, and a group with no
preconceived notions, who take the literal meaning of the word
irrespective of the context of the words.

114

The first group is further divided into two sub-groups; a group
which strips the words of the Qur’an of their real and intended
meaning, and a group which gives the words meanings which
they do not convey. In both instances, that which they wish to
affirm or negate may be incorrect and therefore they have erred
in both the evidence and the ideology they wish to support with
it, or that particular idea may be correct in which case they have
only erred in the way they use the evidence. Just as this method
is present in the exegesis of the Qur’an, it is also present in the
exegesis of hadith.

Those who err in both the evidence and the ideology such as
the sects of the people of innovation oppose the truth which the
moderate Ummah holds onto; they are those who do not agree
upon misguidance such as the predecessors of this nation.

They interpret the Qur’an and twist it to support their views.
At times they use verses as evidence even though these verses do
not support them, and at times they twist and change that which
contradicts their views, thus distorting these words from their
proper usages.

The difference between using verses as evidence, even though
those verses do not support particular views and explaining away
verses which contradict those views can better be highlighted
by use of an example. The Mu‘attilah state regarding the verse
“There is nothing like unto Him” that ‘this implies that we do not
affirm for Allah any attribute which the creation possesses.’ This
statement of theirs is incorrect and the verse does not support this
view. Sometimes this group may distort the meanings of words
and say, ‘[Allah’s] hand means power or blessing’ so even though
they affirm the attribute they distort its meaning. Therefore, they
either give words meanings they don’t convey or explain away
meanings they do convey.

A further example of this is what is prevalent in our times. It
includes those who interpret the Qur’an with what they refer to

115

as miraculous wonders of the Qur’an, for sometimes they too
interpret the Qur’an incorrectly. It is true that these people have
made many good deductions which attest to the truthfulness of the
Qur’an and that it is from Allah. This is especially beneficial for
da‘wah to non-Muslims who rely upon intellectual evidences and
what they can sense in order to establish the truthfulness of what
the Messenger (3) came with. However, at times they interpret the
words of the Qur’dn with meanings those words do not convey.
For example, the verse, “O company of jinn and mankind, if you
are able to pass beyond the regions of the heavens and the earth,
then pass. You will not pass except by authority [from Allab].””
They claim these verses predict the landing on the moon and
other planets, for they interpret ‘authority’ in this verse to mean
‘knowledge’. This is without a doubt distortion, and it is haram
to give such an interpretation. One who contemplates over the
verse will realise that it is discussing the Day of Judgement, and
the context in which this verse comes supports this. Allah says,
“If you are able to pass beyond the regions of the heavens and
the earth, then pass.” These people have not even reached the
heavens, let alone pass beyond them. The next verse then states,
“There will be sent upon you a flame of fire and smoke” — no
such thing happens to astronauts.

The point being made here is there are people who go to extremes
in trying to prove matters using the Qur’an which the verses do
not support, and there are others who deny what the Qur’dn
supports. If the Qur’an supports recent discoveries then one
can explain the words of the Qur’an as such. This is only if the
words convey that meaning, otherwise one must avoid conveying
meanings which do not exist.

® Sirah al-Rabman, 55:33.

116
From these groups are the Khawarij,!° Rawafid, Jahmiyyah,'™
Muttazilah,'? Qadariyyah', Murji’ah'* and others. From
amongst them the Mu‘tazilah are especially known for their
rhetoric and argumentation.

‘The Khawarij take the verses of punishment and what apparently
refers to disbelief, and say that a Muslim becomes a disbeliever
by committing a major sin, The Rafidah distort the Qur’an and
will say that the verse: “He released the two seas, meeting [side
by side]”! refers to Fatimah. They also state that the verse “as
was the accursed tree [mentioned] in the Qur’an”' refers to
Banii Umayyah. They have many such evil interpretations - we
seek refuge from Allah - they distort the words of the Qur’an
which dispraise and use them against their opponents, and then
distort the verses of praise and use them for those they support.

Likewise, the Jahmiyyah, the followers of Jam ibn Safwan,
distort all the verses pertaining to the attributes of Allah. They

‘© Originally the Khawarij are those who left the camp of ‘All after he agreed to arbitration
between himself and Mu‘awiyah after the Battle of Siffin. They condemned arbitration as an
act of disbelief. Later, they held that all who committed major sins were disbelievers. Many
of their sub-sects have now disappeared although some remnants still remain,

°° The Jahmiyyah are the followers of Jahm ibn Safwan who was executed by Ibn ‘Ajwan
al-Muzani in 123 AH. They believe that man has no free will and that faith only comprises of
the knowledge of Allah and no action, Among their beliefs is that the Qur'an is created.

(2 Mu'tazilah is the name given to Wasil ibn ‘Ata’ and others who followed him when he left
his teacher al-Hasan al-Basti. He left over the issue regarding the position of the one who
commits a major sin. Wasil held that he was neither a Muslim nor a disbeliever, instead he
was in a position between the two.

 Qadariyyah are those who deny the pre-decree of Allah and His creation of human
actions. Instead, they assert that man is completely free in his will and choice and as such is
the creator of his own actions.

°°! The Murji’ah are the extreme opponents of the Khawarij. They believe that faith is mere
knowledge and that it is not lost through sin, no matter how grave the sin may be. As for
whether or not such a person will be punished in the Hereafter, this is left to the Will of
Allah,

6 Sirah al-Rahman, 55:19.
"6 Sirah al-Isra’, 17:60.

117

believe that Allah possesses no attributes and that His names
are void of meaning. Yet others from them claim that Allah has
neither names nor attributes, and that these names refer to His
creation. However we praise Allah for He states in the Qur’an,
“and Allah guided those who believed to the truth concerning
that over which they had differed.”!”

The Mu'tazilah are the followers of Wasil ibn ‘Ata’ and ‘Amr
ibn ‘Ubayd, and as Shaykh al-Islam describes them; are known
for their excessive rhetoric. This is because they constantly refer
to the intellect and give no weight to religious texts, even in
matters which the intellect does not comprehend. Their principle
concerning the attributes of Allah is that which is affirmed by
intellect is real, irrespective of whether or not it is supported
by the Qur’an and Sunnab. Similarly, that which is negated by
intellect is denied whether or not it is present in the Qur’an and
Sunnah. As for that which is neither affirmed nor negated by
intellect, most of them deny it claiming that they only affirm what
is affirmed by intellect. Others do not pass judgement on this last
category as intellect neither supports nor negates it. In all of this
they go to extreme lengths in producing arguments and rhetoric.
You would be amazed at the lengths they go to, although their
arguments are futile. They contradict one another. You will find
that one asserts that Allah must be described with such and such
an attribute, while another argues it is impossible for Allah to be
described with that attribute. These contradictory statements are
sufficient in depicting their futility.

17 Sirah al-Baqarah, 2:213

118
They have authored commentaries of the Qur’dn based upon
their beliefs and principles, such as the tafsir of ‘Abdul-Rahman
ibn Kaysan al-Asamm, the teacher of Ibrahim ibn Isma‘l ibn
‘Ulayyah who used to debate with al-Shafit. Likewise there is the
book of Abii ‘Ali al-Jubba’i,!°* Tafsir al-Kabir by Qadi ‘Abdul-
Jabbar ibn Ahmad al-Hamdani,'® al-Ja@mi’ li-‘Ilm al-Qur’an
by ‘Ali ibn ‘Isa al-Rummani, and al-Kashaf by Abul-Qasim al-
Zamakhshari. All of these authors and others like them held the
beliefs of the Mu‘tazilah.

Al-Kashaf by Abul-Qasim az-Zamakhshari is a famous and
widely available book. It excels in terms of language and
eloquence, but as the author mentions it conforms to the beliefs
of the Mu‘tazilah. However, the only person who will be able
to discern this is one who has knowledge of their beliefs and the
beliefs of Ahlus-Sunnah. This is due to the author’s eloquence
and style; he will mention something which will seem correct
when in reality it is the opposite. For example in the verse, “So
he who is drawn away from the Fire and admitted to Paradise
has attained [his desire].”"'° He comments, ‘Which success is
greater than entering Paradise and being saved from the Fire?”
This is a good statement, however what is intended by it is to
deny that the believers will see Allah in the Hereafter; this is the
greatest of rewards as Allah says, “For them who have done
good is the best [reward] - and extra.”""' If a person was to read
al-Zamakhshari’s words he would think they were correct, as
there is no greater reward than entering Paradise and being saved
from the Fire. However one will not realise that he is denying
the seeing of Allah, for this is the greatest reward and is greater

‘8 Aba ‘Ali Muhammad ibn ‘Abdul-Wahhab al-Jubba’i, died 303 AH. He was one of the
leaders of the Mu‘tazilah and is also credited with a commentary on the Qur'an.

4 Qadi ‘Abdul-Jabbar ibn Ahmad al-Hamdani, died 415 AH. He was an eminent Muttazili
writer, theologian and judge who wrote many works.

‎Sirah [-Imrdn, 3:185.‏ 0د
‎Stirah Yinus, 10:26.‏ الل

‎119

than entering Paradise. As such, al-Zamakhshari has statements
of this nature in which he plays with the minds. If one is not
aware of this, and is unfamiliar with the beliefs of the Mu‘tazilah
and the beliefs of Ahlus-Sunnah then he will be misguided. This
is in relation to his commentary on the names and attributes of
Allah and other beliefs they hold. His comments on language and
eloquence however are good.

120
The principles of the Mu‘tazilah are five: tawhid, justice, the
station between two stations, implementation of the punishment
and ordering the good and forbidding the evil. Their concept
of tawhid is similar to that of the Jahmiyyah’s, i.e. denying the
attributes of Allah.

They claim that from their principles is tawhid (oneness of Allah),
however their concept of tawhid is different. Another principle is
justice, which is also a great principle as Allah says,

sy sich 72 ahaliy

Indeed, Allah orders justice and good conduct
Strah al-Nahl, 16:90

The third principle is the station between two stations. In order to
understand what they mean by this we will put forth an example:
There is a man who performs all his religious duties and refrains
from sins, another who is a believer who has committed major
sins and a third who is a disbeliever. Are all three equal in station?
They claim that the believer who committed major sins is in a
station between the other two stations, i.e. neither a believer nor
a disbeliever.

The fourth principle is implementation of punishments. They
argue that Allah has ordained punishments for certain sins which
do not amount to disbelief. For example, Allah says,

‎EACH‏ 24 2د كد
وَمَن ‎RGR 0B SS al Sa Se Sai‏
‎Ae‏ 4 و ري ]سو 1-62
‎NING AS5 fe SESS‏
عَدَابَعَظِيجًا ©
‎But whoever kills a believer intentionally - his recompense is‏
‎Hell, wherein he will abide eternally, and Allah has become‏
‎angry with him and has cursed him and has prepared for him a‏

‎great punishment.
Sirah al-Nisv’, 4:93

‎121

Likewise, included in this is the Prophet’s (3) statement, “Three
people will not enter Paradise: an alcoholic, one who severs his
ties of kinship and the one who constantly reminds others of his
favours over them,”' and the hadith, “On the Day of Judgement,
Allah will not speak to three types of people, nor will he look at
them or purify them and for them is a painful torment: the one
whose clothes drag beneath him, the one who constantly reminds
others of his favours over them and the one who sells his items by
making false oaths.”'"? The Mu‘tazilah say that it is incumbent
upon them to implement these punishments. They argue that the
one who prescribed these punishments is Allah who is Able to do
all things, so these punishments must be enforced.

The final principle is to order the good and forbid the evil, and
what a blessed principle it is. However, we will discuss later the
false meanings that they intend by this principle. They deceive
people by taking principles which apparently seem noble, but
once explained and clarified one realises they are false.

15 Sunan al-Nasai, no. 2562.

" Sahih Muslim, no. 106.

122
Their concept of tawhid is similar to that of the Jahmiyyah’s, i.e.
denying the attributes of Allah. They claim that Allah will not be
seen, that the Qur’an is created, and that Allah is not above His
creation. They further claim that He does not possess knowledge,
power, life, hearing, sight, speech, will or any other attribute.

Thus, their concept of tawhid is to negate all of Allah’s attributes
from Him. They say that the oneness of Allah implies to negate
His attributes, for if you affirm an attribute for Him then you
have compared Him to something else, and He is no longer
unique.

Tawhid is based upon two matters: negation and affirmation.
It signifies uniqueness which is not attained by only negation or
affirmation, as negation on its own is to devoid all meaning (ta‘til),
and affirmation on its own does not rule out others possessing
similar attributes, therefore uniqueness can only be achieved by
both negation and affirmation.

If one was to say, ‘there is no-one standing’, this is negation, and
as such this position of standing has been negated from everyone,
which now makes it devoid of meaning. On the other hand to
say, ‘Zayd is standing’ is affirmation but it does not exclude
anyone else from also standing, so others may be participating
in this action. However, if you were to say, ‘no-one is standing
except Zayd’, this is tawhid [linguistically]. Zayd is now unique
in this action.

This is the meaning of /@ ilaba ilal Allah (none has the right to be
worshipped except Allah). However, they claim that tawhid is not
to affirm an attribute for Allah - and we seek Allah’s protection
— so He does not possess hearing, sight, power, life, knowledge
or anything else.

123

Their concept of justice involves believing that Allah did not will
creation [i.e. that they should exist], create them nor does He
possess power over them. They also believe that Allah doesn’t
create the actions of His slaves, whether good or bad. He only
wants that which He has ordered in his divine laws. All else may
take place without his permission.

They assert that Allah does not will everything which takes place,
nor does His will encompass the actions of His servants, nor did
He create everything. Their argument for this is that if Allah gave
these actions permission to take place and created them, then
He was to punish people for their actions, this would amount to
oppression. In contrast, if we said that Allah does not create these
actions, but He punishes people because they perform them, this
is justice. If this argument was to be put to the layman, he would
probably immediately agree.

However, in response to this argument it is said that in reality
this is ta‘til and describing the Creator as deficient - this is
because it implies that there exists in the universe that which He
does not want nor that which He wills, or that He did not create
everything which exists, even though Allah says,

et ‏موسي‎
‎po ‏هلق حكل‎
Allah is the Creator of all things
Sirah al-Zumar, 39:62

Furthermore we say, the alleged oppression can be refuted in
two ways; with intellectual and textual evidence. Intellectually,
it can be said that unlike animals, Allah gave every human being
intellect with which he can differentiate between good and bad,
and benefit and harm. As for textual evidence, Allah sent the
Messengers who clarified truth and falsehood, and established
the evidence:

124
7 4, oe ahead
Ss SBS 35 Gy ASS

sac
Ae 5-8
[We sent] messengers as bringers of good tidings and warners
so that mankind will have no argument against Allah after the
messengers.
Stirah al-Nisa’, 4:165

Actual oppression would be to say, ‘Do as you please’, then after
you do as you please you are punished. Warning against certain
actions and then punishing you for performing them is not
oppression. This is similar to a man who warns his son against
a particular action, and then reprimands the child when he
disobeys his command. The man’s actions are considered a means
of rectification. Hence, one can see how they [the Mu‘tazilah]
deceive and debate, and the falsehood they call to. They then
state that Allah only wants that which He orders, so to them His
want and order is synonymous. This is also incorrect, for this
claim means that the majority of people act in contradiction to
Allah’s divine orders, as from every thousand, nine hundred and
ninety nine oppose Allah’s legislative orders. As such, there is no
doubt that there is a difference between pleasure associated with
an order and a will which encompasses that which He ordered
and that which He didn’t.

125
Others who agreed with them on this point are the Shi‘ah of later
times, the likes of al-Mufid, Abii Ja‘far al-Tust and others.

Here, the author (may Allah have mercy upon him) addresses
them as Shi‘ah whereas he previously referred to them as Rawafid.
They are Shi‘ah in the sense that they claim to be the supporters
of ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib. They are Rawafid because they rejected
Zayd ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn when they asked him concerning
Abi Bakr and ‘Umar. He replied by praising them and stating
that they were the ministers of his great grandfather, i.e. the
Prophet (3%). As a result they rejected him and removed him from
his position, and henceforth were known as Rafidah.

The reality is that Ahlus-Sunnah are the true supporters of
‘All ibn Abu Talib (#) and the other believing members of the
prophetic household. The believers are helpers and supporters of
one another. Allah states:

6 Sextet, 5 ‏وو‎ AS

The believing men and believing women are allies of one an-
other.
Stirah al-Tawbah, 9:71

The stronger one’s faith in Allah, the greater his alliance is to the
believers of the prophetic household and others. ‘Ali ibn Abt
Talib himself is free of the statements which they attribute to
him. Rather he burnt those of them who came to him and claimed
that he was god - and we seek refuge in Allah. He was unable
to control his anger, so he ordered that ditches be dug, wood be
gathered and then ordered they be thrown into this fire due to
them claiming he was god. Those who do not verbally claim that
he is god often do so in meaning. They believe that he controls
the universe and that nothing moves in the heavens or the earth
except by the power of ‘Ali.

126

We ask Allah to bear witness that the believers love the prophetic
household. We also hold that the believing members of that
household have certain rights upon us: Firstly, the superiority of
their faith, and secondly their relation to the Prophet (#). They
are honoured due to their close relation to the Prophet (38). The
Prophet (3) is not honoured due to them, but they due to him.
They are also of varying levels. Even though they are honoured
with this close connection to the Prophet (38), this does not mean
they are more superior to those who excelled them in faith and
knowledge. Therefore, Abt’ Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman are better
than ‘Ali in terms of general superiority, even though ‘Ali may
possess some virtues which they do not possess. So there is a
difference between general superiority and certain virtues.

As for punishment with fire, ‘Ali saw this as the strongest
punishment he could inflict upon them, just as Abii Bakr ordered
that a homosexual also be burnt. However at times people
may not possess complete knowledge of an issue. This is why
Ibn ‘Abbas said that if he were in the place of ‘Ali he would
have beheaded them, due to the Prophetic statement: “Whoever
changes his religion then kill him”'"4 and because the Prophet (3)
forbade punishment with the fire.'" It is said that ‘Ali responded
to this by saying that the son of Umm Fadl [Ibn ‘Abbas] is not
mistaken,

11١ Sahib al-Bukbari, no. 3017.
‏كلا‎ Sahih al-Bukbari, ‏.مم‎

127
Abii Ja‘far has a tafsir in which he employs the methods of
the Mu'tazilah whilst incorporating into that the method of
the Twelver Shi‘ah’s (Imamiyyah Ithna ‘Ashriyyah).""° The
Mut'tazilah do not prescribe to their doctrine and beliefs, nor do
they reject the Caliphates of Abii Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman or ‘Ali.

From amongst the principles of the Mu‘tazilah and Khawarij
is the implementation of punishment. They believe that Allah
will not accept any intercession for those who committed major
sins nor will they be removed from the Fire. Without a doubt
this belief of theirs has been refuted by some of the Murji’ah,
Karamiyyah'”” and Kalabiyyah' and their followers. They often
did well in their rebuttal but at times they also erred until the
two groups became complete opposites as has been explained
elsewhere.

This often occurs; a group of people refute another group who
have brought an innovation, but they do this by going to the
other extreme and opposing this innovation with another
innovation. An example can be given of the day of ‘Ashara’,
Some people now consider it necessary to celebrate this day with
joy and happiness, in order to oppose the Rafidah who consider
this day one of sadness and grief. However, this is incorrect. It is
not allowed to oppose one innovation with another. Rather it is
sufficient to simply oppose an innovation by mentioning that it is
not from the sharfab, and that innovations lead to misguidance.
Opposing innovations with other innovations will be of no avail,
an innovation can only be expelled by a sunnah.

6 The Twelver Shiites are those who believe in the infallibility of their twelve imams. ‘The
twelve being, ‘Ali, Hasan, Husayn, Zayn al“Abidin, Muhammad al-Bagir, Ja‘far al-Sadiq,
Masa al-Kazim, Rida, Muhammad al-Jawwad, ‘Ali al-Hadi, Hasan al-‘Askari and finally
his son Muhammad who went into hiding and will be reappearing as the promised Mahdi
according to them,

‘The Karamiyyah are the followers of Abi ‘Abdullah Muhammad ibn Karam, died 255
AH. They conceive of Allah as a substance who is located in space above the Throne. Faith to
them is the utterance of the two shah@dahs which involves neither conviction nor action,

‎Kalabiyyah are the followers of Abt Muhammad ‘Abdullah ibn Sa‘id ibn Kullab al-‏ "د
‎Qattan, died 240 AH. They were later absorbed into the Ash‘ariyyah,‏

‎128

The point here being that this group of people held certain beliefs
and then interpreted the words of the Qur’an in support of
those beliefs. In this regard they have no predecessors from the
companions, their students (t@bi’#m) or those who followed them
from the great scholars of the Muslims, neither in their beliefs
nor in their commentaries of the Qur’an. The faults of their
interpretations of the Qur’an can be seen from many angles. Two
main ways are: possessing knowledge of the futility of their views
and knowledge of their incorrect interpretations of the Qur’an,
either by refuting their position or by defending the positions
they attack.

From amongst them are individuals who are eloquent and
charming, and able to conceal their innovations so that most
people will not realise their deception. This includes the author of
al-Kashaf and others. This particular author manages to confuse
many who would not expect him to possess erroneous views.
1 know of many commentators of the Qur’an and others who
freely quote from these people in their works, who even though
they do not agree with their views or principles, do not realise the
errors in their writings.

This is because these people are proficient in their style and
technique. One will think that their apparent words are good
and beneficial but within them is concealed poison. Those who
quote from their works - even though they disagree with their
views, are also deceived by their words and technique which
blinds them from noticing their falsehood. We have mentioned
that these people hold views and then twist evidences to support
them, or use as evidence texts which do not support their views.

129

Then, due to their extremism in this, groups such as the Rafidah
Imamiyyah, followed by the philosophers and then the Qaramitah
and others have gone to even further extremes. The philosophers
and Qaramitah have especially exacerbated this issue by
interpreting the Qur’an in the strangest of ways. Examples of
commentaries by the Rafidah are:

May the hands of Abit Lahab be ruined, and ruined is he
Stirah al-Masad, 11:1

[They claim that] ‘The two hands are Abii Bakr and ‘Umar’.

They claim that the two hands of Abii Lahab are Abt Bakr
and ‘Umar. This exemplifies the reality of the Rafidah, and
the enormous hatred and animosity they possess towards the
companions (>). Rather, this hatred extends further to Islam.
They openly claim to be Muslims and followers of Islam,
whereas in reality they possess the most severe hatred and enmity
towards the companions of the Prophet (33). How can a person
claim to be a Muslim, and then say that this verse was revealed
concerning Abi Bakr and ‘Umar who are the two greatest
companions? If verses such as this were revealed concerning these
two companions, then the Muslims have no honour left.

130

..if you should associate [anything] with Allah, your work
would surely become worthless
Stirah al-Zumar, 39:65

[They interpret this to mean] ‘between Abii Bakr and ‘Umar vis a
vis ‘Ali in terms of the caliphate’.

The actual meaning of the verse refers to associating partners
with Allah. The claim of the Rafidah is that it refers to who
should be the caliph amongst these three, i.e. if you make them
leaders [instead of ‘Ali] then your actions will be rendered null
and void. Here, we can see how they have completely distorted
the meaning of the Qur’an to the most extreme lengths, and we
seek refuge in Allah.

131

“Indeed, Allah commands you to slaughter a cow.”
Stirah al-Bagarah, 2:67

‘The cow to be slaughtered is referring to ‘A’ishah’ according to
them.

May Allah destroy them. This statement_is from Missa to his
people. However, they assert that it is ‘A’ishah who is being
referred to, and that Allah ordered us to slaughter her. In my
personal opinion, anyone who makes such wild interpretations
has committed an act of disbelief - and we seck refuge in Allah.
Without a doubt these people possess no shame, not from Allah
or the servants of Allah. “And [recall] when Moses said to his
people, ‘Indeed, Allab commands you to slaughter a cow.’”
What relation does ‘A’ishah have to Misa that it would warrant
the revelation of such a verse.

This is the opinion of the earlier and the later Rafidah, for the
latter take from the former. It is incorrect to think that the earlier
Rafidah accepted the leadership of Abi Bakr and ‘Umar. I have
seen the strangest of statements from some, but not all of them;
they claim that Abt Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Ali were all
disbelievers. The first three disbelieved due to their oppression
and injustice and ‘Ali disbelieved because he did not defend the
truth and allowed falsehood to prevail.

132

‘en eee te
‏الكنر‎ AL Ms

...then fight the leaders of disbelief
Sirah al-Tawbah, 9:12

‘The leaders of disbelief are Talhah and Zubayr’, [according to
the Rafidah].

This does not make sense. Allah states: “And if they break their
oaths after their treaty and defame your religion, then fight the
leaders of disbelief.” This verse speaks about those who had
a pact and treaty with the Prophet (3s). The verse can also be
applied to others who are similar to them by way of analogy. The
verse does not refer to what these people insinuate - and we seek
refuge in Allah, but they are a shameless people.

133

لوبتي 5»

He released the two seas meeting [side by side]
Sirah al-Rabman, 55:19

[This verse is interpreted as] ‘The two seas are ‘Ali and
Fatimah’.

251107
439 ‏لوو وَالْمرَعَات‎
...pearl and coral
Sirah al-Rahman, 55:22

‘They are Hasan and Husayn’,

“He released the two seas meeting |side by side]. Between them
is a barrier [so] neither of them transgresses. So which of the
favours of your Lord would you deny? From both of them emerge
pearl and coral.” If there is a barrier between the two seas, does
this also mean that there is a barrier between ‘Ali and Fatimah?
This is an absurd commentary, but as the author mentioned, we
see the strangest of things due to their evil intentions and poor
understanding. Their commentaries comprise these two aspects:
evil intent and poor understanding.

The two seas being referred to here, as mentioned by the scholars
of exegesis, are the fresh and salt waters. It is said that the barrier
between them is what is seen at the mouth of a river where it
meets the sea. The current of a river will be powerful but it is as
if there is a barrier which stops the river merging with the sea.
Others from the scholars have stated that the barrier between
the two seas is the dry earth. This shows the power of Allah
as the earth is a globe, and Allah has withheld the sea so that
it does not spill over onto the land. Yet others have said that it
is a fine barrier between two oceans, to the extent that fish can
differentiate between the two types of water causing certain fish

134

to reside in one and not the other. This shows that the water of
two seas is different even if they touch one another.

These are three statements regarding this verse. None of the past

or present scholars have ever stated that the two seas represent ‘Ali
and Fatimah; this is only from the distortions of the Rafidah.

135
...and all things We have enumerated in a clear register
Stirah Ya Sin, 36:12

‘The register is ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib’.

How can one draw such a conclusion from this verse? The register
refers to a book which is complete; it witnesses and records all
of a person’s actions. How can this refer to ‘Alt? They claim that
this clear register is ‘Ali who supports and champions the truth,
so Allah enumerated everything in this man. This is also a clear
claim that ‘Ali knows the unseen. They further insinuate that ‘Ali
has the same knowledge of the seen and unseen as Allah does.
Everything which Allah has enumerated is present within ‘Ali ibn
Abii Talib.

136

een 2 ‏ع دست ل ب قطي‎
Opal eOallin
About what are they asking one another? About the great news
Strah al-Naba’, 78:1-2

‘The great news is ‘Ali ibn Abii Talib’,

“About what are they asking one another? About the great news.
That over which they are in disagreement.” They state that
this refers to ‘Ali as people are in disagreement over him. He is
praised, dispraised, loved and hated. However, is ‘Ali the news or
the one the news is about? Furthermore, the verse states that the
disagreement is taking place, and not that it will take place in the
future, however when this verse was revealed no disagreement
was present concerning ‘Ali.

137

‎ana‏ ودين مثو ألََبقِيمُو نَالصّلوهويؤنوتَ

‎SASS SI

‎Your ally is none but Allah and [therefore] His Messenger and
those who have believed - those who establish prayer and give

‎zakah, and they bow [in worship].
Sirah al-Ma’idah, 5:55

‎The verse is addressing ‘Alt. They then mention a hadith which
has been classed as fabricated by the agreement of the scholars,
in which ‘Ali gave his ring in charity whilst praying.

‎This is an incorrect interpretation. “Your ally is none but Allah
and [therefore] His Messenger and those who have believed”
- this verse is addressing every believer for each one is an ally
to Allah and His Messenger. Allah says: “Allah is the ally of
those who believe.”!” The Prophet (3) said: “I am closer to the
Muslims than themselves.”'?° This is true alliance, and without a
doubt ‘Ali ibn Abii Talib is included in this verse, as he was from
amongst those who prayed, gave zakah, bowed and prostrated
— may Allah be pleased with him. However, it is not possible to
declare that this verse refers to him specifically and no-one else.
‘Ali is included in this verse, just as Abi Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman,
Ibn Mas‘tid, Ibn ‘Abbas, Khalid ibn Walid and others from the
companions are also included.

‎The Prophet (38) said concerning Zubayr: “Indeed, every Prophet
has a disciple, and indeed my disciple is Zubayr.”"' Despite this,
they allege that Zubayr was from the leaders of disbelief. How
is it possible that the disciple of the Messenger (38) or his closest
companions are the leaders of disbelief? What would you think

‎" Surah al-Baqarah, 2:257.
2° Sabih al-Bukbari, no. 5371 and Sahib Muslim, no. 867.
25 Sahib al-Bukbari, no. 2846 and Sabib Muslim, no. 2415,

‎138

of a man whose closest companions are leaders of disbelief?
Such a man would be like them, either directly or indirectly, as is
stated in the hadith which has doubts [regarding its authenticity]:
“A man is upon the religion of his closest friend, so let each one
of you choose wisely his closest friend.”

122 Sunan al-Tirmidhi, no. 2378, Imam al-Tirmidhi declared it to be authentic.

139
‎oe, 14-5454‏ ممع
وْلَعِكَعَلهِمْ صلَوتُ ريم وَرَحسَة
‎Those are the ones upon whom are blessings from their Lord‏
‎and mercy.‏
‎Stirah al-Baqarah, 2:157‏

‎‘This verse was revealed concerning ‘Ali when Hamzah was
martyred’.

‎Glorified be Allah! Who was more affected by the death of
Hamzah, ‘Ali or the Prophet (3)? It was the Prophet (3). Yet
they say that ‘Al? was more affected and as a result this verse
was revealed because of him. Their lies and fabrications have led
them to state that ‘Ali was more grieved by the death of Hamzah
than the Prophet (3). This is - by Allah ~ a lie, for no-one was
more deeply affected by this than the Prophet (3).

‎140

Similar to these above commentaries is what other commentators
mention. An example is the commentary of the following verses:

The patient, the true, the obedient, those who spend [in the way
of Allah], and those who seek forgiveness before dawn.
Stirah AL‘Imran, 3:17

They state that the patient one is the Prophet (3). The truthful
one refers to Abt Bakr, ‘Umar is the obedient one, the one who
gives in charity is ‘Uthman and ‘Ali is the seeker of forgiveness.

This is ignorance as all of these attributes can be used to describe
a single person. To distribute these characteristics is incorrect.
From the descriptions mentioned in the above verse, the obedient
seems to be the most noble, so how is it that the Prophet (3)
has the virtue of patience, whilst others possess truthfulness
and obedience? The Prophet (38) was the best in all of these
characteristics, the most patient, truthful, obedient and generous
to the extent that he would spend without fear of poverty,'? and
sleep on an empty stomach.'!* His seeking forgiveness from Allah
was something truly amazing, he would repent a hundred times
in a single day's and stand the night in prayer until his feet would
swell saying: “Should I not be a thankful slave?”'**

‎See Sahib Muslim, no. 2312.‏ خم

‎"4 See Sunan al-Tirmidbi, no. 2360 and Sunan Ibn Majah, no. 3347,
"5 See Sahib Muslim, ‏.مه‎

‎26 Sahih al-Bukbari, no. 4836 and Sabib Muslim, no. 2819.

‎141

ADSI AS KE

Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; and those with him...
ie. Abii Bakr,

Chote ce ‏و‎
‎MSH EAS
...are forceful against the disbelievers...
meaning ‘Umar,

+ سوبو كه
‎eree‏
‎...merciful among themselves.‏
‎This refers to Uthman.‏

200 os 2
Ue
You see them bowing and prostrating [in prayer]
Stirah al-Fath, 48:29
This is ‘Ali.

The distribution of characteristics in this verse is not from the
commentaries of the Rafidah, but it is without doubt deficient.
They have arrived at these conclusions because Abii Bakr was
present with the Prophet (38) in the cave, “...and he [Muhammad]
said to his companion, “Do not grieve, indeed Allah is with us.”!”
‘Umar was the forceful one due to him being the most severe in
those matters. ‘Uthman was famous for his kindness, mercy and
compassion and ‘Ali was from amongst those who worshipped
Allah much. However, ‘Uthman was also known for his worship,
as he would spend much of the night in prayer. Therefore, this
interpretation is incorrect. “...those with him...” i.e. the Prophet
(8) includes all the companions; they are all forceful against the
disbelievers and merciful to one another whilst constantly being
in the worship of Allah.

Surah al-Tawbah, 9:40.

142

Even stranger is the commentary of the verse:
hte stra oc Ble an Bedi. oer
ALN OG OE oth
By the fig and the olive. And [by] Mount Sinai. And [by] this
secure city [i.e. Makkah]
Stirah al-Tin, 95:1-3

They comment that the fig is Abt’ Bakr, ‘Umar is the olive, Mount
Sinai is ‘Uthman and ‘Ali is the secure city.

Since this is a book about tafsir, the author is quoting from
different works of tafsir. According to this commentary, Abii
Bakr is the fig, ‘Umar the olive, ‘Uthman is Mount Sinai and ‘Ali is
the secure city. Each of these illustrious companions is described
as either edible or habitable - we seek Allah’s protection. The
reason for this interpretation may be that since Allah began with
the fig before the olive, the fig must be better, and since Abt Bakr
was the first leader he must be the fig, so the order in the verses
is relative to the order of the caliphate. Therefore four objects
match four names.

143

These types of distortion are brought from words which in no
way imply the said meanings. These words do not specifically
refer to certain individuals. Allah’s statement, “...and those
with him are forceful against the disbelievers, merciful among
themselves. You see them bowing and prostrating [in prayer].”
These are all descriptions for those with the Prophet; this is what
the grammarians refer to as successive predication. All of these
adjectives describe those with him, and each description does
not connote a particular individual. At times these distortions in
exegesis cause what is general to be confined to a specific person,
such as the verse, “Your ally is none but Allah and [therefore] His
Messenger and those who have believed” referring specifically to
‘Ali. Another example is that the verse,

And the one who has brought the truth [i.e. the Prophet (3)]

and [they who] believed in it
Sirah al-Zumar, 39:33

Some commentators state that this refers specifically to Abi
Bakr.

They state that the above verse was revealed concerning Abii
Bakr. We have already mentioned that when the scholars say,
‘this verse was revealed because of such and such’, this means
that they are included in the meaning and as such it is one
explanation of the verse. Therefore, whoever stated that this
verse was revealed concerning Abii Bakr intended that Abt Bakr
is amongst those who have believed in the truth brought by the
Prophet (#). Undoubtedly the first and foremost to have believed
was the Prophet (3) himself, as he brought the truth and believed
in it. He was the first to attest to his own truthfulness and to the
fact that he was a true messenger sent to all of mankind. He was
also ordered to proclaim as much,

144

Say, [O Muhammad], “O mankind, indeed I am the Messenger

of Allah to you all
Sirah al-A‘raf, 7:158

145
The following verse,

Not equal among you are those who spent before the conquest
[of Makkah] and fought [and those who did so after it}.
Siirah al-Hadid, 57:10

is also said to refer to Abii Bakr specifically.

If this statement means that this verse refers only to Aba Bakr,
this is incorrect. However, if Abii Bakr is only mentioned as an
example of those who spent and fought before the conquest then
this is a valid example. It is a firmly established principle that a
generalisation cannot be specified or confined in its application
except with the presence of evidence which supports such a
stance. If for example, it is said concerning the verse, “Those
to whom people said, ‘Indeed the people have gathered against
you, so fear them,’” that the people who have gathered refers to
Abii Sufyan as it has been stated then this is possible. Otherwise
it is imperative that what is general remains so because to confine
or restrict it is to have an incomplete explanation of the verse.
Therefore, the commentary must conform to the meanings of the
verse. Specifying something general or generalising something
specific is not allowed. If we have a text relating to something
specific we cannot generalise it. The only exception is by way of
analogy if that is applicable.

146

The tafsir of the likes of Ibn ‏تطهترترنية'‎ 28 is closer to the methodology
of Ahlus Sunnah and further from innovation compared to the
tafsir of Zamakhshari. However, if Ibn ‘Atiyyah had sufficed in
mentioning the views of the predecessors found in their books
it would have been better. He often quotes from the tafsir of
Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari whose book is from the greatest
works of tafsir, but he then leaves quoting all of the sayings which
Ibn Jarir brings from the salaf. Instead he relies on opinions of
people he considers to be profound scholars who in reality are
scholastic theologians possessing principles similar in nature to
those which the Mu‘tazilah possess, even though they are closer
to the Sunnah than the Mu‘tazilah. It is important that we give
credit where it is due, and to know that this tafsir is according to
a particular madhab.

This statement of the author’s shows that he is fair and just,
and that the truth, even if it is from the people of innovation
must be accepted. If certain people of innovation are closer to
the Sunnah than others then they should be praised accordingly
for this level of closeness. As for rejecting everything they say
without differentiation, simply because it comes from a person
of innovation, this is incorrect. A person should always declare
the truth wherever he is, irrespective of the speaker. This is why
men are judged by the truth and the truth is not judged by men.
If you judge the truth by men this makes you a blind follower,
but if you judge men by the truth, this is justice. Hence the author
(may Allah have mercy upon him) is saying that we give credit
where it is due even to the innovators if some are closer to the
Sunnah than others. We mention that so and so is closer to the
Sunnah than so and so.

28 ‏هطق‎ Muhammad ‘Abdul-Haqg ibn Ghalib ibn ‘Atiyyah, died 546 AH, He was a man of
letcers and poetry as well as being a grammarian and judge from Granada, Spain.

147

Indeed, if the companions, their students and the scholars have
an opinion regarding the commentary of a verse, and another
group of people interpreted the same verse in a different way
based upon their ideals and beliefs which are contrary to the
beliefs of the companions and those who followed them, this
latter group is in agreement with the Mu‘tazilah and innovators
in this respect.

In short, whoever diverts away from the methodology of the
companions, their students and their commentaries and leans
towards what opposes them is wrong in this. Rather he is an
innovator in this respect, even though he may be striving to attain
the truth and so be forgiven for his errors.

It is important that we draw attention to this matter; whoever
diverts away from the methodology of the companions, the
successors and their method of commentary has erred. Rather he
is an innovator, even though as a result of his striving for the truth
he may be forgiven. We describe such an individual as mistaken
and an innovator. Every statement in the religion not according
to the Book of Allah, the Sunnah of the Prophet (3), and the way
of the companions or their righteous successors is an innovation.
The Prophet (38) said: “The worst of affairs are the newly
invented matters, and every innovation is a misguidance.”'”’ This
is also the case in matters of belief. Everything which opposes
the way of the companions and their successors is an innovation.
However, is such an individual sinful? If he strove to the best of
his ability in trying to reach the truth then he is forgiven as the
author stated.

Here, we have two points: the first is the actual statement and
the second is the one who issued this statement. The statement
which opposes the way of the companions and their successors
is an innovation. With regards to the speaker, if he tried to the

9 Sahib Muslim, no. 867.

148

best of his ability to attain the truth but still fell short then he is

forgiven, for Allah says:

Allah does not charge a soul except [with that within] its capac-
Stirah rn 2:286

Such a person is forgiven for his mistakes. This is a principle
which is almost unanimously agreed upon. Even if there is
a difference of opinion regarding some of its finer details, the
general principle is established.

One may ask: How is it that someone who differs from the
methodology of the companions and their successors is called an
innovator, but that due to his striving he is also forgiven for his
error? The answer is that he mentioned a statement not previously
known from the companions or their righteous successors, so in
this respect he has brought an innovation. However, this does
not mean that we classify him as an unconditional innovator
because of his error in one matter.

Another question which one may have is in respect to verses which
may be connected to modern and recent discoveries. There are no
textual evidences or statements from the Prophet (%) regarding
these matters, however there are statements present from the
companions and scholars commentating on this verse. Is it then
allowed for someone to disregard those statements and instead
focus on linguistic and scientific deductions from the Qur’an? Is
such a person also considered to be an innovator?

The answer is that if the Qur’an does actually allude to those
matters then the person is not an innovator, and as such this
statement does not contradict the statement of any other scholar.
If on the other hand, this view opposes the statements of the
predecessors then we reject such views. In most instances, the
predecessors would not have commented on such discoveries

149
because they were unaware of them. It is however possible that
the Qur’an generally alludes to such points, but it is rare that the
Qur’an would explicitly mention these events, for if it did then
the companions would have been the first to have interpreted
it as such. Therefore, if the Qur’dn points to such things, it is
permissible to use them in the exegesis of verses, otherwise we
must refute those statements. For example, the word ‘trial’ (fitnah)
has recently been interpreted to mean ‘intellectual warfare’. This
is correct as the Prophet (3) informed us, “trials like a portion
of the moonless night; one will awake as a believer but will have
disbelieved by night, or be a believer before he sleeps but have
succumbed to disbelief by morning.”

‎Sahib Muslim, no. 118.‏ "د

‎150
The point here is to highlight and clarify the methods of verifying
knowledge and the methods of identifying the truth. We know
that the ‏مكاعد‎ was recited by the companions, their students
and their subsequent successors, and we know that they were
more knowledgeable of the meanings and exegesis of the Qur’an,
as well as more aware of the truth brought by the Prophet (3)
[than us]. Therefore, whoever contradicts their statements and
uses different explanations is mistaken in both his deduction and
in his method.

He is mistaken in his deduction as he has interpreted the verses
incorrectly, and he is mistaken in his method as it has caused him
to oppose the interpretations of the salaf.

151

Everyone who opposes their statements possesses certain doubts,
either intellectual or textual, as has been expounded upon
elsewhere.

This statement of the author’s - that the opponents [of the truth]
possess doubts [which they cast as arguments] — is very true and
also has a basis in the cen Allah mentions this in the verse,

It is He who has sent down to to you, 78 rian the Book,
in it are verses [that are] precise - they are the foundation of
the Book - and others unspecific. As for those in whose hearts
is deviation [from truth], they will follow that of it which is
unspecific.
Sirah Al-‘Imran, 3:7

If a proponent of falsehood presented something which had no
doubt in it, it would not be accepted from him. Instead, he brings
doubtful matters and due to his deviation he does not base the
unspecific upon the precise so as to seek clarification. Rather, he
seeks to make it all unspecific and doubtful. As the author states,
every opponent of the companions and their righteous successors
presents doubts with which they hope to cause confusion and
disarray.

152

Here, we wish to highlight the causes of difference in tafsir.
One of the greatest causes is innovation and falsehood where
proponents of these go to the extent of distorting the words of
Allah, and interpreting the statements of Allah and His Messenger
(38) incorrectly and twisting their meanings.

In order to counteract this, one must be aware of the opposing
view which is the truth. One must also know that their views are
opposed by the views of the salaf, and that their commentaries
are innovations. Furthermore, one should then study in detail the
falsehood of their views by using the clear markers of truth laid
down by Allah, This problem is also prevalent amongst those
who write about the exegesis of hadith just as it is prevale.
amongst those who author in the exegesis of the Qur’an.

Those who err in their deductions and not their methods are
like the Sifts, preachers, jurists and others who interpret the
Qur’an with correct ideas but the words of the Qur’an do not
imply such meanings. An example of this is much of what Abi
‘Abdul-Rahman al-Sulami mentions in Haq@’iq al-Tafsir. If the
ideas they propagate are also wrong then without doubt this will
fall under the first category; mistakes in deduction and methods,
since now the meaning they intend is also false.

153
CHAPTER 6

محم

Exegesis of the Qur’an with the Qur’an,
and Exegesis with the Sunnah and the
Statements of the Companions

If one were to ask: What is the best method of tafsir? The response
would be that the most authentic of methods is to first explain
the Qur’an with the Qur’an. This is because what is mentioned
briefly in one place will be expounded upon in another place,
and what is summarised in one place will be explained in detail
elsewhere.

If you are unable to do this then use the Sunnah as it is an
explanation of the Qur’an. Imam Abi ‘Abdullah Muhammad
ibn Idris al-ShafiT said, ‘Every ruling the Prophet (38) issued was

derived from the Qur’an’. Allah states,

KARAM AG,

oe
5 ‏ع ع‎ wee be ace aes
GD rah GI SOV METE ‏ألتَاس‎
‎Indeed, We have revealed to you, [O Muhammad], the Book in
truth so you may judge between the people by that which Allah

has shown you. And do not be for the deceitful an advocate.
Stirah al-Nisa’, 4:105

155
He also says,

And We revealed to you the message [i.e. the Qur’an] that you
may make clear to the people what was sent down to them and

that they might give thought.
Stirah al-Nahl, 16:44

In yet another verse, He states,

AAC Acts

GY Sub Wa; ‏ىاختلفوافة وَهُدَّى‎

And We have not revealed to you the Book, [O Muhammad],

except for you to make clear to them that wherein they have

differed and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
Sirah al-Nahl, 16:64

ord

This is why the Prophet (3) said, “Indeed, I have been given the
Book and something similar to it”! i.e. the Sunnah. The Sunnah
is also a form of revelation similar to the Qur’an although it is
not recited as the Qur’an is recited. Imam al-Shafi‘i and others
have quoted many evidences in support of this, however this is
not the place to go into detail about that.

The point here is that you seek to understand the Qur’an with
the Qur’an. After this one goes to the Sunnah, as the Prophet (3)
said to Mu‘adh ibn Jabal when he sent him to Yemen, “With
what will you judge?” He replied, “With the Book of Allah.”
He asked, “And if you do not find [the ruling] in it?” He replied,
“Then the Sunnah of the Prophet (3)” He then asked, “And if
you do not find [the ruling] in it?” He replied, “I will use my
own judgement.” The Prophet (3) struck his chest and said, “All

"1 Sunan Abu Dawud, no. 4604.

156
praise is to Allah who had guided the emissary of the Messenger
of Allah to what pleases the Messenger of Allah.”'* This hadith is
found in the books of Suman and its chain of narration is sound.

Some scholars have commented on this hadith and classified it
as weak, however the author believes its chain of narration to
be sound and this seems more likely. This is because it agrees
with the general principles of the sharfah, that one should judge
by the Book of Allah and then with the Sunnah of the Prophet
(38), for the Sunnah contains that which is not explained in the
Qur’an and so one must refer to it. As for what is not found in
the Qur’an or the Sunnah, one uses his judgement. This does
not imply that a person follows his own ideas and intellect,
but rather that he strives in the application of the principles of
the Qur’an and Sunnah. As such, this hadith complies with the
general principles of the shar#ah. Those who have classified this
hadith as weak mistakenly think that the statement, ‘and if you
do not find it in the Sunnah’ implies that the Sunnah has a low
status, and that the statement, ‘I will use my judgement’ implies
following one’s own intellect.

If one were to ask, does the Sunnah abrogate the Qur’an, the
answer would be that if it is authentic then it does, but it is
difficult to give a simple example for this. As for the statement of
the Prophet (38), “There is no bequest for an inheritor,”'® it is an
incorrect example for this issue. The Prophet (38) stated, “Indeed
Allah bas given everyone their due right”,** so in this hadith it is
as if the Prophet (3) is saying your predetermined shares of the
deceased’s estate is sufficient, and so you are not entitled to his
will.

‎Sunan Abu Dawud, no. 3592 and Sunan al-Tirmidbi, no. 1327.‏ قن

‎"8 Sabih al-Bukbari.

‎Sunan Abu Dawud, no. 3565, Sunan al-Tirmidhi, no. 2120 and Sunan Ibn Majah, no.‏ كد
.2713

‎157

If we were to really scrutinise this hadith we would find that it
does not abrogate the verse in the Qur’an which states,

VB Doli es iy Ki OS
co 22 ‏ساك‎ eet, Cte
ga Weel ‏لْوصِيّة‎
‎Prescribed for you when death approaches [any] one of you
if he leaves wealth [is that he should make] a bequest for the

parents and near relatives.
Sirah al-Bagarah, 2:180

Hence, this verse has been specified and not abrogated, for the
near relatives are not the legal inheritors and so the bequest is
still applicable to them. Therefore, the hadith only specifies and
does not abrogate the verse. As such, this is not an example for
abrogation [of the Qur’an by the Sunnah].

158
Thus, if you do not find the tafsir in the Qur’an or Sunnah you
return to the statements of the companions, for they are more
knowledgeable regarding this as they witnessed the revelation of
the Qur’an and the circumstances which surrounded its revelation.
They also possessed complete understanding along with correct
knowledge and righteous action. This is especially the case with
their leaders and scholars, like the four rightly guided caliphs and
their righteous scholars such as ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘tid. Imam Abi
Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari said: Abi Kurayb narrated
to us: Jabir ibn Nah informed us that al-A‘mash informed him,
relating from Abt Duha from Masriiq that ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘td
said, “By the One besides whom there is no other god, not a
single verse has been revealed except that I know about whom
it was revealed and where it was revealed, and were I to know
of anyone more knowledgeable than me in this regard and I was
able to reach him then I would travel to him.”

This is an example of travelling for the sake of seeking knowledge.
It is not the intention of Ibn Mas‘td to lavish praise upon himself
or to show-off. Rather his intention is to encourage people to
learn the Book of Allah and its meanings, and to teach them the
tafsir of Allah’s words.

159

A‘mash relates from Abi Wail that Ibn Mas‘tid said, “When
a man from amongst us would learn ten verses he would not
proceed until he fully understood their meaning and acted upon
them.” Also from them [i.e. the scholars of the companions]
is the ink and ocean [of this nation] ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas, the
cousin of the Prophet (3).

He is known as an ocean due to his vast knowledge. Likewise
the term ‘ink’ also implies extensive knowledge. Both ‘ink’ and
‘ocean’ are vast in their nature.

160

He [i.e. Ibn ‘Abbas] was also known as the interpreter of the
Qur’an due to the blessings of the du‘@’ the Prophet (3) made for
him, “O Allah, give him understanding of the religion and teach
him the interpretation [of the Qur’an]”.°5

Ibn Jarir stated: Muhammad ibn Bashar narrated to us that he
was informed by Waki‘ who was informed by Sufyan, from the
authority of A‘mash from Muslim who said: ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘tid
said: ‘What a blessed interpreter of the Qur’an Ibn ‘Abbas is’. He
then quoted another chain of narration from Yahya ibn Dawad
from Ishaq al-Azraq, on the authority of Sufyan from A‘mash
from Muslim ibn Sabih Abii Duha, who narrated from Masriiq
that Ibn Mas‘tid said, ‘What a blessed interpreter of the Qur’an
‏مطل‎ ‘Abbas is’. A third chain of narration is then mentioned from
Bandar, who related from Ja‘far ibn ‘Awn from A‘mash that Ibn
Mas‘id said the previous about Ibn ‘Abbas. These are authentic
chains of narration which all declare that Ibn Mas‘tid praised
Ibn ‘Abbas using the aforementioned wording. Furthermore, Ibn
Mas‘tid died in the year 33 AH, and Ibn ‘Abbas lived on for
another 36 years, so how much more knowledge would he have
acquired during these years? A‘mash relates from Abt Wa’il that
‘Ali appointed Ibn ‘Abbas leader of the Hajj season. One day he
gave a sermon in which he recited Sirah al-Bagarah - and in a
narration — Sirah al-Niir. He then explained each verse in such a
way that were the Romans, Persians and Dalamites to have heard
him they would have embraced [Islam].

It is for this reason that the majority of what Isma‘il ibn ‘Abdul-
Rahman al-Suddi the Senior relates in his tafsir is from these two
men: Ibn Mas‘tid and Ibn ‘Abbas. At times, al-Suddi narrated
from them sayings of the People of the Book which the Prophet
(38) allowed in his statement, “Convey from me even if it is a
verse, and there is no harm in narrating from the Children of
Israel (Banit Isr@il), but whosoever intentionally ascribes lies to

"5 Sabih al-Bukbari, no. 143 and Sahib Muslim, no. 2477.

161
me will take his place in the Fire.”'*° Collected by al-Bukhari
from the hadith of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr.

It is not known that Ibn Mas‘td narrated Israelite traditions; this
was more the case with Ibn ‘Abbas. Therefore, I am not sure if the
author’s statement refers to both of them or just one of them.

136 Sahib al-Bukbari, no. 3461.

162

This is why when ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar came into possession of
two loads of books belonging to the People of the Book on the Day
of Yarmtk, he would narrate from them due to the permissibility
stated in the previous hadith. However these Israelite traditions
are quoted as supporting evidences and not primary sources.
These traditions are of three types: a type which is authentic as
its truthfulness is attested to by our own sources, a type which
is false as our own sources reject it, and a third type which does
not fall into the previous two categories, we can neither judge
it to be authentic or inauthentic. As such we neither believe in
it nor reject it. One is allowed to quote from this third type,
even though most of what is contained in it is of no immediate
benefit.

The scholars of the People of the Book differ considerably
regarding this third category, and as a result the scholars of tafsir
quote from them and also differ in this regard. Examples of this
category are the names of the companions of the cave, the colour
of their dog, and their precise number. Likewise, they differ
regarding the type of wood the staff of Miisa was made from,
the types of birds which Allah gave life to as a sign for Ibrahim,
which part of the cow was used to strike the slain man, the type
of tree Allah spoke from to Miisa, and other such matters which
are not detailed in the Qur’an which possess no direct benefit
in worldly or religious affairs. However, one may mention the
difference of opinion in these matters.

The author states that it is allowed to mention the difference
of opinion on such issues. This is not to depend upon their
opinions but to clarify the differences of opinion present. It may
be that mentioning such differences of opinion from the People
of the Book is beneficial for us, as this will cause us to doubt
the authenticity of what they quote and to know that they have
fabrications and distortions in their narrations. It is impermissible
to mention these statements and accept them as truthful unless
we have other evidences supporting such views. This is why the
author mentioned the three categories of Israelite traditions. We

163

have already mentioned that what we require of knowledge has
been mentioned with clear evidences. As for that which is not
necessary to know, it may be that there is no proof for it as it is
not essential. It is not possible that Allah would leave His slaves
without certain knowledge of what they require with the relevant
evidences which show its truthfulness and allow the heart to be
content.

164
Allah mentions,
Board sce

سيقولون ثللثة
‎bared S55 EEG‏ سي اد الو

ee eit oat tes pac Sst

مع عر

‎ig pay‏ كيلدت رفن ليل
‎bck‏ مَنْهْ ‎COS‏

‎They [i.e. people] will say there were three, the fourth of them
being their dog; and they will say there were five, the sixth of
them being their dog - guessing at the unseen; and they will ‏عد‎
‎there were seven, and the eighth of them was their dog. Say,
[O Muhammad], “My Lord is most knowing of their number.
None knows them except a few. So do not argue about them
except with an obvious argument and do not inquire about
them among [the speculators] from anyone.”
Sirah al-Kahf, 18:22

‎This verse comprises good etiquette in this situation along
with teaching what is necessary. Allah mentions them |i.e. the
companions of the cave] in three opinions. He then weakens the
first two opinions and remains silent about the third showing
its correctness. Were it to also be wrong He would have refuted
it as He did the first two. Allah then states that inquiring about
such issues possesses no benefit. As such the befitting response to
such an inquiry is, “My Lord is most knowing of their number.”
Only a few people know of their exact number as Allah has given
them that knowledge which is why He then says, “So do not
argue about them except with an obvious argument” meaning
do not exert your energy in what is unbeneficial. Furthermore,
do not ask them concerning such affairs as they only guess the
unknown.

‎This is the best way of mentioning differences of opinion. One
gathers all of the relevant opinions, mentions the correct opinion
while refuting the incorrect and then states the fruits and benefits

‎165
derived from the discussion. This is to ensure that one does not
prolong discussion over insignificant matters which possess no
benefit and one does not digress from what is more crucial and
important.

Therefore, the one who does not gather all the different opinions
on a particular issue has presented an incomplete argument, as
the truth may lie in what he has neglected. Similarly, the one
who does not point out the correct opinion has also performed
an incomplete task. If one intentionally authenticates something
incorrect, he has ascribed lies and falsehood, and if one does this
out of ignorance then he has erred.

A person who mentions the varying opinions but does not clarify
the correct opinion is blameworthy at times but at other times
is free of blame. If one is aware of the truth but does not clarify
it, this is deficiency. However if one is unaware [of the correct
opinion], for example if two opinions hold equal weight with him,
then he is not obliged to choose one over the other. This is also
present at times in the works of the author himself, as is found in
his Fatawa. He will mention two opinions, then state that one is
the opinion of the majority, and the other is the opinion of so and
so, or Imam Malik or al-Shafit and so on [without choosing}.

Therefore, one who mentions issues of difference of opinion
must ensure he gathers all the opinions as this is from being
trustworthy. Otherwise, as the author mentions, he may neglect
a stronger opinion. After this, if he has evidence by which he
knows the correct opinion, he must mention this so as not to
leave the audience in doubt. On the other hand, if he is unable to
choose the correct opinion, there is no harm in just mentioning
the opinions without choosing, as Allah does not burden a soul
with more than it can bear.

166

Similarly, whoever discusses differences in issues which hold little
or no benefit, or mentions varying opinions which even though
they possess different wordings all dissolve into just one or two
opinions has wasted time and has incorrectly exaggerated the
matter. Such a person is like one who wears two robes, both of
which are stolen. And Allah guides to the truth.

Concerning the verse the author quoted, some have claimed that
[the opinion stating] their number as seven with the eighth being
the dog [is also incorrect], as Allah then states, “My Lord is most
knowing of their number”. There is no doubt that this is an
incorrect interpretation of this verse, as Allah mentions this after
having refuted the first two opinions and remaining silent on the
third, thus showing its correctness. Were this saying to also be
incorrect then Allah would have mentioned this, as Allah does not
agree to what is contrary to the truth. Allah then states, “None
knows them except a few” and were the statement that Allah is
most knowledgeable regarding them referring to exclusivity then
this last statement would be a contradiction. In conclusion, the
verse shows that the companions of the cave were seven with the
eighth being the dog.

It should also be noted here that Allah says, “...there were seven,
and the eighth of them was their dog” and He does not refer to
them as being eight one of which was a dog. This is because the
dog belongs to a different species and as such it is not included
in the number but is mentioned after it. This is similar to Allah’s
statement,

There is in no private conversation three but that He is the
fourth of them

Stirah al-Mujadilah, 58:7

Again here He does not state that there were four and He is one
of them, as He is the Creator and they are the creation.

167

“So do not argue about them except with an obvious argument”.
The author explains this part of the verse as meaning, do not exert
and tire yourself arguing over the precise number, as there is no
benefit in doing so. This also occurs in the field of hadith, where
at times there are narrations which state, ‘a man came’ or ‘a man
said’, or ‘a Bedouin arrived’ etc. You will find many who exert all
their efforts into identifying that particular person even though
there is no need to do so. As such, these people stress themselves
over what may or may not be important, and neglect what is
more crucial. Therefore the students of knowledge should not
busy themselves with things in which there is little or no benefit.

The conclusion is that the number of the companions of the cave
were seven, with the eighth being the dog. We also know that
they resided in the cave for three hundred and nine years. Other
such [unbeneficial] differences occur regarding the type of wood
the staff of Miisa came from, or the part of the cow used to strike
the slain man, All of this is devoid of benefit.

168
CHAPTER 7

—__

Exegesis of the Qur’an with the
Statements of the Successors (Tabi‘iin)

If one is unable to find the explanation of a verse in the Qur’an
or Sunnah, and does not find any relevant commentaries from
the companions, then many of the scholars used the statements
of the successors such as Mujahid ibn Jabr who was a marvel in
this science. Muhammad ibn Ishaq said that he was informed by
Aban ibn Salih that Mujahid said, ‘I recited the whole Qur’an to
Ibn ‘Abbas three times from beginning to end, stopping him at
each verse and asking him about it.’ Al-Tirmidhi reports from
al-Husayn ibn Mahdi al-Basri that ‘Abdul-Razzaq informed him
from Ma‘mar, who reports from Qatadah that Mujahid said,
‘There is not a single verse in the Qur’an except I have heard
something about it.” Al-Tirmidhi also reports from Abi ‘Umar
who narrated from Sufyan ibn ‘Uyaynah from A‘mash that
Mujahid said, ‘Had I recited the Qur’an using the recitation of Ibn
Mas‘tid, I would not have needed to ask Ibn ‘Abbas about much
of what I asked him.’!3* Ibn Jarir stated: Abi: Kurayb informed
us from Talaq ibn Ghanam, who related from ‘Uthman al-Makki
from Ibn Abi Mulaykah who said, ‘I saw Mujahid asking Ibn
‘Abbas about the exegesis of the Qur’an and he had with him his
tablets. Ibn ‘Abbas said to him “write” until he went through all

‎Sunan al-Tirmidhi, no. 2952.‏ ”ذا
‎Tid.‏ 88

‎169
of tafsir” This is why Sufyan al-Thawri would say, ‘If you have
the commentary of Mujahid then it is sufficient.’

Other such successors (tabi‘in) are 5210 ibn Jubayr, ‘Ikrimah
the freed slave of Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Ata’ ibn Abi Rabah, Hasan al-
Basri, Masriiq ibn al-Ajda‘, Said ibn al-Musayyib, Abul “Aliyah,
Rabi‘ ibn Anas, Qatadah, Dahhak ibn Muzahim and others from
the successors, their students and those who followed them.
Their statements are quoted and at times there is a difference in
wording, but those who are not grounded in knowledge believe
it to be differences of opinion and quote it as such, This is not
the case, as some of them mention something by using examples
or similes whilst others are explicit in what they are referring to.
Most of the time they are in agreement so let the astute be aware
of this, and guidance is from Allah.

Shu‘bah ibn Hajjaj and others have said that the statements of the
successors in matters such as practical rulings (abkam) are not
authoritative, so how can they be so in issues of tafsir? This means
that their opinions are not authoritative over other [successors]
who hold contrary views; this is true. However, if they all agree
on a single issue then without doubt it is sufficient as evidence.
Instead, when they differ, one returns to the language of the
Qur'an or Sunnah, or the general Arabic language or statements
of the companions.

The shaykh (may Allah have mercy upon him) mentions the
difference of opinion present among the scholars regarding this
issue. The author states that ‘many of the scholars’ allow this [i.e.
to use the statements of the successors] but this also shows that
there is no consensus on the issue. Furthermore, without doubt
there are different levels of successors; those who studied with
the companions are not similar to those who did not. Whatever
the case, their statements are not sufficient authority over those
who opposed their views. This is because they are not from the
companions even though their opinions are more likely [than
subsequent generations] to be correct. The closer the generation

170

is to the time of the Prophet (3%) the more likely it is that their
opinions will be correct. This is obvious as later generations had
to battle desires and temptations, and had many generations
between them and the era of prophethood. Thus, the later the
generation the weaker their knowledge and opinions are. This
goes to show the importance of returning to the statements of the
salaf. As for the deductions of later scholars, this requires more
scrutiny as these opinions may be far from the truth.

Hence, the methods for exegesis of the Qur’an are now four:
the Qur’an, the Sunnah, the statements of the companions and
the statements of the successors, with a difference of opinion
regarding the last category. The author’s personal opinion is
that if they the successors] unite then their statements are
sufficient as evidence, but if they differ with one another then
they [i.e. their opinions] are not authoritative.

171
172
CHAPTER 8

Exegesis of the Qur’an Based on
Intellect and Reason

Exegesis of the Qur’an based solely on one’s reasoning is haram.
Mu’ammal informed us from the authority of Sufyan from
‘Abdul-A1a, who related from Said ibn Jubayr that Ibn ‘Abbas
said: The Prophet (3) said, “Whoever speaks about the Qur'an
without knowledge then let him take his seat in the Fire.”'*”

Waki‘ informed us on the authority of Sufyan from ‘Abdul-A‘la
al-Tha‘labi, who related from Sad ibn Jubayr that Ibn ‘Abbas
said: The Prophet (#) said, “Whoever speaks about the Qur’an
without knowledge then let him take his seat in the Fire.” Al-
Tirmidhi reports from ‘Abd ibn Humayd from Hibban ibn Hilal,
who was informed by Suhayl the brother of Hazm al-Qat‘i, who
related from Abi ‘Imran al-Jtni from Jundub that the Prophet
(&) said, “Whosoever speaks about the Qur'an using his own
intellect and happens to be correct [in his reasoning] is still
wrong.” Al-Tirmidhi declared this hadith to be unfamiliar
(gharib) and some scholars of hadith have spoken concerning
Suhayl ibn Abii Hazm. These are the reports from the scholars
who narrated from the companions of the Prophet (38) and other
than them, all stating the severity of commentating on the Qur’an
without knowledge.

‎Sunan al-Tirmidbi, no. 2950.‏ "تد
‎Sunan Abu Dawud, no. 3652 and Sunan al-Tirmidbi, no. 2952.‏ 40

‎173
There are some reports that Mujahid, Qatadah and other than
them would commentate on the Qur’an, however, one does not
believe that their commentaries were not based on knowledge or
that they spoke of their own desires. There are many narrations
from them which support the fact that they did not use their own
reasoning in the exegesis of the Qur’an. Whoever speaks about
the Qur’an using his own reasoning has placed a burden upon
himself which he need not bear, and he is treading a path he
has not been ordered to tread. Even if he were to stumble upon
the correct meaning he would still have erred. The reason for
his error is because he did not approach this matter through the
correct channel. This is similar to the one who judges between
people with ignorance thus ending up in the Fire even if his ruling
is correct at times. He is still sinful but his sin is less than the one
who is incorrect in his ruling, and Allah knows best.

The one who strives to reach the truth but then errs still receives
a reward; similarly the one who does not strive but then is correct
has still erred, especially if what he is discussing contains no room
for analogy and reasoning.

When a person commentates on the Qur’an based on his own
reasoning, he may interpret the Qur’an according to his own
views and beliefs, just as the people of desires do. They state
that such and such means such and such, referring to what
they believe in. Likewise, in later times, those who interpret the
Qur’an with modern and scientific discoveries - even though the
Qur’an does not allude to their interpretations, neither explicitly
nor linguistically, have also interpreted the Qur’an using their
own intellect and reasoning; this is impermissible.

Similarly if one does not possess understanding of the linguistic
or sharZ meaning of a verse, but still speaks about it, he has also
spoken without knowledge, and so is sinful. The example of this
is a layman who interprets a verse of the Qur’an according to
his own understanding without any basis, neither linguistic nor
shar%. Such a person has committed an unlawful act. The reason

174

for this is that such a person testifies that this interpretation
is what Allah intended to say, and this is a dangerous matter.
Allah has forbidden that one should speak about Him without
knowledge,
2 ‏62س‎ 2 tte operate cole geet eric a 8
AGAR be igs FS

000

PSA ‏عَلَ وما‎
Say, “My Lord has only forbidden immoralities - what
is apparent of them and what is concealed - and sin, and
oppression without right, and that you associate with Allah that
for which He has not sent down authority, and that you say
about Allah that which you do not know.”
Strah al-A‘raf, 7:33

Whoever speaks about Allah without knowledge concerning the

meaning of His speech or any of His rulings has committed a
grave sin.

175
Similarly, Allah refers to the slanderers as liars, as He says,
»© ‏ملكو‎ sles DE MIG

And when they do not produce the witnesses, then it is they, in
the sight of Allah, who are the liars.
Sirah al-Nar, 24:13

Therefore the slanderer is a liar, even if his slander is relating
to an accusation of adultery, for he is spreading what he has
no right to spread and speaking about that which he does not
possess knowledge of, and Allah knows best.

It is for this reason that a number of the salaf would excuse
themselves from interpreting verses they had no knowledge of.
This is reported by Shu‘bah from Sulayman from ‘Abdullah ibn
Murrah, who related from Abi Ma‘mar that Abii Bakr al-Siddiq
said, ‘Which earth will hold me and which sky will shadow me if
I speak about the Book of Allah without knowledge.” It is also
reported from Abii ‘Ubayd al-Qasim ibn Salam who narrated
from Muhammad ibn Yazid from al-‘Awwam ibn Hawshab,
who related from Ibrahim al-Taymi that Abii Bakr al-Siddiq was
asked concerning the verse,

And fruit and grass
Stirah ‘Abasa, 80:31

He responded, ‘Which sky will shadow me and which earth will
hold me if I speak about the Book of Allah without knowledge.’
The chain of narration is disconnected.

If a person was asked concerning the meaning of this previous
verse, he may state that the word ‘abb’ means father, thus

"| Ibn Abi Shaybah, vol. 6, p. 136.

176

interpreting the verse according to his own reasoning and
ignorance. Since he has heard people saying ‘abb’ with an accent
(shaddah) whereas in reality it is pronounced ‘ab’ without an
accent, he jumped to the conclusion that this was what the verse
was referring to.

Others use the Qur’anic verses out of context. They use them in
places other than where Allah intended. An example of this is
one who is asked about something and responds by quoting the
verse,

«do not ask about things which, if they are shown to you, will
distress you.
Sirah al-Ma’idah, 5:101

To use this verse in this context is to use it in a place for which it
was not intended.

From here we can also see the error of those who praise the
woman who came to be known as, ‘the woman who speaks with
the Qur’an’. Her story is mentioned in books of literature. She
was a woman who only spoke with the Qur’an. It is said that
for forty years she only spoke with the Qur’an out of fear of
saying something wrong and thus invoking the wrath of Allah.
However, I believe that this act of hers was itself incorrect for by
doing this she was using the Qur’an out of context, and for other
than what it was intended.

177
Abii ‘Ubayd narrated that we were informed by Yazid, who
related from Humayd from Anas, that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab
recited on the pulpit, “And fruit and abba (grass).” ‘He asked
what is abb? As for fruits then we know of them but what is abb?
He then said to himself, ‘Indeed, this is overburdening oneself O
“Umar.”

‘Abd ibn Humayd reported that Sulayman ibn Sarb narrated
from Ibn Zayd, who related from Thabit from Anas who said,
‘We were with ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab and in his robe were four
patches. He recited the verse, “And fruit and abba (grass).” He
asked, what is abb? He then said, ‘Indeed, this is overburdening
oneself, what’s the harm in not knowing?”

In the portion of the hadith in which Anas mentions that ‘Umar
had four patches in his robe - is a benefit from the standpoint of
the science of hadith, as it shows the accuracy of the narrator - the
narrator was accurate and aware to the extent that the patches
in ‘Umar’s clothes did not escape him. In terms of character,
it shows the humbleness of the rightly guided caliphs. They
considered themselves as one of the people and acted accordingly,
to the extent that during the year of the famine ‘Umar forbade
himself from eating luxury foods, instead sufficing himself with
the least amount of food. All this was to ensure that he did not
give preference to himself over others, may Allah be pleased with
him.

That was during a time when the population were upright in
their religion and avoided unlawful matters. This is why it is
reported that a man said to ‘Ali ibn Abt Talib, ‘Why is it that
people have revolted against you but they did not revolt against
Abi Bakr or Umar?’ He replied, “The people in the time of Abii
Bakr and ‘Umar were like ‘Ali ibn Abii Talib, and the people in
my time are like you.”

Likewise, when ‘Abdul-Malik or Hisham ibn ‘Abdul-Malik saw
people complaining he gathered their leaders and noblemen and

178

preached to them saying, ‘To proceed, if you wish for us to treat
you like Abt’ Bakr or Umar would have, be like the men of the
time of Abi Bakr and ‘Umar, and we will treat you like they
would have.’ It is also often stated, ‘As you are, your leaders will
be for you.’

179
All of the above refers to the fact that they () wanted to discover
the reality of the abb. Otherwise it is well known to all that it is
a type of herbage which grows, as Allah says,

Bove Kite ceca
‏بانسب( وَيسبَاوعصْبا)ورينونا ونه‎
‏لي ساك‎
ethane ©
And caused to grow within it grain. And grapes and herbage.
And olive and palm trees. And gardens of dense shrubbery. And

fruit and grass,
Strah ‘Abasa, 80:27-31

Coxe. SKS

Ue aloes

“And fruits and grass.” This is the point of discussion here.
Due to the context of the verses, it is obvious that abb refers to
some form of herbage which grows from the earth. This basic
description is not hidden from Abi Bakr and ‘Umar. However,
they wished to learn more about it, what it exactly was. What
type of herbage is it? This is what confused them. It is said
regarding the abb, that it is a useful and good form of herbage,
possessing much benefit.

180

Ibn Jarir narrated from Ya‘qub ibn Ibrahim from Ibn ‘Ulayyah,
who related from Ayyiib from Ibn Abt: Mulaykah who stated,
‘Ibn ‘Abbas was asked concerning some verses - were you to be
asked concerning them you would have spoken, but he refused to
answer.’ Its chain of narration is authentic.

Ibn ‘Abbas was the one for whom the Prophet (33) made ‏“للك‎
‎that Allah should grant him the ability to interpret the Qur’an.
Were this illustrious companion to be asked about a verse he
would not reply, unlike many in our times. This illustrates the
importance of being cautious when it comes to the exegesis of
the Qur’an.

181

Abii ‘Ubayd narrated from Isma‘Tl ibn Ibrahim, who related from
Ayytib from Ibn Abi Mulaykah who said, “A man asked Ibn
‘Abbas about the verse,

407 re te
Aa RAE SNOT O99

...a Day, the extent of which is a thousand years.
Sirah al-Sajdah, 32:5

Ibn ‘Abbas asked him, ‘Then what about the verse,
OK MFG IES

...4 Day the extent of which is fifty thousand years.”
Surah al-Ma‘arij, 70:4

The man replied, ‘The reason I asked you was so that you would
inform me.’ Ibn ‘Abbas said, ‘They are two days which Allah
has mentioned in His Book, and Allah knows best what they
are [referring to].’ He disliked speaking about the Book of Allah
without knowledge.”

The duration of the Day of Judgement is fifty thousand years as is
in Sirah al-Ma“Grij, as Allah states, “...a Day the extent of which
is fifty thousand years. So be patient with gracious patience.”
This is also confirmed by the Prophet (#) in the hadith of Abi
Hurayrah collected by Muslim,'? in which it is mentioned that
the one who refused to pay the zakah will be punished on a Day,
the length of which is fifty thousand years.

As for the verse in Sirah al-Sajdah, “...a Day, the extent of
which is a thousand years” then this - and Allah knows best -
refers to this world. The context of the verse states, “He arranges
[each] matter from the heaven to the earth; then it will ascend
to Him in a Day, the extent of which is a thousand years of

'® Sahih Muslim, no. 987.

182

those which you count.” The ‘day’ in the verse, “And indeed,
a day.with your Lord is like a thousand years of those which
you count” ‏وز‎ described as being with Allah, hence we cannot
speculate concerning its reality, Allah knows best concerning it.

‘© Surah Hajj, 22:47.

183
Ibn Jarir narrated from Ya‘qub ibn Ibrahim from Ibn ‘Ulayyah,
who related from Mahdi ibn Maymin from al-Walid ibn Muslim
who said, ‘Talaq ibn Habib came to Jundub ibn Abdullah'**
and asked him concerning a verse of the Qur’an. He replied, “I
implore you never to come to me if you are a Muslim.” And in a
narration he said, “...never to sit with me.””

This is from piety and refraining from speaking about the
meanings of the Qur’an. The point isn’t to say to everyone who
asks you concerning a verse ‘don’t sit with me.’ Rather, this was
to stress how careful one should be in these matters.

44 Jundub ibn ‘Abdullah al-Bajali was one of the companions of the Prophet (%). He died
between 60 and 70 AH.

184

Malik narrated from Yahya ibn 5410 that if Sa‘Td ibn al-Musayyib
was ever asked concerning a verse of the Qur’an he would say,
‘We do not say anything concerning the [tafsir of the] Qur’an.’

Al-Layth reported from Yahya ibn Sa‘id that Sa‘id ibn ‏عله‎
‎Musayyib would not speak except about that which he knew
when it came to the Qur’an.

Shu‘bah related from ‘Amr ibn Murrah who said, “A man asked
53514 ibn al-Musayyib about a verse of the Qur’an and he replied,
‘Do not ask me concerning the Qur’an. Rather ask the one who
claims that none of it is hidden from him.’ He was referring to
‘Tkrimah.”

Ibn Shawdhab reports from Yazid ibn Abii Yazid who said, ‘We
would ask Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyib about the lawful (halal) and
unlawful (haram) and he was the most knowledgeable concerning
these matters. Then when we would ask him about the tafsir of a
verse, and he would remain silent as if he had not heard us.’

Ibn Jarir narrated from Ahmad ibn ‘Abdah al-Dabbi, who
related from Hammad ibn Zayd from ‘Ubaydullah ibn ‘Umar
who said, ‘I have met the jurists of Madinah and they considered
it a grave matter to speak about tafsir. From them was Salim ibn
‘Abdullah,"5 al-Qasim ibn Muhammad," Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyib
and Nafi."“”

Abii ‘Ubayd reported from ‘Abdullah ibn Salih, who related from
al-Layth from Hisham ibn Urwah who said, ‘I never heard my
father interpret a verse from the Qur’an.’

‎Salim ibn ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar, died 106 AH. He was one of the distinguished jurists of‏ كد
‎Madinah.‏

‎Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, the grandson of Abi Bakr. He was a great scholar of hadith‏ »لد
‎and figh who died in 106 AH.‏

‎' Aba ‘Abdullah Nafi, died 117 AH. He was the free slave of Ibn ‘Umar, a renowned
scholar of hadith and figh. He was sent to Egypt as a teacher by ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdul-Aziz.

‎185
Ayyiib, Ibn ‘Awn and Hisham al-Dastawa’i all reported from
Muhammad ibn Sirin that he said, ‘I asked ‘Ubaydah al-Salmant
concerning a verse of the Qur’an. He replied, “Those who knew
in which circumstances the verses were revealed have passed
away. Rather fear Allah and remain firm and upright.””

Abii ‘Ubayd reported from Mu‘adh from Ibn ‘Awn, who related
from ‘Ubaydullah ibn Muslim ibn Yasar from his father who
said, ‘Before you speak about Allah, pause and look at what
precedes and follows it [i.e. look at the context.’

Hushaym narrated from Mughirah from Ibrahim!” who said,
“Our peers used to try to avoid [having to] explain verses and
would give [this science] much respect.’

Shu‘bah narrated from ‘Abdullah ibn Abii al-Safar, that al-Sha‘bi
said, ‘I swear by Allah, there is not a single verse except that I
have asked concerning it, but it [¢afsir] is to narrate from Allah.’

Abii ‘Ubayd narrated from Hushaym who narrated from ‘Umar
ibn Abii Za’idah, who related from al-Sha‘bi from Masriiq who
said, ‘Beware of tafsir, for indeed it is reporting from Allah.’

These and other authentic narrations from the pious predecessors
all state the impermissibility of speaking about tafsir without
knowledge. However, there is no harm in speaking [about tafsir]
if one possesses the relevant linguistic and religious knowledge.

It is for this reason that there are a number of varying statements
reported from these scholars. This does not imply contradiction,
for they spoke about matters they had knowledge of, and
remained silent on that which they had no knowledge of. This
is what is obligatory upon everyone. Just as one should remain

“8 Muslim ibn Yasic al-Basri, died 100 AH. He was originally from Makkah but later settled
in Basrah, and distinguished himself as a scholar of hadith and figh.

‎Ibrahim ibn Yazid ibn Qays al-Nakha‘T, died 96 AH. He was one of the most eminent‏ "د
‎tabi‘, He became a distinguished scholar of figh and was known as the jurist of Iraq.‏

‎186
quiet about that which he is ignorant of, likewise he should speak
about that which he possesses knowledge of when he is asked
concerning it, as Allah says:

‎dE‏ 2 ري يست روبر
‎...You must make it clear [i.e. explain it] to the people and not‏

‎conceal it.
Sirah AlImran, 3:187

‎This is also due to what is reported in the hadith, “Whosoever is
asked about a matter but conceals it, will be given a bridle of
fire on the Day of Judgement.”

‎Ibn Jarir reported from Muhammad ibn Bashar from Mu’ammal,
who related from Sufyan from Abi al-Zinad that Ibn ‘Abbas
said, ‘Tafsir is of four types; a type which the Arabs know from
their language, a type which no-one is allowed to be ignorant of,
a type which is known to the scholars and a type which is not
known except to Allah.’ And Allah knows best.

‎These are the four types: a type of tafsir known to the Arabs from
their language. This includes words such as cave, (al-kabf), throne
(‘arsh), layered with fruit (mandiid), banana tree (talh) and so on.
A type of tafsir which everyone must know and no-one is excused
from such as what one must know regarding matters of belief and
action. An example is the verse, “...establish the prayer”. Each
person must know what this establishment of prayer consists
of. Likewise, each person must be aware of the fundamental
parts of belief such as faith in the Messengers. The third type
of tafsir is that which the scholars are aware of, the general,
specific, restricted and unrestricted, as well as the abrogated and
the rulings related to all this. Not everyone possesses knowledge
of this third type nor is it obligatory upon everyone to do so,
rather it is a collective obligation. The last type of tafsir is a type
known only to Allah. Whoever claims knowledge of this type
is a liar as is mentioned in some narrations. Examples include

‎187

knowledge of the reality of the attributes of Allah, the affairs of
the Day of Judgement, Paradise, the Fire, and such affairs of the
unseen. Whosoever claims knowledge of these affairs is a liar.
Such knowledge is only with Allah.

188
SUMMARY
Se

A Summary of ‘An Introduction to the
Principles of Tafsir’

1. Knowledge is either a narration from an infallible source, or
a statement supported by clear proof. All else is either fabricated
and thus rejected, or its status as acceptable or unacceptable is
unknown.

2. It is obligatory to know that the Prophet (%) explained the
meanings of the Qur’an to his companions just as he taught them
its words. The statement of Allah, “...that you may make clear
to the people what was sent down to them...”'® includes both
these aspects.

3. The nobler the generation, the greater the knowledge,
understanding, unity and co-operation present amongst its
people.

4. The pious predecessors (salaf) rarely differed in tafsir. Their
differences of opinion in practical rulings are much greater than
their differences in tafsir. That which is classed as differences
of opinion are more variations in wording than they are
contradictions. These are of two categories:

‎Sirah al-Nabl, 16:44.‏ معد

‎189
The first category is the expression of one and the same idea by
using different words. An example of this is referring to the same
concept by one person mentioning a particular aspect concerning
it and another mentioning another aspect. These explanations
are like using equivalent names which lie between synonyms and
antonyms.

5. Every single name of Allah refers to Him and the attributes that
name possesses. By necessity, it also refers to the attributes which
other names may possess. This is a principle when discussing the
names and attributes of Allah.

6. If the intention of the questioner is to pinpoint an object, it can
be described using any name so long as it is understood to refer
to that particular object.

7. If the intention of the questioner is to learn about the attribute
which that name connotes, an added explanation must also be
given. For example, a person may ask concerning the names of
Allah: al-Quddis (the Pure), al-Salam (the Perfect), al-Mu’min
(the Bestower of faith) whilst knowing that these names refer
to Allah, however, the questioner wishes to inquire about these
specific attributes.

8. If that which has proceeded is clear, one realises that it is often
the case that the predecessors (salaf) would describe something
using a name which points to the object being referred to; at the
same time this name may also contain an attribute not present in
its other names. It is well-known that this is not a contradictory
difference as some people mistakenly think.

The only point of difference is concerning a general term which
is used in a particular case; is it limited to that case or not? None
of the Muslim scholars infer that the general terms present in the
Qur’an and Sunnah only pertain to those specific people about
whom those verses were revealed. Rather, the most that can be
said is that such said verses apply to all those who are similar to
that person for which the verse was revealed, and the wording

190
is not generalised to the limits to which the language allows.
Any verse which was revealed for a particular reason, especially
if the verse is an order or a prohibition, not only includes that
particular person for whom it was revealed but all those similar
to him. This is also the case if the verse is praising or censuring
someone.

9. Their statement: ‘This verse was revealed due to such and
such’ can sometimes mean that this was the reason the verse was
revealed. It can also imply that this meaning is also present in the
verse even if it is not the reason for its revelation, i.e. the meaning
of this verse is such and such.

10. If one mentions a reason for which the verse was revealed
and then another mentions a different reason, it is possible that
both are speaking the truth and that the verse was revealed after
a number of incidents took place, or the verse was revealed twice;
on each occasion for a different reason. Another type of difference
which can be found is where we have equivocal words. This is
because it has a number of meanings in the language such as the
word ‘qaswarah’ which can refer to a shooter or a lion, and the
word “as‘asa’ which can refer to both the advent and departure of
the night. Or it may be because even though the word originally
only has one meaning, it denotes one of two different types or
one of two things such as a pronominal subject, like in the verse:
“Then he approached and descended. And was at a distance of
two bow lengths or nearer.”'! There are very few words in the
Arabic language which are synonymous; this is even rarer in the
Qur’an if not non-existent.

11. Itis common for the Arabs to attach a verb to another verb by

using the preposition of the latter. As such, we can see the mistake
made by those who substitute certain words with others.

‎Sarah al-Najm, 53:8-9.‏ اكد

‎191
12. Differences of opinion may occur due ‏م‎ relevant
evidences being hidden, overlooked, not being known or being
misunderstood, or due to one favouring an opposing opinion.

13. Differences in the exegesis of the Qur’an can be of two types:
The source of the first is narrations and the other type is derived
from different means, for knowledge is either a truthful narration,
or a correct deduction, and the narrations either originate from
one who is infallible or one who is not.

The purpose is to discuss these narrations irrespective of whether
they stem from an infallible authority or not; this is the first
category. At times, we are able to distinguish between authentic
and weak narrations and at times we are unable to do so. The
second category whose authenticity we cannot ascertain, for the
most part is unbeneficial and to delve into it is unnecessary. As
for that knowledge which is essential to the Muslims, Allah has
placed for them sufficient signs showing them the truth.

14. When the narrations of the tabi‘#n differ, some of their sayings
do not possess greater authority than others. Rather, authentic
narrations from the companions in this regard are more reliable
than narrations from their students.

15. The first category in which one is able to establish the
authenticity of a narration is possible - and all praise is for Allah
— in those matters which are essential.

16. The point here is that there are clear signs showing the
authenticity or weakness of those narrations which are essential
and required by the Muslims.

17. Mursal hadiths which are reported by many narrators to the
extent that there can be no chance of intentional or incidental

collusion between the narrators are without doubt authentic.

18. Using this method, it is possible to determine the authenticity
of narrations which are reported through different transmissions,

192
even though each individual narration is not sufficient on its own
due to a missing link present or the weakness of a narrator.

19. This is an essential principal to remember, and is very
beneficial in determining the truthfulness of narrations in hadith,
tafsir and military expeditions, and what people said or did.

20. The point is that if a hadith has been narrated from two
different chains without collaboration, it cannot be a mistake or
a lie.

21. The majority of what is in Bukhari and Muslim can be ascribed
to the Prophet (38) with certainty, as it is of a high calibre.

22. The majority of scholars from all of the different schools of
thought agree that if a hadith reported with a single narrator in
its chain of narration is accepted or approved by action, then it
is sufficient as evidence.

23. Just as they use the hadiths of the one with bad memory as
supporting evidence, they [scholars of hadith] may also classify
the hadith of a trustworthy and reliable narrator as weak due
to apparent and clear errors found in certain narrations. This
is known as the science of ‘ilal al-hadith (the hidden defects in
hadith), and it is one of the most noble and advanced sciences in
this field.

24. People are of two extremes in this issue. A group of scholastic
theologians and their likes who are unfamiliar with the science
of hadith and its scholars do not differentiate between authentic
and weak narrations. This causes them to doubt the authenticity
of hadiths even though they are classified as authentic by the
scholars of this science. The other group claims to follow hadiths
wherever they find a wording narrated by a trustworthy person, or
a hadith which appears to be authentic, considering it to be from
among those hadiths whose authenticity has been established by
the scholars. Even if they contradict a well known and authentic
hadith, they will revert to facile interpretations or insist it is an

193
evidence for a certain issue even though the scholars of hadith
consider it to be incorrect. Just as there are signs by which one
can come to know and establish that a hadith is truthful, likewise
there are signs which also point to a hadith being a fabrication.

25. In the books of tafsir, many such fabrications exist, such as
the hadith narrated by al-Tha‘abi, al-Wahidi and al-Zamakhshart
regarding the superiority of the chapters of the Qur’an. These are
fabricated by the agreement of the scholars.

26. The second of the two categories in which differences occur
relates to reasoning and deduction as opposed to narrations. Most
mistakes which occur in tafsir are as a result of two things which
appeared after the generation of the companions, their students
(tabi‘in) and those who followed them in righteousness.

27. The first problem which arose was people believing in
certain ideologies and then interpreting the Qur’an to fit those
ideologies. The second problem was a group of people who
interpreted the Qur’an just as an average Arabic speaker would,
without considering from whom these words came, to whom it
was revealed and who they were addressing.

28. The first group [achieves its objective] by employing two
methods; either by stripping the words of the Qur’an of their real
and intended meanings, or by giving the words meanings which
they do not convey. In both methods, that which they wish to
affirm or negate can be incorrect and thus they are mistaken in
the evidence used and that which they want to support.

29. The point being made here is that this group of people held
certain beliefs and then interpreted the words of the Qur’an in
support of those beliefs. In this regard, they have no predecessors
from the companions, their students (ta@bi‘iin) or those who
followed them from the great scholars of the Muslims, neither in
their beliefs nor in their commentaries of the Qur’an.

194
30. From amongst them are individuals who are eloquent and
charming, and are able to conceal their innovations so that most
people will not realise, such as the author of Kashaf and others.
This particular author manages to confuse many who would not
expect him to possess erroneous views.

31. In short, whoever diverts away from the methodology of
the companions, their students and their commentaries to what
opposes them is wrong in this, Rather he is an innovator in this
respect, even though he may be striving to attain the truth and so
be forgiven for his errors.

32. Thus, whosoever opposes their statements possesses certain
doubts, either intellectual or textual, as has been expounded
upon elsewhere.

33. Here, we wish to highlight the causes of difference in tafsir.
One of the greatest causes is innovation and falsehood whose
proponents go to the extent of distorting the words of Allah,
and interpreting the statements of Allah and His Messenger (3)
incorrectly and twisting their meanings.

34. Those who err in their deductions and not their methods
are like the Sifis, preachers, jurists and others who interpret the
Qur’an with correct ideas but the words of the Qur’an do not
imply such meanings.

35. The most authentic method with which to explain the Qur’an
is with the Qur’an. If you are unable to do this, then use the
Sunnah.

36. If you do not find the tafsir in the Qur’an or Sunnah you
return to the statements of the companions.

37. Israelite traditions are of three types: a type which is authentic
as its truthfulness is attested to by our own sources, a type which
is false as our own sources reject it, and a third type which does
not fall into the previous two categories. We can neither judge

195
it to be authentic or inauthentic; as such we neither believe in
it nor reject it. One is allowed to quote from this third type,
even though most of what is contained in it is of no immediate
religious benefit.

38. The best way of mentioning differences of opinion is to
gather all of the relevant opinions, mention the correct opinion
while refuting the incorrect and then stating the fruit and benefit
derived from the discussion. This is to ensure that one does not
prolong discussion over insignificant matters which possess no
benefit and one does not divert from what is more crucial and
important.

One who does not gather all the different opinions on a particular
issue has presented an incomplete argument, as the truth may lie
in what he has neglected. Similarly, the one who does not point
out the correct opinion has also performed an incomplete task.
If one intentionally authenticates something incorrect, he has
ascribed lies and falsehood, and if one does this out of ignorance
then he has erred.

Similarly, whoever discusses differences in issues which hold little
or no benefit, or mentions varying opinions which even though
they possess different wordings all dissolve into just one or two
opinions has wasted time and has incorrectly exaggerated the
matter. Such a person is like one who wears two robes, both of
which are stolen.

39. If scholars are unable to find the explanation of a verse in the
Qur’an or Sunnah, and do not find any relevant commentaries
from the companions, then many of the scholars use the statements
of the successors (tabi‘an).

40. Shu‘bah ibn Hajjaj and others have said that the statements
of the successors in matters such as practical rulings are not
authoritative, so how can they be so in issues of tafsir? This means
that their opinions are not authoritative over other [successors]
who hold contrary views; this is true. However, if they all agree
on a single issue then without doubt it is sufficient as evidence.

196
41. Exegesis of the Qur’an based only on one’s reasoning is
haram.

42. Whoever speaks about the Qur’an using his own reasoning
has placed a burden upon himself which he need not bear. He is
also treading a path he has not been ordered to tread. Even if he
were to stumble upon the correct meaning, he would still have
erred. The reason for his error is because he did not approach
this matter through its proper avenue. This is similar to the one
who judges between people with ignorance. His end is in the Fire
even if at times his ruling is correct, thus he is still sinful but his
sin is less than the one who is incorrect in his ruling, and Allah
knows best.

43. These and other authentic narrations from the pious
predecessors all state the impermissibility of speaking about
tafsir without knowledge. However, there is no harm in speaking
[about tafsir] if one possesses the required linguistic and religious
knowledge. It is for this reason that there are a number of varying
statements reported from these scholars. This does not imply
contradiction, for they spoke about matters they had knowledge
of, and remained silent on that which they had no knowledge
of.

197
198
GLOSSARY

مشخ صم

Abkami: Sing: bukm. A law or judgement. In the shariah, the most
important kind is the assignment of a value to human actions:
obligatory, prohibited, praiseworthy, disliked or neutral.

Asbab al-nuziil: The circumstances which led to the revelation of
a particular verse or passage of the Qur’an.

Asb‘ari: An Islamic sect founded in the third century of Hijrab.
From their beliefs is that ian is only belief (i.e., actions are
not part of iman); that iman does not increase or decrease;
that tawhid is restricted to affirming the perfect nature of Allah
(ie., Rubabiyyah); and that most of the attributes of Allah are
metaphorical.

‘Ashiira: The tenth day of the Islamic month of Muharram. It is
recommended to fast on that day, along with the day before or
the day after.

Da‘wah: Lit: ‘an invitation’; Islamically, it refers to the invitation
to Islam, or more generally, the propogation of any religion or
belief system.

Fatwa: A religious edict or verdict.

Fiqh: Lit: ‘understanding’; Islamically, it refers to knowledge of
the detailed laws of the Shariah related to people’s actions, along

with the detailed evidence for those laws.

199
Gharib: Lit: strange/unfamiliar. This is when there is a single
narrator in one of the stages of transmission.

Hadith: A report about the Prophet; his statement, action or
tacit approval of actions of his Companions, or description of his
physical appearance or character.

Halal: Permissible; one of the five classifications of human
actions, according to the shariah.

Haram: Prohibited; one of the five classifications of human
actions, according to the shari‘ah.

Ibram: A state of consecration entered into when one intends to
perform Hajj or ‘Umrah. Certain normally lawful acts become
prohibited.

Isnad: The chain of narrators for a hadith, by which the reliability
of a text may be judged.

Isr@iliyat: Reports of the Jews and Christians about religious
issues and events. The Prophet permitted Muslims to transmit
these reports, which fall into three categories: reports confirmed
by the Qur’an and Sunnah, which we thus know to be true;
reports contradicted by the Qur’an and Sunnah, which we know
to be false; reports containing information about which the
Qur’an and Sunnah are silent. We can neither confirm nor deny
this last category.

Jabmiyyah: The first markedly philosophical heretical sect in
Islam; followers of Jahm ibn Safwan. They denied all of Allah’s
attributes.

Kalalah: A case related to the rulings of inheritance; in this case
the deceased leaves neither descendants nor ascendants as heirs.

The first sect to split ranks with the Muslims. They
believed that any person who committed a major sin, such as

200
stealing, lying, or fornicating, became a disbeliever due to that
sin. They considered most of the companions to be disbelievers,
and as such fought them.

Khutbab al-Hajjah: Lit: sermon of need. This was the sermon
with which the Prophet would begin all of his sermons.

Li‘an: Lit: curse. These are the four sworn testimonies taken by
a man who accuses his wife of adultery. This is accompanied
by a fifth testimony in which the wrath and curse of Allah is
invoked upon the liar. The wife can counteract these testimonies
by making five similar testimonies of her own after which the
husband and wife are separated and can never remarry.

Mu‘attilah: Those who fall into ta‘til; to deny all or some of the
attributes of Allah.

Madhab: It is most frequently used for the schools of thought in
Islamic law; the four major ones being the Hanafi, Maliki, ShafiT
and Hanbali schools.

Mudtarib: A disordered hadith in which a number of reports
with the same strength differ; thus, neither compromise nor
abrogation nor preponderance can be applied.

Murji’ah: An Islamic deviant sect which holds the belief that
sins do not harm believers just as good deeds do not benefit
disbelievers. They also leave the position of those who commit
major sins to Allah in the Hereafter.

Mursal: An incomplete transmission. A hadith whose chain of
transmission lacks a Companion transmitter. In other words it
refers to a hadith in which a tabi‘ has directly narrated from the
Prophet without the mention of a Companion as a link between
him and the Prophet.

201
Musharrakah: A case related to the rulings of inheritance; this
is when the deceased is survived by a husband, mother, two or
more maternal brothers and any number of full brothers.

Mutabi’: A hadith whose wording or meaning is identical to
another hadith which is also reported by the same Companion.

Mu‘tazillab: A rationalist Islamic sect. They figuratively
interpreted texts about Allah’s attributes or denied them outright.
They also denied large portions of the Sunnah, affirmed absolute
human free will, and considered sinful Muslims to be eternally
doomed to Hell. This was all as a result of their giving precedence
to their deductions over the texts of the Qur’an and Sunnah,

Qadr: The pre-decree of Allah.

Qiyas: A legal analogy by which a law is extended from a case
mentioned in a text of the Qur’an or Sunnah to a case for which
there is no specific text on the basis of the same effective cause
for the law in both cases.

Rafidah: The name applied to the Twelver Shi'ite sect, so called
since they believe in twelve Imams. They ascribe powers of
lordship to these Imams, perform tawaf around their graves and
direct their du‘Gs to them.

Sabib: Lit: authentic; in hadith terminology, it means a rigorously
authenticated report, whose isndd is connected, whose narrators
are of good charater and accurate memory, and which is free
from hidden defects or contradiction with more authentic texts.

Salaf: The pious predecessors; normally referring to the first three
generations of Muslims.

Shaddah: The doubling of consonants.
Shahid: A hadith whose wording or meaning is identical to
another hadith, but the narrating Companion is different in

both.

202
Shariah: The divinely revealed law contained in the Qur’an and
the Sunnah. It is comprehensive in its scope, covering issues of
belief, devotional worship, and personal interactions as well as
commercial, criminal, constitutional and international law.

Shi‘ab: The term applied to a variety of dissident groups united
in their belief that the Prophet’s cousin ‘Ali ibn Abii Talib and
his descendants were divinely appointed to lead the Muslims
spiritually and politically.

Sift: An adherent of Siifism, a mystical interpretation of Islam
that stresses the primary importance of rememberance of Allah
as well as the necessity of submitting one’s will to a spiritual
guide in order to progress spiritually. Latter-day Sifi doctrines
such as wabdat al-wujiid (the unity of being) and fan@’ (nirvana)
owe more to Buddhism and Hinduism than they do to Islam.

Sirah: Plural: suwar; A chapter of the Qur’an.

Tabi‘iin: The second generation of Muslims. They are those who
met the Companions of the Prophet.

Tafsir: Lit: interpretation, Islamically, it is the science of
explaining the meanings of the Qur’an.

Tawaf: An act of worship which consists of circumumbulating
the Ka‘bah seven times.

Tawhid: The Islamic concept of monotheism. It consists of
unifying Allah in His Lordship, His right of worship and His
Names and Attributes.

Ummah: The group of people to whom a prophet is sent. The

more common meaning of the Muslim Ummah is those people
who have believed in the Prophet Muhammad.

203
Usiil ul-Figh: The principles of Islamic jurisprudence; a system of
rules developed by generations of Islamic scholars for the correct
deduction of laws from the texts of the Qur’an and Sunnah.

Zakab: An annual obligatory charity taken from Muslims
possessing a fixed amount of wealth and distributed among the
poor and several other categories of recipients.

Zibar: The statement of a husband to his wife “You are to me like
the back of my mother” or such similar statements, i.e. unlawful
for me to approach sexually. This was a type of separation
practiced by the Arabs in pre-Islam in which the wife was neither
explicitly divorced nor married. As such Islam abolished it.

204
