منْأدٍ لَّةالآحكار

Bulugh Al-Maram

Attainment

of the

Objective

According to Evidence of the Ordinances

Compiled by:
Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalani
With Brief Notes from the Book
Subul-us-Salam
Written by:
Muhammad bin Ismail Al-Sanani

DARUSSALAM

Bulugh Al-Maram
Min Adillat Al-Ahkam

Compiled and referenced by

IMAM IBN HAJR
(773 H — 852 H)

لوغ المرَام

Translated by Edited by
Dr. Nancy Eweiss Selma Cook
Dar Al-Manarah

For Translation, Publishing& Distribution
El-Mansoura - Egypt -Tel Fax: 002050 / 2030254
Hand phone: 012 / 3605049 ~ P.0.BOX:35738
E. mail: almanarah400@hotmail.com
® Dar Al-Manarah for Translation, Publishing & Distribution
1424/2003

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or other-
wise, without written permission from the publisher.

Dar Al-Manarah

For Translation, Publishing& Distribution
El-Mansoura - Egypt -Tel Fax: 002050 / 2030254
Hand phone: 012 / 3605049 P.O.BOX:35738
E. mail: almanarah400@hotmail.com

Dar Al Kotob Library Number : 2003 /7157
1.5.8.977 - 6005 - 24-1

oe
CONTENTS
Pages

The Author's Introduction ...

‘Translator’s Introduction... ve Ud
Glossary... 13
Book of Purification (at-Taharah)

Chapter I : Water ... 52 . 18
Chapter II; Containers and Utensils .. 24
Chapter III; ‘The Cleansing of NaJasah and its nature 26
Chapter IV: Ablution (Wadd) .. 28
Chapter V: Wiping over the Socks (Khuf) . 36
Chapter VI: _Nullification of Ablution 3 . 39
Chapter VII: Etiquettes of Relieving oneself

(going to the bathroom) .. . 46

Chapter VIII: The fall ritual ablution (al-Ghusl) and the Hukm
(ordinance) of the person in a state of major
ritual impurity (Junub).........

Chapter IX: Dry Ablution (at-Tayammum)

Chapter X: Menstruation 7

. 52
57
61

Book of Prayer

66
74

Chapter I: The times of prayer ......
Chapter II: The Call to Prayer (Adhan)

Chapter III: The Prerequisites of prayer ..... 82
Chapter IV: The Sutrah (or Partition) In Front of One,

‘Who is Praying .. 89
Chapter V: Encouraging (the Muslim) to be Humble

during prayer... 92
Chapter VI: Mosques .. 95

Chapter VII: The Description of how Prayer is to be performed. 99
Chapter VIII: Sujad as-Sahu (Prostration due to forgetfulness

during prayer)Other forms of Sujad (prostration):

Prostration of Qur’anie Recital, and Prostration

of Thankfulness .......... . . 126
Chapter IX: Supererogatory (voluntary) Prayer .... .. 5
Chapter X: Congregational Prayerand The Position of ‏سقس‎ 8
Chapter XI: The Prayer of a Traveler and the Prayer

of the ill 5 .
Chapter XI: The Friday (Jum’ah) Prayer ...

4

. 158
. 164

Chapter XII: Prayer During Times of Fear or Danger
Galatul Khauf) .
Chapter XIV: The Prayer of the Two ‘Id Festivals .
Chapter XV: The Prayer During a Solar Eclipse
Chapter XVI. The Istisqa’ Prayer (invoking Allah for rain

. 174
178
. 183

during drought) 186
Chapter XVII: Clothing .. . 191
Book 131: Funerals ... . 195
Book IV: Zakah
Chapter I 7 04
Chapter II: Sadaqatul Fitr (Zakah paid at the end
of Ramadan) 225
Chapter I:  Sadagat at-Tataww’ or Voluntary Charity... 6
Chapter IV: Division of Zakah (Zakah recipients) .. . 281
Book V: Fasting
Chapter I: 235

Chapter II: Voluntary Fasting and Forbidden Days to Fast .. 245
Chapter III: I'tikaf and Night prayer (Tahajjud) in Ramadan, 250

Book VI: The Pilgrimage

Chapter I: Its virtues and those upon whom Hajj

(Pilgrimage) is obligatory ... 255
Chapter II: Mawaqit: Fixed Times and Places For Thram.. 260
Chapter III: Kinds of Ihram . ses 262
Chapter IV: ‘The Etiquettes of Ihram .... . 262
Chapter V: Description of Hajj Rituals and Entering

Makkah
Chapter VI: Missing the Pilgrimage or being detained

(h-sar).......

. 268

283

Book VI Business Transactions

Chapter I: Conditions of Business Transactions and

‘Those which are Forbidden ... 285
Chapter II: Options (al-Khiyér) in Business Dealings 303
Chapter III: Riba (Usury). 305

Chapter IV: Concession concerning “Araya (Lending some-
thing for use) and the sale of Trees and fruit .... 312

5
Payment in Advance (or Salam), Loan and
Rahn (putting up Collateral) ..
Bankruptcy and Hajr
Reconciliation ..
Hiwélah (Transferring the Right to Collect

a Debt) and Daman (Guaranteeing Payment). 324
Partnership and Agency 326
Confession 328

315
318
323

Chapter V:

Chapter VI:
Chapter VII:
Chapter VIII:

Chapter IX:
Chapter

Chapter ‏:ك2‎ Al-Ariya (Lending something For use) .......... 8
Chapter XII: Ghasb (The return of wrongfully

Taken property) . 330
Chapter XI: Ash-Shuf’ah (Preempting the sale of a

co-owner’s Share to another) sen 883
Chapter XIV: Al-Qiréd (Financing a Profit -sharing venture).335
Chapter XV:  Musqah (Watering grapes or dates for part

of the crop) and Ijarah (A Contract for Hire

or Lease)... 336
Chapter XVI: Cultivation of a Barren Land(making it fertile).339
Chapter XVII: Waaf (Endowment) . vous B42
Chapter XVII: Gifts, ‘Umra (Life-Tenancy) and ‏طوس‎ 344
Chapter XIX: Lugatah (Lost and found items) .. 348
Chapter XX: Inheritance 350
Chapter XI: Wills (Bequests) . 355
Chapter XIE: Wadi‘ah (Trusts Deposited for Safekeeping)... 358

Book VIII: Marriage
Chapter... .. 859
Chapter I: Compatibility in Marriage and the Right
to Choose seein BTL
Chapter III: ‘Treatment of wives 577
Chapter IV: The Dowry : 382
Chapter V: ‘The Wedding Banquet (Walimah) 386
Chapter VI: Sharing the Time (between two wives or more). 391
Chapter VII: Khul’a (Divorce at the Wife's instance By giving
a payment to the husband)

Chapter VIII: Divorce .
Chapter IX: Raj’ah (Taking Back A Divorced Wife) . . 403
Chapter X: Ila’, Dhihar and Kaffarah (Expiation)
Chapter XI: Li’an. 0 ‏ا‎
‎Chapter XII: ‘Iddah and Thdad |

Chapter XIII: Rida’ (Becoming Unmarriageable Kin

By Suckling)
Chapter XIV: Maintenance
Chapter XV: Child Care and Custody ..

418
421
425

Book IX: Crimes (Qisas or Retaliation)

Chapter:
Chapter II: Types of Diyah (Blood money)
Chapter III: Claiming the Right to Qisis and Qasamah
(taking an oath) .
Chapter IV: Fighting Transgressors (who rebel against,
the ruler unjustly) .. . 445
Chapter V: Fighting The Offender and Killing the Apostate. 447

429
437

443

Book X: Hudad or Prescribed Penalties
in Islamic Shari‘ah

Chapter I: ‘The Prescribed Penalty (punishment)

for Fornication ... . 450
Chapter II: Penalty for Qadhf (Accusing a Person of

Adultery without Proof) 459
Chapter III: Penalty for Theft ... 460

Chapter IV: Penalty for Drinking and the Nature
of Intoxicants . . 466
Chapter V: —Ta’zir Discretionary Punishment ‘And Ordinanees
Regarding An Assailant .. . 469

Book XI: Jihad

Chapter I: 0000
Chapter II: Jizyah and Truces .
Chapter III: Racing and Marksmanship

472

492

Book XII: Food

Chapter: . . 494
Chapter II: Hunting and Slaughtering . » 497
Chapter III: Sacrifices on ‘Idul Ad-ha 502
Chapter IV: “Aqigah .. 506

Book XII: Oaths and Vows

Chapter I: . 508

Book XIV: Judgments

Chapter...
Chapter I: Witnessing and Testimonies

517
521

Chapter II: Claims and Evidence ........csscssssssetsssseeeetsores 524
Book XV: Book of Emancipation
Chapters... . 529
Chapter II: Issues related to al-Mudabbar al-Mukatib
and Umm al-Walad 5 . 8
Book XVI: The Comprehensive Book
Chapter ‏:1آ‎ Good Manners (Adab) .. . 536
Chapter II: Birr (Piety, righteousness, acts of goodness)
and keeping ties with one’s kin . . 541
Chapter III: Zuhd (Abstinence) and Piety .. 546
Chapter IV: Admonition Against Mischievous Conduct 550
Chapter V:  Exhortation to have Good Morals . 560

Chapter VI: Remembering Allah and Supplication 565

The Author's Introduction

All praise to Allah, the Almighty for His open and concealed
bounties, which He bestows at all times. May the peace and bless-
ings of Allah be upon His final Messenger, his family and compan-
ions and all those who strive in the path of Allah until the Day of
Judgment, as well as their followers who inherited their knowle-
dge for indeed the scholars (Ulamé') are the heirs of the Prophets!
May Allah, the Almighty bless them all and their followers.

This is a concise book comprising of Hadith, which are sources
of the Shariah, I have made a meticulous compilation so that the
one who memorizes it will excel among his peers. It may assist the
beginner and the learned person who is seeking more knowledge.

1 have indicated at the end of every Hadith the Imam who
collected it. I used the following abbreviations:

‘The seven Imams refers to: Ahmad}, Al-Bukhari?, Muslim’,
Abi Dawid‘, At-Tirmidhi®, An-Nasa'i6 and Ibn Majah’.

‘The six Iméms refers to: Al-Bukhari, Muslim, Aba Dawad, At-
Tirmidhi, An-Nasé’i and Ibn Majah.

The five Imams refers to: Ahmad, Abd Dawad, At-Tirmidhi,
An-Nasa't and Ibn Majah. They may also be referred to as: The
four and Ahmad.

The four Iméms refers to: Aba Dawa, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasé't
and Ibn Majah.

The three Iméms refers to: Abi Dawid, At-Tirmidhi, An-

1. Ahmad Tbn Hanbal, born in 164 AH and died in Baghdad in 241 AH.
2 Muhammad bin Ismail AL-Bukhéri was born in 194 AH and died in

Samargand in 256 AH
3. Born in 204 AH and died in Naisabor in 161.

4 Sulaimédn bin Al-Ashath As-Sagisténi. Born in 202 and died in 275 AH
in Al-Basrah,

5. Ahmad bin Shuaib, born in 216 and died 303.

6 Muhammad bin 154 died in 276b in Tirmidh,

7-  Muhmammad bin Yazid Al-Qazwint, born in 207 and died in 275 AH.

9
Agreed upon’ refers to: Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

1 have called this book: “Buliigh al-Marém min Adillat Al-
Ahkam” (Attainment of the Objective according to Evidence of the
Legal Judgments); and I ask Allah that what we have learnt may
not be a calamity against us. May He guide us to act according to
what pleases Him, the Almighty.

& Agreed upon means: A’
Bukhari and Muslim,

Translator’s Introduction

Al praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Universe. We praise
Him, seek His help, and ask His forgiveness. We seck refuge in
Allah from the evil of our souls, and the adverse consequences of
our deeds. Whosoever Allah guides, there is none that can misg-
uide him, and whosoever He misguides, none can guide him.

I bear witness and testify that there is no deity that is worthy
of worship except for Allah, who is alone having no partners. I

bear witness and testify that Muhammad 3% is His perfect slave
and Messenger.

Buligh al-Maram is a book, which was written by Imam Ibn
Hajar (773 H - 852 H) with the objective of compiling many of the
Ahédith particularly related to the Ahkém (judgments) of Islamic
Sharah, i.e. those related to worship, business transactions, laws
of marriage and divorce, legal punishments etc. This illustrates
the importance of this book for the Muslim reader, who is always
in need to know the judgments of Shart’ah related to the essential
elements of his life.

Due to the importance of this book, Imém As-San’ant wrote a
very good interpretation of the Ahddith in Bulaigh al-Marém in
his famous book ‘Subul as-Salam.” Needless to say that reading
the Ahadith on their own as they are organized in ‘Buliigh al-
Maram’, may be confusing sometimes as the reader may find that,
some of these Ahadith appear to be contradictory even though
they may be of the same grade of authenticity. Therefore, we made
use of some of the commentary of Imam As-San’ani, plus referring
to some other books, which are relevant to the interpretation of
Hadith, in order to clarify any ambiguity that may arise. Hopeful-
ly these footnotes will make it easy for the reader to comprehend
the essence of these Ahkam in Islamic Shart’ah and how they are
deduced from the combination of these Akédith and the relevant,
Qur’Gnic verses.

A glossary has been included to clarify the meaning of some of
the terminology used throughout it. Needless to say that this ter-
minology is specifically related to Islamic concepts of which there
is no synonym in English. For this reason they were used in
Arabic Transliteration so that the non-Arabic speaking Muslim

i

reader will become familiar with them, and hopefully such words
and expressions will be adopted into everyday speech. One Eng-
lish word could never convey the whole concept and depth of the
Arabic term,

Buligh al-Maram was previously translated, with good effort
by Dar al-Fikr in Syria, but the language of the book required
some refining plus there is a need for explanatory footnotes to
help in the comprehension and understanding of the Ahédith as
mentioned earlier.

I am deeply grateful to Dr. al-Khushd'i Muhammad al-Khu-
shai, who is a scholar of Hadith and its sciences at Al-Azhar
University, Faculty of ‏لفون"‎ ad-Din’, for his great help with the
commentaries included in this edition and his valuable guidance
throughout the whole work.

I would like to express my deep gratitude and appreciation to
my editor sister Selma Cook, as she is not just a language editor,
she reads with the eye and heart of a Muslim who tries to under-
stand, analyze and comment on what she is reading. Her valuable
discussions over the content of the book are always a source of
inspiration for more valuable additions in explanatory footnotes
and in the Hadith text itself. This is very important for editors of
such specialized books that could not be edited by someone who
does not have a good background in Islamic knowledge and the
interest and desire to understand what they are not familiar with

Finally, I must say that this remains a human effort which ean
never achieve perfection, and any comments from the reader will
be much appreciated and will be considered Insha’ Allah in coming
editions. I would like to thank all who helped to publish this book.
1 pray that Allah, the Almighty accepts our efforts, as sincere
deeds are done solely for His sake.

Indeed, any deeds performed without sincerity in Allah's cause
are lost and have no value. May Allah guide and keep us all on
His straight path.

Translator

Dr. Nancy Eweiss
21/10/2003
N.B. What is written between bracksets is used to clarify the mea-
nings of the words in the Hadith and not part of the text said by

the Prophet 38. The words of the Prophet 38 are written in bold, as
in contrast to what is narrated by the Companions.

Glossary

‎Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.‏ بعل
‎RAA: May Allah be pleased with him/her.‏
‎“Asr prayer: Mid-afternoon prayer.‏

‎The Basmalah: The words: Bismillah-ir Rahman-ir-Rahim
(In the name of Allah, the Most Benificient, the Most Merciful),
which is said before reading any Stirah of the Qur'an, including
the. Fatihah: (the opening chapter of the Qur'an).

‎Bid“ah: Innovation in religion: in worship or fundamentals.

‎Dhikr: Words and phrases said to remember Allah, the Almighty
and His greatness.

‎Dhuhr prayer: Noon prayer.
Diyah: Blood money or indemnity,
Fajr prayer: Dawn or early-morning prayer before sunrise.

‎Ghusl: The full ritual washing of the body with water alone -
after a legal impurity such as sexual intercourse, to cleanse oneself
after menses or post childbirth bleeding has finished. To purify
oneself for the purpose of performing prayer. It is also performed
for the dead, before they are buried.

‎Hadith: Prophetic tradition, pl. Ahédith.

‎Hadith Hasan: It is a hadith reported by a reliable chain of
narrators but does not reach the grade of the Hadith Sahih, which
is rendered thus due to the strong memory of its narrators.

‎Hadith Mawgitf! is that in which the narration of the compan-

‎ion does not connect to the Prophet 3, so it is restricted to the com-
panion alone.

‎Hadith Marfii’: is that which is reported with a full chain of

‎narrators, and is connected to the Prophet 38.

‎13
Hadith Mu‘allaq: is that in which the reporter omits the whole
1560 and quotes the Prophet $8 directly.

Hadith Mursal: is that in which the link between the Successor
(T4bi i) and the Prophet 38 is missing.

Hadith Sahih: is an authentic Hadith, which is related by an
unbroken chain of narrators, and its reporters are all trustworthy,
having good and strong memories.

Halal: lawful.
Harém: unlawful

Huditd: plural of Hadd. It refers to the prescribed penalties
(punishments) in Islamic Shari‘ah.

Hukm: a judgment or a legal decision (as specified by Allah), or a
legal opinion, pl. Ahkam,

‘Id: means a festival. There are two major festivals in Islam, one
at the end of Ramadén (dul Fitr) and the other on the day of
sacrifice in Hajj (Edul Ad-ha), on the 10' of Dhul Hijjah.

‘Iddah: the period of time that a woman waits after her divorce or
the death of her husband (before remarrying).

Ihrém: is the intention to perform either Hajj or ‘Umrah, or both,
as well as a state in which certain practices are prohibited such as
wearing sewn garments for men, sexual intercourse, hunting and
using perfume (for more details refer to books of Figh). Ikram also
refers to the white garments that men wear when making the
intention to perform hajj or ‘Umrah which are called the Izar (the
dress worn below one’s waist) and the Rida’ (the cloth worn round
the shoulders).

Igémah: the call to perform prayer, which is said just before the
prayer begins.

‘Isha’ prayer: night prayer which takes place about one hour and
a half after the Maghrib prayer.

Isndid: chain of narrators.

Istihadah: a prolonged flow of blood, which is not a part of the
regular menstrual period.

14
IzGr: a waist sheet, which is used to cover the lower part of the
body.

Janabah: a state of major ritual impurity, due to sexual inter-
course or having a wet dream.

dizyah: poll tax paid by non-Muslims citizens who are staying in
a Muslim land, in return for their protection, services provided ete.
as they do not participate in fighting the enemy.

Junub: a person in a state of major ritual impurity, due to coitus.
Khamr: alcoholic drinks, intoxicants, narcotics ete.

Khuff a hind of leather footwear, which covers the foot up to the
ankles.

Khutbah: a sermon.
Maghrib prayer: sunset prayer.

Mahram: a male relative of a woman whom she cannot legally
marry.

Muhrim: a person ina state of Ihram.

Néfilah: optional or supererogatory worship in contrast to what
is obligatory, but it is recommended or desirable to perform it. pl.
Nawéfil

Najasah: an impurity, which Muslims must avoid and cleanse
themselves of should it contaminate their clothes, body etc as the
presence of such impurity renders their prayer invalid. These imp-
urities include urine, feces, blood and others.

Najt
Qiblah: the direction to which all Muslims turn their faces in

prayer, which is towards the Ka’bak (al-Masjid al-Harém) in
Makkah.

Rabb: Lord of the Universe. The Creator, the Provider, the Sus-
tainer.
Rak‘ah: pl. Rak‘ét. Prayer is made up of several rak ‘Gt, which

consists of one standing (while reciting the Qur'an), one bowing
and two acts of prostration.

ritually impure.

Riba: usury.

15
Sadagah: whatever is given in way of charity. Sometimes the
same term is used to refer to the obligatory payment of Zakah.

ir, which is
id prayer.

Sadaqatul Fitr: sometimes referred to as Zakat-ul
the obligatory Zakah paid by every Muslim before the

Sai: going between the mountains of As-Safé and Marwah seven
times while performing the rituals of Hajj or Umrah.

Salam: buying in advance, which means that the sale of des-
cribed goods or items to be delivered by the seller to the buyer at a
certain time.

Sunnah: all the traditions and practices (sayings and actions) of

the Prophet % The Sunnah is the second source of legislation for
the Muslims, after the Qur'an.

Tahir: ritually pure.

At-TahGrah: (purification) in Islamic Shari'ah it refers to
lifting a state of ritual impurity(hadath)removing najasah.
A term, which refers to purifying the body (or one’s clothes) from
any substance, which is considered impure (Najasah) that prevents
him from performing his prayer. This Taharah may require wash-
ing only the private parts of the body (after going to the toilet), or
washing the whole body after sexual intercourse. It could be perfor-
med with clean water or with dust in cases where water is not
readily available.

Talbiyah: prescribed words to be said during pilgrimage. The

Prophet 3% made his talbiyah using these words: ‘Lab-baika Allah-
umma Lab-baik. Lab-baika la-Sharika laka lab-baik ...’ (Here I
am at Your service, 0 Allah! You have no partner).

Tashahhud: the Testification of faith, which is recited in the
final sitting of the prayer.

Tawéf: circumambulation around the Ka’bah.

“Umrah: a visit to Makkah at any time of the year during which
‘one performs Tawéf around the Ka’bahk and Sa7t between the
mountains of As-Safé and Marwah seven times. (Sometimes it is
called the minor or the lesser pilgrimage).

Wali: in marriage, a wali is the legal guardian of a woman who
conducts her marriage, such as her father, her brother, her uncle
ete,

16
Wasilah: means through which one can get closer to ‏لقال‎ It also
refers to a special status in Paradise reserved for only one servant

‘among the slaves of Allah. The Prophet 38 said, “I hope to be
him(ie. that servant of Allahjand whoever asks Allah to grant
me the status of ‘Wasdlah’ will be entitled to my interces-
sion on the Day of Judgment.”

Zakéh: a certain amount of one's property that is to be paid to
cortain recipients, who are mentioned in detail in the Qur'an (9:60)
under certain conditions. It is obligatory for every free Muslim who
possesses any hind of property, which is liable to ZakGh.

17
Ugh ‏كتَاب‎

Book I: Purification (at-Taharah)
di Gy
Chapter I: Water
ie ts io dh bp 08 WS - th Gos - A ‏عَسنْ أبي‎
AEN EM aH LES ‏لحل‎ Shu bh bos Bh ‏في‎
‎Pek, Gait, Sue 855] « uty,

1, Aba Hurairah (RAA), narrated that the Prophet 32 said,
“Concerning the sea, its (the sea) water is pure (suitable for
performing ablution) and its dead (animals) are lawful
(Halal to eat, without any prescribed slaughtering). It is

related by the four Imams? and Ibn Abi Shaibah (the text men-

tioned above is his). Ibn Khuzaimah and at-Tirmidhi graded it as
Sahih (authentic) [it was also reported by Malik, Shafi? and
Ahmad].

ty be ‏رضي الله له - 8 قَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ - Gd ‏وَعَنْ أبي سيد‎ -
SRS Y ‏طَهُورٌ‎ etal op
2. Aba Sati al-Khudri (RAA), narrated that Allah's Messen-

ger 3 said, “Water is Tahar (i.e. pure in itself and it purifies

other things) and nothing defiles it.” Related by the three

Im&ms," and Ahmad graded it as Sahth (authentic).

9 Abi Dawad, at-Tirmidhi, an-Nas4ii and Ibn Majah.

10. What is meant by the water in the Hadith,is running water such as that
ofa river, or spring, It is considered pure, unless its smell, color or taste
change by having had something thrown into it, as clarified in the follo-
wing Hadith

11 Abd Dawdd, at-Tirmidhi, an-Nasait

18
way antl ‏شيم » لما غلب على‎ UAE 9 ih dp

3. Narrated Abi Umamah al-Bahili (RAA): Allah’s Messen-

ger 38 said, “Water is not defiled by anything, except for
what changes (affects) its smell, taste or color.” Related by
Ibn Majah, but declared weak by Aba Hatim.

a8
‏تَحْدُث فيه».‎

4. _ Imam al-Baihagi reported (through his chain of narra-
tors): “Water is Tahar except when its smell, taste or odor is
changed by a Najasah, which affects it.”

eo ‏ا‎ pete aie

5. ‘Abdullah Tbn ‘Umar (RAA), narrated that Allah’s Mes-

senger 3 said, “Any amount of water that is sufficient to fill
two pitchers, is not easily contaminated by impurity (Naja-

sah).”"2 Another narration says: “It does not become impure.”

Related by the four Iméms."3 Ibn Khuzaimah, al-Hakim and Ibn
‘Hibban graded it as Sahih.

+ وَعَنْ أبي ‎A‏ - رَضي ‎Ob - te th‏ قال ‎os‏ الله ‎Lo‏ الله علي
‎SUT Yo :‏ في ‎etal‏ الثائم 35 ‎sof‏

6. Abd Hurairah (RAA), narrated that the Prophet 38 said,
“None of you should wash in stagnant water when he is

32. Unless this Najésah affects the color, taste or odor of the water.
‘This Hadith is considered weak by most Hadith scholars,

19

Junub (a state of major ritual impurity due to coitus). Re-
ported by Imam Muslim.

‎Gy‏ يبُولنَ أحَدَكُمْ في ‎pst sh‏ الذي لأ يجري » كم

‏85 فيه».
‎In another narration by al-Bukh4ri (of the previous Ha-‏ 7

‎dith): The Prophet 3 said, “None of you should urinate into
stagnant (water that is not flowing), then wash in the same

‎water.”

‎& ‏يتتسل م‎ Yop : 335 ‏؛ وَلأبِي‎ Saya
8. In an another narration by Imam Muslim and Aba Da-
wad (of the same Hadith) the Prophet S# said, “And should not

‎wash in it because of being in a state of Jandbah (major
impurity due to sexual relations).

‎. ‏صحيح‎ BAS » ay ‏داوْد‎ Wa eT ‏حَميعًا».‎

‎9. A man who accompanied the Prophet # narrated, “The

‎Messenger of Allah #8 forbade that a woman should wash
with the water left over by the man or that the man should
wash with the water left over by the woman; and they
should use the water (scoop it from the same vessel) toge-
ther (i.e. at the same time).” Reported by AbG-Dawad and an-
Nas@’i with a sound chain of narrators.

‎10. Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RAA): “The Messenger of Allah

‎#8 used to wash with the water left over by Maimainah
(RAA).” Reported by Muslim.

‎20
‎gt hy ١‏ : عسل نض أزؤاج ابي" ‎Le‏ له ول في
‎ah Ls‏ فَقالت ‎Bs‏ كنت ‎os Yh op WE‏

‎. ‏حزئمة‎ NG ‏المي‎ by

‎11. The authors of the Sunan™ transmitted that one of the
wives'5 of the Prophet ‘ washed from a bowl, and when the Pro-

‎phet 38 came to wash from it (perform ablution or ghus!) she said,
51 was junub (sexually impure).” He replied: “Water does not
become impure.” At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as

‎12. Abd Hurairah (RAA), narrated that the Prophet 32 said,
“If a dog laps the water from the utensil of anyone, purify it

‎The authors of the Sunan are: at-Tirmidhi, Abi-Dawid, an-Nasa’t, and‏ ليد
‎Ibn-Méjah.(Trans.)‏

‎15- Imam ad-Darqutnt reported her to be Maiminah (RAA).

‎16- Most scholars of Figh, are of the opinion that it is permissible for the
men to use the water left over by a woman and vice versa whether for
wuda' (ablation) or ghust, as both al-Bukhari and Muslim reported on
the authority of “A'ishah: "1 used to wash with the Prophet % from the
same bowl,” and also for the Hadith reported above (no. 11). This is also
supported by the Hadith reported by Muslim that the Prophet 3 used to
wash with the water left over by Maimanah (no. 10). As for Hadith no. 9
forbidding this act, the scholars said that it is not as strong as the other
Ahédith, and even if they are equal in authenticity, it does not really
indicate a strict prohibition. Imam Khattabé said that what is meant is
forbidding men from using the water that she already used and not
what is left over (i.e. clean), and some said that it is only preferable not
to use what is left over and not actually prohibited, and Allah knows
best. (Trans.)

‎21
(the vessel) by washing it seven times, using earth"” for the
first washing”. Reported by Muslim, with the addition:“He must
spill it'8,” Imam at-Tirmidhi also related it with the addition:
“The first or the last (washing).”

pe ale th ‏سول له ملى‎ af, - ‏رضي لله عله‎ - BE ‏وَعَسنْ أبي‎ - 1١
- Hh ‏في‎ - ous

‎te « El‏ المع

‎13. Aba Qatadah (RAA), narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3
said concerning cats, “It is not impure (Najis), it is one of

‎those who live among you.” Related by the four Imams. At-
‘Tirmidhi and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Sahih.

‏م ‎Hain‏ قال في ل

‎14. Narrated Anas Tbn Malik (RAA), “A Bedouin came and
started to urinate in one of the corners of the mosque and the

‎people then rebuked him, but the Prophet 3 stopped them. When

‎the man had finished, the Prophet 3 ordered them to pour a
(large) bucket of water over the urine!®.” Agreed upon (Related by
al Bukhari and Muslim).

‎: ‏قال‎ - Ce ‏رضي الله‎ - Rb ‏وَعَن ان‎ ٠
: ott C8. 0055 ont DELS : ‏وَسَلمَ‎

‎15: What is meant by earth here is mixing water with earth until it becomes

‎muddy, and then washing the vessel with this mud the first time, until
he is sure that there is no trace of the dog’s saliva in the utensil.
18. i.e. the water in the vessel.

‎19- It must be noted here that the floor of the mosque was sandy, i.e. there

‎were no tiles, so when the water was poured over the urine, it became
soaked into the sand and did not remain inside the mosque.

‎22
(ie ‏وَفيه‎ UR ‏وَائْنُ‎ SSE SE a
15. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 38

said, “Two types of dead animals® and two types of blood

have been made lawful for us. The two types of dead ani-
mals are seafood and locusts, and the two types of blood
are(the blood of) the liver and the spleen.” Related by Ahmad
and Ibn Majah but with a weak chain of narrators.

silly Be es oe: ad :
0 yb tat ‏أحدكم‎ we ‏عع الاب في‎ bp:

dp ‏وراد‎ » S95 a » teh at lis ‏الآعرٍ‎ Bobs pence
Gall ‏الذي فيه‎ tes

16. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 38 said, “If
a housefly falls into the drink of anyone of you, he should
dip it (all) in the liquid, for one of its wings has the disease,

and the other has the cure.*!” Bukhari and Aba Dawad related
it. Aba Dawad added in his narration, “It puts forward the one
containing the disease.22”

ele hy Lo ‏لبي‎ 08: Oe - eh ‏رضي‎ - how, S45 ١
j ithe CLS les

Gein sy oe SAY

17. Narrated Abi Waqid al-Laithy (RAA): The Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “Whatever (any part) is cut off from a live

«358 Mee hE ‏فَهْرَ‎

20. Dead here refers to dying from “natural causes,” i.e. without the preseri-
bed Islamic slaughtering.
21- Ibis not meant in this Hadith that the person must drink the liquid in

which the fly has fallen, the Prophet 3 is only guiding the Muslims to
the way in which to protect themselves from being infected by microbes,
should they want to continue drinking after throwing way the fly.

22. ie, falls in the liquid with the wing containing the disease (the microbes)

first.
23
animal is considered dead.” Related by Aba Dawéd and at-
Tirmidhi who graded it as Hasan and the wording is his.

LAY oN
Chapter I: Containers and Utensils

seo ‏الله‎ p56 06. - cy ah ‏رَضِي‎ - oth ‏نن‎ fit A
bgt 2) ‏وَلَكُمْ في‎ GH ‏لَهُمْ في‎ OE
18. Narrated Aba Hudhaifah Ibn al-Yaman (RA): The Mes-

senger of Allah 3£ said, “Do not drink from gold and silver
vessels, and do not eat from gold and silver dishes, for they
(disbelievers) have them in this world but you will have
them in the Hereafter.” Agreed upon(i.c, reported by al-Bukhari
and Muslim).

ty fe dn) os ‏فَالَتا : قَالَ‎ - ge th ‏رضي‎ - ce ty 5
lie ‏نار‎ ahi ‏يُحَرْحرُ في‎ US dad ‏رب في إناء‎ gles
19. Narrated Umm Salamah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah

38 said: “Whoever drinks from a silver vessel, is but filling
his abdomen with Hell fire.” Agreed upon.

egal

thy ‏قَالَ : قَالَ 325 الله صلَى‎ a - Oye ‏رَضي الله‎ - We Yh ٠
ipl eb Li Loy) ‏يع‎ tip : choy ale

20, Narrated Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA): The Messenger of Allah
said, “If the animal’s skin is tanned, it becomes pure (T4-
hir).” Reported by Muslim.

GS OU) hy BW ey ١

21. Narrated the four Imams:“Tanning any skin(purifies it)

28- Le. this part is considered like an animal, which has not been properly
slaughtered, ic. is dealt with as being Najésah (impurity),

24
he dh ‏رضي الله علْهُ - » 8 : قَالَ رَسُولُ‎ - Sh pe yey ١
. Oe YA ee th eb Sah ob buoy : ‏وَسَلَمَ‎ ale ain

22. Narrated Salamah bin al-Muhabbiq (RAA): The Messen-
ger of Allah $8 said, “Tanning the skin of a dead animal puri-

يَجُرُوتَهَا » فَقَالَ : ‎ergy et Sy‏ فَفَالُوا
‎bea, etch‏

23, Narrated Maimanah (RAA): The Prophet 28 passed by a
dead sheep being dragged along by (some people). Thereupon he
said to them, “Why didn’t you make use of its skin?” They told
him, “It is a dead animal (ie. had died a natural death, without

being slaughtered).” He said to them ‏روك‎ “Water and the leaves

of mimosa flava purify it.” Related by Abi Dawid and an-
Nasaii.

AS ‏اود‎ PERL . »

24. Narrated Aba Tha‘labah al-Khushani (RAA): I said, “O
Messenger of Allah, we are living in a land belonging to the people
of the Book, so can we eat our meals with their utensils?” He rep-

lied 38, “Do not eat from their utensils, but if you cannot
obtain utensils other than theirs, wash them and eat out of
them.” Agreed upon.

eh Leo - Bes
pees ‏في‎ »

25. Narrated “Imran bin Husain (RA): “The Prophet 38 and
his companions performed ablution from a water-bag belonging to

gro gf Oe ‏وَعَنْ‎ 5

25
an unbelieving woman.” (This is a part of a long Hadith). Agreed
upon.

ob tn ‏التي صَلّى‎ 055 ob hey - ‏مَالك‎ J gg in
. ‏أَحْرَحَهُ لبُخَارِي‎ ale LL ‏مَكَانَ الّئب‎ Eo cy
26. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): “The drinking cup of the

Prophet #8 was broken, and he mended it with a silver chain...”
Related by al-Bukhari.

Chapter HI: The Cleansing of Najasah and
its nature

- we gts س١‎

10 cfs ‏وار‎ put tarp D>: Bite BS ‏وَسَلمَّغ العئر‎
27. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): Allah's Messenger 38
was asked about the use of Khamr from which vinegar is prepa-

red. He said, “No (it is prohibited).” Related by Muslim and at-
Tirmidhi who graded it as Hasan.

Soo dh ‏حير » أمْرَ رَسُولُ‎ EOE Uh : ‏قَالَ‎ - ae ‏رضي الله‎ - ey 8
poll phd ‏عَنْ‎ Sues ‏إن الله وَرَسُولهُ‎ os ab uf gy ee ih

28. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): “On the day of Khaibar,
the Prophet #2 commanded Abé Talhah” to make an announce-
ment, so he called out saying, “Allah and His Messenger 3 pro-
hibit you from eating the flesh of domestic donkeys, for it is
considered as Rijs? (impure food).” Agreed upon.

24. He is Zaid Ibn Sahl al-Angari, who married Umm Sulaim (the mother of
Anas (RAA)), on the condition that he embraces Islam first.
25- Rijs refers to anything which is impure, filthy, abominable ete.

26
29. Narrated ‘Amro Ibn Kharijah (RAA): “The Messenger of

Allah 38 addressed us in Mina, while riding his camel and its sa-
liva was flowing onto my shoulder.” Ahmad and at-Tirmidhi rela-
ted it, and the latter authenticated it.

30. Narrated ‘“A’ishah (RA): “Allah’s Messenger 3 used to
wash the semen (off his clothes), and then go out to prayer in the
same garment. I used to see the mark of the washing (on his clo-
thes).” Agreed upon.

hts

‎rey‏ «لقذ كنت ‎SH‏ من تب رَسُول الله ‎Le‏ الله
‎LES ASS‏ فيه».

‎31. In another version narrated by Muslim she said: “I used

‎to rub it (the semen) off the garment of the Prophet 38, and
then he would pray in it.”

‎eel ‏من‎ g fla Cat ‏كنت أَحْكُه‎ hy : ‏وفي لَْظ لَهُ‎ ry

‎32. In another version narrated also by Muslim, she said: “I
used to scrape it with my nail from his garment, when it
had dried.”

‎Alby 7‏ بي المح - رضي ‎Mh‏ 1 - قال : 08 سول اله الى ‎١‏
‎bs th Lk: hy‏ من بول

‏الغلذي. ‎AEB‏ تلود »

‎. ‏الْحَاكم‎ Boe Lay

‎27
33. Narrated Abi as-Samh(RAA)"*: The Messenger of Allah ‏ل‎

said, “The urine of a baby girl should be washed off (one’s
clothes), while the urine of a baby boy needs only water to

be sprinkled over it. Related by Abi’ Dawid and an-Nasé’i;
5

al-Hakim graded it as S

4؟ ‏ 25 أُسَْاءَ بت أبي بكر - رَضي الله ‎a‏ - أنه صلى ‎fe th‏

34, Narrated Asma’ bint Abt Bakr (RA): The Messenger of

Allah 38 said concerning menstrual blood, when it contaminates
one’s clothes, “She should scrape it, rub it with water and
sprinkle water over it, and then pray in it.” Agreed upon.

35. Narrated Abt Hurairah (RAA): Khawlah asked, “Allah’s
Messenger, what if the blood of menses does not (completely)
disappear?” He replied,“Water would be sufficient (to wash it)
and there is no harm if a trace (of the blood) remains (on
the clothes).” Related by at-Tirmidhi, with a weak chain of nar-
rators.

Chapter IV: Ablution (Wudi’)

ترم ‎sie‏ مع ل 9325 أَْرحَهُ مالل

26- He is ‏د‎ lad; the servant of the Prophet #8.
27. This refers only to a male baby that has not yet begun to eal. If he eats
food (besides breast milk) then Lhe garment is to be washed.”

28
555 ES Sy «Lh,

36. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah

38 said, “If it were not too much of a burden on my nation, I
would have ordered them to use the Siwak with every abl-

ution(they perform).” Related by Ahmad, Malik and an-Nasa’i
Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Sahih.

37. Narrated Humraén Ibn Ibbn® (RAA): ‘Uthm4n (RAA)

called for Wuda’ (water to perform ablution). He then washed his
hands three times, rinsed his mouth and sniffed water up his
nostrils and blew it out. Then he washed his face three times, fol-
lowed by his right arm up to(and including) the elbow three times,
then his left arm up to (and including) the elbow three times. He
then wiped his head (with wet hands), and washed his right foot
up to (and including) the anklebones three times and then his left

foot in the same way. Uthman then said, “I saw the Prophet 32
make wuda’ (ablution) like this way of mine.” Agreed upon.

to el 12

38. Narrated “Alt (RAA) regarding the ablution of the Pro-
phet 3, “He wiped his head once.” Related by Aba Dawid. at-

28. The Sitwdk (or the Miswéh) is a root taken from a small tree or a shrub
called “al-Arak”,
29. ‘The slave of ‘Uthman Ibn “Affan (RA).

29
‘Tirmidhi and an-Nasa’i also reported it with a sound chain of
narrators.

- ‏عَاصِم‎ Fa of ‏الله‎ we ‏وَعَنْ‎ 5

feu es i ‏قَالَ:‎
‎39. Narrated “Abdullah bin Zaid bin “Asim (RAA): regarding

ablution, “The Prophet 48 wiped his head by sliding his han-
ds back and forward again.” Agreed upon

إضي ‎ge Uh‏ - في صفة الْوْضُوء -
‎JS as‏ ييديه وأدير».

CS ‏م‎ SB hg C8 Bc al, oi bin Ba # ١
wa es a) ‏المَكَادَ‎ Ai

40. In another narration by al-Bukhart and Muslim: “He
started with the front of his head, moved them (his hands)

to the nape of the neck, and then returned them to the pla-
ce where he started.”

Ji - ‏الْوْضوء‎ dhe ‏في‎ - Oe Dh Qo) - fe dae: i588

41. Narrated “Abdullah Thn “Amro (RAA): regarding the na-
ture of ablution,“Then he wiped his head, put his little finger

in his ears” and wiped the outside of his ears with his thu-

mbs.!” Related by Abi Dawdd and an-Nasa’i. Ibn Khuzaimah
authenticated it.

‎bp ghey de‏ مقط ‎Kiel‏ كمه لمر نكا كن ليطن بس على

‎30. ‘The purpose here is to wipe the entrance of the ear canal with the little
finger.

‎31- In another narration by Ahmad, the Prophet 48 wiped the inner part of
his ears with his index finger, and the outer portion with his thumb.

‎30
ale Bs ‏حَيْسُومه».‎
‎42, Narrated Abt Hlurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah
#2 said,“When one of you wakes up from sleep he must clear
his nose®? three times, as the devil spends the night in the
upper part of his nose.” Agreed jupon.

GLa ‏يَدَهُ في الإناء حتّى‎ dU ‏من تومه‎ SET x

Wy 2 Ey ‏ب‎ er
43. Narrated Abii Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah

2 said, “Whoever wakes up from his sleep, should not dip
his hand into a bowl (containing water for ablution) until
he has washed it three times, as he does not know where
his hand was (during his sleep).” Related by al-Bukhari and
Muslim, and the wording is Muslim’s.

dh be ‏قَالَ : 06 رَسُولُ الله‎ - Se hoy - Be ‏لقبط بن‎ te

‎aby‏ الْوْضُوءَ ‎wes 8 wel oi Ube ٠»‏ في الا

‎nie pete, bE op

‏$8 0 صَائمًا».
‎Narrated Laqit bin Sabirah (RAA): The Messenger of Al-‏ .44

‎lah 3 said,“Complete and perfect the ablution, let the water
run between the fingers. Use water freely while sniffing it
up your nostrils, unless you are fasting.” Related by the four
Iméms. Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as authentic.

‎te‏ — ولأبي ‎MEY ip : wy, B95‏ قتضمض».
‎In another version by Aba Dawad : “If your perform‏ .45

‎82. With water as we perform the ablution, i.e, sniffed water up his nostrils
and blew it out. In the narration of al-Bukhéri he says, “When one of
you wakes up....... and performs ablution, he should clear ..”

‎33: This fact is part of the unseen that only Allah knows, and we ean only
know it through His Prophet 28. So we believe that the devil actually
spends the night in this part of the nose even though we can not
perceive how.(Trans.)

‎31
ablution, then rinse your mouth.”

oh ‏لل ل‎ Lo hy : te i ‏رضي لل‎ - 8
BN coy Gl eT ‏في الْوُضُوء»‎

46. Narrated ‘Uthman (RAA): the Messenger of “allah 53
would run his fingers through his beard, while making ablution.
Related by at-Tirmidhi. Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Sahih.

eb il ‏وس‎ ob ‏ولا طني" عتلى لل‎ 3545;
47, Narrated “Abdullah bin Zaid (RAA): the Prophet 32 was
brought two thirds of a Mudd‘ (of water to perform ablution), and

he rubbed his arms. Related by Ahmad and Ibn Khuzaimah grad-
ed it as Sahih.

أحذ لأذ

48. Narrated ‘Abdullah bin Zaid (RAA): he saw the Prophet

38 (performing ablution and he) took new water for his ears, apart
from that which he had taken for his head. Related by al-Baihaqi.
‘Muslim reported it with the words: “and he wiped his head
with water other than that left over after washing his

hands (i.e. new water)."25

34. A measure of approximately 2/3 of a kilo.
35. Itis permissible to wash the ears with the water used for the head,

use new water for them. This is deduced from all the relevant Ahi
which were reported concerning this issue,

32
49. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah

38 said, “My nation will come on the Day of Resurrection
with bright streaks of light on their foreheads, arms and

legs due to the traces of ablution.*6 So, if any of you can

lengthen his streaks of light, he should do so.” Related by al-
Bukhari and Muslim and the wording is Muslim's.

50. Narrated “Rishah (RA): ‘Allah’s Messenger # loved to
begin with his right side while putting on his sandals, combing
his hair, purifying himself, and in all his affairs.” Agreed upon.

‎Ein has‏ أَعْرَحَه الأريعة ا و
‎Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah‏ 51

‎aid, “When you perform ablution, begin with your right
side.” Related by the four Imams. Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as
Sabi

‎okey

‎ive ‏والخئّتي».‎ wd 5 «ot

‎52. Narrated ‏الله‎ Mughirah Ibn Shu’bah (RAA): the Messenger

‎of Allah 38 made ablution and wiped over his forelock, his turban
and his socks. Related by Muslim.

‎53. Narrated Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah (RAA): regarding the Hajj

‎36- This is due to washing more than what is obligatory of the face, arms
and legs by washing above the elbows and ankles,

‎33

‎OM ‏ربلوغ‎
(pilgrimage) of the Prophet 28, the Prophet 32 said, “Begin with
what Allah began with.” Related by an-Nasé’i and Muslim.
. ‏بإستاد ضعيف‎ bet BT alt. ‏عَلَى‎ och jf

54. Narrated Jabir Ibn “Abdullah (RAA): “Whenever the Pro-

phet 38 performed ablution, he used to let the flow water abunda-
nily over his elbows.” Related by ad-Daraquini with a weak chain
of narrators.

OG = a thy ‏4ه ,2 - رضي‎

‎By‏ - رضي ‎Be Jus dh‏ - قال : ‎Ub‏ رَسُولٌ الله صَلَى الله

‎sy‏ «لاً ‎oy)‏ لمن لَمْ ‎Sg‏ الم لله ‎lle‏ أعطرَه أحْمد»

‏ده وَعَنْ

‏بو دا

‏ابن ‎EY EG‏ ضّعيف

‎55. Narrated ‏نطق‎ Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah
3 said, “If anyone does not mention the name of Allah at
the beginning of his ablution, he will be considered as if he
did not perform Wudd’ (ablution).” Related by Ahmad, Aba
Dawdd and Ibn Majah with a weak chain of narrators.

‎56. At-Tirmidhi reported a similar narration on the authority
of Sa‘id Ibn Zaid, and Abi Sa’id, but Ahmad said that it is not
authentic,

‏لاه 25 طُلْحَةَ بن ‎Sia‏ عَنْ أ
‎Gt‏ رَسُْولَ الله ‎ae dy fe‏

‎. ‏ضعيف‎ oly 558 opt

‏أبيه » عَنْ ‎ole‏ - رضي ‎aU‏

‎57. Narrated Talhah bin Musrrif through his father, on the
authority of his grandfathes®” (RAA): “I saw the Messenger of Al-

‎37. He is Ka’b bin ‘Amo al-Hamadani, who is proven to have had compan-
ionship of the Prophet 38.

‎34
‎distinguish between rinsing his mouth and sniffing water‏ 38 دق[
‎up his nose (i.e. doing one after the other).” Related by Aba Dawad‏
‎with a weak chain of narrators.‏

‎SBE‏ أبو داو وَالنّسَا
‎Narrated “Ali (RAA): regarding the ablution of the Pro-‏ .58

‎phet 32, “He rinsed his mouth and sniffed water up his nostrils
and blew it out three times, rinsing his mouth and clearing the

‎nose with the very same palm by which he had taken water.”
Related by Abi Dawdd and an-Nasa’i.

‎inserted his hand (into the how), rinsed his mouth
and sniffed water up his nostrils using one handful of water, doing
this three times.” Agreed upon.

‎Co ene Je es) pin
‏رفي‎ OSS
57 4b A eet

‎60. Narrated Anas (RAA): The Messenger of Allah 38 saw a
man. There was a spot, much as the size of a nail on his foot,

‎which had been touched by the water (of ablution). The Prophet 34
then said to him: “Go back and perform ablution properly.”
Related by Abi Dawid and an-Nasa’i.

‎61. Narrated Anas (RAA): The Messenger of Allah 38 used to
35
perform ablution with a Mudd, and perform Ghus! with a 78
up to five Mudds. Agreed upon.

‎sll An‏ من ‎«GA‏ وَاجْعلي من الْمُتطَهرين».
‎said,‏ يك ‎Narrated ‘Umar (RAA): The Messenger of Allah‏ .62
‎“If anyone performs ablution, perfectly, then says, ‘I testify‏
‎that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah, the‏
‎One Who has no partner, and I testify that Muhammad is‏
‎His servant and His Messenger,’ the eight gates of Paradise‏
‎will be opened for him and he may enter by whichever of‏
‎them he wishes.” Reported by Muslim and at-Tirmidhi.‏

‎es ‏التشح عَلَى‎ ou

‎Chapter V: Wiping over the Socks (Khuff)*®

‎63. Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah (RAA) said: “I was with the

‎Prophet 3 (during an expedition). He started to perform ablution
and I was about to remove his socks (the khuff), when he said,

‎38.
‎30.

‎Mudds, i.e. approximately 3 kg.

‎‘Khuff" is leather foot-wear, which covers the ankles. They used to
walk in it, with nothing worn on lop of it. ‘They also used to pray in this
huff alter rubbing it in the earth (as will be mentioned in the chapter
about prayer)

‎36
“Leave them, for I put them on while I was in a state of
purity,*” and he wiped over them.” Agreed upon.

‎Es a 4‏ إلا ‎ott‏ : «أن ‎(bt‏ صَلّى الله ‎ly le‏ مَسَحَ أغلَى
لحف ‎ALE,‏ وَفي إ

‎64. The four Imams, excluding an-Nasa’, reported on the au-

‎thority of al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah (RAA), that the Prophet 38 wi-
ped over the top and the bottom of his socks. There is a weakness

‎in this chain of narrators.#?

‎ask ‏لَكَانَ‎ clu GAN OF Sos MU ‏أنه‎

‏رَأَيْتُ رَسُولَ الله ‎ain fe‏

‎. oped ‏بإمناد‎ 356 WE adi ‏عَلَى ظاهر‎
65. “Ali (RAA) observed, “If religion was based on opinion,
the bottom of the socks would take preference for being wiped to
the top of the socks (khuff), but I saw Allah’s Messenger 38 wiping
over the top of his socks.” Related by Aba Dawiad with a good
(Hasan) chain of narrators.
wr wah ‏صَلّى الله‎ Lt oS 216 ‏صَفْرَانَ بْنِ عَسّال‎ 35
da ‏ولكن من‎ ais ‏إل من‎ Seals GE ‏حمَافنا‎ pV ‏كنا سَفْرًا : أن‎

‎Voge

‎66. Narrated Safwan bin “Assal: ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
used to command us, when we were travelling, not to take off our
socks for three days and nights. We did not remove them unless
we were in a state of post-sex impurity (Jandbah). We did not re-
move them on account of relieving ourselves (defecation), passing

‎40- Le. [have already performed ablution and nothing had nullified it, when
Iput on the Khuff

‎41. This narration was by the writer of al-Mughirah, who is considered by
the scholars as a weak narrator.

‎37
urine or sleeping.” Related by an-Nasé’i and at-Tirmidhi, and the
wording is his.12

‎eg >‏ بن أبي طالب - ‎oo: 8 - Os)‏ الب صَلَى الله

‎67. Narrated “Ali (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏و‎ had
appointed three days and nights for the traveler, and one day and
one night for the resident ‏.ه.ا‎ as the period set for the duration of
wiping over the khuff’ Related by Muslim.

‎OLS 85 8‏ - ضي الله عََهُ - ‎cto: O‏ ْول الله لى الله
‎fe ete MAZE Bs hoy‏ لاد

‎fry,

‎68. Narrated Thawban (RA): Allah’s Messenger ¥ sent out
an expedition. He ordered them to wipe over their turbans and
their socks (Khuff). Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawid and pro-
nounced authentic by al-Hakim.

‎BAS sist, hs hice ean

‎69. Narrated ‘Umar (RAA): (in a Hadith Mawqaf)®, and An-

‎as (Hadith Marfi)!, “When any of you performs ablution

‎and puts his socks or khuff on, he may wipe over them,
offer prayer while wearing them and not take them off, if

‎42. Al-Bukhari said, “Phere is nothing more authentic than this Hadith,
concerning the duration of wiping over the khu/f.”
43. Hadith Mawaaf is that which the companion does not connect to the

‎Prophet 3, so the narration is restricted to the companion alone.
‏علق‎ Hadith Marfit’ is that which is reported with a full chain of narrators,
connected to the Prophet 3.

‎38

he so wishes, except in the case of (Jandbah).” Related by
ad-Darqutni and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih

70. Narrated Aba Bakrah (RA): That ‘ the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 gave permission for the traveler to wipe over the khuff for
three days and nights, and for one day and one night for the
resident, as long as he was in a state of purity when he put them
on. Related by ad-Darquint and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as
Sahih

ae ‏يا رَسُولَ الله مسح‎ : Wb ‏أَنهُ‎ - Be ‏رَضي الل‎ - ee ‏وَعَنْ أب بن‎ ال١‎
5 tg OB cated OLE ‏؟‎ of Bh
: ‏وكَالَ‎ 84S ‏شنت». أَغْرَحهُ أو‎ Uy «Gite : OE ‏؟‎ oT : JE ‏دعم‎
‎71, Narrated ‏وطخ‎ bin “Imarah (RA): that he asked Allah’s

Messenger 32, ‘O Messenger of Allah, may we wipe over our socks
(khuff)? He replied, “Yes.” He asked, For one day” He replied 38,

“Yes.” He again asked, ‘For two days?" He replied, 'Yes.’ He again
asked, ‘For three days? He replied, “Yes and as long as you
wish.” Aba Dawid narrated it saying that it is not a strong

Hadith.

+ ‏قَال : وَيَرْمَيْن ؟ قال‎ c Ge:

Chapter VI: Nullification of Ablution

protected 0

Pond ‏في‎ ih “Abt ede, 0 yp cst eo stog
72. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): ‘The companions of the
39
Prophet ‏ويك‎ in his lifetime, used to wait for the Isha’ (night) prayer
until their heads began to nod (from drowsiness). They would then

pray without performing ablution.*S Related by Aba Dawad. Ad-
Darqutni authenticated it and its original narration is found in
Sahih Muslim.‘°

Sgt ‏بذحا أبي‎ thie wells - ys th 05 - tase ‏ون‎ — vr

BE a dhe Opie ‏فاغْسلي‎ Shy » ‏الصّلة‎ pot

73. Narrated ‘A'ishah (RAA): Fatimah bint Abi Hubaish came

to the Messenger of Allah #8 and said, “I am a woman who has a
prolonged flow of blood ({stihadah), and I am never purified from

this blood"? shall I abandon prayer” He replied 38, 'No, that is

only a vein and not menstrual blood. If it is your menstru-
altion, then leave the prayer, and if it is other than that

then wash yourself from the blood, and pray.” Agreed

upon.

45- Le. They would not repeat ablution, due to dozing off, as they were fir
ly seated on the floor.

46- ‘The narration of Muslim is, “'The people) stood up for the ‘Isha’, when a
man came saying: 1 am in need of something. The Prophet 38 started to
speak with him privately, in a low voice till people dozed off, or some of
them (dozed off), and then they got up for prayer.” In the narration of al-
Baihaci, “They had to he woken up for prayer, as they had slept, to the
extent that one could hear some of them snoring,” In the narration of at-
Tirmidhi, “I saw the companions of the Prophet # sleeping to the extent
that one could hear some of them snoring. But they would stand for
prayer without a new ablution.”

41- Le, The blood never stops flowing

48. In another narration by Abo Dawid, an-Nasa’ and bn Hibbin, the
Prophet 2 said to her, “If it is the blood of menstruation it will be
dark (almost black) and recognizable (by women). If it is that
then leave the prayer. If it is other than that, then make ablu-
tion and pray, for it is only due to a vein.”

40

ead, ve

wits GIG TI ‏وَأسَارَ‎ « ae I Sy oh
74. In another narration by al-Bukhéri, the Prophet 38 said
to her, “Make ablution for every prayer.”

a pe 5h ‏كنت‎

Ee Zo ‏قال : «فيه‎ gh le th eis gy seer ‏المفذاة أن‎
is och bail, «
75. “Ali bin Abi Talib (RAA) said: I used to pass madhi®, so

asked al-Miqdéd to ask the Prophet 8, about it. He asked him,
then he replied, “One must perform ablution (due to its excre-
tion).” Related by al-Bukhari and Muslim and the wordings are
al-Bukhari’s.

ct Lb : - ‏لها‎ dh ‏رضي‎ - Le ‏ل وَعَسنْ‎

“tid Moy el ol dbs ‏الصّلاة ولَمْ‎ Ne

76. Narrated ‘“A’ishah (RAA): “The Messenger of Allah kissed
one of his wives, and then went out to prayer without performing
ablution.” Ahmad related it, but al-Bukhari reported it to be a
weak Hadith

Wiip beat ce

77. Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): Allah's Messenger 38
said, “If one of you felt some disturbance in his stomach
and was not certain if he had released any wind or not, he
should not leave the mosque unless he hears a sound or
smells something. ” Related by Muslim.

49. A white sticky fluid that flows from the sexual organs because of thin-
kking about sexual intercourse or foreplay, ete.

4
+ وعن ‎shh‏ أن عل - رضي ‎i‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ ‎ee Ps‏ ذكري »

‎atts Bad BLM‏ .شبح ‎Gb Eka‏ جنم

‎Fad ‏من حَدِيثْ‎ Lh : es

‎78. Narrated Talq bin “Alf (RAA): “A man said, ‘I touched my
penis,’ or the narrator said: ‘If a man touches his penis during the
prayer, does he have to perform ablution (in this case)?” The Pro-

‎phet 38 said, “No, for it is just a part of you.” Reported by the
five Imams® and Ibn Hibbén who graded it as Sahih,

‎79. Busrah bint Safwan (RA) said: The Messenger of Allah

‎38 said,“Whoever touches his penis must perform ablution.”
Related by the five Imams and was it declared authentic by at-
Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban. Al-Bukhart said: It is the most authen-

‎tic tradition on this topics,

‎50- Ahmad, Abii Dawa, at-Tirmidhf, an-Nasé’ and Ibn Majah.

‎61- The consensus of the scholars is that touching the private parts without
a barrier (clothes ete..) requires performing ablution The Hanaft schoo)
is of the opinion that it docs not require ablution according to the He
dith of Talq. But the Hadith of Busrah is stronger as it was authen-
ticated by many Iméms and was narrated through different chains of
narrators. So the opinion of the majority of scholars is the preferred one,
as they said that the Hadith of Busrah was narrated later than the first
one in Madinah and is known by a greater number of the Companions.
‘The touching which nullifies ablution is that which is done with the
palm of the hand or with the fingers, not that which is done with a nail,
the back of a hand or an arm,

‎42

. ‏وَغَيره‎ key RG NET (ASS ‏في ذلك لآ‎ hg » ‏صّلاته‎

80. Narrated ‘A’ishah (RAA): Allah's Messenger 28 said, “If
anyone suffers from vomiting, nose bleeding, regurgitation
or madhi (during the prayer) he must perform ablution,
then resume his prayer, (provided) that he did not talk (in
the interval between leaving the prayer and resuming it.)”
Related by Ibn Majah, but Ahmad and others declared it to be a

weak Hadith.5?

‎o‏ رضي الله ‎ee‏ - أن 385 أل لبي صَلَى الله
‎pA poles i,‏ لقنم ؟ ‎Uy : WE‏ شعت» ء قَالَ ‎wy bs‏

‎81. Narrated Jabir bin Saumrah (RAA): “A man asked the

‎Prophet 3%, ‘Should we perform ablution after eating mutton?’ He
said, ‘If you wish(make ablution), ‘The man then asked ‘Should
we make ablution after eating camel meat? He said, ‘Yes.’ Rela-
ted by Muslim.

‏“موعن أبي ‎SA‏ - رضي الله عله - ‎Meier: J‏

‏مذي ‎Ey‏ » وَقَالَ ‎fat‏ لَيْصحٌ في هذا الاب ‎he‏

‎82, Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet #8 said,
“Anyone who washed a dead person (made ghusl for him)
must bathe himself, and he who carries him must perform
ablution.” Related by Ahmad, an-Nasa’i and at-Tirmidhi, but

‎52 This Hadith is not actually connected to the Prophet 38, but was n:
rated on the authority of Ibn Juraij on the authority of his father (one of
the Successors “Pabi?’), Therefore the scholars said that it is Hadith
mursal (that in which the link between the Successor (Tabi) and
the Prophet 38 is missing), and that it is a mistake to link the chain
to ‘A'ishah (RA) as she did not narrate it. The scholars are of the
opinion that in this ease he should re-perform his Wuda’ and repeat his
prayer.

‎43
Ahmad said that none of the traditions related in this topic are
authentic.53

أن في الكتاب الذي عت

Dy le ‏رَسُول الله صَلَى الله‎
C5 «Pt Hey » ‏مُرْسَلاً‎ ue ‏رَوَاهُ‎

‎Wy Nah Sa Y ob‏ طاهي».
« وَهُوَ مُعلول .

‎83. Narrated ‘Abdullah bin Aba Bakr (RAA): In the letter
which was written by Allah’s Messenger to ‘Amro bin Hazm,

‎“None should touch the Qur’én except one who is (ritually)
pure (i.e, Téhir).” Narrated by Malik as a Hadith mursal.

‎din ‏صَلَى‎ av ‏رَسُولُ‎ OS : IG - ‏عَنْهًا‎
‎. ‏مُسلمٌ » وَعَلْقَهُ البحَارِي‎ ayy ott IS ‏عَلَى‎

‎84, Narrated “A’ishah (RAA): Allah's Messenger ‏يك‎ used to
mention Allah's Name and (make dhikr) under all circumstances.
Related by Muslim.

‎chy cb ih bth:

‎nRry Peal eta, Pee
3 ‏الدارقطني‎ Pl clog ‏وَلم‎ «dey pet
85. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): Allah's Messenger 32

‎had himself cupped and then prayed without (renewing) his ablu-
tion. Narrated by ad-Darqutni, who declared it to be weak.

‎Ngo) - ‏مَالك‎ of A 25 6

‎86. Narrated Mu‘Awiyah: Allah’s Messenger
eye is the leather strap of the anus, and when the eyes sle-
ep the leather strap is loosened.” Related by Ahmad and at-
Tabarani.

‎53. The consensus of the scholars is that washing a dead person, does not
require ablution as the Ahadith mentioned here are weak.

‎44
A Lop : ‏ىس وا‎

Sis gl le cash I ‏في‎ Sat oi  »أّضو‎

LYN 85 » ‏دُونَ قَوْله : «اسْتطلق الوكاء»‎ Ye ‏من حَديث‎
87. He added (i.e. at-Tabarani),“So whoever sleeps should
perform ablution.” This addition was declared weak by Aba Da-
wad on the authority of ‘Ali, but without his saying, “The leather
strap is loosened.” The chain of narrators for both this Hadith
and the previous one, is weak.

ke of

0 - رضي الله ما - مر

thy :
Calf Lak oat ‏وفي‎ athena’ ‏عَلَى م نام‎ bh

88. Abd Dawid transmitted on the authority of Ibn “Abbas
(RAA): “Ablution is obligatory for the one who sleeps lying
down.” This Hadith also has a weak chain of narrators.

‎a hy 2‏ - رضي ‎Of - cyte dh‏ رَسُولَ ‎adn‏ صَلّى الله

‎. ‏أَعْرَحَهُ الْبزّارُ‎ ee, ‏يَحِدَ‎
‎89. Narrated Ibn “Abbds (RAA): Allah’s Messenger 3S said,
“The devil comes to one of you while he is praying, and
plows in his posterior, so he doubts that he has broken his
ablution (due to releasing wind) but actually he has not. So
if anyone experiences this feeling, he should not leave his
prayer unless he hears a sound or smells something.” Rela-
ted by al-Bazzar.

‎90. The previous Hadith is supported by a narration origi-
nally mentioned in al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of

‎“Abdullah Ibn Zaid.5*

‎54. Narrated ‘Abid Ibn Tamim: “My uncle (‘Abdullah Ibn Zaid) asked Al-
1éh’s Messenger 4% about a person who imagined that he had passed
45
BS Ee ‏رضي الله‎ FA ‏عَنْ أبي‎ ty ١

91. Muslim transmitted something to the same effect on the
authority of Abi Hurairah (Hadith no. 77).

أخدنتء ‎YB‏ : كَدَنْت». وَأَعرَحَة ابن ‎Oe‏ يلفط :

92, Al-Hakim transmitted on the authority of Aba Sa‘id al-

Khudri (RAA): that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If the devil
whispered to any one of you and said: You have broken
your ablution (you have passed wind), you must say: You
told a lie.” Ibn Hibban related the Hadith with the wordings,
“He must say to himself: This is a lie.”

‎eT OL‏ قَضَاءِ الْحَاجَة

‎Chapter VII: Etiquettes of Relieving oneself
(going to the bathroom)

‎din ‏وسو لله متلى‎ o>: ‏بن مالك - رضي لله 4 - قَالَ‎ te ar

‎. Obs by BW el iH Sd) js ‏ملم‎

‎98. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): “When Allah's Messen-
ger 38 went to the privy, he used to take off his ring.5" Reported

‎by the four Imams, but it has a defect (in its chain of narrators).5¢

‎wind during the prayer. Alléh’s Messenger % replied: “He should not
leave his prayer unless he hears a sound or smells something.”

‎55- The ring was engraved with Muhammad Rasi-ulléh (Muhammad is the
‘Messenger of Allah), so he used ‏ما‎ remove it 38 as it is not proper to car-
ry something that has Allah’s name upon it while using to the bathroom.

‎56- Itwas narrated by Hammam Ibn Juraij an the authority of Az-Zuhari on
the authority of Anas, and its chain of narrators is trustworthy, but Ibn
Juraj did not actually hear this Hadith from az-Zuhari, but heard it,
from Zaid bin Sa‘d who heard it from az-Zuhari,

‎46

eth Lo aoe: ‏رَضي الله £6 - كَالَ‎ - ey 54
ethan ‏والتبانث». لع‎ eh ‏أغودُ بلك من‎ pall : lees

94. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): “Whenever Allah's Mes-

senger 3€ entered the privy, he used to say, “O Allah, I seek
refuge in You from male and female devils.” Related by the

seven Imams.*?

hey ‏الله عله‎ Le dn 5 oy : ‏ل‎
‏بالْماب»‎ gull ¢ 5 ‏من مَاءِ‎ SL oe Bayh ‏َمل‎ «Sad ‏َل‎

95, Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): “Whenever Allah's Mes-

senger 32 entered the privy, I along with another boy used to
bring him a tumbler full of water and a spear-headed stick. He
would cleanse himself with water.” Agreed upon.

dy Jot oll ‏لي‎ di : dB - Re th ‏رضي‎ - ib ‏بن‎ itl by 48
cee. ‏فَقَضَى حَاحَتهُ‎ Be ‏تَوارَى‎ S& Glide yoy bo : py
96. Narrated al-Mughirah Ibn Shu’bah (RAA): The Messen-

ger of Allah 3 said to me, “Take the tumbler of water away.”
He went off where I could not see him, and he would then relieve
himself.” Agreed upon.

eet,
97, Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 38 said,
“Beware of the two acts which cause others to curse: relie-

ving yourself in the people’s walkways or in their shade.”
Related by Muslim.

57. Ahmad, al-Bukhéri, Muslim, Aba Dawéd, at-Tirmidhi, an-Nas@’i and Ibn
Majah.

47
po — RE ‏عَنْ مُعَاذ - رَضي الله‎ SYS ‏وَزَادَ أو‎ aa
ENG » ‏الطريق‎ 12155 » a Ny ‏الْْرَار في‎

98. Aba Dawid added to the above narration, on the autho-
rity of Mu’Adh (RAA), “And the waterways.” Its wordings are:
“Beware of the three acts which cause others to curse: reli-

eving oneself in the waterways, in the middle of the road
and in the places of shade.”

5

. ‏ضَعْف‎ gd » ‏ماء»‎ Gi Shy tS ‏عَن ان‎ WEY,
99. Ahmad transmitted on the authority of Ibn “Abbas, “Or

in a swamp of water.” Both this narration and the previous one
are declared as weak.

ei Gd tell ‏قَضَاء‎ ty 24
‏قضاءِ الحَاحَة ار‎ oe

100. At-Tabarani also narrated on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar
(with a weak chain of narrators), the prohibition of relieving one-
self under fruit trees and beside the bank of a flowing river.

ey oe ‏فَالَ رَسُول الله صلى‎ WS ‏وَعَنْ بابر‎ 00١
N38 BRE ‏عَنْ صَاحبهء ولا‎ gh ‏كل وَاحد‎ or oS

a ‏اقطان » وَهْرَ‎ Sty ‏ء‎ Sn Oy yy ch

101. Narrated Jabir (RAA): The Messenger of Allah 38 said,
“When two men go to relieve themselves(in the same place)
everyone should hide himself from his companion and not
converse together, for Allah detests this.” Related by Ahmad,
Ibn as-Sakan and Ibn al-Qattdn authenticated it, but it has a
defect in its chain of narrators.

‎an‏ عَنْهُ

‎102. Narrated Abi Qatadah (RAA): Allah's Messenger 38 said,
48
“None of you should touch his penis with his right hand
when passing urine, or wipe himself with his right hand af-
ter relieving himself, and he must not breathe into the ves-
sel (while drinking).” Related by al-Bukhari and Muslim, and
the wording is Muslim's.

ees) Ge Sgn’ ‏سكج‎ lyf ost By ‏مر‎ cu

103, Narrated Salman (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 for-
bade us from facing the Qiblah (direction of the prayer towards
the Ka’bah) while relieving ourselves or passing urine, from clean-
ing ourselves with our right hand, and from cleaning ourselves
with less than three stones, We also should not use an impure
substance (such as dung) or bones to clean ourselves.” Related by
Muslim.

- GS Gat ‏عَنْ أبي‎ wy ot

as JS 35 » ‏بائط أن بول‎ Bs,

104. The seven Imams reported on the authority of Aba Aiyab
al-Anséri (RAA):“When one of you relieves himself, he should
neither face the Qiblah nor turn his back on it, but turn
towards the East or the West.”

PES, «adi

105. Narrated ‘A’ishah (RAA): Allah’s Messenger + said, “If

anyone goes to relieve himself, he should hide himself from
others.” Transmitted by Aba Dawa.

«pS ‏حاتم‎ 1 ec Lash eh eure

106. Narrated “A'ishah (RAA): When Allah’s Messenger 38
came out from the privy, he used to say, “O Allah I seek Your

49
forgiveness.” Related by the five Imams. Aba Hatim and al-Ha-
kim graded it as Sahih.

107. Narrated Ibn Mas‘0d: ‘The Prophet 38 went to relieve
himself and commanded me to bring three stones; I found two sto-
nes but could not find a third, so I brought a piece of dried dung.
He took the stones and threw away the dung, and said, “This is
Rijs (anything which is impure, filthy, abominable)” Related by
al-Bukhari. Ahmad and ad-Darquini added, “Bring me another
‘one (instead of the dung),”

‎bp : 6 - fey tn‏ سول ‎be dn‏ اله

‎. olay ‏الدَارَقطني‎ ayy

‎108, Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 3 prohibi-
ted that one cleans his private parts with bones or dung and said,
“Neither of them purify.” Related by ad-Darquini who graded it

‎as Sahih.
ole ‏الله‎ foo ‏الله & - قَالَ: فَالَ رَسُولَ الله‎ sy - “4
Ci ‏روه‎ ide fh ile Be OY J ‏من‎ kgs : ploy

‎109. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 38 said,
“Keep yourselves clean from (any traces) of urine, for it is
the cause of most of the punishment of the grave.” Related
by ad-Darqutni.

‎. EY! fete 85 ‏من الْبوْل».‎ fh ‏عاب‎ Sty : ‏وَللْسَاكم‎ 1.
110. Al-Hakim transmitted with a sound chain of narrators:
“Most of the punishment of the grave is bacause of urine.”

‎50
111. Narrated Suraqah bin Malik (RAA): Allah’s Messenger

‎taught us, when in the privy, to sit on the left (foot while squat-‏ قلق
‎ting) while propping up the right one.” Related by al-Baihagi with‏
‎a weak chain of narrators.‏

‏7 وَعَن عيسى إر بن يداد عَنْ أبيه - ‎Ca Ah os‏ - قَالَ 08 325 الله
صَلَى الله ‎ass sab oi ras phy ole‏ نوت

‎112. Narrated ‘Isa bin Yazdad on the authority of his father

‎(RAA): The Prophet 38 said, “When any of you passes urine,
he must pull his penis three times.” Related by Ibn Majah
with a weak chain of narrators.

‎ab 1355 ‏رّات».‎

‎113, Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RA): The Messenger of Allah 3
asked the people of Qiba’, “Allah is praising you!” They replied,
"We use water to cleanse ourselves after using stones.’ Al-Bazzér
related it with a weak chain of narrators.

‎SB plows eI Le oy 6‏ - رضي ‎Se‏ - بون

‎tenet es

‎114, Tbn Khuzaimah declared the aforementioned Hadith au-
thentic, through the narration of Aba Hurairah, but without men-
tioning the stones.
Chapter VIII: The full ritual ablution (al-Ghusl)

and the Hukm (ordinance) of the person in
a state of major ritual impurity (Junub)

115, Narrated Abd Sa’td al-Khudri (RA): Allsh's Messenger

3 said, “Water (washing ) is (obligatory) after (ejaculation
of) sperm.” Related by Muslim. The full narration of this Hadith

is found in al-Bukhari.

ak ‏الله‎ fo ‏ال رَسُولُ الله‎
‏مقت عليه‎ eth ‏وجب‎ a ‏بع» مم هته‎
116, Narrated Aba Hurairah (RA): The Prophet 3 said,

“When anyone sits between the four parts of her body
(arms and legs, of his wife) and exerts himself (has inter-
course with her), bathing (Ghusl) becomes obligatory (for
both).” Agreed upon.

MB Sop : ‏وَرَادَ مُسْلمٌ‎ vay
117. Muslim added (to the above narration),“Even if he does
not emit fluid.”

SE ah :

118, Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RA): Allah's Messenger £
said -concerning a woman who has a wet dream as the man has,

“She must perform Ghusl.**” Agreed upon.

58 ‘The Prophet said this as an answer to Umm Sulaim, who asked, ‘Does

a woman have to perform ghust if she has a wet dream? He said 3%,
“Yes, if she sees the liquid (sexual fluid) .”

52
Heil: lt ‏زَادَ‎ 8
AOS
119. Muslim added (to the above narration), Umm Salamah

then said,Does a woman have sexual dreams? He replied 48,“Yes
she does, how does her child resemble her?”

: وَهَلْ ‎OS‏ هَذَا ؟ قَالَ : ‎id pe‏

5 - tase ‏وَعَنْ‎ vy

َم تقل من أاتع
الْمَيّت». رَوَاهُ بو 558 ‎Sh by‏
‎per-‏ فوم و ‎hah (RAA): ‘Allah’s Messenger‏
‎form ghusl due to four things: janébah (a state of major ritual sex-‏
‎ual impurity), on a Friday, after being cupped and after washing‏
‎the dead.’ Related by Aba Dawad and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as‏

Sahih

ety Se 2s o> : ‏عَنْهًا - قلت‎
‏الحجًاء‎ pay « ‏وَيَومَ الجُمُعَة‎ «

- رضي الَهُ ‎Se‏ - في قصّة تُمَامَةَ بن ‎tite JU‏

7 2g

ciety bt oto

أن يَعْتَسل . رَوَاهُ ‎SIME‏ وأصلهُ

121, Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): concerning the story of
‘Thumamah Ibn Uthal® when he embraced Islam, ‘The Prophet 38

commanded him to perform ghusi.’ Related by “Abdur Razzaq, and
the original full narration related to this issue is agreed upon.

econ rene
122. Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): Allah’s Messenger

59. Thumamah Ibn Uthél al-Hanafi was captured and the companions tied
him to a pillar of the mosque. He eventually embraced Islam and the
Prophet ‏يك‎ untied him and ordered him to go to the garden of Abi
Talhah and perform ghusl. He then performed ghus! and prayed two
Rak’ah. The Prophet % said, ‘Indeed your brother has become a fine
Muslim.’ (Related by Ahmad),

53
38 said, “Performing Ghusl is obligatory on every adult.”
Related by the seven Imams.

lala i maa ey ry

123. Narrated Samurah bin Jundub (RAA): Allah’s Messenger

38 said, “If you perform ablution on a Friday it is sufficient,

but if you perform Ghusl it is more superior.” Related by the
five Imams.

Gt Lo bt oy : ‏رضي لله عله - كال‎ - bie
Got AY ay » ‏الْحَمَسَةُ‎ ay, ٠ 0S ‏مَالَمْ يكن‎ OF cig,

. Oe MES «ley

124. Narrated “Ali (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah 3¥ used to
recite the Qur’an to us unless he was Junub (in a state of major ri-
tual impurity)” Related by the five, and these are the wordings of
at-Tirmidhi who authenticated it. Ibn Hibban graded it as Hasan,

fo ‏فَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ : Si - te ‏رَضِي الله‎ -
as go) Cages Ce ‏دحم أخلة »كع أن د‎ A yy gies ole ‏الله‎
‎od 3h,

125, Narrated Ab Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): Allah’s Messenger
38 said, “When one of you has intercourse with his wife, and

Sy ‏أن‎

wishes to repeat it, he should perform ablution® between
the two acts.” Related by Muslim

‎List ss psd 35 vy‏ للؤد».

‎126. Al-Hakim added (to the above narration), “For it makes
the return more vivacious.”

‎60. It is a recommended actin this ease,
54
- رَضيّ الله ‎ye‏ - قلت : «كَانَ رَسُولُ الله صَلّى

whe 385 ‏من غَيْر أن يَمَسّ مَاء»‎ LE hy pe ghey ae ‏الله‎

127. The four Imams reported on the authority of “A’ishah

(RAA): who said, “Allah’s Messenger ‘# used to sleep while he is
junub without touching water.” This Hadith has a defect.

ise ‏عَنْ‎ ey ‏ب‎ ٠7

‎dane ej va.‏ - رضي ‎ie - te dl‏ : «كَانَ ‎bt‏ الله ‎foo‏ الله عليه

‎128, Narrated “A’ishah (RAA): ‘When the Messenger of Allah
performed Ghusl after sexual intercourse, he first washed his ‏مقط‎
‎nds, then he poured water over his left hand with his right hand
and washed his private parts. He would then perform ablution for
prayer, take some water and wash his hair thoroughly down to the
roots then he poured water over his head three times and then
poured water over the rest of his body, then washed his feet.” Ag-
reed upon, and the wording is Muslim’s.

‎yeh ‏عَلَى‎ EB pe BAS ‏حَديث‎ Le 65

‏صرب بها ‎Cen‏

‎129. Al-Bukhari and Muslim transmitted on the authority of

‎Maimanah (RA): ‘Then he #8 poured water over his private parts

‎and washed it with his left hand, then rubbed his hand on the
ground.’

‎gy ody‏ آخره

‎130. In another narration, she said, ‘And he wiped it with ea-
rth.’ This version concludes, ‘I handed him a piece of cloth, but he
did not take it....’ ‘He started shaking the water off with his hand.’

‎55
eB: hb - ye Sur dn ‏رضي‎ - ab iso im

00 bee

رَسُولَ الله

J ‏؟‎ cally : ‏رراية‎ Sy ‏؟‎ Hel foil Cait ol ‏رَ‎

ope ay ‏ات».‎

131, Narrated Umm Salamah (RAA); ‘ said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah, Iam a woman who keeps her hair closely plaited. Do I have
to undo them for Ghus! after sexual intercourse” In another nar-

‎Sy‏ نما يفيك أنا ‎Ss‏ على رأسك لدت

‎ration, ‘and after the end of menses? He replied 38, “No, it is
enough for you to throw three handfuls of water over your
head.” Related by Muslim.

‎132. Narrated “A’ishah (RAA): ‘Allah’s Messenger 38 said, “It
is not permitted for a menstruating woman or one who is
junub (sexually impure) to stay in the mosque.” Related by
‘Aba Dawid and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Sahih

‎138, Narrated “A'shah (RA): ‘Allah's Messenger and I used
to wash(perform Ghus?) from the same bowl after sexual impurity,
and our hands were alternating (in taking the water). Agreed
upon. Ibn Hibban added, ‘and our hands were crossing over each
other.”

‎Bites ve‏ نر - ‎the)‏ 8 - فال 08 545 الله ‎be‏ الله

‎a.‏ مَاعْسلُوا ‎hy Gp‏ النشر»

‎a3 JF ‏تنت‎ op ey Le

‎tie ‏دي‎ 3, 6 5415. N55

‎134, Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): ‘Allah’s Messenger 3
56
said,“There is Janébah(trace of sexual impurity) under ev-
ery hair, so wash your hair and cleanse the skin.” Abi Daw-
fad and at-Tirmidhi transmitted it but they declared it to be weak.

‎ga -‏ الله ‎Has - ee‏ وفيه راو مَجْهُول .

‎ase ‏وَلْأَحْمَّدَ عَنْ‎ ire

‎135. Ahmad transmitted a similar narration to the above, on
the authority of ‘A’ishah (RAA), but this version has an unknown
transmitter.

‎os

‎Chapter IX: Dry Ablution (at-Tayammum)
‏«أغطيت‎ U6 ples, ole th Se ‏لبي‎ of ‏عَبْد الله‎ yy ae Le vr

‎Sent Ee‏ شهر » وَجُعلَت لي الأاض
أذْرَكُهُ اللا ‎aod (555 « «fells‏

‎136. Narrated Jabir (RAA): The Messenger of Allah 38 said,
“I have been given five things, which were not given to any
one else before me: I have been made victorious due to the
fear (of my enemy), for a distance of one month’s journey;
the earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a
place for prayer and something with which to perform Tay-
ammum (to purify oneself for prayer). Therefore anyone of
my followers can pray (anywhere) and at any time that the

‎prayer is dues!”

‎ke -‏ مُْلم : «وَجُعلت ثربها آنا

‎137. In another narration by Hudhaifah (RAA): “And the soil
of the earth had been made for us as a means with which to

‎G1. The rest of the Hadith is, “The war booty has been made Halal
(awful) for me, and this was not lawful for anyone else before
me; I have been give the right of intercession (on the day of
Judgment); and every Prophet used to only be sent to his nation,
but 1 have been sent to all mankind.” Agreed upon.

‎ST
purify ourselves (for prayer), when we cannot find water.”
Related by Muslim.

sab f ‏رَعَنْ علي عند‎ — vr

ise JOA ‏«وْجُعل‎

138. Ahmad transmitted on the authority of ‘Ali (RAA): “The
earth (dust) has been made for me as a means for purify-
cation.”

الأاض ‎Hie‏ واحداً »م مسح

139. Narrated “Ammar bin Yasir (RAA): ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 sent me on some errands and I became junub (sexually
impure), and could not find water. I rolled myself in the dirt just

as an animal does. I then came to the Prophet 38 and mentioned
that to him, He said, “This would have been enough for you,”
and he struck the earth with his hands once, then he wiped the
right hand with the left one, the outside of the palms of his hands
and his face. “Agreed upon, and the wording is Muslim's.

WES Op : ‏اريّ‎

140. In a version by al-Bukhari ‘Ammar said, ‘He 3 struck
the earth with the palms of his hands, blew in them and wiped his
face and hands with them.’

141, Narrated Ibn Umar (RAA): Allah’s Messenger
58

“Tayammum is two strikes: one for the face and the other
for the hands up to the elbows.” Related by ad-Daraqutni.

ey Le ‏رسُولُ اللّه‎ 38: U6 - ue N ‏رضي‎ - EEA ‏أبي‎ be) 4
‏ود انا‎ GE » ‏بيد الما عر سنن‎ Hy «pth Ct Hoan

‎iy ead Sy «iy‏ رَوَاه الْبَرَّرُ . وَصَّححَهُ ابن ‎٠ od‏ لكر صرب

‎142, Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): Allah’s Messenger ‏يك‎
‎said, “The soil is a purifier for a Muslim, even if he does not
find water for ten years, but if he finds water, he must fear

‎Allah and Iet it touch his skin.”®
. Babe’ 5 ‏أبي ذَر حو‎

‎143, Narrated Aba Dharr (RAA): a similar Hadith transmit-
ted by at-Tirmidhi.

‎ty et‏ أبي ‎ith‏ - رضي الله ‎Be‏ - قَالَ : ‎EIR‏ رَجُلآن في

‎foal th ue ‏قتتها‎ - fo aes Gl - Bt ed

‏جَذا الْمَاءً في ‎ch‏ فَأَعَادَ أحَدْهُمَا ‎Ben‏ وَالْوْضُوءَ » وَلَمْ يُعد الآعتر ء م

‎tel ‏للذ لَمْ‎ ous Dau ‏َدَكرَا‎ hey ‏صَلَى اللَهُ‎ ti ut
‏الأحرُ‎ Gaby : ‏وَقَالَ للآعَرٌ‎ «tie i of, Ey eh

‎. Eady 36 fay

‎144, Narrated Abi Sa’id al-Khudri (RAA): ‘Two men went out

‎on a journey, and when it was time for prayer, and having no
water with them, they performed fayammum and prayed. Then
they found some water during the time of the same prayer. One of
them repeated his prayer with ablution and the other did not.

‎. When they saw the Messenger of Allah 88, they asked him about
the proper procedure in such a case. He said to the one who did

‎62. He must perform Ghus? as soon as he finds water, if he was originally

‎000

‎59
not repeat his prayer, ‘You have acted according to the Sun-
nah and your prayer is sufficient for you’ He said to the
other, ‘You will get a double reward.’ Related by Aba Dawad
and an-Nasé’7.

‎bt ees‏ سوأ »قال ذا ‎ene‏ بالل ‎Sil‏ في سبلي

‎aly Gi nin ‏تيمم رو‎ : Jes ‏إن‎ Jeni Of GS GAS esl

‎145. Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RAA): concerning the verse, “And
if you are ill or on a journey,” (an-Nisd’: 43- he said, If aman
has a wound, which he suffered during Jihad (in the cause of
Allah) or ulcers, then he became junub (sexually impure) and is
afraid that if he bathes he would die; he may perform ablution
with clean earth (Tayammum). Related by ad-Daraqutni. And al-

‎Bazzar (who traced it back to the Prophet #8). Ibn Khuzaimah and
al-Hakim graded it as Sahih

‎a a UB - ee th es - es
ps ale thr he ‏رَسُولَ الله‎ CLS

‎. ‏مَاجَةْ سند وَاهِ حدًا‎ EN ays

‎146. Narrated ‘Ali (RAA): ‘When one of my forearms was frac-

‎tured I consulted Allah's Messenger 38, so he commanded me to
wipe over the bandages or cast.’ Related by Ibn Majah with a very
weak chain of narrators.

‏1407 وَعَنْ ‎ye‏ - رَضي اللهُ ‎Se‏ - في ‎BSN‏ الذي شح » ‎PONS BU‏

‎ty) EIS ‏وَفيه‎ RS ‏سند فيه‎ 548 EG) oa ‏سَائرٍ‎ LBS

‎147, Narrated Jabir (RAA):concerning the man who had a
head injury, then he made Ghus! and died- The Messenger of Al-

‎lah 38 said, “It would have been enough for him to perform
60
tayammum and wrap it with something and wipe over the
wrapping and wash the rest of his body.” Related by Abi
Dawad, but there is a weakness in its chain of narrators.

GV WEI yo 6 - ‏عَنْهُمَا‎ fies dh ‏عباس - رّضئ‎ hey 146
SE ‏للصّلاة ى». رَوَاهُ تارفط‎ ae) key Bee Y Ay eo

ضَعيف جد .

148. Narrated Tbn ‘Abbas (RAA): ‘It is from the Sunnah of the

Prophet 3& for the man to pray only one prayer with each tayam-
mum, and then perform tayammum for the next prayer’ Related
by ad-Daraqutni but with a very weak chain of narrators.

Chapter X: Menstruation

‎fe ip Wa ee‏ الله
‎Sols ni OF By‏ عَنٍ الكلة 1

‎pS tilly Oe ‏وَصَحّحَهُ بن‎ » Lay 558 2

‎149. Narrated ‘A'ishah (RA): ‘Fatmah bint Abt Hubaish used
to have a prolonged flow of blood (Istikddah), so the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 said, “If it is the blood of menstruation it will be
dark (almost black) and recognizable (by women). If it is
that then leave the prayer. If it is other than that, then
make ablution and pray.” Related by Aba Dawid, an-Nas@’t
and Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih,

‎150. In the narration of Asma’ bint “Umais, Aba Dawad trans-

‎61
mitted, ‘She should sit in a tub, and if she sees yellowness
appearing (on top of the water) she should wash (three
times), once for the noon (Dhuhr) and afternoon (‘Asr)
prayer and once for the sunset (Maghrib) and late night
(Ishé’) prayer and once for the dawn (Fajr) prayer and she
should then perform ablution in between those times.”

BUG eS La BRL : ‏خش فَلَنا‎ obs bby ١

وَصَحَّحَهُ الترْمذي » و

ety cats ‏روَاهُ‎ Gy ‏الأمرين‎ Cael hy

151. Narrated Hamnah bint Jahsh, I had a very strong pro-

longed flow of blood. I went to the Prophet 2 to ask him about it.
He said to her, “This is a strike from Satan. So observe your
menses for six or seven days, and then perform Ghusl until
you see that you are clean. Pray for twenty-four or twenty-
three nights and days and fast, and that will be sufficient
for you. Do that every month as the other women become
pure and menstruate. But if you are strong enough to delay
the Dhukr (noon) prayer and hasten the ‘Asr (afternoon)
prayer, then make Ghusi when you are purified and pray
the Dhuhr and ‘Asr prayers together; to delay the Maghrib
(sunset) and hasten the Isha’ prayer, and perform Ghust
and combine the Maghrib and the ‘Ishé’ prayer together.
Do so, and then wash at dawn and pray the Fajr. This is
how you may pray and fast if you have the ability to do so.
‘And he said, “That is the more preferable way to me.” Rela-
ted by the five ImAms excopt an-Naséi, and was authenticated by
at-Tirmidhi,

62
‎٠6‏ وَعَنْ ‎Lane‏ - رَضِي | يي
إلى رَسُول الله ‎pin cle ae th Ob‏ فَقَالَ : ‎Sir»‏ قَدْرَ

‎7 ‏فَكَائت‎ i

‎152. Narrated “A’ishah (RAA): ‘Um Habibah bint Jahsh com-

‎plained to the Prophet 38 about a prolonged flow of blood. He said
to her, “Keep away (from prayer) as long as your normal per-
iod used to prevent you (from praying), and afterwards she
should perform Ghusl (and pray).” (She used to wash for every
prayer). Related by Muslim.

‎56335 ‏ضّلاة». وى لأبي‎ J)

‎153. In another version by al-Bukhari he ‏بقتده وه‎ “And per-
form ablution for every prayer.” Abi Dawid and others trans-
mitted a similar narration.

‎Sh As ‏ل‎ By : ‏فَالَتْ‎ - ye

‎ayy .»‏ البْحَارِيٌ » وَأبُو 595 » وَاللفْظ لَهُ .

‎154. Narrated Umm “Atiyah (RA): ‘After we were pure, we
did not consider the yellow or muddy discharge to be anything (i.e
of the menses blood).” Related by al-Bukhari and Aba Daw@d and
the wording is his.

‎. ‏م : ملم‎ aly)
155. Narrated Anas (RAA): ‘When a Jewish woman was men-
struating, they would not eat with her. The Prophet # then said,

‎“Do everything except sexual intercourse.” Related by Mus-
lim.

‎63
156. Narrated ‘A’ishah (RAA): ‘When I was menstruating, the

Prophet ‏ول‎ would order me to wrap myself up (with an Izér, which
is a dress worn below the waist) and would start fondling me.”
Agreed upon.

‎ple ots — ov‏ - رضي ‎th‏ نما ع 55 ‎Me th Ses‏ وس

‏أذ صف ديتار».

‎5 08 ‏لح‎ B55 » otha 235, « ssid Bboy pee] uM
157. Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RAA): that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, concerning the man who has intercourse with his wife du-
ring her menses, “He must pay a Dinar or half a Dinar in way
of charity.” Related by the five Imams, and al-HAkim authenti-
cated it.

‏- قل :36 سول لله ‎do‏

‎bE .» ‏يكلم لز ول تملح‎ he

‎158. Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): Allab’s Messenger

‎3 said, “Is it not the case that when a woman menstruates
she neither prays nor fasts?” Agreed upon, and this is an ext-
ract from a long Hadith.

‎159. Narrated “Aishah (RA): ‘When we reached Sarif, Tmen-

‎struated. The Prophet 32 said, “You should perform all that a
pilgrim would do, except circumambulation until you are

‎64
pure (i.e. performed Ghusl).” Agreed upon, and this is an extract
from a long Hadith.

س وَعن مان ‎fo‏ - رضي

رَوَاهُ أو دود ‎«iy‏

160. Narrated Mu’adh Ibn Jabal (RAA): that he asked the

Prophet ‏ريلك‎ ‘What is lawful for a man with his wife when she is
menstruating? He replied, “What is above the waist wrapper.”
Related by Abd Dawéd and declared it to be a weak Hadith.

161. Narrated Umm Salamah (RAA): ‘During the lifetime of

the Prophet $8, the post-childbirth woman would refrain (from
prayer) for forty days after delivery.’ Related by the five Imams
except an-Nasaii, and the wording is Aba Dawad’s.

Ae ‏بقَضَاء‎ oy te th ‏صَلَّى‎ oy i Ge var
. ‏الْحَاكمٌ‎ B55 «ih

162. In a version by Aba Dawid, the Prophet 38 would not
command her to compensate for the prayers missed during her
post-childbirth period.

65

(بلوغ المرام).
Book I: Prayer
Chapter I: The times of prayer

ضيّ الله ‎wage‏

أن الي ‎io‏ الله ‎ale‏

Bb Oh » ‏الصَّمْسٌُ‎ ely ‏الظُيْر‎ Sp : ‏قال‎ hy

‎G55 «fail SS, aby‏ الْعَصْرٍ مَا لَمْ تعفر ‎LEN‏ ؛ وَوَقتُ صّلاة

‎me ayy A ‏ما لَمْ تطلع‎ eal ‏مِنْ طُلُوع‎ cal

‎163. Narrated “Abdullah Ibn “Amro (RAA): The Messenger of

‎Allah ‏,ا‎ “The time of the Dhuhr prayer is when the
sun passes the meridian and a man’s shadow is the same
length as his height. It lasts until the time of the ‘Asr (afte-
rnoon) prayer. The time of the ‘Asr prayer is until the yel-
lowing of the sun (during its setting). The time of the Ma-
ghrib prayer is the duration of the twilight. The time of the

‎Isha’ prayer is up to the middle of the night, and the time

‎of the Fajr prayer is from the appearance of the dawn until
the time of sunrise.” Related by Muslim,

‎63. ‘This is the chosen time or the preferable time for the Tsha’ prayer, but it,
is permissible to pray it -for the one who missed it- until the time of the
next prayer, ic. the Fajr prayer in this case. The evidence for this is the
Hadith reported on the authority of Aba Qatdah that the Prophet 3¢
said, “Missing the prayer due to sleep is not an act of negligence,
the real act of negligence occurs when one (is awake and) does
not pray until the time of the next prayer is due.” Part of a long
Hadith related by Muslim,

‎66
. ‏تفيّهه‎ elias (ntl pal BBE

164. Muslim transmitted on the authority of Buraidah —con-
cerning the time of the ‘Asr (afternoon) prayer, ‘While the sun
was white and clear.”

‎Tavs‏ من د

‎M0‏ ومن حَديث أي مُوسى
‎Muslim transmitted on the authority of Aba Mfisé: con-‏ .165
‎cerning the “Asr (afternoon) prayer, “When the sun was high.”‏

‎166. Narrated Aba Barzah (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to pray the ‘Asr prayer at a time, after which a man could go
to his dwelling in the outskirts of Madinah (and arrive) while the
sun was still hot and bright. The Prophet 3 liked to delay the
‘Isha’ prayer, and he disliked sleeping before it and talking after
it. The Prophet 3¥ used to leave (the mosque, or turn to those pra-
ying behind him) after Fajr prayer, when a man could recognize
the person sitting beside him (i.e. because the morning light had
broken), and he used to recite between 60 to 100 verses.’ Agreed

‎upon.

‎167. Al-Bukhart and Muslim transmitted on the authority of
Jabir (RAA):Sometimes he 38 would hasten® the ‘Isha’ and some-

‎G4. Le. pray it earlier, at the beginning of the time of Tha’
67
times he would delay it. He would hasten the ‘Isha’ if he found
people gathered (in the mosque), and if he noticed that they were

lingering he would delay it. As for the Fajr prayer, the Prophet 38
would pray it while it was still dark.”

168. Muslim transmitted on the authority of Aba Masa: ‘The

Prophet 3 ordered for the Ig@mah (the call for the performance of
the prayer) of the Fajr prayer to be pronounced, when the day
broke and people could hardly recognize each another.’

2 وَعَنْ رَافع إن ‎pest‏ - رَضِي الله علَهُ - 8 : ‎gph Lal Sy‏

rib prayer with the Messenger of Allah ‏روك‎ and one of us would
leave (afterwards) and would still be able to see where he had shot
his arrow (because there was still light in the sky).

‎delayed the ‘Isha’ prayer, till a good part of the night had gone‏ يله
‎(almost one third), then he came out and prayed and said, “This‏

‎would be the proper time for it,” if it was not too much of a

‎hardship on my nation. Related by Muslim.

‎65- This is the chosen time and the best for it,
66- Le. I would have delayed it until that time,

‎68
/ - رضي الله عَنَهُ - قال : فَالَ رَسُول ‎ed‏ الله
«إذًا ‎Set‏ الْسَرٌ 15,56 ‎Stay‏

Be, Beoeh

171. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 3 said, “If
the heat becomes extreme, delay the prayer (ie. Dhuhr)
until it becomes cool, as extreme heat is from the fragrance
of Hell.” Agreed upon.

ty fo ‏ب وَعَنْ رافع لن ديج = - قَالَ : قَالَ 305 الله‎ vt

boy Kah iy QS ‏بالمبّح فلْهُ أعْطَمْ لأخو‎ hob pkey ct

Oe S15 ‏التُرُمدي‎

172. Narrated Rafi’ bin Khadij (RAA): The Prophet 3 said,
“Observe the morning prayer till daybreak (i.e. prolong the
recital of Qur’an in prayer, so that you remain in prayer until day-
break), as your reward will be greater.” Related by the five
Imams.

os

173. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 32 said,
“Whoever catches one rak’ah of the Fajr prayer before su-
nrise, he has caught the Fajr prayer, and whoever catches
one rak’ah of the ‘Asr prayer before sunset, he has caught
the ‘Asr prayer.” Agreed upon.

Wee A ‏رضي‎ -
Wie CH EI : ‏م قَالَ‎ esp
174, Muslim transmitted on the authority of ‘A’ishah (RAA):

a similar narration where the Prophet :# said,“One prostration”
instead of “rak‘ah” and then said, ‘a prostration means a rak-
‘ah.

toy : ‏وَقَالَ‎ OS

69
Spey ‏عَلْهُ - قَالَ : سَمِعْتُ‎ Jer ‏رض الله‎ - io th ‏وَعَنْ أبي سعيد‎ — ve

Be Ww sh

175. Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): ‘I heard the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 say, “There is no prayer after the Fajr pra-
yer until the sun rises and there is no prayer after the ‘Asr
prayer until the sun sets.” Agreed upon. Muslim reported in
his narration, “No prayer is to be performed after the Fajr
prayer.”

د وله عَنْ

بن ‎ye‏ فلت ‎he dy BE eee‏ الل

ee gS Fh

176, Narrated ‘Ugbah bin ‘Amir: “There are three times dur-

ing which the Prophet 38 prohibited us from praying or burying

our deceased: from’sunrise until the sun has risen(a spear’s length

above the horizon), when the sun is at its meridian, and when the
sun is setting until it has completely set.” Related by Muslim.

ني ‎ead ty Spats ile‏ أبي ‎alle SA‏ طتعيف » وَزَادَ

177. Ash-ShAfi'l transmitted the second case (prohibition of
prayer when the sun is at its meridian), in a narration by Aba
Hurairah, but through a weak chain of narrators. He added, ‘with

the exception of Friday.”

2S ‏عَنْ أبي قَنَادةَ‎ 555 ony — vA

178. Abd Dawid transmitted a similar narration on the auth-
ority of Aba Qatadah.

70
{ya

HLS aL

أن طم قل . : قل ول الله تل ‎th‏

oN tush blo LAGI ‏رَوَاهُ‎ NG

179. Narrated Jubair bin Mut’im (RAA): The Prophet % said,
“0 tribe of “Abd Manéf, do not prevent anyone from circu-
mambulating this house (the Kabah) or from praying the-
rein at any time they wish.” Related by the five Imams. At-
‘Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

oe a &
180. Narrated Ibn Umar (RAA): The Prophet 38 said, “The

evening twilight is its redness (on the horizon)” Related by ad-
Darqutni and declared authentic by Ibn Khuzaimah.

oily » Bilal ‏فيه‎ Jay pubs ‏حر يحرم‎ : os ly ghey ‏عليه‎
‎Joly - pita Bite iol - ta gs

الطُّعَام». رَوَه ‎GA‏ خرَيمَة

He EL

181. Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RAA): The Prophet 38 said, “The
dawn time, is in reality, two dawns (i.e. two times), one in
which eating is Hardm (unlawful)® and prayer is permis-

sible‘, and the other is when prayer (i.e. the Fajr prayer) is

Harém (prohibited) and eating is permissible.” Related by

Ibn Khuzaimah and al-Hakim and graded it as Sahi

67- Le. for the person intending to fast, that, he should stop eating.
68. Le. The time for praying Fajr is due.

7
: ‏العام‎ Yad ‏من خديت خَيرٍ َحْرْهُ » وَرَادَ في الذي‎ gS — vay

od I Sy : ‏الأ قي». وَفي الآخر‎ PREY OS

182. Al-Hakim transmitted a similar narration on the auth-
ority of Jabir, and added that in which eating is prohibited, ‘It (the
streaks of light of the true dawn) widely spreads on the hori-

zon,’ and the other, ‘It is like the wolf’s tail.5®”

fe ‏َال رَسُول الله‎ : 6 - eS th ‏رضي‎ - ots ‏وَعَنْ ابر‎ ar
pS ly S50 yy ates SF ‏في‎ BEAN JOE ally : ‏وَسَلَمَ‎ le ‏الله‎

183. Narrated Ibn Mas‘d (RAA): The Prophet 38 said, “The
best of deeds, is to offer prayers at the beginning of their
appointed times.” Related by at-Tirmidht and al-Hakim, who an
authenticated it.

Sh ob : J phy oe th he La ‏أن‎

‎ity‏ اله ‎Satya ky heyy‏ عَفْرُ ‎ap all‏ الدَارفطَي

‎why ane ‏بسند‎

‎184. Narrated Aba Mahdhiirah (RAA): The Prophet 38 said,
“Praying at the earliest time for prayer (after the Addn) is
the act, which pleases Allah, if you pray at the middle time
you will be granted Allah’s mercy, and if you pray at the
latest time (just before the next prayer) Allah will grant you
His forgiveness.” Related by ad-Darqutni with an extremely we-
ak chain of narrators.

‎Cah ie 85 LLNS SS ‏حَديث ان عُمَرَ‎ Le

‎185. At-Tirmidhi transmitted on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar a
similar narration, but without the middle time, and it is also a

‎69. i.e. the light that spreads vertically up into the sky, and is followed by
darkness, because it is not really the dawn light. Between both dawns,
there is almost an hour's time.

‎272
very weak Hadith.7

186. Narrated Ibn ‘Umar (RAA): The Messenger of Allah 38
said, ‘No prayer is to be said after (the beginning of) Fajr

(time), except two prostrations (rak Gt).7”” Related by the five

Iams. In the narration of “Abdur-Razzq, “No prayer is to be
said after the true dawn has begun, except the two rak’at
of al-Fajr prayer.”

ارُقطني عَنْ ‎9b‏ بْنِ العَاصٍ - ‎oo)‏ الله ‎E5‏ -

yaw 45 — vay

187. Ad-Darquini transmitted a similar narration on the au-
thority of ‘Amro bin al-As (RAA).

‎ey — van‏ سَلَمَةَ - رضي الله

‎fe ‏رَسُول الله‎ fo : ‏قالْت‎ - We Ss

‏الله ‎EE ass Sab or Jos pach city ae‏ «شطت
عَنْ ‎Ay EG‏ الظهْر ‎HS eon WLS‏ : أَنقْضِيهِمًا 1156 قَالَّ : ‎Ay‏

‎. ‏أَحْمَدُ‎ aes

‎188. Narrated Umm Salamah (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah

‎3% prayed the ‘Asr prayer, and then came into my house, and pra-
yed two rak“ét. Thereupon I asked him (about what he had just
prayed), and he replied, “I was busy (doing something) to pray
the two ‏غة عله‎ after Dhuhr (until it was “Asr time) so I prayed
them now.” Then I asked him, ‘Shall we observe them if we mis-
sed them (at their due time)? He replied, ‘No.’ Related by Ahmad

‎70- As they are both narrated by Ya’qib bin al-Walid al-Madani, Imam
Ahmad reported him to be one of the big liars in Hedith, and Tbn Hibban
said that he used to fabricate Hadith.

‎71. The two rab‘ah here refer to voluntary prayer to be prayed at dawn time,
i.e. before the Fajr prayer.

‎73
- ‏عَنْهَا‎ Jus Ab
189. Aba Dawid transmitted on the authority of “A’ishah
(RAA) a narration to the same effect.

5 — وَلأبِي داو عَنْ ‎Eee‏ -

بَابْ الأَذَان
‎Chapter II: The Call to Prayer (Adhan)‏

‎gy sat eel dey‏ كلوقه

‎EE By GL Be

‎190. Narrated ‘Abdullah bin Zaid bin “Abd Rabbih, ‘While I
was sleeping, a man came to me and said, ‘Say AUlahu Akbar! Al-
la@hu Akbar! (Allah is the Greatest),’ and he mentioned the word-
ing of the call to prayer, repeating the Takbir four times without
Tart’ (repeating the rest of the phrases of the Adhan twice), and

‎the Igémah once,” except for the phrase, gad Qamatussalah™

‎(which is said twice). When the morning came, I went to the Mes-
senger of Allah (to tell him what I had seen). He said, “Your dre-
am is true...” Related by Ahmad and Abi Dawdd, At-Tirmidhi

‎and Aba Khuzaimah authenticated it”

‎79-16. saying each phrase of the Adhén once, apart from the Takbir which
is said twice.

‎13 The time for performing the prayer has arrived.

‎74. When the Prophet 3 emigrated ‏ما‎ Madinah and built his mosque, the
‘number of Muslims increased, and they were no longer afraid to assem-
ble to perform prayers in public. The Prophet 3& consulted his Compan-
ions about the best way to announce the prayer, Some mentioned rais-
ing a banner that everybody could see, others suggested lighting a fire,
but the Prophet 3 rejected the idea as this act is limited to the Magians
who worshipped fire. Some also suggested using @ bell or a tru-mpet like
the Christians and the Jews, but this was also rejected by the Prophet
38 as they would be imitating them, But the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎

‎74
‎Lata ay‏ في آخره قضّة َوْلٍ ‎Se‏ في ‎oF‏ الفجر : «الصّلاة عت

‎«Aly

‎191. Ahmad added to the call to prayer (Adhdn), what Bilal
used to say in the Fajr prayer, “Prayer is better than sleep.”

‎Ny Na‏ عَنْ ألس - ‎EH > : Jb - He th os‏ قَالَ

‏الْمُوَدْنُ في ‎pel‏ حي عَلَى ‎th‏ ال : ‎Ball‏ من ‎eg‏

‎192, Ibn Khuzaimah transmitted on the authority of Anas
(RAA): ‘It is part of the Sunnah that when the one who calls to
prayer says in the Fajr prayer, ‘Hayya ‘alal-Falah (come to suc-
cess), he must then say, ‘Prayer is better than sleep.’

‎Ley 15+‏ : أبي مَحْدُورة - رضي الله عله - أن لبي صَلّى ‎‘le phy oie th‏

‏ولكن 53 لُكب في أرله ‎Fe‏

‎193. Narrated Aba Mahdhérah (RAA): that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3% taught him the Adhan, and he mentioned Tarji’ (repea-
ting the rest of the phrases of the Adhén twice) in the Adhan. Rel-

‎thought for a while and said, ‘Aren’t the Christians the nearest in
love to the believers (the Muslims)? (sirah al-Ma’idah), Isn't it
less dangerous to do like the Christians than the Jews? Why
don’t we use a bell until Allah tells us about the best thing to do.’
He ordered a bell to be made, but ‘Umar suggested that a man should
stand at the door of the mosque or a high place to call to the prayer in a
loud voice. The Prophet # agreed and ordered Bilal to call for the pray
saying, ‘Come to congregational prayer.” People returned home thinking
about this issue, and “Abdullah bin Zaid saw a dream as he narrates, “I
saw a man carrying a bell in his hand, I asked him: ‘Would you sell me
this bell? ‘The man asked, ‘What do you need the bell for?" I answered,
“T would call the people to prayer.” The man then said, ‘Shall I tell you
something better? I said, “Certainly..” He said, ‘Say ‏تفال‎ Akbar...”
When he told the Prophet 8 about the dream, he ortlered him to go to
Bilal and tell him to make the call for the prayer (Adhd), for he has the
best voice. When “Umar (RAA) heard the Adhén, he came out with his
cloak, saying, ‘By the One who has sent you with the truth, I saw some-
thing similar to what he saw in my dream.’ The Prophet 3 then said,
“All Praise be to Allah.”

‎75

ated by Muslim, but he mentioned the Takbir “Allah is the Grea-
test,” twice only at its beginning, while the five Imams related the
Hadith but mentioned that the Takbir is said four times at the

beginning.

2 ONG gies of Sy obs : OB

$8 ‏ولَمْ‎ de GE ‏مني اك انت الصّلاة»‎ iy ‏مد إل‎ y

194, Narrated Anas (RAA): ‘Bilal was ordered to repeat the
phrases of the call to prayer (Adhdn) twice, and the phrases of the
Igamah once, except for the phrase ‘gad Qématussaldh’ (the time
for performing the prayer has come). Agreed upon.

‎YER — v0‏ : «أتر ‎le th ho Ut‏ وَسلَم بلآلأ».

‎195. In another narration by an-Nasé'i, ‘The Prophet 3 orde-
red Bilal’

‎eh oy + fey 1
. ble SB ‏في ذه رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ‎ Bacal ‏وََهنَا»‎ ES 6

‎196. Narrated Abd Juhaifah (RAA), ‘I saw Bilal calling for the
prayer, and I saw the movement of his mouth from this side to
that side,’5 and his fingers were in his ears.’ Related by Ahmad

‎and At-Tirmidhi.

‎HBG oy ‏ب‎ Vay

‎197. Ina version by Ibn Majah he said, ‘He put his fingers in
his ears.’

‎١58‏ ولأبي 558 : ‎HE ty‏ لما بَََ حي عَلَى الصّلاة ‎as‏ وَشْمَالء

‎75- He means that Bilal was turning his head, to the right upon saying
‘Haya “alas-salah’ (Come to the prayer) and to the left upon saying
‘Haya ‘alal-Faiak’ (Come to success).

‎76
198. In the narration of Aba Dawéid, ‘When Bilal reached the
phrase, ‘Haya ‘alas-saléh (Come to the prayer), he turned his neck
to the right and the left, but did not turn himself.’ The original full
narration of this Hadith is found in Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

‎liked his voice, so he taught him the call to prayer.’ Rela-‏ ع
‎ted by Ibn Khuzaimah.‏

‎200. Narrated Jabir bin Samurah, "1 prayed along with the

‎Prophet 2 the two ‘fd (feast) festival prayers, not only once or
twice, without Adhén or Igamah.’ Related by Muslim.

‎fy - Wale UN ‏رضي‎ - HB ‏عن ان‎ + BEM ‏وَنَحْوْهُ في‎ 00١

‎201. Al-Bukhari and Muslim transmitted something to the
same effect on the authority of Ibn “Abbas (RAA).

‏05ب وَعَنْ أبي - رض الله ‎te‏ - في الْحَديث ‎ball‏ في ‎Ped‏
‎oy: - Sat‏ دن ‎Lab Sy‏ اللي ‎le‏ الله ‎cle‏ وس

‎ee BG) ‏يزب‎

‎202. Narrated Abd Qatadah (RAA): in a long tradition when

‎they missed the prayer because of sleeping, ‘and then Bilal said

‎the Adhén, and the Prophet 3# prayed as he used to do every day.’
Related by Muslim.

‎Uy oer‏ عَنْ جاب - ‎oh : - ee dhe‏ صَلّى ‎ois ae ch‏ أ

‎sty oly aia Gh Gy Le ‏ة‎

‎203, Muslim related on the authority of Jabir (RAA) : that the

‎77
Prophet 38 came to al-Muzdalifah and prayed the Maghrib and
‘Isha prayers with one Adhdn and two Igamas.

bh Lo ‏«جَمع‎ : - - ee ‏لله‎ as - fb hye vet
‏دَاوْدَ : لكل ضّلاة » وَفي‎ sf

age eG ‏في‎ Bs:
204. In another narration by Muslim on the authority of Ibn

“Umar, ‘The Prophet 38 combined the Maghrib and ‘Isha’ prayers
with one Igamah.’ Aba Dawid added, ‘Each prayer with an Iqd-
mah.’ In another version by Abi Dawad, ‘He did not (order the
caller to) call for the prayer in any of them.”

hy

de dnp ‏قلا :فل‎

age

لي » فَُلُوا وَاشْربُوا ‎S‏ يناد ان ‎A‏

ae.

BE ohh onal Sj h ad cates;

٠ ‏آخره إِذْرَاج‎ is

205. Narrated Ibn ‘Umar and “A’ishah (RAA): “Allah’s Mess-
enger 38 said, “Bilal says the Adhén (for the Fajr) during the
night, so eat and drink until you hear the Adhén of Ibn
Umm Maktém.” The narrator added that Ibn Umm Makttim was

a blind man who did not call for the prayer, till someone told him,
“The day has dawned, the day has dawned.’ Agreed upon.

SA. ped 5 O31 You Of - gis th ‏ضي‎
‎Sey ‏الله عله‎ fe ‏اقبي‎

. 5 S55 ff

206. Narrated Ibn Umar (RAA): that Bilal called for the pra-

yer before the breaking of dawn, and the Prophet therefore ord-
ered him to go back and say, ‘Lo! The servant of Allah has slept.’
Related by Aba Dawad, who declared it to be weak.

By ‏نام».‎ teh Oy Vo gol » ‏تراحع‎

78
fe ‏َال وول الله‎ 0 ee ei
et ‏قُولُ الْمُوَدْنُ».‎ Void 26th (ae pp ley ale dy
‏فوأ‎ O68 pace ‏وس‎

Et ois J
207, Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudrf (RAA): Allah's Messenger

48 said, “When you hear the Adhén repeat what the caller
is saying.” Agreed upon.

. ‏ملل‎ ke thy ‏رضي‎

00 related a similar narration on the authority
of Mu ‘awiyah.

wwe Sy BY Te ‏«لا‎ I sib « Hlth ‏سوى‎ ane es

209. Muslim transmitted on the authority of Umar (RAA)
the virtue of repeating what the caller is saying, word for word,
except when the caller says, ‘Hayya ‘alal-Faléh’ (come to success),
‘Haya ‘alas-galah’ (Come to the prayer), he then says, wa ‏شا‎ haw-
ala wa 16 Quwata illé billah“Aliyyil“Adheem.’ (There is no power
or might except by Allah's leave).

‎poe bay.‏ أبي الْعَاصٍ - رَضي ‎He Dh‏ - فال : يا رَسُولَ الله

‎. ‏الَحَاكمْ‎ ico » ‏مذي‎ My ital opel ‏أذانه أشر».‎ fe

‎210. Narrated ‘Uthman bin Abd “As (RAA): that he said, ‘O
Messenger of Allah, appoint me as the Imam of my people.’ He
replied 38, “You are their Imam. Be careful about the weak
amongst them,” and appoint a caller to the prayer, who

‎does not accept payment for his Adhan.” Related by the five
Imams and At-Tirmidhi authenticated it.

‎76- i.e. take into consideration,-when you pray, the weakest among them
(whether siek or old), so as not to lengthen the prayer beyond their ability

‎79
211. Narrated Mélik Ibn Al-Huwairith (RAA): The Messenger

of Allah 3 said, ‘When the time for prayer is due, let one of
you call the Adhén.” Related by the seven Imams,

212. Narrated Jabir (RAA}: ‘The Messenger of Allah 32 said to
Bilal, “When you call the Adhén, you should pause between
each phrase, but when you say the Igamah, be quick, and
leave enough time between the Adhan and the Iqamah for
one who is eating to finish his food.” Related by At-Tirmidht

who declared it to be weak.

07 وله عن أبي

- رضي الله عله - أن الي على الله ‎iy ole‏

١» ai I ‏يود‎

213. Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet $2 said,
‘None should call for the prayer unless he has ablution.”
Related by At-Tirmidhi who declared it to be weak.

214, Narrated Ziad bin al-Harith (RAA): The Prophet 38 said,
‘Whoever calls the Adhan should also call for the Igamah.”
Related by At-Tirmidhi and he also declared it to be weak.

AHS ‏وَفيه‎ etl fobs : ‏قَالَ‎ . cay f ‏كنت‎ uf - 4
215. Abi Dawdd related on the authority of “Abdullah bin
80
Zaid, ‘I saw it (i.e. the Adhan in a dream) and I wished to call it
‘The Prophet 38, “Then you call the Igamah.” It is also weak.

25 وَعَن أبي ‎BOA‏ قال ول الله ‎ie‏ اله له ‎yee‏ :
‎Gif‏ بالأذان » 5

216. Narrated Abd Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet ‏و‎ said, ‘The
call maker is the one who is responsible for the Adhan”,

and the Imam is the one responsible for the Igamah.””8 Re-
lated by Ibn ‘Adi who declared it to be weak.

. ‏من قله‎ ea ‏رضي‎ - Ye Le al - 7

217, Al-Baihagi transmitted something similar on the autho-
rity of “Ali,

fe du ‏الله صَلَى‎ 505, U6: ‏لي - رضي الله عَنْهُ - قَالَ‎ ens

Lg ‏النّسَائي » وَصَحّحَهُ ان‎ ty al

‎OB Go‏ اله

‎218, Narrated Anas (RAA): The Prophet 38 said, ‘A suppli-
cation made between the Adhan and the Igamah is never

‎rejected.” Related by an-Nasa’i, Ibn Khuzaimah, who authentic-
cated it.

‎36 phy ie ‏الله‎ Lo ‏الل عَنْهُ - أن رَسُولَ الل‎ 5 - WG V8

‎219, Narrated Jabir (RAA): The Prophet ‏يك‎ said, “Whoever
says, when he hears the Adhén: ‘Oh Allah, Lord of this per-

‎77- He is entrusted him with the time of the Adhan, and it is his respon-
sibility to decide the time for prayer.
78. No one should call the Zqamah except when the Imém asks him to do so.

‎81
fect call”? and the established prayers,° grant Muhammad
the status of Wasilah®! and the most virtuous place,? and

raise him to a praised position,’ You have promised him,’

will be entitled to my intercession on the Day of Judgm-
ent.” Related by the four Imams.

‎by Gy‏ الصّلاة

‎Chapter III: The Prerequisites of prayer

‎oie

‎220, Narrated ‘Ali bin Talq (RAA): Allah’s Messenger 2 said,
“When any of you passes wind during prayer, he must
leave the prayer, perform ablution and repeat the prayer.”
Related by the five Imams and was graded as authentic by Ibn
Hibban.

‎) - gle ‏رضي الله‎ - Le ‏وَعَنْ‎ ١

‎Bboy “sch ‘y Pee a ly y wae Sus Le ys

‎Ee A

‎221, Narrated ‘A’ishah (RAA): Allah's Messenger 3 said,
“Allah does not accept the prayer of an adult woman unless

‎79. This most probably refers to of"Monotheism,"(which is part of the Adhan)
and it is perfect as it antagonizes atheism and associating others with
Allah in worship (polytheism), and it is also perfect as it is preserved
from being changed or altered. (Ibn Hajar in Fath al-Bari),

‎80. The established prayer may refer to its being performed constantly (as it
is always called for) or may also refer to the prayer about to be perfor-
med. (see Fath al-Bari),

‎81- See the glossary for an explanation of its meaning,

‎82 This refers to a status, which is higher than that of all Allah's servants,

‎88. It refers to Intercession on behalf of his followers on the Day of Judg-
ment.

‎82
she is wearing a head covering (Khimér, hijab).” Related by
the five Imams and was declared as authentic by Ibn Khuzaimah.

222, Narrated Jabir (RAA): Allah’s Messenger 48 said, “If
the garment is large enough, wrap it round your body
(when you pray).” And in the narration of Muslim, ‘you should
have its ends crossed with each other (ic. if the garment is

large) and if it is tight then use it as Izér (tie it round your
waist).” Agreed upon.

Beet Li:

‎ty. gly rye‏ حَديث أ
‎Oi‏ الْوَاحد لَيْسَ ‎ee‏
‎Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): Allah’s Messenger 38‏ .223

‎said, “None of you must pray in a single garment, with no
part of it covering his shoulders.” Agreed upon.

‎Wig te

‎1 ah a phy ‏طُهُورَ قَدَمَيْهَاه. أَخْرْحَه أبُو دَاوةَ‎ ha?
224. Narrated Umm Salamah (RA): that she asked the Mes-

‎senger of Allah $8, ‘Can a woman pray in a long shirt (like a night
dress) and head covering without ‏"بقعا‎ (loincloth)” He said, “If the
shirt is long and flowing and covers the top of her feet.”
Related by Aba Dawad.

‎84. Covering the shoulders.
83
225. Narrated ‘Amir bin Rabi‘ah (RAA): ‘We were with the

Prophet 38 (traveling), on a dark night, and the direction of the
Qiblah was difficult to determine, so we prayed (without knowing
the exact direction of the Qiblah). When the sun rose we were sur-
prised that we had prayed facing a direction other than the Qib-
Jah. Thereupon the verse was revealed, “And to Allah belongs
the east and the west, Wherever you turn yourselves or
your faces there is the Face of Allah.” Related by At-Tirmidhi,
who declared it to be weak.

dey Le 05 08 ‏قَالَ‎ - ee th ‏رضي‎ - A ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ 0

1
4. رَوَاهُ مذي وَقََهُ البحَارِي .

226. Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): Allah’s Messenger ‏يك‎
‎said, “The area (falling between) between the east and the

west is considered to be the Qiblah.”*Related by At-Tirmidhi.

30 وَعَسنْ ‎pe‏ بن ‎ay‏ - رضي الله غلَهُ - قال ‎Lit‏ 305 الله ‎eo‏

steed ‏رَادَ‎ ole BE ‏به».‎

227. Narrated “Amir bin Rabi‘ah (RAA): I saw the Messenger
of Allah 38, perform (optional prayer) while riding on his mount
(camel), facing whichever direction it (the mount) turned.” Agre-

85- Ibn “Umar said, ‘I you put the west on your right and the east on your
left, then the area between them is a @iblah. This Hadith is a proof that
what is required is ‏ما‎ face the direction of the Qiblah ‏.هبك‎ the Ka’bah-
and not the actual building or strueture, for those who find it difficult to
determine its actual position. But this Hadith refers to the people of
Madinah and whoever has a position similar to them (i.e. those in Syria,
the Arabian Peninsula and Iraq). For the people of Egypt, the Qiblak is,
between the East and the South (Figh us-Sunnah, as-Sayyid Sabi
Chapter of ‘prerequisites of prayer".

86. Le. he was not facing the Qiblah, as he was traveling.

84

he nodded his head sligh-
‏"ريل‎ and he would not do this in the obligatory prayer.”

ed upon. In the narration of al-Bukhé

‎Sey,‏ حَسَن

‎228. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): “When the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 was on a journey and he wanted to pray voluntary pra-
yers, he turned his mount towards the @iblah, said the takbir
(Allahu Akbar) and then prayed towards whichever direction his
mount turned to.” Related by Aba Dawid, with a good chain of
narrators.

‎th Le tof - ae dn ‏رضي‎ -
le ‏رَوَاهُ الترزمذي » وَلَهُ‎ pad, Gd) tate Gir ‏«الأرضٌ‎ 36 ey
229. Narrated Abd 5830 al-Khudri (RAA): Allah’s Messenger

‎& said, “The whole earth is a mosque (ie. suitable place for
performing prayer), with the exception of graveyards and th
public baths.” Related by At-Tirmidhi, but it has a defect in its

‎ae lt 85 8

‎chain of narrators.®8

‎5 ‏يت الله‎ ab OS » ‏وَمَعَاطن الإبل‎ «alr,
230. Narrated ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA): ‘Allah’s Messenger

‎narrated ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA): Allah’s Messenger ‘8 said in
seven places: dunghills, slaughterhouses, graveyards, in the mid-
dle of the road, bathhouses, places where camels kneel to drink,
and on the top of Allah’s house (i.e. the Kabah). Related by At-Tir-
midhi who declared it to be weak.

‎87- i.e, for Ruki” (bowing) and Sujid (prostration).
88. ‘There was a difference of opinion over which is connected to the Prophet

‎3% or if the Hadith was Mursal (see Hadith no. 80).
85
si ay, wile ab Vy « ‏إلى‎ thal ‏يقُولُ : «لا‎

231. Narrated Abd Marthad al-Ghanawi, ‘I heard the Messe-

nger of Allah 38 say, “Do not pray facing graveyards and do
not sit on them.” Related by Muslim.

. ‏حُرَئِمَة‎ IN SLY ‏د‎

232. Narrated Abii Sa‘fd al-Khudri (RAA): Allah's Messenger

32 said, “When one of you comes to the mosque, he should
turn his shoes (sandals or kiuff) over, and examine them. If
one finds any dirt (Najésah) on them, he should rub them

against the ground and pray in them.” Related by Aba Dawad
and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Hadith Sahth,

233. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 3% said,
“When any of you treads with his Khuff on something wh-
ich is unclean (Najis), he should purify them with dust.”
Related by Abii Dawéd, and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎ae # 1+‏ ماوق أن ‎Seah‏ - رضي ‎a th‏ - فال قَالَ رَسُولٌ الله ‎do‏

‎234, Narrated Mu‘awiyah bin al-Hakam (RAA): The Prophet

‎3 said, “Talking to others is not appropriate during prayer,
for prayer is for glorifying Allah (saying Tasbih), exalting
His greatness (saying Allthu Akbar) and reciting the Qur’an.”
Related by Muslim.

‎86
ole

‎op Jb 8‏ كنا

‎os ee wel ie

‎we were in prayer, in the lifetime of Allah’s Messenger #2. A per-
son would speak to the person next to him until the verse was rev-
ealed, “Guard strictly the (five obligatory) prayers especially
the middle prayer, and stand before Allah with devout obe-
dience (do not speak with one another)” (2:238). And we were
then commanded to observe silence during prayer, and were for-
bidden to talk.” Agrced upon, and the wording is Muslim's

‏556 وَعَنْ أبي ‎SA‏ - رضي ‎ke th‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ ‎fhe dh U5‏ الله
‎«JE he ms Ly‏ وَاتُصفيق .

‎eel

‎236. Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 22 said,
“Saying subhanallah is for men, and clapping is for wom-

‎en.”89 Agreed upon. Muslim has the extra phrase in his narration,

‎‘in prayer’

‎61H ‏من‎ Seal,

‎237. Narrated ‘Abdullah Ibn ash-Shikhkhir,

‎enger of Allah 3€ praying while his chest was ‘buzzing’ like the
rumbling of a boiler, due to erying.’ Related by the five Imams exc-
cept for Ibn Majah, and Ibn Hibban authenticated it.

‎‘I saw the Mess-

‎89- It is allowed, if there is a need such as alerting the Imam toa mistake,
‘warning a blind person ete.

‎87
++ يعن علي - رضي ‎BOS : OU - 85 Ah‏ مِنْ ‎bes‏ الله ‎Loo‏ الله

238. Narrated “Ali (RAA): ‘I used to visit the Messenger of

Allah 38 twice (every day, at certain times). Whenever I entered to
where he was while he was praying, he would clear his throat (as
asign that I may enter). Related by an-Nas@’i and Ibn Majah.

9 وَعَنْ ان ‎RE‏ - رَضِي ‎ese ih‏ - قَالَ : «قلْت لبلآل : كيف ‎eth‏

239, Narrated Ibn ‘Umar (RA), ‘Tasked Bilal: “How did you

see the Messenger of Allah 3 respond when people greeted him
while he was He said, “He would signal to them with his hand.”
Related by Aba Dawéd and at-Tirmidhi who graded it as Sahth.

1 0

TUN ‏حامل‎ Gy ar pl
. ‏في الْمَمْجد»‎ (th 3 Bim: ply dle BE eg

240. Narrated Abi Qatadah (RAA): Allah's Messenger 2% pra-
yed while carrying Umémah® the daughter of Zainab. the daugh-

ter of Allah's Messenger 38 when he prostrated, he put her down
and when he got up from his sujézd (prostration), he carried on her
back (on his neck). Agreed upon. Muslim added in his narration,
‘While leading the people in prayer in the mosque.

hb ‏رضي الله عل - 38 ال وَسُول لله عتلى‎ A ‏أي‎ way
» ‏أَعْرَحَة الأريعةٌ‎ gly Bh

90. She was the daughter of Abul Aag Ibn ar-Rabi‘ah,
88
241, Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 2 said,
“Kill the two black (things): the snake and the scorpion
during prayer.” Related by the four Imams, and Ibn Hibban gra-
ded it as authentic.

Chapter IV: The Sutrah (or Partition)
In Front of One, Who is Praying

: قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎eo‏
‏ذا َل من الم لكف أن

iy Ue tll ly de a eat GS tt, Se ef ‏يتقف‎

‎hs‏ من وَحْهِ آخَر : «أريَعينَ حَرِيقًا»

‎242. Narrated Aba Juhaim bin al-Hérith (RAA): The Prophet

‎said, “If the person who passed in front of another per-
son in prayer knew the the magnitude of his sin he would
rather wait for 40 (days, months or years) rather than pass
in front of him.” Agreed upon, and the wording is al-Bukhari’s
Al-Bazzér narrated with a different chain of narrators, “fourty
autumns.”

‏ليأ صلى ‎eis‏

‎eye

‎243. Narrated ‘A'ishah (RAA): “Allah’s Messenger 32 was
asked during the expedition of Tabik about the sutrah of the one
who is praying. He said, “Something such as the back of the

‎saddle* (to be put in front of him).” Related by Muslim.

‎D1 The stick which is put at the back of the saddle, for the rider to lean on
89
: pig ‏الله عليه‎ ed ‏َال رَسُولُ‎
SEN SE ape ‏ولو‎ St Besley

244. Narrated Sabrah bin Ma’bad al-Juhani, The Prophet 32
said, “When one of you prays, he should put a surah (par-
tition) in front of him, even if it is only an arrow.” Related
by al-Hakim.

245, Narrated Abu Dharr al-Ghiféri (RA): Allah’s Messenger

38 said, “When any one of you stands for prayer and there is
nothing in front of him (at least) equal to the back of the
saddle, as a sutrah, his prayer would be cut off by (the pas-
sing of a) woman, an ass, and a black Dog.” This narration also
has, “The black dog is a devil.” Related by Muslim.

+14 وله عَنْ أبي ‎Sips A‏

246. Narrated Aba Hurairah a similar narration, but without
mentioning the dog,

Ob » ‏توه‎ - ge Uh ‏ابن عبّاسٍ - رضي‎ ge YL 355 ‏ولأبي‎ - 43

247. Aba Dawéd and an-Nasé’ related on the authority of
Ibn “Abbas (RAA): a similar narration without the last sentence,
and he mentioned ‘The woman having her menses.”

5

- رضي لله عله - قَالَ ‎Jb:‏ 55 الله

‎thy,‏ » فَأرَاَ

‎90
lob. Bib ‏ايه‎

‎Ey‏ : «فإن مَعَهُ القرين».

‎248, Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): Alléh’s Messenger
said, ‘If any one of you prays toward a sutrah (a barrier)
and someone tries to pass in front of him, then push him
away. If he refuses, then fight him, for he is a devil.” Agreed

‎upon. In another narration, ‘For he has his evil companion
(Qareen) with him.”

‎249. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah

‎said, ‘When one of you prays, he should place something
in front of him. If he cannot find anything, he should set
up a stick [in front of him]. If he does not have a stick, he
should draw a line [on the ground in front of him] then no-
thing that passes in front of him will harm him.” Related by
Ahmad and Ibn Majah.

‎0548 ‏أَْرَحَهُ أبو‎ abe why oo

‎250. Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): Allah's Messenger

‎3% said, “Prayer is not invalidated by anything, but push
away|the person who is trying to pass in front of you} to the best

‎of your ability.” Related by Abd Dawid, but there is a weakness
in its chain of narrators.

‎91
Chapter V: Encouraging Incitin (the Muslim)
to be Humble during prayer

251. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah

38 prohibited that one puts his hands on his waist during prayer.”
‘Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

252, Al-Bukhari added in his narration on the authority of
“Kishah (RAA): “This is what the Jews do in their prayer.”

263. Narrated Anas Ibn Mélik (RAA): Allah's Messenger 38
said, “If supper is served, then start with it before praying
Maghrib.” Agreed upon.

ety ins 08 : ‏قَالَ‎ -
esi ‏«وّاحدةٌ‎ 2

254, Narrated ‏نط‎ Dharr (RAA): Allah's Messenger 38 said,
“When one of you stands for prayer, he must not wipe away
the pebbles (from his forehead or from the place of his prostra-
tion) as mercy is facing him.” Related by the five Imams with a
sound chain of narrators. Ahmad added in his narration, “wipe it
only once, or not at all.”

92
255. Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated a similar narration on
the authority of Mu’aiqib without giving an explanation.

6 BEA ‏في‎ Guy, Sy: Boy GLIA « ytd Oy) ath

256, Narrated ‘A'ishah (RA): 1 asked Allah's Messenger 3
about looking (turning) here and there in prayer. He replied, "It is
akind of theft by which Satan takes away (a portion) of the
person’s prayer.” Related by Al-Bukhari and At-Tirmidhi who
rendered it authentic, The latter's wordings are, “Avoid turning
while you are engaged in prayer, for it leads to the destrue-
tion (of your religion). If you have to do it, then do it in the

voluntary prayer.”%

257. Narrated Anas (RAA): Allah's Messenger 38 said, “Wh-
enever any of you is engaged in prayer, he must realize
that he is having an intimate conversation with His Lord.
So, he should not spit in front of him nor toward his right
side. But(he may spit, if needs) to his left, and under his foot.”
Agreed upon. In a different version, “or under his foot.”

fe ge Ah ‏قرم لعَائمَة - رَضِي‎ OF ‏قَالَ‎ they 0
Wig VAG ‏«أمبطي عن زاك هذا‎ : eye ‏الله‎ Le ‏الي‎ oe. 8

92 The narration of Al-Bukhari says, “Do not wipe away the pebbles
while you are praying, but if you have to then do it only once in
order to level them.”

99- This is related to unnecessary movements,

93
IAD NY, DE ‏في‎ JAA Sashes

258. Narrated Anas (RAA) (and “A’ishah (RAA)), had a cur-
tain with which she covered the doorway of her house. Allah's

Messenger #8 said to her, “Remove this curtain (of yours) from

us, for its pictures keep me distracted during my prayer.”
Related by Al-Bukhari.

cdl hin : ‏وفيه‎ GE ‏قصّة أَلْبحَايّة أبي‎ Bes ‏عَلَى‎ Lady 8
«tee

259. Bukhari and Mulsim agreed upon the narration of “A’ish-
ah (RAA): concerning the story of the Inbijéniyah of Aba Jahm,

which has the phrase, “It has distracted me in my prayer.”

٠١ ‏إلى‎ pital O85 Hal ‏عَلَيْه وَسَلَمَ : «ليتتهنٌ‎
«pd ‏رَرَاه‎ gil

260. Narrated Jabir bin Samurah (RAA): ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Those who raise their sight toward the sky
during the prayer, should stop doing so, otherwise their

sight will not return to them.” Related by Muslim.

tis Le ‏سْمِعْت رَسُولَ الله‎ ie - te th ‏رضي‎ - se ‏عَنْ‎ GZ
cote ta BY; ‏طَمَام‎ ae, Be Ve : U8 sky oe

261. Narrated ‘A'ishah (RAA): ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah
say, “No one should pray when the the food is served nor

‎Al-Bukhari reported on the authority of “A’ishah (RAA), The Prophet 3‏ ليو
‎prayed in a Kkamisah (a woolen cloak, which had some designs on it,‏
‎and it was given to him as a present from Abd Jahm). He said, ‘Take it‏
‎(the cloak) back to Abd Jahm and bring me his Inbijéniyah (a wo-‏
‎olen plain cloak brought from Inbijan) as this kkamisah has distrac-‏
‎ted me in my prayer.”‏

‎95- In the narration of al-Bulchari, “or their sight may be taken away.”

‎94

when one needs to answer the call of nature.”%

7 وَعَنْ أبي 4 - أن ابي صَلّى الله ‎ples le‏ قال :

«اقتَاوْبْ من الشَيْطّان » فَإذَا ‎Clu‏ أُحَدْكُمْ مليَكْظمْ مَا ‎eG AEE‏ رَوَاُ ‎ple‏ »

Has ‏«في‎ :

262. Narrated AbG Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 3 said,
“Yawning is caused by the devil, so if any of you yawns
(during prayer) he should stop it as much as he can,” Related
by Muslim and At-Tirmidhi who added in his narration, “During
prayer.”

Chapter VI: Mosques

263. Narrated ‘A'ishah (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
ordered that mosques be built in residential areas and that they
should be kept clean and be perfumed.’ Related by Ahmad and
Abd Dawéd and At-Tirmidhi,

264. Narrated Abd Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 4% said,
“Allah cursed the Jews (because) they took the graves of
their Prophets as mosques.” Agreed upon. In the narration of
Muslim, “and the Christians.”

96- Holding himself back from urinating or deficating. That is why it is bet-
ter to relieve oneself first before praying.

95
265. Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated on the authority of
‘Rishah (RAA)If any pious (religious) man dies among them,
they would build a mosque(place or worship) over his grave.”
Also in this narration, “They are the worst of creatures

(people).”

tn Lo ean: U6 - tho - A ‏رَعَنْ أبي‎ 5
‏الْحَدِيث‎ amt ‏من سَوَارِي‎ Willey ‏فَربَطُوهُ‎ By ‏فَجَامَس‎ Le ply

266. Narrated Abd Hurairah (RAA): ‘The Prophet ‏قله‎ sent so-
me horses (i.e. horsemen), who brought back a man” (they had

captured). They tied him to one of the pillars of the Mosque.’ Agre-
ed upon.

‎ee tn oy - Sey ay‏ 9ر364

‎A ‏فيه » وفيه‎ NS
267. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): “Umar (RAA) passed by
Hassén® when he was reciting poetry in the mosque, so he looked

‎at him(in a disapproving manner). Thereupon Hassan said, ‘I used
to recite (poetry) in this mosque, in the presence of someone better

‎than you (i.e. the Prophet #8).” Agreed upon.

‎oe Wy ‏صَلَى‎ in yo, ‏قَالَ‎ : LG eC, ns - hy ta
‏الله‎ W359 : ab th ‏في‎ the ‏شد‎

‎ee ‏«مَنْ‎ ley

‎91 'Thumdmah Ibn Uthal al-Hanali, see Hadith no. 121

‎98. Imam ag-San ‘Ant says (in his book Subul as-Saldm; the interpretation of
Buliigh al-Mardm) that this Hadith is a proof that itis permissible to tie
a captive in the mosque even if he was a disbeliever.

‎99. The poet of the Prophet #8.

‎96
268. Narrated AbG Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet ‏ولك‎ said, “If
you hear a man announcing in the mosque, about some-
thing which he has lost, he should say to him: May Allah
not return it to you, for mosques are not built for that rea-
son.” Related by Muslim.

PUG ploy ele ‏رَسُولَ الله صَلَى الله‎ Of - ‏عَنْهُ‎ thy - ey

له : ‎WIV‏ تجارتك»

269. Narrated Abé Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 3 said, “If
you see someone buying or selling in the mosque, say to

him: ‘May Allah not give you any profit in your trading.”
Related by an-Nasa’t and At-Tirmidhi.

6 وَسُولُ لله صلى الله

فيهًا». رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ »

oo) - He ‏بن‎ SEL
‏الْحُدُودُ في‎ gays pL ce

‎hy‏ ذَاوْد سند ضَعيف

‎270. Narrated Hakim bin Hiz4m (RAA): The Prophet 38 said,
“Prescribed legal punishment (Hudiid) are not to be carried
out in a mosques, nor should retaliation be taken in them”
Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawéd with a weak chain of narrators.

‎LG sy‏ الله ‎ye‏ - قلت : «أصيب ‎oye‏ الحندق

‎271. Narrated ‘A’ishah (RAA): ‘Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh was injured
on the Day (battle) of al-Khandaq (Battle of the Trench) and the

‎Messenger of Allah 32 pitched a tent in the mosque to be able to

‎100- Le. may Allih make this trading unsuccessful,

‎57

‎ts ‏ربلرغ‎
visit him (easily).1! Agreed upon.

A Bi ges pkey . be ‏لل‎ 5 Sly: ey - vt
. ‏متفق عَلَيْه‎ ened. cach ‏يَبُونَ في‎ 5d

272, Narrated “Alshah (RAY: ‘I saw the Messenger of Allah
screening me while I was looking at the Abyssinians playing in
the mosque (with their spears)...” (part of a Hadith). Agreed upon.

yb BLES — yr

BE ‏عندي». الْحَديث.‎ CIS

bE th ‏بَاء في‎ Yow ay &

273. Narrated ‘A’ishah (RAA): ‘A black slave girl had a tent in
the mosque (she used to slecp in the mosque), and she used to
come to me, and we would talk.’ Agreed upon.

8 ahs Wy

274, Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): Allah's Messenger 22
said, “Spitting in the mosque is considered a sin, which is
expiated by burying it (the spit ).” Agreed upon.

: QB - ae aio - ey te

i %y ited foal ‏الْمسَاجد».‎ Binh AE ‏«لاً تقُومٌ السّاعَةٌ حّى‎

275. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): Allah's Messenger ‏يل‎
‎said, “The Hour will not be established before people vie
with one another about (building) mosques.” Related by the
five Imams except for At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as
Sahil

‎wanted Sa’d to be in a place close to his‏ يك ‎As the Messenger of Allah‏ لمر
‎house, so it would be easy to visit him and look after him.‏

‎98
‎aye al‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلَى الله

‎cea

‎So le is

‎58 ‏أو‎ el ‏الْمسَاجد».‎ ae Oh ty :

‎276. Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RAA): Allah's Messenger 3% said,
“I was not commanded to build high and lofty mosques.”
Related by Aba Dawid, and it was rendered authentic by Ibn
Hibban.

‎Ou - Se ‏الله‎ sy

‎owt sy ‏“لالس‎

‏8 رَسُولٌ الله ‎Lo‏ الله ‎oie‏

‎000

‎» ‏أخور أمتي‎ le Ge bs Le 25

‎yn JES‏ التسلحد»

‎SN bey Roary » SLE ‏أبُو دود‎ 55

‎277. Narrated Anas Ibn Malik (RAA): Allah's Messenger ‏يك‎
‎said, “The rewards of my followers were presented to me,
so much so that even the reward for removing a speck of
dust by a person from the mosque (was presented to me).”
Related by Aba Dawad, At-Tirmidhi, and it was graded as auth-
entic by Ibn Khuzaimah.

‎Spy

‎278. Narrated Abd Qatadah (RAA): The Messenger of Allah 38
said, “When one of you enters the mosque, he should pray
two Rak’at before he sits down.” Agreed upon.

‎DLN ‏صمّة‎ OL

‎Chapter VU: The Description of how Prayer
is to be performed

‎te an:‏ - أن ‎<n‏ صَلّى ال
ذا مت ‎Seal J‏ فَأسْبعْ الْوُضُوءَ » ‎pei‏

So: pled stay BU SN;

279. Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): The Prophet 38 said,
“When you get up for prayer, perform ablution properly
and then face the Qiblah and say Takbir (Allahu Akbar) and
then recite whatever you can from the (verses of the) Qur'an,

and then bow until you repose therein!™%in your rukii’). After

that come up again until you are standing upright, and then
prostrate until you repose therein, (in your prostration), then
raise your head and sit and repose (remain motionless for a
while), then prostrate (again) and repose in your pros-
tration. Do that in all of your prayers.” Related by the seven
ImAms, and the wording is Al-Bukhari’s. Ibn Majah transmitted
the following through the chain of narrators of Muslim,“and then
come up again(from rwka Juntil you repose in your standing”

280. Ahmad and Ibn Hibban reported on the authority of

Rifa’ah bin Rafi’ a similar narration which also says, ‘and then
come up again(from rua Juntil you repose in your standing”

epi ‏ترْحعَ‎ & walt ‏«فأقم‎ : 4, ١
281. Ahmad has in one of his narrations, “Straighten your

back until the bones in your spine return to their places
(the spine must be upright).”

Bey Gp : ‏رافع‎ of Bu, ‏وَلتّسَائيّ وأبي 596 من حَديث‎ — ray
‏الى - » ثم يُكَبْرَ الى د‎ AOS oy ‏يسبع‎ BS

102. Which means that one should not be hasty to lift his head,rather remain
motionless for a moment and say the supplications slowly while concen-
trating on what one is doing.

100
‎Hy‏ ويفني ‎Wy, bad ot Uae OT Diy Gy ee‏ فَاحْمَد الله

‎lis, B55

‎282. An-Nasa’i and Ab Dawid reported on the authority of
Riff’ah bin Rafi’, “The prayer of anyone of you is not perfect.
unless he performs ablution perfectly, as Allah Glorified be
He ordered him to do. Then he should utter the Takbir and
praise Allah, the Exalted.” This narration also says, “If you
know some verses from the Qur'an then recite them, or else
praise Allah (say Alhamdu-lillah), say the Takbir (Allahu Ak-

‎bar) and the Tahlil (14 ilaha illallah).%

‎eS BL hy 2555 NG — var‏ وَبمًا سَاءَ الله

‎283. In the narration of Aba Dawid, “Then recite the “Mo-

‎ther of the Book” (al-Fétihah) (i.e. the first sarah or the open-

‎ing chapter of the Qu’an) and then as much as Allah makes
easy for you (to read from the Qur’an).”

‎284, In the narration of Ibn Hibban, “Then (recite) as much
as you wish.”

‎108. Basically, prayer is not valid unless the Fétihah is read (in Arabic) in
each Rak ‘ah, whieh is the consensus of the Scholars. But if the person
finds difficulty in reciting it in Arabic or is dumb or illiterate, or any
other acceptable excuse, then he should try to say any other verse from
the Qur'an, or say it behind someone who can recite. If he still can’t,
then it is permissible for him to say Tusbih, Takbtr and Tahitl

‎101
eds ‏وَقَعَد عَلَى‎ SN ‏وئصّب‎ oad LG, G5 ‏اليَكْمَة الأعيرة‎

285. Narrated ‏تطخ‎ Humaid as-Sé‘idi, ‘I saw the Messenger of
Allah (in his prayer), when he says the opening Takbir (of the pra-
yer) he would raise his hands up to his shoulder level. When he

bows for Rukit” he would place his hands on both knees! and his

back would be bent straight.!° When he lifted his head (from

rukit’) he would straighten his back until all the vertebrate took
their normal positions. When he prostrated, he placed both his
hands on the ground and his fingers would neither be spread nor
clasped together, while his toes would be directed toward the
Qiblah. When he sat in the second rak’ah (after two rak’ét) he sat

on his left foot and kept his right foot upright. When he sat in
the last rak‘ah, he would put his left foot (over the right) and put,
his right foot upright (over the left 1?) and sit upon his posterior,
neither inclining to the right or the left.” Related by al-Bukhari.

Dh ed ‏ْن أبي طالب - رضي الله عَنْهُ - عَنْ رَسُول‎ een

eet ‏للدي قَطَرَ‎ yay Cag : Jb SEA I ‏قام‎ tow LAs,
oH AWAY ‏أنت الْمَلكُ‎ Sth » ‏الْمُسْلمِينَ‎ Gon SF ‏وَالأرْض» إلى‎
. ‏ليل‎ Bee ‏ذلك في‎ Way, ‏في‎ LL ‏آخيره . روَاهُ‎ Fale uh

286. Narrated “Ali bin Abi Talib (RAA): When Allah's Messen-
ger 28 stood up for prayer he said, he would say (as on opening

104. ‘The hands should be placed firmly on the knees.

105- Itis the Sunnah in Ruka’ to make the height of the head the same level
as that of the hips. The back should be straight as ‘A’ishah (RAA) said,
‘It he bowed 3¢ his head would be neither risen nor lowered, but rather
between the two positions, ‘All (RAA) said, “If you put a cup of water on
the back of the Prophet, 38 while he was bowing, its contents would not
spill.” His head would be neither.

108- He would place his left foot on its side while sitting on it. The right foot
‘would be resting on the bottom of its toes with the heel upright.

107- The left foot in this case would emerge from under the right one, which
is in an upright position

102
supplication"), “I have turned my face towards the One Who

created the heavens and the earth!®.

Until he says, ‘and I

am of those who have submitted (i.e. the Muslims). 0 Allah,
You are the Sovereign, there is none worthy of worship but

You. You are my Lord and I am Your slave...etc!!™ Related
by Muslim.

40 وَعَنْ أبي ‎oh‏ - رَضي الله ‎He‏ - قَالَ : كَانَ 25 ‎et Le ah‏
‎filly sch 3‏ » الهم نقني من

‘ ins

287, Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): ‘When the Prophet 38
made his opening Takbir, he would be quiet for a little while
before he started his recitation (of the Qur'an). I asked him, (about
what he says between Takbir and recitation),’ He said, “I say: Oh
Allah, make the distance between me and my sins as far as

108. This is called Du‘@' al-Istiftah (opening supplication).

309- The rest of this supplication says, “and the earth as a true monoth-
cist and Muslim, and I am not of those who associate partners
with Allah (polytheists). Verily my prayers, my sacrifice, my life
and my death, are dedicated for the sake of Allah, the Lord of
the worlds, Who has no partner. Thus I have been commanded
and [am among those who have submitted (the Muslims).”

110- The rest of the supplication says, “Oh Allah, You are the Sovereign,

there is none worthy of worship but You. You are my Lord and 1
am Your slave. I have done injustice to myself and I admit my
sin. Forgive all of my sins, surely no one can forgive sins but
You. Guide me to the most perfect of morals (AkhIaq), for none
guides to its perfection but You. Divert the worst of it (evil mor-
als) away from me, as no one can divert the worst of it but You. I
am here at Your beck and call (present and ready to obey all Your
commands). All good is in Your Hands, and evil is not attributed
to You. I am (created) by You, and 1 am (returning back) unto You.
You are the Most Blessed, the Most Exalted. I seek Your forgive-
ness and unto You I repent."Related by Muslim, Ahmad, at-Tirmidht
and others.

103
You have made the distance between the East from the
West. Oh Allah, purify me from my sins as a white garment
is cleansed of dirt. Oh Allah, wash off my sins with snow,
rain and hail.” Agreed upon.

pate : Ue ‏أنهُ كَانَ‎ - es Les -

288. Narrated ‘Umar (RAA): that he used to say 38, “Glory
be to You Oh Allah and praise. Blessed is Your Name and
Exalted is Your majesty. There is none worthy of worship
but You.” Related by Muslim with a disconnected chain of narra-
tors. But ad-Darqutni related it and connected it to ‘Umar (RAA).

289. The five ImAms reported on the authority of Aba Sa‘td

al-Khudri that the Messenger of Allah 3%, used to say after the
opening Takbir, “I seek refuge in Allah from Satan. From his
prickling (whispering), spittle and puffing.”

200, Narrated “A'ishah (RAA): Allah's Messenger 3€ used to
start the prayer with Takbir and the recitation of ‘All praise be to

104
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, (Adhamdu lilléhi ‏لتططمم‎ ‘Alamin).
When he bowed (for rukii’) his head would be neither risen nor
lowered, but would be between those two positions. When he rose
his head from ruhii‘, he would not prostrate until he stood up with
his back in an erect position. When he lifted his head from pros-
tration, he sat up (for a moment) before prostrating a second time
At the end of each two rak @t, he would recite the Tahiyah (Tasha-

hhud)"?? and he used to sit on his left foot with his right foot upri-

ght. He prohibited us from sitting in the way of the devil!2,or that

a man stretches his forearms (on the ground in his prostration)
like a wild beast He would then complete his prayer with the
Taslim (saying to the right and to the left ‘Peace be upon you and
the Mercy of Allah.” Related by Muslim.

291. Narrated Ibn Umar (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to raise his hands to his shoulder level when he started his
prayer, when he said Takbir (for making ‏قبت‎ and also when he
lifted his head from ‏”قي‎ Agreed upon.

41 رفسي ‎AS: Bilas ee‏ يدَيْهِ حَتّى يُحَاذِيَ بهمًا

292. In the narration of Abd Humaid, reported by Aba Dawad,
“He raised his hands up to his shoulder level, and then would say
Takbir.”

111. Tashakhud means the Testimony of faith (see Hadith no. 334).

112. This way of sitting is called 10:6: Imam ag-San ‘ni in ‘Subul as-Sala
4m, mentioned two types of Iq’a': one in which one sits with the buttocks
on the heels, and with the top of the toes and knees on the ground (as
mentioned above), and this was accepted by some scholars. ‘The second
type is where one sits with his buttocks on the ground, with his palms
down and his knees drawn up and thighs erect (like the sitting of a dog)
which is totally prohibited.

105
rith, a narration similar to that of Ibn ‘Umar, but he said, “...he
raised his hands until they(the fingertips) were level with the tops
of his ears (i.e. when saying Takbir).

C28 hy

dh he Be ete ‏َال‎ BS ‏إن‎ uy ey “4
EIR EBT oe le dow ‏عَلَى‎ 2h ‏يده‎
‎294. Narrated Wa’il bin Hujr: “I prayed with the Prophet ‏يك‎

and he placed his right hand over his left hand (and placed them)
on his chest.” Related by Ibn Khuzaimah.

dn oo ‏الله‎ ys ‏وَعَنْ عُبَادةَ ين الصّامت قَالَ : قَالَ‎ 6
EE ‏القرآن».‎ fl Ge ys Be ‏«لاً‎
‎295. Narrated ‘Ubadah bin as-Samit: ‘The Messenger of Allah

® said, “No prayer (is accepted) for one who does not recite
the Fatihah (the opening chapter of the Qur’n).” Agreed upon.

296. In a version by Ibn Hibban and ad-Darqutni, “A prayer
in which the Fatihah was not recited, is not valid.”

297. In another narration by ‘Ubadah Ibn As-Samit, “Maybe
you recite (Qur'an) behind your Im4m (when you are praying
Jamé‘ah)? We said, ‘Yes. The Messenger of Allah then said,
“Read only the Fatihah, as the prayer of the one who does
not read it, is not valid.”

106
الْحَمْدُ لله رب الْعَالَمِينَ!.

298. Narrated Anas ‏مطل‎ Malik: ‘The Messenger of Allah 38,
Aba Bakr and ‘Umar, used to start the prayer with, ‘Alhamdu
lillahi Rabil ‘Alamin’ (AN praise be to Allah, Lord of the Wo-

‎Agreed upon.‏ لد زعام

‏5 زَادَ مُسَْلمٌ : «لآ ‎oa} Oy) SG‏ الله
‎ast BV;‏

‎299. Anas added in the narration reported by Muslim, ‘but I
never heard any of them reciting Bismillahi -ir-Rahman -ir-
Rahim (In the name of Allah, the Most Benificient, the Most

‎Merciful) at the beginning of recitation or at its end.”4

‏٠س ‎yy Sy‏ لأَحْمَد وَالتسَائِي وان خُرَئْمَة : «لا يَجْهَرُونَ ‎al‏ الله

‎« {pet Mn cao

‎300. Anas also narrated, ‘They would not recite reciting ‘Bis-

‎millahi -ir-Rahman -ir-Rahim’(In the name of Allah, the Most.

‎Benificient, the Most the Merciful) loudly.” Related by Ahmad, an-
Nas@’i and Ibn Khuzaimah.

‎iS MP AIT 0‏ أون». وَعَلَى هَذَا ‎io!‏ ال

‎301. In another version by In Khuzaimah, Anas said, ‘They
used to recite it silently.” This explains the negation in the version
of Muslim ‘but I never heard any of them reciting Bismillahi ~ir-
Rahman ~ir-Rahin ........’ Hadith no. 299.

‎113- He means they do not say the Basmalah aloud, but read it silently
before they read the Fétiah, as is mentioned in the following Ahédith
(no. 300, 300.

‎114. He may be referring to the end of the Fatihah, as they would start rea-
ding other saras or verses from the Qur’én, but again they would not
recite the Basmatah aloud.

‎107
th ‏وض‎ HA ‏»قال ميت وا أي‎ Satyr. 1
: Ay S oti ‏بم‎ ee ga ‏اله‎ py 1

& ‏م‎ be Be = ONS ay 2 a> : Ou [v: 03 (oh ‘oh

ety «Ea

W255 oy le ‏الله‎ Le ‏برَسُول الله‎

302. Narrated Nu‘aim al-Mujmir, ‘I prayed behind Aba Hura-
irah and he recited ‘Bismillahi -ir-Rahman -ir-Rahim,’ and
then he recited the Fatihah until he recited, ‘Nor of those who
went astray,"(i.e. the last words of al-Fatihah) then he said, ‘Amin’.

43 Whenever he prostrated or got up from‘his sitting (after the

two prostrations), he would say ‘Allahu Akbar’ When he concluded
his prayer by saying the Taslim (saying to the right and to the left,
‘Peace be upon you and the Mercy of Allah’), he would say (to us),
‘By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, my prayer is the most sim-
ilar to that of the Prophet 38, among all of you.” Related by An-
Nasa’ and Ibn Khuzaimah,

303. Narrated Abi Hurairah (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah

38 said, “When you recite al-Fatihah recite Bismillahi
Rahman -ir-Rahim’ as it is one of its verses.” Related by ad-

Daraquini, and said that it is only traced back to a Companion
and not to the Prophet 3%.

“ek prey ty ‏قو‎

‎He Gy ot a‏ وَقَالَ : «آمين». ره
‎Narrated Aba Hurairah (RAA): ‘Whenenver The Messen-‏ ,304

‎115. The word Amin is not part of the Fétihak, but it is a supplication mea-
ning “O Allah respond or answer what we have just said.” It is always
said at the conclusion of sitrat al-Fatihah.

‎108
ger of Allah 38 finished reciting the Mother of the Book ‘al-Fa-
tihah’ (in prayer), he used to raise his voice saying Amfn.’ Related
by ad-Daraqutni and al-Hakim.

305. Abd Dawdd and At-Tirmidhi related a similar Hadith on
the authority of Wa’il Ibn Hujr.

- ‏أرق‎ de ‏لل‎ eet 0

» ‏الْحَديث . رَرَهُ أَحْمَدُ‎ Ten “go ‏بالله‎ Sy 5 Sy 7 ip 45 Caf 1

‎gles « 5‏ و

‎306. Narrated “Abdullah bin Abi Awfa (RAA): ‘A man came to

‎the Messenger of Allah 38 and said, ‘I cannot memorise anything
from the Qur'an, so teach me something which is sufficient for me

‎(to say in prayer). The Messenger of Allah 3 said to him, “say,
‘Subhanallah, wal-hamdu lillaah, wa ‏هآ‎ iléha illallah, wa-
‏سلفلا‎ akbar, wa 14 hawala wa 16 Quwata illé billah-‘Aliy-
yil‘Adheem, (Glory be to Allah, and Praise be to Allah!
There is none worthy of worship but Allah, Alléh is the
Greatest, and there is no power nor might except by Allab’s
leave, the Exalted, the Mighty.” Part of the Hadith is related
by Ahmad, Aba Dawad, an-Nasa’i and was rendered authentic by
Tbn Hibban, ad-Daraqutni and al-Hakim.

‎307. Narrated Aba Qatadah (RAA): ‘Allah's Messenger ‏ع2‎
‎used to lead us in prayer, and he would recite al-Fatihah followed

‎109
by two other Siras (i.e. a sarah in each rak ah) -in the first two
Rak at - of the Dhuhr and “Asr prayers. Sometimes we were able

to hear a verse or so (of what he was reading). He used to 3, pro-
long the first rak“ah more than the second, and he would recite ‏لله‎
‎Fétihah in the last two rak’at (the third and the fourth). Agreed

upon.

SD ORR, ‏من ذلك‎ ate ‏عَلَى‎ es
308. Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): ‘We used to estim-

ate how long Allah’s Messenger 3€ stood (while reciting verses
from the Qur’én after the Fatihah) in the Dhwhr and “Asr prayers.
We estimated that he stood in the first two rak’ét of the Dhuhr
prayer as long as it takes to recite “Alif Lam Mim, The revela-
tion of the Book(the Qur’én)..”(i.e. Sirah as-Sajdah, no. 32).
He stood half that time in the last two rak @t, of the Dhuhr pra-
yer. In the first two rak @t of the ‘Asr prayer, he stood as long as
he did in the last two rak dt of the Dhuhr prayer, and in the last
two (of the ‘Asr prayer), he stood about half that time.” Related
by Muslim.

5

poe ey Fliers ea UB ‏وَسَلمَ من‎ ale th

309. Narrated Sulaiman bin Yasar (RAA): ‘A man's used to
prolong the first two rak at of the Dhwhr prayer, shorten the “Asr

116- Imam al-Baghwi in his book ‘Shark as-Sunnah’ said that this man was
‘Amro bin Salamah, who was the governor of Madinah at that time.

110
prayer and recite short siiras of the mufas-sal!”” of the Qur’én
inthe Maghrib prayer. In the ‘Ishé’ prayer, he would recite from

the medium siras‘’8, and in the Fajr prayer he would read from

at-Tiwél.9 Aba Hurairah(RAA) then said, ‘I have not prayed
behind a man whose prayer is more similar to that of the Prophet

38 than that man.” Rendered by an-Nasa%i with a sound chain
of narrators.

fo di 305 tae» ‏فال‎ th gos -

Ba. ‏بالطور».‎ op gl

310, Narrated Jubair bin Mut‘im (RA): ‘I heard the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 reciting Strat at-Tér (no. 52) in the Maghrib pra-
yer.’ Agreed upon

eth Ln 5 08: ‏قَالَ‎ - ae ti ‏رضي‎ -
[tats EE pin Ride gles,

BE .]١ : ‏الإنسّان) [الإنستان‎ & AY

311, Narrated Aba “Wurairah (RAA): ‘Allah’s Messenger 3§
used to recite in the Fajr prayer on Friday, “Alif Lam Mim. The
revelation of the Book (the Qur’én)...” (i.e. Sarah as-Sajdah,
no. 32),and “Has there not been over man a period of time...”
(ie. Sarah al-Insan, no. 76). Agreed upon.

‎Spray -‏ حَديث ان مَسْعُود ‎ey:‏ ذلك
‎At-Tabarni related on the authority of Ibn Mas‘fid: ‘He‏ .812
‎used to do this continuously.”‏

‎117- The Siiras starting from (according to the strongest opinion) Qaf (no. 50)
to the end of the Holy Qur'an.

‎118- This includes the mi'tn (Siras of around and over 100 verses), and the
‘mathdint (come after the mi‘in up to 06/7

‎119. The first seven long Siiras in the Qur'an, and some scholars add Siiras
no, 8 and 9 (as there is no Basmalah between al-Anfail and at-Tawbah).
‘They have been called at-Tiwét! (the long) as they are the longest Siiras
in the Qur'an.

‎ui
‎Lay ir‏ حُدَيفَةَ - رضي الله 45 - قال

‎uss ‏لا‎

‎belt sy sd el gh
313. Narrated Hudhaifah (RAA):1 prayed with the Prophet

‎38, whenever he came to a verse that mentioned mercy, he would
stop and ask Allah for His blessings, and whenever he came to a
verse that mentioned punishment, he would seek refuge in Allah
from the Hell-fire.” Related by the five Imams. At-Tirmidhi rende-
red it Hasan (good).

‎din fo ‏ال َسُولُ الله‎
ESE toes ‏رَاكعًا أو‎ od ‏ألا َرأ‎ Lg Jy ‏«ألا‎ : ply oe

‎| ‏رَضِي‎ - yl gh ey 4

‎said, “I was forbidden from reciting the ‏مقعم‎ whether in
a state of ‏“مله‎ or in sujiid(prostration). When you perform
ruki’, Glorify Allah (say Glory to my Lord the most Great), and
in prostration, strive your best in making supplication, as
you are then entitled to have your supplication answered
(Allah willing). Related by Muslim.

‎ty Soo ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ ws ee - ge ths Gey, -

‏عفر بي» ‎ESE‏

‎315. Narrated “A’ishah (RAA): “Allah’s Messenger 3, used to
say in his rwka’ and sujtid (prostration), “Glory and praise is to
You, © Allah, our Lord. 0 Allah forgive me.” Agreed upon.

‎die dy fo ‏الله‎ 5 or

‏كَعْ نَم ‎i‏ : «سمع
الله لمن حمدة» حين ‎Ne SG‏ منَ لكوع » ‎SSE‏ 85 فم : «رينا ولت
‎Narrated Abd Hurairah (RAM): ‘When Allah's Reco‏ .316

3 got up to pray, he would say the Takbir while standing, then
say the Takbir when he bowed (for rukit’). When he rose from
‏“قطي‎ he would say, “Sami'al Lahu liman hamidah (Allah
hears those who send praises to Him)”, and while standing
with his back straight (after ruka’) he would say, “Rabbané wa
lakal-hamd (O Allah, our Lord! All praise is for You).” He
would then say the Takbir when going down to proatration, and
when he raised his head, then when he prostrated for the second
time he would say the Takbir one more time when he raised his
head from the second prostration. He would do this for all his pra-
yers, in each rak‘ah and he would also say the Takbir when he got
up from his sitting after praying two rak @t. Agreed upon.

الحنذى ‎EE‏ حين

t

‎Vy‏ — وَعَنْ أبي ستعيد الْحُدْرِيّ - رضي الله ‎te‏ - قال : كان رَسُول ‎ah‏ صَلّى

‎gle ‏مك الْجَدُ » رَوَاهُ‎ Adib Aas SY,
317. Narrated Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA): when ‏تطقللف'‎ Mes-

‎senger 48 raised his head from ‏“قبت‎ he would say, “Our Lord!
All praise is Yours. (A praise that) fills the heavens and the
earth, and fill what lies between them, and fills whatever
else, You wish, to be filled after that. You alone are deser-
ving of praise and majesty. This is the most truthful state-
ment that a servant has ever said, and we are all Your sla-
ves. © Allah, there is no one who may withhold what You
give, and there is no one, who may give what You have wit-
hheld. No fortune or prosperity(whether it be money, children,

‎113
power etc) will save or benefit its owner with You (it is only
Your merey and virtue that benefits anyone). Related by Muslim.

aaa ‏وأطراف‎ «575 » goad,
318. Narrated Ibn “Abbas (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah 38

said, “I was commanded to prostrate on seven bones (bodily

parts): the forehead” -and he pointed to his nose, hands, knees
and the ends of the feet (the toes).’ Agreed upon.

ع ومن اين ‎ob AY‏ رَسُولَ الله صَلَى ‎le tn‏ و ‎in‏ سَلُمَ ‎how‏ صَلّى
وَسَحَدَ ‎A Sd GE‏ ناض |
‎Narrated Ibn Buhainah (RAA), ‘Whenever the Messen-‏ .319
‎ger of Allah used to pray, he would keep his arms away from his‏
‎sides (when he prostrated), so that the whiteness of his armpits‏
‎was visible.” Agreed upon.‏

Mh ‏البرك أن عاب - رضي الله ل - قَالَ : قال ,25 صَلّى‎ go - tv

320. Narrated ‏'فعدظاله‎ bin “Azib (RAA): ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Whenever you prostrate, place the palms of
your hands (on the ground), and raise your elbows.” Related
by Muslim.

120- Imam al-Qurtbf said, ‘This shows that the forehead is the main part. on
which the face prostrates, and the nose is associated with it.’ Ibn Daaiq
al-Abd said, ‘This means that the Prophet ‏يأك‎ considered the forehead
and the nose as one part, otherwise, the parts of the body on which pros-
tration is performed would have been eight.’ This Hadith is further expl-
ained by the narration of an-Nasé’i, Ibn Tawas said, ‘And he put his
hand 26 on his forehead and he passed it over his nose and said, “This

one (part).”

114
صل الله عله ‎hey‏

‎OS OT‏ £55 بين ‎canted‏ و
‎Wa'il bin Hujr (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever the Messen-‏ ,321

‎ger of Allah 38 used to bow, he would separate his fingers (with
his hands pla-ced on his knees). When he prostrated, he would
keep his fingers toge-ther.’ Related by Al-Hakim.

‏ذا ‎ae‏ ضَمٌ أصَابعَة». ‎G5‏ الْحَاكم

‎322, “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘I saw the Messenger of Allah
+ praying while sitting cross-legged.”2!Related by An-Nasa’i and
Ibn Kh-uzaimah graded it as Sahth.

‎5 «ge  يندْاو‎ AOS » ‏لي‎ abt Sah
‏الْحَاكم‎ B55 055 ‏وَالَقَطُ لأبي‎ es Yaa S ay,
328. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘Between the two prostrati-

‎ons, the Messenger of Allah 42 used to say, “O Allah, forgive me,
have mercy on me, guide me, grant me well-being, and pro-

‎vide for me.” Related by the four Imams except for An-Nas@’i,
and the wording is from Abi Dawdd. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎se ‏روه‎

‎324, Malik bin al-Huwairith (RAA) narrated that he saw the
Messenger of Allah 2% praying. If he was praying the odd rah‘at
(the first or the third), he used to sit for a moment (a quick sitting

‎after the second prostration) before he got up.” Related by Al-
Bukhari,

‎121. This was when the Prophet # fell off his horse and his ankle was dis-
located (Imam as-San’Ani in Subul as-Salam.)

‎115
325. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 stood

in humble supplication reciting the Qunat!®? for a whole month

asking Alléh to punish some of the Arab tribes, and then he stop-
ped (making this supplication).”12 Agreed upon.

ارقطني نحو من وَجنه ‎GPT‏ و

«رَأًا في ‎tan‏ 1
‎LEY‏ حَتّى قَارَقَ ‎WH‏

326. Ahmad and Ad-Daraqutni related a similar Hadith (on
the authority of Anas) but with a different chain of narrators. The

narration says, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 kept on making Quniit

during the Fajr prayer until he left this world."124

122 Qunfit is a special supplication made in certain prayers while standing
after raising one’s head from bowing. It is usually done in the Witr pra-
yer, or in the second ra ‘ak of the Fajr prayer.

123. They are the tribes of Ra’l and Dhakwan. The Messenger of Allah 38
sent almost 70 of his Companions (who had memorized the Qur’dn), to
those tribes to teach them Islam, There was a peace treaty between
them and the Messenger of Allah 48, but they killed the seventy men.
He was very sad for the loss of his Companions and spent a whole
month reciting this supplication. This is proof that it is permissible to
make Qunit, reciting the supplication aloud (in any of the five prayers)
when Muslims are faced with calamities.

124. What the Messenger 2 stopped (as mentioned in the first Hadith) is his
supplication asking Allfh to punish the people who killed his Compan-
ions. As for what he kept doing, most. scholars are of the opinion that
what Anas meant by Qundt in this Hadith is that the Prophet 3% would
stand (after raising his head from rua’) for some time making supplica-
tion and dhikr (remembering Allah), in the Fajr prayer, until he died
Anas himself and the four Khulafa’, did not observe this Qunae in the
Fajr prayer after the death of the Prophet 38 which supports the opinion
of the scholars, as they would not abandon something that the Messen-
ger of Allah 3 continued doing all his life, so that it becomes part of his
Sunnah

116
‎Mey rv‏ - رضي الله ‎Me‏ - : وَسَلُمَ ‎Vow‏ يعنت

‎Op SSS g's ish Gaus yy
327. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 32 would
not stand for the Qunét (in prayer) unless he was supplicating for
or against certain people.” Ibn Khuzaimah graded it to be Sahih.
: ‏قال : لأبي‎ - 1 lh ‏رضي‎ GAM ‏طَارِق‎ J es ‏وَعَنْ‎
‎(SS ‏وأبي‎ hy ‏رَسُولٍ الله صَلَى الله ه‎ Cas
«355 ‏إل أبَا‎ tad yy

‎328. Sa‘d bin Tariq Al-Ashja‘i (RAA) narrated, ‘I said to my

‎father, “Father, you have prayed behind Allah’s Messenger #8, Aba
Bakr, Umar, Uthman and ‘Ali. Did they observe making Qunit
in Fajr prayer?” He said, ‘No son, it is something that has been
innovated (i.e. a Bid‘ah).” Related by the five Imams except for
Aba Dawad.

‎yrs‏ الْحَسّن بن

‎: ‏من وَْه آرَ في آخره‎
329. Al-Hasan bin “Ali (RAA) narrated, ‘I said to Alléh’s Mes-

‎senger 38, “Teach me some words to say when making Qunit in
the Witr prayer. He taught me, “Oh Allah, guide me with those
whom You have guided, and strengthen me with those ‏نطب‎
‎om You have given strength. Take me into Your care. Bless
me in what You have given me. Protect me from the evil
You have ordained. Surely You have commanded and are
not commanded, and none whom You have committed to

‎117
Your care shall be humiliated You are Blessed, Our Lord
and Exalted.” Related by the five Imams. At-Tabarani and Al-
Baihagi added, “and none whom You have taken as an
enemy shall be honored.” An-Nasa’i added thr-ough another
chain of narrators, “May the Peace and Blessings of Allah,
the Almighty be upon His Prophet.”

330. Ibn ‘Abbas narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 used to
teach us a supplication to recite in the Quniit of the Fajr prayer.”
Related by Al-Baihaqi, but with a weak chain of narrators.

١نم ‎ey‏ هُرَيْرَةَ - ‎ey‏ - 6 : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ْلّى ‎oe‏
‎ie: hy‏ سَجَدَ أُحَدكمٌ 2 دَيْه قبل ‎«ES,‏

pod a YY

Pe ‏وائل بن‎ tah ‏ى من‎
331. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Prophet 8 said,
“When one of you prostrates, he should not kneel down in
his prayer as a camel does (i.c. put his knees down before his
hands). He must put his hands first (on the ground) before he
puts his knees down.” Related by the three Iméms. It is stro-
nger than the Hadith narrated by Wa’il Ibn Hujr.

GE CESS Bay ‏سَحَدَ‎ Up :

3

c= ‏عَلْهُ‎ let ‏رضي الله‎ - Sab ‏أن‎
‎ae

332. Wa’il Ibn Hujr (RAA) narrated, ‘I saw the Prophet 35
place his knees down when he prostrated before he put his hands.’
Related by the four Imams. The reason behind the strength of the
previous narration (of Abé Hurairah) is that it is supported by
another narration on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) which was
graded as Sahth by Tbn Khuzaimah. It was also related by Al-

118
Bukhari but the chain of narrators is only connected to 38
(RAA) and does not reach the Prophet 2 126.

ed Le ‏رَسُولَ الله‎ ob = ge ‏الله‎  - ‏عُمَرَ‎ Ne ore
1 GRY! ‏ثلي‎ du Hh, IS ‏أصابعه‎ Lap
333. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever the Messenger of
Allah ‏يل‎ sat for Tashahhud, ‏تعن‎ he would place his left hand on his

left knee and his right hand on his right knee and he would form a
ring like (fifty-three) and point with his index finger (the right
hand is held closed in this case, with the thumb touching the side
of the index finger, which alone is extended to point with it.) Rel-

ated by Muslim. In another version by Muslim, ‘And he 38 would
close his hand (clench his fingers) and point with his index finger.’

4 وَعَنْ عَبْد الله ‎ofa by‏ - رضي الله ‎ge ch ci: i - Se‏ اللّه

‎BLN oe i,‏ عَلَِكَ ‎a‏ وَرَحْمَةُ ‎Boy di‏ السلا ليا وَعَلَى
عبّاد الله المكّالحينَ » أَشْهَدُ ‎OF‏ لا إل إل الله 4
‎rr. “4‏

‎Of gah Saya ‏خْدَهُ لآ‎

‎125. The consensus of the scholars supports the Hadith of Ibn Hujr. Imam
Tonul Qaiyim is also of the opinion that one should put his knees down
first. Imém An-Nawawi said though that it seems that no opinion is
more prefe-rable than the other, i. both Akddith are accepted, and one
can go down in any way described

‎126- The Testification of faith, which is recited in the final sitting of the
prayer.

‎119
334. “Abdullah Ibn ‏فدلا‎ 54 (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah's Messen-

ger 38 turned around to us and said, “When any of you prays
{and sits for the final Tashahhud) then he should say, ‘All gre-
etings of humility are for Allah, and all prayers (or more
generally all acts of worship) and good deeds (all good things,
sayings, praising Allah, dhikr of Allah ete...) are all for Allah.
Peace be upon you, O Prophet, and the mercy of Allah and
His blessings be upon you. Peace be upon us and upon the
righteous slaves of Allah. I bear witness that none is wor-
thy of worship but Allah, and I bear witness that Muham-
mad is His slave and His Messenger.’ Then you may choose
whatever supplication you like best and recite it.” Agreed
upon, and the wording is from Al-Bukhari.

In the narration of An-Nas@’i on the authority of Ibn Mas‘éd, ‘We
used to say (so and so) before the recitation of the Tashahhud was
made obligatory upon us (as mentioned above).”

In the narration of Ahmad, Ibn Mas‘éd says that the Prophet 38
taught him the recitation of the Tashakhud and ordered him to
teach it to other people.

٠١ ‏الله صَلَى‎ ys ‏«كَانَ‎ : JE ‏عباس‎ Me ply re
. ‏إلى آخيره‎ ob fh ‏الْمُبَارَكَاتْ الصُلوَات‎ ee) aed

335. Tbn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to teach us to say in the Tushahhud, ‘Blessed greetings,

prayers and good deeds are all for Allah ete...(the rest is the
same as the one mentioned in Hadith 334.) Related by Muslim.

336. Fadalah bin ‘Ubaid (RAA) narrated, “Allah’s Messenger

120
38 heard a man supplicating during his ‏"كرمع رمدم‎ but he did not

praise Allah and did not send prayers upon the Prophet 38. There-

upon the Messenger of Allah 8 said, “This one has been hasty
(ie. in making his supplication before praising Allah and praying
for His Prophet). He then called him and said, “When one of you
prays, begin by praising Allah. Then say prayers upon the
Prophet, and then supplicate what you wish from Allah.”
Related by Ahmad and the three Imams: At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Hibban

yar

‎as‏ - رضي لله

‎» pl ‏عَلَى‎ ote ‏صل عَلَى مُحَمّد » وَعَلَى آل مُحَمّد » كُمَا‎ Sal iy

‎Rn : ‏فيه‎ GE 5155 » ‏رَوَاهُ مُسْلم‎ Qe OS SI , ‏حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ‎
eo ‏في‎ tos cat hat
337. Ibn Mas‘dd (RAA) narrated that ‘Bashir bin Sa‘d said,
‘O Messenger of Allah, we have been ordered to send prayers upon

‎you. How do we do it?’ The Prophet 38 was quiet for a moment
and then said, “Say ‘O Allah, Bless Muhammad and the fa-
mily of Muhammad as You blessed Ibrahim (in another nar-
ration: as You blessed the family of Ibrahim). Grant favors to
Muhammad and to the family of Muhammad as You gran-
ted favors to Ibrahim in this world (in another narration to
the family of Ibrahim), You are indeed Praiseworthy and Glo-

‎rious.’And make Tas/im!5(salutation) as I have taught you”
Related by Muslim. Ibn Khuzaimah added, ‘How do we do it (ie,

‎what do we say), whenever we send prayers upon you in our
prayer?”

‎127- The man was most probably sitting for at-Tushahhud, and that is why
the author mentioned this Hadith in this section.
128 Refer to Hadith no. 290.

‎121
338. Ab Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Prophet ‏ل‎ said,
“When any of you finishes reciting the Tashahhud, he
should then seek refuge in Allah from the following four
(trials), and should say, “0 Allah! I seek refuge in You from
the torment of the Hell-fire, and from the torment of the
grave, from the trials of life and death, and from the (evil)
trial of the False Messiah (ad-Dajjal).” Agreed upon. In the
narration of Muslim, “When one of you finishes reciting the
final Tashahhud.”

th fe ey eB
Sab ‏لي‎ lh abe ‏متي » قَالَ‎ dg Hit ‏غلك وَل على‎

339. Aba Bakr (RAA) narrated that he said to the Messenger

of Allah 48 ‘Teach me a supplication that I may say in my prayer.’
He said to him, “ Say, '0 Allah! I have done great injustice to
myself and no one forgives sins but You. So forgive me with
Your forgiveness, and have mercy upon me. You are the

Most Merciful, Oft-Forgiving.” Agreed upon.

be eek: 3B - we tlh ‏إن حجر - رضي‎
3 iE ly : ‏عن نه‎ at

By G5 4

شتاله ‎pC:‏ عا

pone ‏داو اتاد‎ GI cA al :
340. wa’ ‘il bin Hujr (RAA) narrated, ‘I prayed with the Pro-
phet 38, and he would make the Salam (salutation at the end of
prayer) to his right side (saying), “Peace be upon you and the
Mercy of Allah,” and to his left side (saying), “Peace be upon
you and the Mercy of Allah.” Related by Aba Dawid with a
Sahih (sound) chain of narrators.

thy foo ‏أذ لبي‎ - Se ‏رضي الله‎ - Gb ‏بن‎ sath ‏وَعَسن‎ rey
Sy a ‏«لاً‎ BBG Bg, 8 OE

RAS Le By sd ‏وَلَهُ‎ Bh

taf ‏الْحَدُ».‎ cue Sod GS Vy ‏مُمْطِيَ لما منت ء‎

341. Ald Mughtrah bin Shu’bah (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 would say at the end of every obligatory prayer,
“There is no god except Allah, the One, Who has no partn-
er. His is the dominion and His is the praise. He has power
over all things. 0 Allah! There is no one who may withhold
what You give, and there is no one, who may give what You
have withheld. No fortune or prosperity(whether it be money,
children, power etc) will save or benefit its owner with You (it
is only Your mercy and virtue that benefits anyone). Agreed upon.

fall le ‏من‎ ths 5 7
342, ‏4ند8‎ bin Abi Wagqds (RA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 would seek refuge in Allah at the end of every obliga-
tory prayer, saying, “I seek refuge in You from miserliness, I
seek refuge in You from cowardice, I seek refuge in You
from senility, I seek refuge in You from the trials of this
world, and I seek refuge in You from the torment of the
grave.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎OL ey 54+‏ - الله عَنْهُ - قَالَ : كَانَ رَسُول ‎dh‏ صلّى الله ‎ate‏
‏و رضي رسو ‎he‏

ol ‏رَوَاهُ‎ ٠ SY Seah ‏تَبَارَكْت يا ذا‎ pen

343. Thauban (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Prophet 4 would

finish his prayer, he would seck Allah’s forgiveness three times

and then say, “O Allah, You are the Peace, and from You

comes peace. Blessed are You, Owner of Majesty and Gene-
rosity.” Related by Muslim.

‎hey res‏ أبي هر - 5 للع - عن رول الل صَلى لله لوس

‎344, Abd Hurairah (RAA), narrated the Prophet 3# said,
“Whoever glorifies Allah (i. say Subhanal-léh) after every
(obligatory) prayer, thirty three times, and praises Allah (i.¢.
say Alhamdulillah) thirty three times, and says the Takbir
(say Alléhu Akbar), this makes 99 times in all, and to comp-
lete the hundred, he then says, ‘There is no god except
Allah, the One Who has no partner. His is the dominion and
His is the praise. He has power over all things.’ His sins are
forgiven, even if his sins are as abundant as the foam of the
sea.” Related by Muslim. In another narration, the Takbir was
mentioned to be said thirty four times.

‏4 وَعْنْ مُعَاذ بن ‎of J‏ رَسُولَ ‎Lod‏ الله

‏«أوصيلت يَا ‎Se IF BLY: Seb‏ أن تقو

‏للم أي عَلَى
‎BSS‏ وَحْْنِ ‎MEMS‏ رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » ‎eI 556 of‏ بستند قَوِي .

‎845. Mu’adh bin Jabal (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3§ said to him, “I advise you, 0 Mu‘adh, never neglect
to say at the end of every (obligatory) prayer, ‘O Allah, help
me in Your dhikr (remembrance), Your thanks, and in wor-

‎124
shipping You in the most perfect way.” Related by Ahmad,
Aba Dawad and An-Nasai with a strong chain of narrators.

ty be ins 6 -

. Oe ‏ابن‎ Ry U3 ‏الْمَوت».‎
‎.]١ : ‏[الصّمَدُ‎ (20 F ain 5h ph : ‏الطَبرَائي‎
‎346. Abi Um&mah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Whoever recites the verse of the Throne(Ayat
al-Kursi. 2:24) at the end of every prayer, nothing will pre-
vent him from entering Paradise except that he must die
iirst).” Related by An-Nasa’i and rendered Sahth by Ibn Hibbén.
At-Tabarani added in his narration, ‘and recites “Say, He is
Alléh (the) One .....” (stirah no. 112).’

Soo ‏الله‎ yb ‏قَالَ : قال‎ - ee hoo) - eg ‏وَعَنْ مالك‎ - rev
Sed 855 «gel ‏رأيشمُوني‎ OF ‏«صلُوا‎ : chs ale dh
347, Malik bin Al-Huwairith (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “Pray as you have seen me praying.” Related
by Al-Bukhari

348. ‘Imran bin al-Husain (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 2% said, “Pray standing, if you are not able to; pray
sitting; if you are not able to; pray while lying on your
side, otherwise pray by nodding your head.” Related by Al-

Bukhari.

| Of - ae ‏رَضيئئ الله‎ - a ey 8
Vo} 2M ‏فَرْمَى بها - وَقَالَ : «صّل عَلَى‎ BLL,
125

Seis

والشقسل ‎SA‏ أعنقض من ‎he‏ روا

ABs ‏أبو حاتم‎
349, JAbir bin “Abdullah narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
3% saw a sick man praying while sitting on a cushion. The Prophet

38 pushed it aside and said to him, “Pray while sitting on the
ground if you can, otherwise, pray by nodding your head,
and make a lower nodding for prostration than that for

bowing (rukit}).” Related by AlBaihagi with a strong chain of
narrators,

4s 0 ‏بد"‎ ow
‏و وَغيْرهِ من سحو وو‎ pe

Chapter 17111: Sujiid as-Sahu (Prostration due to
forgetfulness during prayer) Other forms of Sujad
(prostration): Prostration of Qur’anic Recital, and

Prostration of Thankfulness

3 الله ‎Se‏ - : «أن التببي

ا ا 00

CAD ‏ويد‎ ARGS LE A Fg Ko

6 ‏الجلوس,‎ 3
350, “Abdullah bin Buhainah (RAA) narrated, ‘Onee the Mes-
senger of Allah 3 led us in Dhuhr prayer and stood up after two

rak Gt and did not sit down (for the middle Tashahhud). The peo-
ple stood up with him, When the prayer was about to end, the

people waited for him 38 to say the Taslim. He said the Takbir
while sitting down, and prostrated twice before he finally said the
Taslim.” Related by the seven ImAms and the wording is from Al-
Bukhari.
In the narration by Muslim, ‘and he 3 said the Takbir in each
prostration while he was sitting down and would then prostrate.

126

‘The people prostrated with him to compensate for the middle sit-
ting (after two rak “ét) that he $¥ forgot (during the prayer).”

¢

351, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Prophet 38 prayed
either Dhukr or ‘Asr prayer with us and he prayed only two rak’@t
and then (finished the prayer) by making the Taslim. He got up
and leaned against a piece of wood in the front part of the mosque.
Aba Bakr and ‘Umar (RAA) were present among the people on

that day, but they did not dare to speak to the Prophet 3% (about
the two remaining rak @t). Some people left the mosque in a hurry
and wondered, ‘Has the prayer been shortened” Among the people

there was a man called Dhul Yadain'® who said, ‘O Messenger of

Allah, have you forgotten or has the prayer been shortened” The
Messenger of Allah said, “I have not forgotten and the prayer
has not been shortened.” Dhul Yadain then said, ‘Surely you

have forgotten, © Allah’s Messenger.” So the Prophet ‏تمع يك‎ up
and prayed two (more) rak @t and finished the prayer with Taslim.
After that he said Takbir and prostrated the way he usually pros-
trated or perhaps a little longer. Next he raised his head and said
the Takbir. Then he said the Takbir again and performed another
prostration, the way he usually prostrated or perhaps a little lon-

129. ‘The Messenger of Allah 4 called him Dhul Yadain (the man with the
two hands) because his hands were long.

127
ger. Finally he raised his head and said the Takbir, (The Prophet

38 performed the two prostrations of forgetfulness (Sujdd as-
Sahu) after praying the two missed rak‘@t.” Agreed upon. In the
narra-tion of Muslim, “In the “Asr prayer.”

يأ نَعمْ» زهي في

352. In the narration of Aba Dawid, ‘The Prophet % said (to
the people in the mosque), “Is it ‘true’ as Dhul Yadain has just
said?” The people nodded their heads confirming what he said.
This narration is also in Al-Bukhari and Muslim but with the wor-
ding, ‘They said “Yes” instead of “nodded their heads.”

‎fas - Ha BL iy Ue, 3) rer‏ - ذلك»

‎353. In another narration by Aba Dawéd on the authority of

‎Abd Hurairah, ‘and he 3 did not prostrate until Allah, the Exal-

‎ted, made him absolutely sure about it (that he had only prayed
two rak’at).

‎oe 35 roe‏ بن حُصَيْن - رضي الله ‎Le By: - Ge‏ الله
‎te py‏

‎Takia psy ‏وَحَْنهُ‎ ity
354. ‘Imran bin al-Husain (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

‎of Allah 38 led them in prayer and forgot (to do something), so he
made two prostrations and recited the Tashahhud and then said
the Taslim.” Related by Abi Dawid and At-Tirmidhi, who graded
it as Hasan (good).

‏.955 ماوق

‎fo ‏الله عَلْهُ - قال :98 رَسُول الله‎ oy - ‏رَعَنْ أبي سعيد الْخدْرِي‎ — ree

‎rust Oe Lee ‏ثر‎
‏كان‎ bE Lt

‎128
Ob Wes IS bos Je OF ‏إن‎ » ie Js Le ‏صَلَى‎
‎oe ay

355, Abii Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Mes-
senger 8 said, “If one of you is uncertain during his prayer,
and he does not remember for sure (the number of rak‘at) he
has prayed, three or four rak “at, then he should put an end
to his doubts and proceed in his prayer based on the num-

ber (of rak Gt) that he is certain he had performed! and

then make two prostrations before the Taslim. If he had
prayed five rak‘@t, the two prostrations would make his
prayer even (i.c. with an even number of rak‘at as the two pros-
trations are considered as one rak‘ah). If he had prayed four
complete rak “at (when he had finished), they would be in def-
iance of Satan.” Related by Muslim.

356. “Abdullah Ibn Mas‘id (RAA) narrated, ‘Once Allah's

Messenger #2 was praying, and when he said the Taslim, he was
asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah, has something new happened in the
prayer? He replied,“What is that?” They said, ‘You prayed so and
so many rak’@t.’ The Messenger of Allah then changed the position
of his fect, faced the Qiblah and made two prostrations. After he

130- He must always assume that he certainly prayed the lesser number of
rak’ét). For example if he is in doubt whether he prayed three or four
rakét, he assumes that he certainly prayed three, if he is uncertain
whether he prayed two or one raf ‘ah, he assumes that he prayed only
‘one and so on.

129

ME ay
said the Taslim, he turned his face to the people and said,“If any-
thing new happened in the prayer, I would have informed
you about it. But I am only a human being and I forget just
as you do, so when I forget, remind me, and when any of
you is uncertain about his prayer, he should try his best to
remember exactly what he did, and then proceed with his
prayer taking this into consideration (whether concerning a
rak‘ah or an integral part of the prayer). Then he should make
two prostrations.” Agreed upon.

eds 6 Aled ‏ثم‎ fale» Geel wy, 3 — rev

357. In the narration of al-Bukhari, “He must finish his

prayer, say the Taslim and then make the two prostrations
afterwards.”

Sls, Sen
358. In the narration of Muslim, “The Messenger of Allah 3
made the two prostrations of Saiu(forgetfulness) after making the

Tastim and talking (the dialogue that took place between him and
the Companions about what happened in the prayer).”

» وَأَبِي ذا

اود » ‎gts‏ من

9 ولا

GR ‏ال‎ Gb Gl 6 ‏بعد‎ he BLE ‏شلك في صلاته‎ b>
859. “Abdullah bin Ja‘far (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “Whoever is uncertain about his prayer, he

should make two prostrations after the Taslim.”'5! Related
by Ahmad and Aba Dawéd, and graded Sahih by Ibn Khuzaimah.

yay or.

Wh fo dy 25 of ies

181. There is a difference of opinion whether to make the prostrations before
or after the Tastim as both cases are mentioned in the Ahddith, but
Imam Ahmad said that it is better to apply each Hadith in similar cases,
and if it is not mentioned in any of the aforementioned Akddlith, then it
is better to prostrate before Taslim, or he has the choice to do either.

130

: Shy, Ebb ay ca
360, Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 said, “If one of you is in doubt (about which
rak‘ab he is praying) and he stood up after praying two rak-
‏رق‎ and he has already stood straight (when he remembered
that he forgot to sit), he should proceed (with his prayer) and
must not sit back again, but he should perform two pros-
trations (of forgetfulness). If he (remembers when he) has not
completely stood up straight, then he should sit down (for
the middle Tashakhud) and he does not have to make the two
prostrations of Sahu (forgetfulness).” Related by Aba Dawad,
Tbn Majah and Ad-Déraqutni with a weak chain of narrators. The
wording is from ad-Daraquini.

361. “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “The one who is led in prayer does not have to make
the two prostrations of forgetfulness. But if the Imam him-
self forgets, both the Imam and those praying behind him
must make the two prostrations.” Related by at-Tirmidhi and
Al-Baihagi with a weak chain of narrators

jee ‏قال : «لكُل‎ at ‏الله لَه وَسَلَم‎ fod pot yy

‎EU ory 598 Sy, ele 8‏ سد ضعيفٍ

‎362, Thaubén (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “One must prostrate twice (Sujiid as-Sahu) every time

‎he forgets'any of the actions of the prayer.” Related by Aba

‎Dawid and Ibn Majah with a weak chain of narrators.

‎132. What is meant here is that he performs only two prostrations at the end
of the prayer, for any number of actions, which he forgot. in one prayer

‎131
Soo ‏مَعْ رَسُول الله‎ ion : ‏رضي الله عَلهُ - فَالَ‎ BB ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ 73
say (ede Sy}: ‏في‎ phy ‏عليه‎ tin
. ple ay; ]١ : hl] ‏؟‎ i

363. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘We performed prostra-
tion along with the Messenger of Allah when he recited, “When
the heaven split asunder,” (strah no.84) and when he recited,
“Read! in the Name of your Lord, Who has created..” (Sirah

no. 96)183 Related by Muslim.

oe gl oy 0

‎eye tiny‏ - قَالَ : (ص]|ص : ‎S25 ]١‏ من
‎okt‏ وَقَد ‎Ga‏ رَسُولَ الله ‎ele an Se‏ وَ

‎364. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The prostration in sarah

‎884, is not a compulsory one, but I saw the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎prostrating when he recited it.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎pendence cl ale
365. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38

‎prostrated when he recited (siirah) “an-Najm” (stirah no. 53).
Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎Geet ay

‏نَابت - ‎te al go‏ - قَالَ : «قرأت عَلَى الي صر

‎366. Zaid bin Thabit narrated, ‘I recited (sarah) “an-Najm”

‎to the Prophet 3 but he did not prostrate.” Agreed upon.

‎Le. The Prophet 38 prostrated when he recited the verse (Ayah) of prost=

‎ration in each of these Stirae,

‎134. ‘This kind of prostration is Suanah (ie. not obligatory) for the one reci-
ting or listening, but it is preferable to do it

‎132

‎57

‎thh Gay - bom yj ws ay 07‏ له - قال : «معلت سور احج
‎fetal‏
‎Khalid bin Ma‘dan (RAA) narrated, ‘Sérah“al-Hajj”(no.‏ .367

‎22) is more excellent than the other Saras by having two prost-
rations (i.e, two verses of prostration.)” Related by Ab Dawad

‏بسخدئين». رَوَاهُ ألو ‎SYS‏

‏4 وَرَوَاُ أَحْمَدُ ‎Coal‏ مَوْصُولاً مِنْ حَديث ‎EE‏ بن ‎Sy «ple‏

‎Line By ‏فلا يقرَأهَا».‎ LY ‏لَمْ‎

‎368. Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi related the above Hadith on the

‎authority of ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir, linked up to the Prophet 2. At-
Tirmidhi added, ‘The one who does not make the two pros-
trations (when reciting the sirah), should not recite them.”
‘The chain of narrators of this Hadith is weak.

‎369. “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘O people, we came across verses

‎of prostration, 95 whoever prostrates has done the right thing, yet

‎there is no sin upon the one who does not do so.” Related by Al-
Bukhari. This Hadith has the addition, ‘Allah, Glorified be He,
has not made it compulsory for us to make the prostration (of
Qur’anic recitation), but whoever wishes can make it."This Hadith
is also in al-Muwatt

‎ole ‏الله‎ Lo Uh ‏قَالَ : «كَانَ‎ - age

‎135. ‘Umar (RAA) said this in the Friday Khutbah (sermon), because one
Friday he recited stirah an-Nahl and he came down from the pulpit and
prostrated along with the people. ‘The next Friday he recited the same
sarah but did not prostrate, hence he said what is in the Hadith.

‎133
370. Tbn ‘Umar (RA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
would recite the Qur’an to us, and when he came to a verse of
Sajdah (prostration) he would say the Takbir and prostrate, and
we would make the Sajdah with him.”Related by Aba Dawid with
a weak chain of narrators.

os phy ale Gh ‏صَلَى‎ ob : - te dn ‏رضي‎ - EK ‏وَعَنْ بي‎ ry

إذا ‎Se‏ يسمه حر سَاححدًا لله». ‎Sony Catal ay;‏

371. Aba Bakrah (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever the Prophet ‏يه‎
‎received something which pleased him (e.g. good news), he would

make the Sajdak (prostration) in gratitude to Allah.” Related by
the five Imams except An-Nasi

‎rv‏ ب ‎iy‏ عَبْد ‎of hI‏ غوف - رض الله ‎Be‏ - قَالَ

‎» ‏أثاني‎ age Op : ‏فَقَالَ‎ EN ‏رقع‎

‎gas

‏كر». ‎LET AY,‏ وَصَحَّحَهُ الْحَاكمْ .

‎372. ‘Abdur Rahman bin ‘Auf (RAA) narrated, ‘The messenger
of Allah prostrated, but it was so long (that “Abdur Rahman was
worried about him). When he raised his head, he said (to him),
“Jibril came to me and told me some glad tidings, so I pros-

‎trated out of thanks to Alléh.”'5% Related by Ahmad and ‏عله‎
‎Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎Lot bt‏ الله عليه

‎8 ‏رَضيّ الله‎ - oe of te ve
OB pte Le OSS: ‏قَالَ‎ - eal ‏فَذَكرَ‎ ad ‏إلى‎

‎- fis - IR cites Cush oly ale ‏الله‎ he ‏سول الله‎

‏قرا
‏عَلَى ‎ast oly, eu‏ , وأصلة في ‎God‏ .

‎136- The Messenger of Allah # said to “Abdur Rahman (who was watching
him at the time), “dibril came to me and said, ‘Shall I not give you
glad tidings? Allah says to you, “Whoever prays upon you, I pray
upon him. Whoever salutes you (says Assalamu ‘Alaikum) I sal-
ute him.” Therefore I prostrated ‏ما‎ Allah in Thanks.” In another
narration, “Whoever prays upon you once, Allah will pray upon
him 10 times.”

‎134
373. ‏'فمدظلة‎ bin “Azib (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 sent “Ali to Yemen — and Al-Bard’ mentioned the rest of
the Hadith. He continued, “Ali then sent a letter telling (the Pro-

phet 38) that they had embraced Islam. When the Messenger of

Allah 3& read the letter, he went down to prostrate in gratitude to
Allah, the Almighty, for this.” Related by al-Baihagi.

Ct Be OU
Chapter IX: Supererogatory (voluntary) Prayer

1 fae Ky
374, Rabi/ah bin Ka’b Al-Aslami (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 38 once said to me, “Ask (me about whatever
you want).” I said, ‘I ask your company in Paradise.’ He then said

3%, “Or anything else (that you want to ask for)?” I said, ‘That is
it.’ He said, “Then help me to achieve this (wish) for you, by

prostrating™? as much as you can.” Related by Muslim.

376. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, “I learnt and observed from
the Messenger of Allah 3&, ten rak ‘at (of Sunnah or non-obligatory

187. The Prophet 3 was referring ‏ما‎ prostrating in prayer. The kind of pra-
yer he is guiding Rabi‘ah to perform, is the voluntary prayer, as every
‘Muslim must perform the obligatory prayer anyway. (Imam Ag-San‘ini
in Subul As-Salém).

135
prayers)!°8: two before Dhuhr prayer, and two after it, two after

Maghrib in his house, two after ‘Ish’ in his house and two rak ‏عه‎
‎before Fajr.”Agreed upon. In another narration by Al-Bukhari and
‘Muslim, ‘and two rak’ét after the Friday prayer in his house.”

376. Muslim reported on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar, ‘The

Messenger of Allah 3¥ used to pray only two short rak at (ie.
would recite short verses of the Qur’An) when it was time for Fajr
prayer.”

‎sh do ai‏ سل ا
‎je ty »‏

‎377. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, The Messenger of Allah 38
used to always pray four rak“@t before Dhuhr and two rak “at be-
fore Fajr under all circumstances.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎—YVA

‎obs ‏له‎ Sa

‎. ‏عليه‎ GE path Went ‏عَلَى‎

‎378. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah $2 was

‎never so regular and keen on observing any supererogatory pra-

‎yer, as he was in observing the two rak “at before Fajr prayer.’ Ag-
reed upon.

‎es OS ul >t ‏وَلمُسْلمٍ‎ — va

‎379. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “The two rak ‘at of Fajr are better than this world and
all that it contains.” Related by Muslim.

‎138- Ibn “Umar here is referring to the non-obligatory prayers that are offer-
ed before and after the prescribed ones.

‎136
‎iy Gt Oy will BLES,‏ «تطَوعا».

‎380. Umm Habibah, Mother of believers (RAA) narrated, ‘
heard the Messenger of Allah 38 say, “Whoever prays twelve
rak’Gt during the day and night will have a house built for

‎him in paradise.” Related by Muslim. In another narrations,
“twelve voluntary rak “at

‎oy

‎381, At-Tirmidhi related a similar narration with the addi
tion, “four rak ‘ét before Dhuhr and two after it, two ‏خش عله"‎

‎after Maghrib, two rak’ét after ‘Isha’ and two rak “at before
Fajr."

‎CF ‏عَلَى‎ BE ‏عَنْهَا : «من‎ tally — ray

‎a‏ - تَعَالَى - عَلَى الثّار»

‎382. Umm Habibah, Mother of believers (RAA) narrated, ‘I

‎heard the Messenger of Allah 3£ say, “Whoever prays four

‎rak’ét before Dhuhr and four after it, Allah will prohibit

‎that his flesh be in the Hell Fire (i.c. will protect him from
entering the Fire).” Related by the five Imams.

‎Sle Ba ‏وأريّع‎ « et

‎ets Le ‏رَسُولٌ الله‎ OG : OG - Age A 5 - ee ‏وَعَنِ ابن‎ ar
EL YG Ny SG GG
383. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Mes-

‎senger 38 said, “May Allah have mercy on a person who
prays four rak ‘at before “Asr.” Related by Ahmad, Abd Dawad,
At-Tirmidhi (who rendered it Hasan) and Ibn Khuzaimah.

‎6598 ‏وأبُو‎ MLE NG a tail JS ‏ا‎

‎137
«GS ‏الم سن . روا‎ lk Of aS ‏شَاء»‎ by

384, “Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani (RAA) narrated that
Allah's Messenger 38 said, “Pray before Maghrib(prayer)! Pray
before Maghrib (prayer)!” And after saying it a third time, he
said: “For whoever wishes to do so,” not wanting the people to
take it as a Sunnah.’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

BL by bb Lath ob ‏لان‎ Uy, ‏رقي‎ rhe

385. In another version related by Ibn Hibban on the autho-

rity of Ibn Mughaffal, “The Prophet 38 prayed two rak‘at before
Maghrib prayer.”

386. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘We used to pray two rah ét

after sunset (before the Maghrib prayer), and the Prophet 38 wo-
uld see us, but he did not order us to do so, nor did he prohibit us.”
Related by Muslim.

387. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to make the two rak at before Fajr so short that I used to say
(to myself), “Has he recited the Fatihah (in each rak‘ah) or not?”
Agreed upon.

388. Abu’ Hurairah (RAA) narrated, The Messenger of Allah
138
3 recited the following ‏(مم52)‎ in the two ‏غة ع"‎ before Fajr pra-
yer: “Say: © disbelievers” (Sarah no. 109) and “Say, He is Al-
Tah (the) One ...” (sarah no. 112).’ Related by Muslim.

gle aie ‏الله‎ Le Loy : i - ie ‏الله‎ a - tae ‏وَعَنْ‎ ae

. ‏البُحَارِيُ‎ ay, pide ‏عَلَى‎ alee ‏الْفَحْرٍ‎ ars fy
389. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎

ed to lie down on his right side after he had prayed the two rak “at
before the Fajr prayer.” Related by Al Bukhari.

die ‏الله‎ Te ‏قَالَ : قَالَ 5 الله‎ - te th ‏وَعَنْ أبي هُرَيْرَةَ - رضي‎ ra

Sey (5B 0 5958 oy » ‏أَحَمْدُ‎
‎390. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Prophet 38 said,
“ After any of you prays the two rak ‘at before Fajr prayer,

he should lie down on his right side.” Related by Ahmad, Aba
Dawid and At-Tirmidhi who graded it as Sc

391. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Mes-

senger 3 said, “The night prayer is (performed) in sets of two
rak’ét. If one fears the breaking of dawn, he should per-
form one (more) rak’ah, thereby making all of them (into an)
odd (number of rak “at) (witr).” Agreed upon.

i - Whe Stes - a cts ray
. ‏مَْنَى». وَقَالَ النسَائِيُ : هَذَا معطأ‎

392. The five Imams related on the authority of Abu’ Hurai-
rah, “The prayer of the night prayer and the day is (perfor-

139

med) in sets of two ‏”عق 'علم‎ Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih, but
An-Nas@ii said that this was wrong.189

ole ‏الله‎ Le ‏قَالَ : قَالَ 325 الله‎ - 2 thy ‏وَعَنْ أبي 8 رضي‎ — rar

. ‏رَوَاهُ مُسْلمٌ‎ I Se df ‏يعد‎ Stan aly» hs

393, Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Prophet 48 said,

“The best prayer (that you may perform) next to the obliga-
tory prayer, is the night prayer.” Related by Muslim.

FE GMO ‏رَعَنْ أبي‎ 94
ms ‏عَلَى‎ dy

«eel a!

394. Abd Aiyab Al-Ansari (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said,“Witr is a duty upon every Muslim. If anyone
wishes to observe it by performing five rak’ét, he may do
so, and if anyone wishes to observe it with three rak’ét, he
may do so, and if he wishes to observe it with one rak ‘ah,
he may do so.”Related by the four Imams except for At-Tirmidhi.
Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

. ‏وَصْحَّحَهُ‎ SUS GOI » ‏وَحَسنَهُ‎ GLa ‏رَوَاهُ‎

395. “Ali bin Abi Talib (RAA) narrated, ‘The Witr Prayer is
not as obligatory as the prescribed prayers, but it is a Sunnah of

the Prophet 38.” Related by At-Tirmidhi who said that it was

189. The extra wording ‘and day,’ has been reported on the authority of “Alt
bin “Abdullah al-Azdi, who was reported ‏ما‎ be a weak narrator by Tbn
Ma‘in. The narration about the night prayer is also mentioned in Al-
Bukhari and Muslim but without the phrase‘and day’. Imam As-San“ant
says that it could be that both are permissible, i.e. to pray (voluntary
prayer) during the day sets of two or four raat

140
Hasan. An-Nasa’i and Al-Hakim also related it, and the latter dec-
lared it Sahih,

bb ‏ا - أن رول الله صلَى‎ eae

‎ots‏ » كُمٌ ‎yh‏ من ‎ahaa‏ هلم ‎es‏ وَقَالٌ : «إلي
ديت أن ‎Oe Lay, ih kis ok‏ .

‎396, Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RA) narrated, ‘Allah's Messenger

‎3 prayed the late night prayer (Tahajjud) in Ramadan one night.
The following night, people waited for him to come for the night
prayer (to join him), but he did not come out. He said to them, “I
was afraid that witr might become compulsory for you.”

‎Related by Ibn Hibban.¥0

‏هي يَارَسْول الله؟ ‎Ji‏ «لوثرُ » ما ين

‎pb by » ‏إلا سئي‎ tal ry,

‎397. Kharijah bin Hudhafah (RAA) narrated that ‘Allah's

‎Messenger 38 said,“Allah, the Exalted has given you an extra
prayer which is better for you than red camels (i.e. the best
breed of camels).” We then said, ‘Which prayer is that © Messen-
ger of Allah?’ He said, “The Witr prayer. You may perform it
(any time) between the ‘Isha’ and Fajr prayer.” Related by the
five Imams except An-Nasa’i. Al Hakim graded it as Seth.

‎pa ‏ع‎ gab J ron De

‏10 ى أَحْمَدُ عن ‎Ab‏ إن يِب عن عَنْ ‎2S oe‏

‎398. Ahmad related a similar narration on the authority of
‘Amro bin Shu‘aib on the authority of his father who narrated it
on the authority of his grandfather.

‎Mo. The narration of Al-Bukhéri has the wording, ‘The following night, peo-
ple waited for the Prophet ‏يك‎ to come out for the night prayer, but he

‎didn’t, In the morning, the people asked him about it. He replied, # that,
‏عط‎ was afraid that the night praver might become compulsory on them,

‎141
8 وَعَنّْ عَبْد الله ‎FM of‏ - 5

53 ‏يوقا فلس مث انظ أو‎ FSi So ig dé ‏لله‎ Le

. ‏الْحَاكمٌ‎ oy Sa

399. “Abdullah bin Buraidah (RAA) narrated on the authority

of his father, ‘Allah's Messenger ‏يل‎ said,“Praying witr is a duty,
so he who does not observe it is not one of us.” Related by

Abi Dawad with a weak chain of narrators“! but Al-Hakim grad-

ed it as Sahih. 2

400. Imam Ahmad reported a similar narration on the auth-
ority of Aba Hurairah but with an interrupted chain of narrators.

401. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, “Allah’s Messenger ‏يك‎ never
exceeded praying eleven rak ‘dt (that was his voluntary night pra-

yer) whether during Ramadan or otherwise. He would pray four
rak’ét, and don’t ask how perfect or how lengthy they were. Then

he would pray four other rak@t and do not ask how perfect they
were or how lengthy they were. Then he would pray three rak at.

‎The chain of narrators has “Abdullah bin “Abdullah Al-“Atakf, who was‏ متمد
‎reported to be a weak narrator by Al-Bukhfri and Muslim,‏

‎442. Scholars said that praying witr is only a confirmed Sunnah (i.e. the
‘Sunnah which the Prophet 3 did not leave performing whether trave-
ling or at home) and is not obligatory as the Messenger of Allah 3 said
to ‏طفق سلا‎ when he sent him to Yemen, ‘Tell them that five prayers
during the day and night have been prescribed by Allah upon
them.” Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim,

‎142
Tasked, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Do you sleep before praying witr?”
He replied, “O ‘A’ishah, my eyes sleep but my heart remains
awake.” Agreed upon.

‎١‏ س وّفي ‎otis ab JG Lol oS Ge OL,‏ ووز

‎402. In another version by Al-Bukhari and Muslim, “He used
to pray ten rak“ét during the night, and then observe the witr with
a single rak‘ah before praying the two (voluntary) rak“at before
Fajr. This would make them thirteen rak ‘é¢ in all.”

‎a ‏إلا في‎ ele ‏يُوترُ من ذَلكَ حمس » لآ يَجْلسْ في‎ » BG ee OSE
403. In another narration by Muslim, ‘A’ishah (RAA): said,

‎“Allah's Messenger 38 would perform thirteen rak“ét during the
night, and would make the wiir with five of them. He would not
sit (during those five rak @t) except in the last one.”

‏04 وَعَنْهَا - رَضي ‎eh‏ - فَالَتْ : «من كُلّ ‎SO‏ قد ‎fh‏ ,05 الله
صلى الله ‎EGE pt Ay ay » ley ae‏

‎404. In another narration ‘A’ishah (RAA) said, “Allah's Mes-
prayed the witr prayer at all hours of the night, (exten-

‎senger #
ding from after the Isha’ prayer) up to the Sahar time™? (mean-

‎ing up to the last hour of the night up to the Fajr prayer).’ Agreed
upon.

‏لي

‎ey‏ : «يا ‎ate‏ الله » ‎Sey‏ فلأ » ‎Oe‏ يَقُومُ من
‎(RAA) narrated, ‘The‏ عمق -لد ‎‘Abdullah bin “Amro bin‏ .405

‎143- The Sahar time refers to the final third of the night. The Prophet 3
prayed witr at all times of the night to show that it is permissible.

‎143
Messenger of Allah 3¥ said to me, “O ‘Abdullah, don’t be like
so and so who used to observe the night prayer and then
he stopped it.” Agreed upon.

406. “Ali (RA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 2
you people [followers] of the Qur'an, perform the Witr pra-
yer for Allah is Witr (ic. One) and He loves all that is witr
(ie. odd in number).” Related by the five Imams and Ibn Khuzai-
mah graded it as Sah

: U6 ple, ale ti ‏الي صَلَى‎ of - cyte ain - ‏اين عُمَرَ‎ by ‏ل‎ oy
iy find Sooke ‏«الجْعلوا آخر‎

407. Ton ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that Allah's Messenger !
said, “Perform the Witr prayer, as the last of your night
prayers.” Agreed upon.

0

h fob ‏رَسُول‎ tee : ‏بن عَلّ َال‎
(Oe BBE Buty » ‏رَوَهُ أحْمَدُ‎ wall ‏ي‎

موعن

«لآر

408. Talq bin “Ali, narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah
say, “There are no two witr prayers to be performed in

one night.” Related by Ahmad and the three Imams and it was
graded as Sahih by Ibn Hibban.

: ‏[الإعخلاص‎ (ef een ‏رَ‎ ١ : ‏[الْكَافرُونَ‎ {5,050
pet BWA Vp : ‏ماود وَلنسَائَيُ . وَزَادَ‎ fh

409. Ubay bin Ka’b (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3 used to recite, “Glorify the Name of Your Lord.”

144

(strah al-Alé no. 87), “Say: © disbelievers” ‏لمجهو)‎ al-Kafi-
rin no. 109) and “Say, He is Allah (the) One...” (stirah ‏عله‎
‎Ikhlag no. 112)144,” in the Witr prayer.’ Related by Ahmad, Abi
Dawiad and An-Nasa’i. An-Nas@’i added in his narration,'He would

say the Taslim at the end of the three rak Gt (i.e. he would recite
one Tashahhud in the final rak ‘ah

َحْوْهُ عَنْ ‎ase‏ - رضي ‎Ge th‏ -» وفيه : كل

3, 345 ‏وَلأَبِي‎ — ٠
Boadhry  ]١ : ‏َه في رَْعَة » 35 الأخيرة : }1 هو لل أحَد [الإعخلآص‎
410. Aba Dawdd and At-Tirmidhi related a similar narration

on the authority of “A’ishah (RAA), who said, ‘He would 3% recite
each siirah in a rak ‘ah. In the last one he would recite, “Say, He
is Allah (the) One.....”, al-Falag and an-Nés (i.e. the last three
‘Sdras in the Qur'an).

pent ‏تُصلبخوا». رَوَاهُ‎ Of 5 ‏«أُؤْترُوا‎ : Je ploy
411. Abd Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Mes-

senger 38 said, “Observe the Witr prayer before the breaking
of dawn.” Related by Muslim.

412. Ibn Hibban related on the authority of Aba Sa‘id al-
Khudri (RAA), “If any of you misses praying witr until the
break of dawn, then he should not pray it.”

‎ay 4٠‏ فَالَ : قَالَ رول ‎leg dle dv‏ : «مَن ام عَنْ الوثر أو
سه ‎Sy als‏ أمنبح أ ‎hash ay, oss‏ إل النسائي
‎Abd Sa‘id Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Mes-‏ .413

‎senger 3 said, “If any of you sleeps and misses the witr, or
if he forgets to pray it, then he should pray it when he

‎144. He would # recite al-A7é in the first rak‘ah, al-Kafirdn in the second
rak‘ah and al-Ikhlas in the last rak‘ah.

‎145
wakes up or when he remembers,”"*5 Related by the five Ima-
ms except for An-Nasaii.

414. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “Whoever of you fears that he will not be able to wake
up during the latter part of the night, he should pray the
witr during the early part of the night. And whoever of you
believes that he will be able to wake during the latter part
of the night, he should then delay the witr to the latter part
of the night, as the prayer at that time is attended by the
angels (i.c. attended by the angels of the night and the angels of
the day), and that is better.” Related by Muslim.

3 pt Huge 3s

415. [bn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “When the dawn breaks, all the time (permissible) for
the night prayer and the witr prayer has gone by then. So
pray witr before the breaking of dawn.” Related by At-Tir-
midhi.

ole th ‏الله صَلّى‎ 35 o> : ‏كَالَت‎ - Ge th ‏رضي‎ - ee yey 4
py) all Oo Gs a pt ky
416. A'ishah (RAA) narrated, “Allah's Messenger 38 would

pray four rak ‘at for ad-Duhé+46 and he added to it(i.e. more rak“at)
whatever Allah willed.” Related hy Muslim,

145. The majority of scholars are of the opinion that if one misses the witr
prayer for any reason, itis recommended that he makes up for it,
‏قفد‎ ‘The mid-morning voluntary prayer. Its time starts after the sun is well

146
hah (RAA) was asked! whether the Messenger of Al-

é used to pray ad-Duhé, she replied, ‘No, unless he was retu-
ming from a journey.’ Related by Muslim.

bh fb eo, Un : - Gi th ga - GGL — ta

EN Sy ‏المشحى ء‎ te ai Sal ‏وسَلم‎
‎418. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, “I have never seen the Messen-
ger of Allah 3€ offer the (voluntary) Duka prayer, but I prayed

out

ح وَعَنْ ‎SUE gi A‏ - رضي الله ‎OF - te‏ رَسُولَ الله ‎So‏ الله عليه ‎hey‏

LG) adh ‏حين ريض‎ Sat Bon : I

419. Zaid bin Argam (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah’s Messenger x

prayed the prayer of penitence when the young weaned camels

feel the heat of the sun (i.e. feel that the desert sand is too hot).”
Related by At-Tirmidhi.

‎we‏ رسي الا - ؛ - قَالَ ‎see!‏ َو لله على الله عل

‎: ‏وَسَلمّ‎ 5
. ‏رَوَهُ الترمذي وَاستَخْرَية‎
420. Anas Ibn Mélik (RAA) narrated that, Allah's Messenger

‎said, “Whoever prays twelve rak‘at for Duha prayer,‏ عله

‏8 الله له ‎Vai‏ في الْجلّة » .

‎up in the sky until just before

‎147. Tt was proven in al-Bukhéri and Muslim, through Suth(sound) Al
that the messenger of Allah ‏وك‎ prayed ad-Duhd prayer, but did not
perform it in front of the companions, and he also may not have perfor-
med it every day for fear that his companions would follow his example.
As for what ‘Aishah (RAA) said, it was very rare that the Prophet 3
‘would be present at her house at the time of ad-Duhé, so it is true that
she has not seen him pray it, or maybe she meant that he did not pray it
regularly. (Ibn Hajar in feeh-ul-Bart’)

‎147

Allah, the Almighty will build for him a palace in Para-
dise.” Related by At-Tirmidhi but with a weak chain of narrators.

‎ty)‏ — ضي الله ‎i‏ َلْتا : ‎fo ih des on‏ لله عل

‎icky‏ فى الح ‎٠ ooh gl‏ رَوَهُ ائنُ

‎421. A’ishah (RAA) narrated,‘The Messenger of Allah 3 came
into my house and prayed eight rak @t for ad-Duhé.’ Related by
Ton Hibban in his Sahih,

‏ان في ‎ee‏

‏بَابْ ‎Lead Hi‏ وَالإِمَمَة

‎Chapter X: Congregational Prayer
and The Position of Imam

‏الله بن عْمَرَ - ‎Of - ge ho‏ رَسُولَ الله ‎Soo‏ الله

‎oo ‏من‎ (fall ‏لْحَمَاعَة‎ Soy : ‏قال‎ hy

‎422. “Abdullah bin “Umar (RAA) narrated that Allah's Mes-

‎senger 3# said, “The prayer offered in congregation is twen-
ty seven times more superior (in reward) to the prayer per-
formed individually.” Agreed upon.

‏- رَضِي الله ‎He‏ - :

‎ty — err‏ عَنْ أبي

‎428. AL-Bukharf and Muslim related on the authority of Aba
Hurairah, “twenty five parts.”

‏4 رَكَدَا ‎Ge‏ عَنْ أبي ‎one‏ وَقَالَ : 5

‎424. Al-Bukhari transmitted on the authority of Aba Sa‘id,
“twenty five degrees.”

‎A ‏أبي‎ 25 — tre

‎ony As ‏يع‎ by gil WB oy ‏نفسي‎ sally : ‏قَالَ‎

‎148
‎yan)‏ َهاء مر رلا فلن » ثم الف إلى حال لآ:
‎lly iit pelle Seb‏ تشبي
مرْمَامئيْن ‎ES‏ لَشَهِدَ العشاء»

‎425. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that Allah's Messenger ‏يك‎
‎said, “By the One in Whose Hand my soul is, I was about to
give orders for the collection of fire-wood (fuel) and then
order someone to announce the Adhén for prayer to be
called, and then ask someone to lead the prayer. Then I
wanted to go from behind and burn the houses of the men,
who do not attend the (obligatory congregational) prayer. By
the One in Whose Hand my soul is, if any of them had
known that he would get a bone covered with good meat or
two (small) pieces of meat in between two ribs, he would
have turned up for the ‘Isha’ prayer.” Agreed upon, and this
narration is from Al-Bukhari

‏لَوْيَعْلمْ أَحَدُهُمْ ‎A‏ يَحدُ ‎Whe‏ سَميئًا ‎She‏
‏عَلَيْه » وَاللْقْظُ ‎wie‏

‎426. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3
said, “No prayer is harder for the hypocrites than the Fajr
and the 'Ishé' prayers, and if they knew the reward (for
observing these two prayers in congregation), they would certai-
nly come to the mosque, even if they had to crawl.” Agreed
upon,

‎va 3 ad a 8 obs

‎. ‏مُسللم‎ Wy) ‏قَالَ : «قأحب».‎
427. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that a blind man eame to

‎the Prophet 38 and said to him, ‘O Messenger of Allah, I have no
one to guide me to the mosque.’ (He was asking for the permission

‎of the Prophet 3 to pray in his house). The Prophet 3 gave him
149
permission to pray at home, but when he turned to ‏مع‎ back, the
Prophet 4¥ called him and said, “Do you hear the Adhan?” The

blind man said, ‘Yes.’ The Prophet 3 then said, “Then respond
to it (by coming to the mosque).” Related by Muslim.

وَالْحَاكمٌ « ‎BES‏ عَلَى شزْط مسئلم » لكن ‎OS)‏ يَْضهُم وَققة .

428, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
8 said, “If anyone hears the Adhdén, but does not come to
the (congregational) prayer (at the mosque), the prayer he of-

fers will not be accepted unless he has an excuse.” Related
by Ibn Majah, Ad-Déraqutni, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim.

prayer with the Prophet wy When the Messenger of Allah
shed the prayer, he discovered that two men had not prayed with
them, so he ordered for them to be brought to him, and they came

shaking with fear. The Messenger of Allah 38 said to them, “What
prevented you from praying with us?” They said, ‘We prayed

in our resting places.’ The Messenger of Allah 3£ then said to
them, “If you pray in your resting places and then come
upon an Imdm who has not yet prayed, then pray with him
and it will be considered as a voluntary prayer (néfilah)
for you.” Related by Ahmad and the wording is his. It was als
transmitted by the three Imams and It was graded as Sali
Ibn Hibban and At-Tirmidhi.

150

أو 345« ‎Bel ig‏ » وأ
‎Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-‏ .430

lah 3 said, “The Imam is only appointed (to lead the prayer)
to be followed. So, when he says the Takbir (Allahu Akbar),
then say the Takbir, and do not say the Takbir until he
says (All@hu Akbar). When he goes into rukii,” then make
rukit’ (after him), and do not go into ruki’ until he goes into
‏كتيج‎ When he says “Sami'al Lahu liman hamidah (Allah
hears those who send praises to Him),” say “Rabband wa
lakal-hamd (O Allah, our Lord! All praises are for You).”
When he goes into sujid (prostration) make sujitd (after
him), and do not go into sujid until he goes into sujfd,
When he prays standing, pray standing, and when he prays
sitting, then all of you should pray sitting.” Related by Aba
Dawid and the wording is his. This narration is also related by
Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Sh ‏رَسُولَ الله صَلّى‎ OF - te ‏الله‎ os

3 iki : ‏كََالَ‎ tk ‏عدو‎
‎RG ‏بَنْدكُْ.‎

431, Aba 5550 Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Mes-

senger #8 saw a tendency among some of his companions to pray

in the back rows. Thereupon he said to them, “Come forward

and follow me (in prayer) and let those behind (in the back
rows) follow you (as they will know my actions through your

actions even if they cannot see me directly).”48

148. This means that those who cannot see or hear the Imam, for being a few
151
432. Zaid bin Thabit aes narrated, ‘The Messenger of All&h

#2 made a small room with matting and prayed there (for a few
nights during the month of Ramadan). Some of his companions

came and started to pray behind him...(the Hadith..).’4® This nar-

ration has, “the best prayer that a person performs is the
one he prays in his house, except for the obligatory one.”
‘Agreed upon.

the : ‏عنهُمَا - قَالَ‎ Sh yo - ‏وعن جَابِرٍ بن عَبْد الله‎ — ty
BAY 0,55 Of day : ghey ale ‏ل ال صلَى الله‎ « pale ‏الْعنَاء» فَطَلَ‎
{Es ‏و(سيح ام ربل‎ fits AE) Be ptt eet ae es

abel 5

pitt ly « .») A ‏ذا‎
‎433, Jabir Ibn. “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘Mu’ adh bin Jabal
lead some of his companions in the Tshé’ prayer, but he made it

too lengthy (recited long Sairas). The Prophet 3 then said to him,
“Do you want to draw people into fitnah (tribulation, affli-
etion)Mu adh? When you lead people in prayer, recite “And
by the sun and its brightness” (strah ash-Shams no. 91), and
“Glorify the name of your Lord” (stirah ‏قله‎ no. 87), and
“Read! in the Name of your Lord, Who has created.” (strah
al-‘Alaq no. 96) and “By the night as it spreads” (sitrah ‏عله‎
‎Lail no. 92). Agreed upon, and the wording is from Muslim.

rows behind, can follow those in front of them, those in the third row
follow the ones in the second and so on.

M9. ‘The rest of this Hadith is, “he prayed there for a few nights, and so some
of his companions came and prayed behind him. When he came to know
about it, he stopped coming out (to pray in that room). In the morning,
he went out to them and said, “I know what you have been doing,
but you should pray in your houses, as the best prayer that a
person performs is the one he prays in his house, except for the
obligatory one.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

152

434, “Kishah (RAA) narrated concerning the story when Al-
lah’s Messenger 38 lead the people in prayer when he was sick,
she said, ‘He came out and sat on the left of Aba Bakr (RAA), and
led the people in prayer while he was sitting down and Aba Bakr
was standing up. Aba Bakr was following the prayer of the Pro-

phet 38 and people were following the prayer of Abi Bakr.”
Agreed upon.

ceed

ee. ols OS (eli ny ‏صَلَى‎ ig

435. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3§ said, “If any of you leads the people in prayer, he
should shorten it (i. keep his recital of the Qur’an brief), for
amongst them are the young, the aged, the weak, and the
ones who have other needs to attend to (after prayer), If one
prays by himself, one may prolong (the prayer) as much as
he wishes.” Agreed upon.

‎hy Le ary,‏ $58 و

‎436. “Amro bin Salamah (RAA) narrated, ‘My father said: I
have come to you from the one who is truly the Messenger of

‎Allah.’ The Messenger of Allah ¥ said to them, “When it is time
for prayer, then one of you should say the Adhén for pra-

‎153
yer, and let the one amongst you who is the most versed in
the Qur'an lead you in the prayer.” “Amro said, ‘So, they look-
ed for such a person and found none who was more versed in the
Qur’én than me, therefore they made me their Imam in prayer
and at that time I was only six or seven years old.’ Related by Al-
Bukhari, Aba Dawdd and An-Nas@’i

ele ti Lo ‏قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ - Se a ey - 9s gy ‏ب‎ trv

عَلَى تكْرمته ‎Sy‏ بإأنه». رَوَهُ ‎pe‏

437. Ibn Mas‘tid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “The one who should lead the people in prayer (who
has the most right) is the one who is most versed in the Book
of Allah. If they are equal in their recital, then the one who
is most knowledgeable in the Sunnah. If they are equal in
the Sunnah, then it is the one who migrated first. If they
are equal in that (ic. they all migrated at the same time), then
the earliest to embrace Isliim ‏مت‎ another narration- the eld-
est. No man should be an Imam for another man in prayer
if the other holds authority (ie. in a place where this latter has
authority in any capacity over the other), or occupy his place of
honor in his house without his permission.” Related by
Muslim

Hn 8 Vp : -

| ‏رَضب‎ - pe ‏من حَديث‎ LAU NG — 8

. ‏واه‎ SSL tg Feb YG carte Easy » ‏رَخْلاً‎

438. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 4
said, “A woman should never lead a man in prayer, neither
a desert Arab should lead an emigrant nor an immoral man
should lead a pious man.” Related by Ibn Majah, but with an
extremely weak chain of narrators,

154
‎hes — er‏ - رضي

‎Be yee Bee 1 ‏ميك‎ ee ‏لماعم‎ ee 3
«SRG 598 off ‏وَحَافُوا بالأغتاق». رََاهُ‎ GEE LLG » ‏صُفْرفَكُمْ‎

‎ese,

‎439. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3 said
“Line up close together in rows for prayer, and bring your
rows near one another and stand neck to neck.” Rela-ted by
Aba Dawad and An-Nasa’, and Ibn Hibbin graded it as Sahth.

‎hy ‏صَلَى‎ ain 05 Os ‏قَالَ‎ - te ‏الله‎ os - SA ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ 0
‏ور‎ GY JE ‏مُقُوف‎ sy Ly
. ‏ملم‎ ay, ‏وَسَيُهَا أوله».‎ wisi

‎440. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “The best rows for the men are the first rows
and the worst rows for them are the last rows. The best

‎rows for the women are the last rows and the worst for
them are the front rows.” Related by Muslim.

‏آخرهًاء وَخَيْرُ صُفُوف الَسَاءِ

‏يت مَعَ رَسُول الله صَلّى
سّاره » ‎eB‏ رَسُولُ الله ‎fo‏ الله ‎ee‏

‎Messenger of Allah 38, and I stood on his left side. He caught my
head from behind and drew me to his right side.” Agreed upon.

‎a eo ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ Len

‎fe - 447‏ - رضي اللَهُ 25 - قا

‎pie ‏وم‎ , tals ‏وَييمْ‎ en ‏وَسَلُمَ‎
‎442. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘One night an orphan and I prayed

‎behind the Prophet 28, and Um Sulaim (his mother) was standing
behind us (forming a row by herself).’ Agreed upon. The wording is
from Al-Bukhari.

‎155
‎sary : ploy‏ اللَهُ حرص ولا ‎ory) a‏ لبَْارِي » ورا

‏ُو ذاه فيه ‎S35:‏

‎443. Abii Bakrah (RAA) narrated that he reached the Prophet

‎in the mosque while he was performing rukit’ (bowing) in pra-‏ وك
‎yer, so Aba) Bakrah bowed too before he joined the row. He men-‏

‎tioned this to the Prophet 3 and he said to him, “May Allah
increase your love for goodness. But do not repeat that act

‎again (bowing before joining the row).”150 Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎Aba Dawid added to this narration, ‘He bowed before he reached
the row and then walked (bowing) to the row.’

‎ty Loo dn ‏رَسُولَ‎ ify - de thy ‏رضي‎ -

‎ttt‏ وَابسَة قر

‎Oe ‏ابن‎
‎444, Wabisah bin Ma’bad (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

‎of Allah 38 saw a man praying alone behind the row, so he ordered
him to repeat the prayer. Related by Ahmad, Abi Dawdd, At-
Tirmidht and it was rendered Sahih by Ibn Hibban.

‎445. Talq bin “Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
38 said, “Nobody should pray alone behind the row.” Related
by Ibn Hibban. At-Tabarani added in the Hadith of Wabisah,
“Couldn't you have joined them or pulled a man to be with
you and form a row?

‎150- One should not join the prayer until he reaches the row.
156
446, Abt Horairah ‏تحمس‎ narrated that the Prophet
“When you hear the Igaémah, proceed to the prayer with
calmness and dignity and do not rush. Pray what you can
(with the congregation) and complete what you miss.” Agre-
ed upon and the wording is from Al-Bukhért.

‎EY‏ دوعن أن بن كنب - ر

‏الله %~ : قَالَ ‎fe hb,‏ الله

‏عَلَيْهِ ‎SNR Bons Se» py‏ من صَلأَتَه وَحْدَهُ » ‎BBs‏
‎IA‏ من صلا ‎Bn‏ » وما ‎Jats BI OB‏ اله - عر
‎JS‏ -». رَوَاهُ أ حَّحَهُ ابن ‎OG‏

‏رَوَاهُ أبُو 548 » ‎IN‏ » وص
‎Ubay bin Ka’b (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of‏ .447

‎Allah 38 said,“A man’s prayer performed along with another
man (ie. in congregation) is better than his prayer on his
own, and his prayer with two men is better than his prayer
along with (just) another man. But if there are more people
it would be more pleasing to Allah, the Almighty.” Related
by Aba Dawad and An-Nas@’t and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎wal gis + - Gi ‏الله‎ p25 - BH ‏وعن‎ 448

‏أن 2 ‎eG OM‏ رَوَاهُ أبُو 558 » وَصّحُّحَهُ ‎SN‏ حُرَئِمَة .

‎448. Umm Waraqah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 instructed her to lead the women of her household (in the
obligatory prayer. Related by Abd Dawad and Ibn Khuzaimah
graded it as Sahih.

‏5 ح وَعَنْ ‎at‏ - رضي ‎te th‏ - : «أنا الي ‎pha ale Dh fhe‏ سنتف

‏وم اناس « ‎AS‏ أَعْمَى». ر:
‎appointed Ibn‏ يك ‎Anas (RAA): ‘The Messenger of Allah‏ .449

‎23318 gly « ‏أحْمَدُ‎ erie

‎157
Umm Maktam to lead the people in prayer and he was blind’
Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawid.

. - GE ‏رضي الله تعالى‎ - Case ‏عَنْ‎ OL ‏لان‎ By — 5٠
450. ‏مطل‎ Hibban narrated a similar narration on the authority
of “A’ishah (RAA).

رَوَاهُ ‎iss BN‏ بإستّاد ضعيف

451, Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎said, “Offer the funeral prayer for the one who says (i.e.‏ عله
‎believes) “There is none worthy of worship but Allah,” and‏
‎pray behind (take him as your Imam) the one who says (belie-‏
‎ves), “There is none worthy of worship but Allah.” Related by‏
‎Ad-Daraqutni with a weak chain of narrators,‏

‎th ‏رَضي‎ - ede 1 ‏وَعَنْ‎ — 5
JE ‏ُلَى‎ ayy, SEAN ‏كم‎

‎. ‏ضعيف‎ ath GLE ‏رو‎ pay Sai

‎452, “Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38 said,
“When any of you comes to the prayer and the Imam is in a
certain position (in prayer) he must do what the Imém is
doing.” Related by At-Tirmidhi with a weak chain of narrators,
(its chain of transmitters is also disconnected).

‎GL‏ صلا الْمُسَافر وَالْمَرِيِضٍ

‎Chapter XI: The Prayer of a Traveler and
the Prayer of the ill.

‎Sit ‏ما فرصت‎ Sb ‏قلت‎ - ge th ‏حي‎

‎. ‏عليه‎ Be ‏الخصتر».‎ Be at, Se Sb es;

‎- L486 825 tor

‎shah (RA) narrated, ‘When prayer was first enjoined
158

‎453.
by Allah, the Almighty, it was only two rak’at (in every prayer,
whether in residence or on journeys). The prayer of the traveler
was later confirmed as being two rak“ét while two more rak’ét
were added to (the original prayer) for the one who is resident
(except for the Maghrib and the Fajr prayers). Agreed upon.

fi Be wii » ‏بع‎

«IM ‏عَلَى‎
‎454. In the narration of Al-Bukhari, ‘Then he emigrated 48, so

prayer was then prescribed as four rak @t, while the prayer of the
traveler was left as it was originally prescribed (i.c. two rak at).

ده — ‎Sy ued) 32 WB Opa Vp sists‏ املح ‎GS‏ طول

al ‏فيا‎

455. Imam Ahmad added in his narration, ‘except for the Ma
ghrib prayer as it is the witr of the daytime and the dawn prayer
due to its lengthy Qur'anic recital.”

5 ‏ويفطر». رَوَاة ؛ ورواة‎ pats

456. ‏ممطمتق”‎ (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 us-
ed to shorten the prayer in his travels and also used to offer the
full prayer. He also used to fast or not fast during his journeys.”

Related by Imam Ad-Daraquini.1! This Hadith has a defect, as it
ishah (RAA), who used to do this, and she

is known that it is

151- The narrators of this Hadith are trustworthy,but it has a defect (shdh),
as it is only attributed to “A’ishah (RAA) and not to the Prophet 3%, as
she is describing what she used to do, and not what the Prophet 38 used

to do, There is a consensus among the scholars that the Prophet
never offered more than two rak“@i on a journey, and all the trustworthy
narrators agreed on this (see for example 'Sahth Al-Bukhar’)

159
said, ‘It is not difficult for me (i.e. to pray the full prayer and fast
during journeys). Related by Al-Baihaqi.

dh ‏َو لله متلى‎ 08 2 cane

ON SR Pees 2 aka

sige ‏ثؤتى‎ Fat CS :

457. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

345 said, “Allah, the Almighty likes people to make use of His
concessions as much as He dislikes people to commit an
act of disobedience to Allah.” Related by Ahmad. Ibn Khuzai-
mah and Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sakth. In another narration, “as
much as He likes people to observe the duties He has made
obligatory.”

Bh fo ‏«كَانَ 305 اللّه‎ : OE
‏رَوَاهُ ملم‎ 65 Soo « ‏ألا راح‎ » SOE ‏حرج مسي‎ gy

458. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah 3

traveled for a distance of three miles or (Farsakhas**?) he would

pray two rak’ét (i.e. shorten the prayer which was originally four
rak‘@t), Related by Muslim.

‎ipo :‏ مع رول الله ‎bd‏ 4

‎459. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘We traveled with the Prophet 38
from Madinah to Makkah and he used to pray two rak @t (for
every prayer) until we returned to Madinah.” Agreed upon, and
the wording is from Al-Bukhart

‎152. A Farsabh is a Persian measure, which is equal to three miles. The nar-
rator was in doubt whether he said miles or Farsakhs.

‎160
460. Thn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Prem of Allah Es
once stayed for nineteen days shortening the prayer.’ In another
narration, (stayed) at Makkah for nineteen days.’ Related by Al-
Bukhéri. In a narration by Abi Dawid, ‘seventeen’, and in ano-
ther narration, ‘fifteen.’

Wipe gtdy : - 82 th ‏حُصَيْنَ - رضي‎ Soe eGo
461. Aba Dawéd also related, on the authority of ‘Imran bin
Husain (RAA), ‘for eighteen days.’

ali Cy ia fae Oy Gt: - Ke ‏وله عَنْ حابر - رضي الله‎ ny
. ‏الف في وَضْله‎ IY Gt Gy SS
462. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 28 stayed at Tabak for twenty days, he shortened the prayer
(during his stay)’ Related by Aba Dawad.

463. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever the Messenger of Allah

3% started on a journey before the sun had passed its meridian
(before noon), he would delay the Dhuhr prayer till the time of
‘Asr and then combine them together, and if the sun declined (pas-
sed the meridian) before he traveled, he used to pray the Dhuhr
prayer and then ride (for the journey). Agreed upon. In a narra-

161

‎Ero‏ المرام»
tion by Al-Hakim with a sound chain of narrators, ‘He 38 prayed
Dhuhr and ‘Asr (combined) and then rode (for his journey),’ Abt

Nu’aim related, ‘Whenever he was on a journey, % and the sun

had declined, he would pray Dhuhr and “Asr combined and then
proceed on his journey.’

bb Lees: J - 1 ‏الله‎ Gos seh ay nt
reas Lapis tad atl, abn ‏يُصَلّي‎ OS ‏؛‎ ase ley

464. Mu‘édh (RAA) narrated, ‘We set out with the Prophet 3%

on the expedition of Tabiik, and he combined Dhuhr and “Asr toge-

ther, and combined the Maghrib and Isha’ prayers.’ Related by
Muslim.

465. Tn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah said,
“Do not shorten the prayer (while traveling) for a distance
less than four Buruds (each Burd equals 16 Farsakh), from
Makkah to Usafan.” Related by Ad-Daraqutni, but its chain of
narrators has “Abdul Wahab bin Mujahid who was accused of
lying in Hadith, by Imam Ath-Thawry.

466. Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “The best ones in my nation are those who
seek Allah's forgiveness when they do wrong, and when on
a journey they shorten the prayer and break their fast.’Rel-
ated by At-Tabarant in his ‘Awsat,’ with a weak chain of narrators.

162

467. ‘Imran bin Hugain (RAA) narrated, I had hemorrhoids,

so I asked the Prophet 38 about the prayer and he said, “Pray
while standing and if you cannot do so, pray while sitting,
and if you can not do that, then pray while lying on your
side.” Related by Al-Bukhart.

Ogee

Ny
4
5 ga fl
468. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 8 visited a sick person and found him praying while
sitting on a cushion. The Prophet pushed it aside and said to him:
"Pray while sitting on the ground if you can, and if you can
not, then pray by nodding your head, and make a lower
nodding for prostration than that for bowing (ruki).”
Related by Al-Baihaqi.

tin ‏فَالَتْ : «رأيْت الي صَلَى‎ - ie | (ga - LE ey ‏ل‎
‎. ‏التَاكم‎ coy YG alg ‏وَسَلُم بلي‎
469. ‘Aishah (RAA) narrated, ‘I saw the Messenger of Allah

#8 praying while he was sitting cross-legged.’ Related by An-
Nasa, and al-Hakim graded it as Sa:

163
Chapter XU: The Friday (Jum’ah) Prayer

Leta th : - ‏وَسَلميقُولُ - على أطواد مثيره‎ de i,

470. ‘Abdullah Ibn Umar and Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated

that they heard the Messenger of Allah 38 say, while standing on
his pulpit, “Those who are not attending the Jum‘ah (Fri-
day) prayer should stop doing so, otherwise, Allah the Exa-
Ited, will seal their hearts and they will be reckoned among

the heedless.” Related by Muslim.

471. Salamah bin Al-Akwa’ (RAA) narrated, ‘We used to offer

the Jum ‘ah prayer with the Prophet 38, and by the time we retur-
ned from the prayer, the walls would have no shade (enough to

shelter us from the heat).’59 Agreed upon. The wording is from Al-

Bukhari.
In the version of Muslim, ‘We would pray the Friday prayer with

the Prophet # when the sun had passed the meridian, and when
we returned (from prayer) we would be following the shade (i.e.

153- What he means is that the shade of the walls is not enough to sit in for
protection from the heat of the sun, not that the walls had no shade at

all. This means that the Prophet 3 used to finish the Jum ‘ah prayer at
an early time, not long after the sun had passed the meridian.

164
searching for any shade- that we could walk in- to protect our-
selves from the heat of the sun).’

472. Sahl bin Sa‘d (RAA) narrated, we never had an after-
noon nap or lunch till after offering the Jum’ah prayer.’ Agreed
upon and the wording is from Muslim. In another narration, ‘In

the lifetime of the Prophet 3.’

7 Os 25 th

473, Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 was
standing (on his pulpit) delivering the Khutbah (sermon) on Fri-
day, when a caravan arrived from Syria. The people slipped out
(from the mosque) towards the caravan, until only twelve men

were left (with the Prophet ‏وك‎ to pray Jum‘ah).® Related by
Muslim.

474, ‏مطل‎ ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Whoever catches only one ‏عله عله"‎ of the Jum ‘ah pra-
yer, or any other prayer, be should then add to it another

154- It was on this occasion that this verse with regard to Jum‘ak was revea-
led." And when they see merchandise or some amusement they dis-
perse headlong to it, and leave you standing."

165
one,!and his prayer will be complete.” Related by ‏,قمد الصف‎

Ibn Majah, Ad-Daraqutni and the wording is his, with a sound
chain of narrators.

thy ‏«أن التي صَلّى‎ : - Se Jer th ‏رضي‎ - Bho ‏بن‎ We bey — eve

475. Sabir bin Samurah (RA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 would deliver the Khuthah (sermon) on Friday while
standing, and then would sit, and then he would stand and speak
again. So, whoever says that he gave the Khutbah (sermon) while
sitting, he would be lying.’ Related by Muslim.

Soo ‏قال : 08 رول الله‎ - eh 05 - ‏ين عبد الله‎ ge ‏داة - وَعَنْ‎
Reb Sty ye ‏وَعَلاَ‎ he Sy Cy cy le ‏الله‎

‎{Jed‏ ]23 :ا(
‎ge Sp (sy [ra‏ )18
‎Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘When Allah's Mes-‏ .476

‎senger 4 delivered the Khutbah (sermon), his eyes would become
red, his voice would (gradually) rise, and he would become filled
with fervor, like one who is giving a warning to an army (against

‎ فارغألا[‎ (ign 58

‎an expected enemy) saying: 55 ‘The enemy has made a morning at-

‎- Or more ‏يق بوم‎ -if not in the Jum ah - to complete the number of ral
which is left, whether one or more,
156- Who is meant here is the one giving the warning to the army, not that

‎the Prophet 3 is saying this
166
tack on you (or an evening attack).’ The Messenger of Allah then
says, “The best of speech (ever said) are those of the Book of
Allah, and the best of guidance is that given by Muhammad
3%, and the most evil of matters are those which are inno-
vated,!57 and each Bid’ah (an innovation in religion, whether in

worship or fundamentals) is considered as a form of misgui-
dance.” Related by Muslim. In another narration by Muslim, Ja-
bir said, ‘The Friday Khutbah (sermon) of the Messenger of Allah
‏يلق‎ would be that he praises Allah, the Exalted and then would say
while his voice is rising, In another narration, (he would say),
“Whomever Allah guides no one can lead him astray, and
whomever Allah leaves astray, will have no one to guide
him.”

Ina narration by An-Nasa’i, “and every misguidance (i.¢. Bid-
‘ah) is in Hell.”

fo bags tie : 36 - ‏ري للع‎ -

477. ‘Ammar bin Yasir (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 say, “Prolonging the prayer and shortening
one’s Khutbah is a sign of one’s comprehension of his reli-
gion.” Related hy Muslim.

Rear pO by ‏عى الم‎ ach IF ‏يق‎ de

478. Umm Hisham bint Harithah bin an-Nu’man (RAA) nar-
rated, ‘I learnt stirah “Qaf. By the Glorious Qur’én” (no. 50:1),
from the Prophet 3 for he recited it upon the pulpit every Friday,
when he addressed the people in the Friday Khutbah.’ Related by
Muslim.

157- Innovated in religion and not innovated in worldly matters if they do not
contradict the fundamentals of Islam,

167
‎At‏ وني ‎Beh tal ay‏ حتفف وا ‎AS sey wb‏ أ

‎CSS otal ‏أبي هريرة في‎ ous AY
479, ‏مطل‎ “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎& said: “Whoever speaks in the Jum‘ah while the Imam is
delivering the Khutbah is like a donkey who is carrying bo-
oks, and for he who tells him to be quiet, there will be no
(reward) for his Jum‘ah prayer.” Related by Ahmad with an
acceptable chain of narrators. This Hadith explains the following
Hadith narrated by Aba Hurairah.

‎480. Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated, “If during the Jum‘ah
prayer while the Imam is delivering the Khutbah, you tell
your companion to be quiet, then you have spoken needles-
sly (spoken evil talk or vain talk).” Agreed upon.

‎481. Jabir Ibn “Abdullah (RA) narrated, ‘Aman entered the
mosque while the Prophet 28 was delivering the Khutbah on Fri-
day. The Prophet 38 said to him, “Have you prayed?” The man

‎replied in the negative. The Prophet 3% said, “Get up and pray
two rak “Gt.” Agreed upon.

‎hey ‏عليه‎ th Le ‏«أن اَي‎ go Cate ‏رَضِي الله‎ lle ‏وَعَسنٍ ان‎ — tat
. ‏وَالْمُنافقِين». رَوَاهُ مُسئلمٌ‎ AG ‏الْجُمُعَة‎ Se ‏يقرا في‎ oO
482. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

‎used to recite in the Jum‘ah prayer, Sirah al-Jum ‘ah (no. 62) and
Stirah al-Munéfiqain (no. 63).’ Related by Muslim.

‎168

١ Hig oS : ‏قَالَ‎ - a hos - 25 gf ‏الْمَان‎
‏حَديث‎ uF ‏وَْهَلْ‎ [ys ‏الأعْلَى) [الأغلّى‎ Gs I A}

483. Numan bin Al-Bashir (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger

of Allah 38 used to recite in the two ‘ids and the Jum’ah prayer,
strah al-Alé (no. 87), “Glorify the Name of Your Lord”, and
siirah al-Ghashiyah (no. 88), “Has there come to you the
narration of the overwhelming (the Day of Resurrection).
Related by Muslim.

484. Zaid bin Arqam (RAA) narrated, ‘The Prophet 38 prayed
the id prayer and then gave an exemption concerning the Jum ‘ah
prayer, and said, “Whoever wishes to pray it may pray it (ie.
the Jum ‘ah).” Related by the five Imams except for At-Tirmidht,
and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as S¢

5 — وَعَنْ أبي ‎U5 - Se a5 - BA‏ قَالَ رَسُولْ اللّه صَلّى الله ‎eke‏

LP ‏رَوَاهُ‎ taf ats Joel nh ‏صَلّى أحَدْكُمُ‎ ps chy

485. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said: “Whoever prays the Jum’ah, should pray four
rak’at after it.” Related by Muslim.

WW ‏رضي‎ - ag of LEN 5 ey

رَسُولَ الله صلّى ‎bh‏
‏أ ‎ES‏ روا ‎pe‏

486. As-Sa'ib bin Yazid (RAA) narrated that ‘Mu‘awiyah
(RAA) said to him, ‘Whenever you have prayed the Jum‘ah, you

169
should not follow it (immediately) with another prayer, unless you
have talked or gone out (of the mosque), as the Messenger of Allah

38 has ordered us to do so, and that we do not follow it with ano-
ther prayer unless we talk or go out.’ Related by Muslim.

487. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Whoever performs Ghust (full ritual washing),
then comes to the Jum‘ah Prayer, and prays as many (rak-
Gt) as much as(Allah has) written for him, and then remains
silent and listens until the Imam finishes his Khutbah, and
then prays with him, his sins - between this present Friday
and the next one- would be forgiven, and even(sins of) three
days more.” Related by Muslim.

هده # وله - رضي ‎Ste‏ نول لله مثلى لله

000000011 ‏ز ز‎ narrated that the Mecsenger of AL

lah 38 said mentioning the (virtues of) Friday, “On Friday, there
is an ‘hour,’ in which no Muslim, who matches (this hour)
praying and asking Allah for something, except that Allah
will grant him whatever he asked for.” The Messenger of
Alléh pointed with his hand indicating how short that hour is.”
Agreed upon. In the version of Muslim, “It is a short period of
time.”

4 رَعَنْ أبي بز" عَنْ ‎al‏ رَضِي ‎ee th‏
صلَى الله ‎oy ob‏ 8 : «هي ‎GEG‏ أن يَخْلِسَ الام إلى أن ‎aN ad‏
170

«pl ay,
489. Abii Burdah'8 narrated on the authority of his father, ‘I

heard the Messenger of Allah say: “It is (i.e. this hour), between
the time when the Imam sits (i.c. upon the pulpit) and the
time that the prayer is completed.” Related by Muslim, but
Imam Ad-Daraqutni says that it is the saying of Aba Burdah and

159

not the narration of the Prophet 4

‎ta‏ 441 ل وّفي حَديث عَبْد الله بن ‎SO‏ عند ابن مَاجَه ‏ وَعَنّْ ‎We‏ علد

‏أبي 6545 وَالنَسَائِيّ : ‎Gy‏ صّلاة ‎Sey Fadl‏ الششّمْس»

‏وَقَدْ ‎Gale‏ فيهًا عَلَى أكثرَ من أَربَعينَ قؤلا لها في سَرْح ‎SIE‏

‎490, 491. Ibn Majah narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah bin
Salam, while Imams Aba Dawid and An-Nasa’i narrated on the
authority of Jabir bin “Abdullah: “It is between the time of al
‘Asr prayer and sunset.” Scholars differed as to the exact time
of this hour, up to almost forty different sayings. I mentioned all of

‎them in ‘Fath-ul-Bari(the interpretation of ‘Sahih al-Bukhdrt".160

‎Gah ‏في كل‎ FEN ‏«تعت‎ : Ob - ‏حابر - رضي الله عَنْهُ‎ ay
‏ضعيف‎ sty Lob ‏قَصّاعدًا جُمَعَة». رَوَاهُ‎

‎492. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘It is from the Sun.
nah of the Prophet 3 that the Jum ‘ah prayer can only be held,
when forty people or more congregate for 160161 Related by Ad-Dar-

‎He is “Amir bin “Abdullah bin Qais and his father is Abd MUsé al-‏ وقد
‎Ash‘ari (the famous companion of the Prophet 48).‏

‎159. Scholars have different opinions as to the time of this hour, but most say
that it is probably after ‘Asr, i.e. towards the end of the day and not
during the Friday prayer.

‎160- This final comment is by Imam ibn Hajar, the author of ‘Bulagh al-
Marém.’

‎161- Imam ag-San‘ani in ‘Subul as-Salém,' says that the Jum’ah could be
held with at least three people, as they form a congregation (and this is
the opinion of the Hanafi), and some scholars are of the opinion that two
could also hold a Jama’ah, There is no evidence from the Hadith of the

‎71

aqutni with a weal chain of ‏02م ممم‎

N doo ‏ابي‎ fy: ath
. ‏رٌ بإستاد لين‎ Soy) ٠ its I
493. Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated, The Messenger of

Allah 38 used to seek Allah’s forgiveness for the believers (males
and females) every Friday (in the Khutbah of Jum‘ah), Related by
Al-Bazzér with a weak chain of narrators.

57 سَمرَة ل

َه : «أن لبي صَلَى الله
‎out hy‏ من ‎UE » 58 agg «Sc otal‏ في ‎dled‏
‎Jabir bin Saumrah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger‏ .494

of Allah 38 would recite some verses from the Qur’an during the
Friday Khutbah, and would remind people (about Allah).’ Related
by Aba Dawid.

Ah ‏كَانَ في‎ by oe Ly 54

: hye wees aah,
495. Tariq bin Shihab (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Al-Jum ah is a compulsory duty upon every
Muslim in a community (of Muslims), save four: a slave, a
woman, a child, or a person who is ill.”Related by Aba Dawid
who commented that Tariq did not hear the Hadith from the Pro-
phet 38. Al-Hakim related the Hadith on the authority of Tariq
who transmitted it on the authority of Abi Musa.

Prophet 38 stating an exact number as a condition for the Jum’ah to be
held, and that is why most scholars say that any number which is
suitable for a Jamé ‘ah prayer is valid for the -Jum ‘ah.

162. The chain of narrators has “Abdul ‘Aziz bin “Abdur Rahman who is con-
sidered a liar, and a fabricator of Hadith,

172

ee ‏قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلّى الله‎ - ete ‏ابن عُمَرَ - رضي اللَهُ‎ yoy
. ‏بإستاد ضعيف‎ Lid ty, ‏حُمُعَةُ».‎ ae eth : oy
496. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

# said, “Al-Jum‘ah prayer is not obligatory for the trave-
ler.” Related by At-Tabarni with a weak chain of narrators.

M25 ‏«كَانَ‎ : 06 - te ‏الله‎ yo) - ‏مَسْعُود‎ gdh sty ay

3 بوْحُوهنا». رَوَاهُ ‎AEB‏

497, ‘Abdullah Tbn Mas‘€d (RAA) narrated, “When the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 mounted the pulpit, he would turn his face to
us’ Related by At-Tirmidhi with a weak chain of narrators.

Lp ‏ان‎ Le oth ene ‏من‎ ate ‏وَلَهُ‎ - 8

498. ‘The above Hadith is supported by another narration on
the authority of Al-Bara bin ‘Azib, related by Ibn Khuzaimah.

ELS ‏قَالَ : «شهانا‎ - we ‏ر يّ الله‎ - BF ‏بن‎ Soh yes — 6
Sb fh ‏رَوَاهُ‎ oi ‏حصا أوا‎ Je Be ps oly ah ‏على الله‎
499. Al-Hakam bin Hazn (RAA) narrated, ‘We attended the

Jum‘ah with the Prophet $8 and he stood leaning on a stick or on

a bow.’163 Related by Aba Dawid.

163- Imam Ibnul Qaiyim says that the Prophet 3 used to lean on a stick or a
bow before the pulpit was made for him, and none of the Companions
‘mentioned that he leaned on anything after the pulpit was made.

173
Chapter XII: Prayer During Times of
Fear or Danger (Salétul Khauf)

500. Salih bin Khawwat (RAA) on the authority of those who
prayed Salétul Khauf (prayer during time of danger) with the Pro-

phet 38 at the battle of Dadt ar-Riga’, ‘A group lined up with the

Prophet #8 -and prayed along with him- while another group faced
the enemy. He prayed one rak‘ah with the group that was with
him and remained standing while they finished the prayer (by
praying another rak ah) and then left and faced the enemy. The
second group came and prayed the remaining rak‘ah with him,
then he remained sitting until they had completed their prayers
themselves, after which he led them in making the Taslim.’Agreed
upon, and the wording is from Muslim.

2 ‏عن‎ GE oi ‏وَسَحَد‎
‎501. Ibn “Umar (RAA), narrated, 1 took part in a battle with
the Prophet 3%, in Najd. We faced the enemy and arranged ourse-

174
Ives in rows. Then the Messenger of Allah 28 stood up to lead the
prayer. A group lined up to pray with him while the other faced

the enemy. The Prophet #2 bowed in ‏لقعب‎ and the first group
bowed with him and then he performed two prostrations. The first
group then left (after praying one rak‘ah) and took place of those
who had not yet prayed. The second group came to pray with the

Prophet 3 and he prayed one rak‘ah and performed two prostra-
tions and then said the Taslim. Then the latter group stood up
and prayed another rak‘ah and performed two prostrations on

their own.’ Agreed upon, and the wording is from Al-Bukhari.1%

egy Saal, ky

t
h

بالشُجُود ‎tty‏ الذي ‎pl a‏ الصف ‎pth‏ في كر ‎SB ah‏
23 ¢ لذي ‎«wad‏ َذَكَرَ الْحَدِيث

َم تأر ‎Caden‏ الأول وتقدمَ الصف الاني» » 555 ‎oe By the‏

Ll ay elias ley che ‏عليه‎ ain ‏الب صَلّى‎
502. JAbir bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘I prayed Saldtul

Khauf (prayer when one is afraid) with the Prophet #8 and he
arranged us in two rows behind him. The enemy was between us
and the Qiblah (ie. the enemy in this case was in the direction of

the Qiblah). The Prophet 38 made the Takbir and we all followed

164. Imam. ag-San‘Gnt in ‘Subul as-Salém’ says that it is apparent that the
second group completed their prayer, and prayed a second rak’ah, after
the Imam made the Tastim without disconnecting their prayer. The first
group did not complete their prayer until the second group had comp-
leted theirs and returned to face the enemy and guard the rest of the
army, and then they would pray their second rak‘ah. This is another
way of performing the prayer when one is afraid. (the fear prayer)

175
him. Then he made ‏“غيم‎ and we all performed ‏“قطي‎ after him.
‘Then he raised his head from the ruké’ and we all raised our

heads from the ‏“قاسم‎ Next, the Prophet 38 went down for Sujaid
(prostration) as well as the row closest ‏ما‎ him (i.e. the front row),

while the back row stood facing the enemy until the Prophet ‏يل‎
‎and the first row had completed their prostration, after which the
back row performed Sujiid and then stood. Following this, those in
the back row moved to the front, while those in the front row

moved to the back. The Prophet 3 performed the ruka” and we all
performed rwkii’. Then, he raised his head and we raised our heads
from ruka’. Afterward, he made the Sujtid and the row that was
previously in the back during the first ra ‘ah prostrated with him
while the [new] back row stood facing the enemy. When the Pro-
phet and the (new] front row had completed their Sujdd, the Inew]
back row performed Sujtid. Finally, the Prophet made the Taslim
and we followed him in this.’ Related by Ahmad, Muslim and An-
Nasa’.

In another narration, ‘...then he prostrated and the first row pros-
trated with him. When they stood, the second row performed
Sujitd...’ and mentioned the same as the rest of the first Hadith.’

Finally, ‘Then the Prophet 38 made the Taslim and we all made
the Taslim with him.’ Related by Muslim.

يعُسْفان».

1 ME AGE «555 ‏أبي‎
‎503. Abd Dawid related on the authority of Aba ‘Aiyash az-
Zuragi, a similar Hadith with the following addition, ‘Tt was per-

formed (ie. the fear prayer) at ‘Usfan.’

« : 5b »

لانم

tial ‏من‎ ttl he play ‏الله عَليْه‎

504. An-Nasa’i narrated on the authority of Jabir (RAA), with

a different chain of narrators that the Messenger of Allah 38 pra-
yed two rak‘Gt with one group of his companions and then made
the Tuslim. Then he prayed another two rak‘at with another
group, and then made the Taslim.

176
505. Aba Dawdd transmitted a similar narration on the auth-
ority of Aba Bakrah.

» ‏ركع و يَقْضُوا». رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ‎ Sis Hs Ve Gy sh Se

وَأبُو 55 » ‎Yd‏ وَصّححَهُ ان

506, Hudhaifah (RAA), narrated, “The Messenger of Allah
prayed the fear prayer with his companions. He led one group in
one rak‘ah, and then the other group in one rak’ah, and they did
not pray a second rak“ah (to complete two rak Gt as they had in
the previous cases). Related by Ahmad, Ab Dawéd, an-Nasé’i and
was graded as Sahth by Ibn Hibban.

. - Wig th ‏رضي‎ - Me ‏عن ان‎ CIE ‏ند ان‎ thy ony

507. ‏مطل‎ Khuzaimah transmitted a similar Hadith on the au-
thority of Ibn “Abbas.

508. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Prophet 38 said, “Sal-
Gtul Khauf (the fear prayer) is one rak’ah and is to be per-
formed in any way.” Related by Al-Bazzar with a weak chain of
narrators.

9ه ‎ey‏ مَرْفُوعًا : ‎Sih‏ صا
‎Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Prophet 3% said,‏ .509
‎“There is no Sujiid as-Sahu (prostration due to forgetfulness‏
‎during prayer), to be performed in Saldtul Khauf.” Related by‏
‎Ad-Daraqutni with a weak chain of narrators.‏

17
Chapter XIV: The Prayer of the Two ‘id Festivals

oe thy Le ‏قَالَ 05 الله‎ : i - ie ‏عَائشَةٌ - رضي الله‎ ts - ه٠‎

مذي

den ‏رَوَاهُ‎ lth Seal ey ‏اس » وَالأَضْحَّى‎ jee ‏يوم‎ Daly : ‏وَسَلمّ‎

510. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎said, ‘Breaking the fast at the end of Ramadan is (dete
ined) when people break their fast, and ‘fdul Ad-hé (the ‘id
of sacrifice), is (determined) when people offer their sacri-

fices.65 Related by at-Tirmidhi.

mt Aion

الصحَاية : «أن ركبا جامرا»

CB pA » ‏بالأشي‎ Sul pat shes
‏مُصَلاَمْي.‎ Sh 1s ‏يُفْطرُوا» وَإذَا أَصْبَحُوا أن‎ of toy ee Cin ‏صَلى‎

. ‏وَإسْتَادُهُ صّحيحٌ‎ Aad ‏وَهَذَا‎ SY ‏وَأبُو‎ » Magy,
511. Aba Umair bin Anas ibn Malik (RAA) narrated on the
authority of some of his uncles from among the Companions of the

Prophet ‏وك‎ that some riders came and testified that they had seen
the crescent (of the new moon) the previous night. Thereupon, the

Messenger of Allah 4% ordered the people to break their fast, and
to go out to their praying place (where they pray the ‘fd prayer)
the next morning (to perform the ‘Id prayer in congregation)."15

Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawad, and the wording is his, with a
sound chain of narrators.

165. Some scholars said that this Hadith refers to the fact that one should
start fasting and break his fast with the Muslim community, and do as
they do, The same applies for the day of sacrifice

166- In the Hadith there lies evidence that it is possible to pray the ‘id pra-
yer on the second day of “d, if people did not know that the erescent had
already been seen, except after the time of prayer has passed , as in this
Hadith. It is also evidence that if one misses the ‘fd prayer for any rea-
son, he may go out and pray it the following day.

178
a)

512. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The messenger of Allah 38 would
not go out on the Day of ‘idul Fitr (Festival of breaking the fast)
until he had eaten some dates.’ Related by Al-Bukh:
narration by Ahmad, there is the additional phrase, ‘He would eat

38 an odd number of dates.”

‎ovr‏ — وَعَن ‎BY gh‏ عَنْ أبيه - ‎eye Dh es‏ - قَالَ : «كَانَ 05 الله

‎Git, sty, ke‏ و"

‎513. Ab@ Buraidah narrated on the authority of his father
(RAA), ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 would not go out on the Day of
‘Idul Fitr, until he had eaten (something), and on the Day of ‘idul

‎Ad-ha he would not eat until he had returned from the prayer.”
Related by Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi and Sahil

‎514. Umm ‘Atiyah (RAA) related, ‘We were ordered to come
to the prayer of the two “fds and (even) bring out with us the
young (virgin) girls (who had not yet reached puberty) and the

‎menstruating women, so they might witness the good(seen)!®? and

‎the Takbir and supplications of the Muslims. However, the mens-
truating women would keep away from the praying place (i.e. sta-
nd to the side and watch).’ Agreed upon

‎167- Of performing the ‘fd prayer in congregation, that everybody joins in
including children, and women, except for the menstruating women,

‎179
515. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 28,
Abii Bakr and ‘Umar used to offer the two ‘fds prayer before the
Khutbah.’ Agreed upon,

516. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 55
went out to the ‘Id prayer and prayed the two rak’ét (of the ‘fd )
and did not offer any other prayer before or after it’ Related by
the seven Imams.

517. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3,
offered the ‘fd prayer without calling for the Adhdn or Igaémah.’
Related by Aba Dawid.

ey Lo LB Sy : WG - 2 ‏وَعَسنْ أبي سعيد - رَضي الله‎

518. Aba Sa‘id (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎never used to observe any prayer before the ‘fd prayer, but when
he returned home, he would pray two rak‘@t.’ Related by Ibn
‘Majah with a good chain of narrators.

‎wy 018‏ ل : «كَان ‎ey is ps th fe fh‏ الفطر والأضطحى
إلى ‎SG « Seth‏ يا يندأ به ‎Hoan‏ ثم مره ‎BB‏ مايل لثمي « ‎[Ay‏

‎. ‏عليه‎ BE IE pl « ‏عَلَى طفُوفهم‎
519. ‏قطة‎ 5510 (RAA) narrated, ‘On the Days of ‘fdul Fitr and

‎180
‘Idul Ad-hé, the Messenger of Allah 38 would go out to the pray-
ing place, and the first thing that he started with was the ‘fd pra-
Oyer, and when he had finished he would stand facing the people,
while the people were sitting in rows, and he would admonish
them and advise them.’ Agreed upon.

Sandal (shh

520. ‘Amro bin Shu’aib (RAA) on the authority of his father
on the authority of his grandfather! (May Allah be pleased with

all of them), narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah $2 would make
seven Takbirdt in the first rak‘ah of the ‘fd prayer, and five Tak-
birét in the second, and then he would start reciting the Qur'an,
after the Takbirat in each rak ah.’ Related by Aba Dawa.

521. Aba Wagid Al-Laithi (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of
Allah 48 used to recite in the prayer of ‘Idul Ad-hé, “Qaf. By the
Glorious Qur’én” (stirah no. 50:1) and “The Hour has drawn
near, and the moon has been cleft asunder."(sitrah no. 54:1).
Related by Muslim.

oe ‏الله‎ Le ‏الله‎ 5 Ob : ‏فَالَ‎ - Sh ‏رضي‎ - Ge ‏وَعَنْ‎ oy
Ged ot ‏العيد حالف الطريق».‎ By ‏كَانَ‎ ty ghey

522. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘On the days of “Id, the Messenger

of Allah 38 would take different routes (i.e. would go to the prayer
in one way, and return home in another.’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

168. He is ‘Amro bin Shu’aib bin Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah bin “Amro bin

181
LUBE ‏عن ابن حمر‎ 538 oh — ovr

523. Abd Dawid narrated a similar narration on the autho-
rity of Ibn Umar.

prey 20.85 «558 ‏أب‎ eel ‏الأضلحى » وَيَوْمَ الفطر»‎ Fy

524. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah 38
came to Madinah, they had two days of sport and amusement. The
Prophet 38 said, “Allah, the Exalted has exchanged these
days for two days better than them; the day of sacrifice
(Idul Ad-héJand the day of breaking the fast(Idul Fitr).” Rela-
ted by Aba Dawid and an-Nasé’i with a sound chain of narrators.

yore

عن ‎tlh os - ie‏ 88 - قَالَ : «من ‎OES‏ يرج ‎J‏ العيد
‎ES GLB Oy, ele‏
‎‘Ali (RAA) narrated, ‘It is an act of the Sunnah of the‏ .525

Prophet 32 to go out to the ‘fd prayer walking.’ Related by At-
Tirmidhi, who graded it as Hasan (good).

526. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘It was raining on the day
of ‘Id, so the Prophet 3% led them in the ‘/d prayer inside the

mosque."9

169- It is preferable to pray the ‘fd prayer in a place outside the city, in an
open area, unless there is an excuse such as rain, in which case it could

be prayed in the mosque. The Prophet 3 prayed the two ‘Id prayers in
the outskirts of Madinah,

182
Chapter XV: The Prayer During a Solar Eclipse

527. Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah (RAA) narrated, “The sun ecli-

psed during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah 38 on the day
when (his son) Ibrahim died. So, the people said that the sun had
eclipsed because of the death of Ibrahim, Allah's Messenger 38
said, “The sun and the moon are two miracles created by
Allah. They do not eclipse for the death or life (i.e. birth) of
anyone. Should you witness an eclipse of the sun or the
moon, pray and invoke Allah until it is over.” Agreed upon.
In the narration of Al-Bukhari, “Until the eclipse is clear.”

SN ‏«قَصَلُوا‎ : - Ue Ath ‏حَديت أبي 5 - رضي‎ LT,
528. Abd Bakrah (RAA) narrated, “pray and invoke Allah

until the eclipse (that you are witnessing) is over.” Related by
al-Bukhari.

ae Bla: ‏يادي‎ UE iby Sat, ‏وَفي‎
‎shah (RAA) narrated,‘The Messenger of Allah 38 reci-
183

529.
ted the Qur’an aloud during the eclipse prayer. He performed four
bowings in a total of two rak‘ét (ie. he performed the rukti’ twice
in each rak’ah), and prostrated four times (i.e. he made Suj-d tw-
ice in each rak“ah).’Agreed upon, and the wording is from Muslim.
In another narration, he sent a man calling, ‘prayer (is to be per-
formed) in congregation’

‎J‏ نم رك ‎By Sus OY‏ ون لكوع الأول ‎he‏ َم انا
‎ie os ates‏ الأول » كم رَكَعَ رُكُوعًا ‎ub‏ وهو ‎eS! op‏

‎530. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The sun eclipsed during the

‎lifetime of the Prophet 38 and he prayed the eclipse prayer. He
made a lengthy standing, similar to (the time that it takes to) re-
cite Sirah al-Bagarah (Stirrah no. 2). Then he made a long rukit’
after which he stood and made another long recital, but shorter
than the first one. Again he went into a long ruka’, but for a shor-
ter time than the first one. Following this, he prostrated (twice)
Next he made another long standing with a long recital, but not as
long as the first one. After that, he made another lengthy ruka”
but it was not as long as the first one. Then he made another
lengthy rukd’ but it was not as long as the first one. After which
he made another long recital but it was not as long as the first
one. Again, he made another lengthy rua” but it was shorter than
the previous one. Following this, he went into syjiid (prostration,
twice). By the time he finished, the sun had appeared, and he star-
ted to address the people,’ Agreed upon, and the wording is from
Al-Bukhar?’

‎184
In a narration by Muslim, ‘When the sun eclipsed, he made ‏يك‎
‎eight bowings in two rak“ét (ie. he performed ruki’ four times in
each rak‘ah), and prostrated four times (i.c. he made sujiid twice

in each rak‘“ah).7

‎(ge L501‏ - رَضْ

‎531. Imam Muslim transmitted a similar narration on the
authority of “Ali (RAA).

‎ye low : ‏ابر‎ 32 WG — ory
532. Muslim also transmitted the following on the authority

‎of Jabir (RAA), ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 performed six bowings
and four prostrations (in two rak @t),”

‎gibt‏ سسَجَدَات».

‎OSH 6 Shows - a Dp) - oh ‏ولأبي 558 عَنْ أب‎ — or

‎533. Ubay bin Ka’b (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

‎3 performed the eclipse prayer, and he made five bowings and
two prostrations (in the first rak‘ah), and did the same in the
second.’ Related by Aba Dawad.

‎Ny «itt 3155 ‏عَدَا».‎
‎534. Ibn “Abs (RAA) narrated, ‘No wind has ever blown,
except that the Prophet #8 would go down on his knees and say,

‎“O Allah, make it a mercy for us and do not make it as a
punishment.” Related by Ash-Shafi i and At-Tabarani.
hy ou) ‏مت‎ sg Le ty : - 85 ‏رضي الله‎ -

‎AG) ‏الآيّات».‎ BCs Kay :

‎170- Some scholars are of the opinion that the eclipse prayer is performed in
this way.

‎185
535. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Prophet 38 made six
bowings and four prostrations (in two rak’ét), when an earthg-
uake occurred and said, “This is the prayer (to be performed)
when one of the signs of Allah (such as an eclipse, an earthq-
uake etc..) occurs.” Related by Al-Baihaqi.

Imam Ash-Shafi’ transmitted a similar narration, excluding the
last part, on the authority of “Ali (RAA).

3

Si Bie ‏اب‎

Chapter XVI: The Istisqa’ Prayer
(invoking Alléh for rain during drought)

Sco » ‏هذه». رَوَاهُ اْحَسْنَةُ‎ Keke Obs al

OU BiG » ‏وَأبُو عَوَآئَةُ‎

536, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يل‎
‎went out (to make the Istisq@’ prayer) wearing old clothes, in a
humble and submissive manner, walking slowly, invoking Allah
(in humility) and prayed two rak’ét, as he prayed the ‘fd prayer,
but he did not give a similar Khutbah (like the one he delivers on
the ‘fd day), Related by the five Imams. At-Tirmidhi, Aba ‘Awa-
nah and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahth.

186
‎Ls;‏ إلى حين» ‎٠‏ ثُمَ رقع يَدَْه فلم

‎“oly Say bby CBs » Sab AL
. ‏كُمٌ أمطرنا‎ ai, eae mae - ‏تَعَلَى‎ - Li Lath. pes,

‎RE BEG ‏وَقَالَ : غَرِيب‎ «55 Tay,

‎537. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The people complained to the

‎Messenger of Allah 38 about the lack of rain, so he gave orders for
a pulpit to be set up for him in the place of prayer. He then ap-
pointed a day for the people to gather and he came out on that day

‎when the sun had just appeared. The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ sat
down on the pulpit, said Takbir and praised Allah. Then he said,
“You have complained of drought in your areas, but you
have been ordered by Allah to supplicate Him and He has
promised that He would answer your prayers.” Then he

‎said: “All praise is for Allah, the Compassionate, the Mere-
iful, the Only Owner of the Day of Judgment. There is no
God but Allah Who does what He wishes. 0 Allah, there is
no God except You! You are the Self-sufficient and we are
the needy. Send down rain upon us and make it a source of
strength for us and satisfaction, He then raised his hands and
kept raising them until the whiteness of his armpits could be seen.
After that he turned his back to the people and turned his cloak

‎aroundt”!, keeping his hands raised, then he faced the people, des-

‎cended from the pulpit and prayed two rak‘ét. Allah, the Almighty
then sent a cloud which produced thunder and lightening, and by
Allah’s permission, it rained.” Related by Aba Dawdd, who said
that its chain of narrators is good.

‎171. In a narration by Al-Bukhari, on the authority of “Abdullah Ibn Zaid,
"The Prophet ‏ع‎ turned his outer garments around, placing its left side
on his right side and vice versa.’ Scholars say that the wisdom here is,

‎the favorable omen of a change of state. It seems that the Prophet #
was optimistic that by turning round his cloak, the state of drought
would turn into that of rain and prosperity.

‎187
588, ‘The story of turning the garment is mentioned in Sabi
Al-Bukharf on the authority of “Abdullah Ibn Zaid, who said, ‘The

‘Messenger of Allah 3€ turned towards the Qiblah and started inv-
oking Allah, then he prayed two rak At reciting the Qur'an aloud.”

‎lt -‏ من ‎Fe‏ أبي حفر
‎Abd Jafar al-Baqir (RAA) narrated, ‘and he turned his‏ .539

‎garment 3§ for the drought to turn away.’ Related by Ad-Dérag-
utni, and it was reported to be Hadith Mursal (that in which the

‎link between the Successor (Tabi) and the Prophet 3, i.e. the
companion is missing).

‎a6, Ue

‎540. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘Aman sn entered the: mosque on Fri-

‎day while the Prophet 38 was standing delivering the Khutbah.
‘The man said, "O Messenger of Allah, our wealth has been destro-

‎yed and we no longer have any transport.'”? Supplicate Allah for

‎us to have rain. The Prophet 3€ raised his hands and said, “O
Allah, give us rain. 0 Allah, give us rain. 0 Allah, give us
rain.” Anas said, ‘By Allah, at that time there were no clouds in
the sky and there was no house or building between the mountain
and us. From behind the mountain came a cloud that looked like a
shield. By the time it reached the middle of the sky it started to
pour with rain. By Allah we did not see the sun for a week. On the
following Friday, a man entered the mosque from that (same) door

‎172. In another narration ‘livestock are dying’, which may aecount for the
lack of transport.

‎188
while the Prophet 38 was standing delivering the Khutbah and
said, ‘Our livestock are dead and the roads are cut off (due to tor-
rential rain). Ask Allah to make it stop’ The Prophet ‏وَل‎ raised his
hands and said, “O Allah, around us and not upon us. 0
Allah, make it upon the hills, small mountains, bottom of
the valleys, and plantations.” The rain stopped and we walked
out in the sunshine.’ Agreed upon.

hy, ‏فُحطُوا استسْقى‎ 1 Oy : - Ge th ‏رَضِي‎ - Ab Of dey ot

541, Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever drought threatened th-
em, ‘Umar Ibnul Khattab used to ask Al-’Abbds ibn “Abdul Mut-
talib to invoke Allah for rain. He used to say, ‘O Allah! We used to

ask our Prophet 3 to invoke You for rain, and You would bless us
with rain, and now we ask his uncle to invoke You for rain. O
Allah! Bless us with rain’ And so it would rain. Related by Al-
Bukhari.

عَم ينا ها

عَهْد ‎aay‏ رَوَاهُ ملم .

542. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘A shower of rain fell when we
were with the Prophet 38. He lifted up his clothes(uncovering part
of his body to the rain), until the rain fell on him. We said, ‘Mes-

senger of Allah, why did you do this? He said, “Because it has
just come from Allah, the Exalted.” Related by Muslim.

13) ‏كان‎ ply le ‏أن الب صلى الله‎ - ye ‏وَعَنْ 6 - رضي اللهُ‎ ote
AGB ‏َافمًا».‎ Co pl» : ‏رأى الْمَطَرَ قَالَ‎

543. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever the Prophet 3£ saw
the rain, he used to say, “O Allah! Make it beneficial.” Agreed
upon.

189
- أن الب" ‎ly dle th foo‏ دعا في
قَصيفًا » ‎BS‏ ضَحُوكًا ء ‎BU‏

. ‏صّحيحه‎ SUE ‏روه أبُو‎ GEN ‏اذا الل‎ Sc «ats «i,

544. Sa‘d (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah #2 would
supplicate for Istisqa’ saying, “O Allah, let us be covered with
thick clouds that have abundant and beneficial rain, that is
accompanied by a strong sound of thunder (which is a sign of
strong rain), frequently making light rain fall upon us and
surrounding us with lightning. 0 ‏بطقللة‎ You are full of maj
esty, bounty and Honor.” Related by Aba “Awanah in his Sai

545. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

& said, “Prophet Sulaiman %4 went out invoking Allah for
rain. He saw an ant lying on its back raising its legs up to
the sky saying, ‘O Allah! We are creatures amongst Your
creatures. We can not live without Your rain.’ Prophet Sul-
aiman then said, ‘Go back, for it has rained in response to
the invocation of others (than you).’ Related by Ahmad.

earn ce ‏الله‎ Lo ay - te ih ‏رَضيّ‎ - egy ett

546. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
sup-plicated Allah for rain and he pointed with the back of his
hand to the sky.’ Related by Muslim,

190
Chapter XVI: Clothing

J - 5 th ‏رَضئ‎ - Gee pe ‏7ه عن أبي‎
ate

Sly ‏يَستحلون الحرّ‎ til Aly ‏نّ‎

بو اود » وَأ

547. Abd ‘Amir al-Ash’ari (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of
Allah said, “There will be among my followers, some people
who will make Halal (lawful) a woman's vagina (ic. adult-
ery) and silk (which is forbidden for men).” Related by Aba Daw-
dd and Al-Bukhari.

ph 35 Gs JAC, « Laan, ‏ذهب‎
‎001 1 ye 35) ale ‏تخلس‎ Of « alu,
548. Abd Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yamén (RAA) narrated, ‘The

Messenger of Allah 3€ prohibited us from eating and drinking
from gold and silver vessels. He also forbade us from wearing clo-
thes made of silk or brocade (i.e. the men but it is lawful for
women) or to sit on them,’ Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim).

‎A ey 8‏ زر

‎549. “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 pro-
hibited (men) from wearing silk, except for the size of two, three or

‎four fingers." Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

‎173. Ibis only permissible for men to wear a garment embroidered with silk
thread, the maximum size of such a design should not exceed the size of
four fingers, or that the whole garment could include a piece of silk not
exceeding that size,

‎191
bE. age

50. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 gave
permission to ‘Abdur Rahman bin “Auf and Az-Zubair to sear silk
clothing on a journey, as they were suffering from a skin irrita-
tion.’ Agreed upon.

08 وَعَنْ ‎Ye‏ - رَضِي الله 85 - ‎Sy : Je‏ التي صلَى الله ‎iy ele‏

agi GEES » ‏وَحْهه‎ Se ae
551. “Ali (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 sent me
a garment striped with silk (or made of pure silk, which is more

likely) so I went out wearing it. I saw the Prophet 32 and he look-
ed very angry (when seeing me wearing it), so I cut it up (and divi-

ded it) among my female (relatives). Agreed upon and the wor-

ding is from Muslim,

لأ رول هل على لل عله وس

‎«bys 3‏ رُوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ »

‎552. Abd Masa (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, “Gold and silk are Halal (lawful) for the females
among my nation, but prohibited for the males.” Related by
Ahmad, An-Nasa’i and At-Tirmidhi.

‎174. In another narration, he divided it into three head covers, which he gave
Ww the three Fatimas (i.e. His wife Faimah the daughter of the Prophet

‎‘itimah bint Hamzah, his cousin

‎3s, his mother Fatimah bint Asad and F

‎192
553. ‘Imran bin Husain (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “When Allah bestows one of His favors upon a
slave, He likes to see its effect on him.”!75 Related by Al-
Baihagt

4ه وَعَنْ ‎Ue‏ - رضي ‎Oty : - Me a‏ رَسُولَ ‎dn‏ صَلَى الله
‎Reeth, hah te‏ رَوَاهُ مُسللمٌ .

554. “Ali (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يلك‎ prohi-
bited (men from) wearing Qassei (a kind of fabric made of silk or

phe ale

striped with silk,!%6 which is brought from Egypt and Syria) or any
clothing dyed with saffron.’ Related by Muslim,

دده وَعَنْ ‎we‏ اللّه ‎eye Wh pa gfe of‏ - 8 : رأى ‎Soo oe‏ الله
بهَدَا ؟». رَوَاهُ ‎PL‏

565, “Abdullah bin “Amro (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of
Allah 38 saw me wearing two garments dyed with saffron. Thereu-

pon he said to me,“Has your mother ordered you to do so?!”
Related by Muslim.

175- This means that one should eat and wear clothes, which reflects his ave-
rage income, as this is a way of acknowledging the grace of Allah upon
him and also if a poor person sees him looking respectable, he would be
encouraged to ask him for help. (Imam as-San‘Ant in Subul as-Salam;
the interpretation of Buliigh al-Marém).

176. It is definitely prohibited if the percentage of silk is very high, other-
wise itis disliked to wear it if there is a small amount.

177- This comment from the Prophet 3 indicates that dying clothes with
saffron is absolutely prohibited for men, and he mentioned the mother
because it is usual for women to use it to decorate their clothing. This is
also supported by the rest of the narration in Muslim, in which the Pro-
phet 48 commanded him to burn the two garments when “Amro asked
him if he should wash them.

193

ated
Bite ‏عند‎ LI : ‏في مُسْلمٍ » وَرَادَ‎ Mh «545 0G) ee ty
١ ‏في الأب‎ fo ted 2

LI ie
556. Asma’ bint Abi Bakr (RAA) reported that she brought out.

the cloak of the Prophet 3 and it had a brocade fringe on the
collar, sleeves, and the front and back openings. Related by Abit
Dawad, and Muslim who added, “A’ishah (RAA) had it until she

died, then I took it. The Prophet 3# used to wear it, and now we
wash it and use it (or the washing) for the sick, seeking a cure (by

virtue of its blessing as it touched the body of the Prophet 38). Al-
Bukhari added to the above narration in his book ‘Al-Adab al-

Mufrad', ‘He 38 used to wear it for (meeting with) delegations and
for the Friday prayer.’

194
Book 111: Funerals

5-H Ait — cov
Sih till pos yeh Ley

io. mundog
557. Ab@ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 28 said, “Remember, as much as you can, the one thing
{fact or reality) which (always) brings an end to all worldly
joys and pleasures, (meaning death).” Related by At-Tirmidhi,
An-Naséaii and Ibn Hibban.

» ‏والتّسائِي‎ » GU ‏روا‎ ٠

مده وق لس - رسي لع - فل فلو ف سل فاط

558. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “None of you should wish for death due to any afflic-
tion, which might have affected him. But if he feels compel-
led to wish for it (due to extreme distress that he feels he cannot
bear), he should say: “O Allah! Grant me life as long as life is
better for me, and let me die when death is better for me.”

Agreed upon.

559, Buraidah (RAA) narrated that the messenger of Allah 2

195
said, “The believer dies while his forehead is ‏78”وستاوء جو‎

Related by the three Imams.

‎ge Mn 25 - TA hat A ao‏ - قَالاً : قَالَ رَسُولَ الله

‎BENG GL ‏«لقُوا مَومَاكُمْ لآل إلا لله». روا‎ : oie ae dn ‏صَلّى‎
‎560. Abd Sa‘id and Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the

‎messenger of Allah 38 said, “Remind those who are on their
death bed of the Shahadah “La Haha illal-éh.” (for them to

‎say it, hoping it will be their last words)."179

‎de ‏بن يسار أن الى لل قال : «افرأوا‎ J a by — on

‎. Ol ‏ابن‎ abate « css, £395 MG) ‏يس-».‎ SEE
561. Ma‘ ail! bin Yasar (RAA) narrated that the messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Recite Yasin (Sarah no. 36), over those who

‎are dying.” Related by Ab Dawid, An-Nas4'i and Ibn Hibban
graded it as Sahih.

‎th Go - ee ea‏ نا - ‎fos «el‏ 925 الله ‎oe‏ لل

‎Fei ei Gh yak fb hy

‎Sy ‏السك‎ es pa 3

‎AS ‏قنخ نان‎ ah ad
ce ‏اغفر لأبي‎ cally : 0 ‏تقُولُونَ». ثم‎

‎Ob:‏ الرُوحَ إِذَا

‏بير , ‎Ye Rich‏ على ما

‎178- Imam as-San’Ant in ‘Subul as-Salém’, says that this refers to one of two
things; one is that when the believer is on his death bed, he would be
sweating due to his suffering in the last moments when his soul is about
to leave his body; this suffering is the last thing that will expiate what
is left of his sins. The other thing, the Prophet 38 could be referring to is
the life of the believer in which he is always working hard to gain his
halal earnings, fasting, praying to prepare for the Hereafter, and so he
meets Allah, the Almighty when he is still sweating.

‎179. Scholars say that it is recommended to remind those who are on their
death bed of the Shahédah, for him to say it, but they disliked insisting
or telling him, ‘Say...’, lest the dying person becomes irritated or gets
more upset due to what he is going through and then utters something
which he should not say.

‎196
‎O55‏ ملم

‎562. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

‎38 came to see Aba Salamah when his sight had become fixed
(with his eyes open, as he had already passed away). So the Pro-

‎phet 338, closed his eyes and said, “When the soul is seized and
leaves the body, the sight follows it” Some of Aba Salamah's

‎family wept and wailed, whereupon the Messenger of Allah 3
said to them, ‘Do not supplicate to Allah anything except
that which is good for you (i.e. do not say anything which goes
against you at that moment), because the angels (who are pres-
ent at the time of death), say “Amin” (asking Allah to accept your
invocation) to whatever you say.” Then he said, “O Allah! For-
give Aba Salamah, raise his status among (Your) rightly
guided servants, make his grave spacious, and fill it with
light for him, and be his successor in taking good care of
his descendants whom he has left behind, (and make them
pious).” Related by Muslim.

‎ear

‏- رض ‎Shy: - Wyle Ut‏ ال

‎563. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah

‎38 died, he was covered with a Yemeni mantle that had some desi-
gns on it.’ Agreed upon.

‎- ‏أبا بكر‎ bb: Gey ont
ote ay ‏بَعْد مؤته».‎
564. “A'ishah (RAA) reported that Aba Bakr kissed the Pro-
phet 38 after he had died.’ Related by Al-Bukhari,

‎: ‏قال‎ ply ale Dh ‏رَضئ الله عَنهُ - عَنِ التي صَلّى‎
ASS  يَدِمْرتلاَو‎ , ‏أَحْمَدُ‎ gg lie fa ‏يدينه » حتّى‎ HIS ‏«نفْس الْمُؤمن‎
565. Ab@ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
197

‏هده وَعَنْ أبي ‎ETA‏ -

Allah ‏يه‎ said, “A believer's soul remains suspended accor-
ding to his debt until it is settled or paid off on his behalf.”
Related by Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi.

Biss chery ll Ladin: - eth ie ‏قَالَ : في الذي سقط عن‎

566. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said concerning the man who fell off his mount and died during
Hajj, “Wash him with water and Sidr (lotus leaves) and shr-
oud him in his two garments (that he was wearing for Ihram).”
‘Agreed upon.

ai ‏رَسُول‎ Soe pit by :
‏سكم‎ dle ‏الل‎ en 5 Sa » ‏ما ثري‎ diy:

كَمَا ‎wey Sa‏ أ لآّ؟». الْحَديت . رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » ‎fy‏ داو .

567. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah

3 died and they wanted to make Ghust (full ritual washing of the
body), they said, By Allah we do not know whether we should take

off the clothes of Allah’s Messenger #£ as we do for our dead or
not? Related by Ahmad and Abd Dawad.'80

eth L Lack Bs Lis - ‏لله عنقا‎ oo) -

‎Dad‏ تر ‎BES‏ بن طلا

‎180- The rest of the Hadith as reported by Aba Dawid, ‘When they disputed
among themselves, Allah cast slumber over them until the chin of each
of them fell on his chest. Then someone said to them from a side of the
house, and they did not know who he was, ‘Wash the Prophet 3s while
his clothes are on him.’ So, they washed him while he was wearing his
shirt. They poured water over his shirt and rubbed him with his shirt
and not with their hands.’

‎198
es) ce ‏متم‎ a ‏«أشعرتها‎ :

Uses: Gall ad ‏في‎

egal wile od a

568. Umm “Atiyah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

4 came to us when we were washing his daughter (Zainab) after
she had died and said, “Wash her three times, five times or
more if necessary, with water and lotus leaves (Sidr) and
apply some camphor to the last washing.” When we finished

making Ghusl for her, we informed the Messenger of Allah 3 and
he threw his Jzér (a cloth, which he wore round his waist) to us
and told us to wrap her in it as the first sheet of the shroud (next
to her body),’ Agreed upon, In another narration, “Start by wash-
ing the organs on the right and those parts that are wash-
ed in ablution.” In the narration of Al-Bukhart, “We braided her
hair in three braids and made them fall at her back’

‘i ‏لل‎ fo db > : ‏علا - فالتا‎ th ‏رضي‎ -

dite Vy eed G8 feat ‏من‎ DPS ‏له أَْوَاب بيض‎

569, “Nishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 was
shrouded in three pieces of white Yemenite cotton sheets. They
did not include either a shirt or a turban.’ Agreed upon.

sth : ‏6ل‎ age tht ‏رَضِي‎ - Sb ‏ابن‎ gb ‏ل‎ ove
‏أغطني قميصًا‎ : i oid ‏فى ول على‎

Gee th Bisse

570, “Abdullah bin “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘When ‘Abdullah
bin Ubay (the head of the hypocrites) died, his son came to the
Prophet 3 and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Please give me your
shirt to shroud him (his father) in it’ So, Allah's Messenger gave it
to him, Agreed upon

199
fe th ‏صَلّى‎ toh of - aye ih ‏رضي‎ - te ‏وَعَن ان‎ on
‏ها من » وَكفئُوا فيا مُوتاكم».‎

BU ‏وَصخّحَهُ‎ « BONY cash ay,

571. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
3 said, “Wear white clothes, for they are (considered as) your
best clothes, and enshroud your dead in them.” Related by

the five ImAms, except for An-Nasa’i, and At-Tirmidhi reported it
to be sound.

َال : قال رثول الله ‎fo‏ الله ‎oe‏

. lat ay .»

؟لاه ‏ وَعَنْ جابر - رَضي الله
‎bp sly‏ كَمَنَ أحَدُكمْ ‎el‏ ميسن
يك ‎Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .572

said, “When one of you is in charge of shrouding his bro-
ther, he should give him the best shroud he can (ic. clean,

covering the whole body, but not necessarily expensive as this is
disliked.)” Related by Muslim.

» ‏اللّحْد‎ 3 Uh

أحُد في ‎OF‏ واحدء ثم ‎REST : ya‏ للقرآن ؟»

573. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يلك‎
‎had each two martyrs of the battle of Uhud wrapped in one shroud,
and then would ask, “Which one of them knew more of the
Qur'an?” He would put that one (that was pointed out) first in the

grave. They were not washed and the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ did
not offer a funeral prayer for them.’ Related by Al-Bukhari

‎th - Ye ove‏ عَنْهُ - 8 : ‎ke a‏ اله
يَقولُ : > لآ ئعالُوا في ‎CEE EG Sh‏ سَرِيمًا». ‎My‏

‎574. “Ali (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah 38
say, “Do not be extravagant in shrouding (i.e. do not spend

‎too much money on them) for it will decay quickly.” Related by
Aba Dawad.

‎x

‎200
cto ty

pthc UY

575. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said to her,“If you die before me, I will wash you myself.” Re-
lated by Ahmad, Ibn M@jah and Ibn Hibban graded it as Safi

: أن فَاطمَةٌ - رض الله
7

Assi a5 ٠

576. Asméa’ bint ‘Umais (RAA) narrated that Fa

(the daughter of the prophet 38) made a will that “Ali (RAA) was
to wash her when she dies.’ Related by Ad-Daraqutni.

. ‏ملم‎ By eS, le ad ‏ها‎ Al ‏قال : «لم‎ - Sy

577. Buraidah (RAA) reported concerning the story of the
Ghamidi woman, who was to be stoned by the order of the Prophet
‏يه‎ (due to committing adultery), ‘Then the Messenger of Allah 38
gave his command concerning her (after her death), so he offered
the funeral prayer for her, and she was then buried.’ Related by
Muslim,

578. Jabir bin Saumrah (RAA) narrated, ‘A man who killed
himself with a broad-headed arrow, was brought to the Prophet

3%, but he did not offer the funeral prayer for him.’#1 Related by
Muslim.

181- The Messenger of Allah 3 did not offer prayer for him, as a punishment
for what he did by committing suicide, and to dissuade others from
doing the same.

201
- رضي ‎tin‏ عَنْهُ - في قصّة ‎amenity Ath‏
‎Le (ye‏ الله ‎ie‏ نوا : مانت » قَقَالَ : «أفلدً
وي على ‎cE a‏

ليه » وَرَادَ ‎Op : Ou Fae‏ هذه القبُورَ ‎ks‏ ظَلمَة

pele ‏بصّلاتي‎ pal 85 ah ‏ون‎ WaT le

579. Abi Hurairah (RAA) narrated regarding the story of the
black woman who used to clean the mosque. The Messenger of
Allah 3 asked about her, and he was told that she had died. He
said to them, “Why didn’t you inform me of her death?” It
seems that they regarded her as an insignificant person. The Mes-
senger of Allah 38 said, “Show me her grave.” They showed him
her grave and he offered the funeral prayer for her.’ Agreed upon.
Muslim added in his narration, Verily, those graves are full of

darkness for those buried in them. Allah, the Almighty, will
illuminate them for their dwellers by my prayer over them”

Ow wt Wyo HS « ‏في ؟»‎

hes ae ‏الله‎ Lh: - ie Jos th ‏.ره ل وَعَنْ حُدَيْفَةَ - رضي‎
Ey LI ET ‏النّي».‎ ob a OS

580. Hudhaifah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
3 used to prohibit the announcement of anyone’s death.'8” Rela-

ted by Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi, who rendered it Hasan.

امه ‎tty‏ عه

‎oh:‏ أذ اب على الل ل

‎581. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎382. The prohibition in this Hadith does not refer to telling people about the
death of a relative, a friend ete for people to console his family and offer
funeral prayer for him. The Prophet 3 is prohibiting what they used to
do before Islam, liko calling out the news of the death of a great man
showing pride over others or wailing and erying aloud for people to know
that someone has died in that house,

‎202
Allah ‏ل‎ informed the people about the death of Negus the day he
died. He took them out to the place of prayer, to offer the funeral
prayer for him. He arranged them in rows, and made Takbir four
times.’ Agreed upon.

48 say, “If a Muslim man dies and a group of forty peo-
ple, who do not associate any one with Allah, pray for him,
Allah will accept their intercession for him (by way of their
Du‘@’ for him.” Related by Muslim.

‎oo - ath J TA by - oar‏ الله ‎te‏ - فا
‎th‏ َي ‎su ats Je gli‏ في نقَاسهًا » ‎10Gb HB‏
‎Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated, ‘I offered the fune-‏ .583

‎ral prayer behind the Prophet 38 for a woman who had died dur-
ing child-birth and he (prayed) standing opposite the middle of her
body.’ Agreed upon.

‎he ty 2d‏ 5 الله

‎git ay) 4 ah

‎584. “‘Alishah (RAA) narrated, ‘By Allah the Messenger of Al-
Jah 38 offered funeral prayer in the mosque for the sons of Baida’
(Sahl and Suhail).88 Related by Muslim.

‎: Lahn? pt oy «aR ‏وَسَلُمَ‎ 3

‏كان رول لله ‎be‏ لل

‎183- This Hadith is evidence that it is permissible to pray the funeral prayer
in the mosque.

‎203
585. “Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila (RAA) and ‘Zaid bin Arqam
(RAA) used to recite four Takbirdt when praying over the dead,
but once he said it five times, so I asked him about it. He said to

me, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3§ used to do so.’ Related by Muslim

and the four Imams.1#

lib (RAA) narrated that he said six Tak-
birét when he prayed over Sahl bin Hunaif, and he said (explai-
ning his action), He is one of the Companions, who fought in the
Battle of Badr.’ Related by Sa‘id bin Mansa.

th Le 25 ‏«كَانَ‎ :
eed

. she sey ‏با‎ ceil my

587. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38

used to say four Takbirét over the dead, and would recite al.

Fatihah in (after saying) the first (opening) Takbirat. Related by
Ash-Shafi? with a weak chain of narrators,

sib sy ‏هده‎

er Sey dice
ei A gle SE ‏جكارَة » فقرا فاتحة‎ ee ‏عَلف‎
‎Ged ay,

588. Talhah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Auf (RAA) narrated, ‘I offered
a funeral prayer led by Ibn “Abbas. He recited al-Fatihah and
said, ‘You should know that it (reciting al-Fatihah) is a Sunnah of

the Prophet 38.’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

88 » ‏وَارْحَمَُ‎ Uy Alm sed Chose ‏عَلَى‎ Ly ke

- Ee ‏الله‎ gai - ge of ‏رَعَنْ عَرْف‎ — 8

184. Most scholars are of the opinion that they are only four ‏غة ه17‎
204
الْخَطَايَا ‎Oya ag or‏ الإبِيَضُ منّ الدّئس ء ‎Ba‏ 5

. pled ay) QO Nes « I ‏وقه‎ » EI ‏ًا من أله » وأذسله‎

589. “Auf bin Malik (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 offered the funeral prayer, and I memorized this suppli-
cation (that he said for the deceased), “O Allah! Forgive him
and have mercy on him (on her). Grant him ease and res-
pite. Make his resting place a noble one, and facilitate his
entry. Wash him with the most pure and clean water, snow
and hail. Purify him from sins as a white garment is clean-
sed of dirt. Give him in exchange a home better than his
home (on earth) and a family better than his family. Grant
him entrance to Paradise and protect him from the trials
of the grave and the torture of Hell Fire.” Related by Muslim

590. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of

Allah & prayed a funeral prayer, he would say, “O Allah! For-
give those of us who are alive, and those who are dead,
those present and those absent, those who are young and
those who are male and those who are female. © Allah! Let
those of us to whom You have given life, live in Islam, and
let those of us You take back die in a state of faith. 0 Allah!
Do not deprive us of our reward for (supplicating for) him,
and cause us not to go astray after him.” Related by Muslim
and the four Imams.

591. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “If you offer the funeral prayer for a deceased
person, supplicate Allah sincerely for him.” Related by Abi
Dawad.

ه وَسَلُمَ قال :

كلك سرّى ذلك فس

592. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Hurry up when you carry the dead body (the
Jandzah), for if the deceased is righteous, you would be
taking it to something better, and if he or she is an evil
person, then you will be getting him or her off your necks’
Agreed upon.

wg Kad & : ‏للم‎
‎593, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 28 said, “Whoever accompanies the funeral (the dead
body) until he performs the funeral prayer will have a
reward equal to (one Qirét), and whoever accompanies the
burial procession, will be doubly awarded (two Qirdt).”

‘They then asked, ‘What is meant by the two Qirét?” He replied
“Like two huge mountains.” Agreed upon. Muslim added the
statement, ‘until it is buried.’

‎A‏ اط راط ل جل أخد»
‎Al-Bukhéri related on the authority of Abd Hurairah,‏ ,594
206
“Whoever accompanies the funeral of a Muslim, seeking
the reward only from Allah, the Almighty, and he stays
with it until he offers the funeral prayer and the burial is
completed, will return back with two Qirat, each Qirat is
equal to the mount of Uhud.’

ay Le tt ‏رأى‎ My :

ٍُ بالإرْسّال
‎Sdlim narrated on the authority of his father (RAA) that‏ .595

he saw the Messenger of Allah #8, Aba Bakr and ‘Umar walking
in front of a Funeral.’ Related by the five Imams, and Ibn Hibban
rendered it Sahth.

ya ean

BE tle ‏يُعْرَمْ‎

596. Umm ‘Atiyah (RAA) narrated, ‘We were forbidden to ac-
company funeral processions, but this prohibition was not manda-
tory for us.’ Agreed upon.

‎ony‏ — وَحَنْ أبي ‎Oa‏ رَسُولَ الل ‎py, ele th he‏ قَالَ
‎Abd Sa‘id (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .597

‎3 said, “Stand up when you see a funeral procession, and
he who accompanies it should not sit down until the coffin
is placed on the ground.” Agreed upon.

‎ah ‏«إذا‎

‎sy
‎of)

‎598. Abd Ishaq narrated that “Abdullah bin Yazid placed a
dead body in the grave from the side near the foot of the grave (i.e.
the end which will accommodate the fect when the body is placed

‎207
in it),185 He then said, ‘This is the Sunnah of the Prophet 38.’ Rel-
ated by Aba Dawad.

قَالَ : «إذا وَضَكُم مر" ‎ty Yi ig‏ الله » ‎ley‏ مله رَسُولٍ
‎AS yy 546 fh Se St et‏ 1
‎il kau‏ 1
‎Tbn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .599

‘aid, “When you place your deceased in the grave, say,
‘In the Name of Allah, and in accordance with the tradition

of Allah’s Messenger 38,’ Related by Ahmad, Aba Dawid and
An-Nasaii.

600. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said,“Breaking a deceased body’s bones is exactly like brea-
king them when he is alive.” Related by Abi ‏مسو‎ in accor-
dance with the conditions of Muslim.

ee

601. Ibn Majah added, on the authority of Umm Salamah
(RAA), “with regards to it being a si

Gb ‏لي لَحْدًا » وَاْصبُوا‎
602. Sa’d bin Abi Wqqds (RA) said (during his death illness)
‘Make a lahd for me and cover it with un-burnt bricks, as you did

with the grave of the Prophet 3%." Related by Muslim.

‎yy 0‏ سَعْد بْن أبي ‎golly‏ قَالَ : «الْحَدُوا

‎185 IL ‏هذ‎ the Sunnah that the head of the deceased is placed first from the
side of the foot of the grave, but if it is not easy to do so, then the body
could be placed in the grave from any side.

‎208
603. A]-Baihaqi transmitted on the authority of Jabir (RAA) a
similar narration and added, ‘and his grave was raised one span

from the ground.18°’ Tbn Hibban graded it as Si

rd)

tn Le ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ am: - He ‏الله‎
‎die Ok, le ‏يُعْعَدَ‎ ot, oh

604. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎
‎probibited whitening a grave with plaster, to sit on it or to build
over it (such as a dome), Related by Muslim.

605. “Amir bin Rabi‘ah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 prayed over Uthman bin Madh‘in, then went to the
grave and sprinkled three handfuls of soil while he was standing,”
Related by Ad-Daraqutni.

عَنْهُ - ‎Wb‏ كَانَ رَسُولٌ الله ‎ah be‏
: «استطْفرُوا لأحيكم ‎hog‏

فرع من دفن المَيت ‎ey‏ و

5548 Ay OEY ON AG. ‏ليت‎

606. “Uthman Ibn ‘Affan (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever the Mes-
senger of Allah $8. finished the burial of the dead, he would stand
by the grave and say, “Seek forgiveness for your brother and

pray for him to be steadfast, because he is now being ques-
tioned.” Related by Aba Dawid. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

186. ‘The surface of the grave is raised one span above the ground so that its
location can be known.

209
eo iS

‎us Sy‏ يبون ذا ملؤي على المت 1 والصرف ‎Be AN‏ أن يقال علد

‎O88‏ » كل لا إل إلا الله ناث مرت ع م

‎O56‏ قل ري الله » رديني

‎Bi ‏مور‎ Phat Hy, Woe 25 SLY!

‎607. Damrah bin Habib (one of the Tabi‘in or the followers of
the Companions) narrated, ‘They (the Companions that he met)
recommended that: after the grave is leveled and the people leave,
that one should stand by the grave and say three times to the dec-
eased, 'O so-and-so, say: “There is no god but Allah”, '0 so-and-so,
say: “Allah is my Lord, Islam is my din (religion), and Muhammad
is my prophet.” Related by Sa‘id bin Mangir.

‎Yes
‎608, At-Tabardni related a similar Hadith on the authority of
‏عطق‎ Umamah on the authority of the Prophet 3.187

‏بن ‎eal Seal‏ - رَضيّ الله تعالَى ‎ee‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ
‎at 9 938 pra‏

‎4 AF in ‏لذ رامدو‎ pee 7

‎609. Buraidah bin Al-Husaib al-Aslami (RAA) narrated that
the Messenger of Allah 3¥ said, “I had forbidden you to visit
graves, but now you may visit them.” Related by Muslim. At-

‎‘Tirmidhi added the following, “It will remind you of the Here-
after.”

‎ext)

‎by : ‏ك أن مَلعُود‎ Bo BG ‏زا الْنُ‎ ٠

‎610. Ibn Majah added on the authority of Bin Mas‘ad, “And
they make you (ic. the graves) renounce this worldly life.”

‎187. Imém as-San’ani in ‘Subul as-Salém’ says that none of the scholars of
Hadith doubt that this Hadith is fabricated (i.e. prompting the deceased
afler the burial), so it could not be traced back to the prophet #8. Imam
Ibnul Qaiyim said that the companions did not do this, as we see people do-
ing nowadays, as standing hy the side of the grave and talking to the dead.

‎210

Oe ‏ابن‎ cy ‏المي‎ oop ‏زات الور‎ cine

611. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 cursed the women who frequently visit the graves. Related
At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sahth

612. Aba Sa’id Al-Khudi (RA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 cursed the wailing women and those who listen to
them, Related by Aba Dawad.

‎ele Seb Ie - ye Jus‏ رَسْولُ الله

‎613. Umm ‘Atiyah (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-
lah 48 made us pledge that we will not wail. Agreed upon.

‎- Ros
Sy Uitte : ‏كَل‎

‎614. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, “A dead person is tormented in his grave by the
wailing for him.” Agreed upon.

‎. - AS Si Dos - ak ‏المُغيرة بن‎ oops Gy 5

‎615. Al-Bukh4ri and Muslim transmitted a similar narration
on the authority of Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah.

‎. ONY, woth

‎616. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘I attended the burial of one of the
211
daughters of the Prophet ‏ل‎ He was sitting by the side of the
grave and his eyes were shedding tears.’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

G17. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 48 said, “Do not bury your dead during the night un-
less you have to do so.” Related by Ibn Majah. Muslim reported
a similar narration, but Jabir said in his narration, ‘The Prophet

38 disapproved that someone is buried at night, unless the funeral
prayer has been offered for him.’

(aie ‏لَمّا‎ : US - ‏عنُْ‎ Oo - ts det ey

618. “Abdullah Ibn Ja’far (RAA) narrated, ‘When we received
the news of Ja‘far's death; when he was killed (in the Battle of

Mu'tah), the Prophet 3 said, “Prepare some food for the fam-
ily of Ja‘far, for what has befallen them is keeping them
preoccupied.” Related by the five Imams except for An-Nasa'i

619. Sulaiman bin Buraidah narrated on the authority of his

father (RAA) that the Prophet 48 taught us that when we visit
graves we should say, “Peace be upon you, O believing men
and women, 0 dwellers of this place. Certainly, Allah wil-
ling, we will join you. We supplicate to Allah to grant us
and you well being.” Related by Muslim

212
ach ob oll ae ‏وَعَنٍ اين عبّاسٍ قَالَ : مر 05 الله صلَى الله‎ ay
5S Oa ‏يشر‎ «ih ‏ا هل‎ Glo (Statin : ‏فال‎ gin ple GG

. ‏رمدي » وَقَالَ : حَسْنْ‎ OG Ae Ly a ah
620. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated,‘Once the Messenger of Allah

38 passed by some graves in Madinah. He turned his face toward
them saying, “Peace be upon you, 0 dwellers of these gra-
ves. May Allah forgive you and us. You have preceded us,
and we are following your trail.” Related by At-Tirmidhi, who
graded it as Hasan.

th ‏قَالَ 5 صَلّى‎
. ‏البْحَارِي‎ AGS ‏أَفْضُوا إِلَى ما قَدَمُوا».‎
621. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎

said, “Do not speak badly of the dead, they have already se-

en the result of (the deeds) that they sent on before them.”
Related by Al-Bukhari.

: ‏قال‎ LS Sas - te Uh ‏رَضئ‎ - thy, 6 ea ‏وَرَوَى‎ >

ae Yip

622. At-Tirmidhi related a similar narration on the authority
of Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah, and he added, “Thus you will be
offending the living (ie. if you curse their dead).”

213
asp os

Book IV: Zahah
Chapter I

623. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that when the Prophet 38
sent Mu’adh ibn Jabal to Yemen (as governor), he said to him:
“You are going to a people who are People of the Scripture.
Invite them to testify that none has the right to be worsh-
ipped but Allah and that I am His Messenger. If they obey
you in this, then teach them that Allah, the Glorious One,
has enjoined five prayers upon them in every day and
night (in twenty-four hours), and if they obey you in this,
then tell them that Allah has made it obligatory for them to
pay Zakah upon their assets and it is to be taken from the
wealthy among them and given to the poor among them.”
Related by Al-Bukhari.

624. Anas (RAA) “narrated that Aba Bakr ‘Ass -Siddiq (RAA)
wrote him this letter, “This is the obligatory Zakéh, which the

Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ made obligatory for every Muslim, and
which Allah, the Almighty had commanded him to observe. ‘For
each twenty-four camels, or less, their Zahah is to be paid as
sheep; for every five camels, their Zakah is one sheep. When the
amount of camels is between twenty -five to thirty- five, the due
Zakah is one she-camel ‘bint makhéd’ (a camel which is one year
old and just starting the second year) or a male camel ‘ibn labiin’
{a young male camel which is two years old and already starting
the third year). However, when the amount of camels reaches thi-
rty-six, the due Zakah is a young she-camel ‘bint labiin’ (a young
female camel, which is two years old and already starting the
third year). When they reach forty six to sixty camels, their due
Zakah is a she camel ‘hiqgah’ (which is three years old and star-
ting the fourth). When they reach sixty-one to seventy-five, one

215
‘Jaz‘ah’ (a four year old camel already starting its fifth year).
When their number is between seventy-six to ninety camels, their
due Zakéh is two young she camels ‘bint labiin’. When they are in
the range between ninety-one to one hundred and twenty camels,
the Zakah is two young she camels ‘higqah’. If they are over a
hundred and twenty camels, on every forty camels, one ‘bint lab-
fin’ is due. And for every fifty camels (over one hundred and twe-
nty) a young she-camel ‘higqah’ is due. And anyone, who has got
only four camels, does not have to pay Zakéh unless he (the owner
of the camels) wants to give something voluntarily.

Regarding the Zakah of grazing sheep, if they are between forty
and one hundred and twenty, one sheep is due as ZakGh. If they
are between 120 and 200, two sheep are due. If they are between
200 and 300, three sheep are due. If they exceed three hundred
sheep, then one sheep is due for every extra hundred grazing hea-
ds. If the grazing sheep are less than forty, (even if they are 39)
then no Zak@h is due on them, unless he (the owner of the camels)
wants to give something voluntarily.

One should not combine (i.e, gather young animals together) or
separate them for fear of paying Zakah.#% When there is a mixt-

ure of cattle shared between two partners, and Zakah is paid join-
tly between them, then they have to calculate it equally among
them (depending on the share of each). Neither an old or a defec-
tive animal nor a male goat (a ram used for breeding) may be

taken as Zakdh, unless the Zakah collector wishes'®® to do so.

Concerning silver, the Zakah paid is a quarter of a tenth for each
200 Dirhams. If the amount of silver is less than two hundred

188. One way of doing this is when three people, each of them has forty she-
ep (ie, one sheep is due on each). So, when the Zak@h collector comes,
they put them together, which comes to 120 sheep., and they the due
Zakah is only one sheep. Or if two partners have 201 sheep, which mea-
ns that 3 sheep are due, then they divide them between them, for each
to give only one sheep.

189. ‘The Zakéh collector should not take this last type, (the breeding ram) as
this will harm the owner, but he may take any of these three if he has
no other choice, as the old and the defective animal is not to be taken as
Zakik anyway. The same Arabic word used in the Hedith could be read
as ‘al-Mussaddiq’, which is the owner or the one who pays Zakah. In
this case the meaning would be ‘the male ~goat” may not be taken unless
the owner permits it to be taken as Zakéh, as itis from his best animals.

216
Dirhams (even if it is 190) then no Zakéh is to be paid for it,
unless the owner wishes to do so.

If the number of camels reaches the number on which a jaz“ah (a
four year old camel already starting its fifth year) is due as Zak@h,
but he only has a ‘higgah’ (a she camel which is three years old
and starting the fourth),it should be accepted from him along with
two sheep if they were available (to compensate for the difference)
or twenty Dirhams. If on the other hand he has to offer a ‘hiqqah’
as Zakah, but he only has a ‏ره عدر‎ it is accepted from him, and
the Zakéh collector will then pay him the difference, which is twe-

5 — وَعَنْ مُعَاذ بن ‎die th fo y+ - ts thas - Je‏ وس

‎oh Ie‏ امه أذ ‎BG‏ من كل تلد

‎Foe ‏ين‎

‎ah bey nada ab see BE foe Ie J Big

‎١ Aly » ‏رمدي‎ oy
625. Mu’adh bin Jabal (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger

‎of Allah 3 sent him to Yemen, he commanded him to take a ‘tabi”
(young bull) or ‘tabf“ah’ (young cow, which is one year old), as
Zakéh for every 30 cows. And for every forty cows, a musinnah
(two year old cow) is due, Every non-Muslim who attained the age
of puberty should pay one Dinar or the equivalent from the Mu’é-
firt clothes (made in a town in Yemen called Ma‘éfir).” Related

‎by the Five Imams and the wording is from Ahmad.

‏اف في وَطله » ‎«Oe BRIG‏ وَالْحَاكمُ .

‎ape bby NN

‎oF‏ الله ‎Le‏ الله

‏و ‎tanh‏ ولأبي حاو ‎BM pale ley : GH‏ دُورهم».

‎thie Leys :‏ المي عَلَى ميّاههم».

‎626. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, who reported on the authority of his grand father (RAA) that
the Messenger of Allah 38 said, “The Zakah of the Muslims
should be collected by their water trough.” Related by Ah:

‎190- This is paid by the people of the Scripture (Christians and Jews) as
Jizyah or tax, as they are under the protection of a Muslim government.

‎217
mad, ‏نطق‎ Dawid also has the narration, “Their Zaka@h should

only be collected in their dwellings.”!*!

627, Abii Hurairah (RA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “No Zakah is to be paid on one’s horse (that he
rides) or one’s slave.” Related by Al-Bukhari. Muslim also has

the narration, “There is no ZakGh to be paid on one's slave,
except for Zakdt-ul-Fitr (which is paid at the end of Ramadan,
and a Muslim must pay it on behalf of all of those he is respon-
sible for).”

: 1 نحل لآل مُحَمّد ‎ie Gh‏

628. Bahz bin Hakém narrated on the authority of his father,
who reported on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the

Messenger of Allah 3 said, “For every forty camels, one ‘bint
Iabain’ (a young female camel which is two years old and already
starting the third year), is due as Zakéh. No camel is to be
separated from the rest of the camels (i.e. the jointly owned
live stock as mentioned above). Whoever gives it willingly, see-
king his reward from Allah, will be rewarded. (However) if
someone refrains from paying it, it will be taken from him

191- The point here is that the Zakéh eollector goes to the payer in his dwel-
ling to make it easier for him, or as some scholars said, that this is not
to make the people bring their animals a long way from their water
troughs or dwellings,

218
(by force) along with part of his property (as punishment), for
it is a right of Allah. None of it is lawful for the family of
Muhammad 3%.” Related by Ahmad, An-Nasd’i, Aba Dawad and
Al-Hakim rendered it Sahih.

2c NRA. a 425 AS oS AIRES ‏الحرل»‎

629. “Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ said,
“When you possess two hundred Dirhams at the end of the
year (if you still have all of them), five Dirhams are levied on
them as Zakah. There is nothing upon you (to be paid) in
gold, until it reaches (the value of) twenty Dinars. When you
possess twenty Dinars, at the end of the year, then there is
half a Dinar levied on it (as Zakah). Any additional amount
will be calculated in the same manner. No Zakéh is to be
paid on monetary holdings, until they have been owned for
one year, Related by Aba Dawad, who rendered it Hasan.

56 » ‏مالا‎ sti ‏عَنْهُمَا - : «مّن‎ A ‏عَن ابن عُمَرَ - رضي‎ GL -
By a ipl de Obs ale

630. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘Whoever earns any money,
he is not liable to pay Zakéh, until the period of a year has passed

(while still possessing the same amount of money). Related by At-
‘Tirmidhi,

ics Ligh ah ‏في‎ Lp 00 ier

631. “Ali (RAA) narrated that, “There is no Zakah to be paid
on working cattle.’ Related by Aba Dawad and Ad-Daraqutni.
639. “Amro bin Shu’aih narrated on the authority of his father
who reported on the authority of his grand father, on the authority
of ‘Abdullah bin “Amro (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 4 said,
“One who becomes the guardian of an orphan, who owns
property, must trade on his behalf and not leave it (saved
and unused) until it is all eaten up by Zak@h (which is paid
yearly).” Related by At-Tirmidhi and Ad-Daraquini with a weak
chain of narrators.

‎ce‏ رَعَنْ عبد الله بن أبي ‎a‏ قَالَ ‎or‏ 5 صلّى الله ‎ae‏ وَسَلُم ذا
‎ele the tab : Se pe saa‏ فقأ
‎“Abdullah bin Abi Auf (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever a per-‏ .633

‎son came to the Messenger of Allah 38 with their Zakah, he would
say, “O Allah! Send your blessings upon them.” Agreed upon.

‎(sta 2
634. “Ali (RAA) narrated that al~ Abbas (RAA) asked the Mes-

‎senger of Allah 2 to allow him to pay his Zak@h before its due
date, and he gave him permission to do so.’ Related by At-Tirmidht
and Al-Hakim.

‎ire

‎JG AS OS OE ¢
, ‏رَوَاهُ ملم‎ 4 oo ‏من لمر‎ SHS OS OIL
635. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3

‎220

‏حمس ‎SIF‏ من | رق

said, “There is no Zakéh to be paid on less than five ounces
of silver, less than five camels or less than five Awsug!” of
dates.” Related by Muslim.

ع

636. Abd Sa‘id Al-Khudsi (RAA) narrated that the ‘Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “There is no Zakah to be paid on any amo-
unt of dates or grain less than five Awsug.” Agreed upon,

th ‏اله هم - عن ال صَلى‎ gas - ‏أن عند لله عن أيه‎ te ‏وَعَنْ‎ — av

637. Sélim bin “Abdullah narrated on the authority of his

father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 4 said, “A tithe is due
as Zakah, on every plant watered by heaven (rain water),
springs, or underground water (ic. watered without effort).
While half a tithe is paid on what is watered by irrigation
(ie. machines are used).” Related by Al-Bukhari. Aba Dawid ad-
ded in his narration, “When it is watered by underground
water (close to the surface and keeping the land wet), a tithe is
paid, but half a tithe is paid when the land is watered by
wheels or animals.”

‎glist‏ 000007 - أن الب صَلّى

‎638, Aba Masa 3 ‘Ash‘art and Mu’Adh (RAA) narrated that

‎192- A wasag is equivalent to sixty ‏ممم‎ (a cubic measure of varying magni-
tude), Five Awsug is equivalent to 50 Egyptian kaylah (one Kaylah is a
dry measure for grain, 50 Kaylah is equivalent to 653 gm of wheat.

‎221
the Messenger of Allah 3 said to them,“Do not take any Zakah
except on these four crops: barley, wheat, raisins and da-
tes.” Related by At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim.

639. Imam Ad-Daraqutni related on the authority of Mu’adh
(RAA), ‘As for cucumbers, watermelons, pomegranates, and sugar-

cane, the Messenger of Allah 34 has exempted them from Zakah.’
It is transmitted with a weak chain of narrators.

OG - 3 th ‏رَضِي‎ - EE ‏وَعَنْ سَهْل بن أبي‎ ae

OB SB ‏وَدعُوا‎ 1B ‏حَرْصهمْ‎ tp: ley ale ‏الله‎

he ‏رَسُول الله‎
‏هَدَعُوا‎ OE gar

ef

. ‏وَالْسَاكمٌ‎ » Oe Oh ‏وَصّحَّحَهُ‎ EU NY

7 ‏ليه‎
‎640. Sahl bin Abi Hathmah (RAA) narrated, ‘We were com-
manded by the Messenger of Allah, ‘Whenever you assess the
amount of something, estimate the [Zakah] and ignore one-
third. If you do not, then leave(at least) one fourth.” Related
by the five Imams, except for Ibn Majah.

- ‏أسيد‎ of OE ‏وَعَنْ‎

رَضيّ الله عَلهُ - قَالَ ‎ab:‏ رَسُولُ الله ‎Soo‏ الله
‎a5 55 Sys « at Lad os Lah Go of ty ce‏

اكات

Phi iy Daal ay,

641. “Attab bin Usaid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Alléh 38 commanded us, “Grapevii
ctly as palm trees, and its Zakéh is taken in raisins.”!% Rel-
ated by the five Imams.

es are to be estimated exa-

193. The point in ignoring a third or a fourth of the produce is a reprieve for
property owners since they, their gucsts, and their neighbors need to eat,
from it, Also, the produce is exposed to birds feeding, passers-by taking
some, and being blown away by the wind, An estimation of the total

222

‎it‏ أنت ‎he fh‏ الح وس

‎642, “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, who reported on the authority of his grand father (RAA) that a

‎woman came to the Messenger of Allah 28 accompanied by her
daughter, who wore two heavy gold bangles. He said to her, “Do
you pay Zakah on them?” She said, ‘No.’ He then said, “Are
you pleased that Allah may put two bangles of fire on your
wrist on the Day of Judgment?” She then threw them away.
Related by the three Imams with a strong chain of narrators.

‎Bb cae yl - ye ‏الله‎ ny - ‏سَلَمَةَ‎ gy er

‏ره بو 5515 » وَالدَارمْطِْي » وَصّحَّحَهُ ‎pS‏

‎643. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated that she was wearing

‎golden ornaments and asked the Messenger of Allah 4, ‘Is it cons-
idered as a treasure?’ He said, “If you pay the due Zakéh, then
it is not considered as a treasure.” Related by Aba Dawitd and
Ad-Daraqutnt,

‏نَ الذي ‎Sd‏ لليِع». رَوَاه أو 6338

‎644. Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

‎ger of Allah 38, used to command us to pay Zakah from (the goods)
we had prepared for sale. Related by Aba Dawid with a weak
chain of narrators.

‎amount of Zakéh on all the produce without excluding a third or a
fourth of it, would affect the interests of the owners.

‎223

8 وَعْسن أبي ‎SG‏ - رضي الله عله - أن رَسُولَ الله ‎Le‏ الله ‎joie le‏

BE ‏الْحْمْسٌ».‎ iy ‏«وفي‎ : ate

645. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah # said, “One fifth is compulsory to be paid (as Zakah)
on buried treasure.” Agreed upon,

‎beg 5‏ عَمْرِر ‎Sb‏ عَنْ أبيه عَنْ ‎ole‏ - رَضِي الله ‎gle‏ - أن رَسُولَ
الله ‎Oi ply ae th Ee‏ = كثْر وَحَدَهُ ‎pin te Bhs‏

‎BN ION Sy BURA BT BBO BA ERG TS

‎. ‏حمسن‎ aay ee NE

‎646. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, who reported on the authority of his grand father (RAA) that

‎the Messenger of Allah 38 was asked about a treasure that was
found by a man in some ruined land, and he said to him, “If you
found it in an inhabited village, then you must advertise its
having been found. However, if he found it in an uninhabi-
ted village, then on it and the rest of the discovered trea-
sure one fifth is payable as Zaka@h.”Rclated by Ibn Majah with
a reliable chain of narrators.

‎647, Bilal bin AlHérith (RA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 took Zak@h from the mines of Qabdliyah.?9*

‎194- Qubal is a location on the shores of the Red Sea, five days traveling from
Madinah,
pail Lie ou

Chapter I: Sadaqatul Fitr (ZakGh paid at
the end of Ramadén)

Ee Care A Siti

648. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
enjoined the payment of one ‏قو‎ 196 of dates or one ‏“قو‎ of barley as.

Zakét-ul-fitr on every Muslim, slave or free, male or female, young
or old, and he ordered that it be paid before the people went out to
offer the ‘fd prayer.’ Agreed upon.

‎NG 8‏ عدي : ‎ott ICN‏ ضتعيف : ‎ph‏ عَنِ الطَرّاف في

‎649. Ibn “Adi and Ad-Déraqutni also related on the authority
of Ibn ‘Umar but with a weak chain of narrators, “Save them (ic.

‎the poor) wondering around (in the markets and the streets asking
for food) on that day.”

‎Pod ace bey 0٠

‏ري - رَضي الله عنْهُ - قال : ‎By‏ تُْطيهًا في 5
‎tate ole‏ م ‎eb‏ أَرْ ‎Ee‏ مِنْ تمر » أَْ ‎Bip Ble‏
‎fy Be o>‏ أقط». 6

‎by By de GL ‏اها مسن زيب».‎

‏ا

‎Sosy. Po BRAM ‏كُلت‎ us Ey ‏أن كلد‎
ate ‏وَلأبي 546 : «لاً أُخْرِج ًا إلا‎ .» pling ale hn

‎650. Aba Sa‘id AL-Khudri (RAA) narrated, “We used to offer

‎it Zakét-ul-fitr) during the lifetime of the Prophet 3¥ as one s4’ of

‎195. One $4” = approximately 3 kilograms.
225

‎ates
food or one ‏“قو‎ of dates, or one sd” of barley or one s@’ of raisins.”
Agreed upon.

In another narration, “or one sé’ of dried cottage cheese.” Aba
Sa‘id then added, “As for myself, I would continue to give it as I
used to give during the time of the Prophet $3."96

Aba Dawéd also transmitted on the authority of Aba Sa‘td, “I
would never give but a sa.”

acne BN pe gh gts 01

a

Cy 538 fgg ‏الصّدقَات».‎

651. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
enjoined Zakét-ul-fitr on the one who fasts (i.e. fasted during the
month of Ramadan) to purify him from any indecent act or speech
and for the purpose of providing food for the needy. It is accepted
as Zakah for the person who pays it before the ‘fd prayer and it is
Sadagah (i.e. voluntary charity) for the person who pays it after
the ‘Jd prayer. Related by Abo Dawdd and Ibn Majah and Al-
Hakim graded it as Sahih.

eke ‏اك‎ ie OL
Chapter 111: Sadaqat at-Tatawu’ or
Voluntary Charity

196. The rest of this narration goes, “continued to do so until Mu'awiyah
came to us to perform pilgrimage; haf or 'umrah, He then addressed the
people from the pulpit and said to them: "1 see that two mudds of wheat.
from Syria equals one sé” of dates. Tho people accepted that.” Abd Said
then contended, “As for myself..."0wo mudds are equivalent to half a
si’, that is why Abii Sad insisted on giving one full sé as he used to do
during the lifetime of the Prophot 38

226
‎Site Sp‏ بصدقة ‎wu‏ حتى لآ غلم ماله ما ؟ ‎BE ala‏ َيِه

‎652. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “Seven people will be shaded by Allah under
His shade on the day when there will be no shade except
His...” He mentioned the rest of the hadith, which says, “and a
man who gives charity so secretly that his left hand does
not know what his right hand has given.” (i.e. nobody knows
how much he has given in charity), Agreed upon.

‎. TAs, Oe Bay
653. ‘Uqbah Ibn “Amir (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger

‎of Allah 3 say, “Everybody will be shaded by his Sadagah
(on the Day of Judgment) until it has been judged between
the people.” Related by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim.

‏04 وَعْنْ أبي سعيد الْحْدرِيّ - ‎es‏ الله ‎eb Lay - fe‏

‏لق افيا لوا 1 ‎tos gs‏ الله من ‎edt Zak‏

‎654. Abi Sa‘id Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Prophet

‎38 said, “Any Muslim who clothes another Muslim who is
naked, Allah will clothe him from the green garments of
Paradise. Any Muslim who feeds a Muslim who is hungry,
Allah will feed him from the fruit of Paradise, and any Mu-
slim who gives drink to a Muslim who is thirsty, Allah will

‎give him a drink from the Sealed Nectar.”!9? Related by Abi

‎Dawtid with a weak chain of narrators.

‎197- This is the pure and clear white wine, which the believers will drink in
Paradise, but it will not make them intoxicated as the wine of this worl-
dly life. It is kept in sealed containers that will only be undone by their

‎227
oy dle ‏الله‎ Le ‏الب‎ ys - ‏عل‎ th ‏وَضِي‎ - ie gi gS bth — a00

OE ‏الصّدَقة ما‎ 5 I ba bats ‏د السُّقلى‎ > LS

ak GE iS ‏يسن‎ iy oth Ea ane ‏ومن‎ Se ab ‏عن‎
‏ا حَارِي‎ ded,
655. Hakim bin Hizam (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said,“The upper hand is better than the lower hand
.e. he who gives in charity is better than he who takes it).
One should begin by giving to his dependents. And the best
Sadaqah (charity) is that, which is given by a wealthy per-
son (from the money which is left over after his expenses).
And whoever abstains from asking others for some finan-
cial help, Allah will provide for him and save him from ask-
ing others; Allah will make him self-sufficient.” Agreed upon
and this version is of al-Bukhari.

3250s

» ‏أَْرَحَهُ أَحْمَدُ‎ ed

656. ‏عدم‎ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 was asked, ‘Which kind of Sadaqah is better? He replied,
“That which is given by one who does not have much pro-
perty. And begin by giving to your dependents.” Related by
Ahmad, and Aba Dawad. Ibn Khuzaimah, Ibn Hibban and Al-Ha-
kim graded it as Sahih.

23510 - رضي لله عه - َل ل ول لله ‎be‏ ال ل سل
657. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-
lah 38 said, “Give Sadagah.”‘A man then said, ‘Allah’s Messen-
ger, I have a Dinar, He then said to him, “Give it to yourself as
Sadaqah.” The man again said, ‘I have another one.’ The Messe-
nger of Allah 3 said, “Give it to your children as Sadagah.”
He said, ‘I have another one. He said, “Give it to your wife as
Sadaqah.” The man again said, ‘I have another one. The Messe-
nger of Allah 3 said, “Give it to your servant as Sadaqah.”

He said, ‘I have another one.’ The Messenger of Allah 38 said,
“You know better to whom you should give it.” Related by
‘Aba Dawad and An-Nasa‘7. Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim regarded it
as Sahih.

658. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 01
said, “When a woman gives some of the foodstuff (which she
has in her house) in charity without being extravagant
(without being wasteful), she will receive the reward for what
she has spent, and her husband will receive the reward
because of his earning, and the keeper (if any) will be simil-
arly rewarded. The reward of one will not decrease the
reward of the others.” Agreed upon.

8 55 أبي سعيد ‎God‏ - رضي ‎th‏ - قَالَ : جات ‎TA‏

3 Bay ‏به عََيْهمْ».‎ Kies ‏مَنْ‎ Bol
659. Abd Sa‘id (RAA) narrated, Zainab the wife of Ibn Mas’éd
came along and said to the Prophet 38, “O Messenger of Allah!

229

You have commanded us today to give Sadaqah (charity). I have
some jewelry of mine and I wanted to give it as Sadagah, but Ibn
Mas’id claims that he and his children are the most entitled to
my ‏.تله وم ممق‎ (deserve it more than anyone else.)’ The Messenger
of Alléh 38 said,“Ibn Mas’fd is right. Your husband and your
children are more deserving.” Related by Al-Bukhéri.

660. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

#8 said, “A man who persists in begging people to give him
charity, will come on the Day of Judgment and there will

not be a piece of flesh on his face.”!%8 Agreed upon.

Se Le 5 ‏قال قال‎ - te dy

661. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3§ said, “He who asks others to give to him in order to
inerease his own wealth, is akin to one who asks for live
coals. He who wishes to have more, let him have it and he
who wishes to have less, let him have it.” Related by Muslim.

tn Jo (Be - BOS ahs

ised ay, eee Ker ‏من أن‎ Oe ay
662, Az-Zubair bin Al’Awwam (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

198- This hadith means to show the ugliness of begging where there is no real
necessity, which makes the person loose his pride so that he comes on
the Day of Judgment without any flesh on his face. The Qur’an praised
those whom one thinks they are rich because of their modesty, as they
do not beg people in spite of their need. (2:274-275)

230
senger of Allah 38 said, “It is better for any of you to take a
rope and cut some wood (from the forest) and carry it over
his back and sell it, to preserve his dignity (as he is earning
his own living), rather than:ask a person for something and
that person may give him or not.” Related by Al- Bukhari

‎sur‏ عَنْ ‎YE‏ ُنب - رضي ‎th‏ 2 - فَالَ : َال رَسُولُ الله صلى الله

‎SF Obl Jn SEG ‏وَْهَهُ » إلا أذ‎ eo IK ‏كَد‎ ti:

‎toy Celt ‏لآل منق» « واه‎ Ay
663. Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

‎ger of Allah 38 said, “Begging is like a scratch with which a
man scratches his face; unless one is asking the ruler or in
the case of dire necessity.” Related by at-Tirmidhi, who regar-
ded it as Sahil

‏بابب قَسْم الصّدَقات

‎Chapter IV: Division of Zakah (ZakGh recipients)

‎ee‏ ةغل ل بول سل
‎fo she we pus:‏

‎«ASE Bay «ab 2 » ‏أَحْمَدُ » وأو ماود‎ 4

‎. ‏بالإرْسّال‎ Jets
664. AbG 5250 Al-Khudri narrated that the Messenger of
Allah & said, “Zakah is not allowed for the well-off person

‎except for one of the following five: an administrator of
ZakGh, a man who buys Zakah holdings with his money, a
person who is in debt, a fighter in the cause of Allah, or a
rich person who is given a present by a needy (miskin)
person which the latter had been given as Zakah.” Related
by Ahmad, Aba Dawad, Ibn Majah, and Al-Hakim regarded it as
Sahih

‎231
665. “Ubaidullah bin “Adi bin Al- reas (RAA) narrated that

two men told him that they had gone to the Messenger of Allah 3
asking him to give them something from the Zakéh money (as he

was distributing it at that time). The Messenger of Allah 2 then
looked them up and down and found them to be sturdy and strong.
He then said to them, “If you desire, I shall give it to you, but
this Zak@h is not for one who is rich, neither for the one
who is strong and able to earn,” Related by Ahmad, Aba Daw-
30 and An-Nasa’

ل ‎fh‏ لق و ‎ea‏ ون جا .

666. Qabisah bin Mukhariq Al-Hilali (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 3% said, “Asking for (the money of) Zakah, is
justified only for the following three: first, a man who is in
debt: it is then permissible for him to receive [Zak@h] until
his difficulty is resolved; second, a man who was struck by
calamity, which destroyed his holdings, which also makes
it permissible for him to receive [ZakGh] until he is in a
position to carn his own living; and third, a man who has
been reduced to poverty and three persons of caliber from
among his people testify to his desperate circumstances.
Such will receive until he finds a means of support for him-

232

self. Other than these cases, 0 Qabisah, it is considered as
taking suht (unlawful or harém earnings), and the person rec-
eiving it (this Zakah) will be consuming forbidden (unlawful)
holdings.” Related by Muslim, Ab Dawad, Ibn Khuzaimah and
Ibn Hibban.

667, “Abdul Muttalib bin Rabah bin Al-Harith narrated that
the Messenger of Allah 38 said,“Indeed, Zakah ought not to be
given to the family of Muhammad 3%, it will be like giving

them from the impurities of people.”™ In another narration,

“It is not lawful for Muhammad or the family of Muham-

- pit ‏إن‎ So

‎Bye bth ay se‏ هَاشم شَيْءٌ وَاحذ». ‎Gy‏ البُخَارِي
‎Jubair bin Mut‘am (RAA) narrated, “Uthman Ibn 'Affan‏ .668

‎and I went to the Messenger of Alléh 38, and said to him, ‘O Mes-
senger of Allah! You have given the family of Bana Al-Muttalib
from the fifth of the war booty of Khaibar and left us out, while we
and they are of the same status.’ The Messenger of Allah replied,
“Band Al-Muttalib and Bana Hashim are one.” Related by al-
Bukhari.

‎199. The Qur'an described Zakéth in Sirah at-Taubah (9:103) by saying:
“Take Zakéh from their wealth in order to purify them.” Zakah is
regarded as the act, which purifies the money of the people, as they give
out the part, which if they had kept it, would be hardm for them to keep
since Allah ordered them to give it

‎233
669. Aba 8357 (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

#8, appointed a man from Bani Makhzim to collect the Zakéh.
‘The man said to Aba Rafi’, ‘Accompany me so that you may get a

share of it.’ Aba Rafi’ replied, ‘No! Not until I go to the Prophet 3
and ask him,’ He went to the Messenger of Allah % and asked

him, and the Prophet 3 replied, “The client (slave) of a cert-
ain tribe are like(the members of the tribe) themselves and

Zakéh is not lawful for us.” Related by Ahmad, the three
ImAms, Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn Hibban.

eat hb dab i a eens
5 3 ah fe
Og ‏متي‎

. ay MOL BEB Y Gy SS ‏ل‎ 5
670. Salim bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar narrated on the authority

of his father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 3 used to give
“Umar bin Al-Khattéb something (some money), but he would say
to him, ‘Would you give it to a person, who is more needy than

me? The Messenger of Allah 3 would then say to him, ‘Take it.
If you are given something from this property, without
your having asked for it or being eager to receive it, and if
you are not given, do not go and ask for it.” Related by
Muslim.

200- Abdi RAfi’ was a slave of Al-’Abbiis the uncle of the Prophet #8, and he
‘reed him at the time of the Caliphate of ‘Ali (RA).

234
‎OLS‏ الصّيام
‎Book V: Fasting‏
‎Chapter I‏

‎671. Ab Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

‎lah 38 said, “None of you should fast a day or two before the
(beginning of the) month of Ramadéa, unless it is a day on
which one is in the habit of fasting (ic. voluntary fasting that
coincides with that day).” Agreed upon.

‏اليوْمَ الذي

‎pe eid

‏يُشَلكُ فيه فَقَدَ ‎gas‏ أبا القاسم ‎Le‏ الله ‎aie‏ وَسَلُمَ ». 555 6 ‎ate fe‏

‎. Oe Ng
672. “Ammér bin Yasir (RAA) narrated, ‘Whoever fasts the
day of doubt?! he has then disobeyed Aba al-Qasim (the Prophet

‎Related by the five Imams, and Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn‏ رض
‎ban graded it as Sahih.‏

‏57 س وَعَنٍ ‎ot‏ عُمَرٌ - رضي ‎te: was th‏ رَسُولَ الله صَلَّى ‎th‏

‎ale BE ld ‏فَاقَدُرُوا‎

‎Jy bb pe ‏وَلمْسْلمٍ : «قإن أغمى‎

‎201- It is the day that precedes Ramadan and people are not sure if it is the
last day of Sha ban or the beginning of Remadén.

‎235

673. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger of

Allah 38 say, “Start fasting after you have seen it (i.e. the new
crescent) and end the fast (at the end of the month) when you
see it, If it is overcast and cannot be seen, then estimate its
sighting (i.e. presume that Sha ‘ban lasted for thirty days).” Agre-
ed upon,

Muslim narrated, “If it is too overcast to be seen then pres-
ume that it (Sha’bén) lasted for thirty days.”

In another narration by al-Bukhari, “wait until thirty days of it
(Sha ban) have passed.”

He lst : - ‏رضي الله عَنْهُ‎ - Gb ‏في حَديت أبي‎ Li ave

ان ثلاثين».

674. Al-Bukhéri reported on the authority of Aba Hurairah,
“Complete the days of Sha ‘ban as thirty days.”

قَالَ : «ترَاءى ‎Lh‏ الهلال <

‎(ol ph pla SH, AL‏ بصيّامه».
‎ayy‏ أبُو 545 » رَصّحَحَهُ ‎Oe Ey « Aste‏

‎675. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The people were trying to
sight the new moon (of Ramadén) and when I reported to the Mes-

‎senger of Allah % that I had seen it, he fasted and commanded
people to fast.’ Related by Abi Dawéd, and Al-Hakim and Ibn
Hibban graded it as Sahih..

‎th foto ie ust - ‏ا‎
‏إلا الله ؟» قال‎ Jt

‎676. Ibn “Abbfs (RAA) narrated, ‘A Bedouin came to the Pro-
236

phet 38 and said, I have sighted the crescent (of Ramadén). He
then said to him, “Do you testify that there is none worthy of
worship but Allah?” The Bedouin said, ‘Yes’ He asked him
again, “Do you testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah?” The man replied, ‘Yes.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 there-
upon said, “O Bilal! Announce to the people to (start) fasting
tomorrow.” Related by the five Imams. Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn

Hibban graded it as Sahth. An-Nasa’i said that it is most probably
Mursal (a Hadith in which the link between the Successor (Tabi)

and the Prophet #8 is missing.

OG Bye carp 98) 5
LN ‏من‎ i IES flee ‏«لاً‎ :
677. The mother of the believers, Hafgah (RAA) narrated that
the Messenger of Allah 3£ said, “Whoever does not form his
intention to fast before Fajr, his fasting will not be accep-
ted.” Related by the five Imams, but At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’i
consider it to be related by Hafsah and not connected to the Pro-
phet 38.
Imam Ad-Daraqutni transmitted, “No fasting is accepted for
one who does not form the intention (to fast) the night

before.” 202

4 1 Site “Yon IB « io okey

wal da Ty ‏أثانا‎
‎riley ‏م‎

fone INTE ‏«أرينيه‎ a

. ‏ملم‎ By. Js ‏ضَائمًا»‎
‎678. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘One day the Messenger of AL
202- Some scholars are of the opinion that one can form his intention once at

the beginning of the month to fast for the whole month, instead of mak-
ing this intention every night.

237
entered my house and said, “Is there anything here (to
eat)?” I said, ‘No.’ He said, “I shall then be fasting (today).”
Then he came to us another day and we said to him, ‘Someone has

offered us some hais®3 as a gift.’ He then said, “Show it to me. I

bad been fasting since this morning,” and he ate from it (as it,
was a voluntary fast and not during the obligatory fasting of Ram-
adn). Related by Muslim.

8 وَعَنْ سَهْلٍ إن سَعْد -

we hi bi ‏ما‎ Pe ‏الا‎ GS a8 sky
679, Sahl bin Sa’d (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 3¥ said, “People will always be fine (on the right path, or
following the Sunnah) as long as they hasten to break their

fast (in Ramadén).”2 Agreed upon,

th Lea, ‏حَدِيثٍ أبي هُرَيْرَة - رَضيّ الله عَنهُ - عر‎ GEG — a
‏قَالَ : «قال الله - عت وَجَر‎
680. Aba Hurairah (RAA) oe “The Messenger of Allah

% said, “Allah, the Most Exalted said: “Those among My
servants, who hasten to break their fast, are the most belo-
ved (or dearest) to Me.” Related by at-Tirmidhi

- رَضِي ‎U6 - Se th‏ :06 25 الله صلَى الله

‎Ly Sh‏ فإ في ‎AS SiN‏ متم

‎681. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 35
said, “Eat the suhir (pre-dawn meal), for there are blessings
in this meal.” Agreed upon.

‎ole ‏الله‎ Le op Fah pe ot ey tar

‎203- A kind of food made of dates, fat and dried cheese.
201- Aba Dawad added the following in a similar narration, '.... because the
Jews and the Christians delay doing so. (ie. breaking their fast)

‎238
682. Sulaiman bin “Amir Ad-Dabbi (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 38 said, “When one of you is breaking his
fast, he should eat some dates. If dates are not available,
then break it with some water, for water is purifying.”
Related by the five Imams. Ibn Khuzaimah, Ibn Hibban and al-

he ‏رضي له الى 8 - قَالَ فى رسو‎ th ‏أي‎ Aimar

. ‏عليه‎ ESM yl ‏حين‎ wai Rahs ‏ترك‎
‎683. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
38 forbade us from practicing wisdl in fasting (i.e. fasting continu-

ously without breaking one’s fast in the evening or eating before
the following dawn). So a man said to him, ‘But you practice wisal

O Messenger of Allah!’ The Prophet Allah 3 replied, “Which one
of you is like me? I am given food and drink during my sle-
ep by Allah.” So when people refused to stop wisdl, the Prophet

2 fasted day and night, continuously along with them for a day
and then another day and then they saw the crescent (of the new

month of Shawwél). The Prophet 3 said to them, “If the erese-
ent had not appeared, I would have made you fast for a
longer period.” That was a punishment for them because they
refused to stop (practicing Wisd). Agreed upon.

مطح وك ‎BB‏ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎Dh be‏

ub oo poe ‏به وَالْجَهْلَ َل لله‎
Shelly 35 he bah ayy tiny

684. ‏نطف‎ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Whoever does not give up forged speech and

239
evil actions and does not abandon foolishness, Allah is not
in need of his leaving food and drink (i.e. Allah will not ac-
cept his fasting).” Related by Al-Bukhari and Aba Dawad, and
the wording is from the latter.

ly SSE ow BSS , ‏وَهْرَ صَائمٌ‎ ety «pile GY ‏يُقَبّلَ‎ Ly
yy ‏ه » والفظ لمُمئلم » وَزَادَ في‎

685. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
would kiss and embrace (his wives) while fasting, for he had the
most control of all of you over his desires,’ Agreed upon and the
wording is from Muslim, who added in a narration, ‘In Ramadén.’

la ‏«في‎ :

6 - رُعَن اين عباس - رضي ‎th‏ على ‎ge‏ : «أنا التي ‎oe Lo‏

IE a cts By EG PAL GS a Ly
686. Ibn “Abbas (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

8 had himself cupped while he was in a state of Ihram, and had
himself cupped while he was fasting.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

lbs : OB » ‏في رَمَضَانَ‎ aN 5
687. Shadd&d bin Aus (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 came across a man in Al-Baqi’ (in Madinah) who was
having himself cupped in Ramadén, and said to him, “The one
who cups and the one who is being cupped have both bro-
ken their fast.” Related by the five Imams except for At-Tirmi-
dhi. Ahmad, Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn Hibban regarded it as au-

thentic.205

205. ‘The majority of scholars are of the opinion that cupping is allowed while
fasting, as proved by the hadith of Ibn “Abbas that is narrated at a per-
iod of time later than that of Shaddad, as Ibn ‘Abbas accompanied the

Prophet 3 on his farewell pilgrimage. So, it was probably prohibited at
240
eof oll ey 088

‎pated Bed EES GG UE‏ أن ‎jae‏ إن
أبي طالب ‎ple BG GS‏ فَمَرٌ به الي صَلَى ‎Wy‏

‎5 ‏عله‎ dh Le ‏بي‎

‎688. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The first time cupping was dis-
liked for the one who is fasting was when Ja‘far bin Abi Talib had

‎himself cupped while fasting and the Messenger of Allah 38 came
across him and said, “Those two have broken their fast (mea-
ning Jafar and the man who was cupping him)” But later on the

‎Prophet 3€ allowed cupping for the one who is fasting. Anas used
to have himself cupped while he was fasting. Related by Ad-Dara-
utni, who regarded it as a strong hadith,

‎Hane bo 5‏ - رضي ‎We Su Uh‏ - » أن للب

‎ca‏ في ‎Olay‏ « وَهُوَ ‎pole‏ روه ابن ‎Sal‏ اماد ضتعيف

‎wif he ‏لأَيْصحّ في‎

‎689. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 ap-

‎plied Kohl to his eyes while he was fasting’ Related by Ibn Majah

‎with a weak chain of narrators. According to At-Tirmidht, nothing

‎authentic has been related from the Prophet 3 concerning this
issue, ic. applying kohl, eye drops etc..to the eye while fasting.

‎: Ob - ‏عَنْهُ‎

‏ل رَسُول الله ‎hb‏

‎aye‏ فطعم لل

‏نسي وَهْوَ ‎ite‏ فأكل أَوْ شرب »

‎690. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 said, Whoever forgets that he is fasting, and eats or
drinks is to complete his fast, as it was Allah who fed him
and gave him something to drink.” Agreed upon.

‎the beginning during fasting, but later it was allowed, and it is only
disliked if the person becomes weak due to cupping while fasting.

‎241

0 وَللْماكم ‎A>:‏ فطَرٌ في ‎a8 Sa‏ فلا فصا ‎ole‏ ولا ‎GS‏

691. Al-Hakim transmitted on the authority of Aba Hurairah,
“Whoever breaks his fast during Ramadan due to forgetful-
ness is not to make up for the day later or perform any
expiation.” It is a sound hadith.

. ‏الدَارفَطي‎ ats » ‏أَحْمَدُ‎ del, ‏الْحَمَسَهُ‎ ory
692. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Whoever is overcome and vomits is not to
make up for the day, but whoever vomits intentionally
must make up the day.” Related by the five Imams.

‎ar‏ وَعَنْ جَابر بن عَبْد الله - ‎th oo‏ عَلَى عَنْهُمَا - » أن رَسُولَ الله

‎693. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏نكما ولك‎ for
Makkah during the year of the conquest (of Makkah) in Ramadan
and he and the people with him fasted until he reached the valley
of Kura‘Al-Ghamim. He then called for a cup of water, which he
elevated so that the people could see it, and then he drank. After-
wards, he was told that some people had continued to fast, and he
then said, “Those are the disobedient ones! Those are the
disobedient ones!”

‎BS gy tat‏ لَهُ : ‎AB Op‏ شق عَلَِهمُ ‎OH «an‏ يرون فيمًا

‎694. In another narration,He was told that people are finding
242
it difficult to fast (during the journey) and they are waiting to see

what the Prophet 3¥ will do. So he called for a cup of water after
the ‘Agr (afternoon) prayer and drank it’ Related by Muslim.

‎of 35 32} ane‏ ذو ‎th - LM‏ غلة - أله َال يا رَسُولَ
‎adel dh‏ على الصا 0

‎695. Hamzah bin ‘Amro Al-Aslamt (RA) narrated, ‘I said to

‎the Messenger of Allah 38, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I find within me
the strength to fast while traveling. Would there be any blame

‎upon me if I were to do so? The Messenger of Allah 4 said to him,
“It is a concession from Allah. Whoever takes it has done
well. Whoever likes to fast, there is no blame upon him.”
Related by Muslim.

‎696. ‏م15‎ ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘An elderly man is permitted
to break his fast, but he must feed a poor person daily, and he
does not have to make up for it’ Related by Ad-Daraqutni and Al-
Hakim, who rendered it to be Salih.

‎243
BGA Grr Lt ‏د تقال‎

١ ‏رَرَاهُ‎ aes Cab G ‏«اذْهب‎
‎697. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that a man came to the

Messenger of Allah 3 and said, “I am ruined O Messenger of Al-

lah!” The Messenger of Allah 38 asked him, “What has ruined
you?” The man replied,T had intercourse with my wife during the

day in Ramadan(while fasting).” The Prophet 3% said to him, “Are

you able to free a slave?” The man said, ‘No.’ The Prophet 28
said, “Can you fast for two consecutive months?” He said,
‘No. The Prophet then asked him, “Can you provide food for
sixty poor people?” He said, ‘No.’ Then the man sat down. A

basket of dates was brought to the Prophet 4% and he said to the
man, “Give this as Sadagah (voluntary charity).” The man said,
“To someone who is poorer than us? There is no one in this city (Al-
Madinah)who is in need of these dates more than us!’ The Prophet

38 laughed until his molar teeth could be seen and said to the
man, “Go and feed your family with these dates.” Related by
the seven Imams and the wording is from Muslim,

‘dh oe ‏«أن لبي‎ : - ge ‏على‎ Ms ‏رَضي‎ -
oe 3 etal Jai ‏نَم‎ ٠ pte ‏امن‎ heats gh ce
‏تُضي».‎ Vp : ‏سَلَمةَ‎ Hes ‏وَزَادَ ئلم في‎

698. “A'ishah and Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated, The Mes-

senger of Allah 38 would rise in the morning (when it is already
Fajr time) while he was Junub (in a state of major ritual impurity
due to intercourse) on a day in Ramadan. He would then perform
Ghusl and fast.’ Agreed upon. In the narration of Muslim on the
authority of Umm Salamah, ‘And he would not make up for it
(that day)”

5 وَعَنْ ‎Lane‏ - رضي الله الى ‎Ge‏ - أن الي صلَى الله

ee wath ‏غلا‎ fe fe

244
699, “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎said, “Whoever dies while he still has some fasts to make up
(of the days of Ramadén), then his heir (any of them) should
fast on his behalf.” Agreed upon.

Chapter It: Voluntary Fasting and Forbidden
Days to Fast

700. Abi Qatadah Al-Ansari (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger

of Allah 38 was asked about fasting on the day of “Arafah (the 9%
of the month of Dhul Hijjah). He replied, “Fasting on the day of
“Arafah is an expiation for the preceding year and the fol-
lowing year.” He was also asked about fasting on the day of ‘As-
hard’ (the 10 of the month of Muharram). He replied, “Fasting
on the day of ‘Ashard’ is an expiation for the preceding

year.” The Messenger of Allah 38 was also asked about fasting on
Monday, and he replied, “This is the day on which I was born
and the day on which I was sent (with the Message of Islam)
and the day on which I received revelation.” Related by
Muslim.

‎Se OF fey ١‏ - رضي

‎Ss‏ عَلْهُ - ‎oF‏ رَسُول ‎dh‏ صَلّى
الله عَلَيْهِ ‎Saal Sona, pe om : du Lg‏ سنا من شََّالٍ ‎pad OF‏
الدهر». رَوَاهُ ‎2p‏
‎TOL. Abt Aiyab Al-Ansirf (RAA) narrated that the Messenger‏
‎of Allah 38 said, “Whoever fasts during the month of Rama-‏

‎245

dan and then follows it with six days of Shawwél will ‏عط‎
‎(rewarded) as if he had fasted the entire year.” Related by
Muslim.

‎ba sh‏ حَرِيفا».

‎702. Aba Sa‘id Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “No servant (of Allah) fasts on a day (merely)
for the sake of Allah except that Allah pushes the Hellfire
seventy years further away from his face, due to fasting on
this day.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

‎703, ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 us-
ed to fast until one would say, he never breaks his fast (i.e. he ne-
ver stops fasting), and he would abandon fasting (at other times)
until one would say that he never fasts. And I never saw the Mes-

‎senger of Allah ¥ fast for a complete month except for the month
of Ramadan, and I never saw him fast in a month more than he
did in the month of Sha‘bén.” Agreed upon and the wording is
from Muslim.

‎he Mes ae: as 8 BiB AGH av t

‎704. Aba Dharr (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 commanded us to fast for three days of every month; that is on
the days of the full moon; the 130, 14th, and 15% (of the lunar

‎246
month), Related by An-Nas@’i and At-Tirmidhi and rendered au-
thentic by Ibn Hibban.

Ge ‏لى الل‎ dh ‏أذ سول‎ » - te Sis th ‏رض‎ - O54 ‏ا أي‎ 03
GE ‏يإأنه».‎ Y Sate

2 ‏زا أثو‎ «Soc bly,

705. Abi Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “A woman is not to fast (even) for one day while
her husband is present except with his permission.” Agreed
upon and the wording is from Al-Bukhari’. Aba Dawad’s version
states, “unless it is during Ramadan (then she does not need
his permission as it is obligatory fasting).”

706. Aba Sa’id Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated. ‘The Messenger of

Allah 3 has prohibited fasting on two days; the day of Fitr (brea-
king the fast of Ramadén) and on the day of sacrifice (7dul Ad-
‘4@), Agreed upon.

707. Nubaishah Al-Hudhali (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 3 said, “The days of Tashrig (the three days follo-
wing ‘Idul Ad-hé, ic. 11, 12% and 13% of Dhul Hijjah) are days
of eating, drinking and remembering (dhikr) of Allah, the Most
Great and Glorious.” Related by Muslim,

2

shah and Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘Nobody was

247
allowed to fast on the days of Tashrig except for those, who could
not afford the Hadi (sacrifice),’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

709. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 28 said, “Do not single out Friday night (ie. the night
preceding Friday) among all the other nights for perform-
ing the night prayer. Also, do not single out Friday among
other days for fasting, unless it coincides with the days one
regularly fasts.” Related by Muslim.

710. Ab Hurairah, narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “None of you should fast on Friday, unless he fasts
together with the day before or the day after.” Agreed upon.

3١ ‏الله صَلّى‎ Jets ‏رضي الل َه - أذ‎ - Ca ‏وَعَله‎ س١‎
SKE » ‏فلا نَصُومُوا». رَوَاهُ الْحَسْمَةُ‎ OS Lila 8p
711. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “When it is the middle of Sha‘bén do not fast
(until it is Ramadén).” Related by the five Imams, but Imam
Ahmad declared it to be a weak narration.

ST eg ee

5 : Pils IU Ley

a sp faq as yp Pat

. ‏تلك 5 50 : هُو ملسمو‎ ss ‏وَقَد‎ Obes FY Se

712. As-Sammaé’ bint Busr (RAA) narrated that the Messen-
248

ger of Allah 38 said, “Do not fast on Saturday unless it is an
obligatory fast. (Do not fast) even if you do not find anything
(to eat) exeept for some grape peelings or the branch of a
tree, in that case he should chew on it.” Related by the five
Imams and its narrators are reliable. Imam Malik disapproved
this narration, and Aba Dawad said that this narration is abro-

gated.205

es ‏رَسُولَ الله صَلَّى‎ he - ee a hy - ‏سَلَمَّةَ‎

Pi 00,

713. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

3% used to fast more often on Saturdays and Sundays than on the
other days. He would say, “They are the 205 of the polythe-
ists, and I love to act contrary to what they do.” Related by
An-Nas&’ and was rendered authentic by Ibn Khuzaimah, and the
wording is his.

A ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ 4
714. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 forbade fasting on the day of ‘Arafah for the one who is
actually at ‘Arafah (i.e. performing Hajj). Related by the five Im-

‎Imam As-San‘Ani in'Subul As-Salim,’ says that probably Aba Dawéd‏ مد
‎says that it is abrogated, because he is referring to the following narra-‏
‎tion of Umm Salamah, who narrated that the Messenger of Allah 33‏
‎used to often fast on Saturdays and Sundays. Imam At-Tirmidhi said‏
‎that what is disli-ked here is for a person to exclusively choose Saturday‏
‎as a day of fasting, as it is the day that the Jews honor. Anyway, most‏
‎scholars said that it is disliked to fast on Saturday by itself due to the‏
‎above mentioned Ahadith, except for Imam Malik, who said that it is‏
‎permissible to fast on Saturday by itself, but the hadith of As-Samma’ is‏
‎evidence against his opinion,‏

‎249
ms except for At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Khuzaimah and al-
it as Sahih.

ون د أي ل - ‎ts‏ فال :06 رَسُول ‎he dy‏

715. ‘Abdullah Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “May he, who perpetually fasts (without a
break) never fast.”207 Agreed upon.

Chil Vy fle Vo : ‏اده بلفظ‎

on ply yy

716. Muslim narrated on the authority of Abt QatAdah,“May
he not fast or break his fast.”

‎ou‏ الإغتكاف ‎et;‏ رَمَضَانَ
‎Chapter 111 : I'tikaf 206 and Night prayer‏
‎(Tahajjud) in Ramadan‏

‎ele ty Le ‏رَسُولَ الله‎ ot - be i ‏رضي‎ - A Le iy

‎! OAs) fH ‏«مَن‎ : J

‎Ue‏ وا

‎717. Aba Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah
said, “Whoever prays during the night in Ramadén out of

‎207- The Prophet 4 is probably rebuking the one who fasts continuously by
making this du’ (supplication) against him, meaning to stop him from
doing so, Or it could probably mean that this person will not be rewar-
ded for this fast, as he is acting contrary to the Sunnah of the Prophet 38
who prohibited fasting on ‘id days and the other days mentioned above.

‎208. I'tikdf in this context: means remaining in a mosque (preferably a cong-
regational mosque) for a certain period of time with the intention of
remaining in seclusion from worldly matters, and keeping oneself busy
with acts of worship such as praying, fasting, reciting Qur’én, dhifr ete.
In other words one devotes himself purely to the worship of Allah for
that period of time, with the intention of getting closer to Allah, the Al-
mighty. It could be performed in Ramadan (which is recommended dur-
ing the last ten days of the month) or at other times.

‎250

sincere faith and seeking its reward from Allah, will have
all of his previous sins forgiven.” Agreed upon.

718. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘With the start of the last ten

days of Ramadan, the Messenger of Allah 38 used to tighten his
waist helt (i.e. keep away from his wives) and used to stay up pra-
ying all night, and he would also wake his wives(to pray and recite
‘Qur'an etc..).” Agreed upon.

719. “Aisha (RAA) narrated, "The Messenger of Allah 38 us-
ed to perform I'tikaf during the last ton days of Ramadan until he
died. Then his wives used to perform I'tikéf after his death.’ Agre-
ed upon.

720. “ishah (RAA) narrated, “Whenever the Messenger of

Allah 3 intended to make I'tikaf, he would pray the morning pra-
yer and then he would enter the place of his I‘tikdf (i.e. the place,
which he had prepared for his J‘tikéf inside the mosque).” Agreed
upon.

Sesh

721. “Aishah (RA) narrated, The Messenger of Allah 32 ‘used
251
to put his head into (the window of my house) while he was in the
mosque (performing I'tikaf) and I would comb his hair. When he
was in I'tikdf he would not enter the house except for some need.”
Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-Bukhart’

» ‏لا يَعُودَ مَرِيضًا‎ of ‏المتتكف‎ Je Bay: el ey vy
cy | ‏لخاحة‎ EI BU YG

“ Sa Vy » Hg
TAY 6 356 ‏رَوَهُ أبُو‎ eg welt ‏ِل في‎ BRE ‏ولا‎ » oa x ‏اغتكّاف‎

. ‏آخره‎ Lay pont OT) ae

722. “Mishah (RA) narrated, ‘It is Sunnah for the one perfo-
rming [‘tikaf not to visit the sick, attend a funeral, or touch his
wife (with sexual desire), nor have sexual intercourse with her. He
should also not go out (of the mosque) except for an extreme neces-

sity, and no I'tikaf is accepted without fasting, or without being

in a congregational mosque (where Friday prayer is performed).’
Related by Abii Dawid with an acceptable chain of narrators, but
scholars say that the last part (starting: ‘no I'tikaf is accepted...)
is most probably the saying of ‘A’ishah (RAA), i.e. Hadith Maugaf

(i.e, that which the companion does not connect to the Prophet 38)
and it is not the saying of the Prophet 3 himself.

hay ale ts Le Gah of - age
AAO et 6 a oY ‏لتك ل م‎ jet i ‏قَالَ‎

CaS Got  ٌمكاَحْلاَو‎
728. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

8 said, “The one who is performing I’tikGf does not have to
fast unless he obliges himself to do so.” Related by ad-Daraq-
utni and al-Hakim, and most, probably it is also the saying of Ibn

7 رَعَسنٍ اسن عَيّاسٍ -

“Abbas, ie. Mawgiif and not of the sayings of the Prophet 38.

209- According to most scholars it is preferable for one to fast while perfor-
ming [*tikaf but. he is not obliged to do so.

252
eel ‏أن ِجَالاً‎ » - ge Dh ‏رضي‎ - oth oo — vv
‏لقاريى لتم بي المع الأو ال رَسُولُ الله‎ ul ey le ‏الله‎
‎OF ‏فَمَنْ‎ MN a ‏في‎ Ab UY; ‏وَسَلَمَ : «أرَى‎ ole ‏الله‎ i
de 5 AGM ‏ها في السبع‎

724, Tbn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘Some of the companions of
the Prophet 38 were shown in their dreams that the night of

5200

Qadr21° was in the last seven nights of Ramadan. The Messenger

of Allah 3 said to them, “It seems that all of your dreams
agree that (the Night of Qadr) is in the last seven nights, and
whoever wants to seek that night should do so in the last
seven nights (of Ramadén).” Agreed upon.

iy cetyl ‏وعشرين». َو‎ ca ‏في‎ 06 peg
Gy ae BYE iol ‏وقد الف في على‎

725. Mu’awiyah i Abi Sufian (RA) narrated, "The Mes-
senger of Allah said regarding the night of al-Qadr, “It is the 27°

night?" (of Ramadén).” Related by Abi Dawid. But it is most

probably the saying of Mu ‘awiyah and not the Prophet 3.

210- The night of Qadr is the most virtuous night of the year, as Allah says in
the Qur'an: "Verily! We have sent it in the night of al-Qadr. And what
will make you know what the night of al-Qadr is? The night of Al-Qadr
is better than a thousand months...” (Sirah 97). Any action done on that
night for example, reciting the Qur'an, making dhikr of Allah, and so on,
is better than acting for one thousand months, which do not contain the
night of Qadr. It is to be expected in the last ten days of Ramadan.

211 Scholars hold different opinions as to when the night of al-Qadr occurs.
Some are of the opinion that it is the 21*, some say the 23" others say
the 25% and yet others say that it is the 29%, Some are of the opinion
that it varies from year to year, but most scholars believe that it is most
probably the 27" of Ramadan due to the hadith related by Ahmad on
the authority of Ibn “Umar, that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “He
who likes to seek that night should do so on the 27%.”

253
- ‏واكاك‎ Seite 336 ‏أي‎ $B tad, + Be
726. shah (RAA) narrated, ‘I asked the Messenger of Allah
3%, ‘O Messenger of Allah, if I know what night the night of Qadr
is, what should I say during it” He said, “Say: O Allah, You are
the Pardoner and You love to pardon, so pardon me.” Rela-

ted by the five Imams except for Aba Dawéd. At-Tirmidht and Al-
Hakim reported it as Sahih.

727, Abd 510 Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 28 said, “One should not undertake journeys except
to three mosques: al-Magjid al-Hardm (in Makkah), the Aqsé

mosque, or this mosque (in Madinah).”12 Agreed upon.

212. Scholars say that if one makes a vow to perform ‏يقلن[‎ in one of these
three mosques in particular, then he should fulfill his vow, due to this
hadith, which indicates that these mosques have special preference over
any other mosque. But if someone vows to perform ['tikéf in another
mosque, it is not obligatory on him to fulfill it and he may perform it in
any place.

254
mel ous
Book VI: Pilgrimage
‏عَلَّيِه‎ eb Oy ‏فمْله‎ GL

Chapter I: Its virtues and those upon whom
Hajj (Pilgrimage) is obligatory

رَسُولَ الله ‎ole‏

- رضي الله ‎te‏

ya

728. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3§ said, “The performance of ‘Umrah is an expiation
for all the sins committed (between this Umrah and the previ-

ous one), and the reward for Hajj Mabrir 219 (the one accepted

by Allah or the one which was performed without doing any
wrong) is nothing save Paradise.” Agreed upon

‎Lise gy -8‏ - رَضي ‎Bs Cis - ie th‏ رَسُولَ الله » عَلَى
النسَاء ‎SL ge‏ قَالَ : ‎Selle ay‏ حهَادٌ ‎SY‏ فيه : ‎Gti «BS‏
رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » ‎RG Big‏ واللفظ له ‎BEY‏ صّحِيحٌ « ‎Waly‏ في الصّحيح

‎729. ‘Mishah (RAA) narrated, ‘I once asked the Messenger of

‎Allah 38, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Is Jihad incumbent upon women?
He replied,“Yes. They have to take part in Jihad in which no
fighting takes place, which is: Hajj and “Umrah.” Related by
Ahmad and Ibn Majah and the wording is his. It is reported with a
sound chain of narrators.

‎213. It is the Hajj accepted by Allah or the one, which is performed pure of
any sins or evil actions.

‎255
730. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RA) narrated, ‘A Bedouin came to
the Prophet 8 and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Tell me about

‘Umrah! Is it compulsory? He replied 38, “No (it is not compuls-
ory), but it is better for you to perform it.” Related by Ahmad
and at-Tirmidhi. Scholars are of the opinion that it is Mawgiif.

Ibn ‘Adi narrated with a weak chain of narrators on the authority

of Jabir (RAA) in a Hadith Marfa’ (connected to the Prophet 32),
“Hajj and Umrah are compulsory.”24

ا وَسُولَ الله ما اسيل ؟
الْحَاكمْ » ‎cently‏
‎Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah _ was‏ .731

asked, ‘What is as-Sabil? 25’ The Messenger of Allah 38 replied,

“Provision of food and means to make the journey.” Related
by Ad-Daraqutni and rendered authentic by Al-Hakim.

Ly Shy :

BRS ‏وفي إسلناده‎ . Ae

732. _At-Tirmidhi reported the same hadith on the authority
of Ibn ‘Umar but with a weak chain of narrators.

214. Most scholars hold the opinion that ‘U/mrah is Sunnah and not a comp-
ulsory duty.

215. The man is asking about what is meant by being able to perform Hajj as
mentioned in the verse, “And Hajj is a duty that mankind owes to

AUGh, those who can afford the journey,” (3:97).
256
Dy ae ho ‏الي‎ of ‏وَعَنٍ ابن عباس‎ 7+

«من ‎{yall‏ ؟» فَقَالُوا

أنت ؟ ‎Ou‏ : «رَسُول الله ‎al ais‏ ارا

5 ‏أَخْرُ».‎ MS : Bay:

783. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
came across some riders at ar-Rawhé’ (a place near Madinah). He
asked them, “Who are you” They replied, ‘Who are you?” He
replied, “1 am the Messenger of Allah.” A woman then lifted up
a boy, and asked the Prophet, ‘Will this boy be rewarded for Hajj?”

The Messenger of Allah 38 replied, “Yes, and you too will be
rewarded.” #16 Related by Muslim.

عَنْهُمَا - ديف رول الله ‎oe‏ الله
‎cid. oy Shu hed‏ : يا رَسُولَ الله » ‎dite sy‏ عَلَى ‎pote‏

Gains YE Ce A a LEY » ‏جيرا‎ a SES

ea

734, ‏مطل‎ “Abbas (RAA) narrated that ‘Al-Fadl Ibn “Abbas was

riding behind the Messenger of Allah 32 when a woman from the
tribe of Khath“am came along, and al-Fad) started looking at her

and she also started looking at him. The Messenger of Allah 32
kept on turning al-Fad!'s face to the other side. She said, ‘O Mes-
senger of Allah! Allah has prescribed Hajj for His servants, and it
has become due on my father who is an old man, who cannot sit
stable on his mount. Shall I perform Hajj on his behalf? The Pro-

phet 38 replied, “Yes, you may.” This incident took place during

216. ‘The boy will be rewarded for his obedience, while the mother will be
rewarded for carrying and instructing him to perform Haij. This hadith
is evidence that performing Hajj by someone before attaining puberty is
correct and acceptable, but once he attains the age of puberty, he is to
perform hajj once again, as Hajj is compulsory on adults only

257

زبلوغ المرام).
the Farewell Pilgrimage of the Prophet ‏.يك‎ Agreed upon, and the
wording is from Al-Bukhar?’

th J Ae

Woah ‏؟‎ ot ot 5 at ‏كَانَ عَلَى‎ Vt Ge So tae : ‏قَالَ‎

‎pa of. -‏ من

‎Be NGG ‏بالْوّفاء».‎ Bf ase » ‏الله‎
‎785. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘A woman from the tribe of

‎Juhainah came to he Prophet 3 and said, ‘My mother had vowed
to perform Hajj, but she died before fulfilling her vow. Should I

‎perform Hajj on her behalf” The Prophet 38 said, “Yes perform
Hajj on her behalf. Had there been a debt on your mother,
would you have paid it or not? So, pay off her debt to Allah,
for He is most deserving of settlement of His debt.” Related
by Al-Bukhari

‎Lag‏ - رضي

‎5

‎ee eT el Os ol dls ehh eS ‏صَبيّ‎ th

‏نج حَجُّة أخرى». رَوَاهُ ابن أبي

‎sp ‏الف في رفعه , وَالْمَحْفُوظ أله‎ AY he
736. Ibn ‏مقططف‎ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎3% said,“Any minor (child) who performs Hajj must perform
it again after coming of age; any slave who performs Hajj
and is then freed, must perform his Hajj again.” Reported by
Ibn Shaibah and Al-Baihagi. Its narrators are authoritative but
scholars say that it is Mawqiif.

‏لله ‎Cha 36 - te‏ رَسُولَ ‎fed‏ الله

‏إلا ‎Gey‏ ذو ‎el Bes Wy he‏ إلا

‏يا 55 الله » ‎fay‏

‎Sy Ley‏ - رضي
‎Ch‏ يَقُولُ : ‎Ye‏ يخلون ‎iu hs‏

‎258
00 (RAA) narrated, heard the Messenger of
Allah 3 saying, “A man must never be alone with a woman unless
there is a Maram 217 with her. A woman also may not travel with
anyone except with a Mahram (relative).” A man stood up and as-

ked, '0 Messenger of Allah! My wife has gone for Hajj while 1 am
enlisted for such and such a battle, what should I do?” The Mes-

senger of Allah 38 replied, “Go and join your wife in Hajj.” Agreed
upon, and the wording is from Muslim.

شاك » 6 :لآ قال : ‎Weta eo‏ ,8 سُيرمَة». رَوَاهُ ‎SM‏ دوك »
‎PA‏ 0 وَصَكّحَهُ ابن ‎BI‏ » وَالراحمٌ ‎LE SGP‏ .
2 ابن حبان » والراجح عا ‎H‏

738. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎heard a man saying, ‘O Allah! Here I am in response to Your call
(saying Labbayk on behalf...) on behalf of Shubrumah.’ The Mes-
senger of Allah 3¥ asked him, “Have you performed your own
Hajj?” He replied, ‘No,’ whereupon the Prophet 38 told him, “You
must perform Hajj on your own behalf first, and then per-
form it on behalf of Shubrumah.” Related by Aba Dawéd and
Tbn Majah. Ibn Hibbin graded it as Sahth,

وَعَئْهُ - رضي الله ‎te‏ - قال ‎Lo hs ches‏ الله عليه ‎phe‏
‏كَقَالَ : ‎op‏ الله د ا 8 أن حايس فلن

رَسُولَ للّه؟قَالَ:

‎Is J‏ عَام يَا

‎739. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎4 once addressed us and said, “O People! Hajj has been prese-

‎217. A man from among her relatives to whom she is not permitted to marry.
259
ribed for you.” Al-Aqra’ bin Habis stood up and asked, ‘O Pro-
phet of Allah! Are we to perform Hajj every year?” The Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “Had I said ‘yes’, it would have become a
(yearly) obligation. Hajj is obligatory only once in one’s lif-
etime. Whatever one does over and above this is superer-
ogatory (a voluntary act) for him.” Related by the five Imams
except for at-Tirmidhi

- رضي الله ‎Me‏ - .

740. A similar narration was also related by Muslim on the
authority of Aba Hurairah,

Chapter I: Mawéqit: Fixed Times and
Places For Ihram

741. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
3% specified for the people of Madinah, DhulEulaifah (a place 540
km to the north of Makkah) as migat.218 For those coming from

ash-Shm (including Syria, Jordan and Palestine), he specified al-
Juhfah (a place 187 km to the north-west of Makkah and close to
Rabigh, where they now perform their Ihrém). For those coming
from Najd, he specified Qran al-Mandzil, (a mountain, 94 km to
the east of Makkah, overlooking “Arafah. For those coming from
Yemen, he specified Yalamlam (a mountain 54 km to the south of
Makkah. These places are for the people (coming from the above

218. A place from where they must declare their intention for Hajj and enter
the state of Ihrém.

260
specified countries) as well as for others, who pass by them on
their way to perform Hajj or ‘Umrah. Those living within those
boundaries can assume Ihram from where they set out (for the
journey), and even the residents of Makkah, their Migat would be
the place where they are staying in Makkah.’ Agreed upon.

- رضي الله عا

‎Le (a ob : -‏ الله عا
‎fons ota‏ عرق». ‎fay,‏ دَاوُىَ» ‎ge,‏

‎742. “Aishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 spe-
cified for those coming from Iraq, Dhat ‏و17‎ (a place 94 km to the
north-east of Makkah) as their Migat,’ Related by Aba Dawid and
An-Nasa’i.

‎a ‏من‎ pt ‏عن‎ Lh — ver

‎gOS‏ ره
‎Muslim related a similar narration on the authority of‏ .743
‎Jabir, but it is most probably Mawgéf.‏

‎ver‏ وي صحيح ‎Ob : GH‏ عُمَرَ هُوَ الذي ,25 ذَاتَ عرق»
‎Al-Bukhari reported that it was Umar, who specified‏ .744

‎Dhét ‘Irq as the migat (of those coming from Iraq).!9

‎Lies vee

‏وأبي 356« ‎re Bot GAG‏ - رضي الله
عَنْهُمَا - : «أن اَي صَلَى الله ‎fea BY 5, ply ale‏ 3 المقيق».
‎spe-‏ يلك ‎Ibn “Abbas narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .745

‎sified al-“Agig (a part of Dhat ‘Irg) for those coming from the east.’
Related by Ahmad, Abo Dawad and An-Nasa’i,

‎219. After al-Basrah and al-K0fah were conquered.
261
‎GL‏ وُجُوه الإخرام وَصفعه
‎Chapter HI: Kinds of Ikram‏

‎VEN‏ عن ‎go Bien ele - ge thi oy - Ne‏ رَسُول الله صلّى

‎Sh ee ee eee

‎746. “Aishah (RAA) narrated, ‘We left Madinah with the Mes-

‎senger of Allah 3 to perform the Farewell Hajj. Some of us decal-
red Ihrém to perform Umrah, while others declared their inten-
tions to perform both Hajj and ‘Umrah. Yet others declared their

‎Thram to perform Hajj only. The Prophet #8 declared Ikram for
Hajj only. Those who intended “Umrah terminated their ‏قعل‎ as
soon as they finished the rituals of Umrah. Those who intended
to perform Hajj only or to combine Hajj with ‘Umrah, did not ter-
minate their Jirdm until the Day of Slaughtering (i.e. the day of
sacrifice or dul Ad-ha), Agreed upon.

‎Gh ay ey GU
Chapter IV: The Etiquettes of Ihnram

‏مر - ‎po)‏ الله عََهُمًا - قال : «مًا ‎“al‏ رَسُولُ الله ‎ty fo‏
له ‎key‏ علد ‎cis wench‏

‎747. Tbn Umar (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 38
used to start saying the Talbiyah (after entering the state of
Ihram) from the mosque of Dhul Hulaifah (i.e. from the Migat of
Madinah)’ Agreed upon.

‏موعن

‏الله ‎ie‏ الله ‎play ate‏ قَالَ

‎fo gly:
262
OU EN GB ‏وَصَحَحَهُ‎ a ‏رَوَاهُ‎ .» Hoye ‏أَصْوَائهُمْ‎

748. Kballad bin

father, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Jibril (peace be upon
him) came to me and told me: ‘Command your Companions
to raise their voices when saying Talbiyah.” Related by the
five Imams and rendered authentic by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hib-
ban.

as-Sa’ib narrated on the authority of his

749. Zaid bin Thabit (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of

Allah 38 intended to make hrém for Hajj, he would wash, and
take off his ordinary clothes (and put on his white Ihram).” Rela-
ted by At-Tirmidhi who declared it to be Hadith, Hasan.

‎be‏ :ما كن فلع من اب" قال : «لا

‎VIET Gt Gatch‏ جه ‎Si Jes‏ الحفين

‎750. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
was asked about what the person who is in a state of Ihram
(Muhrim) should wear. He answered, “A person in the state of
Thram is not allowed to wear a sewn shirt, a turban, trous-

‎ers, a hooded robe, shoes or sewn slippers (Khuff0), unless

‎one is unable to find unsown slippers, then he may wear
his Khuff or shoes provided one cuts them below the ank-
les, and you must not wear clothing that has been dyed
with sweet smelling fragrance (such as saffron).” Agreed
upon, and the wording is from Muslim.

‎220. Leather foot-wear which covers the ankles
263
py le ‏رَسُولَ الله صلَى الله‎ CB ‏«كُنت‎ Li Lae ey voy
‏ع1‎ GE woth ‏ولحله قبْلَ أن يَطُوف‎ PAS ‏لإحرامه‎

751. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘I used to apply perfume to the
Prophet #8 when he intended to enter the state of Ihrém, before
he put on his Zhrém (garments). And again when he ended his
state of Ikram, but before he had made Tawaf around the Ka‘bah.”

221 Agreed upon.

ele th ‏رَسُولَ اللّه صَلّى‎ Of a th ‏رضي‎ - le gp Oc 8s vey
752. “Uthman bin ‘Affan (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 3 said, “A Muhrim (one in the state of Inrém) must not
contract marriage, nor help others contract marriage, nor
get engaged to marry.” Related by Muslim.

758. Aba Qatédah Al-Ansari (RAA) narrated concerning his
hunting a zebra while he is not in a state of Irém,222 that ‘Allah’s

221- Perfume may be used on the body as well as on the Hajj garments, but
only before making the intention to enter the state of Ikram.

222. Abd Qatadah reported that Alléh' s Messenger 38 went out to perform
Hajj and they accompanied him, The Prophet 38 dispatched a group, ine-
luding Abi Qatadah, and told them to follow the seashore until they
‘meet him again. All of them except for Aba Qatddah were in the state of
Jhram. On the way, they saw a herd of zebras. Abi Qatédah caught a
female zebra and they all ate from its meat, but they wondered if it was
permissible for them to eat of it as they were in the state of Zhram
(because it is not permissible for the one in the state of Jivdm to engage
in hunting or eating land game). Then they carried the rest of the meat
to the Prophet 38, and told him the whole story. The Prophet 3§ asked
them, “Did any of you ask Abii Qatadah to attack the herd,

264

Messenger 38 said to Abd Qatadah's companions -who were in a
state of Ihrém, “Did any one of you ask Abi Qatadah to
attack the herd, or point it out to him?” They said, ‘No. The
Prophet 42 then said, “Then, you may eat what is left of the
quarry.” Agreed upon.

َل - ‎sil A‏ لرَسُول الله

4 وَعَنٍ ‎al‏ بْن ‎at‏ الي - رضي |

Sy ‏َه‎ 5 1 Oy ‏أ‎ » yy 285 «85 te he let Se

‎Otis Spi >‏ خرك». شق
‎As-Sa’b bin Jath-thamah al-Laithi (RAA) narrated, ‘He‏ .754

‎presented to the Prophet 38 the meat of a zebra while he was in

‎the area known as al-Abwa’ or Waddan. The Prophet 3 declined
it, and said to him, “We declined your present only because

‎we are in the state of Ihnrém.” 2% Agreed upon.

‎755. ‘A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Five kinds of animals are vicious and harmful, and
they may be killed outside or inside the sacred area of
Haram (Sanctuary). These are: the scorpion, the kite, the
crow, the mouse, and the rabid dog.” Agreed upon.

‎(as in the hadith). Scholars deduced from this story that itis permissible
for the Muhrim to eat land game as long as he did not ask for it to be
hunted, pointed it out to the person who hunted it or helped in the hunt,

‎223. The Prophet 3 declined the present because the man caught it especial-
ly for the Prophet 3% while he was in the state of Ihrém. What is allowed
for the muhrim is to eat what was given as a present from land game
that was not caught for the muhrim but for the one who is not in the
state of Zhrdm, who caught it for himself and then decided to give some
of it to the muhrim as a present.

‎265

وَعَن ابن ‎ale‏ - رضي ‎at‏ تَعَالَى ‎ge‏ - : «أن التي صَلَى الله عليه
‎SESE gat hy asi gk‏
‎Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah‏ ,756

had himself cupped while he was in the state of Ihram,’ Agreed
upon,

: لآ . قَالَ : «قصح ‎uh BE‏ أو أطعم سن

753. Ka'b bin ‘Ujrah (RAA) narrated, ‘I was carried ‏ما‎ the

Prophet 3 and the lice were falling over my face. He said, “I did
not know that your disease is hurting you as much as what
I see. Can you sacrifice a sheep?” I said, ‘No.’ He then sai
“Fast for three days or feed six poor people, half a Sa”

each.” ™ Agreed upon.

‎ven‏ وَعَنْ أبي ‎BEA‏ - رضي ‎Be th‏ - قَالَ : لما فح ‎tin‏ - تَعَالَى - عَلَى

‎cE BE Cady Vp
768. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘When Allah, the Most
High granted His Messenger 38 victory on the conquest of Mak-

‎kah, the Prophet 38 addressed the people, so he glorified Allah
and praised Him, and said, “Allah withheld the elephant from

‎224. In another narration: of dates,

‎266
Makkah” and empowered His Messenger and the believ-

ers over it. It has not been made lawful (ic. fighting in it) for
anyone before me, but it has been lawful for me only for a
few hours on that day (of the conquest), and it will not be
made lawful to anyone after me (to enter it fighting). Its wild
game must not be frightened, its thorns are not to be cut.
No one is allowed to pick up lost articles (Lugatah) unless
he announces it (what he has found) publiely (in order to re-
turn it to the owner). If anyone has someone murdered inside
its boundaries, then he has the choice of the best of two
options (i.e. either to accept compensation, i.e. blood money or to
retaliate). Al“Abbas then said, ‘Except for the Idhkhar (a kind of
nice smelling grass, which is used by goldsmiths and burnt in

households.) 226

759. “Abdullah bin Zaid bin “Asim (RA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Ibrahim declared Makkah as a
Haram (Sanctuary) and made supplication for its people,
and I declare Madinah to be a Haram just as Ibrahim dec-
lared Makkah as a Haram, and I made supplication for its
Mudd and Sa’ (refer to hadith no, 650), just as Ibrahim made
supplication for the people of Makkah.” Agreed upon.

د بي بي طالب - ‎io‏ الله 85 - قَالَ 36 ,305 الله ‎fo‏

ate ‏اللهُ‎

«ple ot, «Ae ssa

Referring to the Abyssinian expedition against Makkah, meaning to des-

troy the Ka‘bah, but Allah, protected His Sacred House, and they went.

back defeated after Allah sent flocks of birds on them (Siirah 105).

226. In another narration the Prophet ‏عد‎ said to Al-’Abbis, “Except for the
Idhkhar.” Which means that it is excluded from the prohibition of cut-
ting wild plants for the reasons that Al-’Abbas mentioned.

267

760. “Ali bin Abi Talib (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Madinah is a Haram (Sanctuary) and its Sac-
red Precincts extend from “Air to Thawr (the names of two
mountains).” Related by Muslim.

Chapter V: Description of Hajj Rituals and
Entering Makkah

761. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 performed Hajj (on the 10 year of Hijrah), and we set
out with him (to perform Hajj). When we reached Dhul-Hulaifah,
Asma’ bint “Umais gave birth to Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr. She
sent a message to the Prophet $8 (asking him what she should do).
He said, “Take a bath, bandage your private parts and make
the intention for Ikram.” The Prophet 38 then prayed in the
mosque and then mounted al-Qaswa’ (his she-camel) and it stood
erect with him on its back at al-Baida’ (the place where he started
his hram). He then started pronouncing the Talbiyah, saying:
“Labbaika Alléhumma labbaik labbaika la sharika laka
labbaik, innal hamda wan-ni'mata laka wal mulk, la sha-

269
rika lak (O Allah! I hasten to You, You have no partner. I hasten
to You. All praise and grace is Yours and all Sovereignty too; You
have no partner), When we came with him to the House (of Allah),
he placed his hands on the Black Stone (Hajar al Aswad) and kis-
sed it. He then started to make seven circuits (round the Ka’bah),
doing ramad (trotting) in three of them and walking (at his normal
pace) four other circuits. Then going to the place of Ibrahim (Maq-
‘am Ibrahim), there he prayed two rak’ét. He then returned to the
Black Stone (Hajar al Aswad) placed his hands on it and kissed it.
Then he went out of the gate to Safa, and as he approached it, he
recited: “Verily as-Safa and Marwah are among the signs
appointed by Allah,”(2:158), adding,“I begin with what Allah
began.” He first mounted as-Safa until he saw the House, and
facing the Qiblah he declared the Oneness of Allah and glorified
Him and said: ‘La ilaha ila-léh wahdahu la sharika lahu,
lahul mulk wa lahul hamd, wa huwa ‘ala kulli shai’in qa-
deer, la ilaha illa-Néhu wahdahu anjaza wa'dahu, wa nas-
ara ‘abdahu, wa hazamal ahzaba wahdah’ (There is no God
but Allah, He is One, and has no partner. His is the dominion, and
His is the praise and He has Power over alll things. There is no
God but Alléh alone, Who fulfilled His promise, helped His ser-
vant and defeated the confederates alone.”) He said these words
three times making supplications in between. He then descended
and walked towards Marwah, and when his fect touched the bot-
tom of the valley, he ran; and when he began to ascend, he walked
(at his normal pace) until he reached Marwah. There he did as he
had done at Safa...

When it was the day of Tarwiyah (8! of Dhul-Hijjah) they went to
Mind and put on the Ihram for Hajj and the Messenger of Allah

38 rode his mount, and there he led the Dawhr (noon), ‘Asr (after-
noon), Maghrib (sunset), ‘Isha and Fajr (dawn) prayers. He then
waited a little until the sun had risen, and commanded that a tent
be pitched at Namirah (close to Arafiit). The Messenger of Allah
3%, continued on until he came to ‘Arafah and he found that the
tent had been pitched for him at Namirah. There he got down un-
ti] the sun had passed its meridian; he commanded that al-Qaswé’
be brought and saddled for him, then he came to the bottom of the
valley, and addressed the people with the well-known sermon
Khutbat al-Wada’ (the Farewell Sermon). Then the Adhén was

pronounced and later on the Jqg@mah and the Prophet 3% led the

270
Dhuhr (noon) prayer. Then another Igamah was pronounced and

the Prophet 8 led the ‘Asr (afternoon) prayer and he observed no
other prayer in between the two.

‘The Messenger of Allah 3% then mounted his camel and came to
the place where he was to stay. He made his she-camel, al-Qasw@’,
turn towards the rocky side, with the pedestrian path lying in
front of him. He faced the Qiblah, and stood there until the sun
set, and the yellow light diminished somewhat, and the disc of the
sun totally disappeared. He pulled the nose string of al-Qaswa’ so
forcefully that its head touched the saddle (in order to keep her
under perfect control), and pointing with his right hand, advised
the people to be moderate (in speed) saying: “O people! Calmn-
ess! Calmness!” Whenever he passed over an elevated tract of
land, he slightly loosened the nose-string of his camel until she
climbed up. This is how he reached al-Muzdalifah. There he led
the Maghrib (sunset) and ‘Isha prayers with one Adhan and two
Igamas, and did not pray any optional prayers in between them.

‘The Messenger of Allah 3% then lay down until dawn and then
offered the Fajr (dawn) prayer with an Adhan and an Igamah
when the morning light was clear. He again mounted al-Qaswd’,
and when he came to Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram (The Sanctuary Land-
mark, which is a small mountain at al-Muzdalifah) he faced the
Qibiah, and supplicated to Alléh, Glorified Him, and pronounced
His Uniqueness and Oneness, and kept standing until the dayli-
ght was very clear. Then he set off quickly before the sun rose,
until he came to the bottom of the valley of Muhassir where he
urged her (al-Qaswé’) a little. He followed the middle road, which
comes out at the greatest Jamarah (one of the three stoning sites
called Jamrat-ul ‘Aqabah), he came to Jamarah which is near the
tree. At this he threw seven small pebbles, saying, ‘Allahu Akbar’
while throwing each of them in a manner in which small pebbles
are thrown (holding them with his fingers) and this he did while
at the bottom of the valley.

He then went to the place of sacrifice, and sacrificed sixty-three
(camels) with his own hand (he brought 100 camels with him and

he asked “Ali to sacrifice the rest). The Messenger of Allah #8
again rode and came to the House (of Allah), where he performed
Tawéf Al-Ifadah and offered the Dhuhr prayer at Makkah...’ Mus-
lim transmitted this hadith through a very long narration descri-
bing the full details of the Hajj of the Prophet 3.

27
762. Khuzaimah bin Thabit (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Mes-

senger of Allah 48 finished his Talbiyah whether in Hajj or ‘Um-
rah, he would ask Allah for His good pleasure and acceptance and
ask Him for Paradise, and would seck refuge in Him from Hell.’
Related by Ash-Shafi’i with a weak chain of narrators.

763. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “I have offered my sacrifice here (at Miné) and all of
Mind is a place for slaughtering, so sacrifice where you are

staying (at Mind). And I have stopped here 227 (at “Araféit) and

all of ‘Arafat is a stopping place (for the Day of “Arafah on the
9th of Dhul-Hijjah). And I have stood here, and all of Jam’
(meaning al-Muzdalifah) is a place for standing.” Related by
Muslim.

af ple ae ah fle (a bb : - Ge th ‏رضي‎ - ae ey 4
. ‏مف عليه‎ ET ‏وَعرَجَ‎ OEE Gls KG oe
764. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah

38 came to Makkah, he entered from its higher side (a place now
called al-Mu ‘alla gate) and went out from its lower side (now cal-
led Kuda). Agreed upon.

227. The pilgrim is not literary asked to stand at ‘Arafah on that day,but just
to be physically and mentally present there, whether he is asleep, awa-
ke, riding, lying down ete.

272
‎fb hey ne‏ - رضي الله

‎765. Whenever Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) came to Makkah he would
spend the night at Dhi Tuwé valley (near Makkah), and in the
morning he would bathe. ‘Ibn ‘Umar used to say that this is what

‎the Messenger of Allah %&, used to do.’ Agreed upon.

‎avy

‏عن ان غَيّاس - رَضئ ‎WN‏ عَنْهُمَا
‎ea, Stl ay dle BO‏ وال

‎766. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that he used to kiss the Black
Stone and prostrate himself on it. Related by Al-Hakim and Al-

‎Baihagi.23

‎UTA «bry‏ مَا ييْنَ ال
‎Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .767
‎commanded them to trot for three circuits and walk (with a‏ ,38

‎normal pace) for four circuits, between the two corners (The Black
Stone and the Yemeni corner). Agreed upon.

‎Gb es ob

‎Ab ho 4‏ - رَضِي الله ‎Ty : - ee‏ كا
الأول ‎ELS‏ 355 أَريعاه .

‎hf Bah ‏في‎ Ob ‏ذا‎ hey

‎de Be ent as

‎wéfround the Ka ‘bah, he would trot during the first three circuits

‎228- This hadith is reported to be weak, as it is reported with a weak chain of
narrators. It has only been confirmed that the Messenger of Allah 3
placed his hands on the Black Stone and kissed it, not that he prost-
rated on it. The hadith of ‘Umar (no. 770) proves this.

‎273
and walk the remaining four.

In another version, ‘I saw the Messenger of Allah 38, when he
made Tawéf, whether on Hajj or ‘Umrah, that he would trot for
the first three circuits (of Tawéf) and walk for the remaining four.’

Agreed upon.
ies ale th ‏رَسُولَ الله صَلّى‎ hob : ‏كَالَ‎ - tho) - ‏وَعَئْهُ‎ -8

. ‏مسئلم‎ AG eg ‏غَبْرَ لكين‎ eh ‏من‎ pl

769. Ybn Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘I never saw the Prophet 38
touch (place his hands on) any other part of the Ka bah except the
two corners: The Black Stone and the Yemeni corner.’ Related by
Muslim,

50
ولولا أثي

770. ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that he kissed the Black Stone
and said, I know that you are a stone and can neither benefit any-

one nor harm anyone. Had I not seen Allah’s Messenger 32 kissing
you, I would not have kissed you.’ Agreed upon,

: «رأئنت رَسُولَ الله ‎ho‏ الل
د ع عه ‎erry‏

771. ‏نطف‎ At-Tufail (RAA) narrated, ‘I saw Allah's Messenger

making Tawéf round the Ka’bah, and he was touching the
corner (of the Black Stone) with a stick that he had with him and
then kissing the stick.’ Related by Muslim.

byw

hy es Le ‏«طاف 305 الله‎ Oe Sf i ‏وَعَن‎ wr

GAB B55 LOY

779. Ya'lt bin Umaiyah (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of
Allah 38 made the Tawéf while wearing a green Yemeni mantle,
bringing it up from under his right armpit while covering the left
shoulder.’ Related by the five Imams except for An-Nasa’i. At-
Tirmidhi graded it as Sahih.

214
عامل ما يل ذا

“اا وَعَنْ كس - رض الله 4 - قَالَ
كي من ‎et . eke (S56 Bh‏ عا

773. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘When we assumed Thram (for
Hajj or Umrah) some of us raised their voices with Talbiyah and
nobody objected to that, and others raised their voices with Takbir
and no one objected to that (which means that saying Allahu
Akbar ‘Allah is the Greatest’, or reciting the Talbiyah are both
acceptable during Ikram). Agreed upon.

774. Ton “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
sent me at night from al-Muadalifah (to Mind) with the weak

members of his family (women and children). Agreed upon.

BE ag is
775. ‘A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Saudah(the wife of the Prophet

3%) asked his permission, on the night of al-Muzdalifah, to leave
earlier (to Mind) as she was a heavy and slow woman.’ The Pro-

phet #8 gave her permission.’ Agreed upon.

وَعْن ابن غَيّاس - ‎th gos‏ هما - قال َل نا ‎dni‏ مل الل

776. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38,
said to us, “Do not throw the pebbles at Jamrah al-‘Aqabah

229- It is Sunnah to spend the night at Muzdatifah and start going to Mind
after Fajr. This narration however, indicates that it is permissible for
the women and children (the weak members on the journey) to leave to
Mind at night.

275

until sunrise.” Related by the five Imams except An-Nasa’i, but
with a disconnected chain of narrators.

777. ‘Rishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Prophet #8 sent Umm Sal-
amah on the night of the 10 (before the day of the Sacrifice) and
she threw her pebbles before dawn, after which she returned to
Makkah to perform Zawéf’ Related by Abi Dawad.

08 ‏حَحُهُ » وَقَضَى‎ ES » ‏نهار‎ TS Ub OS Be sy ‏نفع ء وَقذ‎

778. “Urwah bin Mudarras (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “Anyone who offered this prayer -at al-
Muadalifah- along with us, and waited with us until we ret-
urned to Mina, and he stayed at “Arafat (on the 9'') before
that by night or day, he would have completed the pres-
cribed duties of Hajj.” Related by the five Imams. At-Tirmidhi
and Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Sahih.

0ح وَعسن عم - ‎oe Dh Gos‏ - قَالَ : ‎YY Gy path Op‏ يُقيضون
‎is 25‏ ع ‎AH‏ سحْس ؛ وَيَقُولُونَ ‎od fh‏ و شي لى لله ‎Aly‏
‎pale‏ قأقاض 98 ‎of‏ تطلع ‎a‏ رَوَهُ لحار .

779. Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The pagans did not use to depart
from Muzdalifah until the sun had risen, and they would say, ‘Let
the sun shine on Thabir (the highest mountain in Makkah). The
Messenger of Allah 4 contradicted them and departed from Muz-
dalifah before sunrise’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

276
Messenger of Allah 38 kept on reciting Talbiyah until he threw
the pebbles at Jamrat-ul ‘Agabah..’ Related by Al-Bukhari,

781. “Abdullah bin Mas’‘fid (RAA) narrated that he kept the
‏يزعم مكل‎ on his left and Miné on his right and threw the seven peb-
bles of Jamrat-ul “Aqabah. He then said, ‘This is the location
where the one on whom siirah al-Bagarah (sitrah no. 2) was reve-

aled2% (i.e. the Messenger of Allah 38). Agreed upon.

le ‏سول الله صلّى الله‎
. ‏رَوَاهُ ملم‎ AEN cig ‏عْدَ ذلك فَإذَا‎
782. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 3 threw Jamrat-ul ‘Aqabah on the Day of Sacrifice (the 9
of Dhul Hijjah) in the forenoon, On the following days he threw
them when the sun had passed its meridian.’ Related by Muslim.

رَسُولَ الله صَلَى الله ‎de‏ وسَلُم ‎oy; tly‏ البْحَارِي .

230- He is referring to the place where the Messenger of Alléh ‏يك‎ stood to
throw the pebbles,

277
783. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that he used to throw the
pebbles of al-Jamrat ud-Duniyé (the Jamrah near to the Khaif
mosque) with seven small pebbles, and would recite Takbir when
throwing each pebble. Then he would go ahead until he reached
the bottom of the valley, where he would stand for quite a long
time facing the direction of the Qiblah, and raising his hands,
while supplicating Allah. Then he went and threw seven pebbles
at the second Jamrah (al-Jamarah al-Wostd) while saying Allahu
Akbar with each throw. He would then turn to the left of the bot-
tom of the valley, stand there facing the @iblah and supplicating
to Allah with his hands raised. Then he went to Jamrat-ul “Aqa-
bah, threw seven pebbles at it, uttering the Takbir with each
throw. After that he left and did not pause. He would then say, ‘I

joing like this.’ Related by Al-Bukhéri.

saw the Prophet

Et dat ‏رَسُولَ‎ Uf - ee ths - Bey 4

0g 6 » ‏يا رَسُولَ لله‎ fall : ‏الوا‎ alah 2 ‏ملم‎
‎. ‏َلَيْه‎ BE ‏««َالْمْقَصرِينَ».‎
‎784, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

48 said, “May Allah bless those who shaved.” The Companions
asked him, ‘O Allah's Messenger, what about those who cut their
hair short? They repeated their question twice (and each time he

repeated his saying, ‘May Allah bless those who shaved.”8)On the

third time, the Messenger of Allah 3 then said,“And (may Allah
bless) those who cut their hair short.” Agreed upon.

- وض له ‎ozs wee‏
ل

231- In one version of this hadith, the Messenger of Allah 38 made a supplica-
tion for those who shaved three times, and in the fourth he supplicated
Allah for those who cut their hair short. In another version he suppl
ted for those who shaved twice, and the third time he supplicated Allah
for those who cut their hair short.

278

aN “jan: 36% 195 (6
785. “Abdullah Ibn “Amro bin al-‘As (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 3 stood in Mind during the Farewell Hajj,
while the people asked him questions and he answered them. A
man asked, ‘O Prophet of Allah! I was not alert and I shaved my

head before slaughtering my animal? The Prophet 38 said,“There
is no harm, go and slaughter your animal.” Another man as-
ed, ‘I slaughtered the animal before I threw the pebbles” Prophet
8 said, “There is no harm, go and throw your pebbles.” The
narrator said:“Whoever asked the Prophet 3% about anything done

before or after the other he told him “No harm done. Go and do
(whatever you missed).” Agreed upon.

jh ‏بذللد». روه‎ Stel 2 og

786, Al-Maistr bin Makhramah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Mes-

senger of Allah 3 sacrificed his animal before he shaved and com-
manded his companions to do so.’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

th & nds ty — vay
oy wy ‏لم لأسا ء‎ NB es bp :pley

رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » وَأبُو 558 » وَفي إستاده ضَّمْف .

787. ‘Rishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
said, “When one of you threw the pebbles and shaved his
hair, everything including perfume becomes lawful for him
except women (i.e. sexual intercourse).” Related by Ahmad and
Aba Dawéd with a weak chain of narrators.

- yl ot #5 — VAR
9 BE th ‏عَلَى‎ Ut:
788. Ibn ‘Abbas (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
279

. ‏حَّسّن‎ al 5515 ‏أبُو‎ Oy) open
3 said, “Women (pilgrims) so not have to shave (their heads);
they may only shorten their hair.”Related by Aba Dawad with
a good chain of narrators.

789. Ibn “Umar (RA) narrated that ‘Al’Abbas bin “Abdul

Muttalib asked permission from the Prophet 3 to stay at Makkah
during the nights of Mind in order to provide drinking water (from

Zamzam) to the pilgrims, and the Prophet 3¥ allowed him.’ Agreed
upon.

ed bs hs bh ‏دع : «أذا مول لله على‎ Spo ve.

iB) os « ‏الْحَمْسَةُ‎ a5 ZB FS OL
790. “Asim bin “Adi (RA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 excused the herdsmen of camels from sleeping at Miné
and asked them to throw pebbles on the day of sacrifice (i.e. throw
Jamrat-ul “Aqabah and they do not have to spend the night at
Mina), and then to throw the pebbles of the next day and the day
after (i.¢. of the 11% and the 12% combined (on the 12), and then
throw pebbles again on the 13: Related by the five Iméms. At-
Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎te tlh as -‏ - قَالّ : «عَطَينًا ‎Bus‏ الله ‎Loo‏ الله

‎791. Aba Bakrah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 delivered a sermon to us on the Day of Nahr (sacrifice) (and the
narrator mentioned the sermon.),’ Agreed upon.
che ty vay
‏الشريق ؟‎ pf ‏هَذَا أوْسَط‎ Cathy : us Sn ei ply oe ‏صَلى الله‎

1 ‏حَسْنٍ‎ aay 5518 ‏رواه بو‎ . eas

792. Sarra’ bint Nabhan”? (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 delivered a sermon to us on the second day of sacrifice,
‘Yaum ar-Ru’as’ (11' of Dhul -Hijjah) and said, “Is this not the

middle of the days of Tashrig?” ‏3ت‎ Related by Abi Dawid.

to her, “Your Tawéf_by the Ka‘bah and your Sai between
Safé and Marwah is sufficient for both your Hajj and
“Umrah (i.e. one Tawéf and one Sa‘t are sufficient as she combi-
ned Hajj and ‘Umrah. Related by Muslim.

. ‏الي أن الحاكم‎ oN ss
794. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 did not trot during the seven circuits made in the final Tawaf
when he returned to Makkah.’ Related by the five Imams except
at-Tirmidhi, Al-Hakim graded it as Sahth.

‎ey vate‏ - رضي ‎ce tlh‏ — «أن الي صَلّى ‎ply ale thn‏ صَلّى
الظهرَ وَالْمَصرَ ‎tals 0 Pcl, G ay‏ باْمُحَصّب » ثم ركب إِلَى ‎eth‏

‎Gtk‏ يم». 355 البُخَارِيُ

‎232 She was mistress of a temple in pre-Islamic days.

‎233. The days of Tashriq are 110, 12, and 13% of Dhul Hijiah, but probably
the Prophet # means that it is the best of its days, or maybe the middle
counting the day of sacrifice with them, as ‘Yaum ar-Ru'ts’ is by cones-
nsus the 11°

‎281
795. Anas (RAA), narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يلك‎ rested
for a while at al-Muhassab (a valley opening at al-Abtah between
Makkah and Mind) prayed Dhuhr, “Asr, Maghrib and ‘Tsha’ pra-
yers after which he rode to the Kabah and made Tawéf’ Related

by Al-Bukhari.
Oyj ‏ذلك - أي‎ Jel ‏تكن‎ Tay: - Ge ‏رَضِي الله‎ -
ow th fo ‏لَهُ رَسُولُ الله‎ oh ‏وتو‎ ~ phy

‎ayy oon Ad pa‏ مُسْلمٌ
‎“Aishah (RAA) narrated that she did not use to do that ~‏ .796

‎i.e. rest at al-Muhassab- and said, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 res-
ted at al-Muhassab, because it was easier to stop there and depart
from (icc, it is not a Sunnah to rest there’). Related by Muslim.

‎iy 917‏ اين عبس - رَضِي الله عنهُمَا - قال : «ابر ‎CAR‏ أن يكون

‎6 acd peers

‎FAY. oth ‏عَهْدهمْ‎

‎797, Ton “Abbas (RA) narrated, ‘People were commanded to
make the Tawéf round the Ka’bah their last rite(Farewell Tawé/)
but the menstruating women were excused from it,’ Agreed upon

‎. ‏حلا‎ SN Soa ARG, ae

‎798. ‏مطل‎ Az-Zubair (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “Offering prayer in my mosque (in Madinah) is
better than one thousand prayers elsewhere, save for those
offered prayer in al-Magjid al-Harém (in Makkah). And pra-
yer offered in al-Masjid al-Harém is better than prayer
offered in my mosque by one hundred prayers.” Related by
Ahmad and Ibn Hibban graded it as Safi

ow

‎otal‏ والإخْصّار

‎Chapter VI: Missing the Pilgrimage or being
detained (Th-sér)

‎ay fo ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ path : ‏ال‎
‏قابلً».‎ UG BI SB A BG Gy » ‏فَحَلَقَ رَأسَهُ‎ » hy ale
. ‏رَوَهُ البُحَارِيُ‎

‏6 عن أب

‎799. ‏مطل‎ “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Prophet 38 was
prevented from performing ‘Umrah (by Quraish) he shaved his
head, had intercourse with his wives and slaughtered his animal.
‘The next year he performed ‘Umrah to make up for the year that
he had missed. Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎pet le th ‏صلَّى‎ tn ‏سَاكيّةٌ » فَقَالَ‎ of,

‎800. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
went to visit Duba’ah bint Az-Zubair bin “Abdul Muttalib. She
said to him, ‘O Messenger of Allah I have made the intention to
perform Hajj but I am suffering from an illness.’ He said to her,
“Perform Hajj but set a condition that you shall be relieved
of the Ikram whenever you are prevented (due to illness,

‎etc..)."4 Agreed upon.
: ‏الله 5 - قال‎ os - Gal ‏إن عَمْرو‎ 2 OK ‏وَعَنْ‎ a
ides bee ‏أو‎ CF ‏«من‎ ply de Ls ‏قَالَ‎

‎234. This indicates that a muhrim can preset a condition that if he is preven-
ted from performing Hajj or ‘Umrah then he is relieved from his hram
whenever he is prevented,

‎283
مك قابل» قَالَ عكْرمَةُ : ‎GN ILS‏ عباس وأا هُرَيْرَةَ عَنْ ذَلكَ  ‎Bate VS‏ .

801. ‘Tkrimah narrated on the authority of Al-Hajjaj bin ‘Amro

al-Ansari (RAA), that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If anyone
breaks (a leg) or becomes lame (while he was performing Hajj
or Umrah) he is released from him Ihram and must perform
Hajj the next year.’ Tkrimah said, ‘I asked Ibn “Abbas and Aba
Hurairah about this statement of Al-Hajjaj, and they said that he
had spoken the truth. Related by the five Imams. At-Tirmidhi
graded it as Hasan

284
كاب قوع

Book VII: Business Transactions

‎OU‏ شُرُوطه وقا ‎gd‏ عَنْهُ
‎Chapter I: Conditions of Business Transactions‏
‎and Those which are Forbidden‏

‎~ ply ie th ee af - ‏َل‎ po) - ‏إن رافع‎ HB Seay
ُ Seo Seen : ‏؟ قَالَ‎ CLF Sh ‏ل : أي‎

‎pS S's «Sh ‏روه‎

‎802. Rifa‘ah bin Rafi’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 was asked, ‘Which type of earning is the best?” He said,
“A man’s earning through working with his own hands,
and every business transaction which is approved (which is
Halal and free of cheating ete...).’ Related by Al-Bazzar and al-
Hakim graded it as Sahih

‎SB Ve DU ‏بها الل ؟‎ Reed
cis ‏إن الله‎ yh th pi : ‏عند فلك‎ chy oe ah Le no ‏قال‎
‎803. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘He heard the Mes-

‎senger of Allah 38 say in the year of the Conquest (of Makkah)
while he was in Makkah, “Allah has prohibited the sale of ale-
ohol, dead animals, pigs, and idols.” People asked, ‘O Messen-
ger of Allah! What about the fat of dead animals, it is used for

‎285
greasing boats and skins and people use it for making oil for

lamps.’ He said, ‘No, it is Haram.” The Messenger of Allah 32
then added, “May Allah curse the Jews, for Allah made the
fat (of animals) Hardém (unlawful) for them, yet they melted
the fat, sold it and ate its price.” Agreed upon.

804. Ibn Mas‘ad (RAA) narrated, T heard the Messenger of

Allah 38 say, “When two business dealers dispute (over a bus-
iness dealing) and none of them has evidence to prove his
case, the final word is left to the seller or they may both
abandon the deal.” Related by the five Imams and al-Halim
graded it as Safi

‎Be os fe ase‏ - رضي الله = ‎Shy‏ رَسُولَ الله صَلّى

‎ii oh dy Bid ‏يّى عَنْ‎ ples dle ‏الله‎
‎805. Abd Mas‘ad al-Ans (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger

‎of Allah 48 prohibited taking the price of a dog, the earnings of a
prostitute and the fees taken by a soothsayer.’ Agreed upon.

‎ahaa ol J se‏ ل ‎al‏ كدي ‎Bs‏ رخن فل فى

‎806. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘That he was once
traveling on his camel which had become so slow that he intended

‎to get rid of it. The Prophet 3 passed by (after Jabir told him the

‎286
story), and poked the camel with his stick, and asked Jabir to ride
it again. The camel was much faster than it had ever been before.
The Messenger of Allah 38 then said to Jabir, “Sell it to me for
one Ugiyah(ounce) of gold.” Jabir said, ‘No.’ He again said, “Sell
it to me for one Ugiyak of gold”. Jabir says, ‘I sold it for one
Ugiyah and stipulated that I should ride it to my house.’ When we
reached(Madinah) I took that camel to the Prophet #¥ and he gave
me its price. I returned home but he sent for me (and when I went,
to him) he said, “Do you think that I asked you to reduce the
price to take your camel? Take your camel and your money
it is all yours.” Agreed upon and this is Muslim's version.

bs ash : Jb Le

et ploy dle ‏الله‎ Le ‏به الي‎ ead

807. Jabir (RA) narrated, ‘A man decided that a slave of his
would be free after his death, but the man had no other property.

‘The Messenger of Allah 3€ took the slave and called (the people)
for one to buy him (from the Prophet 38), and he sold bim.2%5

aay

Agreed upon.

نتاف فيهء ‎Ye‏ ملى اله ‎i‏ معنا »قال :

‎«eyed ay, sy‏ 355 ُحْمَدُ » ‎(fib‏ «في ‎oe‏ جامد»

‎808. Maiminah (the wife of the Prophet ‘#) (RAA) narrated

‎that the Messenger of Allah 32 was asked about a mouse that fell
into a pot of clarified butter, and died inside it. He said,“Take out
(the mouse) and what is around it, and throw it away. Then
eat (the rest of) your clarified butter.” Related by Al-Bukh-
ari. Ahmad and an-Nasa’i added the following, ‘in solid clarified
butter’.

‎235- In the narration of Al-Bukhéri, Nu’aim bin “Abdullah bought him and
paid 800 Dirhams. Scholars say that this Hadith is evidence that the
ruler can sell the property of a man who is bankrupt and divide the
money among his debtors or give it to him to spend (as in this Hadith).

‎287
» ‏البْحَارِي‎ ale ‏وَأبُو 548 15 حَكَمَ‎ Las hays dS Lae ‏ان‎

809. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “If a mouse fell into a pot of clarified butter, and
the butter is solid, take it (the mouse) and what is around it
out and throw it away. But if the butter was melted (ic. in a
liquid state) do not touch it (i.e. throw it all away).” Related by
Ahmad and Aba Dawéd. Al-Bukhari and Aba Hatim ruled it to be
weak.

JN AS op - We ‏حَابرًا - رضي الله‎ Ellen : ‏قال‎ th ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ ٠
1 woo CIE Yp : 31 «0.41

810. Aba Az-Zubair (RAA) narrated, 1 asked Jabir about the
price of cats and dogs.’ He answered me, ‘The Messenger of Allah
38 rebuked that.’ Related by Muslim. In a version by An-Nasa’i, he

added, “Except that of a hunting dog,”236

296- There is a consensus among the scholars about the price of the dog exe-
ept the one used for hunting or guarding. They differed over the price of
a cat, but they agreed to selling it if it is used for a certain benefit.

288
عله : ثم قل :نانفك قا حا

‎Soe‏ مُسْلمٍ قال: «اشْترِيهًا وَأَعْتقيهًا وَاشترطي لَهُمْ الؤلاء».

‎811. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Barirah came to me and said,
‘Lhave made an agreement with my masters to pay them nine
Ugiyas (ounces, of gold) (in installments) one Ugiyah per year, so

‎please help me (to pay the money), “A’ishah replied, ‘I am ready to
pay the whole amount now provided your masters agree that your

‎Wala”9? will be for me.’ Barirah went back to her masters and told
them about that offer but they refused to accept it. She returned,

‎and at that time, the Messenger of Allah 3% was present (at
‘Kishah’s house). Barirah said to ‘A’ishah, “I told them about the
offer but they did not accept it and insisted on having the Wald’

‎for themselves.’ The Prophet 38 heard that, and ‘A’ishah narrated
the whole story to him. He then said to her, “Buy her and stip-
ulate that the Wald’ should be yours, as Wala’ is (legally)
for the manumitter.” ‘A’ishah (RAA) did so and the Messenger

‎of Allah 38 stood up in front of the people, and after glorifying and
praising Allah, he said, “What about the people who impose
conditions which are not in Allah's Book (i.¢. contradictory to
Islamic Shari‘ah)? “Every condition that is not found in the
Book of Allah is invalid, even if its number is one hundred.
Allah's decisions are the right ones and His conditions are
the firmer ones, and the Wala’ is for the manumitter.” Agre-
ed upon and the wording is from Al-Bukhari.

‎In Muslim’s version, “Buy her and manumit her, and stip-
ulate that her Wald’ loyalty is yours.”

‎287. Wald’ refers to the right of inheriting the property of a manumitted slave
after his death. The one who has the most right to inherit from him is
the one who manumitted him,

‎289

‎shy‏ & المرام).
20000 ‏رَوَاهُ مالك » وال‎ ٠ eae
812. ‏د15‎ ‘Umar (RA) narrated, “Umar (RA) prohibited scl-
ling the mothers of children and said, ‘She is not to be sold,

given as a gift, or inherited, but her owner is to enjoy her (in sexu-
al intercourse) as long as he lives. When he dies she becomes free.’
Related by Malik and Al-Baihagi.

حَابرٍ - رَضِي اله ‎ie‏ - قَالَ : «كنًا ‎GS‏ سس

aA

‎eg‏ الأزلآدء

‎an‏ مضل له عله ‎cat Gian‏ به نه َه تايف

‎Oe Ya » Chi HE ‏ان‎

‎813. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘We used to sell our slave women
who are mothers of children, during the lifetime of the Prophet 3

‎and he did not object to it.’2#9 Related by An-Nas@’i, Ibn Majah ad-
Daraqutni and Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sahi

‎١‏ وَعَنْ ‎WB ae We‏ : «تهَى 305 الله ‎fhe‏ الله ع
‎otal fa‏ روا ‎HA‏ وزَادَ في ‎i Sep: Wy‏ ضراب الْحَمَلِ».

‎814. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎prohibited the sale of excess water." Related by Muslim. Jn ano-

‎238- The mother of a child is the female slave who gave birth to a child, wh-
ose father is her Master. he child is consequently free, and she is not to
be sold after that.

‎239. Imém ag-San @ni in ‘Subul as-Salém’ says, that it is only ‘Umar who
prohibited her being sold, and it is not a consensus among the compa-
nions that she is not to be sold.

‎240- This narration refers to any water in excess of one’s needs whether fou-
rd in land which is not owned by anybody, or in someone's land, whe-
ther in a well or otherwise, as no one should prohibit others from using
water which is in excess of his own need, as the Prophet 2 said that
people are partners in water, grass and fire.

‎290
ther narration, ‘and hiring a camel to copulate with a she-camel
(ie. no money should be paid for copulation).

8 «نهَى رَسُولُ الله صَلَى ‎th‏

815. Ibn ‘Umar narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏-نطمعم يك‎
bited taking fees for the copulation of an animal’ Related by Al-
Bukhari.

816. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
prohibited the sale called ‘Habal al-Habalah,’ which was a kind of
dealing practice in Pre-Islamic times(Jéhiliyah). A man would pay
the price of a she-camel which was not yet born, but would be born
by the immediate offspring of an existing she-camel.(i.e. would be
the offspring of a she-camel which was still in her mother’s womb)’
Agreed upon, and the wording is from Al-Bukhari.

‎ - aww‏ الله عَنهُ - : ‎Shy‏ رَسُولَ الله صَلَى ‎Aw hey le th‏ عَنْ
يع الولآء » وَعَنْ ‎Gah ante‏

‎817. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated, "The Messenger of Allah 32
prohibited selling or donating the Wald’ of a freed slave.’ Agreed
upon.

‎os‏ الله 5 - قال ‎ao:‏ 525 الله عليه
وَسَلّمَ عَنْ ‎sg‏ وعد م ؛ ‎ayy ay‏ ملم .

‎818. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
prohibited Bai‘u al-Haséh™' (trading of a pebble), and Bai‘u

‎241- A type of sale practiced in pre-Islamic periods, by which the seller thr-
ows a pebble, and sells the goods or the piece of land ete... on which the
pebble falls with a certain price agreed upon previously.

‎291
al-gharar.”2# Related by Muslim.

op 1 36 gly ale Mh ‏أن رَسُولَ الله صَلَّى‎ - oe th ‏رضي‎ - ey 5

819. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “If anyone buys food (grain or otherwise) he
should not resell it, until he receives it (ic. in his hand ).”
Related by Muslim.

قال : «نهى 25 ‎fe‏ الله
‎any‏ أحْمَدُ , وَالنسَائِي » ‎ORG felt By‏ .

820. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
4 prohibited the double sale24%(two transactions combined in one)’

Related by Ahmad and An-Nasé’i. At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban
graded it as Sahi

wee FLY ‏هَلَهُ‎

9 ‏تين في‎ EM > : 555 ‏وَلأبِي‎ ١

821, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Whoever sells a double sale in one, will have
the worst of them or (it is as if he involved himself in) Riba
(usury).” Related by Aba Dawad

242. Sale involving risk or chance, ic. the sale of what is not present at the
moment.

249- Scholars disagreed on what is meant by a double sale in this hadith
Some say that it is selling commodities with two prices, one immediate
and another higher, which is deferred to a later time, the second inclu-
died an increase for the delayed selling of a commodity over its immed-
iate price, But most scholars refuted this opinion claiming that it is a
legitimate form of sale that existed in authentic texts (selling by install-
Iment). The second form is selling with two prices, one immediate and
another higher, deferred and uncertain. The seller tells him, ‘It is for
such and such amount of eash and for such and such amount of delayed
payment and they depart while being uncertain without having deter-
mined anything. This form is prohibited. Some scholars say that one of
its forms is to make a double deal, one says I sell you my horse on the
condition that you sell me your slave

292
- a ‏عَنْ أبيه عَنْ‎ eb ‏بن‎ yA be — ary
1 : hey ale an he ‏رَسُولُ الله‎

Bal ‏المدكور‎ gpa

في الأوأستطء وَهُوَ ‎ap‏

822. “Amro bin Shu‘aib narrated on his father’s authority who
reported from his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah
38 said,It is prohibited to have a loan combined with a sale

(in one deal), or having two conditions in a sale, or claimi-

ng a profit on something which is not in your possession.

There is no selling what is not in your possession.’ Related
by the five Imams. At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Khuzaimah and al-Hakim
graded it as Sah

‎te 5‏ - رضي الله ‎Se‏ فَالَ : ‎a ah‏ صَلّى الله

‎ay ‏إن شيب‎ 9 Ab Le il: fran ‏ملك‎ 355 oth ‏َع‎

‎823. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on his father’s authority who
reported from his grandfather (RAA) that ‘The Messenger of Allah

‎38 prohibited Bai’u al-‘Urban (paying nonrefundable deposits). 4°
Related by Malik.

‎244- The seller stipulates that the buyer gives him a loan to sell him the go-
ods, or that the buyer borrows the money from the seller as a condition
to buy his commodity.

‎245- ‘As long as the goods are still in the possession of the seller, the profit
belongs to him until the transaction is complete. So he is the one who
gains any profit or bears any loss. The buyer cannot claim any profit
until he possesses the goods

‎246- It is a form of prohibited sales in which a nonrefundable deposit is paid
towards the price of an item. If the buyer decides to keep it, the deposit
is part of the price, but if he does not, then the seller keeps the deposit.

‎293

: OU - ge ‏رَضِي الله‎ Ab hy eave

glob Ips a ayes Uli
: ‏فَقالَ‎ cA MG ‏فَإَا هو‎ LB ‏من حلفي يذرّاعي ؛‎ hy Ja ‏الرّحُل»‎
‎hey ‏الله ليه‎ oo ‏رَسُولَ الله‎ OB » ‏حَتّى وز إلى رَخْلك‎ ea es ‏أ يه‎
» ‏رحَالهم». رَوَهُ أحْمَدُ‎ ll ‏حتى يَمُوزها لشم‎ «Gece at Res

بو داو » وَاللمَط له ‎cay‏ ان ‎Otte‏ وَالْحَاكمٌ .

في ‎cath‏
‏38 أ أ عل

aes

824. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘I bought some oil from the
market and when I came to take it, I met a man who offered me a
good profit (i.e. wanted to buy it from me). When I was about to
accept the deal, a man caught hold of my arm from behind. I tur-
ned around to find that the man was Zaid bin Thabit.’ He said to
me, ‘Do not sell it where you have bought it from, (but wait) till it

is in your possession, as the Messenger of Allah 38 prohibited that

goods are sold, until the trader takes possession of them.’ 7 Rela-

ted by Ahmad and Aba Dawid and the wording is his. Ibn Hibban
and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

825. Ibn “Umar narrated, ‘I said to the Messenger of Allah
‘{ sell camels at the market of Bagi’. So, I would sell for gold (i.e.
make the deal with the price set in gold or Dinars), and take silver
(Dirhams) for them, or sell for silver (Dirhams) and take gold for
them. I would take these for these and give these for these.’ The

Prophet 2¥ told me, “There is no objection if the price you
use is the current price (the day of making the deal) and as

247. ‘Tho expression that Zaid used is until the traders take it back ‏ما‎ their
residence, but what he really means is until they have it in their posses-
sion whethor it has to be transpored or taken in hand ete.

204

long as you part having settled all the deal.” Related by the
five Imams, Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎ - a‏ الله ‎aie i - te‏ رَسُولُ الله ‎ple ale tin he‏ عن
‎Ibn ‘Umar narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 prohi-‏ .826
‎bited ‘Najsh’8 (Bidding up merchandise).’ Agreed upon.‏

‎te Uh ‏رضي‎ - yo ‏وَعَنْ‎ ary

‎os RG AI, ‏المُحَاقلةء‎

‏ان مَابحَهُ » وَصَّحَّحَهُ الترمدئ .

‎827. Jabir bin “Abdullah narrated, “The Messenger of Allah
38 prohibited Muhaqalah®®, Muzébanah?®, Mukhabarah®!, Thu-

‎nid?2, unless it is explicit.’ Related by the five Imams except for
Ibn MAjah. At-Tirmidhi graded it as Sahi

‏وَالْمُحَاضَرَة » وَالْمُلآَسَمّة » وَالْمَُابَدَة » وا

‎. Ged yy adie

‎828. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3%

‎248. It is prohibited to bid up the price of a piece of merchandise that one is
not interested in buying but he is only doing so to deceive another bid-
der, who would believe that it is worth that. price

‎249. It means selling grain while they are still in their husk, But Jabir (the
narrator) explained it as selling a sown field for a hundred Firg (16 pou-
ads or 12 Mudd) of wheat.

‎250- There are various forms of this sale such as selling grapes for raisins by
measure or selling dates while they are still on the palm trees, for dried
dates and so on,

‎251- Renting land for some of its erops.

‎252. ‘To sell something while excluding part of it, unless the excepti
licit, such as selling a number of trees and excluding one. If this particu-
lar tree is identified, then it is permissible or else it is prohibited.

‎295

prohibited Muhéqalah, ‏,تتقرله موق راعسا‎ Mulamasah, Mundba-
dhah®, and Muzdbanah. Related by Al-Bukhari.

aoe 3 LES. 3 UE oid ‏خ حَاضْرٌ‎

829. ‘Tawa narrated on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, that the
Messenger of Allah 38 said, “Do not go out to meet caravans
(on the way to make deals with them) and no townsman is per-
mitted to sell things on behalf of a man from the desert.”25

1 asked Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘What did he mean by saying ‘no townsman is
permitted to sell on behalf of a Bedouin.” He replied, ‘He should
not be a broker for him.’ Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-
Bukhari’.

- رضي الله عَلهُ - 6 : َال سول اللّه ‎ale Ds fo‏

GBB AINE Abe dis

وَسَلم:
‎pi 55 .» toll‏

830, Abd Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Do not go out to meet what is being brought (for the
market by the riders). If one (of the traders) is met, and some of
his goods are sold, then when the owner arrives at the

253. ‘The sale of fruit or grain before they are ripe and in good condition,

254- A man selling his garment for another's man garment merely by tou-
ching it, and none of them looks at the other man's garment.

255. It means that two men cast their garments to the other to buy but with-
out careful examination

286- According to the majority of scholars the reason for the prohibition is the
harm that affects the city dwellers from this practice, as when the
Bedouin is left to sell his commodity, people will buy it at a lower price.
If the city dweller sells it for him, he can only sell it at the going market
rate.

296
market, he has the choice (whether to cancel the deal or accept
it).”257 Related by Muslim.

‎avy‏ - رضي ‎Be th‏ - فال : ‎by ais‏ الله ‎Loe‏ الله ‎peg die‏ أذ

‎831. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, The Messenger of Allah

‎38 prohibited that a city dweller sells on behalf of a man from the
desert, and ordered not to bid against one another, no man should
outbid the selling of his brother (Muslim brother), nor propose to
marry a woman whom his brother has proposed to, and no woman
should ask for the divorce of her sister (in Islam) to take advant-

‎age of what is in her pot(to replace her in her life).5*Agreed upon.

‎In another version by Muslim, “A Muslim should not offer a
price above that offered by another Muslim.”

‎ary‏ — وَعَنْ أبي ‎Gl‏ الأَنْصَارِيّ - رَضي ‎Ou - ee ah‏ سَمغْت ‎Oy‏ الله

‏فرق ‎Go‏ وَالدَة ‎Gays‏ فرّقَ الله ينه وين ‎el‏
‎ay .»‏ أَحْمَدُ » ‎bie,‏ الذي » وَالْحَاكمٌ » وككن في ‎lial‏

‎832, Abd Aiydb Al-Ansari (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Mes-

‎senger of Allah 38 say, “If anyone separates a mother and her
child, Allah will separate him from his beloved ones on the
Day of Resurrection.” Related by Ahmad. At-Tirmidhi and al-
Hakim graded it as Sahih, but there is a weakness in its chain of
narrators...

‎257. The seller may find that the price he was offered outside the town is less
than the real price, then he has the choice to accept or cancel the deal.

‎258 A Muslim woman should not ask a man to divorce his wife, so that she
alone would have all the privileges that the other wife had, of having a
husband, being provided with all her life expenses ete.

‎297
‎As, ‘ Stuy 3 oe MN‏ وا
‎“Ali bin Abt Talib (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Al-‏ .833

‎lah 38 commanded me to sell two (slaves) young brothers, so I did
but I separated them (i.e. sold each to a different person). When I

‎mentioned this to the Prophet he said, ‘Search for them and
bring them back, and do not sell them except to the same person
(do not separate them).’ Related by Ahmad with a reliable chain of
narrators, Ibn Khuzaimah, Ibn al-Garad, Ibn Hibban, al-Hakim,
at-Tabarani and Ibn al-Qattan graded ‏اذ‎ as Sahi

‎jy; sas ‏في م و‎
834. Anas bin Malik (RAA) narrated, “The prices went up in

‎Madinah during the time of the Prophet ‏.كك‎ People asked him’ 0
‘Messenger of Allah! The prices went up, so please fix the prices for

‎us.’ The messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ replied, “Allah is The One Who
fixes the prices, He is The Restrainer, He is the one Who
Gives generously, The Sublime Sustainer, and I wish to me-
et Allah, the Almighty with none of you having any claim

‎on me for any injustice regarding blood or property.

‎259. This Hadith is evidence that fixing prices by authorities is an act of
injustice, unless there is a clear imbalance in the market, in which case
authorities should interfere by applying fair measures especially when it
is relevant to the essential provisions. Some scholars such as Malik said

‎298
Related by the five Imams except for An-Nasa’i. Ibn Hibban gra-
ded it as Sahth

eh fo ‏عَنْ رسُول الله‎ - te ‏وَعَنْ مَعْمرٍ ين عَبْد الله - رضي الله‎ — are

oh ‏اطي » رَوَاُ‎ 0 [SB Vo : ‏وَسَلْمَ قال‎
835. Ma‘mar bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “No one monopolizes” except that he is
a sinner.” Related by Muslim.

alse ‏الله عل‎ Lg ‏غلة‎ th ‏رضي‎ SrA ‏أي‎ tea

calc Ve pla Lp ‏ضَاعًا‎ gat ‏«رَرَدُ‎ : eth gk a Ly ‏رقي‎
‎C51 2p : ‏َال البُحَارِيُ‎
Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

said, “Do not tie up the udders of camels and sheep
(and leave them un-milked for a long time). Whoever buys
such an animal (unaware of what you did) has the option after
milking them, either to keep it or to return it to the owner
along with one Sa” of dates.” Agreed upon.

In Muslim's version, “He has the choice for three days (to keep
them or not.”

In another version by Al-Bukhari, (Hadith Mu‘allag?6)”"He must
return it along with one Sa’ of any grain but wheat.” Al-

that prices should be fixed for essential provisions, while other scholars
said that it is permissible to fix the prices if this is for the welfare of the
people and to save them from the greed of merchants.

200- Monopolizing here refers to withholding some goods until its price goes
up and then putting it out for sale

261- That in which the reporter omits the whole Isnéd and quotes the Pro-

phot 48 directly,
299

Bukhari commented, ‘But the narrations which say “with one Sa“
of dates,” are more (than the other one).”

‎yt ayy ete Ge‏ وَزَادَ الإسْمَاعيلي
‎Ibn Mas ‘ad (RAA) narrated, ‘Whoever buys a sheep who-‏ .837
‎se udder had been tied up, and he decides to return it, then he‏

‎should give it back with one 36 .” Related by Al-Bukhéri, Al-Isma-
“ili said, ‘of dates,’

‎es ale ‏الله‎ fo ‏الله 2 - أن وَسُول الله‎ os - SS ‏وَعَسن أبي‎ ar
‏هَذَايَا‎ Gs ‏َل » فَقَالَ‎ Ref CIS. Gs k ib » ‏من طَعَامٍ‎ ie ‏عَلَى‎
‏ا الله و‎ Bol : ‏صَاحب الطُعَام ؟» قَالَ‎
op ‏رَوَاهُ‎ ee CB Se ‏؟ مَنْ‎ (ath arg ‏كَيْ‎ tcl
838. Abd Hurairah {RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 happened to pass by a pile of food (grain), and when he
inserted his hand into that pile, his fingers were moistened. He
said (to the seller), “What is this?” The man replied, ‘O Messen-
ger of Allah! These have been drenched by the rain.’ The Messen-

‎ger of Allah 3 said, “Why didn’t you place this (the damp part
of the pile) at the top of the pile, so that people could see
it? He who deceives is not (one) of (my followers).” Related by
Muslim.

‎sy Lave‏ عَبْدالله بن ‎HG‏ عن
مر ‎oe‏ لبا م أ

‏3808 وول الل تل لل

‎839. “Abdullah bin Buraidah narrated on the authority of his

‎father, that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Whoever stores up
grapes in their vintage season until he sells them to a wine
maker, he would be putting himself into the Hellfire, while
knowing the reason for being there (i.e. he knows why he is in
the Hellfire).” Related by At-Tabarani in ‘al-Awsat’, with a good
chain of narrators.

‎300
tiga : ply de th ed by ‏ال‎

بالعّمَّان». رَوَاهُ الْحَمْسَةُ ‎Gey‏ البحَارِيُ , ‎Bh 540 NG‏ اللْمذي »

bath 2515 « ‏وَالْحَاكمٌ‎ » Oe BAG » ‏الْجَارُود‎ Ooty » ‏عريْمة‎ NG

840. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 38 said,
“al-Khardj; ‘benefit or profit’ (profit of the bought item, or befi-
tting through using it) belongs to the buyer (the one who pos-
sesses the sold item and he holds responsibility for it).”2"

Related by the five Imams, but Al-Bukhari and Aba Da
ded it as weak. At-Tirmidhf, Ibn Khuzaimah, Ibn al-Ga
Hibbén, al-[Hakim and Ibn al-Qattan graded it as Sahth.

rad gra-
“ad, Ibn

441 - وعن عروة 9

‎soy‏ لو اطترى مركها زيح

‎» ‏حَديث‎ he ‏في‎ Gel Bethy . ‏السَالِي‎ 0 ins ‏رَوَهُ‎ eet

‎841. “Urwah al-Bariqi (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah’s Messenger 38
gave him a Dinar to buy a sacrificial animal or a sheep. He bought
two sheep, and sold one of them for a Dinar. (When he returned)

‎262- The story of this hadith is that two men came to the Prophet 3 dispu-
ting over a matter. One of them had bought a slave boy from the other.
‘The boy stayed with the buyer for sometime, then the buyer found a
fault with the slave. He wanted to return him to the original owner, who
refused to take him back claiming that the buyer had employed the
slave and made use of his service. The Prophet ‏يك‎ judged that the boy
should be returned to his original owner and said the above hadith ‘al-
Khardj bid-Damén.’ Meaning that the benefit the buyer got from the
slave was in return for the expenses, which the buyer would have to pay
if the sold item was damaged -after the buyer decides to cancel the deal
and before he gives it back to the original owner- then it is the buyer
‘who is responsible for its price, as it was in his possession. The hadith
then means that the benefit or profit goes to the one who holds the resp-
onsibility of the item, i.e. profit and loss goes to the buyer as it is actual-
ly in his possession.

‎301
the Prophet 38 invoked Allah to bless his dealings of buying and
selling. It was such that if had bought (even) dust, he would have
made a profit from it.’ Related by the five Imams except for An-
Nasa’. Al-Bukhart reported it within another Hadith

842. At-Tirmidhi related a similar hadith on the authority of
Hakim bin Hizam.

وَعَنْ شراء ‎a‏ وَهُرَ آبق » وَعَنْ

siete sy

843. Abd 5530 al-Khudri (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 prohibited buying what is still in the womb of the cattle
until they give birth, or selling what is in their udders (until they

are milked). The Prophet # also prohibited buying a runaway
slave(as he is not present), and prohibited buying war booty before
it is divided, or buying Zakat property before it is received(by their
recipients) and prohibited buying the lucky stroke of a diver (with-
out knowing what he will come out with). Related by Ibn Majah,
Al-Bazzar and Ad-Daraqutnt with a weak chain of narrators.

{2:5 Yy : ‏وَسَلّمَ‎ ale Dh ‏َال رَسُولُ الله صلى‎ : UU ‏مَسْعُود‎ ol 22 att
844. Ibn Mas‘dd (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, ‘Do not buy fish before they are caught, as it invol-
ves Gharar (sale involving risk or a chance).” Related by Ahmad,
who said that it is most probably Hadith Mawgif.

السسّمَكَ في الْمَاء » ‎BG‏ غَررُ». روه أحْمَدُ » وَأَشَارَ

‎hs gt ate‏ - رضي ‎O48 Dh‏ - 08 فى وول لله لّى

١ ‏وا‎ SN ‏ضرع » رَوَاهُ الطبراني في‎
A ‏عَلَى‎ bsp Gi ef, » ‏الْمرَاسِيلٍ لعكْرمّة‎
ges dy bs sey

845, Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

346 ‏أو‎ ol

3 prohibited the sale of fruit until it is ripe, or to sell fur (of cam-
els and goats) which have not yet been shorn, or milk which is still
in the udder. Related by At-Tabarani in ‘Al-Awsat, and by ad-
Daraqutni.

846. Abd Hurairah (RA) narrated that 8 Messenger of Al-

lah 48 prohibited selling the womb of female cattle and the sperm
in the backs of male camels’ Related by Al-Bazzér with a weak
chain of narrators.

قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎fe‏
‎je‏ الله عَم

6548 fh ‏«من أقَالَ مُسْلمًا بي ». رَوَاهُ‎ : rane

(Sly » ‏هن حاف‎ Bhs EG IG

847, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “Whoever helps in the revocation of a contract
(between two Muslims to settle their disputes), Allah, the Almi-
ghty will save him from slipping on the Day of Resurree-
tion? Related by Abd Dawad.

seal OU
Chapter 11: Options (al-Khiyar) in Business
Dealings

Cay ‏عَلَى َلك فَقَدْ‎ Ws BN OME ‏فَإِنْ‎ SH Lk yf

faa ‏ترا‎ Oo aod

وَلَمْ يوك ‎ty‏ منْهمًا أ

فْقَدْوَحَبَ

848. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said,“The seller and the buyer have the right to go ahead
(vith the deal) or cancel it so long as they have not parted -
physically (and are still at the place transaction), or until
one of them gives the other the choice (to think over the deal
for a few days even if they parted physically, or to go ahead with
the deal before they part). If one of them gives the other this
option and the deal is made on this condition, then it beco-
mes binding (even before they part, according to the set condi-
tion). And if they part after they have made the bargain and
none of them decided to abandon it, the agreement is also
binding,” Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

5ح ‎IB‏ عرو أن طب عَن أيه عن مم - 5 ‎al ie‏
بايغ لقاع ‎Sys he ok‏ أن تَكُونَ

‎a5 .4‏ الْحَمْسَةُ ‎NY‏ مَاجَة

‎849. ‘Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on his father’s authority who
reported from his grandfather (RAA), that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, “The seller and the buyer have the right to go ahead
(with the deal) or cancel it as long as they have not parted -
physically- (and are still at the place of transaction), unless
it is a deal of choice, whereby one of them gives the choice
to the other to go ahead with the deal or to cancel it before
they actually part (i.e. on the spot). And it is not permissible
for one of them to part from his companion(before they make

‎the final agreement) for he may want to cancel the ‏”.لمعل‎

‎263- This means that if he suddenly leaves the place of the deal, then this
would make the deal final, while his companion might still want to

‎304
Related by the five Imams except for Ibn Majah. Ad-Daraqutni,

In another version, “Until they part from their place (of mak-
ing the deal).”

850, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that, ‘A man told the Messen-
ger of Allah 3 that people deceive him in his deals, so the Prophet

of Allah 38 told him, “When you conduct a deal, say no chea-
ting or deceiving (in this deal).” Agreed upon.

بَابْالربَا
‎Chapter III: Riba (Usury)‏

pb ‏روا‎ alge th:
851, Jabir (RAA) narrated, "The “Messenger of Allah 3 cursed
the person who accepts usury, its payer, the one who recorded it,

and the two witnesses, and he said, 38, “They are all equal (in
sin).” Related by Muslim.

BEA ‏من حَديث أبي‎ UA Gta 57

852, Al-Bukhari reported a similar Hadith on the authority of
‘Aba Juhaifah.

think it over, and may wish to cancel it. So it is disliked to leave the
place of the bargain until itis finalized.

305

853. “Abdullah Ibn Mas‘id narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “There are seventy three types of Ribé. The
one least in sin, is that equal to the sin of a man who mar-
ries his mother, and one of the worst kinds of Ribé is to

violate the honor of a Muslim.” 264 Related by Ibn Majah in a
short form and al-Hakim in a complete one. The latter graded it as,

854. Aba Sa‘id Al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah & said, “Do not sell (exchange) gold for gold, unless
they are equivalent in amount, and do not sell (exchange) a
lesser amount for a greater amount (or vice versa), and do
not sell silver for silver unless they are equivalent in amo-
unt, and do not sell a lesser amount for a greater amount
(or vice versa). Also do not sell silver or gold that is not
available at the moment of exchange, for gold or silver that
is present at the time.” Agreed upon

eae U6 ‏بن الصّامت‎

هو ‎Bp OF‏ كان هذا ‎cag‏ م
‎bin As-Samit (RAA) narrated that the Messen-‏ طمفقطل .855

24. No doubt the first type is worse, but the Prophet 38 means to show how
evil it is to defame another Muslim.

306
ger of Allah 38 said, “Whenever gold is exchanged for gold,
silver for silver, wheat for wheat, barley for barley, dates
for dates, salt for salt unless they are exactly equivalent in
amount and quality, and exchanged -delivered- on the spot
(ie. the exchanged goods will be in the respective possession of
both the buyer and the seller before they part, each delivering the
goods to the other). If these types differ (when making the deal,
such as exchanging gold for silver) then sell -and buy- as you
wish (in different amounts) if payment is made on the spot.”
Related by Muslim.

‎Oy U5‏ مثلا

‎. 558 Bes ‏باه‎ 8 I
856. Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated that the aa of AL

‎lah 3 said, “Whenever gold is exchanged for gold, it should
be equivalent in amount and quality, and whenever silver
is exchanged for silver it should be equivalent in amount
and quality. Whoever gives more or asks for more, this is
considered Riba (usury).” Related by Muslim,

‏سعد دري وأبي خريرَة - رضي لله ‎of - wg‏ رَسُولَ

‎mes pe 3-2 oes‏ » كم الخ بالشراهم

‎wb fe ip BBs ae
857. Aba Sa‘id ‏كله‎ Khudrt (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

‎of Allah 32 appointed a man as a governor of Khaibar, and the
man brought him dates of an excellent quality. The Messenger of

‎Allah 38 asked him, “Are all the dates in Khaibar of the same
quality?” The man replied, ‘I swear by Allah O Messenger of
Allah! that they certainly are not. We take one Sé’ of these dates

‎307
for two or three S@’s (of our lesser quality dates).’ The Messenger

of Allah 38 said thereupon, “Do not do that (as this would be
Ribé). Sell the lesser quality dates for Dirhams (money) and
then buy the good quality dates with the Dirhams you rece-
ived.” He also said that the same applies when things are sold by
weight. Agreed upon.

858. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 3 prohibited selling a quantity of dates of unknown mea-
sure, for a specific amount of dates (of known weight).’ Related by
Muslim.

pes ‏كُنْت أسْمَمْ‎ As ‏قَالَ‎ - te th ‏رضي‎ - date of ne ‏وَعَنْ‎ - 5
‏وَكَانَ طََا‎ « «fae Se plat, pth : ye ley ale thy ‏الله صَلّى‎
859. Ma‘mar bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘I used to hear

the Messenger of Allah 38 say, “Food is to be exchanged for
food in equivalent amounts.” The narrator added, ‘Our food at
that time was barley.’ Related by Muslim.

860, Fadélah bin ‘Ubaid (RAA) narrated, ‘I bought a necklace
on the day of Khaibar for 12 Dinars (of gold). It contained gold and
gems, but when 1 distinguished each separately, I found that it
contained more than 12 Dinars worth (of gold). I mentioned this to

the Prophet 38 he said, “Do not sell it until its contents (gold

308
and gems)are distinguished(and the weight of each is known).”
Related by Muslim.

‎Ha oe‏ إن ‎we‏ : «أن ابي صلى الله ‎oly de‏ َى عَنْ َي
‎of ody oth‏ تسيئة». رَوَاهُ ‎LOS‏ وَصّحَّحَُ ‎iy « Gok B‏ الْجَارُود .
‎Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of‏ .861

‎Allah 38 prohibited selling animals for animals on delayed paym-
ents.’ Related by the five Imams. At-Tirmidhi and Ibn al-Garad
graded it as Sahih.

‎Sab Mb AY

‎ete th 5 -‏ - قَالَ ‎Cae:‏ رَسُولَ ‎dy‏ صَلَى الله

‎lish aid, iG bp : oe ‏وَسَلُمَ‎ ce
egy Vi Sie ‏لل‎ a ‏الحهاة‎ oy

‏أبُو ‎ME gall Wy, Ly S46‏ « وَفي ‎SUE asl‏ و

‏ان » وَصحّحَهُ ان اقطان

‎UR‏ تا
‎Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger of Al-‏ .862
‎lah 32 say, “When you practice ‘al-inah sale,” getting hold‏

‎of the tails of the cows (ic. getting busy with plowing and lea-
ving Jihad); feeling content with agriculture and neglecting
Jihad, Allah will bring upon you humiliation and disgrace,
which He will not lift until you revert to your religion.”
Related by Aba Dawéid with a weak chain of narrators. Ahmad
related a similar narration on the authority of ‘Ata’ with a reliable
chain of narrators. Ibn al-Qattén graded it as Sahih.

‎863. Aba Umémah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎265. The seller sells the goods to the buyer with a delayed payment, and then,
repurchases it for a lower price. This is considered as a prohibited sale
by the Hanafi, Maliki and Hanbalt schools due to this evidence.

‎309
Allah 38 said, “If anyone intercedes for his brother(in Islam)
and he is given a present (in return for his favor) and he acce-
pts it, he is guilty of practicing a great type of Ribé.” Rela-
ted by Ahmad and Aba Dawéd with a weak chain of narrators.

: ‏قَالَ‎ - Wye ‏رضي‎ - hg ap ‏عََبْد اله بن‎ ey — ant
oh} 4 dy fet, Bh

. ‏وَصْححَةُ‎ LAG
864. “Abdullah bin “Amro bin AlAs (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 3 cursed the one who bribes and the one who
accepts the bribe’ Related by Abi Dawid and rendered authentic

الراشِي ‎aly‏ رَوَاُ ُو 558 »

wh ale tn foo oly : ‏وَعَلْهُ‎ ane
3 : ‏قَالَ‎ » ica ‏ص‎ eo Bb EE » ‏الإبل‎
‏وَل‎ «pS ‏الصٌدقة». رَوَاهُ‎ Jy

865. “Abdullah bin ‘Amro bin Al s (RAA) narrated, The

Messenger of Allah 4% commanded him to prepare an army, but
the camels he had were insufficient (some people remained with-

out camels to ride). So the Messenger of Allah 38 ordered him to
buy camels in exchange for the young camels of ZakGh (which they
did not have at that time). ‘Abdullah says, ‘I used to exchange two
of the young camels of Zakdh for one older camel. (When they

received the young camels of Zakah? they gave them to the

people who sold them the camels).’ Related by Al-Hakim and Al-
Baihaqi with a reliable chain of narrators.

3 وإ كاد

266- One of the channels for spending Zakah money is in the way of Allah.
310
كَرْمًا أن ‎ay Sy‏ كَيْلاً » ‎Oy‏ كَانَ رَرْعًا أن
كله». ‎Sb‏ علَيْه .

866. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 35
prohibited Muzébanah*6’, which means that a man sells the fruit

of his garden in any of the following forms: to sell dates that have
not yet been harvested and are still on the palm trees, for fresh (or
dried) dates of measured weight, to sell grapes that have not yet
been harvested, for measured amounts of raisins, or standing cro-
ps for a measured quantity of grain. He prohibited all such barg-
ains.’ Agreed upon.

gph ih BBC

867. 5800 bin Abi Waqqas (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Mes-

senger 8 being asked about selling fresh dates for dried dates. He
replied, “When fresh dates are dried, do they lose weight?”
‘They replied, ‘Yes.’ So he prohibited such a deal.’ Related by the
five Imams, Ibn al-Madini, at-Tirmidhi, Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim
graded it as Sahih.

a hey dle th fo ‏«أن اب‎ a ‏0س وعسي‎
+ ‏وَالبَرَارُ اتاد طعيف‎ «BBL ay; ‏أيْنِ».‎ este Body

868. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 2
prohibited selling postponed credit for another postponed credit
(i.e. a debt for a debt).’ Related by Ishq and Al-Bazzér with a
weak chain of narrators.

267. Refer to hadith no. 827,
311
ey ‏ريا ويلع الأول‎ ii ‏الرخصّة خصّةفي‎ OU
Chapter IV: Concession concerning ‘Araya
(Lending something for use)
and the sale of Trees and fruit

‎Ba‏ رضي

‎OS Gels EU ‏أذ‎ : ah ‏في‎ (Abs ples cle

‎wh wt OS Gels oth pial dll ‏في‎ (abn : gts

‎869. Zaid bin Thabit (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
38 permitted selling the dates of ‘Araya (the palm tree lent for

‎use) if their dates are sold for measured amounts of dried dates.
Agreed upon.

‎In the version of Muslim, ‘He gave the license regarding the fruit
of the “Ariya for its sale to the original owner.

‎HB es aye‏ - رضي : ‎ohh‏ رَسُولَ الله صَلَى الله

‎Cee ah ook chy de‏ من ‎kA‏ قو نضنة أسنو» أ
في ‎se te . ashi ie‏ .
‎Abd Hurairah (RA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah‏ .870

‎# gave permission for the selling of the dates of ‘Araya, by estim-
ating the amount of dates on the palm trees (unharvested) on the

‎condition that their amount is less than five Awsuq?® or five Aws-

‎ug.’ Agreed upon.

‎268- During times of droughts, the Arabs had the habit of lending some of
their palm trees to those who had none so as to eat the fruit of those tre-
es for a certain period of time. Sometimes the owner of the palm trees
‘would be bothered by the frequent coming into his garden of the one the
tree is lent to. So, the Prophet 2 gave them the permission (to the len-
der) to buy the dates while still unharvested (even though this is prohi
bited otherwise)from the man he lent it to, for an amount of weighed dri
ed or fresh dates. So they would estimate the weight of the dates while
still on the palm trees and buy them from the needy, for dried dates,

‎269- A Wasaq is equivalent to sixty ‏كم قد‎ (a cubic measure of varying magni-
tude) . Five Awsuq is equivalent to 50 Egyptian kaylah (one Kaylah is a

‎312

871. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 2
prohibited the sale of fruit until it is ripe. He prohibited the seller
and the buyer. Agreed upon. In another version, ‘When he was
asked about what is meant by being ripe, he would say “Till they
are safe from being affected by blight.”

١ ‏أن الى‎ Ss

. ‏للْبُحَارِيّ‎ ity, » ae
872, Anas bin M&lik (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

3% prohibited selling fruit until they had bloomed. When he was
asked about the sign of this he said, “Till they become red and
yellow (i.c. fit for eating). Agreed upon and the wording is from
‘Al-Bukhéar?’,

العلب حَتّى يود » وَعَنْ تيع ‎ay; es Bo Sd‏ الْحَنْسَهُ إلا ‎«ed‏

. ‏والْحاكمْ‎ » O tn BSc

873. Anas bin Malik (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
38 prohibited selling grapes until they become black, and the sale
of grain until they become hard (i.¢. till they both ripen),’ Related

by the five Imams except for An-Nasa’i. Ibn Hibban and al-Haékim
graded it as Sahih.

dry measure for grain, 50 Kaylah is equivalent. ‏ما‎ 653 gm of wheat.
313

874, Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “If you sell your brother dates (or fruit), and
they are stricken with Ja’ihah (Calamity),2 it is not perm-

hy ‏رفي‎

issible for you to take any money from him.27| Why should

you take the wealth of your brother unjustly?” Related by
Muslim.

In another version, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3% commanded that
the price of the fruit stricken with a Calamity, is to be remitted’

BE op HL oy

875. “Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 3 said, “If someone buys pollinated date palms,
their fruit belong to the seller unless the buyer stipulates

that they will be for himself (and the seller agrees).” Agreed
upon.

270. J@ihah or Calamity could be any of the diseases or infestations which
affect plants and may totally or partially destroy them. It could also be
any unfortunate condition which was not caused by man, such as wind,
snow, cold, lack of water ete.

21. There is a difference of opinion among the scholars over the Jé'ihah.
Shafit and Abi Hanifah are of the opinion that if the fruit was sold
before being ripe, while it was still on the tree, then the seller is not to
take any money as it is prohibited to sell fruit before it is ripe (while on
the tree), but if they are sold after becoming ripe, then the seller is not,
to repay the buyer any of the price. Zon Hanbal is of the opinion that the
price of any damaged fruit is not to be claimed by the seller, and the
‘buyer has the right to ask for a reduction in this ease. Still many scho-
lars believe that it is recommended as a moral obligation that the seller
does not claim the full price, as compensation to his Muslim brother for
his loss, and that is actually the implicit recommendation in this hadith.

314
oy aly ‏السّلمء‎ ON
Chapter V: Payment in Advance (or Salam”),
Loan and Rahn®! (putting up Collateral)

5م عن ان ‎he‏ قَالَ ‎ole th Le pb‏ وَسَلَمَ ‎Mich‏ وَهُمْ

وَللْبْحَارِيّ ‎BOLI yn:‏ شياء»

876. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Al-

‎came to Madinah they were paying one and two years in‏ 3 طق[
‎advance for fruit, so he said, “Whoever pays money in advance‏
‎for dates or fruit (to be delivered later) should pay for it‏
‎with a known specified weight and measure (of dates or fruit,‏
‎to be delivered).” Agreed upon.‏

‎diss ti ‏رضي‎ - Syl ‏ين أَيرَى وَعَبْدالله بن أبي‎ ah as ty — aw
55 « pha ale Dh ‏صَلّى‎ ah J) ‏انم مَعَ‎
Pa ‏وفي‎ NG ‏والشعير‎ ht ‏في‎ aS tn buts. buf wt:
55 ‏لَّهُمْ‎ OST: se ‏«رَالرّيت إِلَى أجل مُسَمّى‎

‎. ‏البُخَارَيُ‎ IGG

‎877. “Abdul ‏مقسطفظ‎ bin ‏قعطف‎ and ‘Abdullah bin Abi Aufa
(RAA) narrated, ‘We used to get war booty while we were with Al-

‎lah's Messenger 38 and when the Nabat? of Sham came to us (to
make dealsjwe used to pay them in advance for wheat, barley, and

‎272. Buying in advanee, refers to the sale of described goods or items to be
delivered by the seller to the buyer at a certain time.

‎273. The word “Rahn” in Islamic Shart‘ah means ‘items of possessions offer-
ed as security for a debt so that the debt will be taken from these posses-
sions in case the debtor failed to pay back the due money.

‎274. Arabs who mixed with the Romans so that their lineage became mixed
(not pure Arabs anymore) and their Arab tongue was spoiled,

‎315
raisins (or oil in another version) to be delivered within a fixed
period of time.’ They were asked (by other companions), ‘Did the
Nabat own standing crops or not (at the time of the deal)” They
replied, ‘We never asked them about that.’ Related by Al-Bukhéri.

‎avn‏ — وَعَنْ أبي ‎Me Se WN a5 - BB‏ - عَنٍ
‎Set oy: ILS‏ أمْوَالَ اناس ب

‎1 jh ay) .»- ‏تعَالَى‎ - ai at

‎878. Abi Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘Whoever takes people's
money (as a loan) with the intention of repaying it, Allah will
repay it on his behalf, and whoever takes it in order to squander

‎it” then Allah will punish him." Related by A-Bukhari.

‎B65 oy » ‏رشي لل عنقا - قالت : «قلتُ 4 05 الله‎ - ae

‎he‏ قدت مله ‎gi‏ تسيئة إلى

‎Ee bey Let , ‏اع الْحاكمٌ‎ eas ‘
879. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, 1 said: '0 Messenger of Allah

‎38 so and so has been brought material from Syria, will you send
him someone to buy two garments on credit until it is easy for you

‎to repay? So, the Messenger of Allah 4 sent someone to him but
he refused.’ Related Al-Hakim and Al-Baihagi with a trustworthy
chain of narrators.

‎sab : iy ale ‏الله‎ oe 05 36 a

‏إِذَا كَانَ ‎Fa Sy UB‏ يرب ‎ales‏ إِذَا كَانَ ‎UY‏ وَعَلَى

‎ish ‏التفقة». رَوَآهُ‎ Oy OS) wil
880. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

‎lah 38 said, “A mortgaged animal may be ridden by the mor-
tgagee, in return for its expenses and one can drink the

‎215- Which means that he did not take the money out of need but he took it
just to spend it, having no intention to pay it back.

‎276. Alléh will punish him for his evil intentions in this world and in the
Hereafter.

‎316
milk of a milch-animal in return for its expenses, if it is
mortgaged. He, who rides the animal or drinks its milk has
to pay the expenses.” Related by Al-Bukhari

‎a : Jb ey aay‏ رول الله صلى اله ‎BPG Se ghey ce‏ مين

‎U8 EBS ‏الذي‎ ote

‎Lae‏ إلا أن المشفوظٌ عند أبي ذاو و
‎Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-‏ .881
‎lah 38 said, “The mortgaged item does not become the prop-‏

‎erty of the mortgagee 277 ‏أت‎ remains the property of the owner

‎who mortgaged it- he (i.e. the mortgagor) is entitled to its bene-
fits (or increase in value) and he is liable for its expenses (or
loss).”Related by Ad-Daraqutni and Al-Hakim with a trustworthy
chain of narrators.

‎pew a5 ala wei

‎882, Aba Rafi’ (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
borrowed a young camel (less than six years) from a man, and
when the camels of Zakah were brought to him, he ordered Rafi’

‎to return the young camel to its owner. AbG Rafi’ returned to the
Prophet ‘4 and said, ‘I could only find an excellent camel above
the age of six.’ The Messenger of Allah 38 said to him, “Give it to

‎him, for the best men are those who are best in paying off
their debts.” Related by Muslim.

‎277- In Jéhiliyah -before Islam- Arabs were in the habit that the mortgagee
wuld claim the ownership of the mortgaged item if the mortgagor failed

‎to pay the due money, so the Prophet 3& prohibited this practice.
317
هه وَعَنْ ‎Ye‏ َال : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صلَى ‎ole ts‏ 5

hae ey, cel ‏بن أبي‎ ead ‏َه‎

: «كل فض جر

لفق فهر رب
‎“Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 4 said,‏ .883
‎“Every loan which leads to an extra interest(when repaid), is‏

considered Ribé (Usury).” Related by Al-Harith bin Abi Usam-
ah, but there are omissions in its chain of narrators.

44و شَاهدٌ ‎na‏ عَنْ ‎ab‏ إن ‎eae‏ لتقي .

884. Al-Baihagi related a similar weak narration on the auth-
ority of Fadalah bin “Ubaid.

. ‏الْبُحَارِيّ‎ ate Se ‏عَبْدالله بن‎ be Gy ST — Ane

885. Al-Baihaqi also narrated a similar narration on the au-
thority of “Abdullah bin Salam, but it was not traced back to the

Prophet

886. Aba Bakr bin “Abdur Rahman narrated on the authority

of Aba Hurairah (RAA), ‘We heard the Messenger of Allah 38 say,
“If a creditor finds the very piece of goods (which he sold)
with a man who went bankrupt, he is more entitled to take
them back than anybody else.” Agreed upon

218. Suspension of dealings for the insane and children,
318
الْْرمَاء». وَوَصلَهُ ‎LS Mikey Lach‏ لأبي ذَاوُة .

887. Abd Dawid and Malik transmitted on the authority Aba
Bakr bin “Abdur Rahman in a Hadith Mursal, “If anyone sells
goods on credit to a man who went bankrupt, and has not
paid him any of the price of the goods, then if the very
piece of goods (which he sold) are with that man, he is more
entitled to take them back (than anybody else). And if the
buyer dies, the owner of the goods is then equivalent to the

other creditors (i.c. he is no more entitled than them in taking
his goods back).”

— AAA

wots ‏عَنْهُ - في‎ 3 ee
ghey de th ty

بج وْصَححَهُ الْحَاكمٌ » وَضَعَفَهُ أبُو دَاوُدَ ‎acts Unt key‏ ال
‎Aba Dawéd and Ibn Majah related the same Hadith on‏ ,888
‎the authority of Umar bin Khaladah, ‘We went to Aba Hurairah‏

(RAA) to tell him about one of our friends who had gone bankrupt.
He said, “I shall certainly judge among you with the same judg-

ment of the Prophet 3%, “If anyone becomes bankrupt or dies
and the owner of the goods finds the very piece of goods
which he sold, he is more entitled to take them back (than
anybody else).” It was rendered as weak by Aba Dawad, but al-
Hakim graded it as Sahth.

‎ans‏ وَعَنْ عُمَرِو بْن الشّريد عَنْ أبيه - رَضي الله ‎OB - Se‏ : قَالَ رَسُولْ الله

‏احد يحل عراضة ‎heb‏ روَاهُ أو 6595

‎889. “Amro bin ash-Sharid narrated on the authority of his

‎father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Lingering in
paying back a due debt(by one who can afford to pay), justifies

‎319
his defamation and punishment.” Related by Abi Dawad and
‘An-Nasa’i, Ibn Hibban graded it as Sait.

روه ملم

890. Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated,‘A man suffered loss
in fruit that he had bought, and owed the seller a large amount of

money so that he became bankrupt. The Messenger of Allah 32
said, “Give him Sadagah (charity).” People paid him charity,
but that was not enough to pay his debt. The Messenger of Allah

#8 said to his creditors, “Take what you find, and that is all
you may have.” Related by Muslim,

EG » ‏داو مرْسَلاً‎ seh st
891. Ka’b bin MAlik narrated on the authority of his father

(RAA), ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 suspended the property of Mu-
“adh (prohibiting him from making any deals) and sold it to repay
a debt that was due on him,’ Related by Ad-Daraquini and was
graded as Sahth by Al-Hakim.

an ‏صَلَى‎ the be bn ‏قَالَ‎ - tt th ‏رصي‎ - Sab oh ‏وَعَنٍ‎ — aay

يَوْمَ ‎atl‏ وأنا ‎SFA‏ : فلم يُحرني ‎P96‏

Lids Sobel aah ‏ذقي‎

892. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘I was presented to the Pro-

phet ‏يلك‎ on the Day of Uhud when I was fourteen years of age (to
320
ask him for permission to fight with the men), but he did not allow
me (to take part in the battle). I was again called on the Battle of
al-Khandag (the Trench) when I was fifteen years old, and he allo-

wed me (to take part in the battle).”2”9 Agreed upon.
Al-Baihaqi's version has, ‘He did not allow me as he did not see
that I have attained puberty.’ Ibn Khuzaimah graded it as Sahth.

We Ee by : ‏الى عَنْهُ - قَالَ‎ De) -

othe Ge ey Betyg OS ig ‏َم‎ hy ce ‏مَلّى الله‎

» ‏حبّانَ‎ Bh ‏وَصَحُّحَهُ‎ » BBW

BNE ‏عَلَى‎ : By pels,

893. . ‘Atiyah al-Quradhi (RAA) narrated, ‘We were brought to
the Prophet 3 on the Day of Quraidhah. Those who had begun to
grow (pubic) hair were killed, and those who had not grown hair,
were set free. I was among those who had not grown any (pubic)
hair, so I was set free.’ Related by the four Imams and rendered as
Sahih by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim.

4 وَعَنْ عرو إن شُعَيْبٍ عَنْ أبيه ‎Se‏ جَدّه - رَضي ‎We all‏ - : أن
رَسُولَ الله ‎Ge‏ الله عليه ‎chy‏ َالَ : ‎Sp‏ يَجُورُ ‎Shs sity‏ إلا يإذن ‎wate)‏

رفي ‎se‏ «لا يَسُورُ ‎Qe BHA‏ ذا ‎GAS OG‏ عملمتها». روا

. Sto boy GiB Wt Gael, » ‏أَحْمَدُ‎
‎894. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his father
on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “It is not permissible for a woman to give (any
part of her possessions) except with the permission of her
husband.”

In another version, “It is not permissible for a woman to be
in charge of any of her property if her husband has the full

279. Scholars deduced from this hadith that fifteen is the age limit between
childhood and manhood, and that anyone who has not attained the age
of fifteen, is not allowed to be in charge of his money or make any busi-
ness dealings.

321

ربلوغ المرام).
right to divorce her.” Related by Ahmad and the authors of
the Sunan except for At-Tirmidhi. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

5م ‎SKA gf and by‏ - رَضي الله 5 - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولْ اللّه ‎Soo‏

895. Qabisah bin Mukhariq (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 3 said, “Asking for (the money of) Zakéh, is justi-
fied only for the following three: first, a man who is in
debt, it is then permissible for him to receive [Zakah] until
his difficulty is resolved; second, a man who was struck by
calamity which destroyed his holdings, which also makes it
permissible for him to receive [Zakéh] until he is in a posi-
tion to earn his own sustenance; and third, a man who has
been reduced to poverty and three persons of caliber from
among his people testify to his desperate situation, will re-
ceive until he finds for himself a means of support.” Related
by Muslim.

280. Imam al-Khattabi said that this is not an obligation on the woman, rath-
er it is just preferable due to the joint life between them to take his
permission, or that this is only relevant to a woman who has not reach-
ed puberty. This is supported by the Hadith, which relates that the Pro-
phet 2% said to the women (on the Day of al-Ad-ha), “Give Charity”,

and the women straight away started to throw their jewelry to the Pro-

phet 38, whether ear-rings, rings etc and Bilal was collecting them in his,
garment, and this is considered as giving of their property without the
permission of the husband, and this is the opinion of the scholars,

322

Chapter VI: Reconciliation

896. “Amro bin ‘Auf al-Muzani (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 said, “Reconciliation is permissible betw-
een Muslims, except one which makes something that is
lawful (Halal) as unlawful, or makes something which is
unlawful (Haram) as lawful. Muslims are to adhere to their
terms (conditions) save a term that permits something
which is unlawful (Haram) or prohibits something which is
lawful (Halal).” Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it as Sahih,
but scholars disagreed with him because the narration of Kathir
bin ‘Abdullah bin “Amro bin ‘Auf is weak. Perhaps at-Tirmidhi
considered it reliable as it was narrated through many chains of
narrators.

. - ‏عَلْهُ‎ Ss Uh ya - 5 ‏من حَدِيث أبي‎ » OG Le Wy nay

897. Ibn Hibban rendered it as a Hadith Sahih on the autho-
rity of Aba Hurairah,

898. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “No one should prevent his neighbor from fixing
a wooden peg in his wall.” Aba Hurairah then said (to his com-
panions), ‘Why do I find you averse to it? By Allah, I will always

323
keep narrating it to you (to remind you of this hadith).’ Agreed

upon.
‏قَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ : 8 - ee - ‏وَعَنْ أبي حْمَيْد التاعدي‎ 8
ee ll ‏و ليب‎ eh fe

ol feet: ‏وَلْحَكم‎ OE By)

899. Abd Hamid as-Sé’idi (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah said, “No Muslim has the right to take his (Muslim)
brother's stick except with his willing permission.” Related
by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim,

‎OU‏ الْحَوَالَة وَالصّمَان

‎Chapter VII: Hiwélah (Transferring the Right
to Collect a Debt) and Daman
(Guaranteeing Payment)

‎900. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “Lingering in repaying due debts by a wealthy
person is an act of injustice. And if one of you is referred to
a wealthy person (i.e. his debt is transferred to that person to
pay it on his behalf}, he should accept it” Agreed upon.

‎324
وَسَلمَ معن لقرم ‎eshte‏ قل ‎hes‏
‎f‏ « وَصَّخَّحَهُ ان ‎Oe‏ » وَالْحَاكمٌ .

dy « 3515 fly » Sas Fry,

901. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘A man from among us died, so we
made Ghusl for him and shrouded him, and we brought him to the
Prophet 38, and said, ‘Shall we offer the funeral prayer (Jandézah)
for him? Allah's Messenger #8 made a few steps forward and then
said, “Is he in debt?” We replied, ‘Yes, two Dinars (that he owes
to somebody).’ The Messenger of Allah #8 then turned away, but
Abii Qatédah took upon himself the responsibility to pay the debt.
We then went back to the Prophet #8 and Aba Qatadah said, ‘I sh-
all pay the two Dinars.’ The Messenger of Allah 38 thereupon said,

“Are you taking the responsibility of paying the creditor
his rights? In that case the dead will be free from this obli-
gation” Aba Qatadah said, ‘Yes’ The Messenger of Allah 3 then
offered the funeral prayer for the deceased. Related by Ahmad,
Aba Dawéd and An-Nas@i. Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as
Sahih.

fh fe ‏على = أن وول لله‎ th ‏رضي‎ - SE ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ any

Alby B35 thy ‏مَات‎ Sin :

902. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘Whenever a man, who
had died while being in debt was brought to Allah’s Messenger 32,
he would ask, ‘Has he left anything to repay his debt? If he
was told that he had left something to repay his debts, he would

lead the funeral prayer for him, otherwise he would say, “Offer
the funeral prayer for your brother.” When Allah guaranteed

His Messenger #¥ wealth through conquests, he said,“I am closer
to the believers than themselves, so if a Muslim dies while

325
in debt, I am responsible for the repayment of his debt.”
Agreed upon.

In a version by Al-Bukhari, “Whoever dies without leaving
anything to pay his debt, I am responsible ...”

on the authority of his grandfather, that the Messenger of Allah

32 said, “No guarantee (i.e. guaranteeing another’s appearance)
is accepted in prescribed punishments.” Related by Al-Baih-
agi with a weak chain of narrators.

Chapter IX: Partnership and Agency

: pe Rios «548 fg) eae Cd
904. Abi Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‘id, “Allah, the Most High says, I am the third
(partner) of two partners as long as one of them does not
betray the other; if they betray (each other), I shall depart
from them.”Related by Aba Dawéd. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih

Gyo SY oly ‏أَحْمَدُ‎ ary,

905. As-Sa’ib Al-MakhzGmt (RAA) narrated that he was the
partner of the Prophet ‏عل‎ before the Message. On the Day of the
Conquest of Makkah, the Prophet “& said (to him), “Welcome my

326
brother and my partner.” Related by Ahmad, Aba Dawid and
Ibn Majah.

od ay. ‏الْحَديث‎ a hl

906. “Abdullah Tbn Mas‘id (RAA) narrated, ‘Ammar, 520 and
I agreed to become partners in whatever we obtained from the war
booties on the Day of Badr.” Related by An-Nasa’i.

Be - eye Jas ahh ‏رضي‎ - due ‏جَابر بن‎ bey ay

SIIB ‏رَوَاهُ أبُو‎ .4
907. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘I intended to go to

Khaibar, so I went to the Prophet ‏يك‎ (to tell him) and he said to
me, “If you meet my agent (who collects the Zakith property) at
Khaibar, take fifteen Awsug from him.” Related by Aba Daw-
ad who graded it as Sahth.

908. “Urwah al-Barigi (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 gave him a Dinar to buy him a sacrificial animal or sheep
(refer to hadith no. 839.) Related by Al-Bukhari

327
pe ply oe hh ath se ‏حابر - رضي الله‎ ya.
aol ». 3th a ge - Ce ‏أترّ‎

Gh AE
910. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of

Allah 38 sacrificed sixty-three (camels) and ordered ‘Ali to slaugh-
ter the rest (refer to hadith 760)’ Related by Muslim.

عه اتسيف ‎ee‏ لل
أمرأة ‎Ba La og « a‏ .» الْحَدِيث . ‎Me BE‏

ets fa)
‏يا نس عَلَى‎ 2b »
911. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated with relevance to the sto-

ry of the hired slave (who committed adultery with the wife of his
master), “Go Unais to the wife of this (man, i.e. the master)

and if she confesses (that she has committed adultery),
then stone her to death.’ Agreed upon.

باب الإفْرَارٍ

Chapter X: Confession

. ‏من حُديث طويل‎ Ot GE th OF ‏«قل الْحَقّ وَلَوْ‎ : gly,
912. Abd Dharr (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said to me, “Say the truth no much how bitter it is.” Rela-
ted by Ibn Hibban as a part of a long Hadith and graded it as
Sahih.

Chapter XI: Al-‘Ariya (Lending something For use)

ploy dle ‏الله‎ fe ‏الله‎ 05 UU WE ‏ندب‎ ae

. pS od ‏وَصَّحّحَهُ‎ » BAG SLAY, «ihe S Cielo ah >

913, Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated that the Messen-
328
ger of Allah ‏يك‎ said, “The hand (the person) which borrowed
bears responsibility for the taken item, until it is retur-
ned.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. Al-Hakim graded it
as Sahih.

geo ‏قَالَ 05 الله‎ OG - 2 jus ain ‏رضي‎ -
2 fh ‏الأمائة إلى من‎ Shy : phy ie ‏الله‎

‎ye GLEN‏ دَاوْدَ ‎Stl Bios ES‏ » وا

‎914, Ab@ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

‎lah 3 said, “Render back the trusts to those who trusted

‎you, and do not betray those who betrayed you.” Related by
‘At Tirmidhi and Abd Dawad who graded it as Hasan..

‎hes ‏قَالَ : قَالَ لي‎ - ke for th ‏رضي‎ - Sty Lis; - 6

‎«ates OSE ‏أثثلك رُسْلي فَأَغْطهمْ‎ bp :

‎tne

‏:يا رَسُولَ

‎SEG WARE ‏غَاريَةٌ‎ lm UE ‏مُْدّةُ ؟‎ ET Ws Heh ‏الله‎

‎OE ‏وَصّحَّحَهُ ابن‎ lay » ‏داود‎ hy
915. Ya‘li bin Umaiyah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 said to me, “When my messengers come to you, give
them thirty coats of mail.” I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Is it

‎a lent item with a guarantee of its return (Madménah),2*! or just

‎a lent item that will be returned (Mu’addah) (in this case he is not
financially liable for its loss or destruction.’ The Messenger of Al-

‎lah 3 said, “No, it is a lent item that will be returned.” 2

‎281- For which he(the person lent to) is financially liable if it is destroyed due
to negligence or being used for other than what the lender permitted.

‎282- Some scholars take this hadith as evidence that the person who borrows
an item for a certain period of time is not financially liable for its destr-
uction but is only responsible to give it back as long as it is safe. But
‘most scholars are of the opinion that if a lent item is lost or destroyed
due to misuse then the person who borrowed it must pay its price which
is the -Ariya Madmanah.

Related by Ahmad, Aba Dawid and An-Nasa’i. Ibn Hibbén graded
it as Sahi

916. Safwan bin Umaiyah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of
Allah 3% borrowed coats of mail from him on the Day of Hunain.
Safwan asked him, ‘Are you taking them by force O Muhammad?’

‘The Messenger of Allah 2 replied, “No, it is a loan with a guar-
antee of its return (Madmiinah).” Related by Aba Dawid,
Ahmad and An-Nasa’i. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

. - ge ‏رضي اله‎ - yey ‏ع‎ iis ‏وَأَخرَجَ لَهُ شّاهدًا‎ ayy

917. AlHakim narrated a similar hadith on the authority of
Ibn “Abbas (RAA).

Chapter XI: Ghasb (The return of wrongfally
taken property)

أن يسول الله ل ‎ty‏

918, Sa’id bin Zaid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3§ said, “Whoever usurps even one span of anyone’s
land, his neck will be encircled with it down the seven ear-
ths on the Day of Judgment.” Agreed upon.

SASS Way Le

919. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘While The Messenger of Allah 3
was with one of his wives, one of the mothers of the believers (ie.
one of his wives) sent a bow! containing some food with a servant

of hers. The wife (in whose house the Messenger of Allah 28 was
sitting) struck the bowl with her hand and broke it. The Prophet
collected the shattered pieces and put the food back in it and said
to them, “Eat.” The Messenger of Allah then gave another unbro-
ken bow! to the servant and kept the broken one.’ Related by Al-
Bukhari and At-Tirmidhi, who mentioned that the one who broke
the bowl was ‘A’ishah(RAA). He also added in his version, ‘and the

Messenger of Allah 3¥ said, “Food for food and a bowl for a
bowl.”

َلَيْسَ لَهُ ‎Wo‏

وله ‎ay, ts‏ أَحْمَدُ

af
ed

920. Rafi’ bin Khadij (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “If anyone sows in other people’s land without
their permission, he has no right to any of the crop, but he
may get back what it cost him.” Related by Ahmad, and the
four Imams except for An-Nas@’i. At-Tirmidhi graded it as Hasan.

- رَضي ‎Sh‏ عَنْهُمَا - قَالَ
رَسُول الله صل ‎Jed os Op : ey ae th‏ رَسُول الله صتلى الله

wal ‏مر‎ hs ‏قَالَ‎

‎oly de‏ في ‎GS UBT Ue «pif‏ تعنلا » وَالأرْضُ ‎ead AW‏ رَسُوا

‎331
HS ‏يطرج‎ OF a ‏صاحب‎ aly Gentil ‏بالأرضٍ‎ pl ie ‏الل‎ Gi ‏الله‎

AE ES Cage WP) ‏حَقٌ».‎ pb Sal te : a8;

921. ‘Urwah bin Az-Zubair (RAA) narrated, ‘A man from the
Companions of the Prophet 3¥ said, ‘Two men came to the Prophet
disputing over a piece of land, in which one of them had planted
palm-trees and the land belonged to the other.’ The Prophet ‏يك‎
‎judged that the land belonged to its original owner and comman-

ded the other to take out his palm-trees (which he planted unju-
stly), and said, “No right pertains to the one who plants the

land of others wrongfully.”* Related by Aba Dawéd with a

good chain of narrators,

BEG » ‏عروَة » عَنْ سَعيدٍ بن رَيْدِ‎ My ‏من‎ gh Otel ‏عند‎ Set — ayy

oh

في وصلله ‎SC‏ و

922. The quoted part of the aforementioned Hadith, is also

related by the authors of the Sunan on the authority of Urwah
bin Sa‘id bin Zaid.

‎de els ;‏ في
‎Aba Bakrah (RAA) narrated that. the Messenger of ‘Allah‏ .923

‎3% said in the Sermon of the Farewell Pilgrimage at Mina, “O
people! Surely, your blood and property are inviolable un-
til you meet your Lord, as the inviolability of this day and
this month in this land.” Agreed upon.

‎283. He either takes out what he cultivated or takes the amount that he
spent on it.

‎332
Chapter XII: Ash-Shufah (Preempting
the sale of a co-owner’s Share to another)

ahi ‏رَسُولُ‎ cabs : ‏قَالَ‎ -

َقَعَت الْحُدُودُ » ‎Silo‏

wee eal «die Ba ‏فلا‎ thn

924, Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 3 decreed the right of preemption (to the partner) in every
joint property (i.e. which is not clearly divided between partners),
but if the boundaries of the property were demarcated or the ways
and roads were fixed, then there is no preemption.’ Agreed upon
and the wording is from Al-Bukhar’’.

حَائط ء لا ‎gy. ae‏ لفط ‎Vs‏ يحل أن ‎aed‏

925. In Muslim’s version, ‘Preemption is applicable in every
joint property, whether land, a dwelling or a garden. It is not valid
‏صف‎ another version ‘it is not lawful- for the partner to sell his
share before informing his partner.

HES, OG ‏وَصحّحَهُ ان‎ BO OG,

وَعَنْ أس بن مالك قَالَ

Guu Bef ian Jie»

926. Anas bin Malik narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said,“The neighbor of the house is the one who has the most
right to buy it.” Related by An-Nasa’i, Ibn Hibban graded it as
Sahth, but it has a defected chain of narrators.

333
ole th ‏قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلَى‎ : gu - te ‏الله‎ oy -

‎ary‏ وَعَنْ أبي رافع

‎Belly‏ بصّقبه». ‎i AS OSE‏ وَالْحَاكمٌ » رَفيه قصّة

‎927. Abd Rafi’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “The neighbor has more right than any one else beca-
use of his nearness.” Related by Al-Bukhari and al-Hakim.

‎- ‏حابر‎ ey ava

‎Come

‏طَرِيقْهُمًا وَاحد». رَوَاهُ أَحْمّدُ » ‎AG Wy‏

‎928. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “The neighbor has the most right to the preemption of
his neighbor's property. He should be waited for (before sel-
ling it)even if he was absent, when the two properties share
the same road.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams with a
reliable chain of narrators.

‎TES ‏َال : «الشقعةُ‎ hy

‎aya‏ ور اسن ‎Ae‏ عَنِ الي ‎she‏ الله
العقال». ‎NMS,‏ وا

‏شَفَعَة لقائب». وَإِسْنَادُهُ ‎Lae‏

‏لبَرَارُ » وَزَادَ : «وا
‎Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .929

‎38 said, “The right of the neighbor for preemption is similar
to loosening a strap.” Related by Ibn Majah and Al-Bazzar

‎who added, “There is no preemption for one who is absent.”
But it is narrated through a weak chain of narrators.

‎284- The Prophet 3& is drawing a parallel between the two cases. When the
strap of the camel is loosened it flees immediately, the same applies if
the neighbor does not hurry to buy the property which is on sale, then
his right to buy it will be lost just as fast as the running of the camel
But this Hadith is

‎334
ah OU
Chapter XIV: Al-Qiréd (Financing a
Profit -sharing venture)

| ‏أن ال صل‎ : - He ho - HS i -

‎caput « yal ee AY Lb‏ ,ولط الي بالشّمر للبئْت » لآ

‎«cia Ay HE GNA eg

‎930. Suhaib (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said,“There are three things which are blessed, selling with

‎a postponed credit,2% Mugaradah,?*6 and mixing wheat and

‎barley for one’s household and not for sale.” Related by Ibn
‘Majah with a weak chain of narrators.

‎BN de bs ‏كان‎ Gy : - ‏عَلهُ‎ Di a5 - ‏بن حرَامٍ‎ pS ‏وَعَنْ‎ 9 0

‏« عن ‎of cp le of Stl‏ ُو

‎Bip ‏وَهْرَ‎ eats en Of ‏عَلَى‎ OS ‏ِنّهُ عَملَ في مَال‎
931. Hakim bin ‏صسقعن8‎ (RAA) narrated that he used to say

‎that if he gives money to someone by way of Mugdradah; ‘You
should not trade with my money in living beings, do not transport
it by sea, and do not come down with it into the bottom of a river
hed. If you do any of these acts, you should guarantee to return me
my money.’ Related by Ad-Daraqutni. Malik said in al-Muwatta’
on the authority of al-’Ala' bin “Abdur-Rahman bin Ya‘qab on the
authority of his father on the authority of his grandfather that he

‎285- Which will be paid for at a later specified time. It is blessed as it gives
the buyer a chance to pay for his goods(which he already received), when
his money is available.

‎286- Giving someone money with which to do business, on the basis that the
provider takes a percentage of the profit.

‎335
traded with some property belonging ‏ما‎ Uthméan on the condition
that the profit would be divided in halves between both of them.
This is Hadith Sahih and Mawqif

Chapter XV: Musaqah (Watering grapes or dates
for part of the crop) and Ijarah
(A Contract for Hire or Lease (

932, Ibn “Umar (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 made a deal with the people of Khaibar (the Jews) that they
would have half the fruit and vegetation of the land they cultiva-
ted (in return for their work on it), Agreed upon.

In another version by Al-Bukhari and Muslim, "They requested the

Messenger of Allah 3 to let them stay there on the condition that
they would cultivate it and take half of the fruit. The Messenger of
Allah 38 told them, “We will let you stay on this condition, as
long as we wish,” They stayed there until ‘Umar (RAA) deported
them.

In a version by Muslim, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 handed over
to the Jews of Khaibar the palm-trees and its land on the condi-

tion that they should cultivate it with their own wealth (providing
seeds ete..) and take half of its fruit.”

336
‎geo‏ ديج
كان الا يُوَاجيُون
تء ‎JEG‏ الْحَداول »

‏ا هنا ملك جر ‎pyle Os OG te‏ مَضْمُونُ فلا يَأ به .

‎PMNS ‏نْ‎ gett ‏إطلاق‎ 5

‎983, Hanzalah bin Qais (RA) narrated, 1 asked Rafi’ bin
Khudaij about letting out land for gold and silver.’ Rafi’ replied,
‘There is no harm in doing that, people used to rent land during

‎the lifetime of the Prophet 38 for what grew by the streamlets or
by the beginning or end of water canals, or for something from the
crops. But sometimes, one portion of the product would be destro-
yed while the other would be saved, whereas (on other occasions)
this portion was saved and the other was destroyed and thus no
rent was payable to the people (who let out the lands) but for this
one (which was saved). It was due to this that he (the Holy Pro-

‎phet 38) prohibited it, unless the land was let out for something,
which is well known and reliable to be paid(such as money or som-
ething of known value) there is no harm in it’ Related by Muslim.

‎of Allah 32 prohibited Muzéra ‘ah’? and commanded that people
should be employed for a known wage. Related by Muslim.

‏الذي حَحَمَهُ ‎Oe aE‏ حَرَامًا لَمْ ُغطه». ‎GI ay,‏

‎287- Sharecropping, which means to farm someone's land for a share of the
harvest.

‎337,
935, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 38
had himself cupped and gave the one who cupped him his wages,
and if this pay was prohibited he would not have given it to him’
Related by Al-Bukhari.

9 - وَعَن راقع أن ديج - رضي لل غلا - فال : قال رول الله تل الله

‎pl Coss hy le‏ حبيث». رَوَاهُ مثلم

‎936. Rafi’ bin Khadij (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 said, ‘The earnings of the cupper are impure(but not
prohibited).” Related by Muslim.

‎a ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ ary

‏4 سل د

‎937. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

‎lah 38 said, ‘Allah, Glorified be He said, “Three persons are
My adversary on the Day of Resurrection: a man who gave
a promise in My Name then did not carry it out; a person
who sold a free man and took the price; and a man who
hired a servant and after using his services, did not give
him his wages.” Related by Muslim,

‎988. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that ans ‏د‎ of Allah
& said,“The thing which is most worthy for talking payment
is the Book of Allah.” Related by Al-Bukhari

‎288- Taking payment for teaching others (children or otherwise) how to recite
it, help in memorizing ete.

‎338
- قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎ho‏ الله
حبر ‎ORT‏ قَبْلَ أن ‎Lin!‏ عَرَقَهُ». ‎EN SG‏
‎Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .939
‎said, “Give a hired person his fees before his sweat dries‏

up.” Related by Ibn Majah.

940, 941, Aba 81214 and al-Baihagi transmitted something to
the same effect as the above on the authority of Aba Hurairah and
At-Tabardni on the authority of Jabir but they are all weak.

سي ل نه ‎Ba‏

Eas ‏وَفيه‎ » SIE 155 .»

Ge

942. Abd Sa’id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah ‏يك‎ said, “He who hires a person should inform him
of his pay.” Related by ‘Abdur-Raziq but with a disconnected
chain of narrators.

‎sy‏ الْمَوَات
‎Chapter XVI: Cultivation of a Barren Land‏
‎(making it fertile)‏

‎943, “Urwah narrated on the authority of “A’ishah (RAA) that

‎‘Allah’s Messenger 3 said, “He who cultivates land that does
not belong to anybody has more right to it than anybody

‎339
else (i.e. to own it).” ‘Urwah said, “Umar gave the same verdict
during his Caliphate. Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎3B 4‏ سعيد إن ريد - رَطبِي
‎YS Ey : OG‏ هئ ‎GA ag. ug Wd‏ » وَقَالَ : روي

‎any ١ ‏بْنُ عُمْرَ » وَالرَاِحَحْ‎ alte ‏وَقيل‎
‎944. 85550 bin Zaid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “He who cultivates a barren land (makes it

‎fertile), it belongs to him.” Related hy the three Imams. At-
Tirmidbi graded it as Hasan

‎die tn Lo at cat
. ‏إلا لله وَلرَسُوله». رَوَاهُ البُخَارَي‎

‏عبس ‎OF‏ المكعْب بْنَ ‎Ra‏ |

‎ose 6‏ اب

‎er Yo : ‏قال‎ by
945. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that as-Sa’b bin Jath-thamah

‎“No Himé? except

‎al-Laithi told him that the Prophet 3% said,
for Allah and His Messenger 38.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎: play ele th ‏فال : فَالَ 05 الله صلَّى‎ ae Sue th ‏رضي‎ he -

‎Ge Ny ‏ضَرَرَ 45 ضرَارَ» رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ‎ Wo
946. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎239. A Himé is an area in which grazing is only restricted —unjustly- to a
certain person who prohibited others from entering it or letting their
animals graze in it. They used to practice this in Jéhiliyah by letting a
dog bark on a high land, and as far as his barking is heard, is considered
a Himé for this person. The Messenger of Allah 38 prohibited this and
only allowed it for the Imam or the ruler of the Muslims, who ean make
an area of land as Himé for a purpose, which he considers to be benefi-
cent for the Muslims such as making it a Himd for the grazing of the
camels of Zakah. This Hadith prohibits taking a Hima by anybody exce-
pt as that which the Messenger of Allah 38 took as Hlimd ie. it is only
the right of the Imm or ruler of the Muslims. “Umar bin al-Khattéb
(RAA) made places called ar-Rabadha and ash-Sharaf ‏فصن‎ for grazing
the animals of Zak,

‎340
38 said,“(One may) neither initiate harm(to himself or towards
others) nor reciprocate (their actions) by harming (them).”
Related by Ahmad and Ibn Majah.

947. Malik transmitted a similar tradition on the authority of
Aba Sa‘id

948. Samurah bin Jundub(RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “Whoever surrounds a barren land with a
wall, it belongs to him.” Related by Aba Dawéd. Ibn al-Garad
graded it as Sahih,

8 وَعَنْ عَبدالله إن
له أربعُونَ ‎as‏

949. “Abdullah bin Mughaffal (RA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 3 said, “Whoever digs a well (in a barren land
which does not belong to anybody) he is entitled to get forty
cubits (a cubit is 0.58 m in Egypt) of this land as a resting
place for his cattle near the water.” Related by Ibn Majah
with a weak chain of narrators.

950. “Algamah bin Wail narrated on the authority of his ‘tath-

er that the Messenger of Allah 38 assigned him a piece of land in
Hadramit. Related by Abi Dawdd and At-Tirmidhi,

341
951. Ton ‘Umar (RA) narrated that the Messenger of of Allah
38 assigned Az-Zubair the size of land his horse could cover at a
run. So he made his horse run and when it stopped he threw down

his whip. The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “Give him a piece of
land up to the point where his whip has reached.” Related
by Aba Dawid but he rated it as weak.

‎ae‏ وَعَنْ 5 ‎Gy‏ الصّحَابَة - رضي الله

‎wat «98h ‏ثلاثة في‎ BAe Ltd

‎te ‏دَاوُدَ » وَرّجَالَهُ‎ tf ly

‎952. A man from the Companions of the Prophet 38 said, I

‎went on an expedition with the Prophet 32, and I heard him say,
“People are partners in three (things): herbage, water and
fire.” Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawid with a reliable chain of
narrators.

‎alae AES‏ جَارِية » أو
‎qe‏ يَدْعُو ‎oth‏ رَوَاهُ مُسلمٌ .
‎Abd Hurairah (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-‏ .953

‎lah 38 said, “When a person dies, (the reward of) his deeds
stops except for three: “A perpetual Sadaqah (Sadaqah
Jériyah), knowledge from which benefit is (continuously)
gained, or a pious child who is invoking Allah for him.”
Related by Muslim.

‎342
954. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated, “Umar got some land in Kh-

aibar and he went to the Prophet 38 to consult with him about it.
He said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I got some land in Khaibar more
valuable and precious to me than any other property I ever had.’

The Messenger of Allah 3 said to him, “If you wish you can
give the land as endowment (wagf) and give its fruit in
charity.” So, ‘Umar gave it in charity as an endowment (wagf) on
the condition that the land would not be sold, inherited or given
away as a gift. Its yield would be given in charity to the poor, rela-
tives, for the emancipation of slaves, for the Cause of Allah (ie.
Jihéd), to travelers and guests; and that there would be no harm
if the guardian of the endowment ate from it according to his need
but with moderation, and to give a friend food to eat provided he is
not storing it (the fruit) for the future (i.e. he should not own any
of its benefits).’ Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

A version by al-Bukhari has: ‘He gave it as Sadaqah that must
not be sold (as it is not permitted to sell the wag/) or gifted but its
yield must be spent (as Sadaqah)

ده — وَعن ‎1B‏ - رضي لل ‎je‏ غلا -
‎i‏ د . وفيه : ‎Bi We thy‏

955. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
343
38 sent ‘Umar (RAA) to collect Zakah...."As for Khalid he has
retained his coats of mail and weapons (as endowment) to
use them in Allah’s Cause.” Agreed Upon.

By sally ‏الهبة,‎ OU
Chapter XVIII: Gifts, '‘Umra™ (Life-Tenancy)
and Ruqbé

هر ن ‎OOS‏ إن تشير ‎AWS‏ به سول الله ‎fe‏ الل عله ‎hes‏

:كي لحل في ‎CRIES‏ َال وول لله على لل ‎ale‏

956. An-Nu‘man bin Al-Bashir narrated that his father took

him to the Prophet ‏عله‎ and said, ‘I have given this son of mine a

slave who belonged to me.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 asked him,
“lave you given all your sons the same (gift)?” He replied,

‘No’ The Prophet 3 said, “Then take back your gift.”
In another version, My father hurried to the Prophet 3 to ask

him to be witness on my gift. The Prophet 3§ asked him, “Have

290- ‘Umré means that a man gives another man a house and says to him, ‘T
give it to you to live in as long as you live,’ and is considered a gift.
Rugbé literally means watching for, it means that a man gives a house
to another man and says to him. ‘ITI die first, then itis yours, and if you
die first it is mine’ So it is called Rugba because each of them is
watching for the death of the other. Therefore it is disliked as each of
the two men hope for the death of the other, but Islam stopped this
practiee as it considers Rugba a permanent gift that will be inherited by
the heirs of the one it is given to.

344
you done the same with all your children (i.c. have you given

cach of them the same gift?) He replied, ‘No.’ The Prophet 4 said,
“Fear Allah and be just with your children.’ My father then
returned and took back his gift.’ Agreed upon.

In a narration by Muslim, the Messenger of Allah 4 said, “Let
someone else be witness to this (gift).” He then said to him,
“Would you like them to treat you well equally?” Nu’man

said, ‘Yes.’ The Prophet #8 then said, “Don’t do it then.”

Me ‏دحم في‎
957. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3S said, “The one who seeks to take back his gift (which he
has already given) is like a dog which swallows its vomit.”2"
Agreed upon.

In a version by Al-Bukhari, “A bad example is not considered
one of us, He who takes back his gift is like a dog that swal-
lows its vomit?

958. Ibn ‘Umar and Ton “Abbas narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 3% said, “It is not lawful for a Muslim to give a gift to
someone and then take it back, except for a father concer-
ning what he gives his son (he can then take it back).” Related
by the four Imams and Ahmad. At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Hibbén and al-
Hakim graded it as Sahih.

201. This hadith is proof that taking back a gift, which has already been
given is absolutely prohibited exeept for the gift which is given by the
parent to his / her child.

345,
رضي اله ‎ei - Ye‏ : «كَانَ رَسُولُ الله ‎he‏ الله َيِه
ع سن ملعل ‎foe ee‏ 1 1
ل الْهديّة « ‎tele C8‏ رَوَاهُ ‎soe‏

959, “A’shah (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah’s Messenger 38 used to

accept presents and used to also give presents in return.’ Related
by Al-Bukhari,

. oe CA GS » ‏رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ‎

960, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘A man gave a she-camel as
a present to the Messenger of Allah 38, so he gave him something
in return for it and asked him, “Are you satisfied?” The man
replied, ‘No.’ The Prophet 3 then gave him more and asked again,
“Are you satisfied?” The man replied, ‘No.’ Again the Prophet ‏قل‎

gave him more and asked him, “Are you satisfied?” The man
replied, ‘Yes.’ Related by Ahmad. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎a8‏ لورئته»

‎961. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 28
said, ‘al- Umré belongs to the one to whom it is given.” Agre-
ed upon.

‎346
Muslim transmitted, “Keep your property for yourselves and
do not waste them away, for whoever gives ‘Umré (life-
tenancy)to anyone, it belongs to the one to whom it is given
both during his life, after his death and then to his descen-
dants.”

In another version, “The ‘Umra, which the Messenger of Allah 3
allowed (to be given to his descendants after his death) is the one
in which the one (who is giving away the property) says: ‘It is for
you and for your descendants.’ But if he says, ‘It is for you as long
as you live.’ It is returned to its original owner.

Ina version by Aba Dawid and An-Naséi,Do not give property
to others by way of Rugbé and ‘Umré for if anyone is given
either of them, the property goes to his heirs’

bo List

be. Saas. Sy fave oy

962. “Umar (RAA) narrated, I gave a horse ~in charity: to a
man to use in Jihad in the Cause of Allah. The man did not look
after it properly, and I thought he would sell it for a cheap price. I

asked the Messenger of Allah $8 about this (i.e. buying it myself).’
‘The Prophet 38 said to him, “You should not buy it, even if he

gave it to you for a Dirham (he should not take it back as he
gave it in charity and it is considered as a gift).” Agreed upon.

Roa ay ptt hy 0 ‏افد‎ ot Pree a)
963, Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 3§ said, “Exchange presents between yourselves as this
creates love between you.” Related by Al-Bukhari in his book
‘al-Adab al-Mufrad.’ Abd Yala with a good chain of narrators.

964. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 22 said
347
“Exchange presents between yourselves as this extra-cts
grudge gently(irom your hearts).” Related by Al-Bazzar with a
weak chain of narrators.

BE ‏فسن اة».‎ Sh GOW 5 OEY: ‏الْمُسْلمَات‎

965. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “O Muslim women! None of you should look
down upon the present sent by her (female) neighbor even
if it were the trotters of a sheep.” Agreed upon.

: JB ‏وَسَلُمَ‎ al

Seba ‏الْحَاكم‎

966. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “If anyone gives away a gift he is the one who has
most right to it as long as he was not given anything in
return.” Related by al-Hakim who graded it as S

at
Chapter XIX: Luqatah (Lost and found items)

ae ‏ف في الطَري‎ nd gles ey ‏قَالَ مد الي صَلَى‎ Te ‏بدو‎
‏لأكَمهاه‎ Bi ‏منّ‎ OSs of GEL JVs

967. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 2
passed by a fallen date in the street and said, “Were it not for
my doubt that this might have been given in charity, I

would have eaten it.”2°? Agreed upon.

292. It is well known that the Messenger of Allah 3 does not eat out of cha-
rity but would only eat what is given to him as a present.

348
968, Zaid bin Khalid al-Juhant narrated, ‘A man came to the
Prophet 38 and asked him about al-Lugatah (lost items found on

the ground and picked up by someone). The Prophet 3% said, “det-
ermine its container, and the string with which it is tied,
and then announce publicly for a year that it has been
found. If the owner shows up, give it to him, otherwise use
it as you like (as it has entered his possession). The man again

asked, ‘What about a lost sheep” The Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“It is for you, your brother or a wolf.” The man again said,

‘What: about a lost camel?” The Messenger of Allah ‏وك‎ said, “Why
should you take it as it has got its water container (its stom-
ach),and its hooves and it can reach the places of water and
can eat from the trees until its owner finds it?” Agreed upon.

‎go anes‏ لله

‎i>‏ آرى ‎٠ Bl IG Se 3 De‏ روا مُسْلمٌ

‎U6 - 25 th ‏رَضِي‎ - Ze 9

‎969, Zaid narrated that the Messenger of Allah 28 said, “He
who keeps a stray property (Iuqatah), he himself has gone
astray, unless he announces that he found it.” Related by
Muslim,

970. ‘Iyad bin Himar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said,“He who finds a lugatah should call two trusty
witnesses (to show them what he found) determine its contai-
ner, and the string with which it is tied, and he should not
conceal it or cover it up. If its owner shows up he is the one
who is entitled to take it back, otherwise it is the property
of Allah, which He gives to whom He wishes.” Related by Ah:
mad and the four ImAms except for At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Khuzaimah,
Ibn al-Garéd and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

971.

Messenger of Allah 38 prohibited picking up the Jugatah of the
pilgrims.’ Related by Muslim.

oh 132 te ty ‏من ال مُعاهد‎ tb

972. Al-Miqdam bin Ma‘diakrib (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 8 said, “It is not lawful to eat predatory wild
animals that prey with fangs, or a domestic ass, and it is
not lawful to keep the lugatah of one who has been given a
covenant (by Muslims) unless he disposes of it.” Related by
Aba Dawid.

باب القن انض
‎Chapter XX: Inheritance‏

973. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah.
350
38 said, “Give the shares ordained (by Allah) to their rightful
heirs, Whatever is left after that goes to the nearest male
heir (to the deceased).” Agreed upon.

974. Usdmsh bin Zaid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “A Muslim is not to inherit a disbeliever and a
disbeliever is not to inherit a Muslim.” Agreed upon.

975. Ibn Mas’dd (RAA) narrated concerning the inheritance
of a daughter, a son's daughter (granddaughter) and a sister, sur-

viving the deceased. The Prophet 3 ordained that the daughter's
share is one half, the son’s daughter is one-sixth and whatever
remains is the sister's.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎ofa ts an‏ - رضي ‎Wyte tht‏ قال

‎suit, gy ‏لشت‎

‏َيَاهُ أَحْمَدُ
39

‎ea A Toa je

‎976, “Abdullah Ibn “Umar (AA) narrated that the Messenger

‎of Allah 3 said,“The followers of two different religions may
not inherit from each other.” Related by Ahmad, the four Ima-
ms and At-Tirmidhi.

‎bi

| ‏رَصّحُحَهُ‎ BY UE ‏رَوَاهُ‎ . »

«إنّ ‎ALU‏ الآعتر

977. ‘Imran bin Husain (RAA) narrated, ‘A man came to the
Prophet 38 and said, ‘My son's son has died. What is my share

from his inheritance?’ The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “You get
one sixth.” When the man turned away, the Messenger of Allah

& called him and said, “You are entitled to another sixth.’25

Ny

When the man turned away, the Messenger of Allah 38 called him
and said, “The other sixth is an extra allowance (to what is
ordained for you). Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-
Tirmidht graded it as Sahih.
ele ‏الله‎ Le ‏«أن لبي‎ : - eee tn ay - ‏عَنْ أبيه‎ BE ‏ابن‎ ges
try 595 tg) Gh WS LS a tt
. ‏الجَارُود» وَكَهُ ابن عدي‎ ea

978. Ibn Buraidah (RAA) narrated on the authority of his
father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah #8 appointed a sixth to
the grandmother if no mother was left to inherit with her.”Related

by Aba Dawéd and An-Nas@’i. Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn al-Garad
graded it as Safi

AVA

ab js Ley

OM aay

203- ‘The deceased in this case left two daughters and his father surviving
him, The two daughters are entitled to 2/3 of the estate. The remaining
third will be given to the grandfather, but his prescribed share is only
one sixth and the other sixth will be given back to him as there are no
other heirs. In this case the grandfather is considered to be ‘Asabah,
which refers to the relatives of the deceased on his father’s sido. They
are entitled to take the rest of the estate after the fixed (prescribed)
shares are distribu-ted, which applies to this case. The Messenger of
Allah 3% wanted to teach the man that his prescribed share is only one
sixth and not one third. That is why he gave him one sixth when he
asked about his inheritance, and then called him again and told him
that this other sixth is an extra amount to his share as itis given back
to him for being‘Asabah in the absence of any other heirs.

352
. ‏حبَّان‎ Ey «(SG Sy «sth ‏ة‎

979, Al-Miqdam bin Ma’diakrib (RAA) narrated that the Mes-
senger of Allah 38 said, “The maternal uncle is the inheritor
of those who have no (standard) heirs.” Related by Ahmad

and the four Imams except for At-Tirmidhi. Aba Zar‘ah ar-Razi
graded it as Hasan, but al-Hakim and Ibn Hibban graded it as

SS : Si - thy os - Je ‏أتائة بن‎ Ny ty ‏هه‎
‎: ‏قال‎ ele} «

وَارِتُ ‎ayy «il “By Veg‏ أَحْمَدُ

- رَضِي الله ‎ed 5 oF - ge‏ اله

a
‏و‎ TUE Se diy by
3 WS » 56 ‏سوّى أبي‎ anh
980. Aba Umamah bin Sahl (RAA) narrated, “Umar wrote to

Aba ‘Ubaidah (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, “Allah
and His Messenger are the guardians of the one who does
not have a guardian; and a maternal uncle inherits from
the one who does not have any (standard) heirs.” Related by
Ahmad and the four Imams except for Abi Dawdd. At-Tirmidhi
graded it as Hasan and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sa.

3 ain ‏رضي‎ - fo ‏وَعَنْ‎ 41
‏«إذًا انهل الْمَولُودُ وَرث»‎
981. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎

said, “As soon as the infant cries (at the moment of birth) it

is entitled to inherit.” Related by Ab Dawad. Ibn Hibban gra-
ded it as Sahth.

Oe NRG » 545 ‏ل أبُو‎

291. In this case the deceased has no‘Asabah (relatives on his father's side)
and no other heirs who are entitled to obligatory shares.

295. When the heir of someone who died is expecting a child, the estate is not,
to be divided until the child is born.

353

en ‏(بلوغ‎
‎gl gb ey AY‏ عيب » عَنْ أبيه » عَنْ بد

‏قَالَ 5 325 صَلّى
‎oll chy:‏ من ‎ego ete‏ روا ‎YC‏ وَالدارقْطيُ »

‎. ‏عَلَى عَمْرو‎ tai Lagat, » ‏النَسَائيُ‎ Meh, » we ‏ائنُ‎ ay

‎982. “Amro bin Shu‘aib narrated on the authority of his father

‎on the authority of his grandfather that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “A killer does not receive (a share of the) inheritance
(of the one he killed).” Related by An-Nasa’t and Ad-Daraqutni.

‎6 = 46 ‏الله‎ os - bes oj ‏6ه وَعَنْ‎

‎ih Fuh ‏ما أَحرَرَ‎ « : Oe ples ob ‏صَلّى الله‎

‏رَوَاه آبو دَاوْدَ ‎Ag BEB‏ 2 بن

‎ka‏ رَسُولَ اللّه

‎983. “Umar bin al-Khattab (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Mes-
senger of Allah 3# say, “Whatever rights gained by the father
or child (meaning al-Wala") are to be transferred to his ‘As-
abah (relatives on his father’s side) regardless of their degree
of kinship” (meaning that loyalty is not inherited and does not

‎follow the rules of inheritance).”Related by Aba Dawad, An-Nasa’t
and Ibn Majah. Ibn al-Madini and Tbn “Abdul Barr graded it as
Sahih.

‎toy‏ عَبْدالله ‎Sab of‏ - رضي ‎Stas Ain‏ عَنهُمَا - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ اللّه

‏السب » لآ يناع ولا ‎Sg‏

‎296- Wala’ refers to the right of inheriting the property of a manumitted sla-
ve after his death, The one who has the right to inherit him is the one
who manumitted him. In Jéhifiyah; before Islam, they used to sell this
Wala’ or give it asa gift but Iskim prohibited this.

‎297- Most scholars are of the opinion that Wald’ is not part of the inheritance
of the deceased. For example if a man manumitted a slave, and he has
two sons, and one of his sons had a child and then died. If the manumit-
ter dies, the Wala’ of the manumitted stave (his inheritance) goes to his
son alone and is not to be shared between the son and the grandson as
would be in the ease of inheritance. This means that Wala’ is the right of
the closest “Asabah of the deceased and not to be distributed as part of
his inheritance.

‎354
روه فخا بسن طم ‎Gat‏ عَنْ ‎tall ga‏ عَنْ أبي ‎bd‏

984. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 3 said, “The Wald’ (of a manumitted slave) is consi-
dered as one’s lineage, not to be sold or donated? (refer to

hadith no. 816).” Related by al-Hakim through Ash-Shafi‘i on the
authority of Muhammad bin Al-Hasan, on the authority of Abi
‘Yasuf. Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sahih.

985. Abd Qalabah narrated on the authority of Anas (RA)

that the Messenger of Allah 3¥ said, “The one who is most kno-
wledgeable of the laws of inheritance is Zaid bin Thabit.”
Related by Ahmad and the four Imams except Abii Dawid. At-
ih.

Tirmidhi, Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as Sahi
Chapter XXI: Wills (Bequests)

ده نا أن شم - رَضي الله عنهُمَا - ‎J‏ :عل سول لله على لله عل

986. ‘Abdullah Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said,“It is not rightful for a Muslim, if he has any-
thing to bequeath, that he sleeps two consecutive nights
without having with him his written will.” Agreed upon

298- This hadith again assures the fact that Wald’ is like the lineage of a

person. The inheritance still goes to the one who paid the money to the
slave and is not to be sold or donated as soon as the slave dies, as the
Tink to the manumitter still holds.

355
SB tte

987. 5800 bin Abi Waqads (RAA) narrated, ‘I said, '0 Messen-
ger of Allah! I have a lot of money, and no heirs but my daughter.
Shall I give (bequeath) two thirds of my wealth as charity? He 3
said, “No.” I said, ‘Then half of it?” He 4 replied, “No.” I said,

‘Then one third of my wealth?’ He 3 replied,“Yes one third; and
even one third is too much. Indeed, to leave your inheri-
tors rich (after your death) is better than leaving them as a
burden begging from people.” Agreed upon.

cen £ Se ‏ل‎ ah ‏لب صلى‎ Ab ise 25 — ‏هده‎

AU ‏لقلا‎ Sl SAIS FUL od ye
tl hy « BE ein 6 eye 2
988. “Alshah (RA) narrated, “A man came to the Messenger

of Allah 38 and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! My mother died sud-
denly and did not write a will, and I believe that if she had been
able to speak (now), she would have given it in charity, Would she
be rewarded if I pay the charity on her behalf?’ The Messenger of

Allah 38 said,“Yes.”Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

3S bef ti db dibs eh

BSS « AB « Lies ye ‏إلا‎ hgh, 3 f

ة ‎Ly‏ اْجَارُود .

989. Aba ‏طمسقستا‎ al-Bahili (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the
Messenger of Allah 3§ say, “Allah has given every one who is
356
entitled to a right (in inheritance) what is due to him, no will
may be made to a (standard) heir.” Related by Ahmad and the
four Imams except for An-Nasa’i. Ahmad and at-Tirmidhi graded
it as Hasan. Ybn Khuzaimah and Ibn al-Gardd graded it as a
strong Hadith.

BB » - OE Mh Gos - ‏ابن عبس‎ enh ip {itu 535 44.
25 Ap so

990. Ad-Daraquini transmitted a similar narration on the
authority of Ibn “Abbas (RAA) and added the following, “Unless

the heirs agree to it (i.e. making a will for an heir).” Its chain of
narrators is Hasan.

. ‏حَسَنْ‎ Bis th

th Les OU - ‏عَنْهُ‎ us tlh ‏عن مُعاذ أن جل - ضي‎
‏عد‎ Rp ob Xb ois bop sity ‏عَلَيْهِ‎
‎. ‏الدارقطني‎ oy, kis.
991. Mu’Adh bin Jabal (RA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 4 said, “Allah gave you as a charity” a third of your

property when you are about to die, as an addition to your
good deeds.” Related by Ad-Daraqutni

لك

Fa) ) ‏من حَديث‎ iy alee 7

992. Ahmad and al-Bazzar transmitted it on the authority of
Abii Ad-Darda’.

. ‏وله طلم‎ «ats at ‏يقري‎ BS ‏كك‎
‎993. Ibn Majah transmitted the same narration on the auth-

ority of Aba Hurairah (RAA) and they are all weak traditions but
may support each other, and Allah knows best.

299. He gave you permission to make a will within the third of your property
as charity, when you are about to die.

357
tees ous
Chapter XXII: Wadi‘ah (Trusts Deposited for
Safekeeping)

4 - عَنْ عَمْرِو إن عب عَنْ أيه عَنْ ده - رضي الله لها - عن الب

! ‏ان مَاجَةْ » وفي‎
994. “Amro bin Shu‘aib narrated on the authority of his father
on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger of

Allah % said, “If anyone is given an article as a trust, he
does not have to pay for its loss or destruction (unless he
misuses it).”Related by Ibn Majah with a weak chain of narrators.

358
nl vues
Book VIII: Marriage
Chapter I

te J hp 2A of dts oo — 6

995. Ibn Mas‘td (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

+ said to us, “O Young people! Whoever can marry among
you, should marry, for that will help him lower his gaze
and protect his chastity. Whoever is not able to marry is
recommended to fast and that will be his shield (as it dimi-
nishes his sexual energy).” Agreed upon.

hes

cost

oe ‏الله‎ fo Bo - 8 ‏مالك - رَضي الله‎ of yf by aan
ls ‏وأا » وموم ؛‎ «al iy : «de

EE ky
996. Anas Tha Malik (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 praised and exalted Allah and said, “..Yet I pray (night
prayer) and sleep, fast and break my fast, and I (also) marry
women. Whoever does not follow my Sunnah is not from

me (nor one of my followers).”3° Agreed upon.

300- The Messenger of Allah ‏ع3‎ said this to the three men who asked about
how he worshipped Allah, and when they were told, they thought their
‘own worship was insufficient and one of them decided to offer prayer
throughout the night forever, the second said that he will fast through-
out the year, and the third said he will never get, married. ‘The Messen-

359

اناك بأ

Oe BN Se «
997, Anas bin Malik (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 used to command (urge) us to get married and would very
strictly prohibit us from remaining in celibacy and say, “Marry
the woman who is child bearing and loving, for I shall boa-
st over all the nations by your number on the Day of Resur-
rection.” Related by Ahmad. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahth.

‎te aL a‏ أبي 555 ‎ity » tty‏ حبّانَ » من حَديث مَعْقلٍ

‎hg

‎998. Aba Dawdd and An-Nasaii and Ibn Hibban related a
similar Hadith on the authority of Ma‘qil bin Yasar.

‎1-3 be GE ‏يَدالك».‎ Sef lt oth,

‎999, Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

‎lah 38 said, “A woman is married for four reasons: her pro-
perty, lineage, beauty and her religion (meaning her piety).
So, marry the religious one otherwise you will be a loser.”
Agreed upon along with the rest of the seven Imams.

‎iJ ‏روج‎ By Ue Gy ‏كان‎ oy ae

‏وَبَارَكَ ‎te‏ وَحَمَعْ ‎USE‏ في خَيْر». ‎fy,‏ والأربعة
وجب ‎See‏

‎1000) Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of
Allah £ congratulated a man on his marriage, he would say,

‎ger of Allah ‏يك‎ thereupon said to them, “By Allah, I am the most fearful
of Allah of you and yet I pray...”

‎360

“May Allah bless (both of you), and may He bestow His ble-
ssings upon you, and unite you together in goodness.” Rela-
ted by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Khuzaimah
and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

. ‏واكم‎ MINES HAIG MELO, our OSE

1001. “Abdullah Ibn Mas ‘tid (RAA) narrated,"The Messenger of

Allah ‏يلك‎ taught us to say for fulfillment of a need, “All praise if
for Allah. We praise Him, we seek His aid and we ask for
His forgiveness. We seek Allah’s refuge from the evil of our-
selves. Whomsoever Allah guides, there is no one who can
lead him astray, and whomsoever Allah misguides, there is
no one to guide him. I testify that none has the right to be
worshipped but Allah alone, and I testify that Muhammad

38 is His slave and Messenger.” And recited three verses. Rela-
ted by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi and al-Hakim
graded it as Hasan.

Che toy: ‏وَسَلُمَ‎ oe hh Le ‏رَسُولَ الله‎ Os OG Ae 5
PEE GG ASB GH Ge hy OF phe of Bh stat

. ‏الْسَاكمُ‎ Bio's « SW ‏أَحْمَدُ » وأبُو دَاوْدَ » وَرِجَالَهُ‎ ayy

1002. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “If one of you proposes to a woman, and he can see
from her what may entice him to marry her, he should do
so.” Related by Ahmad and Abii Dawid with a reliable chain of
narrators. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

CDs « ‏ماهد ند مذي‎ ye

. ‏عن الْمُغيرّة‎
1003. At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’i transmitted a similar narra-
tion on the authority of Al-Mughirah.

361

1004. Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban transmitted a similar narra-
tion on the authority of Muhammad bin Maslamah.

1005. Abi Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

14h 3 said to a man who told him that he had got engaged, “Have
you looked at her?” The man replied, ‘No. He said to him, “Go
and look at her for it is more likely to create affection bet-
ween the two of you.” Related by Muslim.

po ae oe et ea Ry Ban
3 = ‏على‎ Stet ‏«لآ يَحْطْب‎ : gles te

Gob hair, . ale BE ed ot
1006. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

said, “It is not allowed for a man to propose to a woman
whom his brother (in Islam) has already proposed to, until
the first suitor gives her up, or allows him to propose to
her.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-Bukhari.

362
اح فَقال: فون عَنْ

1007, Sahl bin Sad As-S0“idt (RAA) narrated, ‘Once a woman
came to the Prophet 2 and said, ‘I dedicate myself to you (for

marriage). The Messenger of Allah 3 looked at her up and down
and then lowered his head. When the woman saw that he had
made no decision she sat down, One of the companions of the Pro-
phet 4 got up and said,'O Messenger of Allah! If you have no need

of her, marry her to me. The Prophet 38 asked him, “Do you
have anything to give her as a dowry?” The man replied, ‘No,

I swear by Allah, O Messenger of Allah.’ The Prophet 3 said to
him, “Go to your family and seek something (to offer her).”
‘The man went and then returned saying, ‘No, I swear by Allah I
found nothing.’ The Messenger of Allah 38 said to him, “Seek
(something) even if it is an iron ring.” The man went and then
returned saying, ‘No, I swear by Allah 0 Messenger of Allah, not
even an iron ring, but I have this ‏“بقع‎ (waist sheet)- Sahl said, ‘He
had no upper garment’- and I shall give her half of it’ The Mes-
senger of Allah #8 said, “What would she do with your Izér?
If you wear it, there would be nothing of it for her, and if
she wears it, there would be nothing of it for you.” The man
sat down, and when he had sat for a long time he got up. When

Allah’s Messenger 38 saw him turning away, he commanded peo-
363
ple to call him back. When he came the Prophet #8 said to him,
“Have you memorized something of the Qur’an?” The man
said, ‘Yes, I have memorized such and such Sarahs,’ and named
some of them. The Prophet 38 then asked him, “Can you recite

them by heart?” He replied, ‘Yes.’ The Prophet 3 then said, “Go
for I have married her to you for what you have memorized
of the Qur’An.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim

In another version he said, “Go for I have married her to you,
and teach her some of the Qur’an (that you know).”

In another version by Al-Bukhari, “I have married her to you
for what you have of the Qur'an.”

him, “What have you memorized (of the Qur'an)?” He said,
‘Sarah al-Bagarah (the Cow, No.2) and the one next to it (Sarah

No. 3). The Prophet 3 then said,“Get up and teach her twenty
verses.” Related by Abii Dawid.

of:

‎ey 8‏ بْن ‎due‏ بن الور عَنْ أبيه - ‎th‏ عَنْهُمْ

‎» ‏قال : «أغْثوا اللكَاح». رَوَاهُ أحْمَدُ‎ oy oe Ln ‏رَسُولَ لله صل‎
3
1009. ‘Amir bin “Abdullah bin Az-Zubair narrated on the au-

‎thority of his father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“Announce the wedding.”Related by Ahmad and al-Hakim gra-
ded it as Sahth.

‎8G‏ يني و

‎1010. Aba Burdah bin Abi Mas narrated on the authority of
364
his father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah ‏ولك‎ said, “No marri-
age is to be conducted except with a ‏قاعم‎ (a woman's guar-
dian),” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. Ibn al-Madini, at-
Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahth.

on the authority of ‘Imran bin al-Husain, that the Prophet 3 said
“There is no marriage (to be conducted) save with a guardian

and two just witnesses.”

ele dh fo ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ Oe : ‏قَالَتْ‎ - Ge hy
gb ‏بها‎ 55 8 oy GES GS ob ‏بير‎ ES ‏أة‎

لي » ‎Nobo‏ عَوَائة »

1012. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that ‘Allah’s Messenger ‏قنك‎ said,
“If any woman marries herself without the permission of
her wali, then her marriage is void. If the groom copulates
with her, she deserves the dowry because of(the enjoyment
of) her private parts he has made lawful to himself. If they
dispute then (they can resort to) the ruler (as he) is the guar-
dian of those who do not have a guardian.” Related by the
four Imams except for An-Nasa’i. Abd “‘Uwanah, Ibn Hibban and
al-Hakim graded it as St

diy ‏صَلّى‎ ai ‏رَسُولَ‎ of

1013. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “A non-virgin woman (divorced or widowed) is not
to be married except after consulting her nor can a virgin
be married except with her consent.” The people asked, ‘O

365
Messenger of Allah! How is her consent(to be known)” He said, “If
she remains silent.” Agreed upon.

1014. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “A non-virgin woman is worthier to organize her af-
fairs than her guardian. As for the virgin she must be ask-
ed for her permission. Her silence is a sign of her consent
(to be married).” Related by Muslim.

In another version, “A guardian has no authority over a non-
virgin woman and an orphan girl(i.e. virgin) must be asked
for her permission (in marriage).” Related by Aba Dawéd. An-
Nasa’ and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

نَ ‎Sas tin‏ عَنْهُ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلّى
‎aah Che Wye ahah ati‏
‎Eb Soy «(bl‏

1015. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Let no woman be the guardian of another wo-
man in marriage, and let no woman marry herself (by her-
self without a guardian).”Related by Ibn Majah and Ad-Daraqutni
with a trustworthy chain of narrators.

W259 Vw : phy ‏الله عَلَيْهِ‎

ابن

13 إن ‎fb‏ - رضي ‎Cie A‏ - قَالَ ‎ao‏ رَسُولَ الله
على فاع وي عب ‎ein isis‏ لازت

ee ye
. ‏من حلم افع‎ JN ‏أن سر‎ BT ‏من ونه‎ sity
1016. Nafi’ narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar(RAA), ‘The

Messenger of Allah 28 prohibited Shighar. It is the marriage in
366

which a man marries his daughter to another man, and the latter
in return marries his daughter to the former, on condition that no
dowry is to be paid by either.’ Agreed upon.

1017. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that a young woman came to
the Prophet 38 and stated that her father had married her against

her will. The Prophet 38 gave her the option to annul the marriage
or to accept it’ Related by Ahmad, Aba Dawad and Ibn Majah.

1018. Al-Hasan bin Samurah(RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Alah % said, “Whenever two guardians marry off a
‘woman (to two men), the first husband is worthier of her.”
Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi graded it as
Hasan.

pees spanks ote, bus ‏دَاوُدَ » وال‎ fly
1019, Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “Any slave who marries without the permis-
sion of his master, he is like a fornicator.” Related by Ahmad
Aba Dawdd and At-Tirmidhi. The latter and Ibn Hibban graded it

1020. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “A woman is not to be married along with her
paternal or her maternal aunts.” Agreed upon

be Jos dh ‏رضي‎ - UE oy ١

. p55 SEY ‏وَسَلّمَ : «لآ يكح الْمْحِْمْ‎ ce
LEY Oe 555 Lbs Ye ay ‏وَفي‎

1021. ‘Uthm4n (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 35
said, “A pilgrim while in a state of Ikram may not contract
marriage (himself), nor contract the marriage of someone
else.” Related by Muslim.
In a version by Muslim, “He may neither propose to a woman
(either for himself or for someone else),” Ibn Hibban added the fol-
lowing in his version, “Nor be asked for the hand of a woman
(he is the guardian of).”

th be dni 36:

‎a og 5 2‏ - رضي الله ‎CGS Jae‏ - قال

‎Beg hy Can ly ‏عله‎
‎1022. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 08
married Maiminah while he was in the state of Ihrém.30” Agreed

‎upon.

‏ها - 25 ‎Lo Lob - Ge tlh‏ الله

‎1023. Muslim transmitted on the authority of Maiminah(RAA)

‎that the Messenger of Allah 38 married her while he was not in
the state of Ihram.

‎301- Many of the companions are of the opinion that the Prophet 3 married
MaimGnah before he puts on his ‏بقعا‎ but the news of his marriage
became known while he was in the state of Ihrdm, and then he consum-
mated his marriage in Makkah. This opinion goes in accordance with
the prohibition mentioned in this hadith.

‎368
ale Gi ag she BENG ‏به‎ Be ‏الشروط أن‎ Sl Op
1024. “Ugbah bin “Amir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah $8 said, “The most deserving conditions to be fulfilled,
are those that make the private parts lawful (Halal) for you
(ic. in marriage).” Agreed upon.

‎EL 4 8‏ الأكْوَع - ‎Mh gas‏ 85 - قَالَ : ‎Gey‏ 5 الله

‎|| ‏في‎ Abel eG ole,

‎SE‏ نام » َم ‎By Ee al‏ سملم

‎1025. Salamah bin al-Akwa’ narrated,’The Messenger of Allah
#8 permitted Mut‘ah Marriage, for three days in the year of

‎Autas,5"S but then he prohibited it.” Related by Muslim.

‎dy be any i ‏رضي اللَهُ تعَالَى عَنْهُ - قَالَ‎ - Yee

‎1026, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
prohibited the Mut‘ah marriage on the battle of Khaibar.” Agreed

‎‘upon,
‎aie ky ale ‏الله‎ Le ‏ُو اله‎ KE 6 oy
sigs Ay tan ‏ره‎ . sce py ‏الأهليّه‎ 2h

‎1027, ‘Alt bin Abi Talib narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 38
prohibited the Mut‘ah Marriage on the battle of Khaibar as well
as the flesh of domestic donkeys.”"Transmitted by the seven Imams
except Abi Dawid.

‎302- This is a kind of temporary marriage, the duration of which is predeter-
mined through an agreement between the man and the woman. The
purpose of this marriage is to have sexual intercourse for that period of
time, by the end of which the woman is automatically divorced. It is
‘unanimously termed invalid by all Muslim scholars.

‎308. A battle which took place after the Conquest of Makkah.

‎369
ذم ‎cath‏ قن :0 عل من ‎a‏ ل سه »ولا ألا

Ob ‏و‎ tant,

1028. Rabi’ bin Sabrah narrated on the authority of his father
(RAA) that the Messenger of Allah $8 said,“I had permitted you
to contract Mut‘ah Marriage, but Allah has surely prohi-

bited it until the Day of Resurrection. So, if any of you has
a woman that he married through Mut‘ah, he should let
her go, and do not take back any of the dower he gave her.”
Related by Muslim, Abii Dawdd, An-Nasa’i, Ibn Majah, Ahmad
and Ibn Hibban.

a ae eo ya

iy » ‏وَلنْسَائِي'‎ Fay, oY

1029. Tbn Mas’tid (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah ‏د‎
‎cursed the muhallil% and the one (the first husband) for whom

the woman was made lawful (through this marriage). Related by
Ahmad, An-Nasaii and At-Tirmidhi who rendered it to be auth-
entic.

soy Pare aero) ‏ل وفي‎

1030. ‘The four Imams except An-Nasé’i transmitted a similar
tradition on the authority of “Alt.

offn

804. This marriage was permitted for sometime at the rise of Isl4m, but then
it was finally prohibited in the year of Khaibar

305- Al-Muhallil is the man who temporarily marries a woman, who has been
divoreed three times and thus she is not lawful anymore for her first
husband. The muhallil marries her temporarily, may have sexual
intercourse with her or not. He then divorees her to go back to her first.
husband, to whom she is now lawful (Halél) to remarry exeept through a
new marriage contract. This is also prohibited as it is another form of
temporary marriage that stipulates separation due to a previously made
agreement between the first husband and the muchallil,

370
د إلا ‎i‏ رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » 985 548«

1031, Abd Hurairah(RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 34
said, “A man guilty of adultery, who has been flogged, sho-
uld not marry but one who is as guilty as he is.” Related by
Ahmad and Aba Dawad with a trustworthy chain of narrators.

1032, “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘A man divorced his wife three
times, then she married another man who also divorced her before
having sexual contact with her. The first husband wanted to rem-
arry ‏ص‎ ‘after her divorce from the second man). The Messenger of

Allah 38 was asked about this, but he replied, “No, she cannot
marry the first husband until the second husband consum-
mates his marriage with her, just as the first husband had
done.” Agreed upon, and the wording is from Muslim.

jedi ‏الْكَقَاءَة‎ OL
Chapter H: Compatibility 306 in Marriage
and the Right to Choose

الل ‎eee‏ - قَالَ : قال رَسُولَ ‎ah‏ صَلَى الله

Se ‏نف » إلا‎ CH ‏نهم‎ aay « at
tbe ‏بو‎ ENG » ‏مَنْلَمْ يْسَعٌ‎ wate ‏وفي‎ « ASE ‏رَوَاهُ‎ ie sf

306- Scholars have differed over the definition of compatibility, and most of
them are of the opinion that the most important aspect is that of in reli-
giousness.

371
1033. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of ‏يك‎
‎said, “Arabs are equivalent to one another (in marriage) and
clients (slaves) are equivalent to one another, save a weav-
er or a cupper.” Related by Al-Hakim but all its chains of narra-
tors are extremely weak, and most scholars considered it to be a
false tradition

. gait SE ‏بن‎ ste ‏اْبَرّار عَنْ‎ ate yore

1034. Al-Bazzr transmitted a similar narration on the autho-
rity of Much bin Jabal, but with a disconnected chain of nar-

rators.

قيس - رَضيّ ‎ye fos dh‏ : أن ‎Le i‏ الله

. ‏«الكحي أُسَامَة» روا ملم‎ : GI ‏فال‎ gly ake

1035. Fatimah the daughter of Qais (RAA) narrated that the
Messenger of Allah 38 said to her, “Marry Usamah.” 207 Related
by Muslim.

we ‏الله‎ Le te ‏الله الى‎ 5 - A en
- GES O55 - » ath ‏الكحُوا‎

Ny » 355 ‏أبُو‎ oy
1036. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
3% said, "0 sons of Bayadah (Band Bayadah) marry Abi
Hind®” to (someone of) your women, and marry his women

(his daughters),” and he was a cupper,’ Related by Aba Dawad
and Al-Hakim with a good chain of narrators.

307. Fatimah bint Qais was from the tribe of Quraish, i.e. of a noble lineage,
while Usdmah was his slave and the son of his client Zaid.

908 Abdi Hind or Yasar, cupped the Prophet 3, this hadith and the previous
one, are proof that it is not only the lineage which counts in equivalence.
It was also reported that Bill (RA), who was a slave before he was
manumitted by Abd Bakr (RAA), married Halah the sister of “Abdur
Rahman bin “Auf, and “Umar (RAA), offered his daughter Hafsah in
marriage to Salman al-Farist (a Persian slave) before she married the
Prophet 38,

372
ana 2-7

. ‏عَبْدًا‎ OI A Ge th ‏عَنِ ان - رضي الله الى عَنْهُ - عند‎ es

1037, “A'ishah (RA) narrated, ‘When Barirah was manumit-
ted, she was given the choice to remain with her husband (Mugh-
ith) who was a slave at that time, or to leave him.’ (part of a long
tradition) Agreed upon.

In a version by Muslim: ‘Her husband was a slave.’ He also rela-
ted on the authority of “A’ishah (RAA): ‘He was a free man.’ But
the first narration (that he was a slave) is stronger.

Al Bukhari also related on the authority of Ibn “Abbas that he was
asalve,

1038. Ad-Dahhak bin Fairdz Ad-1 Dailamf narrated on the au-
thority of his father (RAA),'O Messenger of Allah! I have embraced

Islam and I am married to two sisters.’ The Messenger of Allah
38 said to him, “Divorce whichever of them you wish to lea-

ve.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams except for An-Nasa’i.
Ibn Hibban, ad-Daraqutni and al-Baihaqi graded it as Sahth.

309. It is prohibited in Islam to marry two sisters together at the same time.
373
‎oe eS GL, ets,‏ وَلْحَاكم»

‎fy‏ )285 حَاد

‎1039, Slim narrated on the authority of his father (RAA),
‘Ghailn bin Salamah who embraced Islam and he had ten wives
{at the time) who all accepted Islam with him. The Messenger of

‎Allah 3% commanded him to choose only four of them.’ Related by
Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as
Sahih; but al-Bukhari, Aba Zur‘ah and Aba Hatim graded it as a

‎defected Hadith..
ale ‏صَلّى الله‎ LB Sp : ‏إضئ الله عَنهُمَا - قَالَ‎ - le gl Byte

‏وَسَلمٌ نه زيب على أبي ‎of ie)‏ ابيع ‎BF‏ ست سسنين بالنَكَاح الأول » و

‎«(Stl ROURESS a ‏تساي‎ ey Abhay eG Bat
‏ائي 2 و ا‎ Ms 9 sex

‎1040. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah
restored his daughter Zainab to Abt Al-As bin ar-Rabi®1 after

‎six years(of separation) according to (the contract of the) first mar-
riage and did not make a new one.’Related by Ahmad and the four
Imams save An-Nasa’i. Ahmad and al-Hakim graded it as Si

‎1041. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his

‎310- Abd Al-’As bin ar-Rabi was the husband of the Prophet's daughter (Zai-
nab). She embraced Islim with the family of the Prophet 3 while he
remained a polytheist and was taken as a prisoner of war in the Battle
of Badr. Zainab sent her necklace (which was given to her by her mother
Khadijah) to the Prophet 48 as a ransom to set him free, the Prophet 3
accepted it and stipulated that Al-Ag lets her migrate to the Prophet. ‏يك‎
‎in Madinah. She migrated and in the year 6 of al-Hijrah of the Prophet

‎3% the verse which prohibits the marriage of a Muslim woman te a disbe-
liever was revealed. She remained for two years and her marriage was
suspended until Abd Al-“As embraced Islam (during the 8" year of al-

‎Hijrah) and the Prophet 3 restored her to him.
374

father on the authority of his grandfather that the Messenger of
Allah 3 restored his daughter Zainab to Aba Al-’As with a new
marriage contract.’ Imam At-Tirmidhi said that the hadith of
‏مطل‎ “Abbas is related with a stronger chain of narrators.

= وَعَنْ ان ‎tb‏ - رضي ‎cate ht‏ - قال : ‎Hp ells‏ قرحت

فَحَاءَ ‎Lah‏ فَقَالَ : يَا رَسُولُ الله » إني ‎Sealey ALTE‏ بإسملامي »

ty

eh AOS AS a ‏وَسَلَمَ م‎ oe Le ‏الستَرْعَهًا رَسُول الله‎

الأرّل». رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » وَأبُو 35

1042. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘A woman embraced Islam

then got married. Her (first) husband came and said, ‘O Messen-
ger of Allah, ‘I have accepted Islam and she knew that (before she
got married). The Messenger of Allah 38 then took her away from
the second husband and gave her back to the first one.’ Related by
Ahmad, Ab Dawdd and Ibn Majah. Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim
graded it as Sahih

Ce edn : ghey ale ‏لله‎ he ‏لي‎ I Lg GK,
By ‏حَمِيلٌ أن‎ sata 35 ¢ we ayy. ‏ها بالصّدَاق‎ hy oul,
Wy Ud at ‏في‎ ole ‏مَجْهُولٌ « وَاعشُلف‎

1049, Zaid bin Ka’b bin ‘Ujrah narrated on the authority of
his father, ‘The messenger of Allah 38 married al-“Aliyah from

311- Ahmad and Ad-Darqutnt said that this is a weak hadith. The stronger
narration is the one that says that the Prophet 3 consented to the first
marriage after Ab@ AlAs embraced Islim. Imém Ibnul Qaiyim said
that the hadith related by Ibn ‘Abbas indicates that the marriage was
suspended. If the husband embraces Iskim before her ‘Iddah is over,
then she is still his wife and there is no need to renew the marriage. If
the husband embraced Islam after the ‘Iddah of his wife is over, then
they must be separated at the termination of ddah and remarry with a
new contract,

375
Bani Ghifar. When she had entered his presence and doffed her

clothes, the Prophet 3 saw whiteness on her flanks. Thereupon,
he said to her, “Put on your clothes and go back to your
family,” and he gave her the dower. Related by Al-Hakim, but
there is Jamil bin Zaid in the chain of narrators who is not trust-
worthy.

لَه عَلَى ‎Ge Bs‏ ره هيه بن مور ‘

1044. Sa‘id bin al-Musaiyab narrated that “Umar bin al-
Khattéb (RAA) said, ‘Ifa man married a woman and when he has
had sexual intercourse with her, he discovered that she is leprous
or insane, she is entitled to get her dower for having had interco-
urse with her and he is to get back what he paid from the one who
deceived him by marrying him to her (and he knew of her defects),’
Related by Sa‘id bin Mansdr and MAlik bin Abi Shaibah with a
trustworthy chain of narrators.

1045. Sa’td bin al-Musaiyab narrated a similar narration on
the authority of “Alt and added, ‘or had a defect in her vagina (like
a protrusion that impedes having normal sexual relation with
her), her husband then has the choice to keep her or divorce her.
If he had intercourse with her, then she gets her dower for him
having enjoyed her private parts.

1046. Sa’id bin al-Musaiyab also narrated,Umar (RAA) orda-
ined that an impotent husband must be given a chance for a year
before divorcing him from his wife.’ It is transmitted with a trust-
worthy chain of narrators

376
slid es OL
Chapter HI: Treatment of wives

07 عَنْ أبي ‎YA‏ - رَضِي الله 5 فَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولْ الله ‎Lo‏ الله ‎ele‏

lay ‏«ملفون مَنْ أتَى امْرَة في دُيرهًا». روَاهُ بو 96« وَلتْسَئِي‎ icy
Se! yu fel si prone dey

1047. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah & said, ‘He who has intercourse with his wife through

her anus,!? is cursed,’ Related by Aba Dawid and An-Nasa’t
and the wording is his.

1048. Tbn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3% said, “Allah does not look at a man who had intercourse

with another man or with a woman in her anus.” Related by
At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa’i and Ibn Hibban.

312. This is absolutely prohibited through the rulings of the Qur’én and
Sunnah,

377
1049. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day,
should not hurt(cause problems to)his neighbor. And I advise
you to treat women kindly, for they are created from a rib,

and the most crooked part of the rib is the upper part's If

you then try to straighten it, you will break it off, and if
you leave it as it is, it will remain crooked. So, I advise you
to treat women well.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-
Bukhari.

In another version by Muslim, “So, if you enjoy her (company)
then enjoy her while she is still crooked, and if you try to
straighten this nature of hers, you will break her, and bre-
aking her means divorcing her.”

‎isto f Ot by : Ge‏ اميه

‎1050. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘We were on an expedition with

‎the Prophet 3%. then when we approached Madinah and we were

‎about to enter the city, he said to us, “Wait until you enter it at
night -at the time of ‘Isha- so that the lady with unkempt
hair may comb her hair, and the one whose husband has
been absent (for along time) may shave her pubic area.”
Agreed upon.

‎In another version by Al-Bukhari, “When anyone of you has
been away from home for a long time he must not return to
his family during the night (ic. surprise them while they are
asleep).”

‎313. This hadith refers to the woman’s affectionate nature, which makes her

‎fit for being a wife and a mother, and this is what the Prophet
by saying that she was created from a crooked rib.

‎378

‎ee ey‏ - رضي ‎eh‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولْ اللّه

‎1051, AbQ 8054 al-Khudri (RA) narrated that the Messenger

‎of Allah 3 said, “Among the worst people in Allah’s sight, on
the Day of Resurrection, is the man who copulates with his
wife and she with him, and then spreads her secret.” Rela-
ted by Muslim,

‎1 3 acti oe ‏ابن‎

‎1052, Hakim bin Mu’éwiyah narrated on the authority of his
father (RAA), ‘I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah! What are the rights
of one’s wife upon her husband” He answered 3, “To feed her
when you eat, clothe her when you clothe yourself, not to
slap her face or insult her, and not to abandon her except
inside the house.” Related by Ahmad, Abd Dawid, An-Nasé’t
and Ibn Majah. Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎Sygh ‏«كانت‎ : UG - Cee ‏رضي الله‎ - de ‏حابر ين‎ te

‎1053. Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Jews used to
say, ‘When a man has intercourse with his wife through the vag-
ina but being on her back, the child will have a squint. So, the
verse was revealed, “Your wives are a tilth for you so go to
your tilth when or how you wish.” (2:223). Agreed upon and the
wording is from Muslim.

‎379
. ‏عليه‎ BE old obs
1054. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “If any of you wants to have sexual intercourse
with his wife, he should say, ‘In the name of Allah, 0 Allah!
Protect us from the devil and keep the devil away from
what You grant us (i.e. offspring).’ If it is predestined for
them to have a child, the devil will never be able to harm
him,” Agreed upon.

1055. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Whenever a man calls his wife to his bed (for
intercourse) but she refuses to come, the angels curse her
until the morning.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-
Bukhari.

Another version by Muslim says, “and He Who is in heaven
(ie. Allah) remains displeased with her, until her husband
has reconciled with her.”

Gab ‏ولط‎ ٠

1056. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
cursed the Wasilah (the lady who adds artificial hair to hers or to
someone else's) and al-Mustawsilah (the one who asks for it) and
also the lady, who tattoos (herself or someone else) or gets herself’
tattooed (i.e. asks for it)” Agreed upon.
رضي ‎Wie tly‏ - فالتا : ‎Sipe‏ رَسُول
‎Lb‏ الل ل ‎ti a Al goby‏ هَمَمْتْ ‎all of‏ عن ال
م سوه ‎Sah op‏ فَفَالَ طول لله متلى ‎wes NS by gl he th‏

. ‏ملم‎ ay

1057. Judhamah bint Wahb (RAA) said, I was with Allah's
Messenger ## along with some people when he said, “I intended
to prohibit Ghilah*" but I considered the Romans and the

35 ‏بلك‎ EL ey ٠6

44

Persians and found that they do it without any harm being
caused to their children.”Then he was asked about “Az! (Coitus
interruptus), he replied 38, “This is secret (way of) burying
alive.” Related by Muslim.

2B ‏وَرِحَالهُ‎ « fe tba ¢
1058. Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated, ‘A man said, ‘Al-
lah’s Messenger! I have a slave girl and I practice ‘Az/ with her. I

do not want her to conceive, but I have desire in what men (usua-
lly) have (i.e. intercourse). But the Jews say, that ‘Az/ is the minor
—type -of burying alive.’ The Messenger of Allah 3€ said, “The
Jews told a lie, for if Allab wishes to create it (an offspring)
you would not be able to stop it.” Related by Ahmad and Aba

Dawad and the wording is his. It was also narrated by an-Nasé't
and at-Tahawi and its narrators are trustworthy.

14. Ghilah means either suckling during pregnancy, or intercourse with the
wife while she is breast feeding a child.

381
NGS ‏يهطل‎ th fe ‏لك بي" هله‎ is : ‏ومسل‎
‎1059, Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘We used to practice ‏لعف‎ during

the lifetime of the Prophet 3 while the Qur’an was being revea-
led, and if it was prohibited, the Qur'an would have prohibited us
from doing it.’ Agreed upon.

And in a version related by Muslim, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏َك‎
‎heard about it but did not prohibit us from doing so.”

1060. Anas Ibn Malik RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of of Al-

lah 38 used to have intercourse with all of his wives, with only one
single Ghusl.’ Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

GaSe OLS
Chapter IV: The Dowry

1061. Anas Ibn Malik (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

3§ freed Safiyah and made her freedom as her dowry.’ Agreed
upon.

الوحْمَنٍ - رضي ‎Ah‏ نه - أنه َال ‎edi:‏

382
رَسُول ‎ah‏ صَلَى ‎“eet pie cle ais‏ م
‎Aba Salamah bin “Abdur Rahman (RAA) narrated, ‘I‏
‎asked “A’ishah (RAA), ‘How much was the dowry given by the Me-‏

ssenger of Allah 28 (to his wives)?’ She replied, ‘The dowry which

the Prophet 38 gave to his wives was only twelve Ugiyahs anda
Nash.’ She asked, ‘Do you know what a Nash is” I replied, ‘No’
She said, ‘half an Ugiyah. This would make 500 Dirhams (because
the amount of one Ugiyah equals forty Dirhams and the Nash
equals twenty)’ Related by Muslim.

1063, Ibn ‘Abbas (RA) narrated, ‘When “Alt married Fati-
mah, the Messenger of Allah % said to him, ‘Give her something
(as dowry)’ “Ali replied, ‘I have nothing (to give her).’ The Messen-

ger of Allah 3¥ said to him,Where is your Hutamiyah mantle?
Related by Aba Dawid and An-Nasé’i. Al-Hakim graded it as
Sahih.

oe

Guy

1064. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er on the authority of his grandfather (RAA), that the Messenger
of Allah & said, “When a woman gets married for a specified
dowry, a gift (extra to her dowry) or a promise (to give her
something) before contracting the marriage, it is hers, and
what is (promised) after contracting the marriage, belongs

383
to whoever the promise was given to (whether to the woman
or her guardian). The most honorable property a man is given
is that which he gets on account of his daughter or sister’s
marriage.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams except At-
Tirmidhi.

roe
Slike Je ‏مَسْعُود : لَهَا‎ Ui ‏نات ء‎ Sy ‏يَدْعْلْ‎

2 وَعَسنْ ‎Halle‏ عن ان ‎ops‏ أله سل عَنْ ‎ESF PS‏

5 كم منّا - مثْلَّ ‎Eb chit‏ يها ان مسلقود ‎EMG MET.‏

1065. “Alqamah narrated on the authority of Ion Mas‘éd, ‘He
was asked about a man who had married a woman but had not
specified his wife's amount of dowry until he died before the con-
summation. Ibn Mas‘éd said, ‘She deserves the usual amount of
marriage dowry given to similar brides (of the same standard of

living), no more and no less. She must also observe ‘Iddah’5 (for

four months and ten days, as it is the Iddah observed after the
death of the husband), before marrying again and she is also entit-
led to inheritance. Thereupon Ma’gal bin Sinan al-Ashja’l got up

and said, ‘This is the judgment of the Prophet : in the case of a
woman called Barwa’ bint Washiq -a woman of my people- as
what you judged.’ Ibn Mas‘td was very happy about what he
heard.’ Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidht gra-
ded it as Sahih.

: Fae ‏وَعَنْ‎ 5
pid CA UL A ate ‏في‎ bef GLa,

أَخْرَحَه بو دَاوْد » وأَارَ بلَى /

815- A woman's post marital waiting period whether after divorce (to verify
that she is not pregnant) or out of mourning (after the husband’s death),
before she can remarry.

384
1066. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 3 said, “If anyone gives a dower to a woman in the
form of some flour or dates, he bas made her lawful for
him.” Related by Aba Dawad.

1067. ‘Abdullah bin “Amir bin Rabi‘ah narrated on the autho-

rity of his father (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 38 gave his
approval to the marriage of a woman for two sandals as dowry.’
Related by At-Tirmidht and graded it as Sahih, Some scholars
disagreed with him

1068, Sahl bin Sa‘d (RAA) narrated, ‘The ‏مه‎ of Alléh

32 married a man to a woman for a dower of an iron ring.’ Related
by Al-Hakim (part of the long hadith presented earlier, 1007).

1069. “Ali (RAA) narrated ‘The dower should not be less than
ten Dirhams.’ Related by Ad-Daraqutni with a defected chain of
narrators.

1070. “Uqbah bin ‘Amir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “The best dower is the easiest one.” Related by
Abi Dawad. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

385

ربلوغ المرام).
- رضي الله ‎Bie otal Ch Ss oF - Ge‏ من

ely ‏عدت‎ Wy : ‏فَقَالَ‎ - Gag OS

vy

)22 16
وول لله ‎ie‏ عل ‎gin‏

tel Be Gas its oh ‏مَطلَقَهَاء‎

. ‏راو رولك‎
1071, “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that ‘Amrah bint al-Jawn sou-
ght refuge in Allah from ‏طقال‎ Messenger 3 when she entered

his presence ‏يفت‎ when he married her- and he 38 said to her,
“You have sought refuge in The One in Whom men seek ref-
uge.” So he divorced her, and commanded Usamah to give her
three garments as a gift (i.e. her amenity payment). Related by
Tbn Majah but there is an unreliable narrator in its chain.

ايث أبي أسيد ‎Gael‏

1072. There is a similar narration in Sahih al-Bukh4ri on the
authority of Abd Usaid as-Sa ‘idi.

+ The Wedding Banquet (Walimah)

Chapter

ن ‎AS‏ مطفرة » فقا «ما ‎«tN‏ قَالَ : يا رَسُولَ

على ‎nh‏ ذهب ‎Ue.‏ ال : ‎Soy‏ الله لك ‎wf‏

«pl ly ‏عليه‎ Gat ‏يشاق».‎ fs

1073. Anas bin Malik (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 saw ‘Abdur Rahman bin “Auf with traces of saffron on
his clothes. He thereupon asked him, “What is that?” “Abdur
Rahmén answered, ‘I married an Ansari woman for a Nawét (five

Dirhams) of gold,’ The Messenger of Allah 3 said to him, “May
Allah bless you. Make a Walimah (wedding banquet) even
ih only one sheep.” Agreed upon and the wording is from
Muslim.

386
. ‏عليه‎ BS asl ugh ‏إلى‎ pote ‏«إذًا دعي‎ : gly ale

OS POT YE Lawl sal asic 5 tp : IG

1074, Tbn ‘Umar (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3 said, “When one of you is invited to a Walimah, he should

accept the invitation.” Agreed upon.
In a version by Muslim, “When one of you is invited by his
brother, he must accept the invitation, whether it be a
wedding banquet or something similar.”

oie tin ‏قَالَ : 06 رَسُولُ الله صَلَى‎ - Se thi ‏رَضيّ‎ - SA ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ — ve
‏الوا‎ ob tales an :

« وَيُدْعَى إِبْهَا مَْ ‎WUE‏ » وَمَنْ

eT Ly, ‏الله‎ fae ‏فَقَدْ‎ EN al ‏لَمْ‎

1075. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “The worst food is that of a Walimah from
which is turned away whoever comes to it (i.e. the poor), and
to which is invited whoever refuses (to come, i.c. the rich). He
who does not accept the invitation has disobeyed Allah and
His Messenger.” Related by Muslim.

: peg ate ‏الله‎ he dln yy Ob: 06 = te th Gey - ey ٠5

septs Bat OS Oy « alls ‏كَانَ صائمًا‎ OB » LenB ‏معي أَحَدْكُمْ‎ tp

1076. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “If anyone is invited (to a Walimah) he must
accept the invitation. If he is fasting, he should invoke Al-
lah (i.c. making invocation for the one who invited him), and if
he is not fasting, he should eat.” Related by Muslim.

pd Wh ‏حَديث‎ ty G ‏ل‎ ٠0
1077. Muslim has also transmitted on the authority of Jabir a

similar tradition that goes, “If he wishes to eat he could do so,
and if he does not he may abstain from eating.”

387
ty ‏ال قَالَ 325 الله صَلَى‎ - Bese hati ht

‎py ١‏ َم ‎sth‏ « طعا

‏تند جهو سوه ‎MG‏ به». ركه ‎GAA‏ واستطرية » ‎Doss‏

‎1078. Ibn Mas‘ad (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, “The food of a Walimah offered on the first day (of
marriage) is a duty, and that offered on the second day is
Sunnah (ic. just preferable) and the food of the third day is a
sign of showing off (and hypocrisy), if anyone does some-

‎thing just to show off, Allah will slander him®6 (publicly in
this life or in the Hereafter).” Related by At-Tirmidhi,

‎fate eva

‎1079. A similar tradition is related by Ibn Majah on the
authority of Anas,

‎a -‏ الله ‎ye‏ - فالتا : «أرا

‎GBI SAL ‏من شعير».‎
1080. Safiyah bint Shaibah (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

‎ger of Allah 38 gave a banquet with two Mudds of barley when he
married some of his wives.’ Related by al-Bukhart

‎316. Imam Al-Bukhari said that the Messenger of Allah 3 did not specify a
day for the Walimah, and for those who could nat come the first day cou-
Id come later, unless what he means in this Hadith is those who doe it
for the sake of showing off and out of hypocrisy and not to follow the
Sunnah

‎388
1081. Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3% sta-
yed for three nights at a place between Khaibar and Madinah, and
there he consummated his marriage with Safiyah. I invited the
Muslims to his Walimah that included neither meat nor bread. It

was only that the Prophet 3¥ ordered that some dining sheets be
spread, and dates, dried cheese and clarified butter were provided
on it’ Agreed upon and the wording is from al-Bukhari.

Pon heh 0305 fi

1082. A Companion narrated that the Prophet 3€ said, “If
two people invite you at the same time to a Walimah, ac-
cept the invitation of the one whose door is closer to you
(ie. the closest neighbor). But if one of them comes before the
other, accept the invitation of the one who came first.”
Related by Aba Dawad with a weak chain of narrators.

‎fo dni oi:‏ لله

‎1083. Abi Juhaifah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “I do not eat while I am reclining.” Related by
Al-Bukhari

‎: pli ole Le hy BOS WEL lot ‏وَعَنْ عْمَرَ‎ 8
BE ‏يَليك».‎ YS » ‏يَمينك‎ 5 dV BE
1084, ‘Umar bin Aba Salamah narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said to me, “Young man, say Bismillah (mention the
Name of Allah) before you eat, eat with your right hand
and eat from what is next to you.” Agreed upon.

‎389

. ee HE » YS bd tiny Bh ay .4

1085. Ibn “Abbas (RA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
was brought a bowl of Tharid (crumbled bread, soup and meat), so
he said, “Eat from the sides and not from the middle (of the
dish) for the blessing descends in the middle of it.” Related
by the four Imams with a sound chain of narrators. The wording is
from an-Nasé't

1086, Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

#2 never showed a sign of dissatisfaction towards any food (pres-
ented to him). When he liked something he would eat it, but if he
disliked it he did not touch it.” Agreed upon.

1087. Sabir AA) narrated that the “Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Do not eat with your left hand, for the devil eats with
his left hand.” Related by Muslim.

Be asttyl ‏نفس في في‎ MG wet of yy : 7
1088, Abd Qatédah (RA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “When anyone of you drinks, he should not
breathe into the vessel (he is drinking from).” Agreed upon.

1 - ie Ste Uh ‏رضي‎ - J

1089. Abi Dawid related a similar narration on the authority
of Ibn ‘Abbas but with the addition, “or blows in it.” At-Tirmidhi
graded it as Sai

390,
ious
Chapter VI: Sharing the Time
(between two wives or more)

1090, “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah's Messenger
divide the nights between his wives equally, and would say, “O
Allah! This is my division in what I can control (i.e. the
time). So, do not blame me in what You have control over
but I don’t (i.e. love and feclings).” Related by the four Imams.
Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as Sahth, but at-Tirmidhi said
that it is most probably Hadith Mursal.

‎nen ae spot‏ : أن لبي صا مَلى ‎ale th‏ وَل
‎ape tas‏

‎them, will come on the Day of Judgment with one of his

‎sides paralyzed.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams with a
sound chain of narrators,

‎ear

‎£ BE cd
1092. Anas (RAA) narrated, “It is part of the Sunnah of the

‎Prophet 38 that if someone marries a virgin and he has already a
matron, then he should stay with the virgin for seven days; and if

‎391
someone marries a matron, then he should stay with her for three
days, and then he starts to take turns between them (equally),
Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-Bukhéri,

‎ye ah ey -‏ - : أن ‎i‏ صَلَّى الله عا

‎. ‏و : الي». رَوَاهُ ملم‎
1093. Umm Salamah (RA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 married her, he stayed with her for three nights and then
said, “You will get all your rights fully with me. If you wish
I shall spend seven nights with you, but if I spend seven
nights with you, I have to spend the same time with all the
other wives (i.e. anyone he marries who is a matron, he will spe-
nd seven nights with her. But the rule that was set by the Prophet

‎38 is that the virgin is entitled to seven nights and the matron to
three).” Related by Muslim.

‎1094. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that Saudah the wife of Allah’s
Messenger 38 gave up her turn to “A’ishah (RAA). So the Prophet

‎38 used to stay with ‘A'ishah on her night, and the night that was
originally given to Saudah.’ Agreed upon.

‎- tb he) - 55 ty 6

‎role

‎392
sister’s son, the Messenger of Allah 34 would not give preference
to one of his wives over the others as to the division of the nights
he spends (with each of us) and he was just. It was very rare that,
a day would pass without him visiting each one of us. He would
come close to each one he is visiting(cuddling or kissing) but would
not have intercourse with her, until he is in the house of the wife
whose turn is that night, then he would spend the night there.’
Related by Ahmad and Abi Dawdd and the wording is his. Al-
Hakim graded it as Sait

1096. Muslim transmitted on the authority of “A’ishah (RAA)

that she said, ‘When The Messenger of Allah 3 prayed ‘Asr, he
would visit all of his wives, coming close to each of them but...(as
the hadith above).

i bead

1097. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘During the fatal illness of the

Messenger of Allah 3 he used to ask his wives, “Where shall I
stay tomorrow? (meaning with which wife) He meant to ask
about ‘A’ishah’s turn. His wives therefore permitted him to go
where he wished, so he stayed in “A’ishah’s house (until he died
there).’Agreed upon.

3 ‏ذا راد فا‎ ply « Ds Lo ‏فلتأ : 06 305 الله‎ Gey ٠١2
le GE ha EE MB ots BS

1098. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah

intended to go on a journey, he would draw lots. The one whose
lot came out, would go with him on the journey.’ Agreed upon.

5
1099, “Abdullah bin Zam’ah (RAA) narrated that the Messen-
ger of Allah 38 said, “None of you should ever beat his wife as
he would whip his slave....’5"” Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎Wy‏ الخلع
‎Chapter VII: Khul‘a?#5 (Divorce at the Wife’s‏
‎instance By giving a payment to the husband)‏

‎let daly : ‏ل‎

‎1100, bn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The wife of Thabit bin Qais

‎came to the Prophet 38 and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I have no
complaint against Thabit in terms of his religion or morals, but
what I fear is falling into disbelief after coming to Islam (what she
means is being ungrateful to her husband as she is not satisfied).

‎317. ‘The rest of the hadith says, “and then has sexual intereourse with
her at the end of the day.” (such behavior contradicts human nature,
as this is an intimate relationship that requires love and affection bet-
‘ween the spouses.)

‎318 ‘Takes place when the woman is unhappy in her marriage, due to the
husband's bad appearance or manners etc... and wishes to be separated
from him. So, separation between them takes place in return for remun-
eration given to the husband, She gives this amount of money upon wh-
ich they agree (or gives him back his dower, or gives up all her financial
Tights, etc.. depending on the kind of agreement they make to let. him
release or divorce her.

‎394
The Messenger of Allah 3¥ said to her, “Will you give him back

his garden?” She said, ‘Yes.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 said to
him (the husband), “Take back the garden and make a single
pronouncement of divorce (i.e. divorce her once).” Related by
ALBukhari. In another version by Al-Bukhari, ‘and he comman-
ded him to divorce her.

kate te gly ale th Sia ‏فَحَمَلَ‎ Be
1101. Aba Dawid and At-Tirmidhi transmitted that the wife
of Thabit bin Qais asked for Khul’a from her husband and the

Messenger of Allah 3 told her to wait for a single menstruation
(as her Tddah).

1102. ‘Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fa-
ther on the authority of his grandfather that Thabit bin Qais
looked very ugly and his wife said, ‘If it was not for the fear of

Allah, I would have spat on his face when he entered my place.’319
Related by Ibn Majah.

gh SY ‏ذلك‎ os >

ae ‏بن أبي‎ fe at LG 7

1103. Ahmad transmitted on the authority of Sahl bin Abi
Hathmah, ‘It was the first Khul’a in Islam’?

319 She said in another narration, that she saw him walking among his
companions, and found that he had the darkest skin, he was the short-
est and the most ugly, so she feared Allah in treating him badly or not
giving him his rights and that is why she asked for Khul‘a.

395
BL OL
Chapter VIII: Divorce

‎heyy » pth ts‏ سَالَهُ
‎Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .1104
‎said, “There is no lawful matter which is more detested‏
‎by Allah than divorce.” Related by Aba Dawad and Ibn Majah.‏
‎Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih,‏

‎bt oy 2‏ - رضي الله ‎ge‏ - : أنه ‎Gib‏ هوهي ‎BE‏
‏هد ‎hts‏ الله لَه ‎fy‏ هسل سر وول الله ‎Soo‏ الل ‎ie‏ وَل
‎tg‏ بَعْدُ » ‎Ho Ory‏ أن يمس 7

‎ge aes gl gilt ‏أن‎ als

‎1105. Ibn ‘Umar narrated that he divorced his wife while she
was menstruating during the lifetime of the Prophet #8. Umar

‎asked the Prophet 3£ about that and he said, “Let your son
take her back and keep her in wedlock until her menstrual
period ends and then wait until she has the next period
and when it (the period) ends, if he wishes to keep her, he
can do so and if he wishes to divorce her, he can do so be-
fore having sexual intercourse with her. This is the presc-
ribed period that Allah has fixed for the woman to be divo-
reed.” Agreed upon.

‎der him to take her
back and then divorce her when she is (after the time of her
period) either pure from menstruation or pregnant.”

‎396,
eet Gye Alay,

1107. In another version by Al-Bukhari, ‘It was counted as one
declaration of divorce (i.e. divorcing her while she is menstrual-
ting)’

فَإِنّ رَسُولَ الله صَلّى ‎aE‏
‎Sues shies‏

انا » فَقَدْ عْصَيْت رَبك فيمًا ‎tb te Bl‏ امرأتك».

1108. In a narration by Muslim, Ibn ‘Umar said (when he was
asked him about the one who divorced his wife while she was
having her menses), ‘If you have made one or two declarations of
divorce, Allah's Messenger 38 commanded me to take her back
and then wait until she has her next menses, and then wait until
her period ends, and then divorce her before touching her (having
sexual intercourse with her). But if you have pronounced the word
of divorce three times (at the same time), then you have disobeyed
Allah and His Messenger 3% in His command about divorcing your
wife’

68 وفي روَايَة ‎oI‏ : قال ‎ale‏ بْنُ ‎«(dle Wadham sae‏ وَلمْ يَرَهَا
شا » وَقَالَ : إذَا طَهْرَتْ ‎led‏ ليُمْسك».

1109. In another version, “Abdullah Ibn “Umar said, ‘So he
made her return to me and did not count this divorce (the one

pronounced during her menses) and said, “When she is purified,
he may divorce her or keep her.”

age ‏عَلَى‎ SiN > : ‏قَالَ‎ - Ogle th oy - Ae hy ey ه٠‎
CSO SG Ab ‏خلاقة‎ be tg Kh plo ale th ‏رَسُْول الله صلى‎
‏كانت لَهُمْ فيه ناد قَلَوْ‎ ST ‏قد استَعْحَلُوا في‎ at Op: ‏عُمَرُ‎ IL , ‏رَاحدةٌ‎

. ‏ملم‎ By) ‏عَلَنِهم».‎ Stat ‏عَلَيِهِمْ ؟‎ stadt

1110. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘Threefold divorce (If one
397

states three pronouncements of divorce at the same time) was cou-

nted as only one divorce during the lifetime of the Prophet 38, Aba
Bakr and two years of the Caliphate of Umar. Then ‘Umar said,
‘People have become hasty in a matter in which they used to take
their time (i.e. divorce) before deciding on it. So, I wish if we impl-
ement it on them (count them as three divorces if they say at one

time).’ 3 So Umar implemented it. Related by Muslim.

fo ‏ولول ال‎ sh: 25 ‏رضي الله‎ - ad ‏وعَنْ مَحْمُود بن‎ ١

J (OE FU » ‏امه 258 تطليقَات جميعًا‎ Gib Jo chy ‏الله عليه‎
1 u ‏قَامَ رَحْلَّ فَقَالَ‎ Bs abt 35

«By igs Such ayy ‏الله » لا أله ؟‎

1111. Mahméd bin Labid (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 was told about a man who divorced his wife by making
three pronouncements of divorce at the same time (threefold divo-

ree). The Prophet 38 got up very angrily and said, “Are you ‏هام‎
‎ying games with Allah’s Book while I am among you?” A
man got up and said, '0 Messenger of Alléh, shall I kill him?
Narrated by An-Nasa’i with a sound chain of narrators.

fae, fob ‏قال‎ Ce ‏على‎ th ‏رَضِي‎ - ole Wy Biv
aes ce ‏الله‎ by ‏َال له‎
. ‏ماود‎ ff ‏رَوَاهُ‎ agin,  ُتْمِلَع‎

َه وَسَلُمَ : «راجع ‎DB LUI‏

1112. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘Aba Rukanah divorced his

wife (irrevocably). The Messenger of Allah 3% thereupon said to
him, “Take your wife back.” Abo Rukénah then said, ‘I have
divorced her three times.’ The Messenger of Allah again said to
him, “1 know that. Take her back.” Related by Aba Dawid.

320. He means it as a punishment to let them think it over firs, before pron-
ouncing divoree three times at the same time.

398
7

ins, (A Gib: ‏لأَحْمَدَ‎ a ‏وفي‎ 1١

. OEE ‏وفيه‎ GIRLY Uh

apd BE ‏في مجلس وَاحد‎
Gane ‏رفي‎ «Gants Wr : gly ‏به‎

1113. In a narration by Ahmad, ‘Aba Rukénah divorced his
wife irrevocably (by making three pronouncements of divorce) in
one sitting. He then became very sad. The Messenger of Allah 32
said to him, “It is considered as one(divorce).” There is a weak
narrator in its chain.

1114. Aba Dawdd narrated with a stronger chain of narrators,
‘Rukanah divorced his wife Suhaymah irrevocably. (When he went

to the Messenger of Allah 34 he said, “By Allah, I only intended it

to be one time (as one divorce).” The Messenger of Allah 34 retur-
ned her to him.

hy ‏قَالَ رَسُولْ الله صَلَى‎ : Sb - Be ‏رضي الله‎ - SA ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ 6
eis Ny BSI, CK AS, Sale Ha Sls Lo pty ‏عَلَيْهِ‎

. ‏وَصَحَّحَُ اْحَاكمٌ‎ Cat Yi

1115. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 48 said, “(There are) three things when they are taken
seriously they are considered as serious and when taken in
jest, they are still taken seriously. (They are) marriage, div-

orce and revocation (of divorce).” Related by the four Imams
except for an-Nasa'. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

SM ayy

Stet, ‏ضّعيف : «الطْلاق‎ BT OG Le ‏لان عَديّ‎ Ly ‏وّفي‎ 5
Sry

1116. In a narration by Ibn “Adi with a weak chain of narra-
tors, “(They are) divorce, manumitting and marriage.”

399
1117. Al-Harith bin Abi Usamah narrated on the authority of

‘Ubadah bin As-Samit (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 2% said,
‘It is not permissible to jest in three things: divorce, mar-
riage and manumitting. Whoever mentioned them, they are
binding.” It is related with a weak chain of narrators.

pay le ‏صلّى الله‎ Sth ‏رضي الله نه = عَن‎ - SA ‏وَعَسنْ أبي‎ va

«ls

1118. Ab Hurairah, narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏أ‎
‎said, “Allah, the Almighty has forgiven for my Ummah (nat-
ion) the thoughts that occur to their minds (what they speak
within themselves), as long as they do not put them into ac-
tion or express them verbally (utter them).” Agreed upon

Yr ‏وَقَالَ أو حاتم‎ Ast » ‏مَاجَهُ‎ BN ‏رَوَاهُ‎ elle
1119. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Allah has forgiven my Ummah their (wrong actions),

which are due to error or oblivion, and for what they do
under coercion.” Related by Ibn Majah and al-Hakim.

(Sata fe Bp

1120. ‏م15‎ ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘If a man takes an oath that

400
his wife is prohibited(unlawful) to him, it is not to be considered
as anything (i.e. not considered as a divorce). Verily you have a go-
od example in the Messenger of Allah 38. Related by Al-Bukhari.

I, ted ‏فهو‎ HGS AS Se ‏«إذًا‎ : ike ‏عن ابن‎ ly 0
1121. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘If a man takes an oath that

his wife is prohibited (unlawful) to him, he should offer an expia-
tion for his oath.’ Related by Muslim.

‎iy‏ عدت بتَظيم ‎aoe‏ بأملك». ‎oy‏ البْحَارِيُ
‎“Mishah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the daughter of Al-Jawn‏ ,1122

‎entered the presence of the Messenger of Allah 38, and he went
near her, she said, ‘I seck refuge in Allah from you.’ He replied,
‘You have sought refuge in the One Who is Great, Rejoin

‎your kin.?2? Related by Al-Bukhari

‎dy eo ‏قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ - Se do - ey er

‏بعد ‎BG‏ ولا ‎ke‏ إلا ‎wath a‏ رَواه أبو يعلَى »

‎1123. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏لك‎
‎said, “No divorce is to be considered except after marriage

‎(has taken place), and no emancipation is considered exce-

‎321- Meaning he would not touch her or have any sexual relationship with
her,

‎822. She was divorced in this ease, as the Messenger of Allah 3 meant to
divorce her

‎323- Such as a man saying that any woman I marry from that family or tribe
will be divorced, even before he marries any of them. This is not conside-
red as a divorce as marriage has not yet taken place

‎401
pt after the actual owning(of the slave).” Related by Aba Yala,
and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih, but the Hadith is defective,

ES US hy

pS spall oo BUY eh 004

1124. Ibn Majah related the same narration on the authority
of ALMiswar bin Makhramah, with a reasonable chain of narra-
tors, but it is also defective.

قَالَ رَسُولُ ‎fe al‏ الله ‎ply ale‏ :
فيب لَاَيَْلكُء ‎SEY‏ فيمًا ‎eh UY‏ أو 356 » وا

1125. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fa-
ther on the authority of his grandfather that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said,“No human being may make a vow about some-
thing which he does not possess, or emancipate someone
who he does not possess, or divorce someone who is not his
(wife).” Related by Aba Dawad and At-Tirmidhi who graded it as
Sahih, al-Bukhari commented that it is the most sound Hadith on
this subject.

: sees

1126. ‘A'ishah (RAA) narrated that ‘Allah’s Messenger 4 said,
“There are three (people) who are not blamed for their ac-
tions: the sleeping person until he wakes up, the child until
he becomes mature, and the insane person until he comes
back to sanity or becomes conscious.” Related by Ahmad and

the four Imams except for At-Tirmidhi, Al-Hakim graded it as
Sahih.

Chapter IX: Raj‘ah (Taking Back A
Divorced Wife)

. ‏وَسَنَدُهُ صّحِيحٌ‎ «WB ‏هَكَذَا‎ 55 fay

1127, ‘Imran bin Husain (RAA) narrated that he was asked

about the ruling of a man who divorces his wife and then takes

her back without the attestation of witnesses. He said, ‘Get witn-

essses for both her divorce and her raj‘ah.’ Related by Abt Dawid
with a sound chain of narrators.

1128. It was also related by Al-Baihaqi with the wording,
“Imran bin Husain (RAA) was asked about a man who took back
his divorced wife without the attestation of witnesses. He replied,
‘He did that without following the Sunnah (of the Prophet 38), let
him get the witnesses now.’ Imam At-Tabardni had the addition,
‘And ask for the forgiveness of Allah.”

- رَضي ‎«ga Gib WF - age Sn‏ 6 الي

1129, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that when he divorced his
wife, the Messenger of Allah $¥ said to ‘Umar (RAA), “Command
him to take her back.” Agreed upon.

403
HUES Uy ‏بَابْ الإيلاء‎
Chapter X: 110321, Dhihaér®5 and Kaffarah
(Expiation)

- ge thos -

SUS cull fy » ‏حَلالا‎ adh ‏لَ‎

BGs « Cole ‏رَوَاهُ‎

1180. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah's Messenger
oath not to approach his wives (made 1187 and prohibited (some-
thing which is not unlawful in itself).Then he went back and made
this thing lawful (as it was originally) and offered an expiation for
his oath.’ Related by At-Tirmidhi, with a trustworthy chain of
narrators.

‎ay‏ وَعَن ‎by‏ - رضي ‎Mh‏ عَنْهُمًا - قا
‎ui,‏ المُولي حت ‎lly‏ ولا ‎Obs cb a‏ حتّى يُطلّق». ‎aie‏ لبحَارِي .
‎Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘When the period of four‏ .1131
‎months has expired (as stated in the Qur'an), the husband either‏
‎returns to his wife (has a normal relationship with her) or divorces‏
‎her. And the divorce is not valid until the husband declares it him-‏
‎self.’ Related by Al-Bukhéri.‏

‎106 - 2 dh oo) - ‏بن يسَارٍ‎ but tay - ١
(SOU ‏وَسَلُمْ كلهُمْ يَهُونَ اْحُولي». رَوَاهُ‎ dle hy Le ‏من أمْحَاب البِيّ‎ Shy
1132. Sulaiman bin Yasar (RAA) narrated, ‘I met over ten

‎Tab ile, ES jy

‎324. This is where the husband takes an oath that he will not approach his
wife, i.e. not to have sexual intercourse with her, as a kind of discipline
‘The maximum period for the /14’ as set by the Qur’én is four months
(Sarah al-Bagarah, 2:26).

‎325- A practice that goes back to pre-Islamic times. It is when the husband
makes a statement to his wife like, ‘You are to me like the back of my
‘mother,’ meaning never to approach her. For the Muslims Allah preseri-
bed an expiation to be offered by anyone who says such a thing, and it is
not regarded as divorce,

‎404
Companions of the Prophet 42 who gave the husband a maximum
of four months for the 14’ (after which he should either divorce
her or resume his relationship with her). Related by Ash-Shafi7.

1133, Tbn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘Ia’ at the time of Jéhiliyah
(pre-Islamic period), used to continue for one or two years. Allah
revealed that it is not to exceed four months. If it continues for
less than four months, then it is not considered 1160 Related by
Al-Baihagi.

1134. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘A man practiced Dhihér
with his wife and then he had intercourse with her. He went to

the Prophet 3 and said, ‘I had intercourse with her before making

the prescribed expiation.’ The Messenger of Allah 3¥ said to him,
“Do not approach her until you do what Allah ordered you
to do.” Related by the four Imams and rendered as Sahih by At-
Tirmidhi. The narration of Al-Bazzar is as follows, “Offer the
prescribed expiation and do not do it again.”

BONG MST ‏مسنكيئا». أعطرة‎ he Art UE ‏فال : «أطّعْ‎ . en
3 + ‏هم فرقا من تر تين ب‎ f

. ‏الْجَارُود‎ ly EIR ‏لبن‎ oy th

1135. Salamah Ibn Sakhr (RAA) narrated, ‘When the month

of Ramadan came, | feared lest I should have intercourse with my
wife (while fasting), so I made Dhihar with her and told her that
she is like the back of my mother. One night (in Ramadan) I saw
something of her (body) so I had intercourse with her. The Mes-
senger of Allah 3% said to me, “Free a slave.” I said, ‘I do not pos-
ses any but myself.’ He again said, ‘Then fast for two consecu-
tive months.’ I said, ‘Whatever I suffered was due to my fasting.’

He said, “Feed sixty poor people one Farag (a measure that
equals 15 $4’) of dates.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams
except for An-Nasd’i. Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn al-Garéd graded it
as Sahih.

‎OL;‏ اللْعَان
‎Chapter XI: Li’ans26‏

‏عَن ابن - ‎os‏ الله ‎tage‏

‎caf. hr‏ أن لَرْ وَحَدَ ‎at wit‏ عَلَى ها

‎326- The word is derived from the Arabic word La’n which means cursing,
This takes place when a man accuses his wife of committing adultery
without having four witnesses to support his claim. If he speaks publicly
about it he will be considered as an accuser and will be given eighty la-
shes, which is the punishment for accusation of adultery. When this inc-
ident took place during the lifetime of the Prophet 3¥ the verse of Lian
was revealed (24: 6-9), which states that a husband should swear four
times (in front of the magistrate and in the presence of his wife) that he
is telling the truth and the fifth time he says that may the curse of Allah
be upon him if he is lying, And then she swears four times that he is
lying about what he has charged her with and the fifth time she says
that may the wrath of Allah be upon her if he is telling the truth, In this
way he is no longer liable to be punished for false accusation and she is
no longer liable to be punishment for adultery. By this, she is eternally
prohibited for him and the child she is expecting (if any) is not his.

‎406
1136. bn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘A man asked, 'O Messenger
of Allah! What do you see if someone from amongst us happened
to find his wife committing adultery. What should he do? If he ta-
ks, he is talking of a grievous matter, and if remains silent, he is
also keeping silent over a grievous matter. The Messenger of Allah

38 did not answer him. Afterwards the man came again and said

to Allah’s Messenger 38, ‘What I have asked you about is now my
affliction (ie. it actually happened to me; that he saw his wife
committing adultery). Then Allah, the Almighty revealed the ver-

ses of Sarah an-Niir, and the Messenger of Allah 38 recited them
for him, exhorted him and reminded him of Allah, and told him
that the torture of this present life is much less than the torture of
the Hereafter. He (the man) said, ‘No, by Him Who sent you with

the truth! I did not tell a lie about her.’ Then the Prophet 38 called
her (the wife of that man) and exhorted her as well. She said, ‘No,

by Him Who sent you with the truth! He is a liar.’ The Prophet 38
began with the man who made four testimonies by Allah, and then
the woman did the same, and then he separated them both (for-
ever). Related by Muslim.

‎cn‏ رضي للاعة - . أن 25 لله على ‎th‏ يوسم َل

‎1137. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎3 said to the couple involved in the case of Li’an, “Your accou-
nts will be with Allah. One of you two is a liar. You have no

‎407
authority over her.” The man said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! My

property!’ The Messenger of Allah ‏و‎ replied,“If you were telling
the truth concerning her, that would be in return for what
you have enjoyed of her, and if you were lying, that would
be more remote to you than her returning to you (ic. if he
was lying about her, how would he take what he had given to
her).” Agreed upon.

‎By ll‏ به». ‎BE‏ عليه

‎1138. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Watch(for the baby that she will give birth to), if she gives
birth to a child which is white with lank hair, then it is her
husband’s child, but if she gives birth to a child which is
brown with curly hair then it is the child of the man her
husband accused her of committing adultery with.” Agreed

‎upon.

‎SU «208g ‏دود‎ ff S55

‎1139. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
ordered a man to put his hand on his hand on the fifth testimony
and said to him, “It would be the decisive one (which will bring
Allah’s punishment and curse, and will separate them for ever).”
Related by Abi Dawid and An-Nasa'i with a trustworthy chain of
narrators,

‎‘a ae ‏في‎ iss Pei PER #1

‎AE : ‏ما كال‎ 26 LES ‏«قلمًا‎
‏ملم ». ل‎ doth fe ‏أ ناث وشو له‎ ABE
1140, Sahl bin Sa’d (RAA) narrated concerning the ease of the

‎408

couple involved in the Li‘én,When they had finished making their
testimony, the man said. ‘O Messenger of Allah! If I keep her now
as a wife with me, then I have told a lie about her.’ The man then

divorced thrice before Allah's Messenger # ordered him to do

50,27 Agreed upon,

So tht hae ‏أن رَْلا‎ : -

GEE UE lain: ‏لأمس ء قَالَ‎

‎٠ 34‏ وا

‎ly ‏مذي‎

‏: «قاستشتغ ‎ale‏ . رَوَآهُ ‎ff‏ ذا

‎1141. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘A man came to the Prophet
38 and said, ‘I have a wife who does not keep the hand of the tou-

‎cher (anyone who touches her) from her. The Prophet 38 said to
him, “Divorce her.” The man replied, ‘But I am afraid, I won't be

‎able to keep away from her. The Messenger of Allah 38 then said
to him, “Then enjoy her (with that deficiency),” Related by Aba
Dawad, At-Tirmidhi and Al-Bazzar with a trustworthy chain of
narrators.

‎An-Nasa't related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas with a different

‎chain of narrators, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 said to him, “Divo-
ree her.” He replied, ‘I can not endure my desire for her’ The

‎Messenger of Allah 32 then sad, “Then keep her.”

‎fn fo ‏الله‎ B58 - ‏رضي الله عله‎ - A oy 5

‎yt ley te

‎327. ‘The majority of scholars are of the opinion that separation takes place
anyway by the end of the process of Li‘an. As for what this man did, he

‎was not ordered by the Prophet # to do so. His divorce only assured him
of what had already taken place, whieh is their separation for ever.

‎409
I ‏عَلَى رموس‎ Seay 2 NC - a ‏يط‎ ky - ‏حَحد وَلَّدَهُ‎

ere

ye ‏دَاوْدَ‎ aE ‏وَالآخرينَ».‎
‎1142. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that he heard the Mes-

senger of Allah 3 say when the verse of Lian was revealed,“‘Any-
one who falsely claims a child to her family, while he does
not belong to them, Allah will have nothing to do with her
(not to expect His Mercy) and will not let her enter His Para-
dise. And any man who denies paternity of his own child -
while looking at him(i.e. he is certain that he is his child) Allah
will not let him look at Him (at Allah) and shall disgrace
him in the presence of all creation the first and the last (on
the Day of Resurrection).” Related by Abi Dawad and An-Nas-
ai and Ibn Majah. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih,

CA » ‏عَيْنِ‎ i ‏بولّده‎ A ‏وَعَنْ عْمَرَ - رضي الله 2 - قَالَ : «من‎ ١١4+
‏لَهُ أن ب‎

Op ‏هه » وَهُوٌ حَسَنٌ‎ Sept .» A
1143. “Umar (RAA) narrated,'Whoever acknowledges his pat-

ernity to his child, even for a second, he is not to deny him,’ Rela-
ted by Al-Baihagi,

- رض الل ‎Me‏ - : أن ‎SES‏ َال : يا رَسُولَ الله » ‎Sy‏

Wide gay)
1144. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘A man came to the Pro-
phet 38 and said,'My wife gave birth to a black child.’ The Prophet

isked him, “Do you have camels?” The man replied, ‘Yes.’

410
‘The Messenger of Allah 38 asked him, “What color are they?”

The man replied, ‘Red.’ The Messenger of Allah 38 asked him
again, “Is there a gray one among them?” The man answered,
‘Yes.’ The Messenger of Allah #8 then asked him. “Where has
that (gray) one come from?” The man said, ‘Maybe it is due to
heredity.’ The Prophet 3 said, “Maybe your latest son has this
(black) color due to heredity.”

Ina version by Muslim,The man was intending to deny him.’ And

said at the end of the narration, ‘Allah's Messenger 38 did not
allow him to deny him’

‎ou‏ العدة

‎as 5 is cel ey MENG ‘
Chapter XI: ‘Iddah and 11

‎BL Up:‏ الأسلميّة

‎t0‏ 1 عن ‎ah‏ ين ‎GS‏ - رضي الله
- رضي ‎a a = ye‏ وقاة وها ‎Lo Sh its «Sth‏ الله
‎aie,‏ قتكم » ‎hays wes Gols‏ وأملة
‎soe‏

‎Sb‏ وص حا ‎day‏ وكا

‎1145. Al-Miswar bin Makhramah narrated that Subai‘ah al-
Aslamiyah(RAA) gave birth(to a child) a few nights after the death

‎of her husband. She went to the Prophet 38 and asked his permis-
sion to get married, so he permitted her to do so and she did.’%
Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎328. The woman whose husband has died refrains from adornments, perfu-
mes, going out (except for a necessity) etc... for a period of four months
and ten days after the death of her husband which is her ‘Iedah.

‎329. ‘The ‘Iddah of the pregnant woman ends when she gives birth whether
divoreed or a widow.

‎all
In another narration, ‘She gave birth forty nights after the death
of her husband.’

In Muslim's version, Az-Zuhari said, ‘I see nothing wrong with her
getting married while she is still in her post birth bleeding but on
condition that her husband does not touch her till she becomes
pure.’

1146. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘I commanded Barirah to obse-
rve her ‘Iddah for three menstrual periods.’ Related by Ibn Majah.

1147. Ash-Shi’bi narrated on the authority of Fatimah bint

Qais (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 38 said regarding a wo-
man who is divorced three times (irrevocable divorce), “She has
no right for maintenance or housing.” Related by Muslim.

5 « ‏تعن و تكتحل‎ OF Bat OS IS

535 Ny pit ‏»وال‎ Si «bh fs ‏مر نْ‎

1148. Umm “Atiyah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “It is not lawful for a woman who believes in
Allah and the Hereafter to mourn for a dead person for
more than three days, except for her husband (she is to
mourn) for four months and ten days. She is not to wear a
dyed garment, except for a garment of ‘Asb (special clothes
made in Yemen). She must not apply Kuhl nor perfume. But

412
what is permissible is that when she is purified from her
menses, she may use a small amount of Kust (type of incense,
to get rid of the smell of the blood).” Agreed upon and the wording
is from Muslim.

Aba Dawad and an-Nasé’i added the following, ‘She must not
apply Henna.’ an-Nasé'i added, “or comb her hair.”

: ‏؟ قَالَ‎ hastens Gl room

1149. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated, ‘I applied aloe juice to
my eyes after the death of Abd Salamah.’ The Messenger of Allah
3 said, “It gives the face a nice glow (makes it look fresh),
so use it only at night and remove it in the daytime, and do
not comb your hair with scent or henna as it is a type of
dye.” I then asked him, ‘What should I use when I comb my hair?

He said, “Use lote-tree leaves (Sidr).” Related by An-Nasa’i and
Aba Dawad with a good chain of narrators.

1150. Umm Salamah narrated, ‘A woman came to the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! My daughter's
husband died, and she is suffering from a disease in her cyes.
Shall we apply Kuhl to it? He replied, ‘No’ Agreed upon.

. ‏ملم‎ By ‏مَعْرُوفا».‎ ais Wf glad Of ‏حُدَي تلك فَإنّكِ عَسَى‎
1151. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘My maternal aunt was divorced
thrice, and she wanted to reap some dates of hers, but a man saw

413
her and blamed her for going out. She came to the Messenger of

Allah 3 to complain, and he said to her,“Certainly, go and reap
your palms, so you may give in charity thereof or do a good
deed.” Related by Muslim.

bs ist Ste ue

1152. Furai‘ah bint Malik narrated, ‘My husband went out in
search of some of his slaves, and they killed him. I asked the Mes-

senger of Allah 3 to go back to my people, for my husband left me
without a house that belonged to him or maintenance.’ He said to
me, “Yes (go to your family).” When I was in my room he called
me and said, “Stay at your place until you finish your prese-
ribed Tddah.” She said, ‘So I stayed there for four months and
ten days.’ She added, Uthmén used to follow the same ruling later
on(i.e. for the “Iddah of the woman whose husband died).” Related
by Ahmad and the four Imams, At-Tirmidhi, adh-Dhuhali, Ibn
Hibban and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

1153. Fatimah bint ‏دنه‎ narrated, ‘I said: © Messenger of
Allah! My husband divorced me thrice and I am afraid that some-
‘one may attack me (as she was staying in a deserted place). The
Messenger of Allah gave her permission to move to another house
(to spend her “Iddah there.)' Related by Muslim,

44
398 AT hes ‏طهر‎ GAT OIE ‏ولد ذا توفي‎ Me : ‏ينا‎

yin diet « seh BSc, BU ‏وَابْنُ‎

1154, ‘Amro bin al-“As (RAA) narrated, ‘Do not confuse us ab-

out the Sunnah of our Prophet 3. The ‘Iddah of the slave woman,
who is the mother of a child (born free), and her master died, is
four months and ten days.’ Related by Ahmad, Abd Daw0d and
Ibn Majah. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

(5596

«othe hy Sob» :
Gey ‏مَرْهُوعًا‎ Beh,  'ينطفراَدلا‎ 5 wots yey

1155. Tbn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The slave woman has only
two pronouncements of divorce (unlike the free woman who has
three), and her Iddah is only for two menstrual cycles.’ Related by
Ad-Daraqutni.

ل ‎IN « LSE » 545 A EE‏ من ‎ta‏ عا

1156, Aba Dawad, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah related the

same Hadith on the authority of ‘A'ishah (RAA). Al-Hakim graded
it as Sahih but some scholars rendered it weak.

697 وَعَنْ ريمع ‎of‏ ثابت - رَضي الله 85 - ‎oe‏ ابي صَلى الله عَلَيِْ
‎ply‏ قَالٌ : ‎bs Yo‏ لامريء ‎edly le Dy‏ الآحر أن ‎ahs‏ مَاءَهُ £55 غَيره».

Bh sg » ‏حبّانَ‎ By LG » ‏دَاوُدَ‎ ST

1157. Ruwaifi‘ bin Thabit (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 3 said, “It is not lawful for a man who believes in
Allah and the Day of Resurrection to have intercourse with

a slave woman (newly bought) who is already pregnant.”

330- If a man buys a slave woman and discovers that she is already pregnant
he is not allowed to have intercourse with her until she delivers the

415
Related by Aba Dawid and At-Tirmidhi, Ibn ‏صقططنع‎ graded it as
Sahih.

«Ge I La : ‏عَنْهُ - في امرأة المفقود‎ ain

كيف

oa

1158, Ibn ‘Umar narrated concerning the wife of a lost man
(who is absent and his news ceases to reach her), that she must
wait for four years and then have an ‘Iddah for four months and
ten days (assuming that he died). Related by Malik and Ash-
Shafi’.

1159. Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “The wife of a lost man remains his wife,
until she gets certain news about his fate.” Related by Ad-
Déraqutni with a weak chain of narrators.

JB - 22 ‏حابر - رضي الله‎ ey i

5 علد ار

قل سول لله ‎$e‏ الل له

‎Ua‏ يَكُونَ اكحًا » أ ذا مَخرمٍ». ‎Oy‏ ملم

‎1160. Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

‎of Allah 38 said, “No man is allowed to spend the night in the
house of another woman unless he is married to her, or of
her Makrams (who are not allowed to marry her.)” Related
by Muslim.

‏- رضي الله ‎Be - eS‏ لبي صَلّى الله
‎GY‏ ذي ‎BBE ght‏ البُحَارِي .

‎1161. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎32 said, “No man should be alone with a woman unless it is

‎child. [f he is not sure that she is pregnant, then she must have ‘Tddah
for one menstrual period before he can have intercourse with her.

‎416

in the presence of one of her Mahrams (male relatives that
she cannot marry),” Related by Al-Bukhari.

or ‏وَصَحَحَهُ‎ 58 5 35
1162. Abd Sa‘id Al-Khudri(RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said regarding the captive women taken in Autés (the
location of a battle), “You should not have intercourse with a
pregnant woman until she gives birth, nor with a non-preg-
nant woman until she has one menstrual cycle.” Related by
Aba Dawid. Al-Hakim graded it as S

1163. There is a similar hadith transmitted by Ad-Daraqutni
on the authority of Ibn “Abbas

ny ale th ‏الب صَلّى‎ og » - 2 ‏رضي الله‎ -

1164. Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated ‏عط عمط‎ Messenger of

Allah 2 said, “The child is to be attributed to the one on
whose bed he is born, and as for a woman adulterer she is
to be stoned.” Agreed upon.

111011538 ل وَمِنْ حَديث ‎at ge‏ وَعَنٍ ان ‎og‏ علد

1165, 1166, 1167. An-Nasé’i transmitted the same hadith on
the authority of “A'ishah and Ibn Mas‘dd (RAA). Aba Dawad rela-
ted it on the authority of Uthman.

47

‎hy‏ المرام).
Chapter XIII: 18067 (Becoming Unmarriageable
Kin By Suckling)

ply
1168. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3

said, “One or two sucklings would not make marriage unla-
wful.”Related by Muslim

1169. ‘A’ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “Be sure as to who your foster brothers are, for the
foster (suckling) relationship is confirmed when milk is st-
ill the essential food for the child (the only food that satisfies
his hunger).” Agreed upon.

and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah #2! Sélim the client of Aba Hudh-
aifah lives with us in the same house, and he has now reached

puberty.’ The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ said to her, “Suckle him so
that he may become unlawful (in regard to marriage) for

you.”35! Related by Muslim.

331- Scholars are of the opinion that this hadith is not a common ruling, as it,
is only infants who are normally breastfed. In this case, the messenger
of Allah 38 meant that she may give him some of her milk (in a cup) and
thus she would foster him, and not actually suckle him as he is a grown

418

1171, “Aishah (RAA) narrated that Aflah the brother of Abd
al-Qu’ais (Aflah is her foster uncle) came and asked for permission
to enter upon her after the verse of the Hijab (the veiling of wo-
men) was revealed. “A’ishah added, ‘But I refused to let him in.
When the Messenger of Allah 38 came, I told him what happened,
so he commanded me to give him permission to come into my pres-
ence and said, “He is your uncle.” Agreed upon

اكات ري - ‎dhs‏ قلا : ‎am‏ نيما لل

ات ات ‎a eal‏ خضي مَعْلُومَات » ‎bby GA‏
‎th‏ َيه ‎Gas gly‏ فيا مقرأ م القُرآن». رَوَاهُ ‎plied‏

1172. “Aishah (RAA) narrated, ‘It had been revealed in the
Holy Qur’an that ten (definitely) known suck lings make the mar-
riage unlawful, but that was abrogated (and substituted) by five

known sucklings. When the Messenger of Allah 38 died, they were
still read (their recitation was finally abrogated from the Qur'an
before his death, but the ruling still applies).” Related by Muslim.

ole nro ae ah; ‏من‎ PIE ‏وَيَحْرُمٌ من الرّضّاعَة‎

1178. Thn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 38
was asked to marry the daughter of Hamzah (his cousin and foster
brother), he said, “She is unlawful for me as she is the daugh-
ter of my foster brother. What is unlawful due to blood rel-
ations, is also unlawful due to Rid@‘ah (suckling).” Agreed
upon.

man and she cannot. uncover in front of him. But the majority of scho-
lars are of the opinion that fosterage only applies to infants within the
first two years.

419

PSG ‏وَصّحُحَهُ هُرَ‎ » LIS Gy

1174. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “The only suckling which makes marriage
unlawful is that which is absorbed in the bowels and was
before the time of weaning.” Related by At-Tirmidhi. He and
al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎ : - 8 tos -‏ رَضَاعَ إل في
‎al‏ َوه ‎Uy EEG‏ عدي » ‎Obs BSI Ese‏ الْمَوقُوفة

‎1175. Tbn “Abbas (RA) narrated, ‘Rida (suckling) only appl-
ies to infants during the first two years of age.’ Related by Ad-
Daraqutni and Ibn ‘Adi.

‎1 5h ‏بو‎ Soph gd oat, « phsl pal oY ‏وَسَلَمَ : «لا رَضَاعَ‎ ab
1176. Tbn Mas ‘ad (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎ne by — an‏ - رضي اله له - قل

‎said, “The only suckling which makes marriage unlawful‏ وَل
‎is that which strengthens the bones and lets the flesh‏
‎grow.” Related by Abt Dawid.‏

‎ty wv

‎Wj EARS » ‏قيلّ ؟». كَمَارَكَهَا عُقَبةُ‎ a CS
1177. “Ugbah bint Al-Harith narrated that he married Umm
Yehia bint Abi Ihab. A woman came along and said,‘ suckled both
of you.’ ‘Uqbah then asked the Messenger of Allah 38 who said to
him, “How can you hesitate (about separating from her), after
you have been told (that you were suckled from the same wo-

‎man)?” Ugbah then separated from her and she married another
man. Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎420
‎٠‏ أَرحَهُ أبو دَاوُدَ » وَهْوَ ‎Poe‏ وَل

‎36 prohibited that a foolish woman be asked to suckle an infant.

‎Related by Abd Dawid. It is a Hadith Mursal and Ziad is not a
Companion

‎ol OLS
Chapter XIV: Maintenance

‎ipa i ‏بن‎ Me eis id - gle al ‏رضي‎ - Mane 9

‎ele FE ‏وَمَا يَكْفي ينيك».‎ BK ‏ف ما‎
1179, “ishah (RAA) narrated that Hind bint ‘Utbah ‏عطا-‎ wife

‎of Abi Sufian- came to the Messenger of Allah 3£ and said, ©
Messenger of Allah! Abo Sufidn is a miser and he does not give
enough maintenance for me and my children except what I used to
take from him without his knowledge. Am I to be blamed for that?”

‎The Prophet 3 said to her, “Take what is su’

‎ient for you

‎and your children but in moderation (take only in reasonable
amounts).” Agreed upon.

‎392. Scholars say that the wisdom behind this prohibition could be that bad
character may be inherited, so it is better to choose one with fine qua-
lities.

‎421
aot Fah usd aut oth: Og ye boy th camel

CAG Oe ‏وَصَّحَّحَهُ ابن‎ ONS

1180. Tériq Al-Mubéribi (RAA) narrated, ‘We arrived in Madt-
nah when the Messenger of Allah 3€ was on the pulpit addressing
the people and saying, “The hand which gives (charity) is the
upper hand. And spend first (before giving charity) on the
ones who are dependent on you: your mother and father,
your sister and brother, then your closer relatives and so

on.” Related by An-Nasa‘i. Ibn Hibbén and ad-Daraqutni graded
it as Sahih.

fy fe 305 : ‏عَنَهُ - قَالَ‎ BA oly ay
‏لما ُطيق».‎ Sith yn LILY, Sy tab ty shy et

1181. Abd Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said,“A slave is entitled to his food and clothing (spent by his

master), and he is not to be given tasks that are beyond his
ability.” Related by Muslim

1182, Hakim bin Mu’awiyah Al-Qushairi narrated on the au-
thority of his father, ‘I asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah! What are the

rights of one’s wife upon her husband? The Prophet 38 said, “To
feed her when you eat, and clothe her when you clothe
yourself.” (see hadith no. 1052).

od)

‎ue <‏ وَكسوئهن

‎— VAY
3 ts ‏بطوله‎ tel ‏في حَدِيث‎

‎: emia Sol ‏بِالْمَْرُوف».‎
‎1183. Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RAA) narrated, In the Farewell

‎422

‎- tn Be
Sermon, the Messenger of Allah 38 said regarding women, “You
are responsible for their maintenance and clothing in a
fair manner.” Related by Muslim.

‎ih, (lt Se Shy‏ : «أن يَحْبِسَ ‎OS SEE‏ كُوت4».

‎1184. “Abdullah Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messen-
ger of Allah 38 said, “It is a grave sin for someone to destroy
those for whom he is responsible for their maintenance
(leave them without paying their necessary provisions).” Related
by An-Nasé't
In the version of Muslim, “...to withhold his provisions from
those he possesses (his slaves).”

‎Ys JS Hohe
‏لكن‎ » Bw ‏وَرجَاله‎

‎1185. Jabir (RAA) narrated concerning the pregnant woman

‎whose husband died, that the Messenger of Allah 38 said, “She
has no right to maintenance.” Related by Al-Baihaqi with a
reliable chain of narrators, but he regarded it as Mawqaf.

‎. ‏رَوَاهُ ملم‎
1186. It was mentioned earlier that the one who was divorced

‎thrice is not entitled to maintenanee (see hadith no. 1147), Related
by Muslim.

‎deo DW 5 UE: OG - 2 Ses th (5 - A ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ — ay
‏بن ُو‎ SiN » ‏الشفلى‎ op hy oy ‏لله عليه‎

‎1187, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
423
Allah 38 said,“The upper hand is better than the lower hand
(ie, he who gives in charity is better than he who takes it). And
spend first on the ones who are dependent on you. A
woman would say: ‘Feed me or divorce me.” Related by Ad-
Daraqutni with a good chain of narrators.

1188. Sa‘id bin al-Musaiyab narrated regarding aman who
finds nothing to spend on his wife, ‘They should be separated.’ Rel-
ated by Sa‘id bin Mansar on the authority of Sufian on the autho-
rity of Aba az-Zinad who said,‘ asked Sa‘id bin al-Musaiyab: Does

this relate to the Sunnah of the Prophet 38? He replied: “Yes it
does." This Hadith is a Mursal.

الَى عَلْهُ - : «ألة كب بِلَى ‎Boek Ah‏

‎WE Ju,‏ عَنْ ‎Les‏ أن ‎Ob VAAL‏ يفوا أ يُطَلقُوا» فإن ‎vy‏ يعوا يتقف

‎of the armies regarding some men (soldiers) who had been absent
from their wives for long periods of time, telling them to send ma-
intenanee or divorce them. If they divorce, they should send them
maintenance for the period that they had stopped paying it. Rela-
ted by ash-Shafi‘i and al-Baihaqi with a good chain of narrators.

1190. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that a man came to the

Messenger of Allah 38 and said, ‘Allah’s Messenger, I have a Din-
Ar? He then said to him, “Spend it on yourself.” The man again

said,I have another one.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Spend
it on your children.” He said, ‘I have another one.’ He said,
“Spend it on your wife.” The man again said, ‘I have another
one.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Spend it on your serv-

ant.” He said, ‘I have another one.’ The Messenger of Allah 38
said, “You know better to whom you should give it.” Related
by Ash-Shafii and Aba Dawéd and the wording is his. An-Nas@’I
and al-Hakim also transmitted it, but mentioned the wife before
the children.

CB ‏كُعٌمَنَ قال : «أتك».‎ ome

aeRO ES RE Ce erat

1191, Bahz bin Hakim narrated on the authority of his father
on the authority of his grandfather (RAA), that I said: ‘O Messen-
ger of Allah! Who deserves my best treatment? The Messenger of

Allah 38 said, ‘Your mother.” I said again, ‘Then who” He said,
“Your mother.” I said, ‘Then who” He said, “Your mother.” I
said, ‘Then who?’ He said, “Your father, and then your closer
relatives and so on.” Related by Aba Dawad and At-Tirmidhi,
who rendered it Hasan.

425
يسرع ما ني ‎ds Wee‏ الله علي
‎oS‏ ». رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » وَأبُو 558 » ‎BSc‏ الْحَاكمْ .

1192, “Abdullah bin ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘A woman said, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! This is my son; for him my womb was a ves-
sel, my breast was like a water skin, and my lap was his bedding,
yet his father divorced me and wants to take him away from me.’

The Messenger of Allah 38 said to her, “You have more right to

keep him unless you get married.” Related by Ahmad and Abi
Dawid. Al-Hakim graded it as Sai

ich ke

1193. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that a woman said: 0
Messenger of Allah! My husband wants to take away my son, and
he is helping me and draws water for me from the well of Aba
‘Inabah (i.e. her son). Her husband came and the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “O boy! This is your father and this is your
mother, take the hand of whoever you wish of them.” The

boy then took his mother’s hand and she went away with him’
Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi graded it as
Sahih.

تل ‎٠»‏ فأفْتد ‎au py i th ar‏ الأب" ماحية » و

333- ‘This is a proof that when the child starts ‏ما‎ be independent he is given
the choice between staying with the mother or the father.

426
‎(ly: Ub dt‏ اخدم». ‎Gh OU‏ أبيه

‎. ‏الَاكم‎ bey » ‏أبُو 556 » وَالسَائيُ‎ apt
1194. Rafi’ bin Sinén (RAA) narrated that he embraced Islam
but his wife refused to do so. The Messenger of Allah #2 made the

‎mother sit on one side and the father sit on the other side and
seated the boy between them. The boy then inclined to his mother.
‘The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “O Allah! Guide him.’ The boy
then inclined to his father’s side, and he took him and went away.’
Related by Aba Dawad and An-Nasa’l. Al-Hakim graded it as
Sahih.

‎oye gt 5 2 5‏ : أن الت صَلَى الله ‎le‏ 4

‎feat ‏أْرحَه‎ «budge tidy : ‏وَقَالَ‎ »

‎1195. Al-Baré’ Ibn “Azib narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎8 ordained that the daughter of Hamzah should stay with her
maternal aunt, and said, “The maternal aunt has the same
status as the mother.” Related by Al Bukhari,

‎GM 2‏ حَديث علي - ‎oy‏ الله ‎Jub - Be‏ : «َالْحَارِيةُ
‎Gy Deh OB Gale te‏
‎Ahmad transmitted the same hadith on the authority of‏ .1196

‎“Ali (RAA) and said, ‘The little girl must be given to the care of her
aunt for the maternal aunt is like a mother.’

‎1197. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 8 said, “When the servant of one of you brings him his food,
if he does not let him sit with him (to eat) he should give him one
or two mouthfuls.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Al-
Bukhar?’.

‎427
1198. Ibn ‘Umar narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ said,
‘A woman was punished on account of a cat. She kept it
locked in until it died. So, she was put in the Hell Fire bec-
ause of what she did. She neither fed it or gave it water; as

she locked her in, nor left her to eat from the creatures of
the earth.” Agreed upon.

428
كتَاب الْجنَيَا

Book IX: Crimes (Qisas or Retaliation)

Chapter I

1199. Ibn Mas‘td (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “The blood of a Muslim who testifies that none has
the right to be worshipped but Allah and that I am His
Messenger, cannot be shed lawfully, except in three cases:
a married person who committed adultery, in Qisds (reta-
liation) for murder‘(life for life)and the apostate from Islam
who abandons the Muslim Jamé‘ah (community).” Agreed

upon.

رَضي ‎Ge‏ = عَنْ رَسُول الله ‎No‏
‎ay‏ نم كي : زان حصن قيرح

ae

‎Bh hy‏ من

‎1200. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3 said,
“The blood of a Muslim is not to be shed except for three
reasons: a married man who committed adultery, a man
who kills another Muslim intentionally for which he must
be killed (in Qisés or retaliation), and a man who abandons
Islam and fights against Allah and His Messenger, in which

‎429
case he should be either killed, crucified, or exiled.” Related
by Ab@ Dawid and An-Nasa’i. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

: قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلّى
اناس يم ‎th‏ في ‎oe BE ot‏
‎“Abdullah Ibn Mas‘id (RAA) narrated that the Messen-‏ .1201

ger of Allah 38 said, “The first issues to be judged among
people on the Day of Resurrection, are those of unlawful
blood-shed.” Agreed upon.

‎toi da 2) ١‏ - رضي لل عن

‎1202, Samurah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, “Whoever kills his slave we shall kill him, and who-
ever cuts the nose of his slave we shall cut off his nose.”
Related by Ahmad and the four ImAms. At-Tirmidhi graded it as
Hasan.

‎Aba Dawid and An-Nasé’i added the following, “and whoever
castrates his slave we shall castrate him.” Al-Hakim graded
this addition as Sahih.

‎Shah egy 1+‏ - رضي ‎th‏ عَلَهُ - قَالَ : مشت 35 الله
‎ie‏ الله علي ‎ply‏ يقُولُ : ‎UG SEE Sy‏ بالْولّد». )85 ‎LT, MET‏

‎3h BEGG BU LT,‏ الْحَارُود واليبهقي « وه
‎“Umar bin al-Khattab (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Mes-‏ ,1203

‎senger of Allah 38 say, “A father is not to be killed for his off-
spring.” Related by Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah. Ibn al-
Garéd and al-Baihaqi graded it as Sahih,

‎430

- ‏لل‎ st
fy ol ‏مكل وَفْكَاكُ‎ : UY dip tall ‏هذه‎

رَوَهُ البُحَارِي .

1204, Abd Juhaifah (RAA) narrated,'I asked ‘Ali: ‘Do you have
any other Divine Revelation besides what is in the Qur’én? ‘Ali
said, ‘No, By Him Who made the grain split (germinate) and crea-
ted the soul, we have nothing besides the Qur’an except the gift of
understanding the Qur'an, which Allah gives a man, besides what
is written in this manuscript. I said, ‘What is in this manuscript?”
“Ali said, ‘The regulations of Diyah (Blood money), the ransom for
captives and the ruling that no Muslim should be killed in Qisés
for killing a disheliever, Related by Al-Bukhari.

BEAT ‏من ويه‎ Ge 8 ‏رأبو‎ AT el #٠

pS pad Bad » ‏دملا هُمْ‎ UK ‏وَقَال فيه «لْمُؤسئرن‎ - eh

مَنْ سوَاهُمْ  ‎SERIES‏ بكار ‎ae SVG‏ في عَهُده».

1205. The previous tradition was also transmitted by Ahmad,
An-Nasa’i and Abii Dawad on the authority of “Ali with a different
chain of narrators where he said, ‘The blood of one Muslim (his
life) is equivalent to the blood of another Muslim (i.e. equal in
Qisas and blood money), the protection of Allah is one (and is equ-
ally) extended to the most humble of the believers (i.e. if a Muslim
gives protection to a man or to a group of men, they should all
help him even is he was the most humble of them). Believers are
all like one hand against their enemies. No believer is to be killed
for a disbeliever (i.e. in Qisds), nor should one who has a covenant
with the Muslims be killed while his covenant, holds.’ Al-Hakim
graded it as Sahih.

431
eh ‏وحد‎
‏محرا‎ BS

ألس بْن مالك - رضي الله ‎la‏ عَلهُ - ‎by‏

5و

قد رض بَيْنَ حَجرَيْن . فَسَألُوهًا : مر مَنْ ‎BS‏ باك ‎US‏ فلن ©
‎ty‏ ايودي ‎oH‏ رثول الله عتلى الله عله

. ‏وَاللَفْظ لمسلم‎ » ale ‏متف‎ ates ‏بين‎ LL Coy of oy

1206. Anas bin Mélik (RAA) narrated that a girl was found
with her head crushed between two stones. They asked her, ‘Who
did that to you? Is it so and so, or so and so? They mentioned some
names to her until they mentioned the name of a Jew, whereupon
she nodded her head. The Jew was captured and he confessed. The

Messenger of Allah 3¥ ordered that his head be crushed between
two stones.’ Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

0B ‏لأس‎ USE ofp : - be

١ ‏رضي‎ - gab of ‏وَعَسنْ عمران‎ 9
pil jes ‏لم‎ phy le th SoC st ‏عام اس‎ OS is

sey Bay ASP lls

1207, ‘Tmran bin Al-Husain (RAA) narrated that a slave of
some poor people cut off the ear of another slave belonging to some

rich people. They came to the Messenger of Allah 32 but he appoi-
nted no compensation for thems” Related by Ahmad and the thr-

ee Imams with a sound chain of narrators.

د ‎Be dora i‏ اد

384. Scholars have different opinions as to the reason for giving no compen-
sation. Some say that it happened by accident, some say that maybe it
was because his masters were poor so the Messenger of Allah 3 gave
him the compensation himself, some say that the boy was still immature
and Allah knows best.

432
‎wl‏ ثم نه رَسُول الله صلى الله ‎de‏ أن يفص من راح

‎Yu ety » basi » ‏رَوَاُ أَحْمَدُ‎ . te

‎Faria

‎1208. ‘Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his
father, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA), that a man
stabbed another man in his knee with a horn. So he came to the

‎Messenger of Allah 3 and said, ‘Retaliate on my behalf.’ The Mes-

‎senger of Allah 3 said to him, “Wait until your wound has
healed.” The man came again and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah!
Retaliate on my behalf’ So, he allowed him to retaliate against the
‘one who attacked him (by stabbing him the same way). Then he

‎came again to the Messenger of Allah 38 and said, ‘O Messenger of

‎Allah'T have become lame.’ The Messenger of Allah 3% said to him,
“I forbade you (to take retaliation until your wound was healed)
but you disobeyed me, may Allah keep you away from His
mercy (for your disobedience), and as for your lameness you
are not entitled to any compensation (as he retaliated before
he discovered the lameness otherwise he would have been entitled
half the Diyah).” Then Allah’s Messenger prohibited the following,
'No retaliation is to be made for a wound before the victim is tota-
lly recovered.’ Related by Ahmad and Ad-Daraqutni.

‎te ‏رضي الله‎ - A ey 2

‏َو ‎Sy‏ وَقضَى بدية ‎Th‏ عَلَى ‎gt‏ 5

‎tp‏ هَدَا من ‎oS ony‏ من أخل ‎BE es‏ عل

‎1209, ‏وطق‎ Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘Two woman of the tribe
of Hudhail fought with each other and one of them threw a stone
at the other. In this way she killed the woman and what was in
her womb (as she was pregnant), Their dispute was presented to

‎fice he

‎433
the Prophet ‏لك‎ who ordained that the Diyah (blood money) of the
unborn child, is a male or a female slave of the best quality. He
also decided that the Diyah of the woman is to be paid by her rela-

tives (the one who killed) on her father’s side.%35 The Messenger of

Allah 38 also ordained that her inheritance (of the woman who kil-
led as she died later) be for her sons and husband (and not for her
relatives who had to pay the Diyah). Hamal bin An-Nabighah Al-
Hudhaili then said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Why should I pay the
Diyah for one who neither drank nor ate nor spoke, nor cried (i.e.
the dead fetus), such a creature is not entitled to blood money,

The Messenger of Allah 3 then said, “This man is one of the
brothers of the soothsayers,” on account of the rhymed speech
which he used, concerning the dead fetus.

. ‏وَالْحَاكمْ‎ OS ‏وَصَّحَّحَهُ ابن‎ adel ES - ‏الأعترى‎
‎1210. Aba Dawdd and An-Nasa’i narrated on the authority of
Tbn “Abbas that ‘Umar (RAA) asked about the judgment of the

Prophet 3 concerning the Diyah of the dead fetus. Hamal bin An-
Nabighah Al-Hudhaili then got up and said, “I was between the
‘two women. One of them struck the other with a stone, killing her

and what was in her womb. So the Messenger of Allah 3 ordained
++” (as above). Ibn Hibbén and al-Hakim graded it as Sahih

| ‏وَعَنْ أئس - رَضِيّ‎ 0
yt AM oa ‏بو‎ Gal WLI ae Se
‏الله َل‎ Le ‏سول الله‎ pb pa ‏فا إلا‎ ches oie ‏الله‎ hi

885- There was no @iség in this case, as the woman did not intend to kill her.
She only used a small stone or the like.

434
tad ote ty bp : by

‎Goby as sit‏ لا

‎Oe‏ أن » ‎alata dn Les‏ قر

‎SEGA
‎1211. Anas narrated that Ar-Rubai’ bint An-Nadr (his aunt)

‎broke the incisor teeth of a girl. The family of Ar-Rubai’ asked the
family of the girl to pardon her, but they refused. They then offe-

‎red them Arshi6, (as compensation) but they also refused. They

‎came to the Messenger of Allah 3 asking for Qisés, and he gave
orders that they should take their Qisés from Ar-Rubai’. Anas bin
‘An-Nadr then came to the Messenger of Allah 38 and said, ‘O Mes-
senger of Allah! Will the incisor tooth of Ar-Rubai’ be broken? No,
by Him Who sent you with the truth, her incisor tooth will not be
broken. The Messenger of Allah 38 then said to him, “Anas! Al-
lah’s decree is equal retaliation.” But the family of the girl
agreed to pardon Ar-Rubai’. The Messenger of Allah 3 then said,
“Among Allah's servants are those who if they swear by Al-

‎1ah(for something), Allah will consent to their oath.” Agreed
upon, and the wording is from Al-Bukhari.

‎dies ‏أو عَضاء‎ bye ‏أو‎ , BoE

‏وَمَنْ ‎IE‏ ذرئة عليه لَه ‎oa‏ رس أبو داو

‎beh ay Ue By « (OV

‎1212, Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
28 said, “If anyone is killed and his killer is not known™”, or

‎336. Term used for blood money owed for injuries.
387- Such as the one killed in a fight between two families or two tribes and
it is not definitely known who killed him or how he was killed, In this
case the other family must take an cath that they did not kill the vietim,
and if itis known whe killed him (which group of people or which fam-
ily) they would share his Diyah (Tor a death caused by mistake) Other-

‎43

was killed with a stone, a whip or with a stick (Le. killed by
mistake but with a deliberate injury) his Diyah will be that
of killing by mistake (manslaughter). As for whoever killed
deliberately, retaliation is due (from the one who killed him).
Anyone who tries to prevent taking Qisds (from the killer)
may Allah curse him.” Related by Ab Dawad, An-Nasa’i and
Ibn Majah with a strong chain of narrators.

1213. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said,“If a man holds another man so that a third man can
kill the seized one, then the one who killed is to be killed
(in Qisés) and the one who seized the killed one is to be im-
prisoned.” Related by Ad-Daraqutni. Ibn al-Qattan graded it as
Sahih and its narrators are trustworthy.

Boks ey ‏أن ال صَلّى‎ : goth ‏بن‎ outs sy 4
WKS ‏حَهُ عَبْدالررٌاق‎ i 8

1214. “Abdur Rahman bin Al-Bailamani narrated that the
Messenger of Allah 38 killed a Muslim who killed a Mu ‏زيزع‎

who had made a covenant with the Muslims, and said, “I am clos-
est to the ones who keep their covenants of protection.”
Related by “Abdur Razzaq.

wise, if it is difficult to identify the group of people who killed him, his
Diyah is to be paid from the Muslim Treasury

388. A Mu‘Ghid is a non Muslim who is residing in an Islamic State with
whom there is a covenant of peace and protection. The killing of such a
person is murder.

436

‎ie SE‏ فَقَالَ

‎:« : JG - ‏عَنْهُمَا‎ Uh ‏رضي‎ - ab ‏وَعَن ابن‎ 96
1215. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘A young boy was murdered

‎deceitfully. ‘Umar (RAA) thereupon said, ‘If all the people of San
(in Yemen) participated in killing him, I would kill them all.’39

‎Related by al-Bukbari.

‎1216. Abd Shuraih Al-Khaza‘i (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

‎senger of Allah 3 said, “If the relative of one of you is killed
after my speech, his family has one of two choices: ‘Either
they take his Diyah or kill the killer.” Related by Aba Dawad
and An-Nasa’i.

‎ELTA ‏أبي‎ eat bp hota ‏في‎ Gray

‎1217. A similar narration is transmitted by Al-Bukhari and
Muslim on the authority of Aba Hurairah.

‏بَابْالديّات
‎Chapter II: Types of Diyah (Blood money)‏

‎& ghey ale ts ‏صَلَى‎ th ‏عَنْهُمْ - : أن‎ Ls

‎BBG OY bE ‏من‎ Ob : ‏الْحَديت - وّفيه‎

‎ph A‏ فتك

‎8G‏ 55 إلا أن يَرْضَى

‎339. The incident happened when a man traveled and left his wife with their
child. The woman and her lover killed the child for fear that he may tell
the husband about it when he returned. Those involved were the woman,
her lover, her servant and another man. When Umar knew about it from
‘Yala bin Umaiyyah, his ruler in Yemen, he issued a decree that all of
them must be killed as they killed him collectively.

‎437
is Cod Sco ‏اله من‎ ees

‎Jd,‏ في ‎fe Cases‏ من ‎«athe J fiz ben bay « oo‏ وَعَلَى أهلٍ

‎1598 FEAT ‏ديتار».‎ Gil ain

‎hee ‏وَاْلَفُوا في‎ sot oe By casi

‎1218. Abd Bakr bin Muhammad bin ‘Amro bin Hazm narra-
ted on the authority of his father on the authority of his grand-

‎father (RAA) that “The Messenger of Allah 38 wrote to the people
of Yemen (mentioning the hadith which included), ‘Whoever kills a
believer deliberately for no reason or a crime that he committed,
he should be killed (in retaliation), unless the family of the murde-
red person agrees to take Diyah (blood money). The Diyah for a
life is a hundred camels. Full blood money (i.e. total Diyah of 100
camels) is paid for the total cut off of each of the following: the
nose, the eyes, the tongue, the lips, the penis, the testicles and the

‎backbone.*° For the cutting off of one leg; half a Diyah is paid (ie.

‎50 camels). For a head injury a third of the Diyah is paid, for a
stab which penetrates the body, one third of the Diyah, for a blow
which breaks a bones or dislocates it, 15 camels. For each finger
or toe, 10 camels are paid. For each tooth five camels are paid.
For a wound which exposes a bone five camels are paid. A man is
Killed in Qisds for killing a woman. For those who possess gold,
they should pay the equivalent of the 100 camels which is fixed as
one thousand Dinars.’ Related by Aba Dawid in his book "al-
Marasil”, an-Nasé'i, Ibn Khuzaimah, Ibn al-Gardd, Ibn Hibban
and Ahmad, but they disagreed regarding its authenticity.

‎340. A full Diyah is duo in this case, as each of these organs are either impai-
red (i.e. cannot be compensated), or the full pair is cut off (such as the
ears, the lips ete.)

‎438
من وَجنْه آخرٌ ‎Boe iat‏ العامة ‎eo‏

1219. Tbn ‏4ن مم1‎ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
% said, “The Diyah for accidental killing is paid in five typ-
es of camel indemnity™!: 20 she-camels ‘hiqgah’ (in their fou-

rth year), 20 she-camels ‘Jaz ‘ah’ (in their fifth year), 20 she-
camels ‘bint makhéd’ (in their second year), 20 she-camels
‘bint labiin’ (in their third year) and 20 he-camels ‘ibn Laban’
(in their third year).”Related by Ad-Daraqutni with a strong chain
of narrators. The four Imams reported it with this version, “twe-
nty ‘ibn makhéd' (twenty male camels which had entered their
second year),” instead of “ibn labtin.”

b Se ee

ig

‎fe‏ إن ‎Rb‏ عَنْ أيه

‎BI OS Be OSE Shay :

‏وَأربعُونَ حَلفَةَ » في بُطُونهًا ‎GSS‏

‎1220. Aba Dawad and At-Tirmidhi transmitted on the autho-
rity of ‘Amro bin Shu’aib on his father’s authority, who reported
from his grandfather (RAA), who reported that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “The Diyah (of intentional homicide) is paid in
three different types of camels*#: 30 she-camels ‘higqah’ (in

‎their fourth year), 30 she-camels ‘Jaz‘ah’ (in their fifth year),
and 40 pregnant she-camels.”

‎341- This Diyah is less severe in that its payment is deferred, and paid in five
different types of eamels. Some scholars say that it could be paid over a
period of three years,

‎342. This Diyah is severe in that it is to be paid immediately and paid in
three different good types of camels.

‎439
1221, ‏مطل‎ ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the one of Allah

38 said, “Three types of people are most hated by Allah, the
Almighty: whoever kills another in the Sacred area of Har-
am (Sanctuary), whoever kills anyone other than the one
who killed him or whoever kills anyone in revenge as in
times of Jéhiliyah (pre-Islamic times).” Related by Ibn Hibban.

Bi. ‏الله ءا‎ ie
oe BN Ge BL - Leads,

1222, ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amro ‏ز ز‎ (RA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 38 said, “The Diyah for accidental and
quasi-deliberate homicide -such as that inflicted with a
whip or a stick. is a hundred camels, forty of which are
pregnant she-camels.” Related by Aba- Dawid, An-Nas@’i and
Tbn Majah. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahth.

‎OE NG‏ : «دية ‎I etal‏ ين ورين ‎alge‏ عَشَرَةٌ من ال بل ‎JS‏ إمنتع».

‎1228. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
38 said, “This and that are equal -meaning the little finger
and the thumb.” Related by Al-Bukhari. Aba Dawad and At-Tir-
midhi transmitted, “The Diyah for the fingers and toes is the
same, and that for the teeth is the same; the incisor and the
molar tooth are the same.” Ibn Hibban narrated, “The Diyah
for the fingers and toes is the same; 10 camels for each.”

‎440

5 وَعَنْ ‎Sg‏ عَنْ أبيه عَنْ ‎ols‏ - رضي الل ‎pate‏ -

1224, “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger

of Allah 3 said, “Anyone who practices medicine but is not
known as a practitioner, and kills a human being or inflicts
harm on him, will be held responsible.” Related by Ad-Daraq-
utni. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih. Aba Dawad, an-Nasa’i and
others also narrated it, but its Mursal form is stronger than the
connected one.

وفك ‎phy eth le:‏ َل ‎go:‏ المواش عضن

Any » St ay

لون عر من ‎wey‏ وَصَحَّحَهُ ‎Se BN‏

الْجَارُود .

1225. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger
of Allah ‏يك‎ said, “For a wound which exposes a bone five
camels are paid (in compensation).” Related by Ahmad and
the four Imams. Ahmad added the following statement, “And the
fingers and toes are all equal- in Diyah- ten camels.” Ibn
Khuzaimah and Ibn al-Garad graded it as Sahih,

sis ‏ال له‎ Soe ‏قال 8 وول لله‎ - cs ego EO

1226. “Amro bin Shu‘aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger

441
of Allah ‏يك‎ said, “The Diyah of the Dhimmi is half that of a

Muslim.” Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. The narration
of Abi Dawid, “The Diyah of the Mu‘Ghid (non Muslim with a
covenant of protection) is half the Diyah of a free Muslim.” In
the narration of An-Nasa'i,“The Diyah of a woman is the same
as the Diyah of a man up to the third of the value (if the due
value exceeds the third then her Diyah is half that of the man).”

ك5

iat. ‏سلآج»‎ Fe Gee , ey ‏تسن در‎ Ses

1227. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-
er, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “The Diyah of the quasi-deliberate homicide
is as severe as deliberate murder (in its being given in three
types of camels), and the offender is not to be killed. This
happens when the devil excites enmity between people
causing them to shed blood but not due to hatred or car-
rying weapons in fighting.” Related by Ad-Daraqutni and gra-
ded it as weak Hadith.

bey pes
1228, Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that, ’A man killed another

man during the lifetime of the Prophet 38, so the decided that his
Diyah would be 12 thousand (Dirhams).’ Related by the four
Imams.

343. A non-Muslim; Christian or Jew, living under the protection of an Isla-
mic government

442
1229. Abd Rimthah narrated, ‘I came to the Prophet 3 with
my son and he asked me, “Who is this?” I answered, ‘This is my

son, and I swear on it.’ The Messenger of Allah 32 said,“He will

not carry your burdens’ (sins) and you will not carry his

burdens.” Related by An-Nas@’i and Aba Dawad. Ibn Khuzaimah
and Ibn al-Gardid graded it as Sahth.

‎pb OL‏ الثم وَالقسّامة

‎Chapter 111: Claiming the Right to Qisas and
Qasamah (taking an oath)

‏0 - عن حل ‎in‏

‎344- In another narration, the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ asked him again,
true that he is your som? The man then said I bear witness to it. "1
‘Messenger of Allah 3 smiled because of the resemblance between the
father and son and for the fact that the father took an oath on this
matter.

‎345- Any action which entails Qisas or punishment.

‎443

1230. Sahl bin Abi Khaithamah (RAA) narrated on the autho-
rity of some honored men from his people that ‘Abdullah bin Sahl
and Muhaiysah bin Mas ‘id, went out to Khaibar because of a har-
dship they were undergoing. Muhaiysah came and told them that
“Abdullah bin Sahl had been killed and thrown into a well. He
came to the Jews and said to them, ‘I swear by Allah that you
have killed him.’ They replied, ‘We swear by Allah that we have
not killed him.’ Then Muhaiysah came along with his brother

Huwaiysah and ‘Abdur Rahman bin Sahl to the Prophet 92 and

Muhaiysah started to talk. The Messenger of Allah 3 said to him,
“Let an older one speak (take charge of this matter).” So Huw-
aiysah narrated what happened and then Muhaiysah spoke. The
Messenger of Allah 88 said,“Either they pay the Diyah of your

companion or be ready for war.” The Messenger of Allah
wrote to them about this and they wrote back saying, ‘By Allah,
we have not killed him.’ The Messenger of Allah #8 then said to
Huwaiysah, Muhaiysah and “Abdur Rahman bin Sahl, “Would
you take an oath (that they killed him) and then you will be
entitled to the Diyah of your companion.” They answered,
‘No (as they did not witness the crime),’ The Messenger of Allah 38
then said, “Then the Jews should take an oath (that they are
innocent)” They said, ‘They are not Muslims.’ The Messenger of
Allah 88 thereupon paid the Diyah of the victim himself and sent
them 100 camels. Sahl commented, ‘A red she-camel (of these 100
camels) kicked me,’ Agreed upon.

‎ey 11‏ مي الأنصّار : ‎Oh‏ رَسُولَ الله صلّى ‎joey ale th‏
قد الْقَسَامَةَ عَلَى ما كانت عَلَيْه في ‎ea‏ وَقَضَى ‎be‏

‎444
1931 A man from the Ansér narrated 1 that the Messenger of

Allah % consented to the Qasémah (taking an oath that they did
not kill the victim), which was practiced during the time of Jahili-
yah (pre-Islm) and the Messenger of Allah 3 made a judgment
between some men from the Ansar concerning a man who was
killed and they claimed that the Jews had killed him.’ Related by
Muslim.

pa ‏أفل‎ JL OL
Chapter IV: Fighting Transgressors
(who rebel against the ruler unjustly)

1232, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

+ said, “Whoever carries arms against us, is not one of us.”
‘Agreed upon.

1233, Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, “He who rebels agai-
nst obedience to the ruler, abandons the Muslim commun-
ity and then dies, his death will be as if he died at the time
of Jéhiliyah,” Related by Muslim.

LA ‏روه‎ dca dia ‏تقل عمّارا‎ : py ale
1234. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3£ said, “The transgressing party will kill “Ammar
(Ammar bin Yasir).” Related by Muslim,

445
‎By re‏ ان ‎Se‏ - رضي الله عنما - قَالَ َال سول لله ‎fo‏ لله

‎BB AS » ‏كوثرَ بن حكيم‎ thy ‏فوَهمَ » لأن في‎
1235. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
48 said “Do you realize Ibn Umm ‘Abd*6 what the ruling of

‎Allah is concerning those who rebel against the ruler in
this Ummah?’ I said, ‘Allah and His Messenger know best.’ He
said, “A wounded man among them is not to be given the
last stroke (that kills him), their captive is not killed, the

‎not divided (among other Muslims).” Related by Al-Bazzar and
al-Hakim. The latter graded it as Sahih but he was mistaken as
Kawthar bin Hakim (one of the narrators) is a rejected narrator.

‎tte 7 «6s
1236. “Arfagah bin Shuraih (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Mes-
senger of Allah 38 say, “He who comes to you when you are

‎united and wants to disunite your community, kill him.”
Related by Muslim.

‎346- The one who is known as ‘Ibn Umm ‘Abd’ is “Abdullah bin Mas‘td, and
may be Ibn “Umar is narrating the hadith on his authority.

‎446
Chapter V: Fighting The Offender and
Killing the Apostate

fo 75 38: ‏ع - فل‎ th ‏ع عله أل ع - رضي‎ se

1237. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar narrated that the Mera of

Allah 38 said, “He who is killed while defending his property
is considered a martyr.” Related by Aba Dawid An-Nasa’i and
At-Tirmidhi who graded it as Sahih...

+ — عسي ‎et We‏ - ري له

1238. ‘Imran bin Husain (RAA) narrated, Ya‘la bin Umaiyah
fought with another man. One of them bit the other man’s finger
and the latter (whose finger was bit) pulled his hand out of the
first man’s mouth (who was biting) by force, causing his incisors
teeth to be pulled out. They presented their dispute to the Prophet,

38 who said, “One of you bit his brother as a male camel
bites? Go and there is not Diyah for him (as a punishment for
their foolishness).” Agreed upon and the wording is from Muslim.

Se Le pats ‏قل أو‎ : 38 - Heth GA SH

1239, Ab Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

447
Allah 38 said, “If anyone spies on you (tries to look at you)
without your permission, and you thereupon throw a stone
at him and because of it he lost his eye, you are not to be
blamed.” Agreed upon. In another version by Ahmad and an-
Nasé'i and graded as Sahth by Ibn Hibbin, “He has no right for

stag ii cles ‏كرض انك »الى‎

َه ان ‎a‏ وفي ‎atl‏ اطتلافة .

1240. Al-Bard’ bin “Azib (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah ‏يله‎ ordained that the guarding of a garden is the responsi-
bility of its owners during the day and the guarding of animals is
the responsibility of their owners at night. However, the owners of
the animals are responsible for any damage caused by their anim-
als during the night (i.e. pay compensation for what they damaged
of other's property). Related by Ahmad and the four Imams except
At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

date rom ‏رضي الل‎ - 43th ‏وَعَنْ‎ 4١
ty

58 ‏بي‎ By ‏وني‎ weg
1241, Mu‘adh bin Jabal (RAA) narrated - concerning a man
who embraced Islam and then turned to Judaism (i.e, apostated),
4 shall not sit down until he is killed. That is the Command of
Allah and His Messenger, and he gave an order that he must be
killed and so he was.’ Agreed upon.
Ina version by Abd. Dawad, ‘He was given a chance to repent and
return to Islam but he refused

wes eth ‏رَضي‎ - Ao
Sth 855 eh BG Soo ‏«مَن بَدَل‎ : ply aie cis

oo ‏الله‎ p25, 6 : ‏اث َال‎ ob 5

1242. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
448
3% said, “He who changes his religion (i.e. apostates) kill
him.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

Sb 55 «S58 lays ‏هَدرُ».‎ Yes 3 ‏اشهَدُوا‎ Yi : ‏فقَالَ‎ py
1243, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘A blind man had a pregn-

ant slave, who used to abuse the Messenger of Allah 3 and def-
ame him. The blind man forbade her but she did not stop. One

night she began to slander the Prophet 38 so he took a n axe,
placed it on her belly, pressed it and killed her. The Messenger of

Allah 38 was told about it, and thereupon he said,“Oh people! Be

witnesses that no Diyah is to be paid for her blood.”347 Rela-
ted by Ab Dawid with a trustworthy chain of narrators.

347. Because she was slandering the Prophet 3%, so she is considered as a°
disbeliever and an apostate,

449

«بلوغ المرام)
‎Gus‏ الْحُدُود
‎Book X: Hudad or Prescribed Penalties in‏
‎Islamic Shari‘ah‏

‎Res Ou

‎Chapter I: The Prescribed Penalty (punishment)
for Fornication

‎joo tad Som nat

‎eget Gigs ols « is

‎1244, Aba Hurairah and Zaid bin Khalid al-Juhani (RAA)

‎narrated that a Bedouin came to the Prophet 3 and said, ‘O Mes-
senger of Allah! I beseech you by Allah, that you judge between us
according to Allah's Laws’ The man’s opponent who was wiser
than him got up and said, ‘Yes, judge between us according to

‎Allah’s Law and kindly allow me (to speak).’ The Prophet 38 said,
“Speak.” He said,'My son was a laborer working for that man (the
Bedouin) and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his
wife, and I was informed that my son deserved to be stoned to
death (as punishment for this offence). I ransomed him with one

‎450
hundred sheep and a slave girl. But when I asked the knowledge-
able people they told me that my son should receive a hundred
lashes and be exiled for a year, and the man’s wife should be sto-

ned to death. The Messenger of Allah 3§ replied, “By Him in
Whose Hands my soul is, I shall judge between you accor-
ding to the Law of Allah (i.e. His Book). The slave girl and
the sheep are to be returned to you. As for your son, he has
to receive one hundred lashes and be exiled for a year. 0
Unais! Go to this man’s wife, and if she confesses, then
stone her to death.” Agreed upon, and this is Muslim’s version.

Sub 254 4

الصامت قَالَ : َال رَسُول الله صلّى ‎Dh‏
‎Wye Gry dy‏ عن فَقَد ‎5h Sa pe‏ باكر ‎aut‏ ون

. ‏رَوَاهُ ملم‎ ih Wl Sl Oy Oy « 38
1945. ‘Ubddah bin AgSamit (RA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “Receive from me (this revelation), receive
from me (this revelation). Allah has ordained a way for those

women“ (unmarried females who committed adultery). When

an unmarried man, commits adultery with an unmarried
woman, they should receive one hundred lashes and be exi-

led for a year™®, If they (fornicate while they) were married,

they shall receive hundred lashes and be stoned to death?
Reported by Muslim.

348. ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 is referring to the verso (4:15) stirat an-Nisd’,
“and if they testify, confine them (those women) to their houses
until death, or (until) Allah ordains for them some other way.”

349. Imm Malik is of the opinion that a woman is not to be exiled as this
will expose her to hardship, and sho is not allowed to travel on her own
anyway. She should only be flogged a hundred lashes, and the male is to
be flogged and exiled. Other scholars say that if she is exiled she must
be with a mahram.

350. Most scholars are of the opinion that there is no need for flogging and
that stoning is sufficient for the (married) adulterer and the adulteress,
‘Their evidence is that the Prophet 3% did not combine flogging and ston-
ing in the punishment of Maiz and only stoned him to death. This is also

evident in. this hadith as the Prophet 4 did not order Unais to flog her
451

1246, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘A Muslim man! came
to the Prophet 38 while he was in the mosque, and called him say-
ing, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I have committed adultery.’ The Mes-

senger of Allah 3£ turned his face away from him, so the man
came round (from the other side) towards his face and said, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! I have committed adultery.’ The Messenger of

Allah 38 again turned his face away from him, but the man repe-
ated his statement four times. When he testified four times that

he did it, the Messenger of Allah 38 called him saying, “Are you

insane?” The man said, ‘No.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 then
asked him, “Are you married?” The man answered, ‘Yes.’ The

Messenger of Allah $8 “Take him away and stone him (to
death)” Agreed upon

et AG ‏َال‎ - Gee Std ‏وَضي لل‎ ab ‏ن ابسن‎ oF yey
ay 52 ‏لشي‎ A ‏مالك‎
‏لا يا رسُولَ الله‎

1247. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘When Ma‘iz came to the
Prophet 28 (admitting that he had committed adultery), he said to

first, but just to stone her. Some scholars are also of the opinion that,
this hadith is abrogated as it was the first to be revealed, concerning the
punishment of the married adulterer and adulteress while the story of
Matiz. occurred at a later time,

351- He is Maz al-Aslami as evidenced by the following hadith.

452

him, “Perhaps you have just kissed, or touched or looked
(at the woman)." Ma’‘iz said, ‘No, 0 Messenger of Allah.’ Related
by Al-Bukhéri.

S36 Gedy ‏مُحَمَدَا‎ Ge wih bp

الرَّحْمٍ » ‎Ut‏ » وَرَعَيَْاهَا ‎ate‏ » فَرَحَمْ وَسُوا

0

oth Ob oy eb » ‏يَعْدَهُ‎ sy;

dws is Sony a Gis
hh ab ety say Gah hy ‏عَلَى‎ : - A
32 Korey {phos

1248, ‘Umar bin al-Khattab (RAA) narrated that he addressed
the people and said, ‘Verily Allah has sent Muhammad with the
Truth and sent down the Book to him, and the verse of stoning
was included in what Allah sent down, We recited, memorized and
comprehended it. The Messenger of Allah 48 accordingly (to what
was in the verse) stoned to death (whoever committed adultery
while being married), and we stoned after his death. But I am afr-
aid that after a long time passes, someone may say, ‘We do not
find the Verses of stoning in Allah's Book,*? and thus they may go
astray by abandoning an obligation that Alléh has sent down. Ver-

ily, stoning is an obligation in the Book of Allah to be inflicted on
married men and women who commit adultery, when their crime

is proven, evident by pregnancy, or through the confession (of
the adulterer).’ Agreed upon.

352 A Qur’anic verse was revealed prescribing the punishment of stoning,
but according to the opinion of the majority of the companions and schol-
ars, it was later abrogated, regarding its recitation in the Qur'an, but its
verdict still applies as proven by the Sunnah. ‘The Prophet $8 and the
companions after his death continued to apply this punishment for the
married culprit.

358. The evidence required in this crime is: either four witnesses, confession
by the one who committed it, or pregnancy which applies only to women.
‘The majority of scholars are of the opinion that pregnancy by itself is
not a sufficient sign to inflict the punishment unless it is accompanied

453
‎of 5 bp‏ أَحَدَكُمْ 55 ‎Sed wid we‏ ولا ‎GE OE‏ نَم إن زكتا

‏نم إن نت ‎ta‏ 628 تاها ‎Wa‏ ولو بحل
‎«pl bi tay » ole Se pet‏
‎Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger‏ .1249

‎of Allah 4¥ say, “When the slave-woman of one of you com-
mits adultery and she is proven guilty (through witnesses
or confession), he should flog her as prescribed (for the sl-

‎ave woman), but he should not admonish her. If she does

‎this again, then she should be flogged again but he should
not admonish her. If she commits it for the third time, and
she is proven guilty, then he must sell her even if it was for
arope of hair.” Agreed upon, and the wording is from Muslim.

‏وَعَنْ ‎Ye‏ 38 : 08 25 الله صَلَى ‎ply ole hb‏ «أقيمُوا الْحُدُودَ

‏عَلَى ما ‎Ghat kb‏ رَواه أو 58 ‎By‏ مُسلم ‎8s‏

‎1250. “Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38 said,

‎“Inflict the prescribed punishment on those whom you pos-

‎sess (i.e. your slaves).” Related by Abi Dawtid and Muslim (but.
only traced to the Companion).

‎of Oe Ley 0‏ حْصِيْنٍ - رضي الله علهُ - ‎a oF‏ من ‎igh‏ أنت
‎oe Ce‏ فَدَعَا رَسُولُ الله صلّى الله ‎skh Hs Sy oly le‏

‎with confession or witnesses. Malik on the other hand believes that the
pregnancy of an unmarried woman who was not forced to commit. forni-
cation, is sufficient to inflict punishment taking this hadith as evidence.

‎351. The Messenger of Allah 3% is referring to the verse, “And after they
have been taken in wedlock, if they commit illegal sexual intere-
ourse, their punishment is half that for free (unmarried) women.”
(4:25). The punishment referred to in this verso is 50 lashes.

‎454

opty at Jord Gus ‏حَادَت‎ of, iow,
1251. Tmran bin Husain (RAA) narrated, ‘A woman from Juh-

ainah came to the Prophet #2 while she was pregnant due to com-
mitting adultery, and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I have done
something for which a prescribed punishment is to be inflicted, so

please inflict it on me. The Messenger of Allah 8 called her guar-
dian and said, “Be good to her, and when she delivers bring
her back to me.” Her guardian brought her back when she had
delivered and the Messenger of Allah 3 gave his commands and

her clothes were tied around her and then the Prophet 38 gave his
commands and she was stoned to death. The Messenger of Allah

88 offered funeral prayer for her, and thereupon ‘Umar said, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! You offer funeral prayer for her even though

she committed adultery? The Messenger of Allah 3 replied, “She
has offered such a repentance (for her sin) that if it was divi-
ded between seventy of the inhabitants of Madinah, it wou-
14 be sufficient for them. Have you found such repentance
better than sacrificing her life for the sake of Allah, the

Almighty?”955 Related by Muslim

Cell ‏قَالَ : «رَحَمَ‎ - Oe SUF MD ‏رَضِي‎ - Mule ‏بن‎ AG ‏وَعَنْ‎ 2 6

صلى الله عَليْهِ ‎ph‏ رَخُلا من ألم » وَرَخْلا من ‎Copal‏ وامرأة». روا ملم .
‎Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of‏ .1252

Allah ‏يك‎ stoned a man from Aslam‘ to death, a Jewish man and

355- No punishment is to be inflicted on the pregnant woman until she gives
birth even if she was unmarried. In another narration concerning the
same woman it was explained that she was not stoned until she weaned
her child

356- He is Maz whose story was related earlier.

455
a woman. "7 Related by Muslim.

gil ‏حَديث‎ be otal ‏في‎ ot dh Sas 1١7

1253. The story of stoning the two Jews® is mentioned in Al-
Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar.

‎Ub - Se os -‏ كَانَ في اننا

‏4 ل 125 سعيد بن سَعْد بن

‎OB Li |‏ يأمة من ‎SS pty‏ َلك ‎See‏ لرَسُول الله ‎foo‏ الله

‎. ‏من َلك‎ Lael cal Og ‏يا‎ : pls le Stabe: ‏ال‎

‎OLS‏ : «عذوا ‎Wes‏ فيه

‏شتراخ م اضرِبُوةُ به ‎BS‏ وَاحدّة» فَفَعَلوا . رَوَآةُ

‎AOS whey ‏لكن املف في‎ » 55 Bt Gy a, » ‏أَحْمَدُ‎
‎1254. Sa‘id bin Sa‘d bin ‘Ubaédah (RAA) narrated, ‘A small
weak man was staying in our tribe, and he committed adultery

‎with one of their slave-women. Sa‘d mentioned this to the Messen-

‎ger of Allah #8, and thereupon he said, “Flog him (according to)
the prescribed penalty.” The people then said, ‘O Messenger of

‎Allah! He is too weak to bear it.’ The Messenger of Allah $8 then
said, “Get a stalk of the raceme of a palm tree with a hun-

‎dred twigs and strike him just once. So, they did. Related

‎357. The woman from Juhainah whose story was told in the previous hadith,

‎358. Two Jewish people (a man and a woman) were brought to the Prophet 3
as they committed adultery and they were both married. The Messenger
of Allah 2% asked them about the legal penalty for such a crime in their
Book (the Torah). ‘They told him that their Rabbis have innovated a
punishment of blackening the faces with charcoal. ‘Abdullah bin Salam
said, 0 Messenger of Allah! Tel] them to bring the Torah.’ When they
brought the Torah, one of them found the verse of stoning to death with
his hand and starting reading the preceding verse and what followed,
Ibn Salam then said to the Jews, ‘Lift up your hand.’ The verse was
there under his hand and thereupon the Messenger of Allah 3¢ ordered
that the two sinners be stoned to death.

‎359- People were afraid that he may die if he receives the full 100 lashes, so
the Prophet out of merey for him, ordered them to get this stalk, but still
with 100 twigs (to fulfill the number of lashes), to flog him with.

‎456
by Ahmad, An-Nasé’i and Ibn Majah with a good chain of nar-
rators.

- أن لبي صَلَى الله ‎ply ale‏
قَالَ : «من ورَحَدئمُوه ‎(ee‏ عَمَلَ َْمٍ أوط فَاقُْوا ‎Spill, Jet‏ به » ومن
وَحَدئْموه وقع عَلى بهيمة ‎obits‏ واقثلوا
‎odes dey‏ إلا أن

Wh ‏رضي‎ - ote ‏وَعْن ابْن‎ ree

aa Wy » ‏أَحْمَّدُ‎ ay, «ie

1255. Tbn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Whoever you find doing as the people of Lot did
(ie. homosexuality), kill the one who does it and the one to
whom it is done, and if you find anyone having sexual int-

ercourse with an animal, kill him and kill the animal.’

Related by Ahmad and the four ImAms with a trustworthy chain
of narrators.

rey ale ‏الله‎ Lhe (Boy : - ‏رضي الله عنْهُمَا‎ - Sab ‏س وَعَنٍ ان‎ ١١55

ضَرب ‎Oh‏ ون أنا بكر صرب ‎O85‏ ونا ‎OSE Oe Tab‏
‎AY oe‏ الف في وه

1256. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
applied the punishment of flogging and also that of exile,Aba Bakr
(RAA) applied the punishments of flogging and exile and also
“Umar applied them.” Related by At-Tirmidht with a trustworthy
chain of narrators, but scholars differed over its being traced back

to the Prophet #8 or only to the companion.

5 etiaoo ne m0
. BE ‏رَوَاهُ‎ GS 3
1257. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎

360- As for killing the animal, some scholars say that the Fitrah (nature) of
this animal has been spoiled, as it is not created for this. Others say
that it is disliked to eat it or use it after such a disgraceful action.

457
cursed men who are hermaphrodites and women who take the
similitude of men, and said, “Get them out of your homes.”
Related by Al-Bukhéari.

1258. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Avert the infliction of the prescribed punish-
ments as long as you find a way out (i.e. to avoid their infli-
ction).” Related by Ibn Majah with a weak chain of narrators.

FREI 653m : ‏يلفط‎

1259, At-Tirmidht and Al-Hakim transmitted on the authority

of “A'ishah (RAA) with the wording, ‘Allah’s Messenger 3€ said,
“Avert the infliction of the prescribed punishment on Mus-
lims as much as you can.” It is also a weak hadith.

: ‏من قوله بلفط‎ - et ‏رَضِي الله‎ - ee
«hott ‏«ادْرَيُوا الْحُدُودٌ‎
1260. Al-Baihaqi transmitted on the authority of “Ali (RAA)

that he said, ‘Avert the prescribed punishments by rejecting dou-
btful evidence.’

hoy — VY

pe tte See ‏ثققي - ولق إلى له - تل‎ - wh

1261. Ibn “Umar (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Avoid these filthy practices which Allah, the Almi-
ghty has prohibited. He who commits any of these, should
conceal with Allah’s Most High Veil (ic. should not speak

458
about it), and should turn to Allah, the Most High in repent-
ance, for if anyone uncovers his hidden sins (to us), we shall
inflict on him the punishment prescribed by Allah, the Al-
mighty.” Related by Al-Hakim and in Al-Muwatta’ but traced to
its narrator Zaid bin Aslam as Hadith Mursal.

Chapter 11: Penalty for Qadhf (Accusing a Person
of Adultery without Proof )

. is jal Joh « ah. Riven eae at ata ‏فَضْرُِوا‎ DG

1262, “Alishah (RAA) narrated, ‘When my vindication was rev-
ealed,%! the Prophet #8 mounted the pulpit and mentioned what

happened and recited the verses of the Qur’an (which had been
revealed). When he came down from the pulpit he ordered that two

men and a woman‘? should be given the prescribed flogging (for

this false accusation of “A’ishah (RAA) which is eighty lashes).
Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. Al-Bukhari referred to it.

‎wares‏ ا ان

‏55 وَعَنْ أئس ‎MGS‏

‎1268. Anas bin Malik (RA) narrated, ‘The first Li‘an that
took place in Islam was when Hilal bin Umaiyah accused his wife
of having committed adultery with Shuraik bin Sahma.’ There-

‎upon the Messenger of Allah 3€ said to him, “Either you prod-
uce evidence (for your claim) or you will receive punishment

‎361- Strat an-Nar (24:10)
362. The two men are Mistah bin Athdthah and Hassan bin Thabit and the
woman is Hamnah bint Jahsh.

‎459
on your back (i.e. flogged for your accusation if it is false."(refer
to hadith no.1138). Related by Aba Ya‘la with a trustworthy chain
of narrators.

‎URS St Sy 4‏ من حَدِيث اين ‎te‏ - رَضي اللهُ عَنْهُمًا - .

‎1964. Al-Bukharf related a similar hadith on the authority of
Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA).

‎1265, “Abdullah bin “Amir bin Rabi‘ah ‘narrated, ‘T witnessed
the time of Aba Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman (RAA), and those who
came after them. I never saw them flogging a slave for Qadhftfalse

‎accusation of adultery) except forty lashes.’%3 Related by Malik,
and Ath-Thawri in his book ‏“ةله‎

‎i ‏«منْ‎ ply ale th ee ‏ال : قَالَ 5 الله‎

‎bse ‏يَكُونَ كما قال».‎ OS : ‏الْقيّاَة‎ gig dod ‏َل‎ pug Ls

‎1266. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Alléh 38 said, “He who accuses his slave of committing adul-
tery (without proof) will be punished with the prescribed
penalty on the Day of Resurrection unless it is (true) as he
said.” Agreed upon.

‎Chapter III: Penalty for Theft

‎Ys pg ale ‏صلَى الله‎ dh ts ‏قَالَ‎ es ease 2 1١0

‎pit li » ale Bee . ited 69 6 ‏في‎ Yay

‎363. This is evidence that the punishment of a male or a female slave for this
crime is half of that prescribed for a free person, which would be 80
lashes.

‎460
‎Get Li,‏ : «مُفْطَْ ‎GOH AG‏ في ربع ديار قصَاعدَا». ‎By‏ روا
«اقْطَعُوا في ‎of‏ ديار ولا ‎thet‏ فيمًا ‎BIB‏ من ‎CB‏

‎1267. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3 said,
“A thief’s hand should not be cut off except for a quarter of

‎a Dinar or more.” Agreed upon and the wording is from Mu-
slim.

‎‘The version of Al-Bukhari reads, “The hand of a thief is to be
cut off for a quarter of a Dinar or more.”

‎Ina version by Ahmad, “Cut off a thief’s hand for a quarter of
a Dinar, and do not cut it off for what is less than that.”

‎ple ae ‏صل الله‎ Sh Ot : - eee ‏الله‎ ag - ty -
1268. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎cut off the hand of a thief for stealing a shield that was worth‏ كل
‎three Dirhams. Agreed upon.‏

‎pe

‏8 ل ورَعَنْ أبي مُرَيْرَةَ - رضي ‎He Sia Uh‏ - قَالَ : قال 5 الله ‎oo‏

‎BE. abi phish
1269. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “May Allah curse the thief who steals an egg
for which his hand is cut off, or steals a rope for which his

‎hand is to be cut off. Agreed upon.

‎364. A theif’s right hand is to be cut off if he is caught stealing a quarter of a
Dinar (almost 1.5 gm of gold) or goods worth that much at the time of
the theft,

‎365- The consensus of the scholars is that stealing an egg or a rope does not
call for someone's hand to be cut off, The exaggeration in the hadith is
meant to be a factor that urges anyone who thinks of stealing, to think
twice, and see how mean this act is, as he would loose his precious right
hand for something as worthless as an egg.

‎461
‎٠‏ وَعَنْ ‎tee‏ - رضي ‎th‏ نا - أن ‎Sy‏ اله ‎foo‏ الله ‎ale‏ َم
ل : ‎hy‏ في حَدْ من حُدُود الله © ثم قَامَفَحَطَبء فَقَالَ ‎LAN ay:‏

‏نهُمْ كانُوا ذا ‎Se‏

‎weal ghee phos le th bo ‏ال‎ ab si pe

‎1270. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah’s Messenger #8 said (to
Usamah bin Zaid), “Are you interceding with regards to one
of Allah’s prescribed penalties?*” Then he got up and addres-

‎sed the people saying, “O people! What destroyed the nations
before you, was that when a noble person committed theft,
they used to leave him (without punishment), but if a weak
person among them committed theft, they would inflict the
legal punishment on him.” Agreed upon and the wording is
from Muslim.

‎Muslim has another version on the authority of ‘A’ishah (RA)
who said, ‘A woman used to borrow (people's) belongings and deny
having taken them, so the Prophet 3 ordered that her hand be
cut off.”

‎206 ky ce ‏الله‎ hg - eh - oe 0

‏. رَوَآهُ أَحْمَّدُ » والأريعة »

‎. ‏حبّان‎ NG st BR;

‎366. A lady known as Fatimah bint Aswad al-Makhzimiyah who came from a
prominent family committed an act of theft. When the Messenger of
Allah 38 commanded that her hand was to be cut off, people started to
intercede to exempt her from punishment, and among them was Usé-
mah bin Zaid, the son of his former servant Zaid bin Thabit, The Mes-
senger of Allah 3% became very angry and said the statement mentioned
in the hadith. The owner of the stolen goods however can intercede for
the thief, for his hand not to be cut off as long as the case has not yet
been taken to the judge. Once it has been brought to court, no one ean
seek pardon for the thief.

‎462
1271. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 32
said, “There is no cutting of the hand for the treacherous,
for snatching (like the one who snatches and runs away), or for
forcible seizure (looting or robbery).” Related by Ahmad and
the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

. Oe Ey ‏ء‎ Got Call
1272, Rafi’ bin Khudaij (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 say, “There is no cutting off of a hand for tak-
ing fruit or the pith of a palm tree.” Related by Ahmad and
the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sai

bu ‏رحدو لس .ل‎ fi

1273. Aba Umaiyah al-Malchzdmi (RAA) narrated, ‘A thief
who has made a confession was brought to the Messenger of Allah
2%, but no goods were found with him. Allah’s Messenger #8 said
to him, “I do not think you have stolen!” The man replied, ‘Yes
I have’ The Prophet 3% repeated it to him twice or thrice, so he
gave his commands concerning him, and his hand was cut off. He
was then brought to the Messenger of Allah 88 who said to him,
“Ask for the forgiveness of Allah and turn to Him in repen-
tance.” The man then said, ‘I ask Allah's forgiveness and turn to
Him in repentance.’ The Messenger of Allah 3 then said three
times, “O Allah! forgive him.” Related by Aba Dawid, Ahmad

and An-Nasé’i with a trustworthy chain of narrators, and it is Aba
Dawid’s version.

463
4 سو أَخرَحَهُ الْحَاكمٌ من حَديث أبي ‎Sb‏ - رضي الله ‎Be‏ =«
وَقَالَ فيه : «اذميوا به فَافْطفوهُ »

«Lal ‏اليرارُ‎ aah fob ‏م‎

WEY ‏ال‎

1274. Al-Hakim transmitted the same hadith on the authority
of Aba: Hurairah (RAA) giving similar meaning. The Messenger of
Allah 48 said, “Take him away and cut off his hand and caut-

erize him.” Al-Bazzar transmitted the same hadith but commen-
ted that its chain of narrators is not sound.

Se ‏الله تعَالَى‎ oo - ‏بن عَوْف‎ pS ue ty

ply GE ER ‏«لا‎ :
SSE pe Ah ‏وقال‎ » ghee ATS

1275, “Abdur Rahman bin “Auf (RAA) narrated that the Mes-
senger of Allah 38 said, “A thief is not to be fined if the prese-

ribed punishment has been inflicted on him.” Related by An-
‘Nasa’i who said that its chain of narrators is disconnected.

9 4 na
» ‏الْقَطمْ». أَعرَحَة أبُو 358 وَالنَسَائِيّ‎

1276, “Abdullah bin “Amro bin ‏عق له‎ (RAA) narrated, ‘The

Messenger of Allah 38 was asked about dates which are still hang-
ing on the palm tree, he then said,If a needy person eats some
dates, but without taking a supply away in his garment, he
is not to be blamed, but if anyone takes away any of it, he
is to be fined and punished. And if anyone takes away any
of it (the dates) after it has been put in the place where it is
going to be dried, and it amounts to the price of a shield,

464
he must have his hand cut off.” Related by Aba ‏لتصقط‎ and
An-Nas’i. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

hey ae ‏الله‎ Se ‏الي‎ of - eh ‏صفوَان إن أي - رضي‎ 35 — WW
‏كَانَ ذلك كَبْلَ أن‎ St» ‏َع فيه - ؛‎ 85, Be ea gh ALS - ‏قَالَ‎

تبي به ؟». ‎asta La feet‏ وأ

1277. Safwan bin Umaiyah (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Mes-
senger of Allah 38 commanded that the thief who had stolen his

cloak (i.e. Safwan’s) should have his hand cut off, Safwan wanted
to intercede, for the thief’s hand not to be removed. Thereupon the

Messenger of Allah 3& said to him,“Why didn’t you do so before
bringing him to me?” Related by Ahmad, the four Imams, and
Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎ie Fie‏ به الْحَامسة . فَقَالَ : «اللوة».

‎5000000 5
Ray » ‏أبنو 545 وَالنسَائي‎ et

‎1278, Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘A thief was brought to the Pro-

‎phet 3 and he said to them, “Kill him.” The people said, ‘He has
just stolen O Messenger of Allah” He then said, “Cut off his
hand.” He was brought to him the second time and the Messenger

‎of Allah 3 also said,“Kill him.” They said the same and the Mes-
senger of Allah 38 said to them, ‘Cut off his hand.” The same
man was brought a third and a fourth time and same was said.”
When they brought him for the fifth time, the Messenger of Allah

‎48 said, “Kill him.” Related by Abd Dawad and An-Nasé’i who
regarded it as Munkar (a type of a weak hadith).

‎367- The first time a thief steals, his right hand is cut off. The second time
his left foot is to be cut off, the third time his left hand and the fourth
time his right foot.

‎465
من محَديث الْحَارث ‎yf‏ حاطب ‎«SE‏ وَذَكَرَ ‎LN‏

1279. An-Nasa’i also reported a similar hadith on the autho-
rity of Al-Harith bin Hatib. Ash-Shafii mentioned that the killing
in the fifth time (of stealing) is abrogated.

Chapter IV: Penalty for Drinking and
the Nature of Intoxicants

1280. Anas bin Malik (RAA) narrated, ‘A man who had drunk

wine was brought to the Prophet 3% and he commanded that the
man should be beaten (lashed). The man was given about forty
lashes with two palm branches. Anas added, Aba Bakr (RAA) did
the same, but when “Umar (RAA) became the Caliph, he consulted
the people and “Abdur Rahman bin “Auf said, ‘The mildest puni-
shment for drinking is eighty (lashes),’ So, ‘Umar (RAA) gave his
commands accordingly. Agreed upon.

‎Ly vay‏ عَنْ علي - رَضيّ الله ‎Se‏ - في

‎(ab by «Gael ‏ولد بو بكر‎ «elif ey ie th hth
B dle ‏الْحَديث : «أنا رَجْلاً هد‎ gy «i Le 0
‏شَرِيَهَاه‎ & oles Ss on ‏فَقَالَ‎ «aad Bg or,

‎1281. Muslim transmitted on the authority of “Alt (RAA) con-
cerning the story of al-Walid bin “Uqbah% that the Messenger of

‎Jas

‎368. He was the brother of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan and he became a Muslim on
the day of the Conquest of Makkah. He was appointed by “Uthman to

‎466
Allah inflicted forty lashes, Aba Bakr (RAA) forty lashes and
“Umar (RAA) eighty. All of them are in accordance with the Sun-

nah of the Prophet 3¥ but this one (the eighty lashes) is preferable
to me In this hadith also a man witnessed that he had seen him

vomiting wine, ‘Uthman (RAA) said, ‘He would not have vomited
it, unless that he had drunk it”

يّة - رَضي الله 8 - ‎(to‏ صَلَى الله

Bsa OB ‏:«إذًا‎ ah ‏في شارب‎

َم 1 شرب ‎tatty‏ فَاضترئوا ‎{te‏

1282. Mu’‘Awiyah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

+8 said regarding the one who drinks alcohol, ‘If he drinks (for
the first time) flog him, then if he drinks for the second time
flog him, then if he drinks for the third time flog him then
if he drinks for the fourth time you should kill him.”
Related by Ahmad and the wording is his. It is also transmitted
by the four Imams; At-Tirmidhi mentioned what indicates that it
is abrogated, but Aba Dawdd reported it clearly on the authority
of Az-Zuhari.

1283. ‏نطف‎ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “When one of you is flogging (while inflicting a
prescribed punishment)he should avoid the face.” Agreed upon.

govern al-Kéfah and was later ordered to retire by him for drinking ale-
ohol.

369- It is preferable for him due to the daring attitude of the drunkards and
not that what ‘Umar (RAA) did was dearer to him than what the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 did.
467

th fo ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ 3 ALE5 144
FSS » ‏رمدي‎ aly ential ‏في‎ Syd Ey: ‏وَسَلْمَ‎
‎1284, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Prescribed punishments are not to be inflicted in
mosques.” Related by At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim.

Uy Addl ‏تخرم‎ dh gf aa, ‏قَالَ‎ - Se ‏ضي الله‎ - Abby 6

2 Sah «Ai Wood bis eh,

1285, Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah sent down the verses sta-
ting the prohibition of alcohol when there was no other beverage
to drink in Madinah except that prepared from dates (wine of
dates).’ Related by Muslim.

ال : ‎Ig‏ تخرم ‎wel‏ » وَهي من ‎OS‏ من ‎cial‏

yan
: NEG ABS «pally « ‏والحئطة‎ » Jeti « ty,

1286, ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘When the prohibition of Khamr
(alcoholic drinks) was revealed, it used to be made from: grapes,

dates, honey, wheat and barley. Khamr is what shields one’s mind”
Agreed upon

ey ole Gh ‏أن الب صَلّى‎ - ee hs - ‏وَعَنٌ ان عُمَرَ‎ av
‏ملل‎ tel Ge St oy Fe St ly : ‏قال‎

1287. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3% said, “Every intoxicant is Khamr, and every intoxicant is
prohibited.” Related by Muslim.

SKA ‏«مَا‎ su ley ale tt ‏رَسُولَ الله صَلَى‎ Of ‏وَعَنْ جابر‎ van

Ob bey » ‏وَالأَرْبعة‎ Mehl ens is

1288. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “If a large quantity of any beverage intoxicates, then a
small amount of it is prohibited.” Related by Ahmad and the
four Imams. Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sahih.

468
qe ipl ‏شيء أطراقة».‎ Cab by » ‏وَسَفَاهُ‎

1289. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘Raisins used to be soaked

for the Messenger of Allah $ in a water skin, and he would drink
it that day, the next day and the following day. When it was the
evening of the third day, he would drink it and give some to
others. If anything was left from it, he would spill it.’ Related by
Muslim.

Biya
1290. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Allah did not make your cure in what He

made Harém (unlawful) to you.” Related by Al-Baihaqi and

graded as Sahth by Ibn Hibban.

‎en‏ عدا تددس سر سويد

‎ee ELS

‎ee ‏خلرة»‎ fy » ‏مُسْلمُ‎ eel ats isl,
1291, Wa’il Al-Hadrami narrated that Tariq bin Suwaid asked
the Messenger of Allah 4 about Khamr which he made only to be

‎used as a medicine. The Prophet 38 replied, “It is not a medi-
cine, it is a disease.” Related by Muslim and Aba Dawad.

‎Chapter V: Ta’ztr Discretionary punishment
And Ordinances Regarding An Assailant

‏7 - مسن أب ‎SS‏ الألصارعا ألا ستيغ لي كول + ‎My‏ فزق عر
‎siti‏ إلا في ‎tte‏ حُدُود الله -

1292. Abd Burdah Al-Anséri (RAA) narrated that he heard
the Messenger of Allah 38 say, “No more than ten lashes are to

be given except when inflicting one of the Hudfd (prese-
ribed punishments) of Allah.” Agreed upon.

ploy ole th Sh ‏أن‎ ge th ‏رضي‎ - Lae ty 005+
‏الْحُدُوة». رَوَاهُ أ‎ Sy tyne thes bl fy: SLE

eo
‏دَاوْدَ‎ hy A

1293. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 38 said,
“Forgive the people with high moral values when they slip
but not what calls for the infliction of Hudid.” Related by
Ahmad, Abd Dawid, An-Nasa’ and Al-Baihaqi
‏حَدًا‎ sel le BW OS ‏«ما‎ : 6 - ie th ‏رَضِي‎ - Ye ey vat

‎oul‏ تفْسيء إلا شارب الْحَمْرِ 26 ‎aol tds ou‏ البحَارِي.

‎1294. “Ali (RAA) narrated, I would not blame myself for the
death of a man when I inflicted prescribed punishment on him,
with the exception of one who drunk Khamr, for if he were to die,
I would pay Diyah for him.’

‎fet‏ رَيْد - رَضي ‎Mh‏ 25 - قَالَ : قا

‎1

‏ل َسُولُ الله صلَى الله

‎GA By BAN, high 38 ‏ماله‎ bb ‏هن قل‎ sky

‎1295. Sa‘id bin Zaid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Whoever is killed while protecting his prope-
rty, be

‎a martyr.”8” Related by the four Imams and At-Tirmi-

‎dhi graded it as Sahih.

‎370. Imam Muslim transmitted a hadith on the authority of Aba Hurairah
that a man came to the Prophet # asking about a man who is trying to
take away his money, the Prophet 4 said to him, “Do not give it to

‎him.” He then asked again, ‘What if he fights me? The Prophet 3 said
to him, “Fight him." The man asked again, ‘What if he kills me?’ The

‎Prophet 3 said to him, “You are then (considered) a martyr.” The
man asked, ‘What if I kill him? The Prophet ‏يك‎ said to him, “He is then

‎470
bia; aks in eet ‏تل».‎

1296. ‘Abdullah bin Khabbab (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard my
father say: ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah BE say, “There will be
times of Fitan,37! so O slave of Allah be in it the one who is

killed and do not be the killer.” Related by Abi Khaithamah
and Ad-Daraqutni,

fo

cet 7

1297. Ahmad transmitted a similar hadith on the authority of
Khilid bin ‘Urfutah.

in the Hell Fire.” And in that case there is no ‏عقون‎ as the man was
defending himself.
371- Plural of Fitnah which means affliction, hardship trials ete.

471

‎ous‏ الجهاد
‎Book XI: Jihad‏
‎Chapter I‏

‎» ‏مات‎ Sop ply dle thy rj,

‎Reet] «sts tha ‏ل‎ eos

‎aly Bet

‎1298. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “He who dies without having gone or thought
of going out for Jihéd in the Cause of Allah, will die while

‎being guilty of having one of the qualities of hypocrisy.”
Related by Muslim.

‎ayaa

‎kei, ies 7 Soe

‎1299. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “Fight the disbelievers (polytheists) with your prope-

‎rty, yourselves and your tongues.” Related by Ahmad, An-
Nasa’ and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎1300. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ‘I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah!
Is Jihad prescribed (also) for women? Allih’s Messenger 3 said,

‎“Yes, a Jihad which is without fighting, it is Hajj and ‘Um.

‎rah.” Related by Ibn Majah.

‎١‏ وَعَنْ ‎os - bet dns‏ الله ‎ate‏ - قَالَ : ‎ae‏ رَحُلْ إلى

‎Bi ae ‏اك‎ iy fob : ‏فَقَالَ‎ alge ‏أذن في‎ i
472

1301. ‘Abdullah bin Umar (RAA) narrated ‘A man came to
the Messenger of Allah 3 asking his permission to go out for
Jihad. The Messenger of Allah 3¥ asked him, “Are your parents

alive?” He replied, ‘Yes.’ The Messenger of Allah 38 then said to
him, “Then your Jihad would be with them (ic. in looking
after them and being at their service.).” Agreed upon.

‎AG 7‏ وي ‎SY‏ من حَديث أبي متعيد ‎6S‏

‎aah
‎oe”

‎OS YY el ‏أذا‎ oe CYS
1302. Ahmad and Abt Dawid transmitted a similar hadith on
the authority of Abi Sa‘id, and they added the extra statement,

‎“Go back and ask for their permission. If they permit you
to go, then go for Jihad otherwise, be good to them (look

‎after them).”#72

‎- th oo - a yar

‎Bey BE ay ‏المُش ركين».‎ GE elt pt ‏لل‎ ‘st ‏«أنسا يْرِيء من‎ : Ley

‎1303. Jarir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎said, “Any Muslim who stays among the polytheists, does
not belong to me.” Related by the three Imams with a sound
chain of narrators. Imam Al-Bukhari considered it as Mursal (i.e.
the companion is absent from the chain of narrators.)

‎Nees‏ ماي - رضي الله ‎wage‏ - قَالَ َال رول لله صلى الله

‎BE Sy Se ‏ولكن‎ ١ ‏نح‎
‎1304. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated 5-5 the Messenger of. Allah

‎372 Scholars say that this hadith is evidence that asking the parent's permi-
ssion before going for Jihéd is necessary. Also that Jihdd is not compul-
sory when both parents or one of them is still alive (especially if they are
elderly).

‎473
3% said, “There is no emigration (from Makkah to al-Madinah)
after the conquest of Makkah, but only Jihéd (in the Cause

of Allah) and a good intention.”978

SE al ‏فهُرَ في سبل‎ a ‏الله هئ‎ tas 3,53 yb ty
1305. Aba 21655 Al-Ash‘ari (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “The one who fights for Allah’s word to
become Superior, is striving in Allah's Cause.” Agreed upon.

Oe Bboy » ‏ني‎

1306. “Abdullah bin As-Sa‘di narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3§ said, “Emigration (to fight the enemy) will continue
as long as an enemy is fought.” Related by An-Nasa’i, and Ibn
Hibbén graded it as Sahih.

‎5b : 8 sey ٠.‏ 2 الله ‎he‏ الل ‎they ale‏ على يني

‎ADR Gay GB IS ‏ْم » وَستى‎

‎1307. 2138“ (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يلك‎ made
an attack on Bani al-Mus-Taliq when they were unaware.¥ He

‎Killed the men who were fighting and took the women and chil-
dren as captives.’ “Abdullah bin Umar told me about it. Agreed
upon.

‎878. The specific Hijrah (migration) from Makkah to Madinah is not compu-
sory anymore after the conquest of Makkah, but still Jihdd remains
and one could emigrate from his home for its sake. Also emigration with
good intention such as escaping from the land of the disbelieves
travelling to gain knowledge, escaping from Fitnwh ete,

‎314. As they were preparing to ight the Prophet
414

عن لله افوا ولا ام ولا روا وله

1308. Sulaimén bin Buraidah narrated on the authority of his
father on the authority of ‘A’ishah (RAA), ‘Whenever Allah's Mes-

senger 3£ appointed a commander over an army or a Sariyah,375

he would instruct him to fear Allah in his own behavior and consi-
der the welfare of the Muslims who were with him. He then used
to say #2 “Go out for Jihad in Allah’s name, in the Cause of
Allah, and fight those who disbelieve in Allah. Go out for

Jihad and do not indulge in Ghulal*, or be treacherous or
mutilate (dead bodies) or kill a child. When you meet your

375 A small army unit which is sent out by the Prophet 3% for Jihdd, but
without his participation in it,

376- Stealing the war booty before it is distributed according to the laws of
Shart‘ah, According to the consensus of the scholars it is one of the
major sins.

475
enemy, or the polytheists, invite them to three courses of
action, and accept whichever of them they are willing to
agree to, and withhold from doing anything else: Call them
to Islam, and if they agree accept it from them. Then invite
them to migrate from their land to the land of the Emigr-

ants (i.e. al-Madinah),’” if they refuse, then tell them they
will be like the Muslim desert Arabs, * thus they will have

no right in the Ghanimah*” or Fai’ unless they partici-
pate in Jihad with the Muslims. If they refuse (to accept Isl-
4m) order them to pay the Jizyah**! and if they agree, accept

it from them. If they refuse,seek Allah, the Most High's help
against them and fight them, When you besiege a fortress,
and its people wish you to grant them the protection of Al-

‎and His Prophet 38, grant them neither but grant them‏ طقل
‎your protection, for it is less serious (a lesser guilt) to break‏
‎your guarantee of protection than to break that of Allah’s.‏
‎And if they offer to capitulate under the condition that‏
‎they are subjected to the judgment of Allah, do not grant‏
‎them this, but judge according to your own command, for‏
‎you do not know whether or not you will be able to carry‏
‎out Allah, the Most High’s Judgment regarding them.” Rela-‏
‎ted by Muslim.‏

‎377. Migration from Makkah to Madinah used to be compulsory before the
conquest of Makkah, as it was the land of Islim up until that time.

‎318. They are subjected to all the other commands of Alléh like other Mus-
lims, ie. performing prayer, paying Zakah, paying Diyah otc, except
that they do not get a share in war booty.

‎379. Ghanimah refers to the spoils of war that Muslims gain after fighting
the disbelievers and defeating them. One fifth of the war booty is taken
away and the rest is distributed among the ones. who fought. This fifth
is spent on the orphans, poor, needy, in the cause of Allah ete

‎880- ‘This term refers to the war-booty which is acquired from the disbelievers
without fighting them. No fifth is to be taken away and it is spent on the
poor, the orphans ete

‎381- Poll tax money paid by non-Muslim citizens who are staying in a Mus-
lim land, in return for their protection, services provided ete.

‎476

1309, Ka’b bin Malik (RAA) narrated that whenever the Mes-

senger of Allah 3€ intended to go out on a battle, he would pretend
to head in a different destination. Agreed upon.

aed

7 لمان مر رضي الله 22 - قَالَ : «شهت

1310. 315 ‏انو‎ bin An-Nu‘man bin Mugarrin (RAA) narrated, T

witnessed (battles with) Allah's Messenger $8 and if he did not
start fighting at the beginning of the day, he delayed the fighting

till the sun had passed the meridian, and the wind blew*®? and

victory descended from Allah.” Related by Ahmad and the three
Imams. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎te ho‏ - َال : سكل ‎gos‏ الله صَلّى
اله ‎igs Lg be‏ الث ‎Behe‏ عو بن ‎pets‏

‎BE ‏ملهم».‎ pot ‏فَقَالَ‎ ass)
1311, As-Se’b bin Jath-thamah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messen-

‎ger of Allah 48 was asked about the polytheists whose land was
attacked at night with the probability that some of their women

‎Of ‏وَعَنْ المب‎ ١

‎982- If the Messenger of Allah 3% did not start the fighting at the break of
day, he would defer it to the Dawhr prayer time to meet the blessing of
Allah which descended on the believers during the prayer time. As for
the wind, scholars say that Muslims were granted victory at the battle
of the Trench (al-Ahz&bi) by the blowing of the wind, by the will of Al-
lah. Therefore, it is believed to be one of the factors which brings about
victory, and the wind usually blows after the sun had passed the meri-
dian

‎477
and offspring were killed or hurt’ He said 38, “They are from
among them.” Agreed upon

‎Of - ge dh ay - Lee sy 18‏ الي ‎ley ole Shh Le‏ َال

‎1312. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يلك‎
‎said to a man who followed him on the day of the Battle of Badr,
“Go back I will not seek help from a Mushrik (polythe-

‎ist).”98 Reported by Muslim.

‎ley ale th eb se ght ey 1١‏ رأى امرأة ‎Ue‏ في

‎BE cotta, Lh js SE ‏يه‎
‎1318. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 saw a woman who was killed in one of his expeditions, so he
disapproved the killing of women and children. Agreed upon.

‏4 وَعَنْ سَمْرَةَ قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ ‎ce ah eh‏ وَسَلُمَ : ‎eb lb‏

‎50 5

‎ae Lay a fat‏ روا أبو ذا

‎383- Tt is not meant that women and children are killed intentionally, but if

‎they were killed by accident then the Messenger of Allah 38 means they
are not to be blamed.

‎384. This man who followed the Prophet 3 was a brave and strong man, but
the Messenger of Allah wanted him to embrace Istim first as he could
see that the man had a strong desire to become a Muslim. In another
version of the hadith it says that when he became a Muslim the Messen-
ger of Allah 3§ gave him permission to fight with them. Some scholars
say that this hadith is evidence that asking the assistance of a non-Mus-
lim is not allowed in war, but other narrations prove that the Prophet
sought the help of Safwan bin Umaiyah on the Day of Hunain when he
was still a polytheist, and he also asked the assistance of some other
polytheists at the same battle hoping to bring their hearts closer to Isl-
4m, as he gave them a share of the war booty. That. is why some scholars
adopt the opinion that it was first prohibited to seek the help of polyth-
cists during a war, but later on it was allowed (when the power of Islam
became stronger). Ash-Shafi’ is of the opinion that if the polytheist has
a good opinion concerning the Lacties of war ote, it is allowed to seek his
assistance, otherwise it is disliked,

‎478
1314. Samurah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
4 said, “Kill the mature men*® of the polytheists but spare

their children.” Related by Abi Dawad and At-Tirmidhi graded
it as Sahth.

ارذوا توم يَْر». ‎ay)‏

‎te Lis) - Le 2 6‏ - :داهم

‎Vike sys Facet «ett

‎1315. “Ali (RAA) narrated that they (the Muslims and the

‎polytheists)engaged in duel combat on the Day of Badr. Related by
Al-Bukhari and Aba Dawid reported it as part of a long hadith.

‏قَالَ ‎Lig Up:‏ هذه ‎ANI‏ فيا

‏م « يعني ‎ict - OS‏ - - : إولا ‎Ui‏ 3 يكم إلى اهلك ‎by, as‏
‎STL‏ عَلَى مَنْ حَمَلَ عَلَى ‎tie‏ الوم 000 فيهم». ‎BU‏

‎«Sy » Ol BAG « Sou oon

‎1316. Aba Aiyab (RA) narrated that this verse was revealed

‎concerning us (al-Ansar).’ He was referring to the verse, “And do

‎not throw yourselves into destruction,’ (2:195). Abi Aiyab
said that to answer those who disapproved of the action of those

‎who attacked the Romans till they were amidst their army."8>

‎Related by the three Imams. At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Hibban and Al-
Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎385- He means ‏يلك‎ the grown up and strong men who are able to fight.

‎386- When the Muslims confronted the Romans at Constantinople, a Muslim
fighter attacked the lines of the Romans until he was in their midst, and
then returned. People then cried, ‘He is throwing himself into destruc-
tion. Aba Aydb then told them that they are misinterpreting the verse
which was revealed concerning the Ansér, when Allah granted them ‏ون‎
‎tory they said to themselves secretly our property was lost, so why don’t
we stay here to take care of our property and regain what we have lost
(and leave Jihad in the Cause of Allah). Allah, the Almighty then revea-
Jed this verse to show them that the real destruction occurs by staying
back in their dwellings and not spending their wealth in the Cause of
Allah,

‎479
oe GE ‏يني التضير وقطع».‎ LS

1817. Tbn Umar narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38 bur-
nt the palm trees of Band an-Nadir®” and cut them down. Agreed
upon.

5 - ‏الصّامت‎ of

38 رَسُولُ الله ‎eho‏

‎We :‏ توا من الُولَ نار وَعَار على ‎BN Satie‏ والآخرة»

‎. Ole NBR » ‏اي‎

‎1818. “Ubadah bin as-Samit (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

‎senger of Allah 38 said, “Do not be dishonest (and treacherous)
about the war booty (ie. steal from it before it is divided leg-
ally), as Ghulal will be like fire (for the ones who got involved
in it) and a cause of disgrace to those who are guilty of it in
this world and in the Hereafter.” Related by Ahmad, and An-
Nasa’i, and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎oe ‏على الله‎ hy: - a ‏الله‎ sy - awe ‏عَوْف بْن‎ sy 8
vp ate Mh ‏داو‎ fay ‏للْمُقائل».‎ Cty a cy
1319. “Auf bin Malik (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

‎3 judged that the belongings taken from the (non-Muslim enemy)
killed soldier in a war, are to be given to the one who killed him.’
Related by Aba Dawéd. Muslim reported it as part of a long

‎hadith.
‎Je ‏بن وف - رضي اله عله - ل أبي‎ hue bey ٠6

‎A BS BS ug toate LG‏ رَسُول الله ‎fe‏ الله
‎ci;‏ 6 ما ‎B69: Wer tke‏

‎387- This incident took place during the siege of Band an-Nadir in Madinah.
480
ae
se. ‏ين الْحمُوع‎ Ae

1820, “Abdur Rahmén bin ‘Auf (RA) narrated regarding the
story of the killing of Aba Jahl,.they both*® hastened to him with
their swords till they killed him. Afterwards, they went to the Pro-
phet 3 and informed him (of what they had done). The Messenger
of Allah $8 asked them, “Which of you killed him? Have you

wiped your swords?” They said: ‘No.’ The Prophet 2 then lo-
oked at the swords and said, “Both of you killed him.” He then
ordained that the belongings (weapons, shields etc..) of Aba Jahl

should go to Mu’adh bin “Amro bin al-Jamah,’ 388 Agreed upon.

وَعَنْ يحول - رضي لله عله - : «أنّ لبي صلى الله ‎as‏
‎ayo Mast. 2‏ في الْمَرَاسيل » ‎Bes‏

- رضي الله عله - .

1321, Makh6l (RA) narrated, “The Messenger of Allah 3 set
up the ballista while attacking the people of at-Té’if.’ Related by
Aba Dawad with a trustworthy chain of narrators, but it is hadith
Mursal.

8 ‏ر”‎ yl bes 7
‏فَقَالَ‎ TS ‏قَلَمًا ترَعَهُ حَاءَهُ‎ id Ht rae

BE 6 by OS

1322. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 32
entered Makkah with a helmet on his head, and when he took it
off, a man came to him and said, ‘Ibn Khattal is hanging on to the

388. The two sons of al-“Afra’, who were teenagers at the time.

389. ‘The Messenger of Allah 3% commanded that the booty be given to Mu’a-
dh ‏فى‎ scholars say- because he found that it was him who cut off Aba
‏والطوك‎ leg with a fatal blow, which eventually killed him,

481

tes
curtains of the Ka’bah.’ The Prophet 38 thereupon said, “Kill
him.” Agreed upon.

‎ob ae hoy ey 100‏ رَسُولَ الله ‎fo‏ الله
‎hs cle‏ كل يوم ار ‎Wipe iE‏ 1 955 في ‎Bes » deal‏ 3

‎1823. Sa‘id bin Jubair (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of
Allah ‏يك‎ killed three men on the day of Badr while they were in

‎bonds (by throwing arrows at them until they died). Related by
Abdi Dawid.

‏ن ‎ot‏ - رضي ‎Ob : - 5 th‏ رَسُولَ الله ‎Le‏ الله

‎LN oat eo Pa tat ps ‏وَسَلْمَ قدى‎ oe

‎1324, ‘Imran bin Husain (RAA) narrated that the Prophet ‏قل‎
‎exchanged two Muslim men from captivity for one polytheist.” Rel-

‎ated by At-Tirmidhi.
6 GY Op : OU ly ale dh Lo ‏أن الي‎ atl ‏وَعَنْ صخر ين‎ ٠١

‎socal py‏ ماود » ‎Bay‏ مُوتقُونَ
‎Sakhr bin Al-’Ailah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger‏ .1325

‎of Allah 38 said, “If the people (polytheists) accept Islam
they will protect their blood and property.” Related by Aba
Dawa.

‏أسْلَمُوا ‎yah‏ 1 دمَاءَهُمْ وأ

‎390- Ibn Khattal accepted Islém at first and then the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎sent him along with a man from the Ansar to collect Zak@h. Ibn Khattal
then aposticized and murdered his Ang@rf companion and fled to
Makkah with the Zakah money. He also had two slave women who used
to sing slanderous songs about the Prophet 38, After the conquest of
Makkah Ibn Khattal tried to take refuge in the premises of the Ka’bah
by hanging onto its curtains, but the Prophet 3% ordered his companions
to kill him along with his slave women.

‎391-The three men were ‘Tu’aimah bin ‘Adi, An-Nadr bin al-Hérith and
“Ugbah bin Abi Mu’ait who threw the entrails of a she-camel on his back
while he was performing his prayer by the Ka‘bah and they all used to

‎harm the Prophet 3 badly when he was still in Makkah.
482

he ale ‏الله‎ Lo ‏أن ال‎ - Be ‏رطبي الله‎ - pat ‏إن‎ 2 oy 9
NSB ‏في‎ gale ‏الْمُطْعمُ بن عَدِي حا ثم‎ Of Yo : Boel ‏قال في‎
Veet ogy 4S

1326. Jubair bin Mut’im (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 48 said concerning the prisoners of war taken at Badr, “If
al-Mut’am bin ‘Adi had been alive and spoken to me about
those filthy ones(as they were polytheists), I would have freed

them for him.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

fran ‏قَالَ : «أصبنا‎ = Me ‏رضي الله‎ - GAM ‏سعيد‎ fe — rey
sth ‏تعَالّى - : [وَالْمْحْصَنَاتُ من‎ - TY » ‏أَروَاجٌ » فتَحَرّحُوا‎ ES by

ph eet ‏الآيق».‎ {pS ‏مَلَكَت‎

1327. Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated, ‘On the Day (the
battle) of Autas, we took women captives who had husbands. The
Companions felt uneasy to have any sexual relation with them.
‘Then Allah, the Most High revealed the verse, “And women alre-
ady married (are prohibited for you) except for those whom

you possess."293 (4:24),

Dy Lo ‏رَسُولٌ الله‎ Gai : ‏وَعَنْ ان عُمَرَ - رَضيّ اللهُ عنهُمَا - قَالَ‎ SA

. ‏عليه‎ iE ‏بَعر».‎ ad 1

‎et‏ بتعا
‎Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38‏ .1328

‎392. When the Messenger of Allah 2% returned from at-Ta’if, Mut‘im bin “Adi
and his sons gave him their protection to enter Makkah safely and
announced in Makkah that he will enter Makkah under his protection
and that he may pray as he wishes by the Ka’bah.

‎393- When a polytheist woman is taken a5 a eaptive her previous marriage is
immediately annulled. If this woman is pregnant, it is not allowed to
have intercourse with her until she delivers her child. If she is not pre-
gnant, then she must wait for one menstrual cycle before her master can
have sexual intercourse with her

‎483
sent a Sariyah 3 to Najd, and I was among them. They got many

camels as spoils and each one’s share was twelve camels, and they
were given an additional camel each.’ Agreed upon.

aks

‎ob‏ شولا الله ص الله

‎1329, Ton “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘On the Day of Khaibar, the
Messenger of Allah 3§ allotted two shares for a horse, and one
share (from the war booty) for the fighter."3°5 Agreed upon and the
wording is from Al-Bukhari’.
‏سَهْمينِ لفرسه‎ : pd SU ‏لرِجل وَلفَرّسه‎ Ag ths : 555 ‏ب ولأيي‎ vere

‎1330. Abd Dawiid also reported, ‘He allotted three shares for
aman and his horse, two for his horse and one for him.”

‏ل

‎we Len ‏ممت‎ Nag ye ‏س‎ 6١

‎. ‏وَصَححَهُ الطّحَاوي‎ » 346 hh SEG. tlt ‏َف‎ Sy ‏تقل‎ Yo : ba
1331, Ma‘n bin Yazid narrated, ‘I heard the Messenger of
Allah ‏يك‎ say, “Additional booties (extra to the allotted share)
are to be distributed only after the fifth* has been kept

‎aside.” Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawad. At-Tahawi graded it
as Sahih,

‎ry‏ وَعَنْ حَبيب ين ‎Oh‏ - رضي اله 85 - ‎U6‏ «شهلات رَسُولَ الله

‎Sy shay Gab ‏في‎ Clit, 2 ‏في‎ Ap ‏تفل‎ ply ole Ln ‏فى‎

‎. ‏وَالْحَاكمْ‎ «Olle Bay » ‏الْجَارُود‎ ces

‎394. A small army unit sent. by the Prophet ‏يك‎ for Jihad.

‎95- Which means that the rider gets one share, plus two shares which are
allotted for his horse as evidenced by the following hadith. As for the

‎fighter who is not riding, he gets one share.

‎‘The fifth which is taken away is to be spent on the poor, the orphans ete.

‎484

1332. Habib bin Maslamah (RAA) narrated, ‘I witnessed the

Messenger of Allah 3¥ give a quarter (of the war spoils) as an ad-
ditional booty (to a Sariyah) when they gained booty on their way
out to the fight. He also gave a third (of the war spoils) as an ad-
ditional booty when they gained it on their way back.” Related

by Aba Dawad, Ibn al-Gardd, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded it
as Saht

ع ‎yh‏ عُمَرَ - رضي الله - قَالَ : ‎ass‏ رَسُولٌ الله ‎ty fe‏

‎ey US‏ خَاصَّة » سرّى قسْمّة عَامّة

‎CA Ga Jig (Ly ce‏ من
‎«le BE pooh‏

‎1333. Tbn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to give some (members) of the Sariyah he sent out (i.e, some

‎of the soldiers), additional booties especially for them,% apart
from the shares which are given to the whole army.’ Agreed upon.

‎106 - ue ‏اللَّهُ‎ oy - sy vere

‎hee 50

‎sts‏ ولا رقعة». ‎Sy‏ لبْحَارِي ‎٠‏ وا

‎Oe ‏ابن‎ ES

‎1334, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘On our expeditions, we used
to get honey and grapes (as spoils)* and eat them while on our

‎military expeditions, without bringing them to the Prophet 3 (or
whoever is in charge of distributing the spoils). Related by Al-
Bukhari. Aba Dawéd narrated, ‘The fifth was not taken from
them.’ Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎397- The Messenger of Allah 38 gave them more if the booty is gained on the
way back, as the enemy is more on the alert and the fight would be more
fierce.

‎398. This was given as an additional reward for something special they did.

‎399. He means that they did not need to take the permission of those who are
in charge of distributing the war booty as they are allowed to take the
food which is usually eaten either for themselves or for their animals

‎485

. ‏وَصَحِحَة اين الجَارُود » وَالْحَاكمْ‎ » S565 yf

1335. ‘Abdullah bin Abi ‏قث‎ (RAA) narrated, ‘On the Day of
Khaibar, we got some food (as spoils). The man would come and
take as much as he needed and then go away.’ Related by Aba

Dawéd. Ibn al-Garad and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

fo a Jats ‏ري الله عل قل : فل‎ - eit ‏وَعَنْ ريع بن‎ Tn

1336. Ruaifi’ bin Thabit (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3§ said, “He who believes in Allah and the Hereafter
must not ride on an animal belonging to the booty of the
Muslims and put it back when he has emaciated it, or wear
a garment belonging to the booty of the Muslims and put it
back when it is worn.” Related by Aba Dawad and Ad-Darimi,

‎gk 8s # 307‏ الْجراحٍ - رضي الله ‎sb te‏ سمش ‎Ose‏
‏اله صل الله ‎ples cle‏ يقُولُ : «جرٌ ‎le‏ الْمُسلمين بَْطهُمْ». ‎BBE‏

‎Oke a ‏ول‎

‏أي
‎Aba ‘Ubaidah al-Jarrah (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the‏ .1337

‎Messenger of Allah 38 say, “Muslims must respect the protec-
tion granted (to a non-Muslim) by other Muslims.” Related

‎by Ibn Abi Shaibah and Ahmad with a weakness in its chain of
narrators.

‎400. ‘This hadith (and the following ones) provide evidence that x Muslim
may give a covenant of protection ‏ما‎ a non-Muslim (give him asylum)
whether this Muslim is a man or a woman, old or young, rich or poor
and it becomes an obligation on all Muslims to respect it

‎486
وَللطّالسي من ‎Ab Gad‏ بْن الْعَاصٍ ‎Gallet le mi:‏ تامع

1388, At-Taidlisi transmitted on the authority of ‘Amro bin al-
“As (RAA), ‘The right of giving protection to non-Muslims is exten-
ded to the most humble of the believers (and all Muslims must
respect it and give him support).’

GAT ‏بها‎ at
and Muslim transmitted on the authority of
“Ali (RAA),“The protection granted by one Muslim is like one given
by them all, and this right is extended to the most humble of

them.’ Ibn Majah narrated with a different chain of narrators,‘And
the most eminent gives protection on their behalf”

‎re‏ وَفِي ‎etal‏ من حَديث ‎tf‏ هَانِيء : «قَذ ‎WAT‏ مَنْ أجترات».

‎1340. Al-Bukhari and Muslim transmitted in the hadith of

‎Umm Hani’, “We have given protection to whom you have
granted (protection),”#"

‏عْمَرَأَلَُ ‎Oa is deh ee‏ : «لأخرِحَن
وَالنصَارَى من جَزيرَة الْعَرب ء ‎ay, es Westy S‏ مسلمٌ .
‎“Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘Iheard the Messenger of Allah‏ ,1341

‎38 say, “I will certainly expel the Jews and the Christians
from the Arabian Peninsula so as to leave only Muslims in

‎it.™02 Reported by Muslim.

‎enna)

‎401. Umm Hani’ was the daughter of Aba Talib and the sister of “AI bin Abi
‘Talib (RAA). She became a Muslim on the conquest of Makkah. The ha-
ith refers to two men of her family to whom she gave protection on the
con-quest of Makkah and her brother “Alf did not want to accept it, but
the Messenger of Allah 38 accepted her protection.

‎402- Scholars say that polytheists and those adopting other religions can
travel by this area to pass through, except for Makkah and Madinah
and the sanctuary around each of them. What is really meant here is
that they should not get the nationality of this land, in modern standa-
rds, rather they may stay temporarily for work or trade. In another had-

‎487
1342, ‘Umar (RA) narrated, ‘The wealth of Band an-Nadir
(one of the Jewish tribes) was part of what Allah bestowed on His
‘Messenger 3, and which the Muslims had not ridden on horses or
camels to get (i.e. they did not have to fight); so they belonged spe-
cially to the Prophet 38 who would give his family their susten-
ance for a year, then applied what remained for horses and weap-
ons and equipment in the Path of Allah, Who is Great and Glori-
ous.” Agreed upon.

1343, Mu’adh bin Jabal (RAA) narrated, ‘We went on an exp-
edition to Khaibar along with the Prophet 3 and we got some she-

ep (as spoils). Then Allah’s Messenger ‘ divided some of them
among us and divided the rest with the other war booty.” Related
by Aba Dawad on the authority of reasonably reliable men.

44 - وَعَنْ أبي رافع قَالَ : قَالَ الي صلَى ‎ce th‏ وَسلَمَ : «إلي لاّ خيس
‎Sey «yt 56 Fay «en AY; aaah‏ ابن ‎Oe‏
‎Aba Rafi’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ ,1344

24 said, “I do not break a covenant or imprison messen-
gers.” Related by Abii Dawid and An-Nas’i. Ibn Hibban graded
it as Sant

{th the Messenger of Allah 3 said that no two beliefs can coexist in the
Arabian Peninsula, meaning that no other religions should be establi-
shed there or have places of worship for this land to remain pure with
the call to the Unity of Allah, the Almighty.

488

1345. Aba Hurairah (RAA) ‘narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “Whichever town you take peacefully (they sur-
rendered without fighting), and stay therein, you have a share
in it (in whatever is obtained from it); and whichever town dis-
obeys Allah and His Messenger %, a fifth of (its booty) goes
to Allah and His Messenger and what remains is yours.”
Related by Muslim.

Chapter 11: Jizyah*? and Truces

‎Se rs‏ - رَضِي ‎hy: - te th‏ الي صَلَى الله

‎by IBN, Wa rsh ‏من‎ -

‎yearn

‎eth ‏فيا‎ both ‏في‎
‎1346, “Abdur Rahmén bin “Auf (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messen-

‎ger of Allah $8 took the Jizyah from the Magians of Hajar.’ Rela-
ted by Al-Bukhari.

‎(Bhai bls ge shes‏ قم » ‎iy‏ على الجزية».

‎«S38 gl yy,
1347. ‘Asim bin ‘Umar narrated on the authority of Anas and
“Uthméan bin Abi Sulaiman (RAA),The Messenger of Allah 38 sent

‎403- Poll tax money paid by non-Muslims citizens who are staying in a Mus-
lim land, in return for their protection, services provided ete.

‎489
Khalid bin al-Walid to Ukaidir of Dawmat al-Jandal‘ and they

seized him and brought him to the Prophet 38. The Messenger of
Allah spared his life and made peace with him on the condition

that he should pay Jizyah. #95 Related by Aba Dawad.

. ‏وَالْحَاكم‎ » Leben pt
1348. Mu’adh bin Jabal (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 sent me to Yemen and he commanded me to take the
Jizyah from everyone who has reached the age of puberty - one
Dinér- or its equivalent in Ma @firt (garments of Yemeni origin)’
Related by the three Imams. Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded it
as Sahih.

fe thy fe (aoe - ‏َل‎ th ‏رضي‎ - Gh ‏بن عَمْرِو‎ we ‏وَعَنْ‎ ves
i Sete ey hy ‏قَالَ : «الإسلام‎ pig
1349. ‘A’idh bin ‘Amro al-Muzani (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Islam is always superior and sho-
uld never be surpassed.” Related by Ad-Daraqutni.

س وَعَن أبي هُرَيْرَةَ - رضي ‎dh 5 Of - 85 A‏ صلّى ‎hy ale IN‏
‎OG‏ : «لاً 1 اليهُودَ

1350. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Do not start by saluting the Jews and the Ch-

404. Dawmat al-Jandal is a fortress near Tabak held by Ukaidir who was an
Arab Chrisitan and this incident took place during the expedition of
Tabak in the 9" year of Hijrah.

405- Khalid bin al-Walid (RAA) called Ukaidar to Islam but he refused so
they made a peace agreement with him on the condition that he should
pay them Jizyah,

490
ristians (when you meet them), and if you meet any of them
on the road, force him to go to the narrowest part of the

road (i.e. do not give them positions of authority among you.)”
Related by Muslim.

‎ge ale ate‏ عَلَى ‎Pb ploy‏ سبيت

‎. ‏البحَارِي‎ BULL , ‏دود‎ Haat Mai ‏عَنْ‎ pia
1351. Al-Miswar bin Makhramah and Marwan narrated, ‘The
Messenger of Allah went out in the year of al-Hudaibiyah (recon-
ciliation) — the narrator narrated a long hadith which contained,
‘this is what Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah has reconciled with Suhail
bin ‘Amro, to stop fighting for 10 years during which time people
will live safely, and refrain from fighting one another...’ Related by
Abd Dawéd. It is part of a long hadith narrated by Al-Bukhari.

‎of ‏وفيه‎ » - Heh ‏رضي‎ - Fens ‏من‎ Gal HL  — vyor

‎Cab Sh tah : ‏هَذَا يّا رَسُولَ الله ؟ قَالَ‎ CR

‏جَاءنا ‎Jo a‏ الله له 5 وَمَطْرجا0.

‎1352. Muslim transmitted part of this hadith on the authority

‎of Anas bin Malik (RAA) which says, ‘In case any of you comes to
us we shall not send him back to you (i.e. one of the Muslims who
goes back to Quraysh), and in case any of us came to you, you sho-
uld send him back to us (any of the people of Quraysh who goes to
the Prophet 38 they will send him back to Makkah). The Compa-
nions asked the Prophet 38,0 Messenger of Allah! Will you write
this down?’ He replied, “Yes. May Allah send out of His Mercy

‎any of the Muslims who goes back to them. But Allah will
grant a way out for anyone who comes to us from them.”

‎491
‎١5‏ وَعَنْ ‎ds‏ بن ‎ab‏ - رضي الله ‎oo ge‏ الي ‎Lo‏ الله عليه
‎j is‏

‎. ‏البحَارِي‎ EE ‏عَامًا».‎ Saal

‏ُعَاهدالَمْ رح ‎ut‏ |

‎tp Sh

‎Oy «‏ ري

‎1353. “Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messen-
ger of Allah 38 said,“Whoever kills a Mu ‘Ghid*® will not smell

‎the fragrance of Paradise, even though its fragrance could
be smelt at a distance of forty years.” Related by Al-Bukhart.

‏ياب البق ‎os‏

‎Chapter II: Racing and Marksmanship

‏اعنْهمًا -

‎pias age

‎Ene lol Ej sd jo : ‏قل ساد‎ ed ‏عَلَيْه , رَادَ‎ GE

‎Ef sel‏ ومن ال

‎1354, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 3
held a horse race, with horses that had been made lean by trai-
ning, from al-Hafiy@’ to Thanyat al-Wadé’ (names of two places)
and he held a race from Thanyat- alWad@’ to the mosque of Ban
Zuraig between the horses which had not undergone such train-
ing’ Ibn ‘Umar was among those who took part in that race.
Agreed upon.

‎Al-Bukhari added: Sufian said, ‘From al-Hafiya’ to Thanyat ‏عله‎
‎Wada is a distance of five or six miles and from Thanyat- al-
Wada’ to the mosque of Banat Zuraiq is a distance of one mile.’

‎th bo 3h

‎. Oe Yee » 3915. » ‏في الْقابة». رَواهُ أَْمَد‎ CSA aks « Jo

‎408- A Mu ‘dhid is a non Muslim who is staying in an Islémie State and with
whom there is a covenant of peace and protection.

‎492
1355, Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
held a horse race and made the destination from the fully grown
ones at a longer distance.’ Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawéid. Ibn
Hibban graded it as Sahth.

hy be ‏قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ اللّه‎ -
ye MST Ae Ye ‏صل‎ fk BS Y : ‏وَسَلْمَ‎
‏با‎ Ney
1356. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said,“Prize money is allowed only for racing camels,
shooting arrows or racing horses.” Related by Ahmad and the
three Imams. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sc

38 - عن الب" ‎th Le‏ عل ‎pes‏ قال : «
َرْسيْنٍ - وَهْوَ ‎Sa ALY‏ 0 ْو

- رضي

ale BU «55 oh MENG ‏قَمَارُ».‎
‎1357, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‘Allah 38 said, “If anyone introduces a horse in a race with
two other horses, when he is not certain that it cannot be
beaten, there is no harm in it, but when he is certain (it
cannot be beaten) it is then considered as gambling.” Rela-
ted by Ahmad and Aba Dawdd with a weak chain of narrators.

8ه ل 2 ‎HE‏ بن غَا.

hho ‏الله‎ ys ‏قَالَ : سمغت‎ - a ‏رضي الله‎ -
ee 0 ona, ab ee (ie a he ‏للم‎ 7 3
‏من‎ pb ‏لَهُمْ مَا‎ lel} : ‏يقرأ‎ all ‏عَلَى‎ BS «ley le ‏الله‎
‎hoy ‏ألا إن الوه 2250 » ألا‎ » 25H Gah Oy ‏«ألا‎ LS (yl ‏رئاط‎
‎oh ayy ‏الري».‎

1358. “Ugbah bin “Amir (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messen-
ger of Allah ‏يلق‎ recite when he was on the pulpit, “And make ‏مع‎
‎ady against them all you can of power, including steeds of
war(tanks, planes etc.)”(8:60), surely strength is in shooting

(arrows); surely strength is in shooting, surely strength is
in shooting.” Related by Muslim.

493,

Book XII: Food
Chapter I

oo ‏ذي ثاب مر من سباع فأكلة حَرَامُ». رَوَاهُ‎ Bo
1359, ‏قط‎ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Eating any predatory beast that has fangs, is
prohibited.” Related by Muslim

«ge : Bi -

1360. Muslim transmitted the same hadith on the authority of

Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA), ‘He (The Messenger of Allah 32) prohibited...’
and had the additional phrase, ‘and every bird with talons.”

1361. Jabir (RAA), narrated, ‘On the Day of Khaibar, the Mes-

senger of Allah 3§ prohibited eating the flesh of domestic asses,
but permitted horse flesh.’ Agreed upon.

ahh ‏مع رَسُول‎ Uy ‏قال‎ - thoy Bh ‏أبي‎ wis 555

1862, Thn Abi Aufa (RA) narrated, “We went on seven expedi-

tions with the Messenger of Allah 38 and we ate locusts.’ Agreed
upon.

494
1363, Anas (RAA) narrated regarding the story of the rab-
bit,07 ‘He (Aba Talha) slaughtered it and sent its leg to the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 and he accepted it.’ Agreed upon.

‎bo 08 -‏ رَسُْولُ الله ‎Loo‏ الله
‎«AIG Os‏ وَالُْدهّد» ‎cally‏

‎. Oe ey » 556 ‏وَأبُو‎ » 00
1364, Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA),The Messenger of Allah ‏يل‎ prohibited

‎killing four creatures: ants, bees, hoopoes and shrikes.’ Related by
Ahmad and Aba Dawad. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahth.

‎(OE Yh ep By EAN CoE
1865. Ibn Abi ‘Ammar narrated, ‘I said to Jabir (RAA), ‘Is
hyena a kind of game?? He replied, ‘Yes.’ I asked, ‘Did Allah’s

‎Messenger 38 say that?” He replied. ‘Yes.’ Related by Ahmad and
the four Imams. Al-Bukhari and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎407- Anas and some other companions chased a rabbit at Marr adh Dhahran,
and his companions got tired of chasing it, but Anas kept on till he cau-
ght it and brought it to Aba Talhah who sent its leg to the Prophet 38.

‎408- According to this hadith, eating hyena is permissible, but some scholars
say that it is prohibited to eat it as it digs into graves to get human
flesh.

‎495,
فَقَالَ ائْنُ ‎ys‏ كَانَ رَسُولُ ‎Ou ply ale ty ean‏ هَذَا » 345 كَمَا قَالَ :

أَخْرَحَهُ ‎oy tanh‏ دَاوْدَ
‎Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that he was asked about a‏ .1366
‎hedgehog and he then recited, “Say (O Muhammad 38) I find‏

not in that which has been inspired to me anything forbid-
den..” (6:145). An old man who was present said, 1 heard Aba

Hurairah say, ‘It was mentioned in the presence of the Prophet 35
and he said, “It is an abomination from those things which
are abominable.”Ibn ‘Umar then said, ‘If the Messenger of Allah
38 had said that, then it is as he said.’ Related by Ahmad and Aba
Dawid with a weak chain of narrators.

Bees)

1367. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
prohibited eating the animal which feeds on filth or drinks its
milk.Related by the four Imams except for An-Nasa’i. At-Tirmidhi
graded it as Hasan.

: - ‏في قصّة الحمار لوخت‎ - Ue th - ‏أي قنادة‎ bey ra
» ‏وَسلَمَ‎ aie ‏الله‎ Le ‏من اَي‎ by

1868, Aba Qatédah narrated concerning the story of the zebra

“The Messenger of Allah Sate from it.’ Agreed upon. (refer to had-
ith no. 753).

- Gye dhe - Kf ‏بلت‎ tll ‏وَعَنْ‎ 8
. ‏سا فَأكَلاف». متمق عليه‎ hy ‏َل‎ th bt ae

1369. Asma’ bint Abi Bakr (RAA) narrated, ‘During the life-

time of the Prophet 38, we slaughtered a horse and ate it.’ Agreed
upon.

496
1370, Tbn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, “The sand lizard#°9 was ser-
ved as food on the table of the Prophet 38 ” Agreed upon.

5 ‏الله لوم عن للع يتا‎ fo ‏طول الله‎ Se

‎«Sted ce HB . Qs‏ وأ

‎: ‏مَاوُة »و‎ A
1371. ‘Abdur Rahman bin “Uthmén al-Qurashi (RAA) narra-

‎ted, ‘A doctor consulted the Prophet 38 about extracting medicine
from a frog but he prohibited killing it.’ Related by Ahmad, Abd
Dawéd and An-Naséii. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‏تابه الصّّد والدبائح

‎Chapter

‎BoB be‏ :قل رول لم صلى الأ عي

‎1372. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 said, ‘If anyone owns a dog except a sheepdog, a
hunting dog, or a farm dog, a carat of his reward will be
deducted daily.” Agreed upon.

‎ral by eed

‎409- The Messenger of Allah 38 did not prohibit them from eating it, but he
did not like it himself

‎497
SU ‏بماك‎ &

اشم الله - ‎iar‏ فَإِنْ غَاب غلك يوم قلَمْ تجذ فيه ‎AY‏ سَعْمِك ‎IS‏

1373. “Adi bin Hatim (RAA) narrated,’ The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎said to me, “When you set off your dog, mention Allah’s
Name (say Bismillah), and if it catches anything for you
and you come up to it while it is still alive slaughter it; if
you come up to it when the dog has killed it but not eaten
any of it, eat it. If you find another dog with yours and the
game has been killed, do not eat, for you do not know wh-
ich of them killed the animal. When you shoot your arrow,
mentions Allah’s Name and if the game goes out of sight for
a day and you find it without any marks except for that of
your arrow, eat if you wish, but if you find it drowned in
water do not eat it.” Agreed upon, and the wording is from
Muslim.

wk Cy JG a, GE bp : ‏صَيد لّممْرَاضِ » فَقَالَ‎ te AL zg
. ‏رَوَاهُ البْحَارِي‎ IESE » ‏َه وَقيدٌ‎ es

1874. “Adi (RAA) narrated, I asked the Messenger of Allah 3
about hunting using a featherless arrow (al-Mi “rad*), He replied,

“f the game is killed with its sharp edge (the iron piece) eat
it but if it strikes with the middle part of the shaft (ic. it is
not penetrated with the sharp part) and the game is killed (due

to being hit with it), it is considered a Maugidhah*!, so do
not eat it.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

410- It is a featherless arrow without a sharp edge, but it hits the game with
its broad side. Some say that the Mi‘réd is a thick bar of wood with a
Piece of iron fixed to its edge and it could be without this piece of iron
which is closer to its deseription.

411- The Maugitdhah is the animal killed by a violent blow with a stone or a
stick and it is prohibited to eat it. This hadith clearly specifies that if
the game is wounded with a sharp object and bleeds to death, then it is

498
5p 06 hey ole dh te Itsy 0٠

1375. Abd Tha‘labah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said,“When you shoot your arrow and the game has
gone out of sight, eat it when you come upon it, provided it

has not become rotten.”4!? Related by Muslim.

2 dey ib den ‏أدَكَرُوا‎ : gs ‏لآ‎ » ly WA ‏وَسَلْم : إن قَوْمًا‎
fe Lal Oy) ‏وَكلوة».‎ pa ale ‏«سمُوا الله‎
1376. “A'tishah (RAA) narrated, ‘Some people said to Allah’s

Messenger 3, ‘There are people who bring us meat and we do not
know whether or not they have mentioned Allah’s name over it.”
He replied, “Mention Allah’s name yourselves and eat it.”
Related by Al-Bukhari.

et fo ‏رضي الله عله - أن وول الله‎ - Ji of ute ‏س وَعَنْ‎ ٠07
SS, te ‏تنكأ‎ felis da Vp : ‏وَقَال‎ Gish ‏عَن‎ # Ley
1377, “Abdutlah bin Mughaffal ‏تحمس قله‎ (RAA) narrated,"The

Messenger of Allah 3 prohibited throwing pebbles (on animals)
and said, ‘Such means do not hunt a game, nor do they inj-
ure an enemy, but they only may break a tooth or gouge
out an eye.” Agreed upon, and it is Muslim’s version.

permissible to eat it but if it dies out of being hit by an object it is not
lawful to eat in this case, as the body is not penetrated to bleed.

412. If the animal is found having drowned, it is forbidden to eat it, but if he
found it still alive it must be slaughtered first. As stated previously, if
he found his game with no other injury except for that of the arrow, then
itis lawful to eat even if it is dead, as long as it is not rotten

499

ty Le ‏علهُمَا - أن الي‎ aii ‏عماس - رضي‎ gy teva
pet oy aloe bin

US tied Yo : 8

1378. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3% said,“Do not take any living creature as a target.” Related
by Muslim.

- Oe of AS ‏لفقل وَعَنْ‎
Gy ‏بأكْلها». واه‎ Ab awh se oly cle ‏الي صَلّى الله‎ Jeb Soe
1379. Ka’b bin Malik (RAA) narrated, ‘A woman slaughtered a

sheep with a stone, so the Prophet 3 was asked about that and
he ordered it to be eaten.’ Related by Muslim.

1380. Rafi’ bin Khadij (RAA) narrated that the Prophet 28
said, “You may eat an animal which is slaughtered by any
means which causes the blood to gush out as long as Al-
lah’s Name is mentioned over it, except for the tooth and

the claw (not allowed to be used)! The tooth is a bone and

the claw is the knife of the Abyssinians (Ethiopians).” Agre-
ed upon.

‎io : 36 - ws th Gas, Ge By YAN‏ رَسُول الله
صَلَّى ‎Ya of ing ae dn‏ شَيْء من ‎walle Cyt‏ رَوَاهُ ‎pet‏
‎Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of‏ .1381

‎Allah 38 prohibited beating a tied-animal to death.’ Related by
Muslim.

‎ace

‎413. Any sharp object, which makes the blood flow, could be used to slaugh-
ter an animal except for a tooth or a bone.

‎500
الكل

- يعسن دا ني ؤس فل قَالَ رسو الله ‎foo‏ الله علو

ty ede,
1882. Shaddad bin Aus (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Verily, Allah has prescribed proficiency in all
things.Thus, if you kill, kill in the least painful manner you

can;4 and when you slaughter an animal, do it in the best

possible way;5 and any of you should sharpen his blade so

that the animal may be spared from the suffering of the
slaughtering.” Reported by Muslim.

tei sacs ‏أبي‎ G85 — WaT

: ‏وسَلَمَ‎ ae ay

1383. Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “The (legal) slaughtering of the fetus is inclu-
ded when its mother is slaughtered.”*'Related by Ahmad and
Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sahth.

de db ‏قال‎ 6 - ae ‏ي الل‎

d ol ‏أَحْمَدُ وَصّحَّحَهُ اليل‎ 57 eed ‏الْجَنين دَكَةُ‎ iS

1384, ‏مدآ‎ ‘Abbas (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

414. If someone is to be executed (for any erime he committed), he should be
killed in such a manner that he faces the least possible suffering and
that he passes away as quickly as possible,

415- When someone is slaughtering an animal he should not move it around
violently, neither draw it with force, nor slaughter it in the presence of
another animal that may be watching it.

416. When the cow or the camel is slaughtered and a fetus is found inside,
the fetus is lawful to eat if one wishes. That only applies if it was found
dead, but if it was still alive, it must be slaughtered.

501
38 said, “A Muslim’s name is sufficient for him, so if he forg-
ets to mention Allah’s Name when he slaughters an animal,
he should mention Allah’s Name, then eat it.” Related by Ad-
Daraqutni but there is a weak narrator in its chain. Also there is
Muhammad bin Yazid bin Sinan in its chain who is truthful but
had a weak memory.

Bie ae ‏ان‎ BS) ‏بإسناد صّحيح‎ SGN of, ‏ولع‎

1385. “Abdur Razzi transmitted it with a sound chain of nar-
rators on the authority of Ibn “Abbas but it is not connected up to

the Prophet

» Se lath Bebo : ah Lots ‏في‎ 348 of ‏عند‎ a WL ran
«98d Ue 555 ‏امم الله لئام لم‎ 55

1386. Abd ‏لقصو«‎ narrated a similar hadith that reads, ‘The
slaughtering of any Muslim is Halal (awful) whether or not he

mentioned Allah’s name over it.” Its narrators are reliable.

eo ous
Chapter HII: Sacrifices on dul Ad-hé

Sel OS ‏وسلُم‎ dle ‏الله‎ Le Wh : ae ‏نسم‎ aan ae

‎ea.‏ ل على ‎ais‏ وي لفط

‎a ‏الله‎ Sy : ‏وول‎ gna ‏وني‎ tne
1887. Anas bin Malik (RAA) narrated, "The Messenger of Allah
38 used to sacrifice two two-horned rams, mention Allah’s name

‎417- Most scholars are of the opinion that pronouncing the Takbér and Bism-
illah is @ Sunnah except for Ab@ Hanifah. There is also a consensus
among the scholars that if a Muslim deliberately does not mention Al-
Jah’s name while slaughtering then the animal becomes unlawful to eat,
but if he forgets then it is permissible to eat it and it is enough in this,
case to mention Allah’s name before eating it.

‎502
and say the Takbir (Allah Akbar or Allah is the Most Great), and
place his foot on their sides.’ In another version, ‘He slaughtered
them with his own hands.’ Another version has, ‘Two fat rams,’
and another has, ‘two precious rams.’ Agreed upon. In a version by
‘Muslim, ‘and would say Bismillah and Allah Akbar.”

1888, Muslim has also reported on the authority of “A’ishah

(RAA), “Allah's Messenger 3£ ordered a horned ram with black
legs, a black belly and black around its eyes, and it was brought
for him to sacrifice and he said to “A’ishah (RAA), ““A’ishah, get
the knife.” Then he said, “Sharpen it with a stone.” When she
had done so he took it, then taking it (the ram) he placed it on the
ground and slaughtered it. He then said, “Bismillah (In the
name of Allah), O Allah, accept it from Muhammad, Muha-
mmad’s family and from Muhammad's Ummah (followers).”
‘Then he sacrificed it.”

4 said, “He who can afford it but did not offer a sacrifice
must not come near our place of prayer.”*!8 Related by Ah:
mad and Ibn Majah. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih. Other Iméms
said that it is Mawgaf (Le. it is not connected to the Prophet 38.)

418- Offering a sacrifice is not obligatory, but it is a confirmed Sunnah which
was always practiced by the Prophet 38.
503
‎Ok A ra‏ رضي الله عله
‎SN IS aS om IL LS‏ يبح ها مَكَائهًا » ومن لم ‎BBLS‏

‎1390. Jundub bin Sufian (RAA) narrated,'I witnessed (the pra-

‎yer of) Idul Ad-ha with the Messenger of Allah 38 and when he
finished his prayer with the people, he looked at a sheep which
had been sacrificed, so he said, “Anyone who has sacrificed be-
fore the prayer must sacrifice another goat instead (of the
one which he slaughtered before the prayer)and if anyone has

‎not sacrificed he should do so in Allah’s name.’*!9 Agreed upon.
‏كام فنا 5 الله‎ : OS - He hs - ye etsy ‏د‎
‎» ‏عَوَرُهَا‎ Loh eG yah: ‏تَحُورُ في الضّحَايَا‎ Veh : Gul choy ‏علي‎ ay ‏مَل‎
‏والكبيرة التي لآ ثنقي».‎ » Gall (eal yey fo Lea sy

‎. Oe ily « CoB Bes » ‏رَوَهُ أَحْمَدُ » وَالأَربَعَهُ‎

‎1391, Al-Bara’ bin “Azib (RAA) narrated Allah’s Messenger 38
stood among us and said, “There are four types of sacrificial
animals, which are not permitted:A one-eyed animal which
has obviously lost the sight of one eye, a sick animal which
is obviously sick, a lame animal which obviously limps, and
an old animal which has no marrow.” Related by Ahmad and
the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibbén graded it as S

‎PE ‏«لآّ‎ : ley ob ah ean 5 ‏ال‎

‎Wigs

‎. ‏مُسْلمٌ‎ aly, dla ‏لذ مِنّ‎ ibe pa

‎1392. Jabir (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger #8 said,

‎419. This hadith is evidence that if an animal is slaughtered before the ‘efd
Prayer, then it is not considered a sacrifice and will not get the reward
as such, it is rather considered as a charity to be given to the poor. The
Proper sacrifice must be slaughtered after the prayer, which is why the
‘Messenger of Allah 2% told them to sacrifice another one.

‎504
“Sacrifice only a full-grown animal unless it is difficult for
you, in which case you should sacrifice a (six to ten month
old) sheep.” Reported by Muslim.

te ‏يه‎ shone of

WOE VG oe Vy
9 wedi, Oe OG

1393. “Ali (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah’s Messenger 3 enjoined us

to pay great attention to the eye and the ear, and not sacrifice a
one-eyed animal, or an animal with a slit which leaves something
hanging at the front or back of the ear, or with a perforation in the
ear, or an animal with broken front teeth.’ Related by Ahmad and

the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded it
as Sahth.

35 gab: : ‏أبي طالب - وضي الله عن - قال‎ ie iby 7 4
Pins ‏ْنَا‎ A Hol » ‏دنه‎ Se gt hes ale th ‏صَلى‎
‎. ‏شيا ملك متف عَلَيْه‎ BIE ‏في‎ HY «ost

1394, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 3§ appointed me to be in charge of his sacrificial animals,
and commanded me to distribute all their meat, hides, and sad-
diery to the poor, and not to give anything from them to the but-

cher, # Agreed upon

hy EO ‏وول الله صل‎ eta: ‏فال‎ lace gi a ‏وَعَنْ‎ 8

oa Wy will ‏عَنْ‎ ye ‏لة عَنْ‎

1395, Jabir (RA) narrated, ‘In the year of Hudaibiyah (Ree-
onciliation), we sacrificed a camel for each seven people along with

Allah’s Messenger 38, and also a cow for seven.’Related by Muslim.

420- It is prohibited to give the butcher his wages in the form of some meat
of the sacrificed animal, unless he does not take it willingly.

505
Chapter IV: ‘Aqiqah#!

‎gle Qo - ale he -‏ - : «أن الي صَلّى ‎١‏
‏5 عَن الْحَسّن وَالْحُسَيْن ‎AS‏ كَبْشًا». رَوَاهُ أو دَاوْدَ » ‎BE Sy‏

‎Bey ‏حَاتمٍ‎ FESS « ‏وَعَبْدلْحَقَ‎ cosh Say

‎1896. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The messenger of Allah 38
slaughtered a ram for both al-Hasan and al-Husain‘” (at their

‎birth). Related by Abd Dawad, Ibn Khuzaimah, Ibn al-Gardd and
“Abdul Haqq graded it as Sakth, but Abi Hatim said that it is
most probably Mursal.

‎BS ‏حَديت أنس‎ Sp ote Leh — vray

‎1397. Ibn Hibban transmitted a similar hadith on the autho-
rity of Anas.

‎van‏ وَعَنْ ‎ye dh (pos - Lane‏ — : «أن رَسُولَ الله ‎Loe‏ الله
‎Oh 6 Ly‏ شا الْجَاريّة

‎a5‏ مذي وَصَّحّحَهُ

‏انان مُكَافكَان » وَعَنْ

‎1398. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated, ’Allah’s Messenger 38 com-
manded them to slaughter two sheep equal (in age) for a boy and
one for a girl at their birth.’ Related by At-Tirmidhi and graded it
as Sahih.

‎421. This term is used for the animal which is slaughtered for the sake of a
new-born baby whether male or female. The Sunnah is that the animal
is to be slaughtered on the 7" day of the baby’s birth, and also it is an
act of the Sunnah of the Prophet 3% to slaughter one sheep for the
female and two for the male,

‎422, They are the grandsons of the Messenger of Allah #%, and the sons of (AIL
bin Abi Talib and Fatimah the Prophet's daughter. Al-Husain is one
year younger than al-Hasan,

‎506
BS aS is ‏والأرئعة َنم‎ abt ‏وأطرج‎ — vas

1399. Ahmad and the four Imams transmitted a similar had-
ith on the authority of Umm Kurz al-Ka’biyah

PAS Fo

قال : «كل ‎ale SE‏ بعقيقعه , مُذيُحُ عله

slaty ‏سابع‎

1400. Samurah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger 38
said, “Every boy is pawned*? against his ‘Agigah, to be sla-

ughtered on his behalf on the seventh day of his birth, his
head is to be shaved, and he must be given a name.” Related
by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi graded it as Sahih.

423. The Messenger of Allah 38 is drawing a similarity between an article,
which is pawned and a child who is lying in a state of being pledged. If
his parents do not do this “Agiqak for him, he will not be able to
intercede for them with Allah on the Day of Judgment, if he dies in his
childhood before reaching the age of puberty; i.e. they will not benefit
from his intoreession to their welfare,

507
Book XII: Oaths and Vows
Chapter I

deh Le ny ‏هما - عن‎ eh - HB ob 18s)
Sea ea it Fy wl Ga

‎So‏ من كَانَ

‎de Es «

‎1401. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 32
caught up with ‘Umar bin al-Khattab (RAA) when he was with a
group of camel-riders and Umar was swearing by his father, so

‎Allah’s Messenger 38 called them and said, “Verily, Allah forb-
ids you to swear by your fathers, so whoever has to take an
oath, he must swear by Allah or keep silent.” Agreed upon.

‎Ly Hey‏ لأبي 538 و
‎aks‏ : «لا تخلفوا ‎Samy‏ وا بتكم 5 ‎Yay ys oe‏

‎wh‏ صَادقُونَ».

‎1402. Aba Dawdd and An-Nasa’ transmitted on the authority

‎of Aba Hurairah (RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 2 said, “Do
not swear by your fathers or by your mothers, or by rivals

‎to Allah; and swear not by All4h except when you are spea-
king the truth.”

‎fe ts on 25 4

‎ele ‏به‎ Ua ‏عَلَى ما‎ rey
1403, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Your oath should be about something regar-

‎508
ding which your opponent shall believe you.”#4 Related by
‘Muslim.

paler gel wae ji

4 وفي ‎lado yy‏ عَلَى
‎Muslim transmitted, “An oath is to be interpreted‏ .1404
‎according to the intention of the claimant (whether the judge‏

or the defendant's rival demanding an oath concerning a partic-
ular matter).”

‎AS of hate Lt — vt‏ - رَضيّ الله عَْهُ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولِ اللّه
‎Cab yp i‏ عَلَى ‎BB CHG cont‏

‎GEC A lh ‏وانت‎ Gh

‏«قانت الذي ‎5G HB‏ عَنْ يُمينلك». وفي روا

‎fee CAI CE Syd ‏َم نت‎
1405. “Abdur Rahman bin Samurah (RAA) narrated that the
Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ said, “If you take an oath to do some-
thing and later on find something else which is better than
that one, make an expiation for (the dissolution of) your
oath and then do what you find to be better.” Agreed upon.

‎In the version of Al-Bukhéri, “Do what you find to be better
and make expiation for your oath.”

‎ey Lo ‏رَسُولَ الله‎ ie hy - tn

‎ay,‏ أَحْمَدُ وَالأربَعَة » وَصّحَّحَهُ ال

‎1406. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
38 said, “If anyone says: ‘If Allah wills’ when swearing an

‎424- This hadith is relevant to the intention of the claimant (whether he is a
judge or otherwise). The claimant asks the defendant to administer an
ath on a certain matter, which he claims to be truthful about. So, in
this case the defendant makes an oath with his intention being related
to this particular matter, which his rival claimed that he is guilty of.
‘This is supported by the following hadith.

‎509
oath, he is not held responsible if he breaks it (i.e. he does
not have to provide expiation for breaking it).” Related by Ahmad
and the four Imams. Ibn Hibbén graded it as Safi

Fey: Oi - te ‏ررَضي الله‎ hey 7
. ‏وَسَلُمَ : لآ وَمَقَلْبُ القأُوب». )5 البْحَارِي‎
1407. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 took an oath, he used to say, “No, by Him Who turns the
hearts,” (i.e. who controls the states of one’s heart). Related by
Al-Bukhari.

0 وَعَنْ ‎a‏ عَمْرو - رضي ‎JU - Ue ah‏ : جَاءَ أ

se. CAE GS get ts IG ty
1408. “Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘A desert Arab

came to the Messenger of Allah 3 and said,'O Messenger of Allah!
What are the most serious sins (the major sins)” The narrator

mentioned the hadith which says,“and the false oath.’25 I asked
(ie. Ibn Umar), ‘What is the false oath? The Messenger of Allah

38 replied, “It is that by which one takes the property of
another Muslim, and he is lying about it (intentionally).”
Related by Muslim.

pointy ‏في قله - تعالّى - : لا‎ - Ge ‏رضي الله‎ - i Dye
‏وَاللّه » وبلى واللّه».‎ Vs BAN ho : ‏قَلَت‎ (at al, ‏الله‎
‏وَرَوَاُ أبُو دَاوُدَ مرْفُوعًا‎ » Go a ol

1409. ‏طمطوتة”‎ (RAA) narrated regarding the verse, “Allah

425. ‘The false oath is called in Arabic, Al-Yamin al-Ghamits (the engulfing
oath), which indicates that it overwhelms the one who took it in sin or in
the Hell Fire.Itis one of the Major sins which includes disbelief in Allah,
killing, magic, adultery, treating parents badly and drinking alcoholic
drinks or narcotics.

50
will not punish you for what is unintentional in your oaths”
(5:89). ‘It was revealed about such phrases as: ‘No, by Allah,’ and
"Yes, by Allah.’ Related by Al-Bukhari and Aba Dawad.

Seth fo ney

pe ikl 65 tah E ys CLI ‏وَتَسْعِينَ‎ Bhs ‏«إن لله‎

3 said, “Allah has ninety-nine names. He who retains

them in his memory’ will enter Paradise.” Agreed upon. At-
‘Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban mentioned the ninety nine names, but it
is the narrators who mentioned them and not the Prophet 38.

1411. Usamah bin Zaid (RAA) narrated that Alléh’s Messen-

ger 32 said, “If one is done a favor and he expresses (his grat-
itude) to his benefactor by saying, May Allah give you a
good reward’ (Jazak Alléh Khairan) he has fully expressed
his appreciation.’Related by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibbén graded
it as Sahih.

: ‏وَكَالَ‎ «ith ‏عُمَرَ‎ A ay

1412. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38

426- There are also other names which are attributed to Allah.

427- What is meant is not just memorizing them, but comprehending their
meanings and implications, observing them in one’s behavior and acting
accordingly ete.

SUL
forbade making vows (Nadhr)'28 and said,“It will not bring (you)

any good but it is only a means by which some of the wea-
Ith of the miserly is taken out.” Agreed upon.

ل : 08 305 الله ‎co‏

pa ‏يُمين». رَوَاهُ‎ US id

BW oo) - pe J ey 141

. ‏يُْمه». وَصّحَّحَهُ‎ Tip

1413. “Ugbah bin “Amir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “The expiation for a vow (Nadhr) is the same
as for an oath.” Related by Muslim, At-Tirmidht has in his ver-
sion, “If he did not specify it.”

4 ح ولأبي 55 مسن حَديث ان عبس - ‎Oh oy‏ لهُمَا - مَرقُوعًا
را لَم يُسَمٌ ‎cael GUS BUR‏ وَمَنْ ‎BEIM‏ مَعْصيّة ‎SASS‏

كفارة يمِين » ‎DEAS‏

1414. Aba Dawid transmitted on the authority of Ibn “Abbas

(RAA), ‘Allah’s Messenger 3 said, “If anyone makes a vow but
does not fulfill it, its expiation is the same as that for an
oath; if anyone makes a vow to do an act of disobedience,
its expiation is the same as that of an oath, if anyone ma-
kes a vow which he is unable to fulfill, its expiation is the
same as that of an oath.” Its chain of narrators is Sakih, but
the scholars of hadith said that it is not connected to the Prophet

38 but it is only the narration of Ibn “Abbas.

428. Making obligatory on oneself an act of worship which was not originally
made obligatory by Allah such as taking a vow ta fast extra days or pray
extra supererogatory prayers or pay charity when so and so happens (if
any sick person recovers, if my absent comes back ete.)

512

(RAA), “If anyone vows to disobey Allah, let him not disobey Him.”

1416, Muslim transmitted on the authority of Imran, that

‘allah’s Messenger 38 said,“A vow to do an act of disobedience
must not be fulfilled.”

تي أذ أستذتي ‎ui‏ سول الله مت اله

gies ale ‏له‎

vow to walk to the Kabah for pilgrimage on foot, and she ordered
me to consult the Prophet 38, so he consulted him and the Mes-

senger of Allah 2 said, “Let her walk and ride.” Agreed upon,
and it is Muslim’s version.

el iy fai ‏الله - تَعَالَى - لأ‎ Op : ‏وَأَحْمَدَء وَالأَرْيَمَةُ : فَقَالَ‎ eva
qh BE vad LS ‏و‎
‎1418. Ahmad and the four Imams also reported that he said

2%, “Allah, the Most High will not do anything with the affl-
ictions your sister imposes on herself, command her to put

9 (scarf) and to ride, and to fast three days.”

on her

429. It is mentioned in another narration that she made a vow to walk to the

Kabah while taking her hijab off, and that is why the Prophet 38 orde-
red her to wear her hijab and to make expiation as this is an act of dis-
obedience.

513

Mean
1419, Ton “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘Sa'd bin ‘Ubadah asked Al-
lah’s Messenger # for a ruling regarding a vow made by his mo-

ther who had died before fulfilling it, and he replied 38, “Fulfill it
on her behalf.” Agreed upon.

‎ck‏ رَسُولَ ‎adh‏ صَلّى

‎- Xe ‏اللهُ‎ (25 -

‎Weal oF ‏ثبت‎ By ٠

‎1420, ‘Thabit bin ad-Dahhak (RAA) narrated, During the life-
time of the Prophet 3 a man made a vow to slaughter camels at
Bawanah and he came to Allah's Messenger #8 and asked him.

‎Allah's Messenger 38 asked,“"Were there any idols worshipped
at that place (in the time of Jahiliyah)?” He said, ‘No,’ The Mes-

‎senger of Allah 3 asked again, “Was any Jéhiliyah festival
celebrated there?” He replied, ‘No.’ The Messenger of Allah then
said to the man, “Fulfill your vow, for there is no fulfillment
of a vow to do an act of disobedience to Allah, neither to
break the ties of kinship, nor to do something which a hu-
man being does not possess (or has no control over).” Related
by Aba Dawad and At-Tabarént and it is his version; it is narra-
ted with a sound chain of narrators.

‏وَلَهُ شَاهدٌ ‎Le‏ حَديث ‎AS‏

‎1421. There is a similar narration on the authority of Kardam
transmitted by Ahmad.

‎514
wail ‏«نشأئك‎ : Sas » ‏فَسَألَهُ‎ atte ve ‏«صّلّ‎ : us «a
. pS dh oy » S915 fly « SdH ‏روه‎

1422. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘A man said on the Day of the
Conquest of Makkah, “O Messenger of Allah, I vowed that if Allah
opens Makkah for you, I shall pray in Jerusalem.” The Messenger
of Allah 3 replied, “Pray here.” He asked him again and the

Prophet 3 again replied, “Pray here.” The man asked the third
time, and the Messenger of Allah then said to him, “It is up to
you then,” Related by Ahmad and Aba Daw0d and Al-Hakim
graded it as Sabi

dy foe eS ethos eae by — err

ch Lats . dis ‏متمق‎ eG games « ‏الى‎

1423. Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messen-
ger of Allah said, “No (religious) journey is to be undertaken
except for prayer in one of the three mosques: Al-Masjid
Al-Harém (The Sacred Mosque in Makkah), the Aqsa Mos-
que (in Jerusalem), and this Mosque of mine (in al-Madi-
nah).” Agreed upon and it is Al-Bukhart’s version

‎GB Wb ae ey 4‏ : يا رَسُولَ الله » إِنّي ‎oto Shi‏
أعتكف ليل في ‎tal etch‏ قَالَ : ‎by‏ اف ‎A‏ مم عَلِهِ »

‎is eth ‏اد‎

‏في روايا
‎“Umar (RA) narrated, 1 said: O Messenger of Allah! 1‏ ,1424
‎made a vow at the time of Jahiliyah to perform I’tikaf 430 for one‏

‎480. haf moans remaining in a mosque (preferably a congregational mos-
que) for a certain period of time with the intention of remaining in seclu-
sion from worldly matters, and keeping oneself busy with acts of wor-
ship such as praying, fasting, reciting Qur'an, dhikr ete.

‎515
night at the Sacred Mosque (in Makkah)’ The Messenger of Allah

3% said to him, “Fulfill your vow.” Agreed upon. Al-Bukhari in
his version had the addition, ‘He (Umar) spent a night in I’tikaf
at the Sacred Mosque in Makkah.’

516,
‎OLS‏ القضّاء
‎Book XIV: Judgments‏
‎Chapter I‏

‎1425. Buraidah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎3S said, “Judges are of three types: two of whom will go to
Hell and one to Paradise. The one who will go to Paradise
is the judge who knew what is right and gives judgment
accordingly; but a judge who knows what is right and does
not give judgment accordingly; and acts unjustly in his ju-
dgment will go to Hell, and a judge who does not know
what is right and judges people while ignorant (of the case)
will go to Hell.”Related by the four Imams and Al-Hakim graded
it as Sahih,

‎deo ‏الله‎ J fos, ‏قَالَ : قَالَ‎ -

‏سكّين». رَوَآهُ أَحَمْدُ » ‎BM,‏

‎A fies ers

‏وَصَّحُّحَهُ ‎YN‏ حْرَئِمّة » ‎UNG‏ حبّان .

‎1426, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “He who has been appointed a judge has been
slaughtered without a knife.” Related by Ahmad and the four
Imams. Ibn Khuzaimah and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎517
Allah 38 said, “You will be eager for the office of ruling, but
it will become a cause of regret on the Day of Judgment

It is a good suckler but an evil weaner.” 45! Related by Al-
Bukhari.

1428. “Amro bin al-’As (RAA) narrated that he heard the Mes-
senger of Allah 38 say, “When a judge gives a ruling having
tried his best to decide correctly and his verdict is right, he
will have a double reward; and when he gives a ruling hav-
ing tried his best to decide correctly and his verdict is wr-
ong, he will have a single reward.” Agreed upon.

th ‏رَسُولَ الله صَلَى‎ eke:

Allah 38 say, “No judge may make a judgment between two
people when he is angry.” Agreed upon.

dle Ds ‏صَلَى‎ dh 35 ‏قَالَ : قَالَ‎ - ea

وَسَلم

‎Ot a Bp‏ 0585 فلا تقض ‎GLEE SU‏ كَلامَ الآرء

‎481- It will be a source of pleasure and power in this world, but as it is a

‎great responsibility, it will be a source of grief and regret on the Day of
Resurrection

‎S18
eel ta tat ed; ‏تقضي». قَالَ عَليٌ : فَمَا‎ GS GO

١ Ob ‏اْمَديني » وَصّحّحَه ابن‎ Nas ay LIDS « 343 ‏وَأبُو‎
‎1430. ‘Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah $8 said,
“When two men present a case before you, do not decide in
favor of the first till you hear what the other has to say.
Then you will know how to judge.” “Ali said, ‘Thereafter, I
judged according to that.’ Related by Ahmad, Abi Dawid and At
‘Tirmidhi who graded it as Hasan. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sc

he fh cash by ‏علد الْحَاكم‎ at Byers

1431. Al-H&kim transmitted a similar hadith on the authority
of Ibn “Abbas.

1432. Umm Salamah narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “You bring your disputes to me, and perhaps some of
you are more eloquent in their plea than others, in which
case I will give a judgment based on what I heard from
him. Therefore, whatever I rule for anyone, which by right
belongs to his brother, I am only giving him a portion of
Hell.” Agreed upon.

J phe ‏نه‎

igo g Me BE 1 Ea very
tag ‏«كبف‎
‎1433. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘Theard the Messenger of Allah

238 say, “How can an Ummah(a nation) be purified(of its sins)
when the right of its weak is not taken from its strong (the
powerful)?” Related by Ibn Hibban.

519
Se EY ‏من حَديث‎ ote LI vere vere

1434, 1435. Al-Bazzar narrated a similar hadith on the autho-
rity of Buraidah, and Ibn Majah on the authority of Aba 4

‎se ey ern‏ - رض الله ‎IG Wie‏ سمغت رَسُولَ الله صل الله
عَلَيْه ‎a ghey‏ : «يُاعَى بالقاضي الْمَادل ‎shes iS «enh py‏ الْحسّاب

‎ip Ob ‏روه ان‎ wee go

‎Fi at ‏لَمْ‎ a fou
1436. “A'ishah (RAA) narrated,'I heard the Messenger of Allah

‎48 say, “On the Day of Resurrection the just judge will be
called (to be asked about his judgments). His questioning will
be so hard that he will wish he had never given judgment
even between two men throughout his life.” Related by Ibn
Hibban and Al-Baihaqi. The version of the latter has, “...between
two men about a single event .”

‎: ‏َال‎ ply aie at ‏عَنْهُ - عَن الي صَلّى‎
. ‏النرأ». واه لبحَارِي‎ GANS ‏َم‎ elit Shp
1437. Aba Bakrah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-
lah 38 said, “The nation that appoints a woman as their ru-

‎ler will never prosper.”** Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎th ‏رَضي الله 0 - عَن الى صَلْى‎ - Leyes ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ vera

‎pee CRS ‏وَلآهُ الله سينا من أمُور‎ to: Ju sly oe

‎432 The Messenger of Allah said these words when the Persians enthroned
Khosrau’s daughter and made her their Empress. There is a difference
of opinion among the scholars whether a woman could be appointed as a
judge in court, but the majority are of the opinion that she is not to be
appointed a judge in criminal courts where murders and similar trials
are conducted.

‎20
1438. Abd Mariam al-Azdi (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “If anyone is appointed by Allah to be in a
position of authority over any of the matters concerning
the Muslims, but then turns away from attending to their
needs and poverty, Allah will turn away from dealing with
his needs.” Related by Aba Dawad and At-Tirmidhi.

hey 18
oh ‏ابن‎ By Gite
1439. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

8 cursed the one who gives a bribe and the one who takes a bribe
to pass judgments.’ Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. Ate
Tirmidhi graded it as Hasan and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahil

اضي الله عله - ‎ja‏ : معن ُو ‎th‏
‏نّ في ‎pS‏ رو

‎oe Ty‏ من حَديث ‎of dhe‏ عَمْرو » ‎BAW ey‏ إلا اللا

‎1440. The four Imams except An-Nasé’i related a similar
hadith on the authority of “Abdullah Ibn “Amro.

‎ley 4‏ أن

‎. ASC ‏روه أو اود » وَصَححَه‎ gst ‏نيد‎
‎1441, ‘Abdullah bin Az-Zubair (RAA) narrated, “The Messen-

‎ger of Allah 38 ruled that the two adversaries should sit (equally)
in front of the judge.’ Related by Aba Dawéd and Al-Hakim gra-
ded it as Sc

‎CHL ‏باب‎

‎Chapter 11: Witnessing and Testimonies

‎Yo : Wu iy ab ah ‏على‎ taal ‏خالد‎ ae ‏عن‎ year
. pe 55 agi ‏َبْلَ أن‎ easly ‏؟ هر لذي يني‎ :

‎521

1442. Zaid bin Khdlid Al-Juhani (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 3 said, “Shall I tell you about the best witn-
ess? He is the one who comes forward to give testimony be-

fore he is asked for it.”#% Related by Muslim.

‎B40,‏ يَسْهَدُونَ ‎Vy‏ يُستَسْهَدُونَ ؛ ‎OSES Vy OS Ay‏ وينْذِرُون ولا

‎of Allah 38 said, “The best among you are my generation,
then their immediate followers, then their immediate follo-
wers. After them there will be people who will give (false)
testimony without being asked, who will be treacherous
and are not to be trusted, who will make vows which they
do not fulfill, among whom obesity will appear.” Agreed

‎upon.

‎1444. “Abdullah Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

‎ger of Allah 3 said, “It is not allowable to accept the testim-
ony of a treacherous man or a woman, or of one who harb-
ors a grudge against his brother, or the servant of a family
(to testify) for members of this family.” Related by Ahmad
and Aba Dawid.

‎433- They are the ones who say their testimony for the sake of Allah, so that
justice could be established.

‎522
1445, Ab@ Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘He heard the Messenger
of Allah 38
dweller of a village (or a town) is not allowed.”454 Related by
Aba Dawad and Ibn Majah.

say, “The testimony of a desert man against the

‎vs‏ وَعَنْ ‎Che Sobel oe‏ فَقَالَ : ‎AS Cat bp‏ يدون
‎BEd iG b bow ge‏ وَإِنّمَا

‏نا من ‎ay, (Sst‏ البحَارِي .

‎1446. ‏جمدت‎ Ibn Al-Khattab (RAA) addressed the ae say-
ing, ‘People were sometimes judged by the revelation of a Divine

‎Inspiration during the lifetime of the Prophet 3%, but now there is
no longer any more (new revelations). Now you will be judged by
what appears to us of your deeds.’ Related by Al-Bukhari.

‎1447, Aba Bakrah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

‎lah 38 said that bearing false testimony is among the most serious
of the major sins’ Agreed upon. (Part of a long Hadith).

‏- رضي ا الله على ‎Cae‏ -

‏5 سن فسن ‎yA‏ و

‎1448, Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 32
said to a man, “Do you see the sun?” He replied, ‘Yes.’ The Pro-

‎phet 48 said, “Bear your testimony in a case as clear as the

‎434- The reason is that the nomads are not familiar with the circumstances of
the village and city dwellers, so they are not allowed to testify against
them, In this case the testimony of another city dweller is more accep-
table, Nevertheless if the nomad is more informed about the relevant
case, than anybody else, then his testimony is acceptable provided he is,
just.

‎523
sun (for you), or leave it.”435 Related by Ibn “Adi with a weak
chain of narrators.

| ‏«أنّ 5 الله صَلّى‎ : - Se th ‏رَضِيّ‎ — 8, ee

‎hy le‏ قضّى

‏؛ وال ‎Bey‏ جيذ .

‎CABG «S48 ‏مُسئْلمٌ » وَأبُو‎ Sel ‏وتتاهد».‎ cme

‎1449, Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
made a judgment on the basis of an oath and a single witness.”
Related by Muslim, Aba Dawid and An-Nas:

‎6535 gf ‏مثلة . ره‎ - ae Jur thi ‏رضي‎ - A ey ste.
ote

‎«shea‏ وص

‎1450. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated a similar hadith which
was transmitted by Ab Dawéd and At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Hibban gra-
ded it as Sahih.

‎OL‏ الدَعَاوَى وا
‎Chapter HI: Claims and Evidence‏

‎1451. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎3% said, “If people were given what they asked for when
they brought a case forward, some would claim the lives
and property of others, but an oath must be taken by the

‎defendants.” Agreed upon.

‎ply \toy

‎1452. Al-Baihaqi narrated with a sound chain of narrators,

‎435- This means that either the person giving his testimony is absolutely cer-
tain about the case or he should abstain from producing his testimony.

‎524
“But the proof lies with the claimant and the oath must be
taken by him who denies the claim.”

- 5 ‏وَعَنْ أبي 5 - رضي الله على‎ — Veer
‏فَأمرَ أن‎ eG ed ‏قم‎ oe Ly
esl ty abs

1453. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

8 suggested to some people that they should swear an oath and
when they hastened to do so he ordered that lots should be cast
among them concerning the oath as to who should swear it.’ Rela-
ted by Al-Bukhari,

ااا ل - أن رَسُولَ الله ‎de‏

Tay CY as

1454. Aba Umamah Al-Harithi (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 38 said, “If anyone through his oath, cuts do-
wn what rightly belongs to a Muslim, Allah has made Hell
compulsory for him and will deprive him of Paradise.” A
man asked, “O Allah’s Messenger, even if it is something small?”
And he replies, “Even If it were a stick from an Arak tree.”
Related by Muslim.

1455. Al-Ash‘ath bin Qais(RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 3 said, “If anyone swears a firm oath, and takes
what is due to it; the property belonging to a Muslim, Allah
will be angry with him when he meets Him (on the Day of
Resurrection).” Agreed upon.

525
‎fh «Hasty, Khai‏ رار

‎1456. Abd Masa (RAA) narrated, ‘Two men had a dispute over
an animal, but none of them had any proof. So Allah’s Messenger
38 gave a ruling that it be divided in halves between them.’ Rela-
ted by Ahmad, Aba Dawid and An-Nasai and the version is his,
and he reported its chain of narrators to be good.

‏عَنْ جَابِرٍ - ‎Uh pos‏ 2 أن رَسُول الله متلى الله ِو

‏اا

‎EEE wl hak ‏يَمِين آئمة با‎ OB ‏عَلَى منبري‎ Oto: 8

‎8 ‏و‎ Pty «558 ‏وَأبُو‎
‎1457. Jabir (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38

‎said, “If any one swears a false oath on this pulpit of mine,
he would have prepared his seat in Hell.” Related by Ahmad,
Aba Dawdd and An-Nas@’i. Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎1458. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “There are three to whom Allah will not speak
on the Day of Judgment, at whom He will not look, and
whom He will not purify, and they will have a painful puni-
shment: A man at a place with excess water in the desert
and he withholds it from travelers; a man who sold a com-

‎526
modity to another person in the afternoon(or after the ‘Asr
prayer) and swore to him by All4h that he had bought it at
such and such a price and he (the buyer) believed him yet
that was not the case, and a man who pledged allegiance to
the Imam but for the sake of worldly matters (i.e. not for
Allah’s sake), if the Imam bestowed on him something out of
worldly riches he adheres to his allegiance, and if he did
not give him anything, he did not fulfill the allegiance.”
Agreed upon.

رضي اللّهُ تعالى 6 - : أن ‎ae oS‏ في ‎CBE‏

Bd) ‏هده‎

: ‏ا‎ LE £08
. ‏حي في يده‎ a oles ale ‏الله‎ Le ‏الله‎
‎1459. Jabir (RAA) narrated, ‘Two men disputed about a she-

camel and each of them produced some proof that it was his ani-

mal, and that it was born at his place.’ Allah’s Messenger 38 ruled
it for the one who had it in his possession.’ Related by Ad-Daraq-
utni with a weak chain of narrators.

aie ‏الى صَلّى الله‎ ob - ee Jee ty hiya 146
US ‏وفي إسسنادهما‎ » LO a ‏َلَى طالب الْحَقٌ».‎ nad ghey

1460. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎restored the oath to be sworn by the claimant (and not the defen-
dant). Related by Ad-Daraqutni with a weak chain of narrators.

1461. “Aishah (RAA) narrated ‘One day, Allah’s Messenger 38
came to me looking happy while his face was glistening and said,

527
“Did you not see that Mujazziz. Al-Mudliji (a physiognomist)
He looked at Zaid bin Harithah and Usdmah bin Zaid, and

then said, “These feet are related to one another.”4%6 Agreed
upon.

436- Zaid bin Harithah the freed slave of the Prophet had a white comp-
lexion whereas Usamah his son was rather dark,, Usamah’s mother
Umm Aiman was also dark, but people started to talk about Usamah’s
lineage because he was dark while his father was while, Mujazziz Al -
‘Mudliji saw them lying down with their faces covered with linen, while
their feet were bare. He then commented upon looking at their feet with

the words mentioned in the hadith which pleased the Prophet 38.
528
Book XV: Emancipation
Chapter I

My foo S05 ‏قَالَ : قَالَ‎ - 2 th ‏رَضِي‎ - te

1462. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Any Muslim, who emancipates another Mus-
lim man, All4h will set free from Hell Fire an organ of his
body, for every organ of the other’s (i.e. from the body of the
emancipated person ).” Agreed upon.

mah (RAA), ‘The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Any Muslim man,
who emancipates two Muslim women, they will be his rele-
ase from Hell Fire.” At-Tirmidhi graded it as Sahth.

PAS coh ‏ولأبي 55 من‎ tt

2 ‏منّ‎ GOES SS ‏مُسْلمَة‎ i ef ‏مُسْلمّة‎
‎1464, Abd Dawid transmitted on the authority of Ka’b bin

Murrah (RAA), “The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Any Muslim
woman, who emancipates another Muslim woman, she will
be her release from Hell Fire.”

529
1465. Aba Dharr (RAA) narrated, I asked the Messenger of

Allah 38 ‘Which action is the most excellent? He replied, “Faith
in Allah and Jihad in His Cause.” I then asked, ‘Which slaves
are the most excellent (for the purpose of emancipating them) and
he replied, “Those whose prices are the highest and are the
most valuable to their owners.” Agreed upon.

1466. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

8 said, “Anyone who emancipates his share in a slave and
has enough money to pay the full price for him, a fair price
for the slave should be fixed. His partners should be given
their shares, and the slave should thus be emancipated.
Otherwise he is emancipated only to the extent of the first
man’s share.” Agreed upon.

1467. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Otherwise he will be required to work to pay
for his freedom, but he must not be overburdened.” Agreed
upon.

قال :06 وسُول لله ‎th Le‏

4. واه ملم

1468. Aba Hurairah (RA), narrated that the Messenger of
530
Allah 38 said, “A son cannot ever repay his parents what he
owes them,*” unless he finds them in slavery, then buys
them and emancipates them.” Related by Muslim.

ee thy i ‏جُنْدب - رَضي الله عنُْ - أن الي‎ Bes
. ‏أنْهُ مَوْقُوض‎ bibl ‏جَمْعٌّ منَ‎ 5
1469, Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “Whoever obtains possession of a rela-
tive, who is next of kin, that person becomes free.” Related
by Ahmad and the four Imams. Some scholars are of the opinion

that it is Mawgéf (not connected to the Prophet 38)

Ny » ‏رَوَاهُ أحْمَدُ‎ lh 58 ee eb wt»

06s BAI Oh ‏فَأعتق انين‎ as ETE Oe ips ply Ce
. ple ‏شَديد». رَوَاهُ‎

1470. ‘Imran bin Husain (RAA) narrated, ‘A man who had no
other property emancipated six of his slaves at the time of his dea-

th. Allah’s Messenger 3¥ sent for them, and after dividing them
into three groups, he cast lots among them, set two of them free
and kept four in slavery, and spoke very harshly to the man (who

emancipated them)."#8 Related by Muslim

1401 وَعَنْ سَفيئَةٌ - رضي الله 82 - قال : «كُنت ‎ti hs‏

قلت ‎wath:‏ وأشترط ‎uke‏ أن تدم رَسُولَ الله ‎fe‏ الله ‎ie‏ وَسلمَمَا

437. Meaning all that he did for him, bringing him up, keeping
ting him, earing for him ete.

438- This hadith is evidence that only one third of a dead man’s property cou-
Id be given in his will, to those who are not of his legal heirs.

531

١, Suppor
. ‏رَوَاهُ أَحْمَدُ » وأبُو 58 وَالنسَائي ؛ وَالْحَاكمْ‎ eke
1471. Safinah (RAA) narrated, ‘I was a slave of Umm Sala-
mah and she said, ‘I shall emancipate you, but on the condition

that you serve Alléh’s Messenger 38 as long as you live.’ Related
by Ahmad, Aba Daw@d, An-Nasa’i and Al-Hakim,

‎hse 8 147‏ - رضي الله ‎gi‏ - أن ول لله ‎he‏ وس

‎1472. “Nishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Wala” is (legally) for the manumitter.” Agreed upon.
Itis part of a long Hadith (refer to hadith no. 811).

‏- رضي ‎eee th‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ ‎al‏ صَلَّى الله
‎LAs 5 ECS IF i‏ رَوَاهُ الّافعي »

‎vw is ‏المحيحين‎ gills itd, ate uate,
1473. Tbn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎38 said, “The Wald’ (of a manumitted slave) is considered as
one’s lineage, not to be sold or donated (refer to hadith no.
984).” Related by Ash-Shafi‘. Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded it
as Sahih. It is also related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim with dif:
ferent wording

‎459- Wald’ refers to the right of inheriting the property of a manumitted slave
after his death. Refer to hadith no. 811.

‎532
َاب ‎aly Ry fa‏ الولّد
‎Chapter II: Issues related to al-Mudabbar*”‏
‎al-Mukétib“! and Umm al-Walad#2‏

: ‏وَقَالَ‎ » bE

1474. Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (RA) narrated that a man from the
Ansar declared that his slave lad would be free after his death
(would be Mudabbar), yet he had no other property. When the

Prophet 3¥ heard of that he said, “Who will buy him from me?”
And Nu‘aim bin ‘Abdullah bought him for eight hundred Dirh-
ams. Agreed upon.

In a narration by Al-Bukhari: ‘The man became needy,’ (so the
Prophet took the slave and said...)."
A version by An-Nasa’i says, ‘The man had a debt, so the Prophet

38 sold the slave for eight hundred Dirhams and gave him the
money and said, “Pay off your debt.”

‎ate ately « ca‏ أَحْمَدَ وا
‎“Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his fath-‏ .1475

‎440. A slave who is told by his master that he will be free after his (the
master’s) death.

‎441. A slave, who makes an agreement. with his master to pay him a certain
amount of money in return for gaining his freedom.

‎442. This literary means the mother of a child. She is the slave woman, who
gives birth to her master’s children, who would be born free.

‎533
er, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA), that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “A slave who entered into an agreement to
buy his freedom is still a slave as long as a Dirham of the

agreed price remains to be paid.”**3 Related by Aba Dawid

with a good chain of narrators. The full hadith is related by Ah-
mad and the three Imams. Al-Hakim graded it to be Sahih.

ae ee

‎VEY‏ وعم
نْهِ وَسَلّمَ : ‎By OW bp‏

‎Oe Ln SY ‏عنْدهُ مَا‎ O55 LAK 5,

‎GUNNER KM ‏َوه أحْمَد‎

‎1476. Umm Salamah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 3 said, “When a slave of one of your women has made
an agreement to pay for his freedom (i.e. he is a Mukatib)
and can pay the full price, she must veil herself from him.”
Related by Ahmad and the four Imams. At-Tirmidhi graded it as
Sahih,

‎ie th Le ‏عَنهُمَا - أن التي‎ ies th ‏رضي‎ -

‎1477. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎3¥ said, “The Diyah (Blood money) of a slave who had made
an agreement to buy his freedom (Mukétib) and had been
killed, is paid at the rate paid for a free man (as a Diyah) as
much as he has paid of the amount agreed upon, and at the

‎rate paid for a slave as the remainder is concerned.” Rel-
ated by Ahmad, Abi Dawad and An-Nasai.

‎443. This refers to al-Mukatib who remains under the same rulings, which
are applicable to a slave until he pays the full amount. Agreed upon,

‎444. This hadith seems to be contradictory to the hadith of ‘Amro bin Shu‘aib
(1461) that a slave ‘is still a slave as long as a Dirham of the agreed
price remains to be paid.’ But most scholars are of the opinion that a
‘Mukétib is still a slave regarding legal punishments and blood money as
ong as he still owes his owner one Dirham. Some scholars still believe

‎534
1478. ‘Amro bin al-Harith, the brother of Juwairiyah the
mother of Believers (the wife of the Prophet 3) narrated, ‘When
Allah’s Messenger 38 died, he did not leave a Dinar or a Dirham, a
slave or a slave-woman, or anything but his white she-mule, his

weapons and a piece of land which he appointed as Sadagah.’
Related by Al-Bukhi

1479. Tbn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger ‏يك‎
‎said, “When a man’s slave-woman bears him a child she
becomes free at his death.” Related by Ibn Majah and Al-
‘Hakim with a weak chain of narrators.

‎tas‏ وَعَنْ سَهلٍ بن ‎GE‏ رَضِي ‎of - Be th‏ رول الله ‎Loo‏ الله
‎by‏ : قَالَ ‎tay:‏ أَعَانَ ‎tau‏ في سيل الله » أو ‎tye‏

‏في ‎BE ds‏ لله يوم لال إلا ظلة». ‎PSE Ra's «MES,‏

‎1480. Sahl bin Hunaif (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah % said, “He who assists a Mujahid for Allah’s sake, a
debtor who is in distress (being unable to pay his debt) or a
slave who had made an agreement to buy his freedom,
Allah will shade him, with His Shade, on the Day when
there will be no shade but His.” Related by Ahmad and Al-
Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎that that this is not the case, taking this hadith as their evidence, but
some scholars said that it is abrogated and the first hadith is the more
established one.

‎535

Book XVI: The Comprehensive Book

23 ‏باب‎
‎Chapter I: Good Manners (Adab)

‎tay‏ عَنْ أبي ‎ie SA‏ عَنْهُ - قَالَ سعدسية
‎ss‏ م م غلى الشللم سبع :ذا

‎1481. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “A Muslim has six duties towards other Mus-
lims: When you meet him, you should salute him; when he
invites you, accept his invitation; when he asks for your
advice, give it to him; when he sneezes and praises Allah,
say ‘May Allah have mercy on you;’ when he is ill, visit him;
and when he dies follow his funeral.” Related by Muslim.

‏3 - رَضي الله ‎te‏ - 06 : 06 رَسُولَ الله صَلى الله
‎ley‏ «الطاوا إلى من هر سمل متك ولا تنظرُوا بلى ‎SY BL‏ فَهُوَ
‎tas y's ON fast‏ الله ‎be kt‏
‎Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of‏ .1482

‎Allah 38 said, “Look at those who are lower than you (financ-
ially) but do not look at those who are higher than you, lest
you belittle the favors Allah conferred upon you.”Agreed upon.

‎Ly ear‏ ن الاب إن معاد - ‎pay‏ اله َه - ‎ait: Gi‏ رَسُولَ الله

1483. An-Nawwas bin Sam’én (RAA) narrated, ‘I asked the

Messenger of Allah 2 about virtue and sin and he replied, “The
essence of virtue is (manifested in) good morals (Akhléq)

whereas sinful conduct“ is that which turns in your heart

(making you feel uncomfortable) and you dislike that it would
be disclosed to other people.” Related by Muslim.

‎Be Ah poy - as hey 2‏ - 8 : 6 5 الله صَلّى الله

‎ry hide Be BG ,8 och Ste ABE GES ‏وَسلَمَ : «إذًا‎ ale
1484. Ibn Mas‘dd (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎+ said, “When three of you get together in company, two of
you must not talk privately while isolating the third, so as
not to make him feel sad (that he is left out) till you mingle
with other people (i.e. you are joined by others).” Agreed
upon and the wording is from Muslim.

‎BE ‏وَتَوْسّعُوا».‎
‎1485, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
+ said, “A man should not ask another man to get up from

‎his place in order to take his seat. But you should make
room for each other and spread out.” Agreed upon.

‏145 وَعَنْ ان عنس £06

‎445- A sin could be that action, which should a person commit it, he would be
subjected to punishment according to Islimic Shari“ah. A sin in this ha-
dith refers to that action, which a person doos not feel comfortable about
doing, even though it is not explicitly prohibited by the Shari'ah, it is
not definitely lawful or acceptable and one fears that Allah will punish
him for doing it, even if people cannot see him. It is better in this case to
avoid it.

‎537
1486. Ibn ‘Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “When one of you eats, he must not wipe his hand
till he licks it, or gives it to someone else to lick (such as a

wife, husband, ete)0. Agreed upon.

7

207 وَعَنْ ره - رضي لله - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎Oh fo‏

Sh ‏عَلَى‎ | 920th hy aS aa cy Al 26
‏ملم : «والراكب عَلَى الْمَاشي».‎ yy ‏وفي‎ de ge
1487. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “The young should salute the old, the one who
is passing by should salute the one who is sitting, and the
small group of people should salute the larger one.” Agreed
upon.

In a version by Muslim, “And the one who is riding should
salute the one who is walking.”

shel chy ‏ذا موا أن‎ td of ‏عأ‎

1488. “Ali (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 2 said,
“When a group of people passes by, it is sufficient if one of
them gives a salutation, and it is sufficient for those who

are sitting that one of them replies.”**? Related by Ahmad and
Al-Baihagi

446. The reason for this is explained in another hadith as the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “You never know which portion of your food is ‏لاط‎
‎essed (has Barakah).” [t is not meant to be obligatory as most scholars
say, rather it is just preferable or recommended for the intended good.

447- Greeting with Salam or responding to Salém (the Muslim greeting), is a
collective duty, thus if one greets or answers the greeting then the obli-
gation or duty is met on behalf of the rest.

538
1489, Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 3 said, “Do not initiate the saluting of Jews and Chris-
tians (when you meet them), and if you meet any of them on
the road, force him to go to the narrowest part of the road

(ie. do not give way for them to pass, but keep going)."“8 Related
by Muslim.

. ‏البُخَارِي‎ EEE SY ‏سح‎
‎1490. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah # said, “When one of you sneezes, he should say, ‘Alh-
amdu-lillah(Praise is to Allah) and his(Muslim) brother sho-
uld say to him, ‘Yarhamuka Alléh (May Allah have mercy
on you). When he says this to him (the last phrase), he should
reply, Yahdikum Allah (May Allah guide you) and grant
you well being.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

lah 38 said, “None of you should drink while standing.”
Rela-ted by Muslim.

443. When the Jews used to meet the Prophet 4% in Madinah, they used to
say to him ‘as-Sém ‘Alaykum’, instead of saying ‘As-Salamu ‘Alaykum’,
‘The word as-Sdm means death in Arabic, so the Jews instead of answe-
ring back the salutation of the Muslims, which is peace be upon you,
they used to wish the Prophet 3% death.

449- It is not meant to be prohibited to drink water while standing, rather it
is disliked as it is narrated by Ibn ‘Abbas that the Prophet 3% drank
from the well of Zamzam while he was standing.

539
1492. Ab@ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “When one of you puts on his shoes, he should
put on the right one first and when he takes them off, he
should take off the left one first, so that the right one sho-

uld be the first to be put on and the last to be taken off.”50
Agreed upon.

rhe ‏عله‎ ho a Jet ‏َل‎ : di - Se ‏ب وَعَنهُ - رَضي الله‎ ١45

. ‏عله‎ Be
1493. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said,“None of you should walk with one shoe, but sho-
uld either wear them both or take them both off.” Agreed
upon.

tis ‏عم - رضي لله لم - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلَى‎ oh ‏ل‎
‎bE. IE OE ‏من‎ Jy ‏ينظ الله‎ Sy : ples ale
1494. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Allah will not look on the Day of Judgment at him
who lets his garment drag on the ground out of pride and
arrogance.” Agreed upon.

‎Bey 140‏ - رضي لله عل - أن وول لل ‎es oe‏ 298

‎Any honorable act in Islam is always done with the right hand or starts‏ -0ق4
‎with the right side, such as salutation, eating getting dressed, making‏
‎ghusl, combing one's hair. On the other hand, acts like cleaning the priv-‏
‎ate parts after going to the toilet is done with the left hand.‏

‎540
Soh atin ON

iy «Slate

1495, Ibn “Umar narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “When one of you eats he should eat with his right
hand, and when he drinks he should drink with his right
hand, for the devil eats and drinks with his left hand.”
Related by Muslim.

1496. “Amro bin Shu’aib narrated on the authority of his
father, on the authority of his grandfather (RAA), that the Mes-
senger of Allah 3 said, “Eat, drink, wear clothes and give
Sadaqah but with neither extravagance nor pride.” Related
by Aba Dawad and Ahmad.

Ly ar oui

Chapter I: Birr (Piety, righteousness, acts of
goodness) and keeping ties with one’s kin

قال ولول لله صلى الل

Of » ‏لَهُ في رذقه‎ key ‏أن‎ Csi to : ey

. Shen Gp

1497. Ab Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “He who wishes to have his earnings grow (and

be blessed) and his term of life prolonged,‘*! he should keep
ties with his kin,” Related by Al-Bukhari.

451- Not necessarily meaning that he will live extra years, but maybe a more
blessed life with more good deeds, leaving behind pious children who
will make Du’é for him ete.

541
1498. Jubair bin Mut’am (RA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “The one who severs the ties of kinship will
not enter Paradise.” Agreed upon.

bye «lh ‏وَإِضَاعَة‎ « SEI SY

1499. Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 3 said, “Allah has made it prohibited for you
to be disrespectful (showing undutiful behavior) to your
mothers, to bury your daughters alive, to refuse others
(their dues), and to demand things from others (which are
not worth demanding), and He hates that you engage in
gossip, asking many questions about people's affairs and
wasting wealth.” Agreed upon.

. ‏واكم‎ «be tba «fet Sa ‏الْوّلدئي».‎

1500. ‘Abdullah bin “Amro bin al-’As (RAA) narrated that the

Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Allah’s pleasure results from the
parent’s pleasure, and Allah’s displeasure results from the
parent's displeasure.” Related by At-Tirmidhi. Ibn Hibban and
al-Hakim graded it as Sahih,

1501. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, a slave of Allah

542
does not truly believe till he wishes for his neighbor what
he wishes for himself.” Agreed upon.

حا ب و اح ار د ‎ay L‏
‎tl OF‏ 2 رضي 5

1502. Ibn Mas‘ad (RAA) narrated, I asked the Messenger of

Allah ‘88: “Which sin is the most serious?” He replied, “To attri-
bute a partner to Allah, though He Alone has created you.”
1 asked, “What next?” He said, “To kill your child, fearing that
he will share your food with you.” I asked again, “What next?”
He said, “To commit adultery with you neighbor's wife.”
‘Agreed upon.

رَسُولَ الله

wt bee

‎Les ey ae‏ لحل ‎oad‏ وتشي أ

‎eh ‏فيسب‎

‎1503. “Abdullah bin ‘Amro bin al-’As (RA) narrated that the
Messenger of Allah 38 said, “For a man to insult his parents,
is one of the major sins.” It was asked, ‘Does a man insult his

‎parents? He replied #8, “Yes, he insults the father of a man
who in return insults his father, and he insults a man’s
mother who in return insults his.” Agreed upon.

‎tort‏ وَسن ع ‎ei od‏ م - أن وول لله ‎L‏ الل ع و

‎1504. Aba ‏طفوتة‎ @RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎# said, “It is not permissible for a Muslim to shun his bro-
ther for more than three nights. When they meet, this one

‎543
turns away (from that one) and that one turns away (from this
one) and the best of them is the one who greets his brother
first.” Agreed upon.

ه٠١‏ - وَعَنْ حابر - ‎te th‏ - قَالَّ : فَالَ ‎fe dy yo‏ الله

beta Soph die Gynt ‏وَسَلّمَ : «كُلُ‎
1505. Jabir bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “Every act of goodness is (considered as) Sad-
aqah.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

ety ‏عَنهُ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُول الله صَلّى‎ eB ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ 0s
phy

1506. Abd Dharr (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

aid, “Do not consider any act of goodness as being insi-
gnificant even if it is meeting your brother with a cheerful
face.” Related by Muslim.

1507. Aba Dharr (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3% said,“When you make some soup, make a good amount by
adding plenty of liquid, and give some to your neighb-

ors.”452 Related by Muslim.

‎٠‏ وَحَنْ أبي ‎Ju - ae hoy — BA‏ :6 سول ‎Lo‏ الله

‎452. This would be compulsory if the neighbors are poor, otherwise it is reco-
mmended to be given as a present.

‎$44
1508. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 32 said, “If anyone relieves a Muslim believer from one
of the hardships of this worldly life, Allah will relieve him
of one of the hardships of the Day of Resurrection. If any-
one makes it easy for the one who is indebted to him (while
finding it difficult to repay ),*? Allah will make it easy for him

in this worldly life and in the Hereafter, and if anyone con-
ceals the faults of a Muslim, Allah will conceal his faults in
this world and in the Hereafter. Allah helps His slave as
long as he helps his brother.” Related by Muslim.

8 وَعَنْ لني ‎poy - hs‏ لله ‎He‏ َال قَالَ 5 الله صَلّى ‎th‏

opt eel ‏قاعله».‎ Bf , << : lis ‏ه‎
‎1509. Tbn Mas‘td (RA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

3% said, “He who guides (others) to an act of goodness, will
have a reward similar to that of its doer.” Related by Muslim.

‎oy 0٠١‏ - رَضِي ‎Cage th‏ - عن الب طلى ‎de dh‏ وَل
قال : دمن ‎«Sel dy GSU‏ ومن ‎SIE‏ ال ‎«BBG‏

‎BE by
1510. Ibn Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎9 said, “If anyone seeks refuge in Allah’s name, grant him
protection; if anyone asks you for something in Allah's

‎oT ih B80 ius ‏م‎

‎name‘ give him something; and if anyone does you a favor

‎recompense him, but if you do not have the means to do so,
make Du ‘é (supplication) for him.” Related by Al-Baihaqi.

‎453- He could relieve him of part of the debt, the whole debt or give him more
time to repay it.
454- Especially those who ask out of dire necessity.

‎545

‎hy‏ & المرام).
Coody a ‏باب‎

Chapter 111: Zuhd (Abstinence) and Piety

\w'mén bin Bashir (RAA) narrated, ‘Theard Allah's

Messenger 3 saying, (Nu’man pointed with his two fingers to his
ears) ‘Both lawful (Halal) and unlawful things (Haram) are

evident but in between them there are doubtful things

and most people have no knowledge about them. So he,
who saves himself from these doubtful things, saves his
religion and his honor (i.e. keeps them blameless). And he
who indulges in these doubtful things is like a shepherd
who pastures (his animals) near the Himé (private pasture)
of someone else and at any moment he is liable to get in it.
(O people!) Beware! Every king has a Himé and the Hima
of Allah on the earth is what He declared unlawful
(Haram). Beware! In the body there is a piece of flesh if it
becomes sound and healthy, the whole body becomes sou-
nd and healthy but if it gets spoilt, the whole body gets sp-
oilt and that is the heart.” Agreed upon.

#0 قسن أبسي ‎GA‏ رص ‎th‏ َل : ل مول اله على لل

Sas ‏لَمْ‎ Oy c ‏«ئعس عَبْدُ الديَارٍ 58 وَل ة ؛ إن أغطيّ رضي‎ : ey ale
455- Doubtful here means that it is not clear whether they are definitely

Halal or Harém.

546
teen opt ey

1512. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Cursed is he, who is the slave of the Dinar,
the slave of the Dirham, and the slave of the cloak borde-
red with silk. If he is given anything he would be satisfied,
but if he is not given anything he is displeased.” Related by
Al-Bukhari.

AE SN ‏«كُن في‎ :

‎ef‏ فلا تقر الْمَسَاءَ » ‎ey‏ من صِحَّدكَ لسَقَمك ء وَمِنْ ‎US‏ لمر

‎1513. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah’s Messenger ‏يلك‎ took
hold of my shoulders and said, “Be in this world as though you
were a stranger or a passerby.” Ibn ‘Umar used to say, “If you
are alive in the evening, do not expect to be alive till the morning
and if you are alive in the morning do not expect to be alive till the
evening, and take from your health for your sickness, and from

‎your life for your death.”#66 Related by Al-Bukhari.

‏8 وَعَنْ اين عُمَرٌ - رَضيّ ‎ge Uh‏ - قَالَ : ‎din Loo ain bys OG‏
ه وَسَلم : «من نشب ب

‎1514, Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
38 said, “He who imitates any people (in their actions) is
considered to be one of them.” Related by Aba Dawad and
Ibn Hibb4n graded it as S

‎Oe Ney » ‏دَاوْدَ‎ AE at 58 ‏ْم‎

‎456- He means that you should make good use of the time when you are healthy
as there will be a time when you are sick and you will not be able to do much
and the same goes for the time when you are alive, to benefit you when you
are dead.

‎487- The hadith is referring to imitating the disbolievers and those, who are
disobedient in their actions, which go against the laws of Islam, and not
simply imitating them, but actually loving these acts.

‎547
1515. Tbn “Abbas (RAA) narrated,'One day I was riding behind

the Prophet 38 when he said, “O lad, be mindful of Allah and
He will protect you. Be mindful of Allah and you shall find
Him with you. When you ask (for anything), ask it from
Allah, and if you seek help, seek help from Allah.” Related
by At-Tirmidhi who verified it as Hasan and Sahih,

1516. Sahl bin Sa‘d (RAA) narrated, ‘A man came to the

Prophet % and said, “O Allah's Messenger, direct me to a deed
which if I do it, I shail be loved by Allah and by people.”He replied,
“If you practice abstinence in this world, Allah will love
you, and if you abstain from (desiring) what people have,
they will love you.” Related by Ibn Majah and others with a
good chain of narrators,

07 وَعَنْ ‎gf a‏ أبي 8 قَالَ : سَمِعْت رَسُولَ الله صلَى ‎ale in‏ وسَلُمَ
التي ‎ET a aed ah‏ ئلم .
‎Sad bin Abi Waqqas (RA) narrated, ‘I heard Allah's‏ .1517

Messenger 3% saying, “Allah loves the pious rich man‘$ who is

sch di Op : ‏ايَقُولُ‎

inconspicuous (free from showing off or hypocrisy). Related by
Muslim.

488- Scholars said that ‘rich’ here does not necessarily mean material wealth,
but rich at heart,

548
py ‏الله عله‎ Le ‏قال : قال رَسُولُ الله‎ th ‏ل - وَعَنْ أبي‎
aoa : ‏وَقَالَ‎ » LSB ay 4 1d ‏«من‎
‎1518, Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah #8 said, “A sign of man's good observance of Islam (his
piety) is to keep away from the that which does not conc-
ern him.’Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it as Hadith Hasan.

1519. Al-Miqdam bin Ma’‘diakrib (RAA), narrated that Allah's
Messenger Hasan said, “A human being has never filled any
vessel which is worse than his own belly.” Related by At-
‘Tirmidhi, who graded it to be Hasan.

1520. Anas (RAA) narrated that Allah's Messenger Hasan
said, “All the sons of Adam are sinners, but the best of sin-
ners are those who repent often.” Related by At-Tirmidhi and
Ibn Majah with a strong chain of narrators.

oe ty Le ‏وَعَنْ لس - رضي الله َنَهُ - 06 :06 305 اللّه‎ س١‎
‏د‎ ‘Li LAK et Say : ail 26

‎To sae‏ مَوقُوف من قل

‎1521. Anas (RAA) narrated that Allah's Messenger 38 said,
“Keeping silent is considered as (an act of) wisdom, but very
few practice it.” Related by Al-Baihaqi in his book ‘Shu ‘ab al-
Imén’ with a weak chain of narrators. The sound view is that it is

‎traced back to one of the companions who quoted it from Luqman
Al-Hakim.
Chapter IV: Admonition Against
Mischievous Conduct

Mo dS, ‏كال : فال‎ - Be Th go - EEA fe ‏-س‎
‎had oh Job os ocd Jt cad oy stall, ety aaa

Aeon
Pieces)

1522. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that Allah’s Messenger

38 said, “Avoid envy, for envy devours good deeds just as
fire devours firewood.” Related by Aba Dawad.

SE ‏من حَديث ألس‎ EU NG ١617

1523. Ibn ‏طدزقل8‎ related a similar hadith on the authority of
Anas,

“524. Aba Hurairah (RA) narrated that Allah's Messenger

& said, “The strong man is not the good wrestler; but the
strong man is he who controls himself when he is angry.”
Agreed upon.

قل : فل ‎fo diy‏ الله

1525. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Oppression will turn into darkness on the Day of
Resurrection.” Agreed upon.

1526. ‏منطةق‎ bin “Abdullah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “Beware of oppression, for oppression will
turn into excessive darkness on the Day of Resurrection;

and beware of niggardliness, for niggardliness destroyed
your predecessors.” Related by Muslim.

رضي ‎ee th‏ = 08 :ل ولول له ‎fo‏

Moth toby ‏السك‎ SG Galo oy St op day oy
ey tof papal

1527. Mahméd bin Labid (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “The thing I fear most for you is the lesser
shirk (polytheism), showing-off (of good deeds).” Related by
Abmad with a good chain of narrators.

1528. Abi Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‘Allah 38 said, “There are three signs of a hypocrite; when he
speaks, he tells lies; when he makes a promise, he breaks it;
and when he is entrusted, he betrays his trust.”Agreed upon.

CaS pial Bly : ab of ‏دالله‎

1529, Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported another hadith on the
authority of “Abdullah bin ‘Umar (RAA) with the addition, “and
when he quarrels, he is abusive (behaves in a very impudent
and insulting manner).”

- 6 : قَالَ رَسُولَ الله ‎foo‏ الله

م : ‎age ath Catan‏ وف اله ‎is‏ غ1
‎Ibn Mas‘ad (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah‏ .1590
551

& said, ‘Insulting a Muslim is disobedience to Allah, and
fighting with him is Kufr (disbelief).” Agreed upon.

le ‏رَسُولْ الله صلَى الله‎ Oi: U6 - 2 th os - A ‏وَعَنْ أبي‎ er
BE ‏الحديث».‎ GAA Shh os « Shy Sty : gle
1531, Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

aid, “Avoid suspicion, for suspicion is the most false
form of talk.” Agreed upon.

1532. Ma‘qil bin Yasar (RAA) narrated, ‘I heard the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 saying, “Any governor in charge of Muslim
subjects who dies while acting dishonestly towards them
will be excluded by Allah from Paradise.” Agreed upon.

se ey — vere
‏ولي بن مر أ‎
shah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 32

said, “O Allah, cause distress to him who has any charge ov-
er my people and causes them distress.” Related by Muslim.

ob ty hn ‏وَعَنْ أبي حُرَيْرَةَ - رضي الله - قَالَ : قَالَ‎ — vere
tip : ple
1534. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah ‏يك‎ said, “When any of you fights, he must avoid (strik-
ing) the face.” Agreed upon.

: ‏أُرْصني . قال‎ alt ‏َال : يا رَسُولَ‎ 55 Of - ae dh ‏رضي‎ - ey vere

SNR EBT LEM Ye : OG » ‏مرَآرًا‎ 585) «LEY

552
1535. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘A man said, “O Messen-

ger of Allah, advise me.” The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Do not
get angry.” The man repeated that several times and he replied,
“Do not get angry.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

hoo dy 305 ‏َال‎ : SG th ‏رضي‎ - Suan the 32, ‏عه‎
‎50 Be ‏مال الله بير‎ go bias We, bp : ey ‏عَلَيْهِ‎ Li

I EEE .»

1536. Khawlah al-Ansariyah (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 3 said, “Some men acquire Allah's Property
(such as the funds of the Muslim state treasury, Zakah etc) and

they will go to Hell on the Day of Resurrection.” Related Al-
Bukhari.

Bef ‏الَمُوا».‎

1537. “Aba Dharr (RAA) quoted the Prophet 38 saying among
what he narrated from Allah, the Most High that He has said, “O
My slaves, I have made oppression unlawful for Myself and
Thave made it unlawful among you, so do not oppress one
another.” Related by Muslim.

». قاو

ty BES > : OU. Ae ‏الله وَرَسُولُهُ‎ : ٠

. ‏ئلم‎ SE ll Bs ‏يكن‎ Oy » ‏اطتبتة‎
‎1538, Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah

3 asked, “Do you know what backbiting is?” They replied,
‘Allah and His Messenger know best.’ He said,“It is saying some-
thing about your brother which he dislikes.” Someone asked,
‘Supposing that what I said about my brother was true? and the

553
Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ said, “If what you say about him is true
you have backbitten him and if it is not true you have
slandered him.” Related by Muslim.

1539, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Avoid jealousy between yourselves, do not
outbid one another (with a view to raising the price), do not
harbor hatred against one another, do not bear enmity
against one another, one of you should not enter into a tra-
nsaction when the other has already entered into it; and be
fellow brothers and slaves of Allah. A Muslim is a Muslim’s
brother. He does not wrong, desert or despise him. Piety is
found here (pointing three times to his chest), despising his
Muslim brother is enough evil for any man to do. Every
Muslim's blood, property and honor are unlawful to be vio-
lated by another Muslim.” Related by Muslim.

الله ‎oe 6 - ee‏ رَسُولُ الله صَلّى الله
ت ‎SHENG » BEY‏ را

. ‏له‎ hy, seh Ey GLI EST Shy,
1540. Qutbah bin Malik (RAA) narrated, “The Messenger of

Allah ‏يك‎ used to say, “O Allah, I seek refuge in You from evil
morals, deeds, passions and diseases.”Related by At-Tirmidhi.
Al-Hakim graded it as Sahth and it is his version.
eo ‏قَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ : US - gs ‏رضي الله‎ - te ‏وَعْنْ ان‎ 7 0
aE ele Sad Vy BEY BE ‏«لاً ثمَارِ‎

gly diab

+ fsa opt
1541, ‏مطل‎ ‘Abbi (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
38 said, “Don’t dispute with your brother; don’t make jokes
with him; and don’t make him a promise which you would
break.” Related by At-Tirmidhi with a weak chain of narrators.

UKE ‏وفي متتده‎ » GLU EE
1542, Abd Sa‘id al-Khudri (RAA), narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “There are two characteristics which are
not combined in a believer; miserliness and bad morals.”
Related by At-Tirmidhi with a weakness in its chain of narrators.

‎Se N25 -‏ - قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎te‏
‎ok thy: tg he‏ مَافَالاً» على الباديىء مَالَمْ يمد الْنظأرم».
‎oe op‏

‎1543. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “When two men insult one another, what they
say is mainly the fault of the one who began it, so long as

‎the one who is oppressed does not transgress.” Related by
Muslim.

‏:ل طول الو ‎th fe‏

‎1544, Abd Sirmah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-
14h 3 said, “He who causes harm to a Muslim will be har-

‎555
med by Allah, and he who acts in a hostile manner against
a Muslim, will be punished in the same way by Allah.” Rela-
ted by Aba Dawid and At-Tirmidhi who graded it to be Hasan
(good).

— ete

ty Le ‏رَسُولُ الله‎ 38 aN TEA

1545, Abd ad-Darda’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “Allah hates the profligate and the obscene.”
Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it to be Sahih.

1546. At-Tirmidhi also related on the authority of Ibn Mas‘td

(RAA) that the Messenger of Allah 38 said, “The believer is not
a slanderer, nor does he curse others, and nor is he immo-
ral or shameless.” Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it to be
Hasan. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahth and Ad-Daraqutni said that
it is most probably Mawgéf (traced only to a Companion).

:8 سول لله مت الله عليه

. ‏رجه البحَارِي‎ a iG yall ‏فَإِنهُم‎ ON Sp

- Ge th (05 - ane ‏وَعَنْ‎ ٠647

rhs
1547, “Mishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
said, “Avoid reviling the dead, they have already seen the

result of (the deeds) that they forwarded before them.”
Related by Al-Bukhari.

a Le an

1548. Hudhaifah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah
“A backbiter will not enter Paradise.” Agreed upon.

sai

556
Eb ‏ال رَسُولُ الله‎ we ‏رضي اله‎ - Hoy 8
hn ‏الطبرَاني في‎ Gal bli ‏الله عَْهُ‎ GS ak US too : chy
1549. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “If one restrained his anger, Allah will keep His puni-
shment from him (on the Day of Resurrection).” Related by At-
‘TabarAni in al-Awsat.

ARS wot] ‏وفي‎ «ge B55 «GLA ET

1551. Aba Bakr as-Siddiq (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “A crafty person, a miser and one who badly
treats those under his authority will not enter Paradise.”

Related by At-Tirmidhi in two separate traditions and there is a
weakness in its chain of narrators.

Sh se ‏ال رَسُول الله‎ 5
. ‏البتاري‎ SRL » ‏الرَصَّاصُ‎ : gs acta
1552. Ibn “Abbas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of ‘Allah

38 said, “If anyone listened to the talk of some people, when
they do not like him to do that, then molten led will be
poured into his ears on the Day of Resurrection.” Related by
Al-Bukhari.

ee ty Le ‏قَالَ : قَالَ 325 الله‎ - he - 5 hoor

‎soley‏ «طُوتى لمن

‎1553. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3
557

‏عَيْبهُ عَنْ عُيُوب النّاس». ‎aM EST‏ حَسّن .

said, “Blessed is he who is preoccupied with his defects
rather than those of other people.” Related by Al-Bazzar with
a good chain of narrators.

8 قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎fe‏ الله
غَضْبان».

on
‏وَهْوَ‎ Mates ‏في‎ Hg bu Ly :

1554. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

said, “Whoever exalts himself and walks proudly; Allah
will be angry with him when he meets Him (on the Day of
Resurrection).” Related Al-Hakim with a reliable chain of nar-
rators.

1555. Sahl bin Sa’d (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah % said, “Haste comes from Satan.” Related by At-Tirmidhi
who graded is as Hasan.

Bs ‏صلّى‎ dh ‏فالتا : قَالَ رَسُولُ‎ - Dh ‏رَضِي‎ - Kae be ١665

1556. “A’ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يل‎
‎said, “Pessimism is part of bad character.” Related by Ahmad
with a weak chain of narrators.

tty — \eey

fy ale Mn ‏قَالَ رَسُولُ الله صَلَى‎ OLS ‏الدُردَاء‎
‎heya SY est Sp,

بي

ol .4 : ‏وَلآ‎ clea o,f

1557. Abd ad-Darda’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Men accustomed to cursing will not be intere-
essors or witnesses on the Day of Resurrection.” Related by
Muslim.

558
1558. Mu‘Adh bin Jabal (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “If anyone disgraces his brother for a sin, he
will not die before committing it himself.” Related At-Tirmi-
dhi who graded it to be Hasan.

1559. Bahz bin Hakim narrated on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his grandfather (RAA) that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “Woe to him who lies in his talk to make the

people laugh, Woe to him! Woe to him!,” Related by the three
ImAms with a strong chain of narrators.

1560. Anas (RAM narrated that the Messenger of Allah 35
said, “The atonement of backbiting a man is to ask Allah to
forgive him.” Related by Al-Harith bin Abii Usamah with a weak
chain of narrators.

0 وَعَنْ ‎Ce - ie ih 5 - tant‏ : قَالَ رَسُولُ ‎by‏ صَلّى الله
‎Catt «ghey‏ الرّحَال ‎ad‏ اللدُ الخصم». ‎BEL‏
‎“A'ishah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 32‏ .1561

said, “The most despicable amongst people in the sight of

Allah is the ruthless argumentative (person).” Related by Mu-
slim.

559
GEV LS ‏في‎ OL
Chapter V: Exhortation to have Good Morals

1562. Ibn Mas‘d (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Adhere (you people) to truth, for truth leads to good
deeds and good deeds lead to Paradise, and if a man conti-
nues to speak the truth and makes truth his object he will
be recorded as truthful before Allah. Avoid (you people) fals-
ehood, for falsehood leads to wickedness and wickedness
leads to Hell, and if a man continues to speak falsehood
and makes falsehood his object he will be recorded as a
liar before Allah.” Agreed upon.

me

1563. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “Beware of suspicion, for suspicion amounts
to the worst form of lying.” Agreed upon.

- وي لع - قَالَ : 08 رَسُولُ الله
3 سول اللو ما

BE 6 Sth oe Ai ¢ ‏ِالْمَْيُوف‎
‎1564. Abd 55358 al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
560

of Allah ‏َك‎ said, “Avoid sitting by the road side.” The people
then said, ‘O Allah’s Messenger, we cannot do without those meet-
ing places in which we converse.” So he said, “Well, if you insist
(on that) give the road its due rights.” They asked, ‘What are
the road's due rights” He replied, “Lowering your gaze, abstai-
ning from anything offensive, returning salutations, enjoi-
ning the right (Ma raf) and forbidding from evil deeds (Mun-
har)” Agreed upon.

1565. Mu’Awiyah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

48 said, “When Allah wishes good for anyone, He bestows
upon him the Figh (comprehension) of the religion.” Agreed
upon.

5 ل وَعَنْ أبي التَرْدَاء - 5 ‎Se th‏ - قَالَ : 08 رَسُولٌ الله ‎hy he‏

538 AEE gl ‏في الْميرّان أنْقل من حُسْن‎ ha

1566. Abd ad-Dardé’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah & said, “The heaviest thing which will be put on the
believer's scale (on the Day of Resurrection) will be good mor-
als.” Related by Aba Dawdd and At-Tirmidhi who graded it as
Sahih.

thy he dn ‏قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ‎ - Cate th ‏رضي‎ - Fb he 60
‏عا‎ YE ‏الإتمان».‎ Ady hey
1567. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

& said,“Hayé’ (modesty, bashfulness etc.) is a part of Faith.”
Agreed upon.

561
1568. Ibn Mas‘dd (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “One of the things people have learned from the
words of the earliest prophecies is, “If you don’t feel any
shame, do whatever you like.” Related by Al-Bukhéri,

1078

oe Le hh 08 : U6 - te thes - ‏عَنْ أبي ير‎

الخرص عَلَى مَا يا ¢ ‎Ge‏ بالله » ‎EY‏ ون ء فلا تقل ‎tds‏
‏أي عَعَلتْ ‎Ur oe Os‏ وَكَذَاء ‎Bish‏ : 3

1569. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Al-

lah 38 said, “A believer who is strong (and healthy) is better
and_ dearer to Allah than the weak believer, but there is
goodness in both of them. Be keen on what benefits you
and seek help from Allah, and do not give up. If anything
afflicts you do not say, ‘If I had done such and such things,
such and such would have happened.’ But say, ‘Allah decr.
ees and what He wills He does,’ for (the utterance) ‘If I had”
provides an opening for the deeds of the devil.” Related by
Muslim.

1570. ‏يقر‎ bin Himar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah said, “Allah, the Most High has revealed to me that
you (people) should be humble, so that no one transgresses
another, or boasts to the other.” Related by Muslim.

562
الاها ل وَعَن أبي
‎tee Ju‏

. ‏وتسئئة‎ Git eel

1571. Aba ad-Darda’ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “If a Muslim defends his brother’s honor in his
absence, Allah will protect his face from the fire of Hell on

the Day of Resurrection.” Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded
it to be Hasan.

1572. Ahmad related a similar hadith on the authority of
Asma’ the daughter of Yazid.

io ‏الله‎ 55, 06: Ub Jus ‏وض ال ال‎ - oh - ‏اها‎
‏عَبْنَا‎ ain ‏راد‎ Bye JES a a

Gy ‏عراء‎ Sy ‏بثو‎

oped ‏أعطرحة‎ .»- Se hs, ‏إل‎ dist gary
1573, Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah ‏يك‎ said, “Sadagah does not decrease property and
Allah increases the honor of him who forgives and no one
will humble himself for Allah’s sake except that Allah rai-
ses his status.” Related by Muslim.

1574. ‘Abdullah bin Salam (RAA) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah 38 said, “O people, extend greetings (saying Salam to
each other), keep relations with your kin, provide food (to
people) and pray at night when people are asleep and you
will enter Paradise in peace.” Related by At-Tirmidhi who gra-
ded it as Sahi

563
530006

: ‏رَسُولَ الله ؟ قَالَ‎ - BE - ee ‏«الدّينُ‎ sy Le
‏وَعَاتهِ». أَخْرَحَه مثلم‎ Sal AN ‏ولكتابه » وَلرَسُوله » رلأئمة‎ » ally

1575. Tamim ad-Dari (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “The religion is Nasthah.”#*9 The people said, ‘To

whom should it be directed” He replied, “To Allah, His Book,
His Messenger, to the leaders of the Muslims and to the

common folk of the Muslims.‘ Related by Muslim,
1576. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “The fear of Allah and good morals (Akhlaq)
are the two major characteristics which lead to Paradise.”
Related by At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim graded it as Suhéh.

لاه

SA Oh Se a ‏ولكن‎ «Sil Lo Shy

pd ‏يَعلَى » وَصّحُحَهُ‎ Fe lhl
1577. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 38 said, “You (people) cannot satisfy people with your
wealth, but satisfy them with your cheerful faces and good
morals.” Related by Aba Ya‘la and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih,

459. The word Nagifah refers to sincerity, good advice, well wishing, integ-
rity, doing justice to a person or situation

460- Nagihah to ‘Allah’ means having faith in Allah, fulfilling all the obli
gatory duties, abstaining from doing what is prohibited ete., Nasihiah to
His Book means believing in all His revelations and eomplying with all
that is in the Qur'an. Nasihah to His Messenger means to believe in
him, in the Divine Revelation that was revealed to him, to follow his
Sunnah ‏,عاك‎ to the leaders of the Muslims by obeying them, giving them
sincere advise, helping them etc. Nastiuwh ‏ما‎ the Muslims means to pro-
vide them with good advice, not harming them, guiding them to what is
good.

564
: ply ole ‏كال : 6 وول الله صلّى الله‎ - te ‏رز اله‎ - ky — teva

‎Lose‏ مرآةٌ أحيه ‎sy 545 AT yh‏ حْسْنٍ
عه ‎Ab@ Hlurairah (RA) narrated that the Messenger‏ ,1578

‎Allah 38 said, “Every believer is the mirror of his brother.”
Related by Aba Dawid with a good chain of narrators.

‏وَعَن اين ‎gat - A‏ لله نهنا - قَالَ قال 345 لله متلى لله
‎Sly it‏ الذي ‎nt sd‏ وير ‎eh fo‏
يُخالط لاس ‎ae nal Vy‏ امم». ‎Sr i‏ ماه ب

‎on ‏إلا أله لَمْ يسم‎ LN

‎1579. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎said, “A believer who mixes with people and endures th-
eir annoyance is better than the one who does not mix with
them and does not endure their annoyance.” Related by Ibn
Majah with a good chain of narrators. AtTirmidhi reported the
hadith without mentioning the Companion.

‎Patho eee

‎: UE - 26 ahh ‏رَضي‎ - ots

‎22 og (isd ‏علقي‎ Cts Lis | ihn log ‏عَلَيْهِ‎
‎. ‏وَصّحَّحَهُ ابن حبّان‎
1580. Ibn ‏مك8‎ 00 (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

‎3 said, “O Allah You have made my creation perfect, so
make my moral characteristics also be the best.”

‎OU‏ الذكر وَالدُعاء
‎Chapter VI: Remembering Allah and Supplication‏

‏١ه‏ عَنْ أبي ‎BA‏ - رضي ‎te th‏ - قَالَ : قال 5 ‎Lo‏ الله ‎oe‏

‎Mis ‏بي‎ ESBS SSG gale ‏أنا مَعَ‎ : - Sut - ON ‏«يقول‎ sly

‎1 SE ANS, » ‏حبان‎ GASES, ee el
565

1581. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Allah, the Most High says: I am with My slave
when he remembers Me and his lips move with My men-
tion,” Related by Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibbén graded it as Sahih,

th fe bb e5 ‏ل‎

Allah 38 said, “A man does nothing to rescue himself from
Allah’s punishment better than remembering Allah.” Rela-
ted by Ibn Abi Shaibah and At-Tabarani with a good chain of nar-
rators.

th fe ain ‏رَسُولُ‎ 6
Koh EY as dh aye

Allah 38 said, “People will not sit in an assembly in which
they remember Allah without the angels surrounding them
smercy covering them, and Allah mentioning them among
those who are with Him.” Related by Muslim.

ey le ‏الله‎ Le ‏قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله‎ -
OG ba cs
1584. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “If people sit in an assembly in which they do

not remember Allah or invoke blessings on the Prophet 38,
it will be a cause of grief to them on the Day of Resurrec-
tion.” Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it as Hasan.

566
1585. Abi Aiydb al-Ansari (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 48 said, “Whoever says ten times: ‘None has the right
to be worshipped except Allah alone, without partner, to
Him belongs all sovereignty and praise. He gives life and
causes death. He is over all things, Omnipotent,’ will have a
reward equivalent to that of emancipating four of the des-
cendants of Isma‘il from slavery.” Agreed upon.

Fry 0046
‏وب‎ NO JE ‏«مَن‎ :

1586, AbG Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah ‏يك‎ said, “Whoever says a hundred times, ‘How perfect
Allah is and I praise Him,’ his sins will be forgiven though
they may be as much as the foam of the sea.” Agreed upon.

bey ‏قَالَ لي‎ tel - te th ‏يلت الْحَارث - رضي‎ Gi Le) — 6407

. ‏مُسْلمُ‎ EGET ‏وَمدَادَ كلماته».‎
1587, Juairiyah bint al-Harith (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said to me, “Since leaving you I have said four
phrases which if weighed against all you have said today,
would prove to be heavier: ‘How perfect Allah is and I
praise Him by the amount of His creation and His pleasure,

and by the weight of His throne, and the ink of His words.”
Related by Muslim.

567
: قَالَ رَسُولُ الله

ay al ‏وَسْبْحَانَ‎ ar ‏إل‎

1588. Abd 5550 al-Khudri (RAA) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah 38 said, “The lasting good deeds are: (the saying of)
‘None has the right to be worshipped except Allah alone,
How perfect Allah is and Allah is great and all praise is for

Allah, There is no might nor power except with Allah.” Rel-
ated by An-Nasa’i. Ibn Hibbén and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih,

SU ‏الْحَمْدُ لله » ولا‎
1589. Samurah bin Jundub (RAA) narrated that the Messen-

ger of Allah 38 said, “The words dearer to Allah are four:
‘How perfect Allah is and all praise is for Allah. None has
the right to be worshipped except Allah alone and Allah is
great.’ It does not matter which you say first.” Related by
Muslim.

الله 5

 ىَلص‎ dhs SOG: We ‏وَعَنْ أبي مُوسَى‎ ven.
‏كثر من 55 الجن ؟ لآ حَوْلَ ولا‎ bt ‏ألا‎

الله إلا

قو
‎Abi Masa al-Ash“ari (RAA) narrated that the Messen-‏ .1590

ger of Allah 38 said to me, “O “Abdullah bin Qais, would you
like to be guided to one of the treasures of Paradise?There
is no might nor power except with Allah.’ Agreed upon. An-
Nasé’i added in his version, “There is no refuge from Allah
except by turning to Him.

SBE : yeti «ce Bt ‏إلا بالله».‎

568
Seth obey » WO) ‏الْعبَادَُ».‎ YB EAN bp :
1591. An-Nu‘man bin al-Bashir (RAA) narrated that the Mes-

senger of Allah 3 said, “Verily supplication is worship.” Rela-
ted by the four ImAms and At-Tirmidhi graded it as Sahth.

ad ‏من‎ th 97

1592. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “Supplication is the pith of worship.” Related by At-Tir-
midhi with a full chain of narrators

1593. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

Allah 3 said, “Nothing is more honorable before Allah than.
supplication.” Related by At-Tirmidhi with a full chain of narra-
tors. Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahth.

- hs) oak
by 0681 ‏«الدُعَاءُ بين‎ : ey
285 ot ‏ابن‎

1594. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 32
said, “A supplication made between the Adhdn and Igamah

is never rejected.” Related by An-Nasa’i and others. Ibn Hibban
and others graded it as Sahih.

‎ou 25 040‏ - رضي الله قَالَ : قَالَ رَسُولُ الله ‎aie an Le‏
‎ey‏ «إنّ ‎SS‏ حَىّ ‎ES‏ يحي من ‎ot‏ إِذَا رد ‎el‏ أن ‎e354‏

‎1595. ‏مفسلدة‎ (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah 32
said, “Your Rabb (Lord of the Universe) is Modest and Gen-

‎569
erous, and would never turn the hands of a slave without
gain when he raises them to Him (in supplication).” Related by
the four Imams except An-Nasa’i. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahth,

th Lo ‏رَسُولْ الله‎ OS : ‏قَالَ‎ - Be Jes th ‏هوه( وَعَنْ 2 - رَضي‎

AG ag Bias USSG Tel ‏في‎

1596. “Umar (RA) narrated, ‘When the Messenger of Allah 4,
raised his hands in supplication, he did not lower them till he wip-
ed his face with them.’ Related by At-Tirmidhi, There are other
traditions, which support this narration, of which are:

40 S48 ‏أبي‎ ite - ‏ما‎

. Oe ‏ابن‎ ey » ‏أَعْرَّحَهُ الترْمذيُ‎
1598. Ibn 1195600 (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah

38 said, “Those who are nearest to me on the Day of Resur-
rection are those who invoke many blessings on me.” Rela-
ted by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

قَالَ : َال ‎ty So hts‏
أنت ري لا إِله إلا أت
وَرَعْدكَ مَا ‎Soh cake‏ بلك من شر ما

8 ل وَعْنْ ‎oth‏ بن أوْس =

‎aie‏ » ونا ‎buh, aie‏ عَهْدكَ
تَعَفْس » اوم لك ‎ay‏ عل ُو لك ‎OE SE le‏ لاير الوب

‏ت». أَْرحَهُ ‎ees‏

‎1599. Shaddad bin Aus (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
570
Allah 32 said, “The best manner of asking for forgiveness is
to say: “O Allah! You are my Lord. None has the right to be
worshipped except You. You created me and I am Your ser-
vant and I abide by Your covenant and promise as best I
can. I seek refuge in You from the evil, which I have com-
mitted. I acknowledge Your favor upon me and I knowle-
dge my sins, so forgive me, for verily none can forgive sin
except You.” Related by Al-Bukhari.

: لَميكُنْ ‎Lobby‏ الله
‎cute A‏
‎ios‏ وت الف ما قي »وان ‎oe‏

‎ARs‏ عم

‎1600. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏لك‎
‎never failed to say these words in the morning and the evening:
#0 Allah! I ask You for pardon and well-being in my religi-
ous and worldly affairs, and my family and my wealth. 0
Allah! Cover my weaknesses and set at ease my dismay. 0
‘Allah! Preserve me from the front and from behind and on
my right and on my left and from above, and I seek refuge
with You lest I be swallowed up by the earth.” Related by
‘An-Nas@’i and Ibn Majah. Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih.

‎tin fe ‏وول الله‎ 98 :

‎1601. Ibn “Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to supplicate saying, “O Allah! I seek refuge in You from
the withholding of Your favor, the decline of the good bea-
Ith You have given, the suddenness of Your vengeance and
from all forms of Your wrath.” Related by Muslim.

‎571
‎١+‏ معن ‎ds‏ بن ‎ab‏ - رضي ‎Cate th‏ - قَالَ : كَانَ ‎po‏ الله
ني ‎SE‏ بك من ‎Sih ey » oad‏
وَصّكّحَهُ الْحَاكمُ .

‎«ete‏ رَوَاهُ الس

‎1602. Ibn ‘Umar (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38
used to say, “O Allah! I seek refuge in You from the burden
of debts and from being over-powered by men and from the
gloating of enemies (at an evil I am afflicted with).” Related by
An-Nasé’i and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahth.

‎Wh Le Ge 8 - i ‏ره الله‎ - SY ey er

‎De kG‏ : اللّهُمّ ني أمتألك ‎af gat ot‏ أنت اللهُ لا ‎ay‏ إلا أنت » الأَحَدُ
‎de 355 i‏

‏ل ‎dh‏ باشمه الذي ‎EG‏ به أططى » ‎bly‏ بد
‎Oe Sey BAW EEE oat‏ .

‎1603. Buraidah (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎heard a man saying: ‘O Allah! I ask You by virtue that I testify
that You are Allah; there is no God but You, the one - the Self
Sufficient Master, Who did not beget and was not begotten, and to
‘Whom no one is equal.’ Allah’s Messenger then said, “He has ask-
ed Allah by His Name by which when asked, He gives, and
by which when supplicated, He answers.” Related by the four
Iméms and Tbn Hibban graded it as Sahih.

‎Ds Le 5 ‏قَالَ : كان‎ - oe th os - A fy 4

‎Salm : J‏ بلك ‎oF‏ وَبك ‎A‏ وبكَ تيا » وَبلك

‎eect ‏الْمَصِيرُ».‎
‎1604. Abd Hurairah (RAA) narrated, ‘Allah's Messenger ‏يك‎
‎would say in the morning, “O Allah! By Your leave we have

‎reached the morning and by Your leave we have reached
the evening. By Your leave we live and die. Unto You is our

‎572
resurrection.” In the evening, he would say the same except the
last phrase: “and to You do we return.” Related by the four
Imams.

rely

اب الثار». ‎EGE‏

Wye ‏الآخرّة‎ Bo ‏يا‎

1605, Anas (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of Allah 38 used
to supplicate frequently: “O our Lord, grant us the best in this life
and the best in the next life, and protect us from the punishment
of the Fire.” Agreed upon.

1606. Aba Masé al-Ash’ari (RAA) narrated, ‘The Messenger of

Allah 38 used to supplicate, “O Allah, forgive me my faults, my
ignorance, my immoderation in my concern. And You are
better aware (of my affairs) than myself. 0 Allah, grant me
forgiveness (of the faults which I committed) seriously or
otherwise (and which I committed) inadvertently and deli-
berately, All these (failings) are in me. 0 Allah, grant me
forgiveness-from the faults, which I did in haste or defer-
red, which I committed in privacy or in public and You are
better aware (of them) than myself. You are the First and
the Last and over all things You are Omnipotent.” Agreed
upon,

- رضي الله عَنْهُ - قَالَ : ‎OW‏ رَسُولُ الله صَلَى ‎tty‏
‏أطلح لي ‎ge‏ الذي هو ‎ele‏ » وأطل بي

573

1607. Aba Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah 3§ used to say, “O Allah! Set right for me my religion,
which is the safeguard of my affairs. And set right for me
the affairs of the world wherein is my living. Decree the
Hereafter to be good for me. And make this life, for me, (a
source) of abundance for every good and make my death (a
source) of comfort to me and protection against every evil.”

Related by Muslim

bth be dn iy oe

‎ey -4‏ - رضي ‎dh‏ - 36
‎Ly‏ تقول : «اللَّهُم الفئني بمًا ‎«gate‏ وَعَلسِي يفعي + ‎Ny‏
‎lls‏ رََاهُ ‎Ld‏ وَالْحَاكم .

‎1608. Anas (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎used to say, “O Allah! Grant me benefit in what You have
taught me, and teach me useful knowledge and provide me
with knowledge that will benefit me.” Related by An-Nasé’t
and Al-Hakim.

‏د أبي هُرَيْرَة - رَضِي الله ‎Sl - Sb‏ « و'

‏عو يله من ‎FAS‏

‎1609. At-Tirmidhi reported a similar tradition on the autho-
rity of Ab@ Hurairah(RAA), he said at its end, “And increase my
knowledge. Praise be to Allah in all circumstances. I seek
refuge in Allah from the state of those who will go to Hell.”
Its chain of narrators is good.

‎dy ‏أ لبي صلَى‎ - ie Ath ‏رضي‎ - dane ay 2
Uy EM ‏كله عاجله وآجله » ما‎ hy ah J aly : tet ‏هَذَا‎

‏لم
بك ‎GO » BG‏ من قل ‎aly » foe SF‏ أن تلح

‎Sad‏ لي ‎Oe GN, ONE ae‏ وَالْحَاكم

‎1610. ‘A'ishah (RAA) narrated, *Allah’s Messenger 3 taught
her this supplication, “O Allah! I ask You of all good of what I
have done and what I have not done in this world and in
the Hereafter. I seek refuge in You from the evil of what I
have done and what I have not done in this world and in
the Hereafter. 0 Allah! I ask of You all good that Your ser-

‎vant and Prophet Muhammad 2 used to ask of You. I seek
refuge in You from all evil that Your servant and Prophet
Muhammad used to seek refuge in You from. O Allah! I ask
You for Paradise and what brings me nearer to it of deeds
and sayings. I seek refuge in You from Hell-Fire and what
brings me near to it of deeds and sayings. I ask You for the
good consequences of Your Decree.” Related by Ibn Majah
Tbn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded it as Sahih,

‏ان عَنْ أبي ‎SE‏ - رضي الله ‎eo‏ - قَالَ : ‎UB‏ رَسُولُ
«كَلمَتَان ‎cote fe ae oh) J OS‏

‎= cay
: ‏الله عليه وَسَلّم‎ Le ‏الله‎
‎ly ‏سْبْحَانَ الله وَسَمْده , سُبْحَانَ‎ : ote ‏ان في‎

‎3

‎1611. ‏وطق‎ Hurairah (RAA) narrated that the Messenger of

‎Allah 38 said, “Two phrases which are dear to the Compas-
sionate One and are light on the tongue but heavy in the
scale are: “How perfect Allah is and I praise Him; and How
perfect Allah is the Most Great.” Agreed upon.

‎575
Dar Al-Manarah

For Translation, Publishing& Distribution
El-Mansoura - Egypt -Tel Fax: 002050 / 2030254
Hand phone: 012 / 3605049 - P.O.BOX:35738
E. mail; almanarah400@hotmail.com

Dar Al Kotob Library Number : 2003 / 7157
LS.B.977 — 6005 - 24-1

576

