An Brocton Of Imam Ahmad's
FOUNDATIONS OF

THE S$ a

An Explanation Of Imam Ahmad's
FOUNDATIONS OF

THES x

By Shaykh Dr. Rabee' ibn Haadee Al-Madkhalee

mas

- REVISED EDITION 1436 H -

© Riwayah Publishing, A Product of RiMarket.Net, The World’s Provider of
Arabic Books

No part of this translation may be reproduced in any form without written

permission from RiMarket.Net, except if it is being reproduced for the

purpose of spreading authentic knowledge and not to sell. In such a case, we

encourage the people to convey the statements of Allah, His Messenger (#8),

and the explanations of the scholars of Ahl as-Sunnah. Surely the success 1s
with Allah.

Revised Second Edition: :j43¢ Juma4da al-Awwal 1436 H/March 2015 CE

Original Publication Date: 2% Rajab 1432/June 2011

ISBN Number: 978-0- 9846600- 6-3

Translation & Formatting: Abi Nah Warithuddin bin Shamsuddin Madytin
Editing: Team Riwdyah, may Allah grant them Paradise.

Cover Design: Usil Design, info@usuldesign.com

Acknowledgement: The majority of the translated Qur’anic verses are from
Muhammad Taqi ad-Din al-Hilalt and Muhsin Khan’s translation of the
Noble Qur’4n.

Arabic Source Text and Hadith References: This book between your hands is
a complete translation of Dr. Rabi‘ bin Hadi al-Madkhali’s Explanation of al-
‏سقس[‎ Ahmad’s Usil as-Sunnah, based on the transcribed document found on
the Sheikh’s official website: http://rabee.net/ar/books.php?cat=S5&id=85.
The original Arabic document was prepared by Salim bin Muhammad al-
Jaza’irt. Certain corrections were made to the original audio by the author
himself. Likewise, detailed hadith references were added to the document. All
of the hadith references in this translated work were based on those found in
the aforementioned transcribed document. With AlJ4h is all success.

Important Note: Unless otherwise noted all [bracketed] notes, phrases,
references, or added benefits are from the author or the one who prepared the
original Arabic document. However, (parenthetical) phrases are often placed by
the translator for added clarity.

Mailing Address: 924 Bergen Avenue, 322 PMB Jersey City, NJ, USA 07306

Website. www.timarket.net Text Only. 973.332.3345 E. admin@rimarket.net
Twitter: @RiMarket_/FB: RiMarket.com/Instagram: Riwayah_Publishing

Day dh, The Mest High, reavard everyone who assisted in this humble ffert. We ash Lidh by
His Beautipd Names and Lofy Hatvibutes to allow this book to be hnowledge from which the people
benefit until the Day of Judgment.

Printed in the United States of America

56
65
70

95

97
101

105

The Annotator’s Introduction

English Text of Foundations of the Sunnah

The Explanation of Foundations of the Sunnah

Avoiding Innovation and Being Cautious of It

The Status of the Sunnah and Its Relationship with the Qur’4n ..
The Belief in the Divine Decree, the Good and Bad of it
Questions from the Class

Believing that Allah will be Seen (in the Hereafter)
Leaving off Debating and Argumentation in the Religion
The Qur'an is the Speech of Allah, and it is Not Created
Having the Belief that Allah will be Seen in the Hereafter
The Belief in the Scales on the Day of Judgment

Allah we) will Speak to His Servants on the Day of Judgment.
The Belief in the Hawd (The Cistern/Fountain) & Its Description

Believing in the Punishment of the Grave
Questions from the Class
Belief in the Intercession on the Day of Judgment

The Appearance of the Dajjal

The Descending of Jesus ‏و6‎

Al-Im&n (True Faith) is Statement and Action; it Increases and
Decreases

Whoever Abandons the Prayer has Disbelieved

The Companions of the Messenger of Allah ‏و6‎

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

Obedience to the Muslim Ruler . n6
Al-Jihad is to be Carried Out with the Muslim Ruler until the Day of
Judgment, Whether (He is) Pious or Wicked 129
The Impermissibility of Revolting Against the Muslim Ruler.............. 132
Questions from the Class 134
It is Permissible to Fight Against Thieves and Rebels 140
We Do not Declare Anyone from the Muslims to be in Paradise or the
Hell-Fire 143
Allah Accepts The Tawbah of One Who Repents to Him 145
The Legal Punishments are Expiations, and the One who is Persistent
upon a sin is under the will of Allah 146
The Legislation of Carrying out the Legal Punishments 149
Declaring to be an innovator the one who belittles any of the
Companions (db) of the Messenger of Allah 63 152
The Meaning of Hypocrisy 155

Submitting to the Texts (Qur’4n & Sunnah), even if we do not know
their meanings 157

Belief that Heaven and Hell are Both Created, and the ruling of the

one who denies that 164
To perform the funeral prayer over the Muslim who dies, even if he

was sinful | 167
Questions from the Class 169
Conclusion , 181
Arabic Text of Usdl As-Sunnah 183
Appendix 189
Coming Soon | 191

3

مهسا يمه
‎Bo QA‏ 7,0

The Annotator’s Introduction

Il praise belongs to Allah alone. We glorify Him and
A beseech His Help and His Forgiveness. We seek refuge in

lah from the evil of ourselves and from the wickedness
of our actions. Whomsoever Allah (22) guides, no one can lead
him astray. And whomsoever All4h leads astray, for him there is
no guide. I testify that there is no deity worthy of being
worshipped in truth except Allah, (He is) alone without any
partners. I testify that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, his family, and his Companions

As for what follows: undeniably the Islamic Creed, which every
Prophetic Message was sent with, holds a high position in al-
Islam. It is the core foundation of the religion and the measure by
which one’s faith is judged to be sound or corrupt. Because of
this, the scholars of al-Islam have placed great importance on
clarifying this creed, explaining it, calling to it, and defending it.

Many scholars have written independent works about the correct
Islamic creed, and others have included their writings inside other
(larger) works. Books both large and small have been written
covering this important topic. From amongst the books written
about the Islamic creed are As-Sunnah by “Abdullah bin Ahmad,
As-Sunnah by al-Khallal, Ash-Shari‘ah by al-Ajarri, Sharh ‏501لا‎
‎al-I'tiqad Ahl as-Sunnah by al-Lalika’?, Al-Ibanah As-Sughra and
Al-Kubra by Ibn Battah, and other works that showed great
concern for the creed. Because these scholars knew the lofty level
and status of the Islamic Creed, they placed importance on
writing about this topic. They recognized that anyone who
deviates in an aspect of the Islamic Creed, or in one of its

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

fundamentals, is in great danger. This deviance could be disbelief,
innovation, misguidance, or other than that.

Based on this point, it is absolutely essential that students of
knowledge have great concern for studying this “Agidah (creed),
and the core fundamentals which it stands upon. And perhaps
you know that al-Bukhart has brought chapters in his Sahih
Collection entitled: “The Book of Faith’, “The Book of Holding
Firm to the Sunnah’, and “The Book of Islamic Monotheism’. All
of this is out of great concern for this ‘Aqidah and the
fundamentals of al-Islam. Likewise, AbG Dawifd has mentioned

“The Book of the Sunnah’ at the end of his Sunan.

(Know for sure) that the intended meaning of “As-Sunnah” is
creed and methodology. Also al-Imam Muslim's ‘Book of Faith’,
in his Sahth Collection, joins with these aforementioned works,
which indicates the significance of the Islamic Creed.

From the small writings that were written in order to clarify the
Islamic Creed is this book Foundations of the Sunnah by al-
Imam Ahmad, the Imam of Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jam4‘ah, that
Imam, that great Mountain of the Sunnah, piety, and zuhd. He
was a measure and a test by which the people of truth were
distinguished from the people of falsehood and misguidance. His
way and fundamental beliefs are stil/a test for the people, even to
this very day. So whoever diverges from these core beliefs is tested

with Ahmad: his methodology and his creed.

Al-Imam Ahmad was a test. Whoever belittled him, this person’s
misguidance, filth, and evil was apparent; and whoever honored
and respected him, then the people used to know that this person
was from Ahl as-Sunnah. The reality is that no one honors
Ahmad except because of this (pure) belief and methodology.
Ahmad and others such as as-Shafit, Malik, and al-Awza? did
not gain such a lofty level of nobility in the eyes of the people

٠
3

AN ‏أضولٍ‎ or

except because they held firm to the Islamic Belief: (they)
respected it, called to it, and safeguarded it.

Therefore, know the status of the Sunnah; and recognize the
people of the Sunnah and their high position. Stick to their way
and tread their path. For indeed, by Allah, they were upon correct
upright guidance: The Book of Allah, the Sunnah of the
Messenger (#8), and the way of the Noble Companions, at the
head of them The Righteous Successors: (Aba Bakr, ‘Umar,
‘Uthman, and ‘Ali > ).

It is imperative that you hold firmly to this way and study this
small book: Foundations of the Sunnah. Perhaps we may study it
quickly, because it is not appropriate to go into too much detail
in these seminars!, but a simple study of this text with some
remarks, according to my ability, will suffice us if Allah wills.

1 ask Allah to give us understanding of His Religion, to make us
firm on His Straight Path, and that He protects you and me from
every path of misguidance and desires. I ask Allah to allow us to
benefit from this book and other than it from the books of al-

Islam, especially the books of ‘Agidah, the belief of ‏أطخ‎ as-
Sunnah and those who stick to the way of the Companions, _

دمج هه 35 مو هى

' This book was originally a series of classes given by the Noble
Scholar Dr. Rabi* bin Had? al-Madkhali.

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

English Text of Foundations of the Sunnah

l-Imam al-Lalika’t—may Allah, The Most High, have
mercy on him—said: ‘Alt bin Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah

bin as-Sakar? narrated to us, and he said: ‘Uthm4n bin
Ahmad bin as-Sammak narrated to us, and he said: Abd
Muhammad al-Hasan bin ‘Abdul-Wahhab bin Abi? al-‘Anbar
narrated to us reading from his book in the month of Rabi’ ‏عله‎
‎Awwal in the year of 293 of the Islamic Calendar, and he said
Abd Ja‘far Muhammad bin Sulayman al-Mingari al-Basri narrated
to us, and he said ‘Abdtis bin Malik al-‘Attar narrated to me, and
he said I heard Aba ‘Abdullah Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Hanbal—may Allah, The Most High, have mercy on him—say:

The Foundations of the Sunnah with us: Holding firmly to
the way of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (38) and
taking them as an example. (It is to) leave off innovations, for
indeed every innovation is misguidance. (Also it includes) leaving
off debating and argumentation, not sitting with the people of

desires; it is to abandon debating and argumentation in the

religion.

The Sunnah with us are narrations of the Messenger of Allah
(#8). It is the tafstr and clarification of the Qur'an. There 1s no
analogy in the Sunnah; examples should not be placed forth for it.
It is not reached with the intellect nor desires; rather it ts
emulation and leaving off desires.

From the binding Sunnah—which if anyone left any part of it,
not accepting it and not believing in it, would not be from its
people—is the belief in al-Qadar (The Divine Decree), the good
and the bad of it, attesting to and believing in the prophetic
reports that have been narrated about it. It is not to be asked why
or how, rather it is only believing and affirming them.

Whoever does not know the explanation of a particular hadith, or
whose intellect does not allow him to understand it, then it is

مر

Cum

—— Ds

Alt ‏و‎

صول السام

sufficient for him to simply submit and believe, because the
matter has been perfected for him; such as the hadith of “as-Sadiq
al-Masdtiq” (The Truthful, The Believed), describing the Divine
Decree, and other prophetic narrations that deal with the Divine
Decree; and such as the narrations that affirm that Allah will be
seen in the Hereafter, all of them, even if they may find it difficult
to fathom or consider it repugnant to the ears, (note: details are
forthcoming), but it is only upon you to have absolute faith in
them, not rejecting one letter from any of these narrations or
others that have been reported by the reliable narrators.

(iron the Foundations of the Suonunaln): Not to debate or
argue with anyone, and not (even) to learn argumentation,
because indeed disputing about the Divine Decree, Seeing Allah,
The Qur’an, and other than that from the aspects of the Creed, is
disliked and prohibited. Whoever behaves in this manner, even if
he is right in his argumentation, is not from Ahl as-Sunnah until
he leaves off debating and submits to and believes in the
narrations. [he Qur’an is the Uncreated Speech of Allah and no
one should be too weak to declare it to be uncreated. For indeed
Allah’s Speech is from Him, not separate from Him; and nothing
of Allah’s Attributes or His Speech is created, Also, be cautious
of debating with anyone who has innovated concerning this affair
or anyone who says his recitation is created or other than this.
And whoever hesitates in this matter and says “I don’t know
whether it is created or not created, it is just the Speech of Allah,”
this person has fallen into innovation, and he is just like the one
who says “It (the Qur’4n) is created.” But rather The Qur’4n is
the Uncreated Speech of Allah.

(From. the Foundations of the ‏نيك يتك‎ To believe that Allah
will be seen on the Day of Judgment, as it has been related from
the Prophet Muhammad ($8) in authentic prophetic narrations.
Also, to believe that the Prophet saw his Lord, for indeed it has
been authentically narrated by Qatadah from ‘Ikrimah, who
reported from Ibn ‘Abbas. Also al-Hakam bin Aban reported this
The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

from ‘Tkrimah, who reported it from Ibn ‘Abbas. Likewise, “Alt
bin Zayd related from Ydsuf bin Mihran who reported this from
Ibn ‘Abbas (#»). We understand this hadith according to its
apparent meaning, as it comes reported from the Prophet (#8). To
speak about this affair (using theoretical rhetoric) is an
innovation; rather we believe in its apparent meaning as it has
been reported, and we do not debate anyone pertaining to this

affair.

(From the Foundations of the Summnah): To believe in the
Scales on the Day of Judgment, as it comes in the hadith, “A slave
will be weighed on the Day of Judgment, and he will not equal
the weight of a mosquito’s wing.” The slaves’ actions will be
weighed as well, as it comes in a narration; believing in it,
affirming it, opposing anyone who rejects it, and shunning
argumentation with such a person.

(From The Foundations of the Suonunalh): To firmly believe
and affirm that Allah will speak to the slaves on the Day of

Judgment with no interpreter between them.

(From the Foundations of the Sunnah): To believe in the
Hawd (the Prophetic Fountain) and that the Messenger (#8) has a
Hawd that his Ummah will come to on the Day of Judgment; its
width is like its length that is equal to a month’s journey, its
vessels are like the number of stars in the sky, as it has been
authentically reported in various narrations.

(From the Foundations of the Sumnah is): The belief in the
punishment of the grave, and that this Ummah will be tested in
their graves, and will be asked about al- Iman, al-Islam, their Lord
and their Prophet, and that Munkar and Nakir will come, as
Allah wills and wants, and to have firm belief in this.

(Firomn the Foundations of the Suomnalh): To believe in the
Prophetic Intercession on the Day of Judgment, and to believe

Pozo 1O

Pio 1 1

AN ‏أضول‎ oid

that people will exit the Hell-Fire after being scorched and
becoming charcoal, then they will be commanded to be brought
to a river at the door of Paradise, as it comes in the narration.

This is (all in a manner that) Allah wills. So it is only for us to
believe and hold this to be truth.

(Fron the Foundations of the Suomnalh): To believe that al-
Masih ad-Dayjal will appear, written between his eyes (the word)
“Kafir.” Also to believe in the prophetic narrations which have
been reported about this, and to believe that this will indeed
occur.

(From the Foundations of the Summah): 1٠ believe that ‘Isa

(Jesus), the son of Mary (#8) will descend and kill the Dayal at
the gate of Ludd.

(From the Foundations of the Sumnah is to believe that):
Faith is speech and action; it increases and decreases; as it has
been narrated in the prophetic narration, where the Messenger
(38) said: “The most complete of the believers in faith are the best
of them in their manners.” [Collected by Abii Dawid, The Book of

Sunnah, Chapter of the Proof of the Increase and Decrease of Im4n, no.

(4682)]

(irom the Foundations of the Summnah is to believe that):
Whosoever abandons the prayer has disbelieved. There is no
other action, the abandonment of which is tantamount to
disbelief, other than the prayer. Whosoever abandons the prayer
has disbelieved, and Allah has made it permissible for him to be

executed.

(From the Foundations of the Sunnah): To believe that the
best of this Ummah, after Prophet Muhammad (#8), is Aba Bakr
as-Siddigq, then ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, then ‘Uthm4n bin ‘AffAn;
we give precedence to these three, just as the Companions of the

Messenger of Allah (#8) used to give precedence to them, and
The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

they did not differ in this affair. After these three companions are
Ashab ash-Shira al-Khamsah (The Five Companions of
Consultation): ‘Alf bin Abi Talib, Talhah, az~Zubayr, ‘Abdur-
Rahman bin ‘Awf, Sa‘d bin Abi Wagqqas, and all of them were
qualified to be the ruler and all of them were Imams. This 1s
based on the narration of (‘Abdullah) bin ‘Umar when he said:
“While the Messenger of Allah (98) was alive and the
Companions were large in number, we used to give precedence to
Abé Bakr, then ‘Umar, and then ‘Uthm4n; after that, we were
quiet.” Then after Ashab ash-Shiira, are the Companions of the
Battle of Badr from those who migrated from Mecca to al-
Madinah, and then the Ansar who participated in the Battle of
Badr, all based on the level of the migration and precedence in al-
Islam.

Then after these companions, the best of the people were the
remaining Companions of the Messenger of Allah (48): the
generation he was sent to. Everyone who accompanied the
Messenger (#8) for a year, a month, a day, an hour, or merely saw
him, he is from the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (3)
all based on the degree of his companionship with the Messenger
of Allah (#8), the time he spent with him, heard from him, or
looked at him. So the Companion with the lowest level is better
than anyone from any other generation that has not seen the
Messenger of Allah (#8) even if they were to meet Allah with
every righteous action. These Companions that accompanied the
Messenger of Allah (#8) saw him, heard from him, and even those
who saw him for one hour and believed in him, then based on
this companionship, they are better than anyone from the
generations that followed, even if they did every act of good.

(From the Foundations of the Sunnah): To hear and obey the
Muslim Rulers, whether they are pious or wicked. Whoever gains
leadership and the people gather and unite around him, and are
pleased with him, and likewise whoever received power by force,

he is called ‘Amir al-Mu’minin’ (the Leader of the Believers).

Pape 1 Z
Pipe AB

(From the Foundations of the Sumnah is to believe that):
Military Expeditions are to take place with the Muslim rulers,
whether pious or wicked, until the Day of Judgment, and it
should not be abandoned. Also, the division of the spoils of war
and the carrying out of the legislative punishments is the
responsibility of the Muslim ruler, and no one has the right to
slander or contest them in the least. Paying the obligatory charity
to them is permissible, and whoever pays the charity to them,
then this is sufficient for him, whether the ruler is pious or
wicked. Likewise, the Friday Prayer is to be performed as two
complete units behind the Muslim ruler, or the one he (.e., the
ruler) has placed there. Whoever repeats his prayer, after praying
with the ruler, he is an innovator who has abandoned the
narrations, opposed the prophetic Sunnah, and does not have any
portion of the virtues of the Friday (Prayer) in the least; this is as
long as he does not see (i.e., believe) that the Friday prayer is to
be performed behind the Muslim ruler, whether pious or wicked.
The Sunnah is to pray with them, two units of prayer, and to
worship Allah, believing that these units of prayer are complete;
no doubt should be in your heart about this at all.

Whoever rebels against the Muslim ruler that the citizens have
gathered behind (giving him the pledge of allegiance) and
affirmed his authority, by whatever means it was, whether they
were pleased or if he took over by force, this rebel has broken the
unity of the Muslims and opposed the prophetic narrations. If he
were to die in this state, he would die the death of al-Jahiliyyah
(the pre-Islamic period).

It is not permissible for anyone to fight or revolt against the ruler.
Whoever does this is an innovator who has veered away from the

Sunnah and the Straight Path.

It is permissible to fight against thieves and those that revolt and
rebel against the Muslim Leadership. If a person or his wealth is
The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

at risk of being attacked, he is allowed to defend himself with all
means. But he cannot seek out the agoressor if he were to escape.
Rather at this point, it is the responsibility of the Muslim ruler.

A person can only defend himself while the assailant is in the
state of attack, without the intention of killing the attacker, and
this is only with the intent of defending one’s life and property. If
he happens to kill the thief in the process, then may the mercy of
Allah be removed from the dead thief. If the person who was
attacked dies in the process of defending himself and his wealth,
it is desired that he will be a martyr as it comes in the prophetic
narrations.

All of the prophetic narrations concerning this matter, have only
commanded with defending oneself, and have not commanded to
kill the aggressor, or to follow behind him (after he escapes) or to
execute him while he is subdued or injured. If the intruder is
taken as a captive, he is not to be killed and the legal punishment
is not to be established upon him (by the one who has him
captive). Rather the victim raises the issue to the one given
authority (i.e., the ruler) and he is to judge in the affair.

(Firomn, the Foundations of the Sumnah is that): We do not
declare anyone from the Muslims to enter the Paradise or the
Hell-Fire, based on any action that they have done. We hope for
the righteous and fear for him (at the same time). Likewise, we
fear for the sinner and desire that Allah has mercy on him.

Whoever meets Allah and has repented from a sin that obligated
for him the Fire, and has not persisted upon that sin, Allah will
accept his repentance, and will pardon him; that is because Allah
accepts the repentance from His servants and forgives the sins.

Whoever meets Allah, and the legal punishment has been
established upon him, that punishment serves as expiation for him
as it has been reported from the Messenger (#8). And whoever

Payot A

2 م9

meets Allah persistent upon committing a sin that obligated for
him a punishment, and has not repented from it, his affair is with
Allah; if He wills, He will punish him, and if He wills He will
forgive him. And whosoever meets Allah as a disbeliever, then

Allah will punish him, and will not forgive him.

The legislation of ar-rajm (stoning) is true and correct for the
fornicator who is or has been married, whether they have
confessed, or sufficient proof has been established against him.
The Prophet (8) has implemented the legal punishment of
stoning, as did the Rightly Guided Successors.

Whoever belittles one of the Companions of the Messenger of
Allah (38) or hates him, either because of something this
Companion did, or by mentioning his shortcomings, then he is an
innovator until he makes supplication for all of the Companions,
asking Allah to bestow His mercy upon them, and his heart does
not contain any negative feelings toward them.

Hypocrisy is disbelief: it is to disbelieve in Allah, worshipping
other than Him, while outwardly professing to be Muslim, as was
the case with the Hypocrites during the time of the Messenger of
Allah (#8). As for the narrations that have come and the statement
of the Prophet Muhammad (38): “There are three characteristics,
whoever possesses all of them is a hypocrite,” this (wording) is
understood as strict and stern speech, but we (still) narrate them
as they have come, without explaining them.

Also the statement of the Prophet (32) “Do not return after me,
as misguided disbelievers, striking at each other’s necks.” [Musnad
Ahmad] Also the hadith “If two Muslims meet with their swords,
the dead one and the killer are in the fire.” [Collected by al-Bukhari}

Also the statement of the Prophet (#8) “To insult a Muslim is
wickedness, and to fight him is disbelief.” [Collected by al-Bukhart]
Also, “Whoever says to his brother ‘O disbeliever,’ then it returns
The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

to one of them.” [Collected by al-Bukhari] Also like the hadith,
“disbelief in Allah is freeing oneself from his kinship, even if it is
remote” [Declared Hasan by al-Albani], and other authentic prophetic
narrations such as these that have been preserved.

We submit to these texts, even if we do not know their meanings.
We do not speak concerning them, debate about them, or explain
them except like that which has been narrated. We do not reject
them except with that which is most correct or most deserving
from amongst them ‏,.ع.1)‎ the narrations).

(From the Foundations of the Suonunalh): The Belief that
Heaven and Hell have (already) been created, as it has been
narrated that the Messenger (#8) said: “I entered Paradise and saw
a palace,” and “I saw al-kawthar”, “and I looked in Paradise and
saw most of its inhabitants were...”, “ and I looked in the Fire
and saw...” Whoever denies that (Heaven and Hell) both have
been created, he has belied the Qur’4n and prophetic narrations;
and I do not deem him to be from those who believe in Heaven

and Hell. -

(Firom the Foundations of the Summah is to believe that):
Whoever dies from the Muslims, worshipping Allah alone, he is
to be prayed over (the Janazah prayer), and forgiveness is to be
sought for him. No sin, whether minor or major, deprives him of
the right to be prayed over and for people to seek forgiveness for

him. Rather his affair is with Allah (38).

‎CRED‏ 36 ومو هى

‎Figo 6

Pogo 7

The Explanation of Foundations of the Sunnah’

]-Imam al-Lalika’i—may Allah, The Most High, have
mercy on him—said: ‘Alt bin Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah

bin as-Sakart narrated to us, and he said: ‘Uthm4n bin

Ahmad bin as-Samma&k narrated to us, and he said: Aba
Muhammad al-Hasan bin ‘Abdul-Wahh4b bin Abt? al-‘Anbar
narrated to us reading from his book in the month of Rabi ‏عله‎
‎Awwal in the year of 293 of the Islamic Calendar, and he said
Abé Ja'far Muhammad bin Sulayman al-Mingart al-Basrt narrated
to us, and he said Abdis bin Malik al-‘Attar narrated to me, and
he said I heard Aba ‘Abdull4h Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Hanbal—may Allah, The Most High, have mercy on him—say*:

* Translator’s Note: In order to facilitate easy reading, footnotes
have been used to separate the words of al-Imam Ahmad bin
Hanbal (the author of Foundations of the Sunnah), from those of
Dr. Rabi’ al-Madkhalt (the annotator). Henceforth, the words of
al-Imam Ahmad are located above the footnote line, while the
annotations of al-Madkhali are beneath the line. Surely with Allah

is all success.

3 Dr. Rabi’ bin Had? al-Madkali’s Explanation: Here, al-Lalik4’s
presented his chain of narration connecting to al-Im4m Ahmad.
This chain of narration meets with the second chain, meaning
that this chain was also mentioned by al-Lalika’t in his work
Explanation of the Fundamental Beliefs of the People of the
sunnah. Likewise, this chain has been presented by Ibn Abi Ya‘lA
in his Tabaqat. These are two different manuscripts with two
different chains of narrations but together each one of them
strengthens the other and furthermore affirms the ascription of
this work to al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, the Im4m of Ahl as-
Sunnah. Likewise, ash-Sheikh al-Alban? found a transcript in a
collection of works in the Thahiriyyah Library and copied it with

his own pen and 1 think this manuscript connects to al-Imam

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

The Foundations of the Sunnah with us are holding firmly to the

way of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ($%)*taking

them as an example.°

Ahmad from another group of narrators, and Allah knows best.
(See appendix for the chain of narrations of the manuscript which
al-Albant verified.) One should look to the different chains of

narrators and compare between them. If the opportunity arrives

we will do that, if Allah wills.

* After connecting his chain to al-Im4m Ahmad, he said [The
Foundations of the Sunnah with us are holding firmly to the way
of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ($8)|. That which
the Companions of the Prophet (#) were upon is the standard
for those who are seeking the truth. They hold firmly to this
fundamental principle, for indeed it is the way of the Messenger
(#8) and his Noble Companions (#); they were, unquestionably,
upon pure guidance. They held firmly to the Book of Allah and
the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (3) in their creed, worship,
interactions, and all their other affairs, especially ‘Aqidah. So al-
Imam Ahmad—may Allah have mercy upon him—is pointing
out this great fundamental principle, which no part of the
Religion separates from, especially the affairs of Islamic Belief.

He says [The Foundations of the Sunnah with us are holding
firmly to the way of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah
(#8).] This is in opposition to people of imnovation; they only
follow their desires and rely upon their corrupt intellects, while
claiming that they are depending upon the Arabic language or
other corrupt measurements and analogies. As for al-Imam
Ahmad and those who preceded him from the Noble
Companions, their successors, and the scholars of al-Islam, the
religion which they held firm to is the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (48), especially in affairs of the
Islmic Creed. They did not depart from these sources. In that is
the straight upright guidance.

138

8

9 مر ©

5” [Taking them as an example|: Taking the Companions of
Muhammad (#8) as an example, undeniably they are the example.
With this statement, al-Im4m Ahmad is hinting at the prophetic
narration: “It is upon you to stick to my way, and the way of the
rightly guided successors; bite down on it with your molar teeth,

and beware of newly invented matters.” [Collected by at-Titmidhi,
The Book of Knowledge, hadith no. (2676), graded Hasan Sahih; Abi Dawad,
The Book of as-Sunnah hadith no. (4607); Ibn Majah, Section: Following the
Sunnah of the Rightly Guided Successors hadith nos. (42, 43), al-Albani
graded it to be authentic; Musnad Ahmad, with the verification of Ahmad
Shakir and Hamzah az-Zayn, from the hadith of al-Irb4d bin Sartyah, hadith
no. 17079]

Likewise he is pointing to the hadith of the saved group when the
Messenger (2) informed that: “This Ummah will separate into
seventy-three different groups; all of them are in the Hell-Fire
except one.” They said: ‘What is the saved group?’ He said:

“Those who are upon what I and my Companions are upon.”
| Collected by at-Tirmidhi, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (2641), al-Albani
graded it to be Hasan |

Also, the Messenger (38) said in another narration: “I have left
you upon the clear path, its night is like its day, and no one strays
from it except that he will be destroyed.” [Collected by Ibn Majah, the
Introduction, hadith no. (43), al-Albani graded it to be authentic; Musnad
Ahmad, with the verification of Ahmad Shakir and Hamzah az-Zayn: the
hadith of al-‘Irbad bin Sariyah, hadith no. (1707); al-Albani also mentioned it
in as-Silsilah as-Sahithah hadith no. (937)]

The Companions held firmly to this clear path; we do not find
from amongst them anyone who deviated from the straight path.
However, there were those who went astray after them, towards
the end of the time period of the Companions, and likewise in the
middle of the time period of (the successors of the Companions).
After that, religious innovation began to become widespread.
The Khawarij and the extreme R4fidhah arose at the end of the
Caliphate of “Ali (<%). So he sent ‘Abdullah bin ‘AbbAs (<) to

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

C350) FE ‏دم هه‎

debate them. Following that, they raised their swords against the
Muslims; ‘Ali fought and killed them as the Messenger of Allah
(#2) commanded. All of the Companions who were alive at that
time agreed with ‘Ali, not opposing him in the least. Therefore,
the point that we are emphasizing is that taking the Companions
as an example is the way of safety and success; tt 1s the ship of
shelter and security. These Companions witnessed the descending
of revelation and attained the correct understanding of the Qur'an
and the Sunnah. They learned the correct way to apply it, all
directly from the Messenger of Allah (3). Therefore they are the
example. For this reason, the Prophet Muhammad (#2) mentioned
“That which I and my Companions ate upon” and he said: “hold
firm to my way, and the way of the rightly guided successors.”

Pape ZO

Pape 21

اجتنابٌ البدّع و ‎SL‏ منها

Avoiding Innovation and Being Cautious of It
t is to leave off innovations®, for indeed every innovation is
misguidance.’ (Also it includes ) leaving off debating and

6 Likewise from the fundamental principles of the Sunnah is
[Abandoning Innovation]: to avoid and leave off all newly
invented matters in the religion, because with innovations comes
destruction. The different deviant groups and sects that fell into
innovation, the Messenger of Allah (8) threatened all of them
with being in the Hell-Fire. This is because they embarked upon
the path of the Shayatin.

As Allah—The Most High—said:

‎od‏ ره
-

‎of 2774 7 or alt £ wk ? 7 17 3
‏يكم‎ Sas ‏ولا تَنَيِعوأ السبل‎ ASE bie hs Thy

‎PR + ‏ل ار‎ 02 4 Zu ot > & 7
“And verily, this is my Straight Path, so follow it, and follow not
(other) paths, for they will separate you away from His Path.
This He has ordained for you that you may become al-
Muttaqfin” [Surah Al-An‘4m:153]

‎Also it comes in the prophetic narration: “The Messenger of
Allah drew a straight line, and said ‘This is the way of Allah’.
Then he drew lines on the left and right of this straight upright
line, and said “These are paths, at the head of each of them is a

‎Shaytan calling to it.” | Musnad Ahmad, from the narrations of ‘Abdullah
bin Mas‘ud, hadith no. (4143), Ahmad Shakir graded it’s chain to be

‎authentic. |

‎So whoever leaves the Straight Path in his creed, his worship, his
jurisprudence, or the likes of these matters has indeed fallen into
one of these paths, which at the head of each one of them is a

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

devil calling to it. As a result, be very aware of innovation and
misguidance, because unquestionably the Messenger of Allah (33)
warned against it, “Whoever innovates in this affair of ours, that

which is not from it, it is rejected.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book
of as-Sulh, hadith no. 2697; Muslim, The Book of al- Aqdiyah, hadith no.
(1718)|

The Messenger of Allah (#8) also warned from the people of

innovation. He recited the verse:
ao ‏م‎ GA Grad ‏ور‎ Bro 47578 447 77% “2
Shs ‏الكتب‎ Age CUS EGNe ‏منه‎ CASH Ale ‏أنزل‎ < call ‏هو‎ +

‎Bor ,‏ ساس با سا سا ‎Les‏ رد سم وح 42

‏ع فت ‎te‏ مك
مَتَسَنِبِهَاتُ ‎OM CE‏ فى 5 ‎Sap‏ يع مم ما به ونه يمه ‎AN‏

‏سس سه رم آذ 2

‏أب تأوِلِ- ‎Aas AL‏ إلا أل وك سِحون ف الْعِا ‎oa Cale Shou‏

‎) )0( SWI ‏ِل‎ S666 xe ‏كل‎

‎“It is He Who has sent down to you (Muhammad ‏(ول‎ the Book
(this Qur’dn). In it are Verses that are entirely clear, they are the
foundations of the Book, and others not entirely clear. So as for
those in whose hearts there is a deviation (from the truth) they
follow that which is not entirely clear thereof, seeking al-Fitnah
(polytheism and trials, etc.), and seeking for its hidden meanings,

‎but none knows its hidden meanings save Allah.”
[Surah Alt ‘Imran: 7]

‎When the Messenger of Allah (#8) recited this verse he said: “Tf
you see the one following that which is not clear from it then
they ate the ones whom Allah has mentioned, so beware of

‎them.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of at-Tafsir, hadith no. (4947);
Muslim, The Book of Knowledge hadith no. (2665) |

‎Allah has clarified that those who have deviance in their heart
seek fitnah, evil and corruption:

‎72 20 MY On

‎7774 7 trr Bor » . 7 fe Be
f Ral ‏لبه منه أبتعاء‎ LE in ‏في كلويهم رَيْعٌ‎ BAN OG ¥

‎Pape BZ

5ر9

ZN Syl td

“So as for those in whose hearts there is a deviation (from the
truth) they follow that which is not entirely clear thereof, seeking
al-Fitnah.”

You will not find an innovator except that he follows that which
is not entirely clear, whether it is from the Speech of Allah, the
speech of the Messenger ($8) or from the speech of the scholars
of the Religion. All of this is in an attempt for him to misguide
the people using these false doubts that he follows.
Unfortunately, this 15 the case both in the past and the present;
you will not see a person who has deviated from the way of Ahl
as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah, except that he follows these doubts and
strives to place corruption and evil doubts in the hearts of the
people. We ask Allah to grant us, as well as you, the ability to
hold firmly to His Book and to avoid innovation, doubts, and
desires.

’ As for the statement of al-Im4m Ahmad [And evety innovation
is misguidance] this is derived from the hadith where the Prophet
(38) stated: “And beware of newly invented matters, for indeed
every newly invented matter is an innovation and every innovation
is misguidance.” [Collected by Muslim]

Every innovation, big or small, is musguidance. Anyone who says
anything other than this is in direct opposition to the clear
prophetic text, which states that ‏للد‎ innovation is musguidance. In
the majority of the Prophet's (#8) religious sermons, or all of
them, he used to say: “Indeed the best speech is the Speech of
Allah. The best guidance is the guidance of Muhammad. The
worst of all matters are the newly invented ones. Every newly
invented matter is an innovation and every innovation is

misguidance.” [Collected by Muslim, The Book of the Friday Prayer, hadith
no. (867)]

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

argumentation, not sitting with the people of desires®; it is to
abandon debating and skirmishing in the religion.

This was the sermon of the Prophet (#8), with which if he
delivered it, he would become very angry, raising his voice; his
face would redden as if he were warning an army, saying: “The

enemy has attacked you in the morning or in the evening hours.”
| Collected by Muslim |

This is due to the great seriousness of innovation and its danger
to the Ummah, because it is misguidance. Whoever says that
there is good and bad innovation has directly opposed the
generality of the statement of the one who does not speak from
his own desire (#8). It is greatly unfortunate that there are those
who even divide innovation into that which is obligatory,
recommended, hated, (permissible), and impermissible, the five
legislative rulings. This is an error, because that which 15
obligatory is not confirmed except with proof. So if it 15
established to be obligatory with proof, it is not an mnovation.
Likewise, if there is proof that establishes a particular act to be
recommended, it is not an innovation, rather it is Sunnah.
Therefore this division is clearly incorrect.

5 From the Principles of the Sunnah is [leaving off debating and
argumentation, not sitting with the people of desires.] Meaning:
do not debate a great deal. Likewise, do not argue except in the
situation where you see that it will be a benefit to the one you are
debating, an individual that you have affirmed wants to attain the

truth. As Allah states:

40 > 2 ‏سرح سح سى ل صخل‎ 0 i a, ‏لسن سس‎ A“ ae

”
ب

“47 4

2 > < ساوح 7 ووس >< ب+.ى اس 1“ 2 2 ‎«a eae‏
هى احسن إن ريك هو أعام يمن ‎hee‏ عن ‎cabs‏ وهو ‎lel‏

Bd

3

“Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and beautiful
preaching, and argue with them in a way that is better, indeed
your Lord knows best the one who strays from His Path, and He

knows best who are the ones who are rightly guided.”
| An-Nahl: 125]

As for the person who debates with the intention of proving you
wrong and defeating you, do not debate with him. This is from
the blameworthy argumentation in the religion; do not debate or
argue in such a situation. May Allah bless you all.

The wise person puts things in their proper places. Therefore, the
person who is in need of having a doubt removed, you should
clarify things to him with (wise) refutations and by dispelling his
falsities, but with wisdom and the best type of admonishment,
not with the goal of defeating or overcoming him. Rather, debate
with the goal of clarifying the truth and directing this person who
is seeking guidance.

As for the statement [not sitting with the people of desires] this is
because, most of time, sitting with the people of misguidance
leads to deviance. Many people are deceived by their knowledge
and intelligence. Consequently, they intermingle and live with the
people of innovation. As a result, Allah leaves them to themselves,
and then they fall into misguidance. This scenario is real and
tangible. Al-Imam Ibn Battah pointed this out when he said: “We
knew a people who used to insult and curse the people of
innovation, but then they began to sit and live with them. Then
they became from them.”

This situation is a reality in every time and place. Some major
individuals (even in our times) were deceived by themselves, so
sadly they fell into innovation. We do not want to mention their
names; they are well known amongst the students of knowledge.

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

From amongst the proofs to establish the principle, [not sitting
with the people of desires] is the statement of Allah:

0 3B? ‏ري‎ ofer > of ‏راض‎ 7 7

‎ae 0 fe “7‏ 4 و عو و . ‎a Y‏ ل( ‎٠. 4 ‘ 2 a‏ 2 1
¥ وإذا رأيت ‎oll‏ يخوضون فيه ‎Lhe‏ فاعرض ‎ape‏ > يخوضوأ في ‎Sade‏

‎C ov
“And when you (Muhammad 438) see those who engage in a false
conversation about Our Verses (of the Qut’4n) by mocking at

‎them, stay away from them till they turn to another topic...”
‏نس مقلم‎ 68],

‎Do not sit with them, because these people engage in false
conversations about the verses of Allah and they speak about

‎Allah without knowledge. Innovation 5 based upon both false

‎conversations surrounding Allah’s Religion and His Book, also by
ascribing this falsehood to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
Allah’s Messenger (#8). Therefore, it is obligatory to depart from
these people. As we have read, the Messenger (3) said: “If you see
the one following that which is not clear from it then they are the
ones whom Allah has mentioned, so beware of them.” [Ibid]

‎Also, the Prophet (#8) said: “There will be a people from my
Ummah, they will come to you with that which neither you nor

‎your forefathers were aware of, so beware of them.” [Collected by
Muslim, The Introduction, hadith no. (06)|

‎This is also from the prophetic text that warns from sitting with
the people of innovation. The ignorant people may be fooled by
their misguidance. As for you (.e., the strong student), you may
have knowledge, evidence, and proof. There is no problem for
you to invite them to the truth and clarify that which 1s correct.
But to sit with them, establishing love and friendship with them,
and that which resembles this behavior, this is a mistake that leads
to misguidance. And it is absolutely incumbent upon the one who
has a (sound) intellect to avoid this.

‎Pip 2O

7ر9

دمج هه 3 مو صى

Some of the Companions, such as Ibn Abbas, warned from sitting
with the people of innovation and desires. Also many of the
major scholars of the generation which followed the Companions,
such as Ayytib as-Sakhtiyant and Ibn Sitin—may Allah have
mercy on them—warned from them. There was even from
amongst them, the one who would not even listen to a person of
innovation, even if he proposed to read a hadith or recite a verse.
He would say to the individual: “No!” The man would ask, “Why
not, He would say: “My heart is not in my hands; I fear that
some type of trial will pierce my heart and I won’t be able to
remove it.”

There is nothing equal (and more cherished) than being safe from
fitnah (e., innovation, disbelief, hypocrisy, etc). No one should
put themselves in a situation where they can be tried and tested;
especially the one who knows himself to be weak.

The Explanation of ‏[ؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

a “ we nr 2 ٠ |
‏منزلة الشنة وعلاقها بالقرآن‎
The Status of the Sunnah and Its Relationship
with the Qur’an
A” the Sunnah with us are narrations of the Messenger of
[lah(#8).? It is the tafsir and clarification of the Qur'an.”

° As for the statement [The Sunnah with us are narrations of the
Messenger of Allah]: I pose the question: what is the Sunnah? Al-
Imam Ahmad says the Sunnah is narrations of the Messenger of
Allah (#8). This means his (#8) statements, actions, and tacit
approvals. Our sources from which we derive knowledge are the
Book of Allah and the Prophetic Sunnah. What is the Sunnah? It
is the narrations of the Messenger of Allah ($8), his statements,
actions, and tacit approvals, which Allah has obligated upon all of
us to cling firmly to and follow.

10 Al-Imam Ahmad says, as he. clarifies the status of the Sunnah
and its connection with the Qur’4n, [The Sunnah is the Tafsir
and clarification of the Qur’4n] as Allah says in His Noble

ur’ an:
Str ‏تيرم‎ hen fy VAI Sy er oe te TE 4
ay Sas wales cel) ‏للنّاس ما نزْل‎ oe] ‏الكر‎ da ‏وأنزلنا‎ 0
“,..and We have also sent down unto you (O Muhammad ‏ويه‎ the

reminder and the advice (the Qur’4n), that you may explain
clearly to men what is sent down to them.” [An-Nahl: 44]

Also, in another verse, Allah states:

SOer cen ‏برك و‎ ic. aherrs ‏ار‎
‎4#) ‏والرسول‎ ail ‏في سَىْء فردوه إل‎ Beet ‏فَإِن‎ #
“...(and) if you differ in anything amongst 70135517 ‏رقء‎ refer it to
Allah and His Messenger...” [An-Nisa: 59]

Pye ZS

و

To return a dispute back to Allah, it is to return it to the Book of
Allah. To return it to the Messenger (#8) it is to return it directly
to him in his lifetime, (8) but after his death it is to return to his
Sunnah (#8). For indeed the Sunnah is a source for mankind, a
reference. And just like the Qur’dn, the Sunnah can be used as a
proof in issues of ‘Aqidah, legislative rulings, halal and haram, and
all other affairs of the Religion, indeed it is a source like the
Qur’4n. For this reason, if a question was posed to the early
generation of Muslims pertaining to the ‘Aqidah or anything
other than that, they would respond based on what came to their
mind using either a verse from the Qur’4n or (a narration) from
the Sunnah, not separating between the two. An example of this
will come (later on) from situations involving ‘Umar, Abd Bakr,
Ibn ‘Umar, and other Companions (:#).

[It clarifies the Qur’An]: The Prophetic Sunnah clarifies and gives
detail to that which is general from Qur’an. It clarifies the
ambiguous, restricts the unrestricted, and specifies that which is
general. The Sunnah offers us details about the Salah, its times, its
description, its frequency, what we should recite, and what we
should say while bowing and prostrating. All of this is found in
the Sunnah. Allah says often in the Qur’4n:

{O85 ‏وءاثوأ‎ lat Lah
“Establish the Prayer and give the charity.”

The Sunnah clarifies these verses, providing detail. Thus, the
Sunnah gives clarity and detail to that which is general in the

Qur'an, specifying and restricting that which is not specific, as 7
Imam Ahmad said [The Sunnah is the Tafsir of the Qur’4n, i
clarifies the Qur’4n].

The Explanation of Usal As-Sunnah

There is no analogy in the Sunnah!!; examples should not be
SY ‏م‎

placed forth for it.” It is not reached with the intellect nor

desires,” rather it is emulation and leaving off desires.

11 [There is no analogy in the Sunnah]: Meaning there is no
analogy in the Religion of Allah, In the presence of a text there is
no analogy, and it is not opposed by any intellect, analogy,
opinion, or anything else. We have no other choice except but to
submit.

As Allah—The Most High—says:
( C4 ep ‏بير سر 72 141 7 سرت ع‎ A ‏ا‎ “0
Tene as hs SESS BE ORR ‏فلا وريّك لا‎ #

(@ GSAS Bets tle

“But no, by your Lord, they can have no Faith, until they make
you (O Muhammad 4) judge in all disputes between them, and
find in themselves no resistance against your decisions, and accept
(them) with full submission.” [An-Nisa: 65]

Some people go to extremes concerning the use of analogies, to
the point that this extremity leads them to reject texts, and they
may even say “This text opposes the fundamentals, and this text
opposes the usage of analogy,” falling into extremes in this issue.

With this principle, al-Im4m Ahmad is refuting the likes of these
people, because in certain unique cases analogy is used, but it 15, as
they say, like the dead meat that is only eaten during times of
complete necessity. Rather, Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah—may
Allah, The Most High, have mercy on him—mentioned in one of

his small works (entitled) Ma‘arij al-Wusdl in clarifying that the
Messenger (#8) explained the Primary and Secondary Affairs of

the Religion: “Based on (research and) examination, there is no
consensus except that we found a text to support it.” Likewise, no
group used (a correct) analogy except that there is a text with the
same meaning, but the people vary in their grasp of the (religious)

SO

3

7ر9

BAN Syl ‏شَرْحْ‎

texts. Only a small amount of people understood the text like al-
Imam Ahmad or (even) come close to his understanding. Because
of this, you find many scholars have used analogy correctly, with
the guidance of Allah. But with a more expansive study of the
Prophetic Sunnah, a text would be found in the Islamic
Legislation (about the same issue). This is because the Messenger
($8) clarified every aspect of the religion, the primary and
secondary affairs, and did not leave anything.

As Allah—The Most High—said:

€ x 0 ‏اه . ص‎ g
{2 ‏من‎ ASN Gly
“We have not neglected anything in the Book” [Al-An‘am: 38]

Also Allah’s Statement:

JS-c ‏و‎ ed Pe at Ca a CR ‏ا رسظءة | برسم‎ eh ‏وروم‎
‎ey “Ao, 74

{ Gey!

“...This day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed

My Favor upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your
religion...” [Al-M4’idah:3]

Our Religion is complete, free from deficiencies. Some people
exert great effort using analogies. Their analogy may be correct
and in agreement with the text, but there may be a legislative text
concerning the issue that has not reached them. If the person
(using analogy) were to have known of the text, he would have
left off the usage of analogy, and sufficed himself with seeking
proof from the text. There may come after him, a scholar who
studied the Sunnah from the different books of hadith, for
example Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High, have
mercy on him—and he finds that a particular consensus amongst
the scholars actually had a text to support it. So although the

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

consensus may have been correct and in agreement with the
legislative proofs, only if the text reached them, they would have
used it as a proof, but they did not find it. So there may be
scholars who came after them, who examined their works, such as
Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High, have mercy on
him—and other than him and found that there are authentic texts
narrated from the Prophet (#8) (to support them tn their
analogies and consensus). Also, these scholars found that there are
correct analogies, but there are narrations from the Noble

Messenger (#8), that they did not have knowledge of.

Hence, al-Imim Ahmad was very stern in refuting the usage of
analogy. He used to refute many affairs where it was claimed that
there is a consensus. And likewise, he used to refute those who say
that ‘the people have united upon such and such an issue. He
would respond by saying: “How do you know there is not a
difference of opinion concerning this issue?” Rather, say “I don't
know of any difference of opinion in such and such an issue, and

don’t say that the Ummah has united upon this issue!”

It is safer to say: “I don’t know any difference of opinion
concerning this issue,” because perhaps there 15 an opposing
opinion that just has not reached you, or you have not come
ACLOSS.

12 Al-Im4m Ahmad says: [examples should not be placed forth for

it.] In the presence of a clear text, submit!

As Allah—The Most High—says:

“But no, by your Lord, they can have no Faith, until they make
you (O Muhammad3§) judge in all disputes between them, and

32

SS

find in themselves no resistance against your decisions, and accept
(them) with full submission.” [An-Nis4: 65]

If someone narrates to you an authentic or sound narration, do
not say “By Allah, By Allah,” and then begin to put forth
examples. Abi Hurayrah («&) mentioned this same principle, as it
is found in the introduction of Sunan Ibn Majah. He said: “AI-
Wud@' is legislated upon anyone who eats that which fire has

touched,” [Introduction of Ibn Majah, hadith no. (22), Book of Purification
hadith no. (485); at-Tirmidhi, The Book of Purification hadith no. (79), al-
Albant graded it hasan |

So he narrated this hadith that commands the one who eats that
which fire has touched to perform wudd’. At this point one of the
Companions said: “What about boiled water, do I perform wud@’
because of it?”

Aba Hurayrah said:“O son of my brother, if a hadith from the
Messenger of Allah reaches you do not put forth examples.”

Meaning, it is not upon you except but to submit. This is a key

principle—may Allah bless you.

13 [It is not reached with the intellect or desires] rather it is only
reached by narrations. If you want the Sunnah and you want
guidance, then it is a must that you study and learn the Religion.
If a prophetic text reaches you, use (sound) intelligence and try to
understand it.

The Prophet (8) said: “Whomsoever All&h wants good for, He

gives him understanding in the Religion.” [Collected by al-Bukhari,
The Book of Knowledge, hadith no. (71); Muslim, The Book of Charity,
hadith no. (1037)]

The Explanation of Us&l As-Sunnah

But if you want to speak about Allah’s Religion without any text
and without any Sunnah, then this is (a form of) speaking about
Allah without knowledge. Allah says:

اي ‎porter oF 7° 7? fe 778 L 27778 wp lbe 7b,‏ 97 اح ساس

SM ‏والبتى بغير‎ AY ‏ماظهر ينها وما بِطن‎ SG) ‏حرم‎ LS}
4 )2( ‏ألم 1تقوة‎ EISHAL ‏لك رامال بريد‎
“Say (O Muhammad 48): ‘(But) the things that my Lord has
indeed forbidden are al-Faw4hish (great evil sins, every kind of
unlawful sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed openly or
secretly, sins (of all kinds), unrighteous oppression, joining
partners (in worship) with Allah for which He has given no
authority, and saying things about Allah of which you have no
knowledge.” [Al-‘Araf: 33]

Thus, it is imperative that the Muslim restricts himself (to the
texts) in affairs of creed, worship, and halal and haram, except
with text. As for affairs of the duny4, work hard. As the Prophet

(38) said: “You know best concetning your worldly affairs.”
[Collected by Muslim, The Book of Virtues, hadith no, (2363) |

The fundamental ruling concerning affairs of Religion is that it is
impermissible except with permission from the Islamic legislation.
So if you entered into the Religion of Allah with your intellect,
and followed your desires, and spoke concerning Allah without
knowledge, then certainly this is from the worst sins, and
sometimes it is even greater than shirk (associating partners with
Allah in worship) as Ibn al-Qayyim stated while explaining the
verse:

رح بل 77 77 ‎Pr DO A oe‏ “سح شح سرح را ‎OF‏ يح سا لل
# فل إِنَما حرم و11 ‎gi ARG ASS, wis‏
‎AILS of‏ ما ل ‎Ke‏ بو ‎ES HL‏ اهما ا علوت ‎CO‏
‎“Say (O Muhammad 38): 0 the things that my Lord has‏
‎indeed forbidden are al-Faw4hish (great evil sins, every kind of‏

SO

جم جه 35 مو 3(

unlawful sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed openly or
secretly, sins (of all kinds), unrighteous oppression, joining
partners (in worship) with Allah for which He has given no
authority, and saying things about Allah of which you have no
knowledge.” [Al-‘Araf: 33]

He said: “This verse moves gradually from the lowest to the
highest, so the greatest is to speak about Allah without
knowledge. This is greater than shirk, because it includes shirk
and other than it. Indeed shirk is not except from the statements
of the people of falsehood and misguidance.”

Therefore, be extremely cautious of being decetved by your
intellect, and so-called intelligence and understanding, leading you
to speak about Allah’s Religion based on desires. Rather to truly
understand these texts is to do as the Companions and their
Successors did: [it is following and leaving off desires]. Do not
allow one’s intellect or one’s desires to take control over the
religion, rather be one who follows, leaving off desires and

submitting to Allah, The Lord of the all the Worlds.

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

‎ole‏ بالقدر خيره و شرّه
‎The Belief in the Divine Decree, the Good and‏

‎| Bad of it

‎| ieee the Binding Sunnah—which if anyone left any part of it,
not accepting it and not believing in it, 1s not from its
people—is the belief in al-Qadar (The Divine Decree)", the good
and bad of it, attesting to and believing in the prophetic reports

‎'4 Pay very close attention to this point; this paragraph is very
important. Here al-Imam Ahmad 15 going to describe to us
certain fundamental principles, which whoever leaves them off is
not from AhI as-Sunnah: he leaves the circle of Sunnah to
innovation. Therefore, pay close attention!

‎[From the Binding Prophetic Tradition, which if anyone left any
aspect of it]: If anyone leaves all or most of it, then this is a great
trial.

‎As for the statement [Not accepting it and not believing in it, is
not from its people]: Whoever refuses it and does not believe in
it, he is not from Ahl as-Sunnah. Not being from Ahl as-Sunnah
means to be from the people of innovation and misguidance—
Allah’s refuge is sought. Are you all aware (dear readers) that
innovation is divided into major, minor, shirk and shad
(deviation from the straight path) as well as trials and tests? As
Ibn al-Qayyim mentions: “Innovation derives from disbelief and
(also) leads to it.” Innovation is built upon (following) desires
and misguidance. Allah says:

‎bj se ES LEM as Bay Sly

‎gee ‏ميخ >سس‎ aL oe ee fer yo ne Aver

‎{WO SSE ‏مِنْبَحَدِ أله أقلا‎ aay ‏فم‎ he BES
“Have you seen him who takes his own lust (vain desires) as his
ilah (god), and Allah knowing (him as such), left him astray, and
sealed his hearing and his heart, and put a cover on his sight?

‎3O

57

Who then will guide him after Allah? Will you not then
remember? [ Al-Jathiyah: 23]

Thus we seek refuge in Allah from following desires. For this
reason, the People of the Sunnah named the people of innovation,
“AAl a-Ahwa” (1.e. the people of desires), because they oppose
Allah’s religion and follow their desires. Examples of these people
include: the Khawarij, the R4afidhah, the Mu'tazilah, the
Jahmiyyah, the Murji’ah, the Safiyyah, the Hultliyyah (the people
who believe in incarnation), the people of wahdatu al-wujiid
(pantheism), the people who worship graves and others like them.
All of this innovation and misguidance opposes the Book of
Allah, the Sunnah of the Prophet (#8), as well as the fundamental
principles of the Sunnah.

The first thing al-Imém Ahmad mentioned is [Belief in the
Divine Decree.] The one who does not believe in the Divine
Decree is not from Ahl as-Sunnah; rather he has left off an
essential component of the fundamentals of the Sunnah. Believing
in the divine decree is a pillar of al- Iman. Both the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of the Messenger (8) point to this fact.

Allah 69 states:

“ >» >% bag
“and all shings We have vecorded with numbers 23 a record) in
a Clear Book.” [Y4-Sin: 12]

Every situation that occurs, Allah has complete knowledge of it,
and He (8%) recorded it in a-Lahw al-Mahfiith (The Preserved
Tablet, The Book of Divine Decrees):

2 oe aA oS 4
{ ‘Ope ‏بعدر‎ tile ‏هل شىْءٍ‎ Ll ¥

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

“Verily, We have created all things with Qadar (Divine
Preordainments of all things before their creation, as written in
the Book of Decrees, al-Lahw al-Mahfath).” [Al-Qamar: 49]

Allah (8%) sent Jibril to Muhammad (38) to affirm the pillars and
fundamentals which the religion is built upon. He asked him
about al-Islam (al-iman, and al-Ihsan), so the Prophet (#2) said to
him: “‘Al-Isla4m is to declare that none has the right to be
worshipped in truth except Allah, and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, to establish the prayer, to give charity, to fast
the month of Ramadan, to perform Hajj to the Holy House.’ He
then said, ‘What is al-Im4n?’ The Prophet (8) said: ‘to believe ‏ص‎
‎Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and to Believe in
the Divine Decree, the good and bad of it is from All4h (38).””

[Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (50); Muslim, The
Book of Faith, hadith no. (08)]

Also, in many verses, five pillars of al-[man are mentioned as well,
other than the Divine Decree, but it (i.e., the Divine Decree) 1s
mentioned in other verses as has proceeded.

3° 4s > on 4 A iw 7 ‏و2 د‎ Lc
ae FE ‏تيه‎ ad} ‏يمآ نَرْلٌ‎ Sint Sale #

) ‏لسو‎
‎o7 Bcd Aur 7 Age ma Lee
ae" ee > Ops ‏ساو لا‎ ed ‏عله > 4559 و‎ a ‏و‎

‎IMS Ea‏ سَوِعَنًا
‎RAN hy CS EE CHG‏ 7 &{
‎“The Messenger (Muhammad) believes in what has been sent‏
‎down to him from his Lord, and (so do) the believers. Each one‏
‎believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers.‏
‎They say, ‘We make no distinction between one another of His‏
‎Messengets’ - and they say, ‘We hear, and we obey. (We seek)‏

‎Your Forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is the return (of all).”
| Al-Bagarah: 285]

‎Sometimes the Divine Decree is mentioned in separate
independent texts, and these fundamentals are also mentioned in

‎SS

BO

one context, but all of them are indicated by the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of the Messenger (#8) as found in the hadith of
Jibril, the hadith of ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘fid, and if All4h wills, we
will mention other proofs dealing with the Divine Decree at
another point.

Thus [Believing in the Divine Decree, the good and bad of it] is
from the foundations of the Sunnah which if anyone leaves any
aspect of it, he has removed himself from Ah! As-Sunnah.
Therefore, it is absolutely binding upon the believer to have firm
faith and belief that the Divine Decree in its totality, the good
and bad is from Allah. Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah—may
Allah, The Most High, have mercy on him—has discussed the
topic of al-Qadar in his work al-‘Agidatu al-WAasitiyyah and other
works, and mentioned that it is of different levels.

The First Level: (To Believe that) Allah’s Knowledge
encompasses everything, and that Allah knew completely about all
of the affairs in His creation, great and small; for indeed Allah's
knowledge is not preceded by ignorance.

Then Allah recorded that in a protected book. The Messenger of
Allah (8) said: “Allah decreed the details of everything before he

created the heavens and the earth by fifty thousand yeats.”
[Collected by Muslim, The Book of al-Qadar, hadith no. (2653)]

And the Messenger (#8) said: “The First thing Allah created was
the pen. Then He said to it: ‘Write!’ It said: “What shall I write?’
Allah € said: ‘that which is and will be until the establishing of
the Hour,” [Collected by Abi Dawad, The Book of Sunnah, hadith no.
(4700); at-Tirmidhi, The Book of al-Qadar, hadith no. (2155); al-Albani

graded it to be authentic, and collected it in his as-Silsilah as-Sahihah, hadith
no. (133)]

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

Allah wrote down all information—which He knew with His vast
all encompassing knowledge—in a/-Lahw al-Mahtith. As Allah
says in the Qur’an:

aCe ar ad

“cll ‏ماف ار‎ ess SGA ‏الي‎ ts 3s # (
‏ا‎ . vo ‏ول‎ GALS ‏من 5355 2.35 إِلَا‎ i ‏وما‎

{Oat NeW
“And with Him are the keys of the Ghayb (all that is hidden),
none knows them but He. And He knows whatever there is in (or
on) the earth and in the sea; not a leaf falls, but he knows it.
There is not a grain in the darkness of the earth nor anything
fresh or dry, but is written in a Clear Record.” [Al-An‘4m: 59]

a ‏ا‎

‎WA) oe‏ | إن تك ‎FEI‏ َل ‎RS KS‏ أو فى

‎(@) 46 4 als ai ay 6 ANT ‏في‎ SI oe

‎“O my son! If it be 0 equal to the weight of a grain of
mustard seed, and though it be in a rock, or in the heavens or in
the earth, Allah will bring it forth. Verily, Allah is Subtle (in
bringing out that grain), Well Aware (of its place). [Luqman: 16]

‎Allah has knowledge of all things; everything was written down in
al-Lahw al-Mahfith.

‎Second Level: To believe in Allah’s all encompassing Will for
everything that He desires to be. Also to believe in His Ability
with which He creates everything. There is nothing in existence or
nonexistence, whether in the past or future, big or small,
statement or action, movement or stillness, except that it occurs
all by the Will of Allah; and it does not exist except that Allah
created it, bringing it to be with His Will, and His Ability with
which He is able to do all things.

‎Pize4O0

With this, Allah sent Messengers and Books, holding the slaves
responsible, commanding and prohibiting them, making them
accountable for their intentions, beliefs, and acts of worship. As
for the obedient one, he is obedient out of a choice and desire to
be obedient, and that does not oppose the Will and Ability of
Allah (3%) in the least. Whosoever is obedient and treads the path
of the Noble Messengers ‏و الشلام)‎ sii ge), his reward is Paradise.
Likewise, whosoever disobeys the Messengers (si ‏و‎ sai ck)
opposing and belying them, certainly he will be held accountable
and recompensed according to his level of transgression. If his
opposition reaches the level of disbelief, then he will remain in
the Hell-Fire forever. If his opposition is in the form of major
sins, other than disbelief, then he is under the Will of Allah; if He
(8%) wills He (8%) will pardon him, and if He (38) wills He will
punish him.

The point of reference: Believing in the Divine Decree, the good
and bad of it, does not oppose the establishment of carrying out
the Islamic Legislation: “Perform deeds, for it will be made easy
for everyone to do what they were created for.”

Some of the people asked the Messenger ($8) about doing deeds
and whether the deeds you perform are based on that which is
written by the pen and decreed by Allah, or is it different from
that. They said: ““O Allah’s Messenger (8)! Shall we not depend
upon what has been written for us and give up deeds?’ He said,
‘Perform deeds, for everybody will find easy to do such deeds as
will lead him to (his destined place for) which he has been

created.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Tafsir, hadith no. (4949);
Muslim, The Book of al-Qadar, hadith no. (2648), and the aforementioned

wording is mentioned in Muslim’s collection |

As for the people of happiness, it will be made easy for them to
do the actions of the people of joy, (gladness, and cheerfulness).
Likewise, the people of misery will do the actions of the people of

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

that have been narrated about it’. It is not to be asked why or
how’, rather it is only believing and affirming them.

sadness and wretchedness. As for the statement of the Messenger
(#8): “Perform deeds,” this means to work based on the Islamic
Legislation, according to that which the Messengers ‏الشلام)‎ 5 sii .ge)
came with, obeying them (in their commands).

That is because Allah gave you all the ability to choose along with
an intellect by which you distinguish between truth and
falsehood, guidance and deviance, obedience and defiance. Thus,
Allah will hold you accountable for that which He has bestowed
upon you: devices which you were given that distinguish you from
animals and inanimate objects. Because of this you will be
questioned and held responsible in front of Allah—The Blessed,
The Most High. All of this leading to either a reward or a

punishment: honor or debasement and humiliation.

15 [attesting to and believing in the prophetic reports that have
been narrated about it.] meaning: to the Divine Decree. From
these narrations are those which we mentioned such as the hadith
of Jibril, “To believe in the Divine Decree, the good and bad of
it.” This relates to the general Divine Decree, which refers back to

Allah’s all encompassing knowledge, and it coincides with that
which Allah wrote in a-Lahw al-MahAhith.

As for the hadith of Ibn Mas‘fid, it refers to the Life Decree, that
which has been decreed about a person’s life. As it is mentioned
in the hadith narrated by Ibn Mas‘td («) that the Messenger,
“The Truthful and The Believed,” (88) said: “Each one of you is
collected in the womb of his mother for forty days, and then
turns into a clot for an equal period (of forty days) and turns into
a piece of flesh for a similar period (of forty days) and then All4h
sends an angel and orders him to write four things, ie., his
provision, his age, his actions, and whether he will be of the
wretched or the blessed (in the Hereafter).” [Collected by al-Bukhari,

PigeAL

سمر6

BAN Syl ‏شَرْحْ‎

The Book of al-Qadar, hadith no. (6594); Muslim, The Book of al-Qadar,
hadith no. (2643)]

This is called the Life Decree. Also there is the Yearly decree, and
that is La an al-Qadar. As Allah says:

ASEBEBO Gx CYS aig |}

2 a
(OK

“We sent it (this Qur’4n) down on a blessed night (Le., the Night
of al-Qadar), Verily, We are ever warning (mankind that Our
torment will reach those who disbelieve in Our Oneness of
Lordship and in Our Oneness of worship). Therein (that night)
is decreed every matter of ordainments.” [Ad-Dukhan:3-4]

In this night, Allah writes down that which will occur to the
slaves from righteous and evil deeds, trials and tribulations, and
other matters similar to this. This is called Yearly Decree which
Allah decrees in this night.

In addition to these previous types of Divine Decree, there is the
daily decree, and it refers to what the slaves do daily and what the
Angels write about them day by day.

6 (believing in] meaning: the texts. It is not to be asked “why did
Allah do this or that, and why did Allah decree this and why did
He command with this and prohibit this.” Likewise, [It is not to
be asked, why or how] Rather it is only upon us to believe and
submit, and feel at ease with the decree, because it may be the case
that these questions derive from opposing Allah 69 His Divine
Decree, His Legislation, and His command and prohibition. So it
is not upon you except but to submit, especially with this matter

of the Divine Decree. Because it is as they say: “the Secret of
Allah—The Blessed, The Most High.” That which you know of

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

93S) 35 CRB

it, praise Allah; and that which you have no knowledge about, it is
incumbent upon you to submit.

[It is not to be asked why or how, rather it is only believing and
affirming them]: This is obligatory upon every Muslim, and it is
from the prerequisites of the Declaration of Faith, “No deity
deserves to be worshipped in truth except Allah, and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,” this entails that you have
surrendered to Allah, in that which He commands with,
prohibits, legislates, and also in that which He decrees upon you,
whether good or bad.

PhyeHD

‎glut‏ للقصوص ‎SpA‏ و ‎EY‏ بها

‎Submitting to the Prophetic Narrations
and Believing in Them

‎nd whoever does not know the explanation of a particular
hadith, or whose intellect does not allow him to

‎nderstand it, then it is sufficient for him to simply

‎submit and believe, because the matter has been perfected for
him!’: such as the hadith of “as-Sadiq al-Masdtiq |The Truthful,

‎The Believed]” (Describing the Divine Decree), and other
prophetic narrations that deal with the Divine Decree.

‏جم جه ‎FE‏ مو هى

‎17 [And whoever does not know the explanation of a particular
hadith, or whose intellect does not allow him to understand it,
then it is sufficient for him to simply submit and believe, because

‎the matter has been perfected for him]
* GBYCSUARY +

‎a

‎“,.Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope...”
| Al-Bagarah: 286]

‎There may be certain texts that one may not understand, about
which he may ask “(what is the) wisdom and goal of them” and
“what is the secret behind them?” But it is incumbent upon you
to affirm and believe them, because this is from the prerequisites
of true faith: “I believe in the unseen, I believe that Muhammad is
true, that the Qur’4an is true, and that which Muhammad came
with is truth, and that he does not speak from his own desires.”
So that which you have knowledge of, then certainly the praise
belongs to Allah alone, and that which you do not have
knowledge of, leave it to the one who knows and you have been

‎sufficed.

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

أسئلة الدرس

Questions from the Class
I. Question: Some of our Salaf? Brothers sit with the people
who follow their desires, (What is your advice to them)?
Response: I will mention some examples for you. The likes of
this happened to Ibn Agil, al-Bayhaqi, al-Harawi, and many
others throughout Islamic History. Many people throughout
history were enticed by the knowledge they have, so they sat
with the people of innovation and desires, thus they became
lost in (deviation). In this are many lessons and admonitions.
This occurred to people that once followed the way of the
Salaf, but because they sat with the people of innovation,
mixed with them, and read the books of the people of
falsehood, they deviated and became lost. So my advice for
these individuals is to benefit from their brothers, and before
that to benefit from the great Manhaj which encourages you
to be safe from all deviance and misguidance, and protected
from all evil. By Allah, nothing is equal to being safe from
misguidance and trials.

2. Question: It is known that differing in secondary affairs
of the religion, with certain conditions, is permissible. So
what are the conditions that make differing in ‘Agidah
allowable? | |

Response: By Allah, I do not see anything that makes
differing in ‘Aqidah permissible. As for what relates to the
Companions—from what some people ascribe to them as
differing in affairs of ‘Aqidah—then indeed they did not
differ in the least. With the will of All&h this issue will be

discussed more in our study of this work, Usdl as-Sunnah.

3. Question: If the Companions agree on a particular issue,
is it permissible for someone to come after them and
introduce a new statement?

Paye4O

Response: Whoever does such a thing is at risk of a serious
threat and puts himself in great danger.

Sa HE 1555 CIGNA GEG 3 ‏من‎ IAG BE ‏وَمَن‎

oN Pa ‏ل لسر م‎ “Zo ad 4 ve ‏س‎ AS este

OT ‏وَسَآءَتٌ مَصِيرا‎ GE oh 5 SSC AS OH

“And whoever contradicts and opposes the Messenger after

the right path has been shown clearly to him, and follows

other than the believers’ way. We shall keep him in the path

he has chosen, and burn him in Hell—what an evil
destination!” [An-Nis4:1 15]

The Companions agree on a particular issue and you come
with a new statement?! This person’s opinion is not in
agreement with the consensus of the Companions, rather it is
in clear opposition to the Book of Allah, the Sunnah, and
(the way of) the believers. This person is following other than

the way of the believers, therefore it is not permissible.

4. Question: I work in one of the companies and some or all
of my co-workers are from deviant groups, so what is your
advice for me in being cautious of sitting with them?

Response: Search for another job; if you find from amongst
them those who accept your call to the truth, then all praise
belongs to Allah alone, but if not then search for another

field of work.

5. Question: Please elaborate on the hadith of Ibn Mas‘tid:
“Each one of you is collected in the womb of his mother for
forty days, and then turns into a clot for an equal period (of
forty days)...” [Ibid]

Response: If a man has intercourse with his wife, and releases
semen into her womb, there is a period of forty days that it
remains as nutfah (1.e., a seed resulting from male and female
liquids, with the permission of Allah). Then Allah—The
Blessed, The Most High—moves it to another stage of
The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

development where it becomes a blood clot, and then he
moves it to another stage for forty days, where it is a morsel
of flesh. So there are various stages. As Allah says:

FEO ‏أطوارًا‎ Sitanse ‏ف[‎

“While He has created you in (different) stages.” [Nuh:14]

However, this hadith may confuse the deviant group, al-
Qadariyyah, because of the fact that Allah knows whether the
slave will be from the happy or the miserable while the person
is in his mother’s womb. This is from their absolute
misguidance. Because indeed Allah—The Blessed, The Most
High—knew this in His all encompassing knowledge, and
recorded it in al-Lahw al-Mahfiith. Then this which was
written agrees with Allah’s Knowledge and that which is
recorded in the Book of Divine Decrees. These people were
influenced by their desires and intellects; otherwise this issue
was Clear and basic with the pious predecessors. And we hope
the questioner is not influenced by the thoughts of these

people.

(9350) EF CRW)

Pipe AS

Page AD

الإمان برؤية الله
‎Believing that Allah will be seen (in the‏

Hereafter)
a" such as the narrations which affirm that Allah will be

seen in the Hereafter!’, all of them, even if they may find it

'8 [And such as the narrations which affirm that Allah will be seen
in the Hereafter]: It is mandatory upon the slave to have firm
belief that the believers will see Allah in the Hereafter. However,
the deviant group, the Mu'tazilah, rejected that Allah will be seen
in the Hereafter based on false doubts, but Ahl as-Sunnah refuted
them using proofs and evidences from the Book of Allah and the
Prophetic Sunnah.

From the scholars who refuted the Mu‘tazilah is al-Im4m Ibn al-
Qayyim using seven verses from the Book of Allah as proof. A
person may not realize how some of the verses can be used as
proof, but if one ponders they would find that he was correct in
using these verses as sound proof indicating that the believers will
see Allah in the hereafter. From these verses is the statement of

Allah(as):

3 قد
‎ote gee Age,‏ سمه ‎ee SATA A OE‏ معو2
#8 واتقوا ‎aul‏ واعلموا أنكم ‎girls‏ 0 وَسْشَِّ رالْمؤمِييت 0 *؛
‎“...And fear Allah, and know that you are to meet Him (in the‏
‎Hereafter), and give glad tidings to the believers.” [Al-Bagarah: 223]‏

Ibn al-Qayyim said (while explaining this verse) that (an actual)
meeting does not take place except if both patties see one another;
this is understood from the Arabic language itself. He also
mentioned that the verses which those who deny that All4h will
be seen hold on to in order to reject the fact that Allah will be
seen by the believers in the hereafter, such as the statement of

Allah:

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

001 ‏هر امت‎ ot 34 ‏م وموم كر‎ 7 ot cd 0
4“ )035( ‏الأبصر وهو اللطِيف اليد‎ A 0 ‏وَهْو‎ ANT BY #
“No vision can grasp Him, but His Grasp is over all vision. He is
the Most Subtle and Courteous, Well Acquainted with all
things.” [Al-An‘am: 103]

Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High,
have mercy on him—mentioned (about this notion of the
Mu'tazilah) that Allah does not praise Himself by simply
negating certain characteristics; rather He praises Himself by
negating certain characteristics and affirming others. And he
mentioned a number of examples to express this point. For
example, the statement of Allah:

{ ‏الاأبصدز‎ 25 5 y 0
“,..No vision can grasp Him...” in this verse is an affirmation
that Allah will (in fact) be seen in the hereafter, because he did
not negate that He will be seen, rather He negated that sight can
grasp and encompass Him; indeed Allah is not encompassed. by
anything. You see the sun and you see sky, and there are many

things you may see, but your vision does not encompass these
things, even though you may be able to see them in general.

Likewise, the statement of Allah to Méisa (338):

“,..you will not see me...” [Al-A‘rAf: 143]
Masa (#8) sought from his Lord that he may see Him. If this was
something that was impermissible or impossible, Misa (#2) would

not have asked for such a thing. So Allah said to him,

eee you will not see me,” meaning at this current time. He did
not say “You cannot possibly see Me.’

000

3

2-4

4 - 97 > Ae B/E gee
“ ..so when his Lord appeared to the mountain, He made it
collapse to dust...” [Al-A‘raf: 143]

But Misa (8) is not able to endure the reality of seeing Allah in
this life, and likewise the physical structure of the human being,
in this life, is unable to endure seeming Allah—The Blessed, The
Most High. How would the human be able to see Allah in this
life, when there comes in the authentic hadith: “His (Allah’s) veil
is light, if He withdraws it (the veil), the splendor of His Face

would consume His creation so far as His sight reaches.”
| Collected by Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (179)]

The physical make up of the human being makes it impossible to
withstand seeing Allah 69 in this life. If the mountains turn to
dust from the majestic appearance of Allah, how can a human
possibly endure seeing Allah? But when All4h—The Glorious,
The Majestic—resurrects His slaves and enters them into
paradise, they enter with a (physical) composition that is prepared

to see Allah (ae).

From the verses which are used as proof is the statement of Allah:

“For those who have done good is the best (reward, i.e. Paradise)

and even mote.” [Yanus: 26]

The Noble Prophet Muhammad (#8) clarified the meaning of
Allah’s statement “and even more”, saying that it refers to seeing
Allah in the Hereafter, as it comes in the hadith narrated by
Suhayb (4) found in Sahth Muslim |The Book of Faith, hadith
no. (18I)|. Likewise many Companions explained that the best
reward is Paradise, “and even more” means to see Allah (22), and
it is better than Paradise. All4h will say to His slaves after

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

difficult to fathom or consider it repugnant to the ears”, but it 15
only upon you to have absolute faith in them”®, not rejecting one

entering them into paradise: “Do you want me to give you
anything else?” They will say “What can we possibly desire, our
faces ate glistening, You have entered us into paradise, and You
have given us again and again, so at that point their Lord will
appear to them. So they will not enjoy or find any blessing better
than seeing Allah, The Blessed, The Most High.”

The prophetic narrations (about this topic) have reached to about
thirty narrations confirming that the believers will see Allah in the
Hereafter. From amongst these ahadith is that which is narrated
by Jarir and likewise that which is narrated by Abd Hurayrah.
The Prophet (38) states: “You will see your Lord on the Day of
Resurrection as you see this (full moon) and you will have no

difficulty in seeing Him.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Tawhid,
hadith no. (7437) |

There are various narrations, many of them collected by al-
Bukhart and Muslim as well. This is that which pertains to seeing
Allah in the Hereafter.

(9 [Even if they may find it difficult to fathom or consider it
tepugnant to the ears]: Meaning the ears of the people who
follow falsehood. As for the people of truth, they accept these

narrations with a welcoming heart.

20 When the fitnah (trials, doubtful matters) appeared and people
began to deny that Allah will be seen in the Hereafter, people
began to stir up confusion, mentioning that these narrations were
repugnant. Does anyone of you (dear readers) become confused
from the hadith of Abi Hurayrah about seeing Allah, or the
verses (about this topic)?! None of you become confused and not
one of you is disturbed by hearing these prophetic narrations. But
the people of falsehood are disturbed. Therefore, they are the

ones who mention this type of speech.

52

letter from any of these narrations, or other than them that have
been reported by the reliable narrators.”!

(35) ERY

2 [Not rejecting one letter from any hadith that the reliable
reporters have narrated.] This is because the Messenger of Allah
(38) does not speak from his own desires; he only says that which
is true. When ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said to the Prophet (8) that
the people say “Do not write (down the prophetic narrations).”
The Prophet ($8) said: “Write! By the One in Whose Hand is my
soul, nothing comes from me except the truth” [Musnad Ahmad,
verification of Ahmad Shakir, from the narrations of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin
al-'As, hadith no. (6510, 6802), Ahmad Shakir graded its chain to be

authentic |

(ORBWNALOMS BiG ( 1S
“Nor does he speak of (his own) desire. It is only a Revelation NN
revealed.” [| An-Najm: 3-4] 8

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

ترك الجدال والخصومات في الدين

Leaving off Debating and Argumentation

in the Religion
Fu: the Foundations of the Sunnah: not to debate or argue
with anyone, and not (even) to /earn argumentation, because
indeed disputing about the Divine Decree, Seeing Allah, The
Qur’4n, and other than that from the aspects of the creed, 1s
disliked and prohibited”. And anyone who takes on such
behavior, even if he is right in his argumentation, is not from the
People of the Sunnah” until he leaves off debating and submits to
the narrations and believes in them”.

22 Al-Im4m Ahmad is advising with leaving off argumentation
because: [Indeed disputing about the Divine Decree, seeing Allah,
The Qur’4n, and other than that from the aspects of “Aqidah, is
hated and prohibited].

Many narrations have come prohibiting argumentation and
debating. The Messenger (#8) came out one day and the people
were disputing about the Divine Decree, so he became very angry
as if a seed of pomegranate was glaring in his face. Then he (3)
said: “Do you want to put the Book of Allah one part against

another?” [Collected by Ibn Majah, The Introduction, hadith no. (85), al-
albant graded it to be Hasan Sahih |

The Prophet (#8) made a very serious refutation of this act, which
indicates that debating about the Divine Decree is impermissible
and the same applies to the other aspects of the Islamic ‘Aqidah.

23 [Even if he is right in his argumentation, he is not from the
People of the Sunnah, until he leaves off debating]. Al-Imam
Ahmad was very stern towards debating. Whosoever says that he
has no means of arriving at the Sunnah except with
argumentation, he is in plain error. However, this statement of al-

8
0

جم جه 3 مع هى

Imém Ahmad is not to be taken in an absolute manner, because
Allah has made it permissible for us to debate in a way which ts
best. If all the conditions are present, and the one engaging in
argumentation wants the truth, not to defeat (you) or to be
stubborn, then you should clarify things to him in the best of
manners. But if he is leaning toward anger, altercation, and
arrogance, you should leave him (alone and not debate with him).

Some people from the Khawary used to come to ash-Sheikh
(Abdul-‘Aziz bin ‘Abdullah) Ibn Baz so that he would debate
them, but he did not debate or argue with them. Likewise was the

case of the Shi‘ah (Rafidhah), he would not debate or argue with
any of them.

* Lastly, al-Imém Ahmad mentioned here [until he leaves off
debating and submits and believes in the narrations] This is what
is obligatory: to believe in the narrations, to convey them to
mankind, while explaining and clarifying their meanings if they
are difficult for the people to understand. (However), if you see
someone debating in a manner that is best, while seeking benefit,
then you should clarify matters to him. If he has a doubt, then
remove it, but with gentleness, wisdom, and fair-preaching. But if
he merely wants to argue, do not debate with him, because he
does not want the truth and the debate will not arrive at any
result.

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

القرآن كلام الله لبس بمخلوق
‎The Qur'an is the Speech of Allah, and it‏

is Not Created
he Qur’4n is the Uncreated Speech of Allah’* and no one

should be too weak to declare it to be uncreated. For indeed

25 This issue, of claiming that the Qur’4n is created, as you all are
aware, is very serious. A great trial occurred for Ahl as-Sunnah
due to this issue, and at the head of (those who sustained great
difficulty and tribulations was) al-Im4m Ahmad. During this trial,
people were imprisoned, tortured, and killed. All of this was done
by the Jahmiyyah and the Mu'tazilah during the time of al-
Ma’miin, al-Mu'‘tasim, and al-Wathig, during three different
leaderships from the Abbasid Dynasty. The Islamic Ummah was
put through a great trial by way of the Jahmiyyah, the Mu'tazilah,
and the other people of misguidance and deviation, where they
gained power over Ahl as-Sunnah, but in the end Allah decreed
that the good end would be for His pious servants. Al-Imam
Ahmad exerted immense patience, persevering upon
imprisonment, torture, and severe burdens that even the
mountains would not be able to bear. So Allah raised his level and
his status, eventually becoming the Imam of Ahl as-Sunnah tn
truth. There is no one who raises their head for the Sunnah and
the banner of the Sunnah except that he is honored to be
connected with this great Imam. Allah honored al-Islam with Abi
Bakr (#) on the Day of the Riddah (apostasy), and with Ahmad
on the Day of the Mihnah (The Trial), as some of the pious
predecessors mentioned. May Allah show him mercy and give him
the best reward.

The Book of Allah and the Sunnah indicate that the Qur’4n is the
Speech of Allah, which Allah—The Glorious, The Most High—
spoke with. Then Allah revealed it to Jibril who conveyed it to
Muhammad (#8). Allah speaks when and if He wills. From His

56

27

3

HAM ‏أضولٍ‎ oc

speech is that which would not be exhausted by the seas, as Allah
says:

A2P ws

4 806 sin

“Say (O Muhammad ‏يل‎ to mankind): ‘If the sea were ink for
(writing) the Words of my Lord, surely, the sea would be
exhausted before the Words of my Lord would be finished, even
if we brought (another sea) like it for its aid.” [Al-Kahf: 109]

From Allah’s Speech are the Books that were sent down for the
rectification and guidance of mankind, to save them from
misguidance and for other aims and goals that only Allah 69
knows. This is from the mercy, wisdom, and requisites of Allah’s
Lordship that He sends down revelation to His Messengers (38)
for the rectification of people's lives, allowing them to become
qualified to enter Paradise, by acting by the revelation, thus
earning them Allah’s pleasure—The Lord of all things.
Whosoever opposes these Divine Books, which All&h has sent
down, while stubbornly rejecting (the truth), the proof will be
established against him, thus earning him the recompense of the
disbelievers and the arrogant ones; his abode will be the Hell-Fire
forever, as Allah mentioned.

[The Qur'an is the uncreated Speech of Allah] which Allah spoke
with—The Mighty, The Majestic—and the Books which Allah
sent down are likewise the Speech of Allah, He revealed them to
His slaves. Allah spoke directly to Miésa, and likewise
Muhammad ($8) on the Night Journey. Allah will call out on the
Day of Judgment, “Where are these so-called partners of mine?”
Likewise, Allah he says in the Qur’an:

7 ow, So ‏ساح‎

The Explanation of ‏أذولنا‎ As-Sunnah

“And when your Lord Called out to Mfisa” [Ash-Shu‘ard: 10]

“Calling out” does not occur except with letters and a voice that
is befitting to Allah, not resembling the voice, nor the letters, or
speech of the creation in the least. So Allah speaks, and speaking
is a characteristic of completeness. Neither objects nor animals
speak, and they are less than the human beings who are capable of
speaking. Allah (88) honored the human being and completed
him. From this completeness is that human beings have the ability
to speak and communicate. This is a characteristic that
distinguishes the human being from all other creatures. So it is
Allah who gave human beings, the angels, and the jinn, who
possess an intellect, this ability to speak, which is a characteristic
of completeness and perfection. Allah 1s complete, and He grants
from His completeness to whomsoever He wills from His slaves
and creation. Knowledge and ability are also characteristics of
completeness. Therefore whoever removes from Allah the
characteristics of speech, knowledge, and ability, then he 15

belittling Allah in an immense way. When one of the disbelievers
of Quraysh said:

{© )0( ‏ول لسر‎ YI ‏إن هذا‎
“This is nothing but the word of a human being.”
[Al-Muddathir: 25]

Allah—The Most High—said:

(OFasy

“1 will cast him into the Hell-Fire” | Al-Muddathir:26 |

Od

3

29

2 2000 aA “yor ‏م 4ق .كذ ور و‎
ORO ‏در‎ ibe ‏قد‎ ES jas (One 53 5) %

{ wx 4 acl Co) 1 ‏ول البشر ع‎
“Verily he thought and plotted. So let him be cursed: how he
plotted! And once more let him be cursed: how he plotted! Then
he thought. Then he frowned and he looked in a bad tempered
way: then he turned back, and was proud. Then he said: ‘this is
nothing but magic from that of old, This is nothing but the word
of a human being!’ I will cast him into Hell-Fire.”
| Al-Muddathir:18-26]

The statement of mankind is created, so Allah threatened him
with a severe punishment. This is slandering the Qur’4n, saying
that it is magic or that it is the statement of a man. This is
lowering and demeaning the Qur’an, which is the Speech of Allah,
sent for the guidance of mankind, and it is not created. As for the
Muttazilah, the Jahmuiyyah, the Batiniyyah, the Rafidhah Shi‘ah,
the Khawary, and all deviant groups, they differ concerning the
Speech of Allah, all eventually arriving at the belief that Allah
does not speak. Even the Ash4‘irah were influenced by the
Mu'tazilah. The first generation of ‘Ash4‘irah used to say “Speech
is a characteristic that exists with Allah, but the Qur’4n is not
actual speech, but rather a narration of His speech. It is not
words, letters, or a voice, Allah did not (actually) speak. This
Qur'an is not His speech!”

We ask Allah for safety and protection (from falling into such
deviation). But sadly, from the later generation of ‘Asha‘irah are
those who blatantly say that the Qur'an is created.

The Qur’4n is the uncreated speech of Allah, and the same for all
of Allah’s speech, it is uncreated. These people when they began

The Explanation of Usal As-Sunnah

Allah’s Speech is from Him, not separate from Him; and nothing
of Allah’s Attributes or His Speech is created”®. Also, be cautious

this fitnah, saying: “The Speech of Allah, Allah created it without
a place,” and they say “It is the Speech of Allah, but it 1s as you
say ‘the She-Camel of Allah.” They say, “The She-Camel of Allah
and the House of Allah, are examples of created things being
attached to the creator.” All of these are lies to confuse and

misguide the people.

Al-Im4am Ahmad mentioned [It is not created.] (I pose the
question): Why is it not sufficient to simply say the Qur'an is the
Speech of Allah? (The answer) is because the Jahmiyyah and
Mu'tazilah deny that the Qur'an is the speech of Allah, but they
say “The Speech of Allah, while they intend that it is created
similar to how we say “The She-Camel of Allah, and the House of
Allah. The She-Camel of All&h and the House of Allah are all
created things, is that not so? They make such a statement, but
they intend only to play games, saying “Tt is the speech of Allah,
but it is created.” Rather say “The Speech of Allah, and it is not

created!”

But if you (were to) say, “The Speech of Allah” and then
remained silent, and did not say it is not created, the Mu'tazilah
and the Jahmiyyah will agree with you (in your statement, if you
do not add “it is not created”)! They will say to you “The Speech

of Allah,” but if you leave it blank they will add or say that it is

created. Rather you should fill in the blank and say it is not
created.

26 [And no one should be too weak to declare that the Qur'an is
uncreated, For indeed Allah’s Speech is from Him, not separate
from Him; and nothing of Allah’s Attributes or His Speech is
created] Meaning: the Speech of Allah is a characteristic of
Allah—The Mighty, The Majestic—but Allah speaks when and
if He wills. The statement of al-Imam Ahmad [For indeed Allah's

Fixe 0O

PiyoO01

of debating with anyone who has innovated concerning this
affair2’or anyone who says his recitation is created or other than

Speech is not separate from Him] is a refutation against the
Mu'tazilah who said Allah created “His Speech” without a place.
Rather Allah’s Speech, Ability, and Will are all from His innate
and essential characteristics; and these qualities are from His
absolute completeness. Just like Allah creates whenever He wills,

He speaks whenever He wills. As All4h—The Most High—said:

o Ayin 20 a aa ts
CO LSS SALE AES soi Heel Cy
“Verily, His Command, when He intends a thing, is only that
He says to it, “Be” and it is” [YA Sin: 82]

Hence the characteristic of speech is an innate characteristic, but

Allah speaks, reveals, provides, and creates with His Speech.

o A" L hier 4 Gwe 7S
“Verily, His Command, when He intends a thing, is only that
He says to it, “Be” and it is” [Y4 Sin: 82]

As for the statement of al-Imaém Ahmad [not separate from Him]
this means that Allah’s (8%) Speech is an innate quality. As for
the Qur’4n, it is heard and Allah’s speech is heard as well. Is this
understood? [not separate from Him]: What does al-Imam
Ahmad intend by this? The intent behind this statement is that
speech is an innate characteristic of Allah, and this is a direct
refutation of the Mu'‘tazilah who said that All&h created this
speech without a place.

277 [And nothing of Allah’s Attributes or His Speech is created; be
cautious of debating with anyone who has innovated concerning
this affair]: Notice how al-Im4ém Ahmad is placing emphasis on
this issue. But when he (te., al-Imam Ahmad) needed to debate he
debated. For example he debated Ibn Abi Du’4d, and other than

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

this. And whoever hesitates in this matter and says" I don’t know
whether it is created or not created”, it is just the Speech of
Allah,” this person has fallen into innovation”, and he is just like

him, when it was a necessity, and the person was seeking da‘wah
and the truth.

28 [Or anyone who says his recitation is created or other than this.
And whoever hesitates in this matter and says ‘I don’t know
whether it is created or not created”| Here when the fitnah of the
statement that the Qur’4an is created came and Ahl As-Sunnah
separated from the Jahmiyyah, the Mut tazilah, and other than
them, there came about those who ascribed to the Sunnah and
said “The Qur’an is the Speech of Allah, and my utterance of the
Qur’4n is created.” So Imam Ahmad refuted them. (That is)
because if you say: “My utterance of the Qur’4n is created,” the
word ‘utterance’ can potentially refer to that which is uttered,
meaning the Qur'an itself, and it 15 possible that it can mean
words which the speaker is speaking with and uttering.

So when it was the case that this phrase can possibly contain
falsehood, it could be exploited by the Jahmiyyah, the Mu'tazilah,
and other than them from those that say the Qur'an is created.
They could exploit it in order to misguide the people. (So a
person may say): “My recitation (or utterance) of the Qur’an is
created,” and he may intend the actual speech which is being
uttered. Al-Imam Ahmad said, [whoever says ‘my recitation of the
Qur’an is created’ is an innovator. |

29 [And whoever hesitates in this matter and says ‘I don’t know
whether it is created or not created, it is just the Speech of Allah,’
this person has fallen into innovation]: When you say Allah's
Speech is not created, do not say “My recitation of the Qur’an is
created”, because it is a means which the people of falsehood use
to eventually arrive at the statement that the Qur’dn is created.
Likewise, do not hesitate to say that the Qur’4n is uncreated.

Pin OF

08ر69

Rather be firm that the Qur’4n is the uncreated speech of Allah:
this is what is affirmed by the Qur’an, the Sunnah, as well as the
Companions and the Pious Predecessors.

If a man has hesitancy or reluctantly to say that the Qur’4n is the
uncreated speech of Allah, then there is doubt concerning his
affair; for indeed, this is innovation and from the ways of the
Jahmiyyah. When this fitnah appeared and its severity intensified,
these innovated wordings came along. There were those who
hesitated to take the stance that the Qur’4n is not created, but it is
a must that we clearly state that the Qur’4n is the Speech of Allah,
and it is not created, and that is the end of it. We do not say our
utterance or recitation of the Qur’a4n is created and we do not
hesitate in this matter. None of this is permissible.

[And whoever hesitates in this matter and says ‘I don’t know
whether it is created or not created’], Masha Allah, this type of
person 1s trying to appear as if he is pious. And this was stated by
a number of people as well, but al-Im4m Ahmad and others from
Ahl as-Sunnah exposed and criticized the likes of these
individuals, and declared them to be innovators. From amongst
them were Ya‘qib bin Shaybah who was from the scholars of
hadith. When he hesitated and said “I don’t know Gf the Qur’an
is) created or uncreated” al-Im4m Ahmad said that he was “a
misguided innovator.” The Caliph at that time sought al-Imam
Ahmad’s advice to give the position of Judge to Ya‘qib bin
Shaybah, perhaps it was the top judge, but Ahmad said: “No, for
indeed he is misguided.”

Perhaps you are amazed from this. By Allah, Ahmad preferred to
employ a Jew or Christian over the people of innovation because
of their absolute danger, in that they cause mischief, spread
corruption, and dissension in the society from within. Has anyone
caused more harm to the Muslims than the people of innovation?
Has anyone caused the Muslims to be in a state of humiliation,

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

the one who says “It (the Qur’4n) is created.” But rather The
Qur’4n is the Uncreated Speech of Allah.°°

‎ERB‏ ومو هى

‎under the feet of the Christians and the Jews, except the people of
innovation? Every trial and tribulation that has inflicted this
Ummah is because of the people of innovation. Even Ibn
Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High, have mercy on him—
mentioned that when the Ummayyad Dynasty fell into innovation
and its leader Marwan al-Himar adopted the beliefs of al-Ja'd, he
was a cause of the fall of that nation. And tnnovation (during
those times) does not equal the innovation that we see in our
times at all!

‎30 [So he has fallen into innovation and he is just like the one who
says ‘It (the Qur’4n) is created.’ But rather The Qur'an is the
Uncreated Speech of Allah}: So whoever hesitates (and does not
take a clear stance), or whoever says his recitation or utterance of
the Qur’an is created, he is from this type of people (who say the
Qur’an is created), holding onto their tails and following their
footsteps in this matter.

8
3

‎olay‏ برؤية الله في انار الآخرة
‎The Belief that Allah will be seen in the‏

‎Hereafter
‎T: believe that Allah will be seen on the Day of Judgment, as
it has been narrated from the Prophet Muhammad (38) in
authentic prophetic narrations*!. Also, to believe that the Prophet
saw his Lord, for indeed it has been authentically narrated by
Qatadah from ‘Tkrimah, who reported from Ibn ‘Abbas. Also al-
Hakam bin Ab4n reported this from ‘Tkrimah, who reported it
from Ibn ‘Abbas. Also ‘Al? bin Zayd related from Ydsuf bin
Muihran who reported this from Ibn ‘Abb4s (<&). We understand
this hadith according to its apparent meaning, as it comes
reported from the Prophet (38).To speak about this affair (using
theoretical rhetoric) is an innovation; rather we believe in its
apparent meaning as it has been reported, and we do not debate
anyone pertaining to this affair.”

‎31 To believe that Allah will be seen on the Day of Judgment, as
it has been narrated from the Prophet Muhammad (#§) in
authentic prophetic narrations.] We have already spoken about
this issue.

‎» A difference of opinion occurred pertaining to this issue: did
the Prophet Muhammad (8) see his Lord the Night of al-Isra’ or
not? Many people clung on to the statements of Ibn ‘AbbAs ()
as well as the statements of Ahmad, deriving the understanding

‎that the Prophet Muhammad (8) saw his Lord with his two eyes.

‎Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High,
have mercy on him—said: “The statement of al-Im4m Ahmad
and the statement of Ibn ‘Abb4s are reported general and
restricted.” Meaning: it is reported generally that Ibn ‘Abbds said

‎that Prophet Muhammad (8) saw his Lord, and it is also

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

reported from him as well that he (#) saw his Lord with his
heart. Likewise it has been narrated from al-Ima4m Ahmad that
the Prophet (#8) saw his Lord with his eyes, and there are other
narrations from al-Imam Ahmad which indicate the Prophet (38)
saw his Lord with his heart.

The correct opinion is that which Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah,
The Most High, have mercy on him—wmentioned: “It is not in
the Book of Allah nor in the authentic Sunnah that the Messenger
of Allah (#8) saw his Lord [with his eyes].” Rather the statement
of Ibn Abbas (2%) is discontinued and does not connect (directly)
to the Prophet Muhammad (38) and at the same time it 15
restricted. And the restricted texts that have come are more
authentic. In Sahih Muslim it is reported that the Prophet (#8)

saw his Lord with his heart twice, [Collected by Muslim, The Book of
Faith, hadith no. (176)|

As Allah—The Blessed and The Most High—said:

(OO) Wusgl OKC}

“The (Prophet's) heart lied not in what he saw” [An-Najm:11]

Also Allah—The Most High—said:

Lot FC 27 g SI OTL?
. {OG ‏نزلة‎ oley ‏ولقد‎ 0
“And indeed he (Muhammad #8) saw him at a second descent
(Le., another time)” | An-Najm:13 |

‘A’ishah—may Allah be pleased with her—was asked about this
affair, she said in the hadith of Masréq: “There are three things
that if anyone says it to you, then he indeed has invented a great
lie against Allah.” From these things she mentioned: “Whoever
says that Muhammad saw his Lord has invented a great lie against
Allah.” So Masrtiq said: “Pardon me for a moment, O Mother of
the Believers. But doesn’t Allah The Most High say:

906

907

{We ‏الْفوَادُ‎ Shy

“The (Prophet's) heart lied not in what he saw.” [An-Najm:11]

Also Allah says:

vo F427 5 fo OC" Ss
{ Cr) ‏ولقد ءاه نزلة أخرئ‎ 0
“And indeed he (Muhammad #8) saw him at a second descent
(i.e., another time)” [An-Najm:13]

She said: “I'm the first of the people from this Ummah that asked
the Messenger of Allah about this.” She said: “That (Le., the
aforementioned verse) refers to Jibril; the Messenger of Allah (38)
said that he saw Jibril in his natural state twice. Once descending
from the sky, blocking what is between the heavens and the earth,
and also he saw him covering that which is between the sky and
the earth, because of the greatness of his creation. Therefore the

verse refers to Muhammad seeing Jibril.” [Collected by Muslim, The
Book of Faith, hadith no. (177)|

And the Messenger of Allah (88) was asked, as it comes in the
hadith of Abi Dharr (2) with the addition of the hadith of
‘A’tsh4h—may Allah be pleased with her—that the Messenger of
Allah ($8) said: “There was light, how could I see Him (and in
another narration: ‘I saw light’).” [Collected by Muslim, The Book of
Faith, hadith no. (178)| meaning: it is something that is highly
unlikely for him to see his Lord.

In addition to this, there is weakness in both the chain of
narrations that al-Im4m Ahmad connected to Ibn Abbds (<>)
[Narrated by Qatadah from Tkrimah, who reported it from Ibn
“Abbas. Also al-Hakam bin Ab4n reported it from ‘Tkrimah, who
teported it from Ibn ‘AbbAs] In the one chain there is the narrator
al-Hakam bin Ab&an, who is truthful, but he has awh4m

The Explanation of Usl As-Sunnah

(delusions) [al-Hafith (Ibn Hajr) mentioned about him in at-Taqrib: “a

truthful worshipper, he has delusions (in his narrations) |.

The other chain includes ‘Ali bin Zayd Jud‘4n, who is weak. [Al-
Hafith mentions about him in at-Tagrib: (that he is) “weak.” Al-Albani says
about him in as-Silsilah as-Sahthah under hadith no. (168): “That which 15
correct concerning him is that the scholars have differed. That which is the

— most preponderant position is that he is ‘weak’ as al-Hafith definitively

mentioned in at-Tagrib. However, he was declared weak due to poor memory,
and not due to an accusation/allegation about himself (i.e, not because of
lying, fisq, innovation, etc). Therefore, the narrations of such a reporter are
elevated to hasan or sahth if there is a corroborating narration to support it. [

Also it includes Yasuf bin Mihran, who is unknown and only ‘Ali
bin Zayd Jud‘an narrated from hum. [Al-Hafith said about (Yasuf bin
Mihran) in at-Tagrtb: “no one reported from him other than Ibn Jud’an, and
he is (less than acceptable)] Therefore, both narrations are
(disconnected).

A disconnected narration reported from Ibn Abbas opposes that
which is directly reported from the Prophet (#8). And if there is a
disconnected hadith that opposes one which is (authentically)
reported directly from the Prophet (#8), which one takes
precedence? This is if we were to say that “seeing Allah” means
directly seeing Allah with his eyes. However, the correct opinion
is that even if this general hadith is authentic, it 1s restricted by
the authentic narration: “He saw his Lord with his heart.” So Ibn
‘Abbds’ narration (#%) restricts the same vision that he also
mentioned generally, by saying that the Messenger (48) saw his
Lord with his heart. Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most
High, have mercy on him—mentions that al-Imam Ahmad stated
that the Messenger ($8) saw his Lord in general, and he also
restricts the seeing of Allah (in another narration from him). But
that which is correct is that the Messenger (#8) saw his Lord with
his heart.

Figo0S

Pye OD

(3S) FCW

Therefore, there is no discrepancy amongst the Companions.
However the people of desires promote differencing in the
fundamental affairs of the religion, and say that the Companions
differed amongst each other in the realm of ‘Agidah, but this is a
lie. They did not differ! ‘A’‘ishdh—may Allah be pleased with
her—negated that the Prophet (88) saw Allah with his sight, and
Ibn ‘Abbas () never affirmed that the Messenger (38) saw Allah
with his eyes, rather he affirmed that the Messenger (8) saw his
Lord with his heart. So where is the differing amongst the
companions? There is none. Is this clear?

Al-Imam Ahmad finishes his discussion of this topic by saying
[We understand this hadith according its apparent meaning].
Perhaps it may be understood that Ahmad believed that the
Prophet (#8) saw his Lord with his eyes, based on the hadith of
Ibn Abbas, but you have learned about the discussion of this
narration of Ibn Abbas, and that it does not reach the level of
authenticity, and may not even reach the level of Aasan (sound).
In addition to this, the narration is restricted by the narration
which is authentically reported. Therefore Ibn ‘Abb4s’ general
statement that the Prophet (38) saw his Lord is explained by the
specific and more restricted narration that the Messenger (#8) saw
his Lord with his heart—may Allah Bless you all. So the result is

that there is no difference amongst the Companions in this issue.

As for the later generations, some of them were influenced by the
statement of al-Im4m Ahmad and falsely assumed that he
intended that the Prophet Muhammad (#8) saw his Lord with his
eyes, but this understanding is incorrect, because Ahmad
explained this same statement with that which limits it to a vision
of the heart, not the eye.

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

الإمان بالميزان يوم القيامة
‎The Belief i in the Scales on the Day of‏

Judgment

| aa the Foundations of the Sunnah is to believe in the Scales
on the Day of Judgment, as it comes in the hadith, “A slave
will be weighed on the Day of Judgment, and he will not equal
the weight of a mosquito’s wing.”*’ [Collected by al-Bukhari, The

33 [To believe in the Scales on the Day of Judgment, as it comes
in the hadith, “A slave will be weighed on the Day of Judgment,
and he will not equal the weight of a mosquito’s wing.” ] A huge
fat man will be brought on the Day of Judgment and he will not
weigh the weight of a mosquito’s wing. In this hadith is a proof
that people will be weighed. And it comes in another authentic
hadith that Ibn Mas‘fd climbed the tree of al-Arak (ie., a tree
from which misw4k is taken) and he used to have very skinny
shins, and the people would be amazed by their skinniness. So the
Messenger (#8) said: “Don’t be amazed by the smallness of his
legs, for indeed they are heavier on the scale than the Mountain

of Uhud.” [Musnad Ahmad, with verification by Ahmad Shakir, from the
narrations of ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud, hadith no. (3991), Ahmad Shakir said
that its chain is authentic. Al-Alb4Ant collected it in as-silsilah as-sahihah, hadith
nos. (2750, 3192)|

In this hadith is proof that the people themselves will be weighed;
however, there is no difference of opinions that the slave's actions
will be weighed. As for the Mu'tazilah, the Jahmiyyah, and the
people of misguidance, they deny the tangible scales, and deny the
Just Weighing. This is the statement of the Mu'tazilah, the
Jahmiyyah, and those other deviant groups who agree with them,
they all reject the scales on the Day of Judgment.

The scale has two pans in which actions are weighed. The hadith
of the scrolls is from amongst the proofs of this. In which “A

man will come, and Allah—The Blessed and The Most High—

Pize 0

77 مرزة©

wy

8
—*
Cc.
%.
5 .

will inform him, presenting his actions to him and they will make
up ninety-nine scrolls filling up that which is between the heavens
and the earth. Then it will be said to him: ‘Do you have any
actions, do you have any good deeds?’ He will say: ‘No O my
Lord.’ So Allah will say to him: ‘Rather you have a good deed
with us, and your Lord does not oppress anyone.’ Then ‘LA il4ha
‏هلل‎ Allah’ (There is no deity worthy of being worshipped in truth
except Allah) will be placed in a pan, and the ninety-nine scrolls
will be placed in the other pan, and LA ilaha illa All4h will weigh
more, because nothing is heavier than All4h’s name.” [Collected by

at- [irmidhi, The Book of Faith hadith no. (2639); Ibn Majah The Book of
Zuhd, hadith no. (4300); al-Albani graded it to be authentic |

It comes in another narration: “If the Seven Heavens and that
which is in it, and the Seven Earths and everything in it were
placed in a pan, and ‘La ilaha illa Allah’ was placed in the other
pan, La ‏عطقل‎ illa Allah would weigh more.” [Musnad Ahmad, with
verification by Ahmad Shakir, from the narrations of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr,
hadith no. (6583); Ahmad Shakir declared is chain to be authentic; Ibn
Hibban (2324) and al-Hakim )1/ 528)—who graded it authentic and adh-
Dhahabi agreed with him. Al-Hafith said in al-Fath: “An-Nas4’4 reported (this

narration) with an authentic chain. |

So the point of benefit is that the Scale on the Day of Judgment
is firmly established in the Book of Allah and the Prophetic

Sunnah.

Allah—The Most High—said:

22 ‏سس‎ oS

‎de 2‏
‎OS ma 7 rete Bowe‏ لوا 3 | >< وو ,4 ‎A‏
‏+ وتضع الموزِين ‎ata 5) boll‏ فلا نظام نفس شيعا وَإن كات

‎Va ais ASE (%[er uy . 2 >
(OSES GENIE & eI
“And we shall set up balances of justice on the Day of
Resurrection, then none will be dealt with unjustly in anything.
And if there be the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it.
And Sufficient are We to take account” [Al-Anbiyah: 47]

The Explanation of Us@l As-Sunnah

a“

‘irae 7 ‏مم‎ ae BR oo 2 OK 7

{ 7 “And those whose scales (of good deeds) are light, they

ate those who lose their own selves, in Hell will they abide.”
| Al-Mu’minin: 103]

t¢7 . ‏ماهد‎

47"( 7 مح ساس و
‎re}‏ هوف عِبسَةٍ ‎Kel‏ وأما

“Then as for him whose balance 5 good deeds) will be heavy,
He will live a pleasant life (in Paradise) But as for him whose
balance (of good deeds) will be light, He will have his home in
Hawiyah (pit, ie., Hell) ” [Al-Qari‘ah: 6-9]

Sadly, Sayyid Qutb, by Allah, rejects the scale, and denies that
Allah will be seen on the Day of Judgment; and he treads the path
of the Jahmiyyah and the Mu'tazilah in many of the affairs of
‘Aqidah, by Allah this is the case. We mention this so that people
will not be deceived by the books of this man. For indeed by
Allah, they are filled with misguidance. In the most fundamental
aspects of the religion, Sayyid Qutb is astray and lost. And many
of the youth will go astray because of their sanctification of him,
raising him to a level he does not belong. Sadly, you do not find a
Mu'‘tazili or Jahmi upon an innovation except that he joins them
in it, magnifying it and drawing attention to 16 he denies the
Scale, the Throne, and many other things as well. By Allah (these)

are catastrophes.

So al-Im4m Ahmad says [To believe in the Scale on the Day of
Judgment as it comes in the hadith] The Mu'tazilah, the
Jahmiyyah, the Batintyyah, and the other misguided groups deny
these (essential points of the Islamic Creed).

Payot 2

Book of at-Tafstr, hadith no. (4729); Muslim, The Description of The Day of
Judgment, Paradise, and the Hell-Fire, hadith no. (2785)]

The slaves’ actions will be weighed as well, as it comes in a
narration; believing in it, affirming it, opposing anyone who
rejects it, and shunning argumentation with such a person.

C35) ERRW

34 [believing in it, affirming it, opposing anyone who tejects it, 2

and shunning argumentation with such a person] You learned ‏مم‎

what has been said concerning debating (in the previous lessons).

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

تكلم الله لعباده لوم القيامة

Allah (3) will speak to His servants on

the Day of Judgment
Re: the Foundations of the Sunnah is To believe and affirm
that Allah will speak to the slaves on the Day of Judgment

with no interpreter between them.*»

35 As the Prophet (#8) said: “There is no one from amongst you
except that Allah will speak to him, with no interpreter between

them.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Heart Softeners, hadith no.
(6539); Muslim, The Book of az-Zakah, hadith no. (10I6)|

It has previously been mentioned that Allah will call out, as Allah
says:

nears

© po ‏من‎ LZ. ‏ما‎ Sle He bla 55 eras ‏وموم‎ }

0007 4% يا لع ع اس ‎bye Aes‏ وس 6 0

{© weds AOS MS S85 ‏وأ‎ pb ae 535
..and on the day when He will call unto them (polytheists)
(saying): ‘Where are My (so-called) partners (whom you did
invent?’ They will say:
‘We inform You that none of us bears witness to it (that they are
your partners)!’ And those whom they used to invoke before (in
this world) shall disappear from them, and they will perceive that

they have no place of refuge (from Allah's Punishment) ”
| Al- ‘Fassila. 47-48 |

pre gt tyr Oe, ¢ ‏عر‎ A744 Are Sh pore
4) 00 ‏رعموت‎ 2S ‏لذن‎ (CRA ‏فيقول أبن‎ ies}
“And (remember) the day when He will call to them say: “Where

ate My (so-called) partners whom you used to assert?”
| Al-Qasas: 62]

Calling out is not except with words and voice, and this is speech.
Allah will call out to the people of Paradise: “Are you pleased?

Phyo lO

BAN Syl od

جم هه ‎FE‏ مو 93(

Shall I give you more?” [Ibid] He will speak (to whom he wishes)
and He (BE) speaks. Allah will speak, He will speak to individuals
without any interpreter, and He (4) will speak to everyone. So
Allah—glory be to Him—is described with this perfection and
completeness, always and forever. This is from His complete and
perfect attributes, and He will speak to individuals on the Day of
Judgment. Likewise, Allah spoke to MtisA and Muhammad (38);
He spoke to Jibril, and Allah speaks to the Angels. This is from
the characteristics of completeness and perfection. Thus the point
of benefit is that Allah will speak to the believers on the Day of
Judgment.

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

‎le}‏ بالحوض وصفته

‎The Belief in the Hawd Its Description
١ ‏ه"‎ believe in the Hawd (The Cistern/Fountain)** and that
the Messenger (#8) has a Hlawd that his Ummah will come

‎36 This is from the points of ‘Agidah that it is incumbent upon
the slave to have firm faith in. A number of prophetic narrations
have come about the awd, reaching the level of tawatur (a
narration that is reoccurring and has been narrated by many
narrators), and that “...(this fountain) would take a month to
travel it...” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Heart Softeners, hadith

‎no. (6579)] and “Tts length and width are equal” [Collected by
Muslim, The Book of Virtues hadith no. (2300) with the wording “Its width

‎is like its length”). In other hadith “It is from al-Madtnah to San‘a”
[Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Heart Softeners, hadith no. (6580);
Muslim, The Book of Virtues hadith no. (2303)] and from “Aylah to
San‘a” [Collected by al-Bukhart, The Book of Heart Softeners, hadith no.
(6591); Muslim, The Book of Virtues, hadith no. (2298)]. The Hawd is
from that which Allah has honored Muhammad (#8) with. And
Allah said about Muhammad 2

‎Pa 2‏ 7 سير م

‎ic het DENS

‎“Verily, We have granted you (O Muhammad $$) al-Kawthar (a
river in paradise). Therefore turn in prayer to your Lord and
sacrifice (to Him only). For he who hates you (O Muhammad
48), he will cut off (from posterity and every good thing in this
world and in the Hereafter).” | Al-Kawthar:1-3]

‎This is from the most virtuous of the things that Allah has
bestowed upon His slave and Messenger Muhammad (38), from
the things of this life and the Hereafter.

‎Piz O

77

3

to on the Day of Judgment; its width is like its length which is
equal to a month’s journey. Its vessels are like the number of stars
in the sky*” | Collected by Muslim, The Book of Virtues, hadith no. (2303) ‏و[‎
‎as has been authentically reported in various narrations.

جم جه 36 مو صى

It has been narrated that people will be pushed away from it; they
are the apostates. The people of innovation, likewise, will be
pushed away, which was mentioned by al-Qurtub? and other than
him. Al-Hafith Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani conveyed from al-Qurtubi
that al-Bukhart said: That which is intended by ‘pushed away’
from the Hlawd and the Messenger of Allah (38) will say: “My
Companions, My Companions,” | Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of
Heart Softeners, hadith no. (6582); Muslim, The Book of Virtues, hadith no.
(2304)], he said these are the people who apostated from the
teligion; while some scholars even included the people of
innovation within them. Why? Because they introduced newly
invented matters into the religion after the Prophet (#8). The
people of innovation introduced affairs into the religion after the
Prophet Muhammad (38). Why will they be pushed away?
Because they changed the religion of Allah, and introduced newly
invented matters into the religion, that which was not from it.

Thus, this hadith includes them as well.

*” These vessels are from gold and silver, as it is reported by
Muslim and others in the numerous authentic narrations and this
is something that is well known.

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

الإيجان بعذاب القبر
‎Believing in the Punishment of the Grave‏

| ae the Foundations of the Sunnah is the belief in the
punishment of the grave*’, and that (the people) of this

38 Many prophetic narrations have come about this point, and

from the verses is the statement of Allah:

do
- ont 4 3 Aa “of SF “7 Z aS

0 دار يَعَرضّوت ‎(ie‏ غدوا وعشيًا ويوم تقوم ‎Sle Tesh acti‏

4“ )5( SOIL ‏فرعو‎
‎“The Fire, they are exposed to it, morning and afternoon. And on
the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the

Angels): “Cause Pharaoh’s people to enter the severest torment.”
[Ghafir: 46]

So Pharaoh and his people, and likewise the disbelievers in
general will be placed on the fire in the morning and the evening.
This is the punishment of the barzakh, then in addition to that
there is the punishment of the Day of Judgment:

2 ‏صر‎ LAE ‏را اس‎ Om 4 ‏مو‎ 2 ve
HY NIE ‏فرعو‎ Tie eS ‏تَمُوم ألنَاعهَ‎ OS #
“,,.and on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be
said to the Angels): “Cause Pharaoh’s people to enter the severest
torment.” | Ghafir: 46]

And there are other verses with similar meaning. From the
prophetic narrations that elaborate on this point is that which ts
in al-Bukhari and Muslim [Al-Bukhart, The Book of al-Widé’, hadith
no. (218); Muslim, The Book of Purification, hadith no, (292)], that the
Prophet (#8) passed by two graves and he said: “Indeed they are
(both) being punished, but they are not being punished for
something (they deemed) to be major.”

(3S

0

9 مرة©

The Messenger (8) said: “Yes, it certainly zs a major sin. As for
one of them he used to carry tales, (with the intentions of
spreading mischief amongst the people). As for the other he did
not protect himself from being soiled with urine (while relieving
himself).” | Collected by al-Bukhart and Muslim]

He fell into a major sin, so Allah punished him in the barzakh
(1.e., stage between this life and the Hereafter). This is from the
proofs that the people will be punished in the grave because of
their sins.

Also from these proofs is the prophetic narration of al-Barra’,
where Munkar and Nakir will come to the person while he is
dead in his grave, and will question him. The believer will
(respond correctly saying): “He is Muhammad, the Messenger of
Allah. He came with clear evidence and guidance,” as it is found
in the hadith of Asma’. Therefore, we believed in him and
followed him.

In the hadith of al-Barra’, (it is mentioned that) the dead will be
asked: “"Who is your Lord? Who is your Prophet? What is your
religion?’ So he will respond by saying: ‘My Lord is Allah, My
religion is al-Islam, and my Prophet is Muhammad (38).’ Then
the angel will say to him, ‘We knew you to be from the believers,
so sleep because indeed you were a believer.’ And then he will be
shown his place in the fire if he were to have been a disbeliever.
And then it will be said (to him); ‘Allah has given you in place of
it, an abode in Paradise.’ Then he will say, ‘O my Lord, establish
the hour!’ And it will be said to him to “Wait!”

As for the disbeliever, the two angels will come and ask him while
he is in his grave: “Who is your Lord? What is your religion? He
will say: ‘uh uh, I don’t know, I heard the people say something,
so I said it.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of the Funeral Prayer,

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

Ummah will be tested in their graves, and will be asked about al-
fman, al-Islam, their Lord and their Prophet. Munkar and Nakir

hadith no. (1374); Muslim, The Book of Paradise, and the Description of Its
Bliss and Inhabitants, hadith no. (2870, 2871)|

We ask Allah to keep us safe. It 1s feared for many people,
because many people do not truly know the meaning of the
Prophetic Message, and they do not know that Muhammad came
with clarity and guidance, and they do not know the meaning of
“La isha ila All4h,” rather they heard the people saying
something so they said it (along with them).

Hence, the believer should beware and ponder over the Book of
Allah, and prepare for this response. Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah
(8) came to us with guidance and clear evidence, so we believed
and followed him. This belief is based on true knowledge of the
guidance and clarity which the Prophet Muhammad (#8) came
with. So that it will be of benefit in this severe test.

And the Messenger (#8) said: “Indeed you will be tested in your

graves, similar to or close to the trial of the Dajjal” [Collected by ‏له‎
‎Bukhari, The Book of Knowledge, hadith no. (86); Muslim, The Book of the
Eclipse Prayer, hadith no. (905)|

(Likewise) in the Tashahhud:“O Allah I seek refuge in you from
the punishment of the grave, from the punishment of the Fire,
from the trials of life and death (and from the trails of al-Masth

ad-Dayjal.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of the Funeral Prayer, hadith
no. (1377); Muslim, The Book of al-Masajid and Places of Prayer, hadith no.
(S89)|

The proofs about the punishment in the grave and the barazakh
are many, including that which we have mentioned and other
proofs as well. This is an established affair which Ahl as-Sunnah
believes in, while the Mu’‘tazilah and others who tread their path
from the people of misguidance deny the punishment of the
grave.

50

3

>
%9

=

will come, as Allah wills and wants, and to have firm belief in
this.°°

جم« هه 85 مو 93

°° How do Munkar and Nakir enter into the grave? As Allah
wills. The Angel enters into the womb and is commanded with
four words: the person’s provisions, end, will he be happy or
miserable. So after this how can anyone ask about how will
Munkar and Nakir come in the grave? We do not have
knowledge of this, rather Allah alone knows the reality of this
affair, and He informed us of this. So it is not upon us except but
to believe. And the most noteworthy characteristics of the believer
is that he believes in the unseen:

Allah says:

Pe a Car ‏ع2‎

7 : - oe ‏عد وام‎ > 07 2 2 re 00 ope 7 4 Pa ‏جاب‎ ord
‏الصّلوة‎ sates Call Seah ‏الذين‎ CO) Gaal a ‏فيه‎ Sei als © ‏الم‎ +

(0 sib Be:
“Altf-Lam-Mim. This is the Book (The Qur’4n) whereof there is
no doubt, a guidance to those who are pious. Who believe in the
Ghayb (i.e., unseen) and perform as-Salah and spend out of what
we have provided for them.” [Al-Bagarah 1-3]

So you believe in the unseen which is included in the Qur’An and
that which is found in the Sunnah of Prophet Muhammad (#8).
And Allah charged His Messenger with conveying this Qur’an
and clarifying it to mankind. These Prophetic narrations that
discuss the punishment of the grave are from the clarification of
the Prophet Muhammad (#8), and they give detail to the verses
about the punishment and bliss of the barzakh.

The Explanation of Usél As-Sunnah

أسئلة الدرس

Questions from the Class

Question: As Salamu ‘Alaikum wa rahmatullah, it has been
narrated on the authority of Ibn Sirin and Ayytb As-
Sakhtiyani about leaving off the people of innovation, and
not even listening to their recitation of Qur’4n. How are these
narrations applied to the tapes of the people of innovation
and the people of partisanship? Are their tapes not to be
listened to?

Response: This warning was not only narrated on the

authority of Ibn Sirtn and Ayytb, rather it 5 found in the
Qur’4n and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (#).This
warning also came from the Companions, their students, and
the scholars of al-Islam. So it is incumbent upon the weak
individual to not subject himself to trials. Rather he should
distance himself from the people of innovation.

2. Question: Can it be said that the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-
Jama‘ah never differed in the fundamentals of the religion?

Response: The Companions—may Allah be pleased with
them—never differed. However, there are from Ahl as-
Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah, even the best of them, who may have
fallen into simple mistakes that do not have any impact on
the Manhaj. For example: are al-Islam and al-Im4n one thing,
or do they each have different meanings, and each person may
have their texts. However, that which is correct is that al-
Iman and al-Isl4m are two different things. Al-Islam, as
mentioned in the hadith of Jibril refers to the actions of the
limbs, while al-Im4n refers to the actions of the heart.

“AJ-Islam is to declare that there is no deity worthy of being
wotshipped in truth except Allah, and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, to establish the prayer, to give the

I.

52

5S

3

‎ar)‏ و السب

‎Tip‏ أصوا

‎te
‏ا‎

‎\

‎obligatory charity, to fast the month of Ramadhan, and to
make pilgrimage to the Holy House if you have the ability.“

‎“Al-Im4n is to believe in Allah, the Angels, the Books, The
Messengers, (the Last Day, to believe in the Divine Decree,
the good and bad of it).” [Ibid]

‎So if al-Islam and al-[m4n are mentioned together, they each
have separate meanings, and if they are mentioned separately,
the one includes the other. Thus, the differences such as these
do not harm, if All4h wills.

‎3. Question: Is it to be understood from the statements of
al-Imam Ahmad pertaining to the innovation of the one who
does not take a position about the Speech of Allah, that in
times of fitnah, no one’s statements are accepted if they are
general, until he clarifies his statements and position?

‎Response: By Allah, this stance is not general or unclear
speech, rather this is clearly innovation; why is he not taking a
stance? Is this statement, pertaining to the Qur’4n being
created, clear or apparent doubt?

‎Questioner: But the question was: Ahmad declared these
people to be innovators; do we declare the likes of these
people to also be innovators?

‎Dr. Rabi’: Yes, we declare the likes of these people to be
innovators in the religion, if a person refuses to take a stance,
and says: I do not know if the Qur'an is created or uncreated,
this person is an innovator. But the ignorant person is not
declared to be an innovator, until he is taught and then
refuses the truth. Nowadays, these people (1e., those who
mention the people of innovation with praise), are diluting
the da'wah. A person can have countless major deviance and
innovation, and the people still refer to him as an Im4m or
The Explanation of Us4l As-Sunnah

Mujaddid (one who has renewed affairs of the religion).
There are no people more dangerous to al-Islam then these
type, who dilute and water down al-Islam, the way of the
pious predecessors. But if someone from the people of the
Sunnah slips (and makes a slight mistake), they do not have
any mercy on them. However, when the people of innovation
fall into major destructive innovation there is no harm, This
is from the great trials that have inflicted the youth during
these times. This deception and trickery places forth a
methodology by which to protect the people of innovation
and their books. For example, the Manhay of a/-Muwdazanat
(a deviant methodology which stipulates that an innovator's
so-called positive qualities be mentioned to counter or offset
any negative characteristics which are being warned from ) this
dangerous methodology is destructive to al-Islam, its core and
its branches. Furthermore, it eventually leads to al-Irja’ (the
belief that actions are not from Faith, and that Faith is not
harmed by disobedience), placing forth principles by which to
protect innovation and its people, while falsely attacking Ahl
as-Sunnah.

4. Question: What are the books that you advise the student
of knowledge to focus on as it pertains to the issue of divine

decree (al-Qada’ and al-Qadar)?

Response: The books of Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, and
from them is the book Kitab al-Qadar. Also the books Shifa
ALAIil, by Ibn Al-Qayyim, Kitab Al-Qadar by Aba Dawid,
Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawityyah, Al-‘Agidah Al-W4sittyyah, etc.
Also there is al-Bukhari’s Kitab Al-Qadar and likewise ~
Muslim Kitab Al-Qadar, finally the statements of the Salaf

that we have previously mentioned.

S. Question: Is Allah’s Speech on/y an innate quality, or
both innate and Qawltyyah (i.e, occur based on Allah's

Pape 5O

AN Syl 78

Divine Will. For indeed Allah speaks with what He wills,
when He wills, and How He wills. )?

Response: Innate and Qawliyyah (i.e., occurs based on Allah’s
Divine Will). He speaks when He wills, and with what He
wills. It is innate and Qawliyyah.

He (the questioner) is asking is speech merely an innate
characteristic? This is the statement of the ‘Ashd‘irah. With
them speech is merely established meanings with Allah,
without letters or voice. They only say speech is an innate
characteristic, but does He speak? According to them, No!
However, Ahl as-Sunnah says: Speech is an innate quality
with which Allah is able to speak, and Allah speaks when He

wills, and if He wills, and to whatever extent:

L\SCL 7 Gree
١
‏صم‎

CO ‏وز جننابوذله.‎
“Say (O Muhammad ‏يله‎ to Mankind): “If the sea were ink for
(writing) the Words of my Lord, surely, the sea would be
exhausted before the Words of my Lord would be finished,

even if We brought (another sea) like it for its aid.”
[ALKahf: 109]

wo SB
‏ت رف‎

-

The statement of al-Imam Ahmad about al-Qadar: [Not to
debate or argue with anyone, and not to learn argumentation]
There are from amongst the small students of knowledge,
who go and debate with the Rafidhah, the Jahmiyyah, and the
Mu'tazilah concerning the divine decree, debating with them
in these affairs. Do not subject yourself to doubts, (for indeed
they lead you to being) astray. However, the skillful scholar,
who knows that he will be able to benefit with such debates,
either aiding the Sunnah or subduing the people of falsehood,
or even maybe Allah will guide the one who the scholar is
The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

debating. If he is seeking the truth, then the scholars is to
clarify the issue to him.

As for you, the poor small student, who is weak in
knowledge, do not debate! I emphasize this point to the
students of knowledge that you should not debate concerning
the likes of these very serious innovations. As for the normal
affairs that you know, and they are in the limits of your
abilities, and you fully understand them, then there is no
problem for you to discuss them, as long as the intention is
not to debate and gain victory, but rather the goal is for
clarification.

Glory and praite be te Vou O Lllah, F testify that there is no deity that deserves
(93 56) 2 CREO

ST

الإمان بالشّفاعة يوم القيامة

Belief in the Intercession on the Day of

Judgment
rom the Foundations of the Sunnah: To believe in the
Prophetic Intercession*on the Day of Judgment, and to

* The Prophetic Intercession is affirmed for the Prophet
Muhammad (#8) and it takes place at the site of the Day of
Judgment, when the situation becomes very intense for the people.
They will go to Adam, then to Nth, then to Ibrahim, then to
Misa, then to ‘Isa; all of them excuse themselves with excuses that
are all known from the hadith. Finally the affair ends with
Prophet Muhammad (#8), at which point he will say “It is for
me.” Then he will go and prostrate a lengthy prostration beneath
the “Arsh (The Mighty Throne of Allah), and will praise Allah
with praises that are not yet known, but rather All4h will inspire
him with these words at that time. Then it will be said to him:
“Raise your head, ask and you will be given, request your

intercession, and you will intercede.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The
Book of Monotheism, hadith no. (7510); Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith
no. (193)]

Also, the Messenger (38) has other intercessions where he will
raise the levels of certain people in Paradise who deserved lower
levels; he will intercede for them, and Allah will raise their levels.
Also there will be people who deserve to enter the Hell-Fire, but
the Prophet (8) will intercede for them, and they will not enter
it. In addition to this, there will be those who will enter the Hell-
Fire because of certain sins which they committed, and major sins
they committed, then the Messenger of Allah (#8) will intercede
for them, along with the Prophets, the Angels, and the Pious.
This is a type of intercession, and there are other types in which
the Prophets, the Truthful, the Pious, and the Angels all will
participate.

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

The Prophetic narrations which describe this intercession are
numerous; they are mentioned in both al-Bukhart and especially
Sahih Muslim. From amongst these narrations is the famous
hadith reported by Abd 5210 al-Khudri, that the Prophet (8) will
intercede, and Allah will say: “Go and take out of Hell anyone
whose heart you find Faith equal to one (gold) dinar, then the
one who has in his heart Faith equal to the weight of half of a
dinar, then the one who has Faith equal to a kernel, then the one
whose Faith is equal to the amount of an atom, then the one

whose Faith is equal to the absolute smallest particle.” [Collected by
al-Bukhari, The Book of Monotheism, hadith no. (7439); Muslim, The Book
of Faith, hadith no. (183)]

So Allah—The Mighty and The Blessed—will remove the people
of Tawhid from the Hell-Fire based on what they have of belief,
even if it be less than the smallest molecule, as it has been
authentically reported in the various prophetic narrations.

The Mu'tazilah, the Khawary, the Rafidhah, and others from the
people of misguidance all reject this intercession, while it is

affirmed in the Book of Allah and the Sunnah.

Allah—The Most High—said:

aw se “a ‏ضرح‎ pans Y 47 aed “? oe Pa a

FB NG : ‏ولا‎ ale ‏وما‎ bl ce ‏يعلم ما‎ }

“He knows what j is s before them, and what is behind them, and

they cannot intercede except for him with whom He is pleased.
And they stand in awe for fear of Him.” [Al-Anbiya: 28)

Here, they hold on to the generalities of these verses which refer
to the disbelievers, but not the believers. For example, Allah says:

58

3

Page 9

a”

fw bezel sg CAL ae eo ‏م‎ he
‏من قبل‎ PRED Les Lyainl Tele ‏يتأيها الْذِينَ‎ }

PX pL ae, 7 ‏سف ررح س2‎ A BS A
4) @) SAual ‏وَل سَفعَة وَالْكَفْرونَ هم‎ EG
“O you who believe! Spend of that with which We have provided
for you, before a Day comes when there will be no bargaining,
nor friendship, nor intercession. And it is the disbelievers who are
the wrongdoerts.” | Al-Bagarah: 254]

. Ror Mor 0 e i

ن يافى يوم لا بيع فِيهِ

ع4

There are many verses that negate the intercession for the
disbelievers.

Allah—The Most High—said:
4 © 2 ‏عه 2097 7 لشفي‎ (a ¥

“So no intercession of intercessots will be of any use to them”
| Al-Muddathir: 48]

The people of desires clung on to these generalities, and left off
the great number of texts from the Sunnah, as well as some of the
verses of the Qur’4n which indicate that the intercession will
occur for the believers, who Allah is pleased with.

Allah says:

aw SF 47?4 Y $227 AL Arey Ly, oe ow ‏ل‎

‎aa‏ رج 0 بير له
‎“He knows what is before them, and what is behind them, and‏
‎they cannot intercede except for him with whom He is pleased.‏

‎And they stand in awe for fear of Him.” [Al-Anbiya: 28]

‎Also Allah—The Most High—says:
(ASS GaN the Kaen 855)

‎1

The Explanation of ‏[ؤولنا‎ As-Sunnah

“Intercession with Him profits not except for him whom He
permits...” [Saba: 23]

As for the disbelievers, the intercession is not allowed for them,
and it will never be accepted. Even Ibrahim’s (8) intercession for
his father will not be accepted even though Ibrahim is the father
of the Prophets (sii , slai de), has such a lofty status, and is
khalil-Allah (.e., the close friend of Allah).

The Prophet Muhammad (#8) will have a specific intercession for
his Uncle ‏نط‎ Talib, where he will be removed from the deepest
parts of the Fire, to the shallowest. Hence, the statement of Allah:

“So no intercession of in intercessors whe be of any use to them”
[Al-Muddathir: 48] refers to the disbelievers.

As for the believers sae says)

‘ 58 Gy TG NMG
“And there are many angels in the heavens, whose intercession
will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave for whom He
wills and is please with.” [An-Najm: 26]

Also Allah—The Most High—says:

{ 235) ‘i soe ais ‏من دا | الزى‎
“...who is he that can intercede with Him except with His
permission. a | Al-Bagarah: 255]

Thus, this is the type of intercession which is permitted by Allah
for the believers and is established in the Book of Allah and the
reoccurring Prophetic Sunnah. The Messenger of Allah and

Poye GO

7ر6

believe that people will exit the Hell-Fire after being scorched and
becoming charcoal, then they will be commanded to be brought
to a river at the door of Paradise, as it comes in the narration.
This is how Allah wills. So it is only for us to believe and hold
this to be truth.

(3S) ERB

(other than him) will intercede for the believers to raise their
levels, and yet for others they will intercede for them not to enter
the Hell-Fire and for others they will intercede for them to be
removed from it, as has been previously mentioned earlier, as it
has occurs in the prophetic narrations.

Ahl as-Sunnah believes in this intercession, and it is from their
fundamental beliefs, in which they oppose the people of
falsehood, from the KhawAry, the Rafidhah, and other then them.
It 15 a must that the believer has firm conviction and belief in this
essential point.

The Explanation of ‏أؤولنا‎ As-Sunnah

The Appearance of the Dajjal

rom the Foundations of the Sunnah is: To believe that al-
Masih ad-Dayjal will appear*!, written between his eyes (the

41 Many prophetic narrations have come concerning the

appearance of the Dayjal and likewise the descending of the
Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary. From amongst these narrations is

that which you say everyday in your prayer: “O Allah I seek

refuge in You from the punishment of the grave, from the

punishment of the Hell-Fire, from the trials of life and death, and
the evil trial of the Dajjal.” [Collected by al-Bukhari]

(Sadly), there are some people who deny the appearance of the
Dayjal, saying that they understand the Dayal with various
explanations and interpretations. Prom the _ strangest
interpretations of the people of these times, is that they say that
the Dayjal is not an actual person and neither is 15 ($8), but
rather they represent spiritual and material tendencies or
persuasions. As for the material movements, they say this refers to
the Dayjal, while the spiritual movements, they say refers to 15

60

The prophetic reports about the Dajjal and the descending of 15
($8) are numerous and reoccurring, as it will follow. From
amongst these prophetic narrations 1s that which is narrated by
‘Abdullah bin “Umar, Hudhayfah bin al-Yaman, ‘Abdullah bin
Mas‘fid, and Abt Hurayrah («). These narrations are in Sahih
Muslim concerning the appearance of the Dayjal, explaining that
every Prophet (52 ‏و‎ sai ge) warned their nations from him, and
likewise Muhammad () warned from him saying: “Indeed I
watn you from him, and I will inform you of something (about
him) that no one has mentioned before: Indeed he is blind in his
right eye. [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Trials, hadith no. (7127) |

Page DZ

Page D3

He will appear with (the image) of Paradise and the Hell-Fire. To
the people it will appear that one river is fire and the other is a
garden. But in reality the river (with the image) of the fire is a
garden and the river with (the image) of a garden is actually fire.
So the Messenger of Allah, (48) commanded the believer, when he
sees the river that appears to be a fire, to lower his head, close his
eyes, and drink from it; for indeed he will find it to be cool water.
And as for that which appears to the people to be a garden, for
indeed it is fire, and the refuge of Allah is sought.

The Messenger (#8) said: “Verily I am more knowledge than the

Dajjal about that which he has and comes with.” [Collected by
Muslim, The Book of Trials and Signs of the Hour, hadith no. (2934) |

So the Messenger ($8) knows more than the Dajjal. The Dayal
does not know that one river is a garden and the other is fire, and
we seek Allah's refuge. The Messenger (38) is informing us about

these realities, and in fact this is from his miracles and that which

indicates the truthfulness of his Prophethood (#8).

Also, it is appropriate to mention here while discussing the
prophetic narrations about the Dajjal, that people have mentioned
that although the Messenger (#8) mentioned the seriousness of
the Dayjal, he also belittled and dismissed him at the same time,
which made the people discuss and engage in this topic, saying
about the Messenger (8) “you have, while emphasizing his

danger, made him seem insignificant.”

The Prophet (38) said: “Tt is other than the Dayjal that I fear for

you.” [Collected by Muslim, The Book of Trials and Signs of the Hour,
hadith no. (2937) ]

The reason for this is that the Dayjal clearly has written on his
forehead Kéfir (Disbeltever), which every believer, whether they

read or write, will be able to understand; it is a clear sign that he

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

word) “Kafir.” Also to believe in the prophetic narrations that
have been reported about this, and to believe that this will indeed
take place.

‎CRED‏ 36 ومو هى

‎is a disbeliever, as opposed to the one who wears the garments of
al-Islam, in the name of al-Isl4m, and carries the slogans of al-
Islam. This person is more harmful, for this reason the Messenger
($8) says: “It is other than the Dajjal that I fear for you.” [Ibid]
These are the ones that misguide the people (mixing truth with
falsehood), the Liars. The Messenger (#8) has warned us from
them.

‎Pie GE

5
3

نزول ‎(que‏ عليه السلام

The Descending of Jesus (3)
tom the Foundations of the Sunnah: To believe that ‘Is4
(Jesus), the son of Mary (#8) will descend and kill the Dayal

at the gate of Ludd.”

42 ‘This comes in many authentic narrations, including that which
is found in Sahth Muslim | The Book of Trials and the Signs of the Hour,
hadith no. (2937)] that Jesus ($8) will descend with his hands on the
wings of two Angels, wearing two garments, lightly dyed with
saffron, at the Eastern Minaret of Damascus. Afterwards he will
head toward the Muslims and then seek to kill the Dajjal, and will
in fact kill him—may Allah bless you all.

The Prophetic Messenger Masih (Messiah) will defeat al-Masth
ad-Dayjal. As for the naming of Jesus with the name al-Masih
‏(المسيح)‎ this if from the word meaning as-Siyahah (lil) (1e.,
traveling through the land, teaching giving da‘wah). While al-
Masih ad-Dajyjal’s (Seal ‏(المسيخ‎ name derives from his eye that is
mamstihah ‏(ممشوحة)‎ (blind in his right eye, resembling a floating

grape). Jesus is a Prophet, a Messenger (8), while the other is a
lying dayjal. One is al-Masih, Jesus the son of Mary (8) and the
other is al-Masth ad-Dayjal, whom Allah will destroy at the hands
of Jesus (38).

After ‘Is4 Jesus) slays the Dayjal, Ya’jaj and Ma’jdy will appear,
and then ‘Is4 (Jesus) and those with him, from amongst the
believers, will retreat toward the Mountain of Tir and will then
supplicate to Allah—The Blessed, The Most High. (At which
point) Allah will destroy Ya’jéij and Ma’jéy, and upon their death,
a foul smell will spread on the land. Then Jesus, the Prophet of
Allah, and his Companions will beseech Allah, and Allah will

send birds with necks like Bactrian camels, carrying them and

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

جم هه 85 ‎C9350)‏

throwing them where Allah wills. Then Allah will make the sky
rain a heavy downpour, leaving the earth like a slippery land like a
clean mirror. At that point Allah, the Blessed and Most High,
will command the Earth to bring forth its fruits and produce.
From the blessing of Allah, a single pomegranate will suffice large
groups of people, and crowds of people will be able to seek shade
beneath its branches. Likewise, Allah will bless the camel’s milk,
to the point that a little bit of camel’s milk would suffice parties,
while the cow’s milk will suffice many people, and the goat’s milk
with suffice a tribe.

Then after this, Allah will send to ‘Is4 (Jesus) and his people a
pure wind and they will die. After this will come forth the most
evil of mankind, bringing forth great chaos and confusion,
committing adultery like donkeys. And it is upon these people

that the Hour will be established. [See Sahth Muslim, Book of Trials
and Signs of the Hour, Hadith no. 2937, from the Hadith of an-Nawwas bin

Sam ‘an |

These are all from the Major Signs of the Hour: the appearance
of the Dayal, the descending of ‘Is4 (Jesus), the appearance of the
Creature, as well as the rising of the sun from the west. All of this
will take place and are from the Major Signs of the Hour.

Pip GO

PayePL

والإيمان قول وعمل يزيد و ينقص
‎Al-Iman (True Faith) is Statement and‏

Action; it Increases and Decreases

| ‏در‎ the Foundations of the Sunnah is to believe that: Faith is
speech and action; it increases and decreases: as it has been
narrated in the prophetic narration, where the Messenger (#8)
said: “The most complete of the believers in faith are the best of

them in their mannerts.” [Collected by Abii Dawad, The Book of Sunnah,
hadith no. (4682); at-Tirmidhi, The Book of Breastfeeding, hadith no. (I 162);

al-albani graded it to be hasan sahith]*

43 Al-Ima4n is made up of statement and action: statements of the
heart and tongue, as well as actions of the heart and limbs. Or you
can say: Al-Iman is speech, actions, and belief: it increases with

obedience to Allah and decreases with disobedience to Allah. This

is al-Im4n with Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah.

The deviant group, al-Khawary, agree with the people of the
Sunnah, that al-Im4n is made up of speech, actions, and belief,
however they deny the fact that faith increases and decreases. This
is because, with the Khawary, a Muslim’s perpetration of a Major
Sin removes him from the fold of Islam. On the other hand, the
Murjrah are the opposite of the Khawary. They say that faith is
only affirmation of the heart, or to simply know, which is the
belief of the Jahmiyyah; but the extreme Murji’ah limit faith to

affirmation of the heart (without actions and statements ).

As for the Muryrah al-Fugahé, faith is made up of belief in the
heart and speech on the tongue, with the exclusion of actions. As
for the People of the Sunnah, both the actions of the heart and

limbs are included within faith, after affirmation. [Note: Some of the
Murji'ah consider actions of the heart to be a component of faith, as Ibn
Taymiyyah mentioned 1 in Kitab al- -[man]

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

Therefore, faith includes beliefs, actions of the heart such as
having fear of Allah, loving and seeking Allah, as well as relying
upon Him. All of these are considered actions of the heart.
Rather, they are at the center of Faith; no one’s faith can be
established except with the actions of the heart. Likewise, actions
of the limbs such as fasting, praying, giving charity, and all other
deeds such as fighting and struggling in the way of Allah, even
removing something harmful from the pathways is all from true
faith. As the Prophet (#8) said: “Faith is made up of seventy
something branches, the highest being La ilaha illa Allah (The
declaration that thete is no deity worthy of being worshipped in
truth except Allah), and the lowest branch is to remove something

harmful from the road.” [Collected by Muslim, The Book of Faith,
hadith no. )35([

This Faith increases with obedience and decreases with
disobedience. It can increase until it reaches the likes of
mountains, and can decrease until it is as small as an atom’s

weight of Faith.

The Murji'ah believe that Faith neither increases nor decreases.
With them, faith is merely affirmation of the heart; therefore it 1s
not susceptible to decrease and increase. Rather, if a decrease was
to occur, this would mean that faith is not present, leaving such a
Muslim outside of the fold of al-Im4n. Also, the Muryji’'ah believe
faith does not vary from one individual to another: the most evil
and wicked of the Muslims is equal in faith to the Prophets, the
Righteous, and the Angels (ssa ‏وَ‎ sia) ge). This belief of theirs is
great misguidance and equally deviant are the Khawary. The evil
of the extreme Murjiah is very dangerous. With this belief of
theirs, they destroy the Legislation of the religion of al-Islam.
And likewise the Khaw4ry are filthy as well, because they declare
the Muslims to be disbelievers, lifting against them swords, and
making their blood and wealth permissible. If a Muslim commits

PigeDS

99

BAN Syl ‏شَرْحْ‎

a major sin such as fornication, robbery or murder, according to
them, he becomes a disbeliever.

All of this is a lie, muisguidance, and faulty understanding. Why
did Allah establish the Isl4mic punishment upon the thief? As
Allah says

قد

as

4 oe "sh ‏ير‎ als
“And the male and same thief cut their hands as a recompense
for that which they committed.” [Al-Ms’idah: 38]

Likewise, why did Allah establish the Islamic punishment upon
the one who drinks alcohol? What about the one who used to
drink alcohol (during the time of the Prophet (8)? He came to
the Prophet (8) and one of the people said: “May the curse of
Allah be upon you, how often it is that you are brought (in a state
of drunkenness).” So the Messenger of Allah (#8) said: “Do not

curse him, for indeed he loves All4h and His Messenger.”
| Collected by al-Bukhar?, The Book of Legal Punishments, hadith no. (6780) |

The legal punishment is established upon the believer and he is
still declared a disbeliever?! Rather this punishment is expiation
for him. Likewise, if an individual commits fornication and the
legislative punishment is established upon him, this is a form of
expiation for him. As for the disbeliever (.e., the apostate), the
Messenger (38) said about him: “Whoever changes their religion,

then execute him.” [Collected by al-Bukh4rt, The Book of al-Jihad, hadith
no. (3017)]

The perpetration of major sins, whether fornication, murder, the
consumption of intoxicants, or any other major sin: indeed, these
are extremely grave and tremendous offenses, and serious crimes
according to al-Islam, but Islam does not declare such Muslims to

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

دمج جه 35 ومو 93(

be disbelievers. Rather, the legislative punishment is established
against him, and this sinner may be punished in the Hereafter
because of his transgression if Allah does not pardon him. But
even with this, he does not leave the fold of al-Islam. Rather, if he
enters the Fire, he will eventually be removed from it by virtue of
the Tawhid that is with him, and eventuate in Paradise.

Pax 1OO

Pye 7

من ترك الصّلاة فقد كفر

Whoever Abandons the Prayer has

Disbelieved
rom the Foundations of the Sunnah is the belief that:
Whosoever abandons the prayer has disbelieved.“ There is no

4 [Whosoever abandons the prayer, he has disbelieved]: There are
many convincing proofs in support of this opinion, that the one
who abandons the pray is a disbeliever. However, there are those
scholars that oppose this opinion, and do not declare those who
abandon the prayer (1.e., from laziness) to be disbelievers, rather
they understand the religious texts (about this topic) in a different
way.

From the proofs that the scholars use to declare the one who
abandons the ne prayer to be a disbeliever is the statement of AII4h:

سه ا ‎A‏ 531 >< 20 أ
ونفصل الا ‎se pes‏ :0 ‘
‎“So if they repent, establish the prayer, and give charity, then they‏
‎are your brothers in the religion.” [At-Tawbah: 11[‏

Therefore, Islamic brotherhood is not established except after
entering into al- Iman, establishing the prayer, and giving charity.

Likewise Allah says,

‎AS‏ وو

‎Sb ‏إن أله‎ LS IES glo ‏و‎ BLAM ‏موأ‎ 31, (26 of }

‎“But if they repent, establish the prayer, and give charity, then
leave their way free.” [At-Tawbah: 5]

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

(Therefore it is understood that) they are not to be left free, and
have the sword removed except if they believe in Allah, establish
the prayer, and give charity. There are many strong proofs.
(Amongst them), the statement of the Prophet (38): “Whoever

abandons the prayer has disbelieved.” [Collected by at-Tirmidhi, The
Book of Faith, hadith no. (2621); Ibn Majah, The Book of Establishing the
Prayer and the Sunnah concerning it, hadith no. (1079); an-Nasa’i, The Book
of Prayer, hadith no. (463); al-albant graded it to be authentic |

As well as the statement of the Prophet (8): “Between a slave and

disbelief and polytheism is to abandon the prayer.” [Collected by at-
Tirmidhi, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (2619); Ibn Majah, The Book of
Establishing the Prayer and the Sunnah concerning it, hadith nos. (1078,
1080); an-Nas4’i, The Book of Prayer, hadith no. (464); al-Albant graded it to
be authentic |

(We should understand the status of the Prayer in Islam, that it is
very important). It is from the pillars of the religion, as
mentioned in the hadith of ‘Abdullah bin Shaqiq that al-Imam
Ahmad mentioned in the saying: “And there is no other action,
which to abandon it is disbelief, other than the prayer.” In this
particular work (1.e., Usd As-Sunnah) al-Imam Ahmad takes the
position that abandoning the prayer is disbelief, basing his stance
upon prophetic narrations as well as the narration of ‘Abdullah
bin Shaqiq, when he said: “There was no other action, the
abandonment of which, the Companions considered disbelief
other than the Prayer.”

Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High,
have mercy on him—has mentioned that the majority of the |
scholars from amongst the Companions and other than them are
upon the opinion that the one who abandons the prayer is a
disbeliever. Rather, a large party from amongst the scholars
declares the one who has abandoned a single pillar from the
pillars of al-Islém to be a disbeliever, whether it is the prayer, the

obligatory charity, or Hajj. However, al-Imam Ahmad has a

Page OP

Poze 5

number of (different) statements about this topic. In one juristic
ruling al-Imam Ahmad does not declare the individual to be a
disbeliever except if he abandons the prayer and charity. While he
has another ruling in which he declares the one who leaves the
prayer to be a disbeliever. Likewise, it has been narrated that he
has a ruling in which he does not declare the one who abandons
the prayer to be a disbeliever. These different positions are due to
the complication and seriousness of these affairs. The proofs for
both sides are very strong and convincing, so a person may have
varying views, decisions, and statements relating to this topic.

As for ash- Shafi‘t, Malik, Abt Hanifah, and many of the other
Imams of the Religion, they are all of the view that the one who
leaves off the prayer (.e., from laziness) is not a disbeliever, while
having complete consensus amongst them that the one who
abandons the prayer, while denying the obligation of it, is a
disbeliever. If he leaves off the prayer, denying it, then there is a
consensus that he is a disbeliever. And as you have heard, there are
those who even declare him to be a disbeliever, even if he
abandons the prayer from laziness and neglect. And ash-Shafi’i,
Ahmad in one of his statements, Malik, and many from amongst
the scholars are upon the position that he is not a disbeliever,
except if he abandons the prayer while denying it. But if he
recognizes it to be an obligation, then the scholars have differed
concerning this. Some scholars consider that he should be
executed. For example, if he leaves off the midday prayer, he is
asked to repent and is commanded to pray this prayer until the
‘Ast prayer comes in. If he still refuses to pray, he is to be
executed, implementing the legal punishment for abandoning the
prayer. As for the scholars who deem him to be a disbeliever, his
execution is not simply a legal punishment; rather he is executed
as a disbelieving apostate. Finally, Ab&i Hanifah is from the
scholars who say that he should not be executed, but rather

imprisoned, put to work, and punished until he either prays or
dies.

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

other action, the abandonment of which is tantamount to
disbelief, other than the prayer. Whosoever abandons the prayer
has disbelieved, and Allah has made it permissible for him to be

executed.

دمج جه 35 مو ‎C93‏

Phyo 1OD

The Companions of the Messenger of

Allah (38)
rom the Foundations of the Sunnah is: To believe that the
best of this Ummah, after Prophet Muhammad (38) is Abi

Bakr* as-Siddiq, then ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, then ‘Uthm4n bin

‘Affan*; we give precedence to these three just as the Companions

4SThis section is dealing with the virtues of the Companions,
which are established in the Book of Allah, the Sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah (#8), and consensus of the Muslims, except

for the people of misguidance such as the Khawarij and the
Rafidhah. The Qur’4n has mentioned the noble qualities of the
Companions, and has clarified their lofty status. As Allah says,

oan OSG AX Spiel ‏لْأَوَلُونَ من‎ ai

ae ‏وأ‎ ae fee | Aves ‏آ#ه ا جع‎ man

4 Outs act a Se ENT

“And the foremost to embrace Isl4m of the Muhéajirin and the
Ansar and those who followed them exactly (in Faith). Allah is
well-pleased with Him. He has prepared for them Gardens under
which rivers flow (Paradise), to dwell therein forever. That is the

supreme success.” [Surah Tawbah: 100 |

Also Allah—The Most Figh—said:

itt <2 325 e770

NOS Eh 2 BEX Seay}
(Or stan gars ess ‏تام‎

“Not equal among you are those who « spent and fought before the
conquering (of Mecca, with those among you who did so later).
Such are higher in degree than those who spent and fought

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

afterwards. But to all Allah has promised the best (reward). And
Allah is All-Aware of what you do.” [Al-Hadid: 10]

Hence the one who spent before the conquering of Mecca and
was from amongst the first to fight, Allah has promised him with
the best reward. Likewise, those that spent afterwards and fought,
Allah also promised them.

As Allah—The Most High—said:

“But to all Allah has promised the best (reward).”

~ Also Allah—The Most ee

7A 2 Sacer vee oA 22 ‏عرس‎

7% se 7 Bae “Ze Ass ‏وه‎ 2

de

CAA “4 wy LO? 4 GAL yy 494 7 FW GZ

سجدا ‎all G4 GS Speen‏ ورضوانا ‎rane‏ ف وجوههم ‎NG‏ السجود

c7 7 “\°% 2° ‏حت‎ 7 Lot . eshse 7
ail Ache ‏في اليل كزرع أخرج سطشه‎ ales acl ‏في‎ IE aus

ا ‎ee,‏ > 2 2 - وغ سس ‎poe‏
‎Je ok LE‏ سوقه- يسَحِبُ لياع | لبغيظ ‎A,‏ الكفار وعد ‎“it‏

4 cous ‏ولا‎ oat ‏ليحت متهم‎ ees ‏امَو‎ Sal
“Muhammad (#8) is the Messenger of Allah, and those who are
with him are severe against disbelievers, and merciful among
themselves. You see them bowing and falling down prostrate (in
ptayer), seeking Bounty from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure.
The mark of them (ie. of their Faith) is on their faces (foreheads)
from the traces of (their) prostration (during prayers). This is
their description in the Taurat (Torah). And their description in
the Injil (Gospel) is like a (sown) seed which sends forth its
shoot, then makes it strong, it then becomes thick, and it stands
straight on its stem, delighting the sowers that He may enrage the
disbelievers with them. Allah has promised those among them
who believe (ie., all those who follow Islamic Monotheism, the

Figo 1OO

Pye 7

teligion of Prophet Muhammad 3% till the Day of Resurrection)
and do righteous good deeds, forgiveness and a mighty reward
(i.e. Paradise).” [Al-Fath: 29]

Also Alla4ah—The Most High—said:

fw 4 Pt 7 Sow 24 ‏سا‎ we Ail wee Ae
‏م وَأَمواِلِهِمَ يدتغون فضلا من‎ rapes oF lar ‏المهدجرين بن الذين أ‎ 5

| ‏ا‎ AY, A WS ne 5 4y an
Sex Alls ‏وليك هم 2 عقون‎ W255 ‏ضوانا و‎

er 7 AA

why sine 2 Sst Ys oe) pla ‏حون من‎ Jala ‏من‎ “at Slat

2 a. 2 S$ “27 Ashe 14 Ewe ‏د‎
‏وَمَن دوق‎ Alias ay SK 5 ermal She 95505 ‏أوتوا‎ epee
4 4 ‏ده‎ Ze

CO) SAMA DSi oS ‏سُحَّ‎

“ne

SEZ ‏وَلَا‎ yl ‏نا‎ ie ‏سبق‎ Sail Gey ‏نا‎ pel ‏رينا‎ oh ys

{Oe eer 5 oe (pale Geld eG sb ‏في‎

“(And a is also a share in this booty) for the poor emigrants,
who were expelled from their homes and their property, seeking
Bounties from Allah and to please Him. And helping Allah (Le.,
helping His religion) and His Messenger (Muhammad $8). Such
are indeed the truthful (to what they say); And those who, before
them, had homes (in al-Madinah) and had adopted the Faith,
love those who emigrate to them, and have no jealousy in their
breasts for that which they have been given (from the booty of
Bani an-Nadir), and give them (emigrants) preference over
themselves, even though they were in need of that. And
whosoever is saved from his own covetousness, such are they who
will be the successful. And those who came after them say: ‘Our
Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in Faith,
and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who have

{2

wae be ‏جَامُو‎ Olly

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most
Merciful.” | Al-Hashr: 8-10]

Therefore the enemies of the Companions, such as the Khawary
and the RAafidhah are not their brothers, rather their hearts are
filled with hatred, enmity, and animosity toward the Companions
of the Messenger of Allah (#8). The traces of this inward hatred
towards the Companions appear on their tongues and pens, when
they criticize and belittle them, declaring them to be disbelievers.

Al-Imam Maltk derived from the statements of Allah: “that he
may enrage the disbelievers with them,” as well as the statement
of Allah, “and those that come after them say: O Our Lord
forgive us and our brothers that preceded us in faith,” that these
individuals who despise the Companions of Allah’s Messenger
(2) will have no reward. Rather the reward is for the one who
comes after them, and is pleased with them, supplicating to Allah
for them, and those who recognize their status and position. “0
our Lord forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith.”
As for the one who comes after them and insults them, curses
them, and declares them to be disbelievers, they are not entitled to
any reward or war booty, and perhaps they may even fall into
disbelieving in All4h—The Blessed, The Most High—as Allah
says, “that he may enrage the disbelievers with them.” Therefore,
only the disbelievers are enraged from them, and we seek Allah’s
refuge.

46 As it has been narrated in Sahth al-Bukhari on the authority of
Ibn ‘Umar, that while the Prophet (38) was alive, “We used to
give precedence to Abi Bakr, then ‘Umar, and then ‘Uthm4n,
after that we were quiet.” Likewise, from gathering the different
texts and narrations, there are many reports that mention these
Companions’ countless virtues and qualities, encouraging the
believers to love and honor them. Rather, the leadership that
followed the death of Prophet Muhammad (38) was in the order

Phyo 1 OS

Pogo 29

of the status of the Companions: Aba Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and
‘Ali (e&). In the past there was once a difference of opinion about
who was more virtuous: ‘Al? or ‘UthmAn, then this dispute ended,
and the People of the Sunnah unified upon the fact that after the
Prophet (#8) the most preferable of the people is Aba Bakr, then
‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, and then ‘Al? bin Ab? T4lib. After them, in
preference, are the remaining Companions that make up the Ten
Promised Paradise: Az-Zubayr bin al-Aw4m, Talhah bin ‘Ubayd-
Allah, ‘Abdur-Rahm4n bin ‘Awf, Sa‘d bin Ab? Waqaas, Sa‘id bin
Zayd bin ‘Amr bin Nufayl, Aba ‘Ubaydah ‘Amir bin al-Jarrah.
These are the companions who the Prophet (#8) testified that
they will enter Paradise.

Therefore we testify that they will enter Paradise, recognize their
virtue and the virtue of all the Companions, because Allah
promised all of them with the best reward, they will all be in
Paradise, with the will of Allah. The Prophet Muhammad (3)
also, specifically mentioned the companions who participated in
the Battle of Badr, when he said: “Perhaps Allah looked at the
People of Badr, and said to them: ‘Do as you desire, for indeed I

have forgiven you.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Battles, hadith
no. (3983); Muslim, The Book of the Companions’ Virtues, hadith no.
(2494)]

This means that they will not enter the Hell-Fire due to this
forgiveness from Allah. Likewise, no one will enter the Fire who
gave allegiance to the Prophet Muhammad (#8) beneath the tree
(The Pledge of Ridwan), as the Prophet (48) said: “No one who

made the pledge beneath the tree will enter the Fire” [Collected by
Muslim, The Book of the Companions’ Virtues, hadith no. (2496); at-
Tirmidh?, The Book of Merits, hadith no. (3860), and the abovementioned

wording is found within his collection |

(This narration is referring to) the people of al-Hudaybiyah. (So
again) we mention the order of (the Companions). Firstly, the

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

used to give precedence to them, and they did not differ in this
affair. After these three companions are Ashab ash-Shira al-
Khamsah (Five Companions of Consultation): “Alt bin Abi Talib,
Talhah, az-Zubayr, Abdur-Rahm4n bin “Awf, and 524 bin Abi
Waqqas”, and all of them were qualified to be the ruler and all of
them were Imams. This is based on the narration of (‘Abdullah)
bin ‘Umar when he said, “While the Messenger of Allah (32) was
alive and the Companions were large in number, we used to give
precedence to Abd Bakr, then Umar, and then Uthmén; after that,

we were quiet.” [Musnad Ahmad, verification by Ahmad Shakir, from the
narrations of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, hadith no. (4626); Ahmad Shakir graded
its chain to be authentic; al-Bukhart, The Book of the Companions’ Merits,
hadith nos. (3655) without the addition of “after that we were quiet” and no,
(3697) with the addition, “...then we would leave the Companions of the
Prophet, not comparing between them”; at-Tirmidhi, The Book of the Merits
of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, hadith no. (3707), without the addition of “after that

most virtuous of the Companions are The Four (Aba Bakr,
‘Umar, ‘Uthméan, and ‘Alf), then the remaining of the Ten who
were promised Paradise, then the People of the “Agabah Pledge,
then the people who participated in the Battle of Badr, then the
People who made the Pledge of Ridwan, and finally the
remaining Companions (:). And they all vary in virtue, as al-
Imam (Ahmad)—may Allah have mercy on him—will mention.

47 Tn this narration Sa‘d is mentioned. However, some copies of
Uséil as-Sunnah mention Sa‘td bin Zayd bin ‘Amr bin Nufayl
instead of Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas. Regardless, one of them
completes six. Al-Imam Ahmad says: [and all of them were
qualified to be the ruler]. Notice how al-Imém Ahmad mentions
this after mentioning all the names. Why did he do this? The
reason is because ‘Umar nominated all of these Companions, and
said “Choose from them. Whoever is chosen from them will be
the khalifah.” Because ‘Umar nominated these Companions, al-
Imam Ahmad derived from this that all of them were worthy to
have been the khaltfah, and that all of them are leaders.

Px 770

»
٠.
>

0

we were quiet.” At-Tirmidhi said about this narration: “hasan sahth gharib...”;
al-albani graded the narration to be authentic. | Then after Ashab ash-
Shara, are the Companions of the Battle of Badr from those that
migrated from Mecca to Madinah, and then the Ansar who
participated in the Battle of Badr, all based on the level of the

migration and precedence in al-Islam.*

* As you know, from the studies and research of the People of
the Sunnah, there are many narrations highlighting the virtues of
‘Alt bin Abi? Talib. Also, from the pledges of the Companions for
‘Alt bin Abi Talib, and the order of the Caliphate, he came fourth

in leadership, and likewise fourth in virtue.

Then al-Imém Ahmad mentions: [Then after Ash4b ash-Shiir al-
Khamsah (The Five Companions of Consultation) the
Companions who participated in the Battle of Badr from the
Muhfjirain, and then those who participated from the Ansar].
Some people give precedence to the People of the ‘Aqabah Pledge
over those who participated in the Battle of Badr, even though
most of the Companions who participated in the Aqaba’ pledge
also participated in the Battle of Badr.

Then al-Imim Ahmad states: [The People of Badr, from the
Companions of the Ansar based on their migration, and
precedence in al-Islam]. The Companions who participated in the
Battle of Badr, those who made the Pledge of ‘Aqabah, those who
migrated, and the Ansar, all vary amongst themselves in level,
based on the knowledge and virtue that Allah gave them, as well
as prosperity in al-Islam, sacrificing their wealth and life.

[Then the best people after these Companions (#>)|: Meaning
after the ten promised Paradise, those who participated in Badr,
those who made the Pledge of Hudaybiyah, and other than that,
“the Best of the people after the aforementioned Companions of
the Messenger of Allah ($8) are the generation in which the

Prophet ($8) was sent in. And everyone who accompanied him,

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

even for a year.” These Companions (#) although they are not
at the same level as those previously mentioned Companions, in
terms of their participating in Islamic Military Expeditions, they
are still considered Companions, and they still occupy this great
and lofty level, in which no other generation can equal them,

regardless of their deeds.

[And everyone who accompanied the Messenger (3) for a year, a
month, a day, an hour, or has seen him.] This is a definition of a
Companion from al-Imam Ahmad, with which one would attain
the status of being a Companion: even if he saw the Messenger
(#%) for a second, not to mention if he accompanied the
Messenger (#8) for a year, a month, a day, or an hour. So the
correct definition of a Companion is: whoever has seen the
Prophet (#8) as a believer and died upon al-Islam, even if they
only saw him and did not narrate from him, he is still a
Companion, who attains this noble level and is included from
those mentioned in the hadith, where the Prophet (#8) said: “Do
not insult my Companions. By the One in whose Hand is my
soul, if one of you were to spend in gold the amount of the
Mountain of Uhud, it would not be equal to half a handful of
that which they have spent.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of the
Companions’ Virtues, hadith no. (3673); Muslim, The Book of the
Companions’ Virtues, hadith no. (2541)] If Allah wills they all will
attain this grand level. |

[So they are from amongst his Companions]: Whoever saw the
Messenger (38) believing in him, and died upon al-Islam, he 1s
certainly considered a Companion, all based on the extent of their
companionship and closeness to the Prophet (#8). Aba Bakr,
‘Umar, ‘Uthm4n, and ‘Alf were all from the Companions who
migrated with the Messenger (#8) lived with him both in Mecca
and Madinah, fought alongside him, and spent in the way of
Allah. So they are more noble then the other Companions.
Likewise, each Companion varies based on their precedence in al-

Cpe 1 12

5 مرة©

Islam and virtues, and the same goes for those who entered into
al-Islam after the conquering of Mecca. Even those who only saw
the Prophet (#8) for an hour or a single moment, he attains this
lofty status of being a companion of the Messenger (#8).

[He is from the Companions of All4h’s Messenger (#8), all based
on the degree of his companionship, the time he spent with the
Messenger (#8), heard from him, or looked at him. Therefore, the
Companion with the lowest level is better than anyone from any
other generation that has not seen the Messenger of Allah (8)
even if they were to meet Allah with every righteous action. |

The best of the second generation, after the Prophet Muhammad
(38) will never be equal to the lowest of the Companions (.)
regardless of the good he may have put forth. This is because,
even if one of us were to spend the Mountain of Uhud in gold, it
would not equal even half a handful of that which the
Companions spent, as it comes in the prophetic narration.
Regardless of what we do, the efforts we exert, the righteous
actions we put forth, we would not equal a mere handful of their
actions. So we ask: what about those from amongst the
Companions who spent freely from their wealth? Some of them
spent half their wealth, and others prepared military expeditions
such as ‘Uthm4n. This was the way of the Companions (:); they
spent in the way of Allah. If one of them gave a single date in the
way of Allah, or half a handful, no one can equal them, regardless
of what they spend

a”

“,..that is the Grace of Allah, he bestows it upon whom he

wills...” [Al-Maidah: 54)

Al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal recognized the status of the
Companions. Likewise, it is a must that each one of us knows the
virtuous status of the Companions, and realizes that they are the

The Explanation of Us4l As-Sunnah

best of the people after the Prophets of Allah (ss 5 sai 4). For
certainly, after the Prophets (sy. 5 ia) .) mankind has not known
anyone like these companions in all of history, in terms of their
faith, their certainty, their sincerity, their struggle, as well as their
efforts and absolute sacrifice in the way of Allah. With them,
Allah opened hearts, nations, and tribes. Muslims everywhere
were enlightened by the narrations that they conveyed from the
Messenger of Allah (#8). Because of their struggle in the way of
Allah, they deserve our respect and are entitled to us recognizing
their status. By Allah, we oppose some people and have allegiance
to others because of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah

(38)

Based on the respect Ahl as-Sunnah’s has for the Companions
() the Scholars of Sunnah have said: whoever belittles a single
Companion then he 15 a zindig (1.e., heretic, hypocrite, astray,
etc.). This is simply from belittlement; so what about one who
insults and slanders the Companions, and declares them to be
disbelievers?! Anyone who belittles a Companion then he is a
disgusting Rafidhah. This, dear brothers, 1s truth and is a
protection for the honor of the Companions of the Messenger of
Allah (8). How can one belittle a Companion, while Allah is
pleased with them, promised them with Paradise, purified and
praised them, and has given them such a magnificent status? The
Companions themselves, as well as the scholars of those
generations that followed all knew and recognized the status of
the Companions. But then you have the misguided and ignorant
hypocrites who oppose them and take these Companions as
enemies.

For this reason, a sign of hypocrisy is to hate the Ansar, and to
love the Ansar is a sign of true faith. So what about hating the
Muhéajiran, those who migrated from Mecca to al-Madinah, for
certainly they are better than the Ans4r? It is even more justified
that loving those who made migration be a sign of faith and

Payot 14

Pye 2

Then after these companions, the best of the people where the
remaming Companions of the Messenger of Allah (38): the
generation he was sent to. Everyone who accompanied the
Messenger (#8) for a year, a month, a day, an hour, or merely saw
him, he is from the Companions of Allah's Messenger (#8), all
based on the degree of his Companionship, the time he spent
with the Messenger (38), heard from him, or looked at him.
Therefore, the Companion with the lowest level is better than
anyone from any other generation that has not seen the
Messenger of Allah (8) even if they were to meet Allah with
every righteous action. These Companions that accompanied the
Messenger of Allah (48) saw him, heard from him, even those
who saw him for one hour and believed in him, then based on
this companionship, they are better than anyone from the
generations that followed, even if they did every act of good.

(3S) FE CRW

likewise hating them be a sign of hypocrisy, because they are more
virtuous than the Ansar. So just imagine (the state) of the one
who initiates his hatred for and opposition to the likes of Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthm4n, and ‘Al? (#) and their brothers from the

noble leaders of the Companions!

Some of those who oppose the companions deem Ibn Saba’, the
Jewish Founder of the Shi‘ah, to be better than Abdé Bakr and
‘Umar! The Rafidhah and the Khawarij see the teachings and
principles of Ibn Saba’, the Jew, to be better than the teachings of
Muhammad (#8). May Allah humiliate them all. All of these
deviant groups originated from the principles and teachings of
Ibn Sabba. The Rafidhah and the Khawarij sought to retaliate
against ‘Uthman, they all rebelled against him; they are the
students of Ibn Saba’—may Allah disgrace them. These
misguided groups believe that Ibn Saba’ produced true believers,
while Muhammad (38) produced three, four, or ten believers (Le.,
based on the deviant statements of the RAfidhah.)

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

Obedience to the Muslim Ruler
rom the Foundations of the Sunnah 15: To hear and obey the
Muslim rulers, whether they are pious or wicked. Whoever

gains leadership and the people gather and unite around him, and

are pleased with him, and likewise whoever received power by
force, he is called Amir al-Mu'muinin (the leader of the

believers).

4 We are obliged to hear and obey the Muslim Ruler who has
attained the level of leadership and the people have gathered upon
his command, whether he is pious or wicked. Even if he has
arrived at this level of leadership through rebellion and
overcoming the previous leader and then afterwards established a
new nation, we still must obey him (in that which does not
oppose the Islamic Legislation). It is not permissible to rebel
against this leader; when you rebel against him once, you will
rebel a second, third, and forth time, leaving the Ummah in a
state of chaotic struggle, one rebel after another. The fundamental
principle is that it is not permissible to rebel against the
leadership. So if Allah were to give power to an individual who
rebels against the leader, conquers the land, and establishes a new
nation upon the previous rule, it is imperative that the Muslims
withhold (and stop) at this point, and give authority and
leadership to the one who has gained power (and authority).
Rather, this person, whether he has gained dominance from
selection, consultation, or pledge, or whether he took control and
arrived at the leadership by the sword, if he has attained power,
strength, and authority, it is a must that he be obeyed; in order to
preserve (and) honor the blood of the Muslims. This is whether
he is a righteous or wicked ruler; he is to be obeyed (1e., in that
which does not oppose the religion).

Take a look at al-Imam Ahmad, al-Bukhart, and the other

scholars of al-Islam. They mention this principle as a Foundation

Gio 10

Pago 10

of al-Islam: “Obeying the Muslim Leaders is a Basic Principle
from the Fundamentals of al-Isl4m,” regardless of if he is pious or
wicked.

The Khawary, the Rafidhah, and other then them from the
misguided groups, may obey the ruler if he is pious (in their eyes),
but at the same time they may not obey or agree with the ruler,
even if he were Aba@ Bakr or ‘Umar because according to the
Rafidhah, even they are not pious. Likewise according to the
Khawary, “Ali is not righteous. But in general they may agree with
a ruler if he has characteristics of righteousness, but they oppose
the wicked ruler. However, as for the wicked, oppressive, and evil
ruler, as long as he has not left the fold of al-Islam, it is never
permissible to rebel against him on any occasion. Many prophetic
narrations have been mentioned about this issue. From amongst
them: “We made allegiance to the Messenger (#8) to hear and
obey, in ease and hardship, in times of enthusiasm, and
sluggishness, and we pledge to prefer this, and not to rebel and

oppose those in authority, until you see clear disbelief.” [Collected
by Muslim, The Book of Government, hadith no. (1709) |

So it is not permissible to rebel against them, regardless of their
wickedness (other than disbelief). Likewise, as found in the
hadith of Umm Salamah, where she reported that the Messenger
(38) said: “There will be Leaders appointed over you, you will see
them doing good and bad deeds. So whoever disapproves these
evil deeds and hate them (in their heart), he is safe and upon him
is no blame. But whoever is pleased with evil and follows them in
their evil (he is not safe and nor is he free from blame). They
said; Shall we not fight against these leaders O Messenger of

Allah ($8)? He said: No, as long as they pray.” [Collected by Muslim,
The Book of Government, hadith no. (1854)]

So as long as they pray, it is not permissible to rebel against them.
(So we ask) what about the one who prays, fasts, gives charity,

The Explanation of UsGl As-Sunnah

performs Hajj, and in addition to that makes it easy and safe for
the Muslims to perform these acts of worship and establishes
safety in the pathways?!

Look at our condition nowadays, with all these people who seek
to rebel against the Muslim rulers! How distant they are from
implementing the statement of the Prophet (38): “No, as long as
they pray”! The Messenger (#8) prohibited them from rebelling as
long as the leader prayed, even though they may have neglected
many aspects of al-Islam, he still said “No, as long as they pray.”
He did not say, “No, as long as they establish the prayer, give
charity, perform Hajj etc.” Rather, he said “No, as long as they
pray.”(Why is this?) This is because, with rebellion comes great
evil and corruption, such as loss of lives, destruction of crops and
cattle, violation of people’s honor, and eventually the humiliation
and weakness of the Muslims, until they become like a small
morsel and easy prey to the disbelievers. All of this is the result of
constant and reoccurring rebellion.

Nowadays, we see that these rebels who have attained leadership
and established countries through revolt and uprisings, by way of
voting, and other than that, what have they done? Since their
reign, what important Islamic mottos or principles have they
actualized? Rather they are amongst the most distant people from
implementing the Islamic Legislation. They even do more evil
than other misguided rulers, by organizing symposiums and
conferences for unity amongst the religions, building churches,
establishing relationships with the Christians, while belittling the
Muslims, and assisting in their impoverishment as well as their
religious and worldly destruction. They have not done anything
different than other rulers. They have arrived to leadership by way
of revolt, voting, or by other means, and they have not done
anything to distinguish themselves. Rather it is all empty speech
and false promises. ‏ظ‎

Pope 118

32
>
3

Therefore, we do not trust the likes of these people; their only
concern is to gain authority and position, by any means necessary.
Then after that, these people turn their backs to al-Isl4m, as you
have seen and experienced. This is the reality of many countries.
These revolutions claim to come in the name of al-Islam, and
then a Communist or some other misguided individual comes and
takes charge. Therefore, there is immense wisdom in this wise,
merciful, heroic, and bold religion, which although it teaches the
ummah to be brave and courageous, with this issue (of interacting
with the Muslim Rulers) it tells the people: be patient! Whatever

you see, be patient; as long as it is not clear disbelief.

Here I will mention a number of prophetic narrations for you to
memorize and write down: On the authority of Abi Hurayrah
(+) that the Prophet (88) said: “The Children of Isra’il used to
be ruled and guided by Prophets. Each time a Prophet died,
another prophet would take his place. As for me, there will be no
Prophet after me, but rather many Caliphs will appear. The
people said: O Messenger of Allah (8)! What do you command
us with? He said: Obey the one who will be given the first pledge
of allegiance; fulfill their (ie. the Caliphs, kings, presidents, etc)
rights, for indeed Allah will call them to account for that which

they have been given authority and responsibility over.” [Collected
by al-Bukhart, The Book of Stories of the Prophets hadith no. (3455);
Muslim, The Book of Government, hadith no. (1842)]

The Prophet (8) did not tell them to call these leaders to
account, or to rebel and revolt against them, or to even seek their
rights. The leaders from amongst these rebels say: “We are not
going to wait for ease to come to us ftom the sky; we must take
that which belongs to us with force. O people, take that which 1s

yours with force! No one will give you your righ ts!”

(They have) no jealousy for Allah’s Religion, nor for the Ummah.
The most jealous of the people is the Prophet Muhammad (38).

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

He (3) said to Sa‘d: “By Allah I have more jealously than you,
and Allah has more jealousy than me.” This is when Sa‘d said:
“What if I found a man with my wife, should I bring four
witnesses, by Allah I will cut him with my sword unarmored, He
said (#8): Are you amazed at the jealousy of Sa‘d, for indeed I
have mote jealousy than Sa‘d, and Allah has more jealousy than
me. For this reason, he has made impermissible evil illegal sexual

telationships.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Monotheism, hadith
no. (7416); Muslim, The Book of al-Li‘an, hadith no. (1499) |

So the Messenger (8) has jealousy for Allah’s religion, he does
not desire that evil and sin spread in the Ummah. Even with this
jealousy, which is greater than ours, the Prophet Muhammad (3)
said: “Fulfill their rights, and Allah will call them to account for
that which they were given authority over.”

(O rebel) you are not the one who calls the leader to account,
rather you advise him in the best of ways. If he listens to your
advice, praise belongs to Allah. And if he does not, you have
fulfilled that which is upon you. But you must be patient, as long
as he (ie., the leader) prays. (It must be known) we are not
making this methodology up from ourselves. It is difficult for
these rebels to hear and accept these words. However, Allah (38)
says:

“But no, by your Lord, they can have 1 no etre until ie make
you (O Muhammad #8) judge in all disputes between them, and

find in themselves no resistance against your decisions, and accept
(them) with full submission.” [An-Nis4: 65]

These people constantly shout out about ruling by the Book of
Allah, but they themselves do not rule by the Book of Allah and

Poge 1 ZO

Poe 7

the Prophetic Sunnah. Rather they are people of innovation, upon
the belief of al-huldl (that Allah exists within His creation and
not above His 3€ Throne). Some of them declare the Muslims to
be disbelievers, and believe that the Qur’4n is created; they
themselves do not judge by the Book of Allah in the least. They
do not desire to return to the ruling of Allah in these issues.
Rather, they are from the most deviant and distant of the people
(in ruling with the Book of Allah and Prophetic Sunnah). They
yell out “There is no rule, except the ruling of Alléh, there is no
rule, except the ruling of Alléh,” while they are the farthest away
(from the Book of Allah) and most deviant as they oppose the
rulings and judgments of Allah and the Prophetic Sunnah. These
people deem these words to be aiding the disbelievers and the
Malahidah!

Zayd bin Wahab reported from ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘td; he said
that the Messenger of Allah (38) said: “There will be after me
selfishness and egoism, and things that you disapprove of.”

They will have wealth and position, and they (i.e., the rulers) will
give this wealth and position to those who assist and help them,
as well as their families and relatives, while the people remain
poor. So in such a case what should the masses of people do? For
indeed, this is oppression and it is ruling by other than what
Allah has revealed! What does the Messenger (#8), who the

Qur'an was revealed to, say about the statement of AlJ4h:

SORss <i oe DSi AGI KE 3 ‏من‎
‎“And whoever does not rule by that which Allah has verealed
then they are from the disbelievers.” [Al-Ms’idah: 44]

What does the Messenger (#8) say (we should do in such a

situation)?!

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

We ask these people (i.e., those who rebel against the Muslim
Rulers): “Are you more knowledgeable of al-Isldm and the Book

of Allah than the Messenger of Allah (#8), his Noble
Companions, and the Scholars of Guidance, throughout history?!”

“Indeed there will be selfishness and egoism and things that you
will disapprove of,” affairs that only Allah knows the reality of.

So they asked the Messenger of Allah (#8), “those of us who
reach that time, what do you command us with?” He (38) said:
“Fulfill that which is upon you, and ask Allah for that which is

rightfully youts.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Merits, hadith no.
(3603); Muslim, The Book of Government, hadith no. (1843)]

(The Prophet (48) did not command you) to go and fight against
the leader and protest. Are there protests in al-Islam? If the water
in a city cuts off for a single day, you see the people protesting
and rallying. Nowadays, many countries give back to their citizens
and do not take anything from them, except a little.

As for these (leaders that the Prophet ($8) is referring to), they
take and do not give anything. If the Prophet (#8) were to have
commanded us with rebelling and revolting against the leader, the
Ummah would have been destroyed. But rather, he directed them
to have patience, forbearance, and to take time and think before
making a decision, in an effort to protect al-Islam, and to prevent
the spilling of blood, and to protect the honor of the
Muslims.(The Prophet (#8) said); “Fulfill that which you are
responsible for, and ask Allah for that which is rightfully yours.”
And he #8 said to the Ansar “You will meet egoism and
selfishness after me.” (These are the) Ansar, those who fought
alongside the Messenger of Allah (#8), and established homes in
al-Madinah, embraced true faith, defended the religion, and
conquered the dunya; what did the Messenger (3%) say to them

(concerning this affair )?

Pye 122

Poze 1 BS

Then people came (after them) who benefited from the efforts
and struggles of the Ansar and the Muhajirtin, many of them
entered into al-Islam after the conquering of Mecca. From
amongst them were Abd Sufyan and Mu‘awiyah. Then after them
came their children who preferred wealth and riches for
themselves. As for Mu‘Awiyah, we do not include him as an unjust
ruler. (But) with Bant Marwan there in fact was a level of
oppression, deficiency, tyranny, and they used to even delay the
afternoon prayer and other prayers outside of the prescribed time.
Even with this, when the Companions lived during the time
period of these types of rulers, they were patient (and endured the
hardships). When people came to Anas bin Malik about al-
Hayjaj, who was worse than today’s rulers, and said to him: al-
Hayjaj is doing this and that, shedding blood, plundering the
people’s wealth, and other things, he told them to be patient, and
that no year comes except that the one that follows will be worse
than the previous. He commanded them with patience and
directed them to the teachings and guidance of the Prophet
Muhammad (38). Nowadays the leaders have organizations (that
seek to limit oppression and injustice), whether from the east or
the west. As for al-Hayjaj, he was a chaotic tyrant who ruled only
by his desires (even with this, Anas commanded them to be
patient. )

Also ‘Algamah bin W4’il reported, narrating from his father who
said that Salamah bin Yazid bin al-Ja‘fi asked the Messenger of
Allah, saying: “O Prophet of Allah: What do you command us
with if there are placed over us rulers who ask us to fulfill their
rights, but deprive us our tights?’ So the Messenger turned away
(not answering). Then he asked the Messenger ($8) again, and
again he turned away (not answering him).” For indeed this is a

serious question that the Prophet (#8) dislikes, a difficult topic.

But what did the Prophet (#8) say to him? So al-Ash‘ath bin Qays
pulled him to the side and said to him “Hear and obey, for

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

indeed they will be called to account that which they have done,
and you will be held accountable for that which you have done.”

Perhaps a person may read these words and understand that these
are simply the words of Ash‘ath bin Qays. Even if we were to say
that these are the words of Ash ‘ath, the Prophet approved of
them. As you all know, the Prophetic Sunnah is made up of the
statement of the Prophet, as well as his actions and tacit
approvals. But it comes in another narration where the Prophet
(#8) himself said: “Listen to them and obey them, for they will be
called to account for what they have done, and you will be

accountable for what you have done.” [Collected by Muslim, The Book
of Government, hadith no. (1846)|

How is it that rulers will ask us to fulfill their rights, while
depriving us of our due rights, and the Messenger (#8) is turning
away evety time he is asked? How amazing is this question (that is
being posed to the Messenger #8) because it leads to trials and
tribulations. (But the Prophet still commanded us saying): “Listen
to them and obey them, for they will be called to account for
what they have done, and you will be accountable for what you
have done.”

Likewise in the hadith of Umm Salamah, where The Messenger
(38) said: “No (do not rebel) as long they pray. You will see
things that you approve of, and other things that you disapprove.
So whoever acknowledges the good, then no blame is upon him,
and whoever disapproves he is safe (from Allah’s punishment).
But the one who is pleased (with the evil) and follows (the leader
in the wrong, is not safe from Allah’s punishment, and there is
blame upon him.)” [Ibid]

Hence, you must hate the evil within your heart. For this reason
al-Imim Muslim named the chapter “The one who hates and

Page 1 BS

disapproves with his heart.” Thus (al-Imém) Muslim (limited)
the disapproval and hatred to the heart.

Also it comes in another hadith: “Whoever sees evil, then he
should change it with his hand, if he cannot change it (with his
hand) then change it with his tongue, and if he cannot change the
evil with his tongue, then with his heart, and that is the weakest
of faith.” | Collected by Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (49) |

Nowadays, if the people see that a scholar has not spoken against
a few things, but he hates it in his heart, the people of deviance
call him a scared coward, a government agent, a spy, claiming that
he only wants to flatter and butter-up the leader. These are all
insults and accusations that have come from the Communists.
This is in no way the manner of the Muslims, but rather the
approach of the Socialist Party, the Nationalists, and other
misguided groups. How can the Muslim youth accept these
statements, while rejecting the statements and advice of the
Scholars of Islam, the People of Sunnah, who hold firmly to these
Prophetic directives, and to the resolutions of the scholars of al-
Islam, such as Malik, ash-Shafi‘t, Ahmad bin Hanbal, and others
like al-Awza‘t and ath-Thawri?!

All of these scholars lived during times where the governments
had errors, mistakes, and muisguidance. Look at what took place
during the time of al-Imam Ahmad. He lived under a nation that
adopted the teachings of Jahm bin Safwan; the methodology of
Jahm entails disbelief, which included the distortion and denial of
the Names and Attributes of Allah. They even adopted the belief
that the Qur’4n was not the Speech of Allah, but rather created.
This (1.e., the statement that The Qur’an was created) was seen as
disbelief with al-Imam Ahmad and the scholars of hadith at that
time. The government was calling the society to disbelief!
Although the people wanted to revolt, al-Imam Ahmad refused,
and said “In (rebelling) is great corruption and harm upon the

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

Muslims.” He reprimanded them. How is al-Imam Ahmad a
coward or a government agent?!

The pious predecessors implemented these narrations and
opposed the Khawary, the Mu'tazilah, and the people of evil and
corruption. But others (who oppose these people) are referred to
as spies and government workers. By Allah, these deviant groups
oppose and reject Ahl as-Sunnah, in the same manner as the
Communists, Socialists, Nationalists, and other disbelieving
groups and parties. How can they address the Muslims in such a
manner, while completely disregarding the prophetic texts?! Why
would they not at least excuse the People of Sunnah, when (it is
the case that) they (are aided and supported by all these) proofs?!
We do not seek to rebel against the leader, and we do not declare
them to be disbelievers until seeing clear disbelief, while they
tread the path of the KhawArij, and declare the rulers to be
disbelievers. (We say to them) “Leave me O brother, do not
belittle me, rather it is upon you to accept the narrations and
listen to the statement of the Prophet (#8): “As | long as they

establish the prayer” “As long as they pray,” “until you see clear
disbelief.”

Ash-Sheikh Bin Baz declared certain rulers of some countries to
be disbelievers, and other scholars as well declared certain rulers
to be disbelievers, because some of them deserve this. But other
leaders have not left the fold of al-Islam, even if they may have
deviated in certain aspects of the religion; no one from amongst
the respected scholars has called them disbelievers.

Is there, for example, a respected known scholar from Ahl as-
Sunnah, from the purest of the people, who has declared a ruler
during our times to be a disbeliever? We only find the foolish and
ignorant ones from those adhering to the way of the Mu'tazilah
and the Khaw4rij to be the ones who declare the Muslim rulers,
armies, and Muslims in general to be disbelievers. All of this

Pize12O

Pogo A ZC

misguidance is derived from the teachings of Sayyid Qutb, who
demolished the fundamental principles of the Sunnah, and instead
attached himself to the principles of the people of misguidance.
There is no false principle except that Sayyid Qutb adopted it;
and there is not a principle from the Sunnah except that he
destroyed it (completely opposing it). From amongst these false
and corrupt principles is that he declared the Ummah to be
disbelievers, and also the belief that faith does not increase and
decrease; and this is the falsehood which led to takfir (L.e.,
declaring the Muslims to be disbelievers). They believe that faith
is either complete or that it is nonexistent, either belief or
disbelief, and that the individual who has committed sins or
obeyed a legislator in a single thing (that is in opposition to the
Islamic Legislation) then he has disbelieved, leaving the religion
of Islam in totality. The KhawArij have gone to this extent! But we
desire that the youth seek knowledge and gain understanding of
the religion. It may be the case that you present the proofs and
evidences, clarifying the misguidance of this man, but the person
may still not accept the truth from you. Rather they have refused,
© dear brothers, to even search for the truth. They have refused
to address this evil with sound intellect, while it has taken root
throughout the east and the west, confusing the Muslim youth,
polluting their minds, and has planted the seeds of enmity,
discord, and hostility. They do not seek to study and learn about
the one whom they have taken as their leader (.e., Sayyid Qutb
and those that have treaded his deviant path), and know exactly
what his methodology is: what his beliefs and understandings are
about Islam. They do not want this at all,

OST Kesh foi ‏تَعْسَوَا بهم وا‎ 555 215 ops aye ity
4

The Explanation of ‏آذولا‎ As-Sunnah

‎ERED‏ مو هى

‎..they thrust their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up
with their garments and persisted (in their refusal) and magnified
themselves in pride.” [Nah:7]

‎By Allah, (O brothers) they have embarked upon an evil path.
And we present these words, even though they may have been
very stern, in order that they may wake up! If they have intellects,
(if they) respect the Qur'an, the Sunnah, and the understanding of
the pious predecessors, (they would wake up.) They must use
sound intellect when addressing these great and serious issues, in
which the ummah has reached a point that it has never reached
before, all on the hands of Sayyid Qutb and those that follow

‎him.

‎Thus we focus on this issue, giving it great emphasis, because of
the evil that surrounds it. It is a must that you (dear reader)
memorize these prophetic narrations; because until we meet Allah,
these are the texts that we implement, seeking nearness to Allah.
And we will not allow a person of desires and misguidance to
cause us to be in opposition to this methodology!

‎Page 1 ZS

Pogo 1 9

Al-Jihad is to be Carried Out with the
Muslim Ruler until the Day of Judgment,
Whether (He is) Pious or Wicked

tlitary Expeditions are to take place with the Muslim

rulers, whether pious or wicked, until the Day of
Judgment, and it should not be abandoned. Also, the division of
the spoils of war and the carrying out of the legislative
punishments is the responsibility of the Muslim ruler, and no one
has the right to slander or contest them in the least.*! Paying the
obligatory charity to them is permissible, and whoever pays the
charity to them, then this is sufficient for him, whether the ruler
is pious or wicked. Likewise, the Friday Prayer is to be

50 As long as a legislated war takes place, until the Day of
Judgment, then it is a must that it is performed under the flag of
the Muslim ruler, whether he is wicked or righteous. And this was
the way of the pious predecessors, such as Ibn al-Mubarak, al-
Awzat, and Ahmad bin Hanbal who used to go out to the
battlefields and fight under the flag of the Abbasid Dynasty.

51 And he sees that the division of the spoils of war, as well as the
carrying out of the legal punishments for fornication, murder,
stealing, drinking alcohol, and other transgressions is the absolute
responsibility and right of the Muslim Ruler, and is not for any
individual or group to partake in. For indeed this would lead to
great bloodshed and corruption, with no beginning and no end to
it. But 1f the Muslim Ruler undertakes these tasks, then even if he
were wicked, the people would be at ease, and will not be
subjected to dissension and conflict.

52 It is not for anyone to go against the ruler in his distribution of

the spoils of war or the charity as was done by Dhil khuwaysirah.

The Explanation of Us&l As-Sunnah

performed as two complete units behind the Muslim ruler, or the
one he (ie., the ruler) has placed there. Whoever repeats his
prayer, after praying with the ruler he is an innovator who has
abandoned the narrations, opposed the prophetic Sunnah, and
does not have any portion of the virtues of the Friday (Prayer) in
the least; this is as long as he does not see that the Friday prayer 1s
to be performed behind the Muslim ruler, whether pious or
wicked, The Sunnah is to pray with them, two units of prayer,
and to worship Allah, believing that these units of prayer are
complete; no doubt should be in your heart about this at all.

Because the Muslim ruler has the right to distribute the spoils of
war based on what he deems to be best. In the legal school of
thought of al-Imam Ahmad as well as ash-Shafi't they distinguish
between zakah ath-thahir (e.g., grains, fruits, and livestock) and
zakah al-batin (e.g., gold, silver, and items presented for sale),
they see that the zakah ath-thahir is the responsibility of the ruler,
while zakah al-batin such as gold, silver, and items that are
presented to sell (ie., land, cars, etc.) this is the obligation upon
the individual who possesses the amount of a nisab (Le., an
amount that if wealth reaches this amount, it 1s obligatory to pay
charity from it; and it differs based on the type of wealth),
whether it is of gold, silver, or from business, it is permissible for
him to distribute it himself. Rather some people prefer that they
themselves distribute this type of charity to be at rest that it has
be given to those who are entitled to receive it. Even with this, if
he were to give it to the ruler (to distribute), this is permissible.
However, if the ruler seeks it from him, then he is obliged to give
it to the (Muslim ruler), and if the people withhold from paying
this obligatory charity, the ruler has the right to combat them for

it, as did the Companions when they fought against those who
held back the zak4h.

53 "The Friday prayer is to be performed behind the Muslim Ruler
or whoever he places there to replace him, such as Imams (of

Masjid) or judges. This Friday prayer, some people may repeat it

Pop 13O

Pie1 31

دمج هه 3 ‎C35)‏

after praying it with the Imam, either because of what he sees as a
legislative excuse, such as the number of attendees has not reached
forty people or because he feels that the Im4m’s prayer is not
correct. No doubt this last reason is worse than the first, because
the one who repeats his prayer, thinking that the Imam’s prayer is
invalid, then he is an innovator himself. Even if the Im4m for the
Friday Prayer was an innovator, you are to pray behind him and
do not make the prayer over, likewise even if he is a wicked
tyrant, you are to pray behind him and do not repeat the prayer.
For in such a case you would be an innovator. [The Sunnah is to
ptay with them, two units of prayer, and to wotship Allah,
believing that these units of prayer are complete; nothing ( no
doubt) should be in your heart about this at all.)

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

تحريم الخروج على أنه المسلمين

The Impermissibility of Revolting Against
the Muslim Ruler

hoever rebels against the Muslim ruler that the citizens

have gathered behind (giving him the pledge of allegiance)
and affirmed his authority, by whatever means it was, whether
they were pleased or if he took over by force, this rebel has
broken the unity of the Muslims and opposed the prophetic
narrations. If he were to die in this state, he would die the death
of the pre-Islamic period.™ It is not permissible for anyone to
fight or revolt against the Muslim ruler. Whoever does this is an
innovator who has veered away from the Sunnah and the straight

path.*

54 As is found in the hadith (narrated by) Ibn ‘Umar (.):
“Whoever dies and does not have in their neck the allegiance dies

the death of the pre-Islamic period.” [Collected by Muslim, The Book
of Government, hadith no. (1851)|

Likewise the hadith: “One who defected from obedience and
separated from the main body of the Muslims, if he died in that

state, would die the death of the pre-Islamic period.” [Collected by
Muslim, The Book of Government, hadith no. (1848)]

Thus it is not permissible to revolt against the Muslim Ruler; and
he said this during the Caliphate of Yazid, and you (all) know the
condition of Yazid. But despite that Ibn ‘Umar (8) realized that
rebelling against the ruler would nullify the pledge of allegiance.
And whoever rebels against the ruler, dies the death of the days of

ignorance. [Muslim mentioned the story in the previous narration no.
(1581)]

55 That is because rebelling against the Muslim Ruler is in
opposition to the authentic prophetic natrations and conflicts
with an important principle of Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jamd‘ah.

Page 1 BD

‎FE CRW‏ مو هى

‎Even if the leader was a disbeliever, rebellion and revolt is sti//
impermissible except with clear ability as well as (guaranteeing)
that the harm would not outweigh the benefits. Therefore if it is
possible in such a case to get rid of him, than do so. If not, then
you must exhibit patience. As for the leader that is still Muslim,
has not left the fold of al-Isl4m, and still prays, it is not
permissible to rebel against him until you see clear disbelief, and
the rebelling is done with the aforementioned conditions.

‎Pye ABS

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

أسئلة الدرس

Questions from the Class

Question: If someone in our times speaks ill of the
companions, do we say that his speech is similar to how the
Salaf spoke about some of the companions? How do we
refute this doubt?

Response: The one who speaks ill of the Companions (4)
from the past, are the Khaw4rij and the Rafidhah. As for Ahl
as-Sunnah, they did not speak ill of the Companions. As for
the predecessors of this person, they are the Khawarij and the
Rafidhah. But Ahl as-Sunnah protected and safeguarded the
honor of the Companions (s). ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-"Aziz
mentioned that: “(the Companions) are a people that Allah
protected our swords from their blood, so we must protect
our tongues from their honor.”

2. Question: What is the correct opinion concerning the
one who leaves the prayer, and how true is the statement
“Whoever does not declare the one who abandons the prayer
to be a disbeliever, he has fallen into the belief of the
Murji’ah, whether he realizes it or not? Is there any from the
early generations who said such a statement?

Response: We do not oppose the one who does not declare
the one who abandons the prayer to be a disbeliever; we do
not speak ill of him. Rather we respect and honor him,
because he has proofs that we respect. These individuals, we
respect them, recognize their status, and position, because
they have texts from the Qur’an and Sunnah that they hold

on to. From these texts is the statement of Allah:

A 77S &

{AS ASUS ‏بو‎ TE ‏لا حفر أن‎ HY

6 ‏مر‎ BO

“Indeed Allah does not forgive that others be wotshipped
beside Him, but He forgives other than that to whoever he
wills.” [An-Nisa: 48)

And there are other prophetic narrations, as well as the
understanding that many of the texts that mention disbelief
often refer to minor disbelief, not major, such as the
statement of the Prophet (#8): “Do not become disbelievers

after me, fighting each other, cutting at each other’s throats.”
[Collected by al-Bukharit, The Book of Knowledge, hadith no. (7077);
Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (65)]

Also that statement of the Prophet (38) when he mentioned
disbelief in general upon the one who commits a major sin:
“The thief is not a believer while he steals, and the fornicator
is not a believer while committing fornication, and the
plundering is not a believer while the people watch him

steal.” [Collected by al-Bukhart, The Book of Drinks, hadith no. (5578);
Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (S7)]

Also the hadith: “By Allah he does not believe, by Allah he
does not believe, by Allah he does not believe. They said who
O Messenger of Allah! He ($$) said: The one whose neighbor

is not safe from his harm.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of
Manners, hadith no. (6016) ]

Therefore, just as these narrations are understood to refer to
minor disbelief, with consensus from their brothers who
declare the one who abandons the prayer to be a disbeliever,
likewise there are scholars who understand the texts that
mention the disbelief of the one who abandons the prayer to
refer to minor disbelief. From amongst the scholars who do
not declare the one who has abandoned the prayer to be a
disbeliever ts ash-Shafi‘t, Malik, ‏قطنم‎ Hanifah, and a large
number from amongst those that follow these scholars. And
there are others that preceded them upon this same
The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

understanding, they have these proofs which are stronger with
them and they are all scholars of the religion and people of

Sunnah. |

As for the one who says (that whoever does not declare
people who leave the pray to be disbelievers, then he has
falling into the belief of the Murji’ah, whether he realizes it or
not) then this is a mistake on his part, and this speech 1s
extremism and deviance from the way of Ahl as-Sunnah.
Because if we make this claim about those who live in modern
times (that they have fallen into ira because of not declaring
those who abandon the prayer to be disbelievers) then it is
more appropriate that we say the same about the early
scholars like ash-Shafi‘t, Malik, and even Ahmad in one
statement that has been narrated from him. Rather Ibn Battah
and Ibn Qudamah even denied the fact that Ahmad even
made the statement that the one who leaves the prayer is a
disbeliever. Also, many of the people who follow al-Imam
ash-Shaf1't, except a few, as well as the followers of al-Imam
Malik, the Hanafi school of thought, and many scholars of
the Hanbali school of thought who are all great scholars, they
were not upon the opinion that the one who abandons the
prayer is a disbeliever. So do we say that all of these scholars
are Murji’ah or that they fell ito al-Irja’>? This is mere
ignorance of the fundamental principles of Ahl as-Sunnah,
and is from the insolence that has humiliated some people.

We ask Allah to pardon us.

3. Question: Is rebelling against the Muslim rulers only with
the sword, or does it include speaking ill of them?

Response: All of this is considered revolting against the ruler.
The one who invokes the people with his speech, he is one of
those known as al-Qu’ad. Al-Ibadhiyyah are from this type of
Khawarij, they encourage jihad, but they themselves do not go
out, but simply encourage the people to go out. So these
people are called al-Khawary al-Qu'‘ad. As for the one who

Figo 06

Pogo A BL

rebels with the sword, then his affairs is clear, he is a clear
rebel. But nevertheless, all of them are Khawary.

4. Question: Indeed you refute every innovator and anyone
who opposes the way of the pious predecessors, and from
among them are those who use weak narrations to establish
certain issues; but al-Im4m 4l-Barbahdri, using weak and
fabricated narrations, affirmed certain issues. So how is it that
you refute those who use weak narrations, and leave the

scholars of the Salaf?

Response: First of all, I do not submit to the fact that al-
Barbahar? uses fabricated and weak narrations to establish
points; clarify this to us! And what gripe do you have with
me? 1 respect all the righteous scholars of the past, not
belittling them in the least, and all praises belong to Allah.
We only refute the people of innovation. As for the righteous
scholars of the past who were known for sincerity,
truthfulness, and religion, then even if they make a mistake
we still consider them to be rewarded for those efforts. The
Prophet (38) said: “Whoever strives hard (seeking the truth)
and is correct, for him is two rewards. And whoever strives
hard (seeking the truth) and he is wrong, then for him is a

single reward.” [Collected by al-Bukhar?, The Book of Holding Fast to
the Book and the Sunnah, hadith no. (7352); Muslim, The Book of al-
Aqduyyah, hadith no. (1716)|

Therefore, if a scholar is known for piety, righteousness, and
truthfulness in searching for the truth, then he will be
rewarded, even when he errs.

As for the people of innovation, this does not apply to them.
That is because they merely follow their desires. For this
reason, rarely do you see a person of innovation return to the
truth. As opposed to the scholar of Sunnah, if he makes a
mistake he immediately returns to the truth after it is pointed
The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

out to him. Take for example, ash-Shafii or Ahmad, if they
made mistakes they would return to the truth by themselves.
You see al-Imam Ahmad going from one statement to
another, all in an attempt to seek out the truth based on the
proofs and evidence; they did not play games with themselves.
One may make a mistake, and then afterwards review the
issue even more, changing his previous opinion. Even Aba
Bakr and others from the people of truth, those known for
truthfulness and sincerity, they are the first to return to the
truth. Also, if they made a mistake, this does not harm them
in the least. Rather, they are rewarded and their lofty status is
still safeguarded with us. As for the people of innovation,
then no! They are as Allah said:

‎١ A‏ جه شر مور سر

‎72 2k ‏سم‎ OD Les 2 7p orr Bor

‎٠. ٠. (0 y ° 01‏ - ته ‎Od « ٠.‏
متشليهلت ‎LU‏ الذين في قلويهم ريع ميتيعون ما تشلبه منه ابتغاء ‎Jai)‏

‏0 0-4 4 قد

‎4) OY LEA ot det

‎“It is He Who has sent down to you (Muhammad #8) the
Book (this Qur’an). In it are Verses that are entirely clear,
they are the foundations of the Book and others not entirely
clear. So as for those in whose hearts there is a deviation
(from the truth) they follow that which is not entirely clear
thereof, seeking al-fitnah (polytheism and trials, etc.), and
seeking for its hidden meanings, but none knows its hidden
meanings save Allah.” [Alt Imran: 7]

‎For this reason, you see them not returning to the truth. The
Prophet (8) said concerning them: “They leave from the
religion as an arrow passes through the flesh of the game, and

‎they do not return until the Day of Judgment.” [Collected by al-
Bukhari, The Book of Seeking Repentance from the Apostate, hadith no.
(6933); Muslim, The Book of Charity, hadith no. (1064) |

‎Nowadays, O dear brothers, you see the people of innovation,
whether they are those that revolt or other than them, you can

‎> ‏ور سس ل عي ع8‎ > 7 Ae “ke od
“pls ‏الكتب ينه ايت محكمات هن أم الكتاب‎ Ale ‏أنزل‎ eal ‏هو‎ }
a”
| de
3

‎Poze 13S

Pago 1 BO

22

3

GAM Jat (ex

establish tens of proofs about a particular topic and even
present statements from the scholars, but they do not (leave

off falsehood) and return to the truth. This is the affair of the
people of desires!

5. Question: How true is the statement “The Im4n of the
angels does not increase nor does it decrease, while the Iman
of human beings increases and decreases, so perhaps a
human’s Im4n can elevate to the point that it is higher than
the Iman of angels. Is this statement true?

Response: I do not know any proof for this statement. But
the Prophets ‏الصّلَاهُ 5 السَلام)‎ ,é) are more virtuous than the angels
‏السَلام)‎ 5 ssi ‏(عَلَيْم‎ and also the righteous believers in the end,
when they enter Paradise they will be better than the angels.
But while in this world, the angels are better than everyone
except the Prophets ‏السَلَّام)‎ 5 Lai We).

(3S) ECRW
The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

قتال اللصوص والخوارج ‎Fle‏

It is Permissible to Fight Against Thieves
and Rebels

I is permissible to fight against thieves and those who revolt
and rebel against the Muslim Leadership. If a person or his
wealth is at risk of being attacked, he is allowed to defend himself
with all means. But he cannot seek out the aggressor if he (the
aggressor) were to escape. Rather at this point, it is the
responsibility of the Muslim ruler. A person can only defend
himself while the assailant is in the state of attack, without the
intention of killing the attacker, and this is only with the intent of
defending one’s life and property. If he happens to kill the thief in
the process, then may the mercy of Allah be removed from the
dead thief. If the person who was attacked dies in the process of
defending himself and his wealth, it is desired that he will be a
martyr, as it comes in the prophetic narrations. All of the
prophetic narrations concerning this affair have only commanded
with defending oneself, and have not commanded to kill the
agoressor, or to follow behind him (after he escapes) or to execute
him while he is subdued or injured. If the intruder is taken as a
captive, he is not to be killed and the legal punishment is not to
be established upon him. Rather the victim raises the issue to the

one given authority (1.e., The Muslim ruler) and fe is to judge in
the affair.*°

56 This is a detailed explanation of the ruling of fighting the
Khawary, thieves, and those that seek to take people's property by
force and power, ‘which is extracted from the hadith in which a
man asked the Messenger of Allah (#8): “What if a man seeks to
take my wealth? He (#8) said: ‘Do not give it to him.’ The man
said: ‘and if he fights me for it?’ He (#8) said: ‘then fight against
him (the thief)’ So the man asked: ‘and if he kills me?’ The
Prophet (#8) said: “Then you are a martyr.’ He said: ‘And if I kill

Piz0 140

Pago 7

him? The Prophet (8%) said: ‘then he (the thief) is in the fire.”
| Collected by Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (140)]

Also the Prophet (8) said: “Whoever dies protecting his life, he
is a martyr. Whoever dies protecting his wealth, he is a martyr.

And whoever dies protecting his religion, he is a ”

| Collected by at-Tirmidhi, The Book of Blood Money, hadith no. (1421); at-
tirmidhi graded this narration to be hasan sahth; Ab Dawid, The Book of
Sunnah, hadith no. (4772); al-albant graded it to be authentic. As for the
Prophet's statement “whoever dies protecting his wealth is (indeed) a mattyr,”
it was collected by al-Bukhart, The Book of Math4lim and al-Ghadab, hadith
no. (2480); Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (141)]

If a person’s wealth, family, or life is attacked, then they can
defend themselves in the way that is best, not seeking to kill the
one who is transgressing. But if it escalates to the level where he
kills this individual (by means of self defense) there is no blame
upon him: if the victim is killed, he is a martyr. The Islamic
legislation has made it permissible for a person to defend himself
in a situation where his life, wealth, or honor (e.g. wives,
daughters, etc) is in danger. Rather some scholars are upon the
opinion that it is obligatory to defend the women that are being
attacked, such as one’s wives, sisters, and daughters. If the
aggressor is subdued, then all praises belong to Allah. But if it
leads to the extent that the attacker is killed, then there ts no sin
upon the one who has defended himself. As for the one who is
killed, then he is in the Hell-Fire, but if the victim (.e. the one
being robbed or attacked) is killed, he is a martyr. In every
situation 2 person is seeking the Face of Allah, 63 holding firm
to the Islamic Legislation, and not merely defending himself,
because actions are by intentions. Allah has made it permissible,
rather obligatory for us to defend ourselves and property.

Al-Imam Ahmad based this issue on the prophetic narrations that
have come. He intends by these words that although the Religion
has made it permissible for a person to defend himself, his wealth,

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

(93 ‏مو‎ 35 CRW

his honor, and his family, it did not make it permissible for you
to kill the aggressor. Therefore, do not intend to kill the
aggressor, but rather to defend yourself. If the harm is removed
and he (1e., the aggressor) is fought off, all praises belong to
Allah. But if his aggression does not cease except through death,
then it is as the Prophet (#8) said: “If the aggressor is killed, he is
in the Fire, and if the victim is killed he is a martyr.”

Also, if this aggressor is under your control and he is wounded or
a captive, do not kill him. You do not have the right to punish
him, or to follow him if he escapes. His transgression has ended,
which is what we desire, either through being wounded or by
escaping, so do not follow behind him. If he falls down wounded,
do not kill him; this is not permissible. Rather it is a form of
transgression. So while you have been commanded to fight against
him, you have not been commanded to kill him. Finally, if the
aggressor becomes a captive you do not have the right to kill him
or to establish the legal punishment upon him, rather you must
raise this issue to the Muslim Ruler; they are the ones responsible
for carrying out Allah’s prescribed ruling, or that which they
desire. If they were to oppose (the correct Islamic Punishment)
the responsibility is upon them.

Page TAZ

5
8
3

لا نشهد لأحدٍ من أهل القبلة ‎Be‏ ولا نار
‎We Do not Declare Anyone from the‏
‎Muslims to be in Paradise or the Hell-Fire‏

e do not declare anyone from the Muslims to enter the

Paradise or the Hell-Fire, based on any action that they
have done. We hope for the righteous and fear for him (at the
same time). Likewise, we fear for the sinner and desire that Allah
has mercy on him.*’

57 Except if it is disbelief in Allah or shirk, which have a specific
ruling. As for sin (other than disbelief and polytheism), we do not
say that this person is in the Fire or Paradise. If he does righteous
deeds we desire for him Paradise, and if he does that which
obligates for him the Fire, we fear for him. Thus we hope for the
one who is obedient to Allah and we fear for the one who
disobeys Allah. But we do not make a decisive ruling (about him),
saying that so and so 1s in the hellfire or in paradise, because this
is not for anyone except Allah, unless it is clear disbelief, such as a
Jew or Christian, (who are) upon clear disbelief. As for this
person, it is said that he is in the fire. We decisively say that the
disbeliever is in the Fire. But as for the believer, whether
disobedient or obedient, we do not make a decisive ruling
concerning any of them, this is to Allah. We hope for the
obedient Muslim and fear for the sinning Muslim, and (at the
same time) we fear for the righteous Muslim as well (because we
do not know the reality of his heart). That is because in front of
the people he may be doing righteous actions, but the reality is
different from that. This is what happened with the man who was
fighting bravely while attacking the enemy during battle and the
Messenger (#8) said: “He is in the Fire.” [Collected by al-Bukhar?, The
Book of Military Expeditions, hadith no. (4203); Muslim, The Book of Faith,
hadith no. )111,112([

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

دمج جه 35 مو ‎C93‏

He appears to be a Mujahid, but his intention is different.
Likewise the one who was hit with an arrow, the Companions
(4) said about him: “So and So is a martyr, so and so is a
martyr.” Until they came to the Prophet (#8) and he said: “Nay,
by Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the sheet (of cloth) which he
had taken (illegally) on the day (of the Battle) of Khaybar from
the booty before the distribution of the booty, has become a

flame of fire burning him.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of
Military Expeditions, hadith no. (4234); Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith

no. (IIS); the abovementioned wording is found in his collection. ]

And Umm al-‘Ala’ had with her ‘Uthm4n bin Math‘an, taking
care of him, and then he died. So she said: “O Aba Sa’ib, Allah
has honored you.” So the Messenger of Allah (#8) said: “How do
you know that Allah has honored him? By Allah I am a
Messenger of Allah and I do not know what will be done to me.”
So she said: “I will not praise anyone after him.” Then she saw in
her dream a fountain running. So she informed the Messenger of

Allah (38). He said to her: “These are his actions.” | Collected by al-
Bukhari, The Book of Shahadat, hadith no. (2687)]

The point is that you do not decisively say anyone is in paradise

or the Hell-Fire.

Phyo 145

الله يتوب على من تاب
‎Allah Accepts The Tawbah of the One‏
‎Who Repents to Him‏

hoever meets Allah and has repented from a sin that

obligated for him the Fire, and has not persisted upon
that sin, Allah will accept his repentance, and will pardon him;
that is because Allah accepts the repentance from his servants and
forgives the sins.°

(3S) FE CRBO

55 As Allah—The Most High—said:

ما ص

‎[aes Yall Coles Joy‏ عَكَ أيهم ‎BY‏ ون َم لَه إِنَأللَّهَ
‎ti 7 Gk Spl 22% or‏ 96 نهم هوا لْعَهُور ‎MN‏ حم ‎OD)‏

‎“Say: ‘O My slaves ) who have transgressed against themselves
(by committing evil deeds and sins)! Despair not of the Mercy of
Allah, verily Allah forgives all sins. Truly, He is Oft-Forgiving,
Most Merciful” | Az-Zumar: 53]

‎Allah loves that His slaves return to Him in repentance. He loves
those who repent and purify themselves. We hope for the one
who repents, but we do not make a decisive decision that he will
be in Paradise or the Fire. We hope for him, if Allah wills. And
there are a number of verses in the Quran and authentic
prophetic narrations that indicate that Allah accepts the
repentance of the one who repents to Him and is happy for his
repentance.

The Explanation of Us@l As-Sunnah

الحدود كقّارات للذنوب و المصرٌ على ذنب ‎CF‏
‏مشدئة الله

The Legal Punishments are Expiations, and
the One Who is Persistent Upon a Sin is
| Under the Will of Allah

hoever meets Allah, and the legal punishment has been

established upon him in the dunyA, then the punishment
serves as an expiation for him as it has been reported from the
Messenger (#8). And whoever meets Allah persistent upon
committing a sin that obligated for him a punishment, and has
not repented from it, then his affair is with Allah; if He 69
wills, He (2) will punish him, and if He wills He will forgive
him. And whosoever meets Allah as a disbeliever, Allah will

punish him, and will not forgive him.®

5 ‘The Messenger of Allah (#8) was with a group from amongst
his Companions and said to them: “Will you not give me the
pledge of allegiance?” And he said: “Give me the pledge of
Allegiance that you will not associated partners with Allah, will
not steal, will not commit illegal sexual intercourse, that you will
not kill your children, that you will not utter slander intentionally
forging falsehood, and that you will not disobey me in al-Ma‘raf
(e., all good deeds),” referring to the allegiance of the women.

They said: “We give you allegiance upon that.” He (#8) said:
“Whoever from amongst you fulfills his pledge will be rewarded
by Allah, and whoever does not completely fulfill his oath, and is
punished in this world, it is expiation for him. So whoever does
not fulfill his oath and falls short, and Allah covers his mistake,
his affair is left to Allah. If Allah wills He will punish him and if
He wills He will pardon him.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of

the Merits of the Ansar, hadith no. (3892); and Muslim, The Book of Legal
Punishments, hadith no. (1709)]

Piz 6

Pago 7

Therefore, the sinful believer is under the will of Allah. As
Allah—The Most High—said:

wee 74 “U7 2 ‏لو سس‎ ev, A77S & 8. ‏دمع لولح‎
{ SLES ‏لمن‎ WS ‏وَيَعْفْر مَادُونَ‎ ody M59 ‏إن الله لا يعهْرٌ ن‎ .:
“Verily, Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with
him in worship, but He forgives except that (anything else) to
whom He pleases.” [An-Nisi: 48]

If a sinning Muslim dies, he is under the will of Allah. If He wills,
He will pardon him, and if He wills, He will punish him. Allah is
the one who forgives, extends His mercy, and possesses
forbearance. Even the slave who commits sins which (are as great
as) mountains, Allah still pardons. Look at the man who will have
scrolls filled with evil deeds, ninety-nine scrolls, each one of them
is a lengthy as the eye can see. But with these scrolls, he came with
the statement “La ilaha illa Allah” (There is no deity worthy of

being worshipped in truth, except Allah), Allah pardoned him.
[refer to the hadith of the scrolls]

The one who meets Allah and has not associated partners with
Him, in the end Allah will forgive him and remove him from the

fire. (Al-Imam Ahmad mentioned): [As for the disbeliever who
meets Allah, he will be punished and for him there is no

forgiveness |.

Cee “4 “N72 oS er, ‏ملم‎ < GB. 2744 ‏2ه‎ +
4 AES SAS SSG is ‏يو‎ Te AY}
“Verily, Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with
him in worship, but He forgives except that (anything else) to
whom He pleases” [An-Nisa: 48]
As Allah says in the Qur’an:

‎a g‏ أ سس اي و سسا

‎be >
4 Maye A Rem Corse, ao 20 4 GA AG
‏و‎ EN angles ‏الجنة‎ ace ‏فقد حرم الله‎ si Jd ‏من‎ at] +

‏م

‏م

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

‎CRED‏ 35 مو هى

‎“Verily, whosoever sets up partnets in worship with Allah, then
Allah has forbidden Paradise for him, and the Fire will be his
abode. And for the thalimfin (polytheists and wrongdoers) there
are no helpers.” [Al-Mi’idah: 72]

‎Pig 14S

Pago 9

شرعية إقامة الحدود
‎The Legislation of Carrying out the Legal‏

Punishments

he legislation of ar-rajm (stoning) is true and correct for the

fornicator who is or has been married, whether they have
confessed, or sufficient proof has been established against him.
The Prophet (38) has implemented the legal punishment of rajm
(stoning), as did the Rightly Guided Successors.

°° Stoning is the legal punishment for the fornicator (who is or
has previously been married). The Messenger of Allah (8) stoned
al-Ghamidiyyah, Ma’‘iz, and al-Juhaniyyah, as well as two Jews
who committed fornication. Also, this is what Allah has decreed
in the Torah, the Injil (the Gospel), and the Qur’4n; the Isl4mic
legislation has agreed to this ruling, affirming it. A verse was sent
down, its wording was abrogated, but the ruling remained. ‘Umar
bin al-Khattab mentioned this when he said: “Certainly Allah sent
Muhammad with truth; He has sent upon him a book. From that
which has been sent down to him is the verse about stoning. We
recited it, memorized it, understood it, and implemented it. The
Messenger stoned, and we stoned after him; so I fear that there
will come someone who will say: “We do not find stoning
mentioned in the Qur’én, so he will go astray because of his
denying an obligation from the obligations of Allah that has been
revealed in the Qur’4n. Then he (‘Umar) said: “and the legal
punishment for the fornicator is stoning, whether it is a man or
woman, if there is a submission to the sin, clear evidence, or

pregnancy.”

A man (or woman) is stoned when there are four witnesses. If
there are only three witnesses, each one of these witnesses is
punished for slander. Therefore it is absolutely necessary that
there are four witnesses who actually saw the sin take place,
witnessing the man’s private part inside of the woman’s private

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

part, explicitly. Their testimony is not accepted unless there are
four witnesses who saw, with certainty, the crime of fornication
take place, with their own eyes. All of this is in order to preserve

life and honor. Allah says:

Se ad

ail ie AS eee 3 J 3p 108 ah, ab tk IS}

oo

“Why 4 ha a not produce four witnesses? Since they (the
slanderers) have not produced witnesses! Then with Allah they
are the liars.” | An-Nar:13 |

Also it is possible that a person will admit to the sin, as was the
case with Ma‘iz and ‏عله‎ Ghamidiyyah, or through pregnancy,
which is the best evidence. So no one is stoned except with clarity,
either four witnesses, or a man or woman admits to the sin, or
pregnancy appears on the woman; this is the punishment of the
muhsin. The Muhsin is the man who married a woman with a
correct marital contract and had intercourse with her. These are
the conditions: that he its one of sound intellect and not insane,
mature and not a child, and that he is a free person, and not a
slave: because if the person is a male or female slave that has
married a proper Islamic marriage, their punishment is half the
punishment of the free one, and it is to be flogged fifty times. As
for the stoning, it cannot be reduced to half. Because the
punishment of the free person that has not been married, whether
male or female is:

‎Ser od 6,‏ 1 ور

‎ait ata EY ale 2185, ws BSH)

‎o a

‎<2 err ones ‏صر د‎ Lida de 287 G4 ‏و سا‎ od
4 0 ‏خر ولشهد عذا َمؤْمنينَ‎ Si akan 2 So)

‎“The woman ole the man a of ilegal sexual intercourse, flog
each of them with a hundred stripes. Let not pity withhold you in
their case, in a punishment prescribed by Allah, if you believe in

Pye 1 OF

جم هه 35 مو هى

Allah and the Last Day. And let a party of the believers witness
their punishment.” [An-Nir: 2]

Therefore, the legal punishment of the slave is half the
punishment of the free person (who has not married); it is fifty
lashes. There is no stoning upon the slave, even if they have
married a correct Islamic marriage. (Rather,) they are to be

flogged fifty times.

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

Declaring to be an innovator the one who
belittles any of the Companions (@)of the
Messenger of Allah (3)

hoever belittles one of the Companions of the Messenger

of Allah (38) or hates him, either because of something
this Companion did, or by mentioning his shortcomings, then he
is an innovator until he makes supplication for, all of the
Companions, asking Allah to bestow His mercy upon them, and
his heart does not contain any negative feelings toward them.°!

61 This is from the fundamental principles of Ahl as-Sunnah: it is
not permissible to belittle any Companion of the Prophet
Muhammad (#8), by mentioning any of their faults or any event |
that may have taken place. Unfortunately, these people (Le., the
KhawAary, the Rafidhah, etc.) take the Religion, the Companions,
and the Islamic beliefs very lightly. A person belittles the
Prophets and the Companions, declares them to be disbelievers,
accuses them of hypocrisy, declares the general body of Muslims
to be disbelievers, and this person is called a /eader, a scholar of
the Ummah, according to whom?! Is it according to those who
want to bring revolution to the Ummah, returning it to its glory?
These people are not to be entrusted with the religion of Allah;
rather they are grouped with the Rafidhah. That is because they
defend the (creed of the) Rafidhah, al-ilhad, zandagah (1e.,
hypocrisy and misguidance), and they defend the books that
contain these criminal beliefs. Rather, they even make allegiance
and disassociation based upon these books. These people are not
to be trusted with the Religion of Allah. They have no value; it is
obligatory that they be grouped with the Rafidhah, and the other
sects of misguidance. In addition to that, they should be opposed,
refuted, and battled against with harshness, because these people
have deceived and wasted the Muslim youth, pulverizing them
with deception, treachery, and dishonesty.

Page A AD

Pye (OS

This 1s the religion of Allah and the ‘Agidah of Ahl as-Sunnah wa
al-Jama'‘ah. (These people claim to be from ahl as-Sunnah) saying:
“We are Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jam4‘ah.” (We respond to them
saying): but Ahl as-Sunnah are in one valley, while you are in
another. Every time we are in a valley, we find you all in another
valley with the people of innovation and desires. Every time we
tread a path from the paths of the people of the Sunnah, we find
you all in another trail, defending the people of innovation and
misguidance. By Allah, they have established principles and
methodologies and incited the entire dunya in order to protect
the people of innovation. How can these people be from Ahl as-
Sunnah? They are to be group with the likes of the RAfidhah, the
people of misguidance and innovation, even if they claim to be
against the Rafidhah. We do not believe them, nor do we trust
the likes of these people with our children. Nowadays, our
children are studying in schools and universities being taught and
cultivated by such people of innovation, where they raise them
upon corruption, misguidance, and waste. They are distancing the
Muslim youth from the methodology of the people of Sunnah.
Unfortunately the youth follow these deceitful ones who play
games with the intellect of these youth, who give them blind
allegiance and trust.

As for the statement of al-Imam Ahmad [And whoever belittles
one of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah, or hates him
for something he did]: Even if it has been established that a
particular Companion has fallen into a mistake, do not mention
this mistake; do not look down upon this Companion by
mentioning this. Rather say that he is mujtahid, (he sought out
the truth, and for him is a single reward even with a mistake).
This is the methodology of Ahl as-Sunnah. Whatever difference
that took place between the Companions, they all exerted effort
to attain the truth. However, much of what is ascribed to them
are lies or has even been distorted, changed, or exaggerate, as

Sheikh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High,

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

‎5E CRED‏ مو هى

‎have mercy on him—mentioned. As for that which has been
authentically reported in terms of their mistakes, it is only like a
drop of water in an ocean, pertaining to (all of the good he has
done). As for his good deeds, then a date that a Companion gives
in charity is better than the Mountain Uhud that you spend in
gold. (Imagine) you spend the likes of the Mountain of Uhud in

‎gold, while a Companion gives a handful of barley or half a
handful.

‎(This charity) with Allah is better than the Mountain of Uhud
and the rest of the mountains of this world. If you were to gather
mountains worth of charity, it would not be equal to a handful of
charity of one of the Messenger’s Companions (38). Therefore, it
is a must that we respect them and recognize their lofty levels that
they have with Allah, who has made the charity that is spent by
one of the Tabi‘tn (the students of the Companions), not even
worth a handful or half a handful of the charity of a single
Companion. So what about you? (What about) these people that
belittle the Companions, have not honored them in the least and
have not recognized their level. Rather they mock their level and
take it lightly?! The one who defends these types of people, they
also have not recognized the level of the Companions, because if
they did they would not take those who curse and insult the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah ($8) as friends and
protectors. They publish and print books that curse the
Companions of Muhammad (#8), disseminating them all over.
They even defend and get angry for these books, while
continually saying: We are Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah. No, by
Allah! No, by Allah! No, by Allah! The people of Sunnah are no
doubt free from these types of people!

Py (OO

5 J 016

The Meaning of Hypocrisy

procs is disbelief: it is to disbelieve in Allah, worshipping
other than Him, while outwardly professing to be Muslim,

as was the case with the hypocrites during the time of the Prophet
Muhammad (#8).

© Hypocrisy is to outwardly profess al-Islam while inwardly
concealing disbelief, whether or not the person worships other
than Allah or does not worship other than Allah. It may be
possible that the person is a zindiq (i.e. heretic, misguided,
hypocrite), who does not worship Allah or other than Allah, such
as the Communists who outwardly professes al-Islam, but
inwardly hide disbelief. Whether he worships other than Allah or
does not worship other than Allah, he is still a hypocrite if he
conceals his disbelief and outwardly professes to al-Islam. That
which must be considered is the actual definition of a hypocrite:
to conceal disbelief, while outwardly professing al-Islam while
lying, hiding, and pretending the entire time or seeking protection
(through this declaration of faith.) Many people even say that
they are from Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah, while being an
innovator in reality. This person conceals innovation, but openly
claims to be from the people of Sunnah. This is a type of
hypocrisy. These people take as their friends and close associates
the people of innovation, they conceal their bid‘ah , and still say
they are from the people of Sunnah. The indication of this is that
they turn to the people of innovation and derive methodologies
to protect them.

We (as Muslims) seek youth who are intelligent, whose allegiance
is completely to Allah, His Messenger, and to the believers, and at
the top of them are the Companions of the Prophet (#8). If we
see a fault in this allegiance, then there is (certainly) a serious flaw
in ‘Aqidah which has destructive implications.

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

دمج جه 35 مو هى

This (aforementioned definition) is hypocrisy: to conceal
disbelief, and openly profess belief in al-Islam, such as the
hypocrites during the time of Prophet Muhammad (38). Ibn
Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High, have mercy on him—
mentions that: some people think that hypocrisy is limited to the
time period of the Prophet Muhammad (3%) and has finished; this
is a mistake. Hudayfah (#8) said: “Hypocrisy during our times is
worse than during the time of the Messenger of Allah ($8). They
said: How? He said: The hypocrites used to’ conceal their
hypocrisy, during the time of the Messenger of Allah ($8). As for
today, they have made their hypocrisy known.”

Nowadays this is also widespread, especially amongst those
political movements, as some have bore witness, by saying: I have
not met a politician that does not lie. Some people even said:
“Politics zs hypocrisy.” Many (Muslims) who involve themselves
in politics have hypocrisy in their actions. From the signs of this
hypocrisy is that they align themselves with the people of
innovation and establish dangerous principles and methodologies
to combat and tear down the methodology of the people of
Sunnah. From amongst these concepts that they have established
is al-MuwéAzanat as well as the principle of the wide and expansive
Manhaj, that includes the whole Muslim Body, (whether they are
from the people of innovation or people of Sunnah), and other
than these principles that are established to attack Ahl as-Sunnah
and defend the people of innovation and misguidance.

Pix 06

Pye 7

ve |e é 3
Submitting to the Texts (Qur’4n & Sunnah),

even if we do not know their meanings

s for the narrations that have come and the statement of the

Prophet Muhammad (#8): “There are three characteristics,

whoever possesses all of them is a hypocrite,”® this (wording) is

understood as strict and stern speech, but we (still) narrate them
as they have come, without explaining them.

© When al-Imam Ahmad mentioned that hypocrisy is to openly
profess al-Islam and to conceal disbelief, he then mentioned a
number of narrations showing the indicators of hypocrisy, while
making a distinction between the two types of hypocrisy. The
Prophet ($8) did not intend by these words that they are
hypocrites in terms of their beliefs, in that they disbelieve in
Allah, the Angels, the Books, the Messengers, and the Day of the
Judgment. This here is another type of hypocrisy (ie., hypocrisy
in belief). Rather, what is intended is that they possess a
characteristic from the traits of the hypocrites. The scholars have
referred to this type of hypocrisy as “Active Hypocrisy.” As the
Prophet (#8) mentioned: “There are three characteristics, whoever
possesses all of them is a hypocrite: he lies when he speaks, he
breaks his promise, and he betrays when he is entrusted.” In
another narration, “When he disputes he is immoral, and when he

makes a contract, he betrays.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of
Faith, hadith no. (33, 34); Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (58, 59)]

These are called the signs of hypocrisy, hypocrisy in actions. They
do not necessarily possess inward disbelief, although it zs possible.
Because of this, the Messenger (#8) said: “Whoever has these
characteristics, he is a complete hypocrite.”

It is possible that he is an absolute hypocrite, and it is possible as
well that he has merely hypocrisy in actions. Regardless, it is a

The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

must that we warn from this type of person who breaks his
promise, lies when he swears, betrays upon being entrusted, and
transgresses during disputes. By Allah, it is a must that we think
badly of him, and that we warn against him, because he possesses
strong indicators from the signs of the real hypocrites. Even with
this, we do not say for certain that he is an absolute hypocrite, but
we are cautious.

We mention these narrations and do not say for certain that the
described people are disbelievers; rather we refrain from stating
these words. For indeed this is closer to honoring the prophetic
narrations. Some of the scholars of the Salaf used to say that we
do not explain these narrations, while others clarified these
nattations in order to refute the Khawary, who claim that anyone
who possesses any of these traits then he is an absolute hypocrite,
one hundred percent, and they declared the people who possessed
these traits to be disbelievers. As for us, we do not. Rather, we
only mention these narrations as a means of placing fear in the
hearts of the people. For example, if we are debated concerning
the meaning of these narrations, we clarify that this is “hypocrisy
in actions” and that this ts minor disbelief. That ts because
disbelief is of two types: major and minor. Likewise hypocrisy is
of two types: major and minor. And also polytheism is two types:
major and minor. So if we are dealing with the extremist from
amongst the Khawarij, we are forced to clarify that the actual
intent from these narrations is minor disbelief.

On the other hand, if we see the general Muslims diving headlong
into sins and disobedience, we mention these prophetic narrations
to deter them, without going into details. And this is that which
is apparent from the way of al-Imaém Ahmad—may Allah, The
Most High, have mercy on himn—The proof of this is that which
has been mentioned. That is because he opposes the rulings of the
Khawary, rather he is from the most severe of the people in
combating and refuting them. The Khawary use these narrations

Foye TO

Pogo TOP

to declare the sinners from amongst the Muslims to be
disbelievers. And likewise they declare those who fall into major
sins to be disbelievers. As for the methodology of Ahl as-Sunnah
wa al-Jama‘ah, they do not declare people who fall into major sins
to be disbelievers. So, for example, in the hadith “Do not return
after me, as disbelievers, striking at each other’s necks,” the
Khawary use this text to declare the believers to be disbelievers.
While Ahl as-Sunnah say that this is faulty understanding, rather
the affair is as Allah says:

&

a- ‏م رس‎ hk 7 “~~ 274A 47

vor 0 o or : +
ee | asks Ele of HA Slices SF 35 Sloe CANT

بالعدل ديل 3
ا لمك قال لتقي 2 )

“And if two parties or groups among oe believers fall to fighting,
then make peace between them both, but if one of them rebels
against the other, then fight you (all) against the one that which
tebels till it complies with the Command of Allah; then if it
complies, then make reconciliation between them justly, and be
equitable. Verily! Allah loves those who are equitable. The
believers are nothing else than brothers (in Islamic teligion). So
make reconciliation between your brothers, and fear Allah, that

you may receive mercy.” [Al-Hujurat: 9-10]

E's

Allah testified to their faith as well as their religious brotherhood,
even though they pulled out their swords, fighting one another.
However, if a Muslim raised his sword against another Muslim,
while deeming his actions to be permissible, then he is a
disbeliever. But if he knows that shedding the Muslim’s blood is
impermissible and he is only transgressing because of some lower
desires, worldly benefits, or animosity, then this is disbelief in
actions, and does not take a person out of the fold of al-Islim.

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

For this reason, Abd ‘Ubaydah and other scholars of the religion,
such as Ibn Taymiyyah—may Allah, The Most High, have mercy
on them—clarified that these texts which the Khawary hold on
to, misusing them to declare Muslims who fall into major sins to
be disbelievers, (i.e., fornication, usage of intoxications, murder,
fighting, and other things similar to this) refer to minor disbelief,
minor hypocrisy, and minor shirk. As for Ahl as-Sunnah, they
explained these texts according to what we have previously
mentioned to you.

Similarly, the hadith in which the Prophet (4%) mentioned: “A
fornicator is not a believer while he is fornicating,” [Ibid] The
legal punishment is established upon him, either stoning or
flogging. If this person was a disbeliever (as the Khawarij claim)
then we would apply the hadith “Whoever changes his religion,
execute him.” [Ibid] The ruling that would apply to him would be
execution; he is asked to repent, and if not he is executed as an
apostate, not as a legal punishment (which would be expiation for
a Muslim sinner). Also, the thief’s hand is cut off.

As Allah says:

“Cut off (from 7 wrist ae the cho hand of the se thief male
ot female.” [Al-M3i’idah: 38]

If he were a disbeliever (for committing this major sin) he would
be killed as an apostate, and not merely have his hand amputated.

The Islamic legislation is to be taken in its totality, gathering

between different texts—may Allah bless you all. As for those
who have deviation in their hearts, they follow that which is not
clear thereof, seeking fitnah and its hidden meanings. As for Ahl
as-Sunnah, we hold on to the clear texts, and return the unclear
texts back to those that are clear. So these texts are unclear, Ahl —

Piz 1 0

‎OF‏ رز(

‎as-Sunnah gather them and return the unclear to that which is
clear. Unlike the Khaw4rij and others from the people of
innovation such as the Murji’ah, the Mu'tazilah and other than
them: they place disagreement between the narrations. They will
hold on to an unclear text, using it to establish an innovation and
declaring the Muslims to be disbelievers.

‎As for those who are firmly rooted in Islamic knowledge, they
bring reconciliation between the texts, gathering them all in a way
in which all of them can be acted upon. Hence, we say: minor
disbelief. Likewise, when it 15 appropriate, we may report these
prophetic narrations in general (without explaining them), while
holding the belief that these texts refer to minor disbelief,
However, if a person falls into major disbelief such as denying
Allah or His Messenger, cursing Allah or His Messenger, denying
something in which there is a consensus concerning it and it is
known by necessity to be from the religion, denying a single pillar
from the pillars of al-Islam (e.g. praying, fasting, charity),
disbelieving in the Angels, the Paradise, the Hell-Fire, mocking
Allah, the Messenger, or His Book, or turning away from the
religion, or rejecting the truth out of arrogance and pride, all of
these are undeniably major disbelief, in which, a person leaves the
fold of al-Islam after committing these acts. However, the sins
that are mentioned in the previous narrations refer to minor

‎disbelief.

‎The same applies to the hadith: “Whoever says to his brother ‘O
disbeliever, then it returns to one of them,” this is minor
disbelief. Unless if he intends that this Muslim is a disbeliever,
and that his religion (of al-Islam) is disbelief. As for this person
(who referred to a Muslim as a disbeliever with this intent), then
this is real disbelief. But for the person who called his Muslim
brother a disbeliever out of mere anger, or because he opposed
him, or any other reason, then this person has not committed

The Explanation of Usdl As-Sunnah

Also the statement of the Prophet (#8) “Do not return after me,

as misguided disbelievers, striking at each other's necks.” [Musnad
Ahmad, verification by Ahmad Shakir and Hamzah az-Zayn, hadith no.
(16644).

Also the hadith “If two Muslims meet with their swords, the dead

one and the killer are in the fire.” [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of
Faith, hadith no. (31); Muslim, The Book of Trials and Signs of the Hour,
hadith no. (2777) |

Also the statement of the Prophet (#8) “To insult a Muslim is

wickedness, and to fight him is disbelief.” [Collected by al-Bukhari,
The Book of Faith, hadith no. (48); Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no.

(64)

Also, “Whoever says to his brother “O disbeliever,’ then it returns

to one of them.” [Collected by al-Bukhart, The Book of Manners, hadith
no. (6103, 6104); Muslim, The Book of Faith, hadith no. (60)|

Also like the hadith “disbelief in Allah is freeing oneself from his
kinship, even if it is remote.” [Ibn Taymiyyah mentioned (this narration)
in Kitab al-Im4n, and al-Albani declared it to be Hasan |, and other
authentic prophetic narrations such as these that have been
preserved.“ We submit to these texts, even if we do not know

major disbelief, but rather minor disbelief. (And by the way), it is

possible to chastise your brother without calling him a disbeliever.

Here, al-Imam Ahmad is being humble, or he may intend that
the general people do not know the interpretation of these
narrations. As for the people of understanding, those who are
firmly grounded in Islamic knowledge, the likes of al-Imam
Ahmad, then these narrations are explained in accordance with
the understanding of Ahl as-Sunnah. (For indeed) al-Imam
Ahmad fought against the Khawarij who (falsely) attached
themselves to these narrations. Likewise, he refuted the Murji’ah
who attached themselves to the texts about the promise (of

Pino 2

No

ae 2M IT ‏مع‎
‎(Cu

mall ‏صول‎

—_——?

their meanings. We do not speak concerning them, debate about
them, or explain them except like that which has been narrated.
We do not reject them except with that which is most correct or
most deserving from amongst them (.e., the narrations).

93 ‏مو‎ 35 CRB

8
Paradise). Al-Imém Ahmad combated every deviant group, which \

indicates that he is an Im4m of the prophetic Sunnah, who in fact NN
knows the correct meaning of these narrations. 8

The Explanation of Usl As-Sunnah

‎Ey BL gh olay‏ مخلوقتان وحكم من أنكر ذلك

‎Belief that Heaven and Hell are Both Created,

‎and the Ruling of the One Who Denies That
he belief that Heaven and Hell have (already) been created,
as it has been narrated that the Messenger (#8) said: “I
entered Paradise and saw a palace®.” “And I saw al-kawthar
(river in patadise)” and “and I looked in Paradise and saw most

‎65 This is from the glad tidings for ‘Umar bin al-Khattab (<)
The Prophet (4) saw (in his dream) a palace made of gold and
by this palace was a woman making wudi’. So the Messenger
asked: “Who does this palace belong to?’ He (the Angel) said: ‘It
belongs to a man from the Arabs.’ The Prophet (#8) said: ‘I am
Arab, who is it for?’ The Angel said: ‘It belongs to a man from
Quraysh.’ The Prophet (338) said: ‘I am from Quraysh, who does
this belong to?’ He said: ‘this belongs to ‘Umar bin al-Khattab.’
The Prophet (#8) wanted to enter inside the palace, but he
remembered the jealousy ‘Umar bin al-Khattab has, so he became
shy and took off. Afterwards, he narrated this story to ‘Umar, at
what point ‘Umar began to cry. He then said: “Shall I have

‎jealousy against you O Messenger of Allah?” [Collected by al-Bukhari,
The Book Beginning of Creation, hadith no. (3242); Muslim, The Book
Virtues of the Companions, hadith no. (2394, 2395); at-Tirmidhi, The Book
of Merits, hadith no. (3689); al-albant graded it to be authentic. |

‎The (benefit from this hadith) is that the Paradise exists, and in it
is a castle for ‘Umar bin al-Khattab which the Prophet (#8) saw
with his own eyes; by it is a woman of Paradise making wudt’.
Likewise there is the hadith where the Prophet (38) saw al-
Kawthar (river in paradise). Also in other authentic narrations tt
mentions that he (38) saw his Hawd (fountain) while he (#8) was
on his minbar. The Prophet (#8) said: “Indeed I see it now.”
There are many proofs about the existence of Paradise. Allah 69

‎said:

Pye 2

of its inhabitants were...”, “ and I looked in the Fire and saw...”
Whoever denies that they (i.e., Heaven and Hell) both have been

PX, Eee SSD Le ie Si a ‏م‎ ax 21 ‏22ج ساس و 2ه‎
{ W) GUE tice REM 955 Soe Al a5 ste) ‏ولقد‎ }
“And indeed he (Muhammad 38) saw him (Jibril) at a second
descent (i.e. another time). Near Sidrat (a lote-tree of the utmost
boundary over the seventh haven beyond which none can pass.
Near it is the Paradise of Abode.” [An-Najm: 13-15]

This is from the proofs that refute the misguided Mu'tazilah,
those who say that Paradise and Hell are non-existent, and that
for them (i.e. Paradise and Hell) to exist now would be of no

benefit. May Allah disgrace them and their (corrupt) intellects,

Allah said about Paradise: “prepared for the pious.” Allah has
prepared Paradise for those who have taqwa. It exists, is prepared,
and the proofs are many. “I looked into the Hell-Fire, and
saw...” “I looked into the Fire and saw that the majority of its
inhabitants were women; I looked into Paradise and I saw the

majority of its inhabitants were the poor.” [Collected by Muslim, The
Book of Heart Softeners, hadith no. (2737)]

Allah—The Most High—said:

Ome 4 2 Z BS “47

Ste Hs actatt ‏وَحَشِيًا ويَوْمَ تَقُومْ‎ Ob Ue to 3G +
4 Gy ‏فرعو أَسَِّدَّ أَلْعَدَابِ‎

“(The fire they are exposed to it morning and noon, and the day
when the hour will be established (it will be said to the angels):

Cause Pharaoh’s people to enter the severest torment!” [Ghafir: 46]

Thus, there are many proofs indicating that Heaven and Hell are
created and that they exist now. From amongst them is that which
al-Imam Ahmad mentioned as well as the aforementioned verses.

The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

created, he has belied the Qur’4n and prophetic narrations; and I
do not deem him to be from those who believe in Heaven and

|

‎EF CREO‏ مو هى

‎66 It is possible that there are amongst these misguided deviants
people who have misinterpreted the text. Therefore we do not
declare them to be disbelievers. While, it is also possible that
there may be amongst them one who is an actual heretic who
belies the text, henceforth being an actual lying zindig.

‎Pixe 6

Figo 1 OF

الصّلاة على من مات من ‎Jal‏ القبلة ولوكان مذنبا
‎To Perform the Funeral Prayer Over the Muslim‏

Who Dies, Even if He Was Sinful

hoever dies from the Muslims, worshipping Allah alone,
he is to be prayed over (ie., the funeral prayer), and
forgiveness is to be sought for him. No sin, whether minor or
major, deprives him of the right to be prayed over and for people

to seek forgiveness for him. Rather his affair is with All4h ©

67 When sinners from amongst the Muslims die, we perform the
funeral prayer over them, even if they be from the people of
innovation. But the leader of the Muslims has the choice whether
to pray over this sinful Muslim or not. Similar to how the
Messenger (#8) did not pray over the man who illegally took (and
concealed) a part of the war booty. Rather, he (#8) said: “Pray

over your companion.” [Collected by at-Tirmidhi, The Book of al-Jihad,
hadith no. (2710); Ibn Majah, The Book of al-Jihad, hadith no. (2848); al-
Albani graded it to be weak]

Likewise he (#8) said: “Pray over your companion,” concerning
the one who died and had a debt. So Ab& Qatddah said: “I will
pay his debt,” at that point the Messenger (3) prayed over the

man as well. [Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of al-Hawalah, hadith no.
(2289) ]

We have been prohibited from praying over the disbelievers as
well as the hypocrites. So neither the disbeliever nor the hypocrite

should be prayed over. (As Allah says ):

| 7% ‏قم‎ 212 EN

‎JBN; +‏ ع ‎oi‏ مَنْهُم ‎ASE‏ لا نهم عل ‎il a‏ و | بس

‏اس و سس قر 8 ل رح مي نر رار

‎GY ‏وَرَسُوله- وَمَانوا 5 مسقو‎
“And never )0 Muhammad 38) pray (funeral prayer) for any of
them (hypocrites) who dies, nor stand at his grave. Certainly they

The Explanation of Us4l As-Sunnah

‎CREO‏ 35 ومو هى

‎disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and died while they were
Fasiqin (rebellious-disobedient to Allah and His Messenger
(38).” | At-Tawba:84 |

‎So it is not permissible to perform the funeral prayer for the
disbeliever nor the hypocrite. But the sinner (and the) innovator
are to be prayed over, as long as they have not left the fold of al-
Islam and we have not found something that has nullified their
Islam with the proof being established against them; we are to still
pray over them. But the Im4m and the scholar can choose not to
pray over him, as a punishment for him, and in order that the
people will refrain from falling into sin and innovation. But we do
not prevent the people from praying over this person, rather we

‎say to them (as the Prophet (#8) said): “Pray over him.”

‏68 7 مرو ©

Pago 9

أسئلة الدرس

Questions from the Class

Question: Is the one who rejects the Tafsir of Ibn AbbAs to
the statement of Allah:

2 Ta?) ‏م رمم ع م مايه سل سر‎ 2> a ve
£& ‏كأؤلتيك هم الكفروت‎ aI GIG KE ay
“...and whoever doesn’t rule by what Allah has revealed then
they are the disbelievers.” [Al-M3’idah: 44]

and says that the verse is to be understood in general, and that
it is not permissible to restrict it, and (says) that the one who
rules by other than what Allah revealed then he is a

disbeliever in all cases. Is this person from the Khawartj?

Response: There is no doubt that this is the way of the
Khawary. So therefore, the one who opposes the scholars of
Tafsir, at the top of them Ibn ‘Abb4s, and opposes the
scholars of hadith, and the scholars of the correct belief and
methodology in the likes of these very serious issues, and
these fundamental principles, then there is no doubt that he
has chosen a way and a methodology other than the way of
the People of Sunnah, and a path other than that of those
who have clear firm knowledge in the religion. So it is
obligatory upon the likes of these people to repent to Allah.
For indeed Ibn ‘Abbas («) is the explainer of the Qur’an and
the Aabr (1.e., learned man, scribe) of this Ummah. Rather the
senior Companions (#) recognized his virtue, knowledge,
understanding, and leadership in the Religion. The Prophet
(38) supplicated to Allah to give him understanding in the
Religion. So the scholars of the Religion treaded upon his
path, and it was the Khawarij that opposed him in the
explanation of this verse, and other than it.

I.
The Explanation of ‏أذولا‎ As-Sunnah

But it is not strange that the people of innovation oppose the
Companions (s). Rather (it is not strange) that they even
oppose the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet

(38)

I mention that the Messenger (#8) described the Khawary as

“youthful in age, foolish in their intellects.” [Collected by al-
Bukhari, The Book of Merits, hadith no. (3611); Muslim, The Book of
Charity, hadith no. (1066) |

And those that explain these verses with the incorrect
meaning are young and foolish. The Prophet (#8) said: “The
destruction of my Ummah will be at the hands of the

youthful foolish ones.” [Collected by al-Bukhart, The Book of Trials,
hadith no. (7058) |

Nowadays people are yelling out: “The youth, the youth, a
renaissance in thinking and consciousness, * but they are the
ones who have destroyed the Ummah and placed it in a
constant maze in the affairs of creed, legislative rulings, the
lives of the Muslims and their wealth. Indeed they have
destroyed the Ummah, both in terms of religion and dunya.
Although some people apply this (aforementioned) narration
to Bant Umayyah, I see that it connects with the hadith in
which the Prophet (38) described the Khawarij as “young in
age, foolish in their intellects.”

So if this hadith refers to youth from the tribe of Quraysh,
then other than them do not escape from this narration
either. Because as I have mentioned, this narration comes
together with the narration in which the Prophet (2)
describes the Khawarlj as young in age, foolish in their
intellects. Their intellects are deficient, and from this
feeblemindedness is that they do not care about the Tafsir or
understanding of the Companions or the scholars of the
Religion. They have chosen a different path, rather we say
that they have treaded upon the path of the Khawarij, whom

Pizo 0

Payot 1

the Prophet (8) described as young in age, foolish in their
intellects. Likewise, the scholars say that the word “young or
youth” also refers to one who is deficient in his intellect and
religion. Frankly, these people are characterized by this
description.

So we ask Allah to pardon the Ummah from their evil, who
call the Scholars agents and spies. They call the people away
from the “Ulama’, while connecting them to those who are
young and foolish, leaders of innovation and misguidance: the

Khawarij and the Rafidhah Shi‘ah.

2. Question: Is it appropriate for us Students of Knowledge
to be quiet about the people of innovation, and simply
cultivate the youth upon the way of the pious predecessors,
without mentioning the people of innovation by their names?

Response: By Allah, they should be mentioned by their
characteristics as well as their names, if there is a need to do
so. If a person takes it upon himself to become the so-called
leader of the Ummah and the youth, and he is pulling them
toward falsehood, then this person should be mentioned by
name, if there is a need to do so.

Also, it is appropriate to mention at this point: One of the
Salafiyyin in Egypt used to teach and mention things in
general, without specifics, so they did not really understand.
So once he began to openly warn from the deviant groups
and people, by name, the students said: O Sheikh, why didn’t
you teach us this from the beginning. He said: I used to give
you lessons, mentioning this information. They said: By

Allah, we didn’t understand.

We studied books dealing with the different deviant groups
and even memorized them, and they did not mention the
names of the modern day deviant groups: at-Tabligh, al-
The Explanation of ‏ولا‎ As-Sunnah

Ikhw4n, and other than them. We did not realize these
individuals were innovators until we studied them and
realized the need to mention them by name. All praises
belong to Allah, many of the scholars that did not mention
their names, began to mention their names openly, and all
praise belongs to Allah, this is obligatory. If there is a no
serious danger, then there is no problem with not mentioning
the name. However, if there is a danger, and these deviant
groups are drawing the youth, exploiting them to fight against
Ahl as-Sunnah, in such a case it is necessary to mention their
names, and there is no honor for them. (From amongst them
are those) that said: “To the Hell-Fire, Ibn al-Uthaymin,
remaining forever, you and those that follow you! This 1s
how they look at the scholars; they consider them to be
disbelievers. These people are Khawary, extremely harsh. May

Allah save us and protect us from their evil.

3. Question: Are women allowed to warn the people from

the books of Sayyid Qutb?

Response: By Allah, if there are women and female students
with her, then she should warn by mentioning the names of
Sayyid Qutb’s books, clarifying his methodology, (and the
books) such as In the Shades of the Qur’an and Social Justice
in_al-Islim. All praise belongs to Allah. Also, recently
Muhammad Qutb (Sayyid Qutb’s brother) announced that
he (Sayyid Qutb) warned from all of the books that he
authored before (the book) ‘Jn the Shades of the Qur‘an’.
After thirty or forty years you come and say that he has
warned from these books after the Muslim youth have been
destroyed. By Allah, this is great deception and betrayal. This
man is considered an “Im4m” amongst the youth. And he
gave written permission that these books be printed, and
fought against anyone who printed these books without his
permission. Millions from amongst the people’s wealth have
been taken without the right, at the expense of the creed and

Pago 1 12

Pye t (3

youth of the Ummah. Why has he made the Companions
seem insignificant to the Muslim Youth? Their jealousy for
Sayyid Qutb is greater than their jealousy for the Prophets
‏السَلام)‎ 5 SLA 4e) the Companions, and the scholars of Al-Islam.
Why is this? Because these (deviants) have connected the
youth to Sayyid Qutb’s takfirt and rebellious methodology,
where his innovation, misguidance, and dangers have become
insignificant to them. Therefore, it is imperative that these

books be refuted. For indeed ath- TA/4/ (In the Shades of the
Qur'an) is filled with ad-Dalél (misguidance).

Also (the book) at-Taswir al-Finnt (Artistic Imagery in The
Qur’4n), I have not seen anyone more insolent with the Book
of Allah and the prophetic Sunnah (than Sayyid Qutb). This
book 15 established upon the most evil principles,
misguidance, arrogance, and deviation; it is the origin of
trials. He has belittled the Qur’4n, making it into all types of
music, theatrical entertainment, and cinema. By Allah he has
degraded the Qur’4n in a way that does not have an equal
throughout history, while he praises himself saying that he
has arrived at things that no one has arrived to before. By
Allah, the most ignorant of the people can realize this
deviance that he has falsely imposed upon the Qur’an. The
most ignorant people honor the book of Allah, and know
that it is free from these claims, while he has not.

(So we say) this book Artistic Imagery, it is before the book
In the Shades of the Qur’4n, why have you not all warned
from this book? Rather, (Muhammad Qutb) even debated a
student’s thesis, before 1400 al-Hijriyyah, surrounding this
book, and gave him the highest level diploma. After twenty
years this book is still published and printed, and then after
that you come and say that your brother warned from this
book? What type of lie, deceit, betrayal and plotting is this
toward the Ummah? He has become “a great Imam” (with
the youth), which indicates their destruction and the fact that

The Explanation of ‏[آنولا‎ As-Sunnah

they are youthful in age, and foolish in their intellects. This
man is treacherous and deceitful to the ummah. After he has
spread these books, that are filled with misguidance, all
around the world in many different languages, and after the
youth have been corrupted, he (Muhammad Qutb) comes
and says that Sayyid Qutb warned from these books. Then
why do you all not recognize that (the book) In the Shades of
the Qur’4n is filled with misguidance? This is their call, based
upon deceiving those who are young in age and foolish and
reckless in their intellects. So it is imperative that we direct
and raise them to a level of guidance.

In these books he exalts the Siftyyah, the liars, and the
Muslim youth upon blind submissiveness and blind
following, as well as misguidance. So in reality, they are in a
place much like submissive slaves to these (leaders of theirs)
who command them like animals without intellects.

Now people rave about the takfir of Sayyid Qutb like they
are obsessed madmen. They pass by Sayyid Qutb’s insulting
of the Prophets (gsi 5 ai ,&) and the Companions, and they
do not have jealousy, nor do they refute it. And if you remind
them with truth and seriousness, they do not accept from
you. (We ask) where is your intellect and reasoning?
Therefore you are from those who are youthful in age, foolish
and reckless in their intellects, not possessing any manners.
We have to hold ourselves in high regard, saving ourselves
(from this fitnah), while advising one another. By Allah, I
have not known anything more dangerous than the books of
Sayyid Qutb and his followers. In the Arabian Peninsula,
(with) the fitnah of Musaylimah (the Liar), the clouds of the
summer came and departed (i.e., the fitnah came and went).
But this fitnah has taken root deep in the land, and has been
chosen for this land, the land of Tawhid (1e., the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia).

Pago t 0

6 مر ©

The youth of this land are followers of Sayyid Qutb who
propagate this fitnah to the world, a blow to al-Islam that it
has never seen before. I say this without any exaggeration;
rather this is a reality. Allah corrected and purified this
country at the hands of righteous people of rectification: the
call of al-Imim Muhammad bin ‘Abdul-Wahh4b. He wiped
away every aspect of evil, corruption, polytheism, magic,
swindle, deceit, and now we see that they have busied the
youth with magic, fortunetelling, and politics that are
established upon lies and wickedness. (According to them, )
everyone is a disbeliever. Entire societies of Muslims are
disbelievers! That is because the people who read the books
of Sayyid Qutb (have adopted his false principles) and
declared the Muslims to be disbelievers. However, they
conceal this with lies and hypocrisy. Because how can a
person that satiates themselves with the books of Sayyid
Qutb and defends them not believe that which they consist
of?

I refute and oppose the belief of the Rafidhah Shi‘ah. If a
person says that he is not a Rafidhi, but they publish and
print their (ie. the Rafidhah Shi‘ah) books in various
languages all over the world, what would you consider this
person? A Rafidhi or what? Likewise is (the condition) of the
person who propagates and promotes the books of Sayyid
Qutb, believing the corrupt and deviant beliefs that they are
filled with, especially if he publishes and defends them. May
Allah bless you.

4. Question: Is it permissible to place the title “Martyr”
upon a person?

Response: No, not with certainty. Because, as we have read
(in the book Usil As-Sunnah) we do not decisively say that
anyone is in Paradise or Hell, and by calling someone a
martyr this is saying that he is in Paradise. Except those who
The Explanation of ‏[ؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

Allah or His Messenger (#8) have declared them to be in
paradise, such as the ten promised with Paradise, the people
of Badr, the treaty of Ridw4n, and likewise the woman who
used to have seizures, the Prophet (#8) testified that she 15
from the people of Paradise. Likewise ‘Abdullah bin Salam,
and others like them. As for other than them, then we desire
that they be from the people of Paradise if they are righteous
and we fear for them at the same time. But we do not say for
certain that they are from the people of Paradise or the Hell-
Fire; we only hope for good for them. However, the
extremists say that anyone is a martyr, even a misguided Shiite
innovator; they say he is a martyr. While they call the scholars
of Sunnah government agents and spies; and the one that dies
from amongst them are not martyrs (1n their eyes).

When Jamil ar-Rahm&an—may Allah, The Most High, have
mercy on him—was killed, did they call him a martyr? He
fought for ten years or more, the first to carry the flag of
jthad, and he established a government implementing the
Islamic Law. After this, he was oppressively killed, fighting in
the way of Allah. With this they still do not call Aum a

martyr!

5. Question: What is the Islamic ruling of the one who
discusses the fitnah which took place during the time of the
Companions?

Response: A deviant innovator who has opposed fundamental

principles of Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah.

6. Question: Do we declare the one who openly commits
sins to be a disbeliever, based on the hadith: “All of my
Ummah is pardoned, except those who commit sins openly?”

[Collected by al-Bukhari, The Book of Manners, hadith no. (6069);
Muslim, The Book of az-Zuhd and Heart Softeners, hadith no. (2990) |

Pago 6

Pogo 7

Response: No, he is not to be declared a disbeliever. The
person who sins openly is an evil doer, we oppose and reject
him. Likewise we warn from him and advise him to make
repentance to Allah. But if he does not repent we warn the
people of him, but we do not declare this person to be a
disbeliever. The person who drinks alcohol, fornicates, and
steals, he is a sinner, unless if he deems these sins to be
permussible. In such a case he is a disbeliever. For example, if
he says that alcohol, fornication, or ruling by other then what

Allah has revealed all are permissible, we say to him that he
has disbelieved.

But if he professes to be Muslim and he prays, but at the
same time he commits sins we do not declare him to be a
disbeliever. Rather we say he is a sinner and we warn from
him.

7. Question: What is your opinion of the one who says
“The Jews and the Christians, there does not exist any
religious enmity between us and them?”

Response: The scholars have ruled that this (statement) is
misguidance and disbelief, and Allah’s refuge is sought. These
people are feebleminded; these people have oddities with
them. In the situations in which they are suppose to be stern,
they are instead gentle; and when they are supposed to be
gentle, they are instead harsh, switching around the affairs.
Ibn ‘Taymiyyah—amay Allah, The Most High, have mercy on
him—mentioned: The Prophet ($8) commanded us to fight
the Khawarij and be patient with the Muslim rulers. We have
mentioned previously the narrations about patience, “Carry
out that which is upon you, and Allah will ask them that
_ which they have been given authority over.” [Tbid]

And (there are) other narrations which have been reported
advising us to be calm, firm, and to endure with patience.
The Explanation of ‏[ذولا‎ As-Sunnah

(That is because this legislation) 1s from The All-Wise and
The Well-Informed; these lessons are obtained from The
Lord of all the Worlds:

(OWE EE EMS
“Should not He Who has created know? And He is the Most
Kind and Courteous (to His slaves) All-Aware (of

everything).” [Al-Mulk:14]

Allah’s truthful Messenger (#8) conveyed this Message, this
trust, so it is obligatory for us to. receive these texts with
respect and honor, ruling to them and by them. As for these
people (i.e., the Khaw4rij and other than them) they do not
desire to take all affairs back to these texts. Rather they play
games with weak and inane misinterpretations. If there comes
an innovation that the Prophet (8) has warned from, they
become angry and warn against the Salaf, while they say about
the leaders of innovation that they are Im4ms, Mujaddidin,
Martyrs, switching around the affairs!! They have changed
and altered Allah’s religion, rather they are worst than the
rulers in altering the religion. They cry out “The rulers have
altered (the Religion).” (We say to them) you all have
changed (and corrupted) the Creed, Foundations of the
Religion, and the Correct Methodology. Therefore, your evil
and corruption is worse than that of the Muslim rulers. The
ruler does not say “this is Allah’s Religion.” These people say
the Muslim rulers have altered Allah’s Religion, while they
have distorted beliefs, principles, and methodologies of the
religion in a greater way than the Rulers.

Amongst the rulers are Muslims and disbelievers. But you
make your main concern the ruler, and alter the religion in
order to fight against the ruler or against those who hold
firmly to the methodology of the Salaf, not being pleased
with these pursuits and changes in the religion of Allah, not
for the ruler or the ruled. (We say to them), tread the path of

Pogo (SE

Pogo 9

the righteous predecessors in everything; if you seek the path
of Ahl as-Sunnah, then this is the path. By Allah, these people
have altered the religion of Allah.

8. Question: Does it apply to Sayyid Qutb the principle of
seeking forgiveness for the one who dies from this Ummah,
and not leaving off praying for them and asking Allah’s
forgiveness for them, just because of a sin they have
committed, great or minor, and leaving his affair to All4h?

Response: The one who makes supplication for Sayyid Qutb,
and asks Allah to forgive him, I do not prohibit him. But as
for me, by Allah after I have come to know his reality I do
not supplicate for him, or ask Allah to have mercy on him.
Rather I deal with him like (I deal with) the RAfidhah. This
is because he has some of the beliefs of the Shi‘ah, al-Huldl,
wahdah al-wujtid, and other things. We fear Allah, and do
not declare him to be a disbeliever, although his books have
very severe statements of disbelief. Likewise, anyone who
publishes his books and _ establishes principles and
methodologies in order to defend him, we criticism him, for
indeed whoever publishes the books of Sayyid Qutb, and
defends him, he is in fact defending great misguidance. But
Sayyid Qutb lived and there is nothing that confirms that he
repented. And even if he repented, it is still obligatory to
refute these books, by warning from them and clarifying the
deviance that they consist of.

Ar-Razi repented, as well as al-Ghazzali and many other
people of innovation repented such as Ibn ‘Agil, but even
with this the war against these books, principles,
methodologies, and ideas continued even until this day. The
scholars of Sunnah did not keep quite concerning these
deviations that these scholars had previously fallen into,

which they left behind in their books, and whose affects
remained in the Ummah. And the books of Sayyid Qutb have
The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

a devastative impact on the Muslim youth, so it is imperative
that we wage war against his books and warn (the ummnah)
from them.

دمج جه 3 مو هى

Poze 1 SO

Paet 61

الخائمة

Conclusion
W: have completed Uséil As-Sunnah, and all praise belongs
to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds. We hope that
although we finished this work quickly, that we have benefited. I
advise myself as well as you all to fear Allah (BE) and to be
sincere to Him, Likewise, I advise you with seriousness in seeking
knowledge, holding firm to the Book of Allah, the Sunnah of His
Prophet, and the methodology of the Pious Predecessors.

I advise you to memorize and strive hard to understand this
treatise, which is small in size but massive in its benefit. From this
book you can begin to study other more detailed works in the
field of Agidah, which have been written by those that preceded
us—may Allah have mercy on them all—due to their knowledge
and understanding of the status of Islamic Belief and_ its
fundamental principles. The statement of al-Imam Ahmad has

proceeded: [Whoever has not fulfilled the conditions of the
Principles then he is not from the people of the Sunnah].

It 1s possible that you can make these texts a measurement by
which to distinguish between the person who is truthfully upon
Sunnah and the innovator. Even if he were to claim that he is
from the people of the Sunnah, these texts distinguish the People
of Sunnah. (For example) you know that from the fundamental
principles 15 to have allegiance to the people of Sunnah and
separation from the people of innovation, disliking them and
warning from them. A large number of the scholars of al-Islam
have mentioned this as a fundamental principle (of the Sunnah),
and held firm to it.

I ask Allah to make us all firm upon His religion, His guidance,
the Sunnah of His Messenger, and to hold firm to the principles

/

The Explanation of ‏أنولا‎ As-Sunnah

that have been mentioned by this great scholar in this treatise,
which is small in volume, but extraordinary in importance.

May Allah give us all success to that which He loves and 15
pleased with, and make us firm upon the Sunnah and the
prophetic guidance. Indeed Allah is the One who hears and

responds to the supplication.

دمج هه 3 مو هى

Pape 52

Pye 1 OS

Arabic Text of Usfl As-Sunnah

. : ‏يُقول‎ Ey ‏الله - أَحْمَدَ بن مُحَمّدَ‎ oe Ui
‏الله‎ te J pi ‏أصحَاب‎ ale ‏عندكا: النَّمَسّكُ بماكان‎ ES ‏أصول‎
‎ets tal Sao - i : ‏بدعة‎ Sug is ‏بهمء ورك‎ sy ‏وَسَلَم‎
‏المراء والجادالءوَالْخْصُومات في‎ WFAN virial ‏وَإترَكُ] الجلوس مع‎
Sad yay ale ‏لله‎ doo ai ‏رَسُول‎ SUT ‏عِنْدنَا:‎ any
‏ولا‎ JEN W Opal ‏وَلا‎ ds EN ‏في‎ ws ‏القرآن»‎ BY le
‏اللازمة‎ EI ‏الهَوَى. ومن‎ BS cGy) ‏ولا الأهوَاءء نما هْوَّ‎ J ilu 4.
‏مِن أَمْلِهَا:الإِمَان‎ BS ‏بها -لّم‎ bey Ge ‏حَصْلَة -ل‎ aL ay ‏مَنْ‎ "4
WJ ‏و وَشْرَوواتَصْدِيقٌ بالأَحَاوِيثٍ فِيهءرَالإِمَانَ بهّالا‎ a all
‏بها لاما [يه].‎ Gall (A WILEY
Sid sol, ob Ys i de aly, ud pe A Sy,
‏الَصْدُوق4 ومثل ما كان مثله في‎ Goa red eed UL ‏به‎ tay)
Ge ‏واسْتوحَش‎ CLO ‏عن‎ ET ‏وإن‎ GIS ash ‏أحاديث‎ by al
‏مِنَ‎ apes ‏وَاحداً‎ WS GL SY ‏لا‎ ole ‏الإمَان بها‎ a Wel
etl ‏عن‎ oly fl ‏الأَحَادِيث‎
‏في القدّر‎ AIS OBI! ALE ‏ولا يُنَاظِرَهُءولا‎ WF Ey [of [
Ue 0S ‏ولا‎ ds e 23S el ; os aby oT aly ‏والرّؤية‎
‎VG oy pty dan ‏يَدَعَ‎ SE BE ‏بِكَلامِه‎ Ci

7
The Explanation of ‏أؤولنا‎ As-Sunnah

والقرآن ‎pr‏ الله ولَيْسَ بمَخلوق ولا ‎of Gla‏ يَقَوللَيْسَ ‎Wiis bee‏ فإن
‎wt Gb pe‏ من وكيس ينه شيءٌ ‎aS be‏ ومَُاطرة من
ليس ‎pis Ata, GL‏ الله فَهَدَا ‎Lo ib BL Lote]‏ قَالَ:هُوَ ‎Gb‏
‎Ls‏ هُوَ كلامُ ]ويس بمَخلوق

‎Se) of,‏ الله ‎wy ale‏ رأى ‎eh sl Waa‏ رَسسُول الله-صلَى الله

‎0

‏هه عم ‎A, bee 0% af oa‏ - ماه 8 6 7 ° ‎ae‏ ل لو تسر و و
عليه وَسَلم-صّحِيح, [قد]روَاه ‎ia Se os oaks‏ عن ابن عباس»ورواه الحكم بن
# > سلس 8 ‎on 3 Boe Bees ae ° r we‏ م ‎oe v4 So‏ °

‎Ol‏ عن عكرمّة عن ابن عباسءورواه علي بن ‎WG‏ عن يوسف بن مِهرَان عن ابن

‎a

‏عباس.
‎o 2‏ 4 8 سم 67 4 77 ‎vie oe te oe A a 2 @ oe‏
والحديث عِنْدَنَا عَلى ‎cl US ole‏ عَن النَبِي-صَلى الله ‎wile‏ وَسَلم-وَالكلام
مرك 02 ° 6 ‎g 2 7 14 02 “ 4 oa‏ 2
فيه ‎Le Sey‏ بو ‎OS‏ جَاءَ عَلَى ‎eal‏ ولا ‎bE‏ فيه أحَدا.
1 و 1 ‎va‏ - 3 0 و
وَالإجَان ‎OF‏ يَوْمَ ‎Aa OF Pele US aka‏ يَوْمَ ‎DUB‏ فلا ‎Ue Og‏

‎JET py Ge‏ العبّادِ كما ‎OGY YI Gl‏ به

‎”

‏@ ه ‎a‏ 7 ?47 ماه + ‎ar o‏ 1 أ دي 440 وو ل سه 2 "41-47
والتصديق|به]وَالإعْراض عَنْ من 34 ذلك ‎SF‏ مجَادَلتِهِءوَان الله-تَبَارَكَ
الم وس و اس ‎tw Fer‏ 6ه + ‎og Seer o£ vor‏ و 2 ‎a‏ مار اه و
وَتَعالى-يكلم ‎Stel‏ يوم القِيَامَةِ ليس بينهم ‎ay‏ تَرحَمّانَءوالإعَان به والتصديق

‎4 vor ‏ره اعم 6 رك‎ A 2 7 4 as ° 4 a“
‏بالحوضءوآن لرسول الله-صلى الله عليه وَسَلمَ-حوضًا يوم القيامة‎ OW cw
00 47 ‏او 00 و و ل سر‎ ov, 41 1 1 4° 7 ‏مره‎ st ‏فى لاه‎ 1
‏ترد عليه أمته»)عرضه مثل طوله مسيرة شهرءانيتهة كعددٍ نجوم السماء على ما‎

‏ماس ‎o‏
‏هو

‏& مام داه 3 + ‎o‏ 7 7 2 67 يه ‎“ae a7 as‏ 0ه الى
صحت به ‎jlo!‏ من عير وجدءوالإبمان ‎elie‏ القبرءوآن هذه | ‎Cpe day‏ 2

‎ag ve os 2 Babe over 38 over ° 00 217 0 4 Zo ‏رع‎ a x
Ny ‏والإسلام»ومن ربه؟ومن تبيه؟ءوياتيه منكر‎ OEY! ‏قبورها وتُسأل عن‎
‏اه و‎ so vd og ‏ات ذه م‎ َ A 6 000

‏كيف شاء ‎eu‏ وجل-.و كيف اراد »و ‎OLE!‏ به والتصديق ب4.

Phyo 1 SO

Ne

is
0

Aa vo ‏عو‎

, OO ‏سن‎ cn ‏-وَيقوم‎ a le ‏له‎ ee slaty ‏وَالإمَان‎

‎ot Gs‏ الله ‎Sel 2 Chat US,‏ به ‎tal‏ به.

‏وَالإيمَان أن المسيح الدّجّال خَارج ‎ase oy OES‏ كاف وَالأحَاديت ‎J‏

‎sisi lefts ‏عِيسَى [ابْنَّ‎ OES GS Ob ‏فيد وَالإمَانْ‎ eS

‎ote SSA gb US ay Lg he, pees
pl JN Se OE 1S ‏ترك المكلاة‎ ed as

‎AS ‏أَحَل‎ a aS ‏فَهُوَ‎ GS ‏إلا الصّلاة من‎ “oS

‎oy Olas ~ ta | ‏بن‎ ab ella ‏بَعْدَ يهَا:أبُو بكر‎ ZY) oda oe

‎f+‏ ه

‏عَفَانَء تدم مَؤُلاء الثلائّة ‎rat LS‏ أُصْحَابُ ‎Soy‏ الله-صِلَى الله
وَسَلَّم لم يُحتلِفُوا في ‎fu‏ بَعْدَ ‎Libel sill ops‏ الشُورى ‎(Ae EL‏

‏بن أبي طالب , ‎debby‏ لوعي الرّحْمَن بن ‎cfs BE‏ أبي
‎gel] vals sabe fellas lla‏ ذهب إلى ‎Sa‏ ابن ‎er ae‏
‎fa‏ وَرَسُول الله -صَلَى الله ‎VALE, e+ aor ale‏ مُتَوَافِرُون ‎wi Sih‏
‎do‏ عَفْمَادُم "ءاي ]بد أمنحاب الشُورى ‎١ Ae OBE‏
‎“fal wtp alg‏ بَدْرِ مِنَ الأنصّار مِنْ أُصْحَاب رَسُول الله- ‎le‏ الله ‎ale‏
‎yu Je aie‏ الطجرة وَالسابقة ألا تألم ‎fash‏ ناس ‎isi‏ هَؤلاء أُصْحَابُ
‎J)‏ لله- صَلَى الله ‎who's alle‏ -القَرن ‎Co! cil‏ فيهم كل مَنْ صَحِبَهُ سن

‏6 2 4
ع

‏أو شهرا أو يما أو ‎asl‏ أو رَآهُ 38 مِنْ ‎abel:‏ له مِنّ ‎Gb Je teal‏

‏2
‏عليه

‎Sb GL Sab eb Hh a) ‏مَعَهُ وَسَمِعَ‎ Hale LIAS Ae
“pl ‏بجمِيع الأَعْمّال؛ كان مَؤلاء‎ ain ‏لله‎ ib Wess ‏لم‎ “yal SB Se fail
The Explanation of ‏أؤولا‎ As-Sunnah

oa 3B

EGIL Sy Ly! ily ‏وَالطاعَة لِلأيِمة َي المؤْمنِنَالبَر‎ GO
Vopele (abi ‏أن‎ 2Y Cpu eS ‏الخُدُود إلى‎ Lic

a
“Ge Sor g°LL o £8 a3

‎ove on 7‏ ° 4 سه ‎Be‏ م همه م م 356 إن ءًَ 0 ءء إن
ينازعهم, ودفع الصدقات إليهم حائزةو نافدة»)من دفعها إليهم اجزات عنه برا
7 ~ 2ه 7 2 ‎yee iar aoa? 4 yo‏ صا ‎Boyer or‏ 7 ل ‎a‏ ره م ه
كان أو فاجراءوصلاة الجمعة حلفه»و حلف من ولاه جائزة باقية نامر كعتين» من
‎Boomer A at of gw rosa vat 2 eer‏ هذى 6ه م كير ° ‎a o,f‏
أعادهما فهو ‎dees‏ ع تارك للاثار»مخالف للسنة»ليس له مِن فضل الجمعة

‎“

‎ye 3‏ 9 الصّلاة ‎Yas Ob‏ كَانُوا: يرهم وفاحرهم ‎dott BIG‏
مِنْ ذَلِكَ ‎Lobe‏ حَرَجَ عَلَى إِمَاِ[ِنْ ‎(oth OS Wye [EF‏ اجتمَعُوا
عَضا ‎ley cell‏ الآثّارَ عَنْ رَسُول ‎od‏ الله عَلَيْهِ وَسلمفَإنَ ‎i‏

‎UG od ed tl GY‏ فَهُوَ ‎bk‏ على ‎Ea)‏ والطريق.
‎pall US;‏ وَاخَوَارِجٍ ‎YW‏ َرَضُوا ‎DOU‏ في تفْسه ‎BEF Mey‏
عَنْ ُفْسه وَمَلهويَدهَُ ‎We‏ بكل ما ‎YSU LT [ale be‏ تركوة
أن يَطْلبَهُمْوَلا 28 آنَارَهُوْلَيْسَ ‎oY‏ إلا الإمَامُ أَوْ ‎ayy‏ الْمسْلِمِينَءإِنّمَا ‎J‏

‏ع
‏2 -_ه
°

‎AN

‎3

‎٠

‎24
‎20

‏لوم ‎er oe‏ 7 أ 71 4 ‎ae a ° é or ٠‏ 7 دع سه 1
يدفع عن ‎dent‏ في مقامِه ذلك.وينوي بجهدهو أن لا يقتل أحدا؛ فإن أتى عليه

‎“ew

‎a id 7 ad ° 8 6 "6 ao 027 a A + ok rr Oy 8 oe oe ° 8
g 8 22 a 1 ‏اس‎ ad ° va ‏هه‎
‎aE ‏في‎ cle US ‏الشّهّادَة‎ ge alley ‏تفسه‎ US aby

‎Paizo 1 SO

Pope 67

5
a
BW
—t*
~
—— ‏ها‎
‎35

21١

4 2
o- 09 o 8 o-Fk ‏ه‎ te

وَحَمِيع ‎wy‏ في هذا نّم ‎cal‏ بقَِالهولم ‎Sl‏ بقثلهءولا اتبَاعِهِءوَلا يُجْهرٌ ‎dale‏
‏إن ‎be‏ أَوْ كان حَرِحَاءوَإن أَحَذهُ أسيرا ‎J gar‏ أن ‎aly‏ ولا يقيم ‎ale‏
‎J Aly “Sy!‏ مَنْ وَلاهُ الله ‎Ab (SHS‏

ital AYU Voie Us ‏بعَملٍ‎ ab OF [ie ‏[أَحَدٍ‎ Lb ea ‏ولا‎
‏رَحْمَة الله.‎ 3 bh ‏عَلَى المسيء المذنب‎ GES ulle GE

وَمَنْ ‎Oa‏ الله ‎Con By‏ به انار اا غير مصير ‎BB ate‏ وَحَل-

‎ay. Jats wo‏ عَنْ ‎ele‏ ويُعْفو عن السيقات.

‏وَمَنْ ‎GE‏ وَقَد أَقِيمَ ‎ate‏ ذَلِكَ ‎AU‏ في ‎US US YEU‏ جَاء في
8 عَنْ رَسُول ‎fois‏ لله ‎whe, se‏

‏وَمَْ ‎a‏ مُصراً غَيْرَكائب ‎OSG‏ الّْتِي [قَد] 3 ‎J be‏
لله -عَرٌ وَحَل- إن ‎Se i‏ وَإِن ‎hance‏

‏ومن لَقِيَه نف ‎Bis ie‏

‎aad “ of ‏م 7 ل‎ {- a

‎sith a eae 136 rhe ‏الله عل‎ she ~ ai ae
7 ‏الذ-صلى الله عَلَيِْ وَسَلم-‎ Jy) ‏مِنْ أُصْحَاب‎ asf (aa ‏ومن‎

‏أو ‎dams!‏
‏2
‏لس ص ل سا سه

‎Regine rele ‏يتَرَحَمَ‎ et ‏كان‎ 4s 7 ‏كان نكأ‎ BIS)
acid ‏فِي‎ Pe! ‏بالله يَعبلَ عبد غير وَيُظهرَ‎ SS ‏:أن‎ ky op ‏هُوَ‎ GUN,
ty ale ‏له-صَلَى لله‎ es ge ‏كانُوا عَلَى‎ “pil UI

‏وَهَذِهٍ الأَحَادِيث ‎See Sh‏ مَنْ كن فيه 4 مُنَافِقهَدَا عَلَى
‎aa‏ نويا كما جَاءتءولا ‎aad‏

‏وَقَولهُ- ‎Ue‏ الله عَلَيْهِ وَسَلَم- :لالا ‎Its‏ بَعْدِي كُمَارً[ضْلااً]يَصْرِبْ
‎peaks‏ ر ‎Og, ot a By Aer emer‏ فَالقَاتِل ‎J xii,‏
The Explanation of Us@l As-Sunnah

Uae) ‏قال‎ as eg Cas Ay 5 bs bal Sin Aer 6) ‏في‎
‎PSG ٠ ‏بالله تبرق مِنْ ' نسب وإن‎ Dey Coal ‏كاف فق يَاء بها‎
‏كش تُفسيرَهَاءوَلا‎ : er sod pease me ‏مما قد‎ tual Yl it
Vy ‏الأَحَادِيث إلأبمثل ما‎ ode La ‏فيدءولا تُجَادِل[فِيه]ءولا‎ ISS

gis ooh ‏تَرُدُهَا إلا‎
al, alle ‏الله‎ ed ‏جَاء عَنْ رَسُول‎ USE 1 ol ay 7
Cit a ‏في‎ 2 eis Gh a Glos):
‏كَذَا)ءفَمَنْ‎ Gy, Gs. eau ‏أَمْلِهًا..... كَدَا4لوَاطْلَمْتْ في‎ A
ale ‏رَسُول الله-صلَى الله‎ a Lik. 38 Ube a ‏عَم‎
‏عَنْهُ‎ LSS ‏[وَلا‎ a ‏وَيُسْتَغْفرُ‎ alle pate afta os ‏وَمَنْ مات من‎

الاسستشفار]ءولا 43 الصّلاة ‎45h =a ale‏ -صغيراً ‎ola “POS‏ إلى

‎EF CRED‏ مو هى

‎Pogo 1 5S

Pogo 1 SO

Appendix
*Chain of Narration of the manuscript which al-Albani checked:
Ash-Sheikh al-Im4m Abd@ Muthfar ‘Abdul-Malik bin ‘AI? bin
Muhammad al-Hamdani said that ash-Sheikh Aba ‘Abdullah bin
Yahya bin Abd al-Hasan bin al-Banna narrated to us andthe said,
my father Aba ‘Alt al-Hasan bin Ahmad bin al-Banna narrated to
us and he said: that Abd al-Hasan ‘Alt bin Muhammad bin
‘Abdullah bin Bishran al-Mu‘addal informed us and he said that
‘Uthman bin Ahmad bin as-Samm4k narrated to us and he said
that Abad Muhammad al-Hasan bin ‘Abdul-Wahhab bin Ab? al-
‘Anbar informed us by way of reading from his book in the
month of Rabi" al-Awwal in the year 293 Hyriyyah, and he said
that Abd Ja‘far Muhammad bin Sulayman al-Mingari of Tinnis
informed us and he said that ‘Abdiis bin Malik al-‘Att4r informed
me and he said that I heard Aba&i ‘Abdullah Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Hanbal—may Allah be pleased with him—

oo,

cv

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

Other Books firrom Riwayah Publish ung

The Easiest Explanation of Beneficial Speech
By Aba ‘Abdillah Al-Masna‘4

Sittings During the Blessed Month of Ramadhan
By Muhammad bin Salih al-‘Uthaymin

The Explanation of al-Ha’iyyah
By Dr. Salih al-Fawzan

The Disappearance of Knowledge

By Muhammad al-Imam

20 Pieces of Advice to My Sister before Her Marriage
by Badr bin ‘Ali al-‘Utaybt

The Correct Creed that Every Muslim Must Believe
by ‘Abdus-Salam Burjis

Expl. of the Hadith of the Man Who killed 99 Men

by an-Nawawm\, al-‘Uthaymin, and others

Pogo 1 GO

Piel DL

Com ung Soomn..::

Letters to My Christian Parents About Islam: The Religion of All the
Prophets
by Dawad Adib

Ash-Sharh Al-Jadid: The Explanation of the Larger Version of
Muhammad bin ‘Abdul-Wahhab al-Wasabi’s Beneficial Speech
by Aba ‘Abdillah al-Masna‘4

Notes

The Explanation of Usfl As-Sunnah

Pogo 1 D2

“1 advise you to memorize and strive hard to understand this
treatise, which is small in size but massive in its benefit. From
this book you can begin to study other more detailed works in
the field of Aqeedah, which have been written by those that
preceded us...”

Riwayah Publishing

The Strength of Authenticity

0
ISBN 978-1-4507-8078-١
924 Bergen Avenue 322 PMB Jersey City, | | 2a

New Jersey, USA, 07306

P: 973.332.3345 + 215.828.3138

F: 201.221.7642 ‏:ع‎ admin@rimarket.net
hetp:y/www.rimarket.net 9!'781450'780780

