Mu‘awiyah then left her and went out to her husband, to
whom he said: “Go in now, as she has composed and prepared
herself. ” Then Ibn ‘Amir went in to find that she had bettered
her manners and bearing and so he fulfilled his need with her
(May Allah have mercy upon them).

Chapter: Amongst Those Who Died in the
Sixtieth Year:
114

Safwan bin al-Mu‘attal Abu ‘Amr was the first man to witness
al-Muraisee‘ and was the one whom the slanderous people
accused of being with Umm ul-Mu’mineen (‘A’ishah), whose
names were later cleared by ‘Allah as to what had been said
about them. He was a noble amongst the Muslims and it is
said that he would sleep so deeply that the sun would come
out and he would still not be woken by it. Thus, the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would
say to him: “If you wake up, then pray. ” Safwan died as a
martyr.
Abu Muslim ‘Abdullah bin Thuwab al-Khawlani who was
summoned by al-Aswad al-‘Ansi to testify to the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who
therefore said to him: “Do you testify that I am the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ?” He
replied: “I cannot hear. I declare that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). ” So the false ‘prophet’ lit a fire and threw him in it,
though it did not harm him for Allah saved him from it just as
He saved Prophet Ibraheem al- Khaleel (the Friend, i. e. , the
name given to him on account of his close relationship with
Allah). He performed the Hijrah (migration) and upon his
return, he found that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) had died and so he went straight to
asSiddeeq ( i. e. , Abu Bakr). On that occasion, he sat between
him and ‘Umar, who said to him: “Praise be to Him Who has
not caused me to die before witnessing someone from the
Ummah (nation) of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) do as Ibraheem al-Khaleel did. ” ‘Umar
then kissed him between the eyes.

115

The Leadership of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah
and the Events and Trials that Took Place
During His Rule
He succeeded his father and was pledged allegiance as caliph
in the month of Rajab of the sixtieth year. He was born in the
twenty-sixth year, making him merely thirty-four years of age
on the day that he ascended to power. He reinstated his
father’s delegates within the different provinces, and did not
dismiss even one of them, which was thereafter seen as
reflection of his intelligence and proficiency.
Al-Waqidi states: “Ibn ‘Umar was not in al-Madinah when
Mu‘awiyah’s mourners arrived; in fact, he and Ibn ‘Abbas
were in Makkah. As they were on their way, they encountered
al-Husain and az-Zubair and said to them: “What business do
you have?” Al-Husain and az-Zubair replied: “The death of
Mu‘awiyah and the pledging of allegiance to Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah. ” At that point, Ibn ‘Umar said to them both:
“Fear Allah and do not divide the Muslim community”, then
he and Ibn ‘Abbas made their way to alMadinah. Once the
people of the major cities had pledged their allegiance, Ibn
‘Umar gave his pledge too, but as for al-Husain and Ibn azZubair, they set out for Makkah where they found ‘Amr bin
Sa‘eed bin al‘As who startled them and to whom they said:
“We have come to seek refuge in this house. ”
In the month of Ramadan of this year, Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah
discharged al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah from governorship of alMadinah on account of his negligence, making ‘Amr bin
Sa‘eed bin al-‘As the deputy of Makkah. When he arrived in
al-Madinah in Ramadan, and some say in the eleventh Islamic
calendar month of Dhul-Qa‘dah, he was proud and haughty
so much so that he imposed a penalty on ‘Amr bin azZubair –
who was an enemy of his brother, ‘Abdullah – by dispatching
him with a military detachment into combat. ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed
116

later began to send out delegations to Makkah to wage war
against ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair.
It is verified in the Saheehain that Abu Shuraih al-Khuza‘i
said to ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed as he sent out the troops to Makkah:
“O chief! Allow me to tell you what the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said on the day following the
Conquest of Makkah. My ears and my heart comprehended,
and I saw him with my own eyes when he said it. He (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) glorified and praised
Allah, and then said: ‘Allah, and not the people, has made
Makkah a sanctuary. So anybody who believes in Allah and
the Last Day (i. e. , a Muslim) should neither shed blood in it
nor cut down its trees. If anybody argues that fighting is
allowed in Makkah as Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) did fight in Makkah, tell him
that Allah gave permission to Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), but He did not give it to you.
Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the
Conquest), and today (now) its sanctity is the same (valid) as
it was before. It is incumbent upon those who are present to
convey it (this information) to those who are absent. ’”
In another narration it states: “If anybody argues that fighting
is allowed in Makkah as Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) did fight in Makkah, tell him
that Allah permitted His Messenger and that He does not
permit you. ” Abu Shuraih was asked: “What was said to
you?” So he said: “He (‘Amr bin Sa‘eed) said to me: ‘O Abu
Shuraih! We know better than you (in this respect). Makkah
does not give protection to one who disobeys Allah or pursues
to commit murder or theft (and takes refuge in Makkah). ”
Al-Waqidi states that ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed appointed ‘Amr bin azZubair as his legal administrator in alMadinah. On one
occasion, ‘Amr bin az-Zubair was followed by his brother’s
associates and other zealots and so he gave them a severe
117

beating, to soon discover that he had beaten his brother, alMundhir bin azZubair, who was amongst them. Thus he told
him that he must take his brother, ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair, in
silver shackles to the caliph, after which he struckal-Mundhir
bin az-Zubair, his son, Muhammad bin al-Mundhir, ‘AbdurRahman bin al-Aswad bin ‘Abd Yaghooth, ‘Uthman bin
‘Abdullah bin Hakeem bin Hizam, Khubaib bin ‘Abdullah bin
az-Zubair, Muhammad bin ‘Ammar bin Yasir and others fifty
to sixty lashes. In the midst of the fighting, however, ‘AbdurRahman bin ‘Uthman at-Tameemi and ‘AbdurRahman bin
‘Amr bin Sahl managed to escape to Makkah.
Meanwhile, Yazeed for ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed sent out summons
for Ibn az-Zubair and demanded that he wanted Ibn az-Zubair
brought to him in gold or silver shackles and hooded so that
nobody would see him. Ibn az-Zubair, however, had
prohibited al-Harith bin Khalid al-Makhzoomi from praying
with the people of Makkah, as ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed’s deputy was
in charge of it. This consequently prompted ‘Amr to deploy a
military detachment to Makkah against Ibn az-Zubair, about
which ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed had consulted ‘Amr bin az-Zubair, to
whom he said: “Who is best suited for us to send to Makkah
to fight against him?” ‘Amr bin az-Zubair told him: “Indeed,
you will not be able to send someone who can cause more
damage to him than me. ” Thus, he was appointed chief of the
military detachment and he assigned Unais bin ‘Amr alAslami at the head of seven hundred combatants to form his
vanguard.
Unais advanced, followed by ‘Amr bin az-Zubair and the rest
of the army (numbering around twothousand strong) until
they halted at place called Abtah, while other accounts
mention at his house near Mount as-Safa. Unais stationed the
vanguard in Tuwa as ‘Amr bin az-Zubair led the people in
prayer, including his brother, ‘Abdullah bin Zubair. ‘Amr
then sent a message to his brother saying: “Swear allegiance
to the caliph and go to him with your neck in golden or silver
118

shackles. Do not allow the people to fight against one another
and fear Allah for you are in the land of sanctuary. ”
‘Abdullah returned a message to his brother, saying: “Your
appointment is at the mosque. ” ‘Abdullah bin Zubair then
sent ‘Abdullah bin Safwan bin Umayyah with a military
detachment to battle against ‘Amr bin Unais al-Aslami,
whereby Unais was badly defeated. After this, ‘Amr bin azZubair’s associates dispersed, leaving him to flee alone to the
house of Ibn ‘Alqamah. His other brother, ‘Ubaidah bin
azZubair, turned him out and his brother, ‘Abdullah bin azZubair, reprimanded him. It is said that ‘Amr bin az-Zubair
died by the whip – and Allah knows best.

The Story of al-Husain bin ‘Ali, the Reason
for His Departure from Makkah to al-‘Iraq
in Pursuit of Power and the Cause of His
Death (May Allah be pleased with him)
Before elaborating on these aspects of his life, it is necessary
to provide a brief biography first. His name was al-Husain bin
‘Ali bin Abi Talib bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib bin Hashim Abu
‘Abdullah al-Qurashi alHashimi, the son of the Prophet’s
daughter, Fatimah az-Zahra’ (May Allah be pleased with her)
who was the Raihan (sweet-smelling basil) of his world.
Al-Qatadah states that al-Husain was born six years and five
and half months after the Hijrah (migration). He was killed on
a Friday on the day of Ashoora’ (the tenth day of the Islamic
month of Muharram) in the sixty-first year, aged fifty-four
years and six and a half months (May Allah be pleased with
him).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) invoked forhim to be blessed with
wisdom and experience and had rubbed his blessed saliva in
119

his mouth while supplicating for him. It was the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who named him
Husain.
Anas is reported to have said: “I was with Ibn Ziyad when the
head of al-Husain was brought to him. Ibn Ziyad started
poking at the nose and mouth of al-Husain with a stick, upon
which he made some reference to his handsome features. So
I said to him: “Al-Husain resembled the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) more than the others did. ”
Al-Husain was a contemporary of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and despite being
so young, he was a Companion whom the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was pleased with until his
death. After that, as-Siddeeq ( i. e. , Abu Bakr) treated him the
same way by honouring and respecting him, as did ‘Umar and
‘Uthman. He was a companion of his father, he would narrate
Ahadeeth on his authority, and he participated in all the
invasions with him, specifically in the battles of al-Jamal and
Siffeen. As a result, when his brother gave up the caliphate
and sought to reconcile matters with Mu‘awiyah, al-Husain
was greatly troubled and urged his brother to go to war with
the people of ash-Sham. In spite of his reluctance, however,
once Mu‘awiyah assumed the caliphate, alHusain would
frequently visit Mu‘awiyah with his brother and he would
show them great hospitality and honour in return.
Following al-Hasan’s death, al-Husain would travel to see
Mu‘awiyah every year, who would generously present him
with kind gestures and treat him with great esteem. He was in
the army that invaded alQustanteeniyyah (Constantinople)
under the commandership of Mu‘awiyah’s son, Yazeed, in the
fiftyfirst year.
When Mu‘awiyah died in the sixtieth year and allegiance was
pledged to Yazeed, Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Umar offered their
120

pledges and therefore resolved to dispute al-Husain and Ibn
az-Zubair, who had left al-Madinah and went to reside in
Makkah. There, the people devoted themselves to al-Husain
by visiting him frequently, sitting around him and attentively
listening to what he had to say about Mu‘awiyah’s death and
Yazeed’s assumption of power. As for Ibn az-Zubair, he
would remain at his place of prayer by the Ka‘bah, despite the
fact that delegations and military detachments had been
despatched to Makkah to capture him. Nonetheless, Allah
granted him victory over them and defeated whoever else
desired his death among the supporters of Yazeed, including
his own brother, ‘Umar, whom Ibn az-Zubair beat and
imprisoned -- an act for which he later became renowned.
However, in spite of all this, he was not heralded by the people
in the same manner as al-Husain, for the simple reason that
al-Husain was regarded as a noble due to his relation as the
son of the Prophet’s daughter. Even though during that time
there was nobody on the face of the earth who was superior to
al-Husain, or who could even be considered equal to him, the
entire “Yazidite” state opposed him. In contrast, letters and
messages came frequently from al-Iraq inviting al-Husain to
go to them.
As the letters began to accumulate and the messengers
continued to arrive, the people of al-‘Iraq increasingly urged
al-Husain to go to them so that they could pledge their
allegiance to him in place of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah, since
they had not yet pledged allegiance to anyone. Eventually, alHusain decided to send his paternal cousin, Muslim bin
‘Aqeel bin Abi Talib to al-‘Iraq to determine the nature of the
matter and its credibility. Upon departing from Makkah,
Muslim passed through al-Madinah in order to obtain two
witnesses to take with him on the desolate road. In the middle
of their journey, however, one of the witnesses was lost and
fled, while the other one died from the harsh conditions of the
desert. In due course, Muslim arrived in al-Koofah alone, and
121

upon his arrival he allegedly stayed with a man called Muslim
bin ‘Awsajah al-Asadi.
Soon enough, word spread among the people of al-Koofah
that Muslim had arrived and so they went to him, pledging
their allegiance to al-Husain, as well as vowing to assist him
by means of their own selves and their wealth. The number of
people who agreed to pledge allegiance to him numbered
approximately twelve thousand, which later increased to
somewhere around eighteen thousand people. Accordingly,
Muslim wrote to al-Husain affirming that he should come,
assuring him of the validity of their allegiance and that he
would make the necessary arrangements for his arrival in the
meantime. Immediately, alHusain embarked on the journey
from Makkah to al-Koofah, which then became widespread
knowledge that reached even the governor of al-Koofah, anNu‘man bin Basheer, who in turn said: “I do not wage war
against whoever does not wage war against me, nor do I
ambush whoever does not ambush me. ” On the other hand,
‘Abdullah bin Muslim bin Shu‘bah al-Hadrami went to anNu‘man and said to him: “This course of action that you are
pursing, O leader, is the course of the weak and feeble. ” He
replied: “That is because I am weak in obedience to Allah; do
you want me to be one of the strong and great in disobedience
to Him?”
Upon hearing of an-Nu‘man’s response, Yazeed gave orders
for his dismissal from al-Koofah, which he abruptly decided
to merge with al-Basrah under the sole governorship of
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad. This drastic move by Yazeed was
undertaken primarily for his own protection and security, and
even though Yazeed hated ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad who he
originally planned to dismiss from al-Basrah, he ended up
entrusting him with authority over both al-Basrah and alKoofah, as was the Will of Allah.

122

Soon after, Yazeed wrote to Ibn Ziyad, saying: “When you
arrive in al-Koofah, seek out Muslim bin ‘Aqeel and suppress
him by either killing or humiliating him. ” Accordingly, Ibn
Ziyad travelled from alBasrah to al-Koofah where he resided
at the royal palace. Once he had established his authority
there, he then sent a slave called Ma‘qil of the Banu Tameem
tribe with three thousand Dirhams, destined for the city of
Hims (in central Syria) so that Ma‘qil could take the money
to the house in which Muslim bin ‘Aqeel was taking the
pledges of allegiance from the people. He was to say that he
had come to offer his pledge in order to gain access. On
arriving there, Ma‘qil offered his pledge and so was let in to
see Muslim bin ‘Aqeel, who subsequently kept him there for
a number of days until he demonstrated his sincerity. After
that, the slave left from there and returned to ‘Ubaidullah and
informed him of the whereabouts of the house and its
occupiers.
Meanwhile, Muslim bin ‘Aqeel moved to the house of Hani’
bin ‘Urwah al-Muradi, and then a second time to the house of
Shareek bin al-A‘war, one of the senior chiefs who had been
informed that ‘Ubaidullah was pursuing him. Upon hearing
this he sent a message to Hani’ saying: “Send Muslim bin
‘Aqeel to me so that he may kill ‘Ubaidullah in my house if
he happens to come here looking for him. ” Thus, he was sent
to Shareek who said to Muslim: “Go and stay in the tent
outside so that when ‘Ubaidullah comes in, I will ask for some
water to be fetched, which will be my cue to you to come in
and kill him. ” Sure enough, ‘Ubaidullah arrived at the house
of Shareek and sat down on his couch, at which point Shareek
shouted: “Bring me some water to drink. ” Reluctant to take
action, Muslim backed down from killing him and as a slave
girl entered the tent with a small jug for the water, she found
Muslim in a nervous state and so quickly ran out. Shareek
repeated his instruction three times, at which point
‘Ubaidullah quickly realised that he was being set up and
signalled to his guard that they should leave immediately,
123

which they did. It follows that Shareek said to Muslim: “What
prevented you from coming in and killing him?” He said: “I
heard a Hadeeth in which the Messenger (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: ‘Faith has prevented treacherous
assassination. A believer does not commit treacherous
assassination. ’ Thus, I detested the idea of conniving to kill
him in your house. ” At this, Shareek said: “Even if you had
killed him while sitting in the palace, nobody would have
prepared him for that, but you would have settled al-Basrah’s
affairs. Had you killed him, you would have killed an insolent
oppressor. ”
It had been alleged by some that ‘Ubaidullah went back to the
house of Shareek bin al-A‘war while Muslim bin ‘Aqeel was
there and attempted to kill him, although Hani’ did not permit
them to enter his house. The chiefs subsequently took Hani’
bin ‘Urwah before ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, upon which
Ubaidullah turned to the judge, Shuraih, and quoted the
saying of a poet (in al-Wafir poetry):
“I want his life and he wants my death,
Your friend desires that you excuse him. ”
After Hani’ had greeted ‘Ubaidullah, he said: “O Hani’!
Where is Muslim bin ‘Aqeel?” Hani’ replied: “I do not know.
” So ‘Ubaidullah said: “Bring him to me. ” Hani’ replied: “By
Allah! If he were under my feet I would not lift them up. ”
‘Ubaidullah then ordered his men to draw Hani’ near to him,
which they did and then ‘Ubaidullah struck him in the face
with a spear until he gave him a head wound and a broken
nose. Hani’ then reached for the sword of ‘Ubaidullah’s guard
to stab him with it but he was pushed away, at which point
‘Ubaidullah said: “Allah has made your blood lawful to me
because of your provocation. ” Then he ordered his
imprisonment.
124

When news of this reached Muslim bin ‘Aqeel, he mounted
his steed while shouting the war cry: “O Mansoor! Die! ”In
doing so, he rallied together some forty-thousand supporters
from al-Koofah, including the likes of al-Mukhtar bin Abu
‘Ubaid and ‘Abdullah bin Nawfal bin al-Harith, who aligned
themselves to his right and his left as they advanced against
‘Ubaidullah. When Muslim arrived at the palace gates he
stood before it with his army, as the tribal leaders who were
with ‘Ubaidullah in the palace looked out from the window
urging their people (who had joined Muslim) to desist, and
warned and threatened them if they did not.
Following this, ‘Ubaidullah went out in the company of some
of the leaders and commanded the people to return to alKoofah and desert Muslim bin ‘Aqeel, which they did. The
people slowly started abandoning him, leaving him one by
one until just five-hundred supporters remained, but soon
even this number fell to three-hundred and then, in the end, a
mere thirty men. As the Maghrib (sunset) prayer was due,
Muslim went away to lead his remaining supporters in prayer,
after which they were to set out in the direction of the palace
gates. However, to Muslim’s dismay, a further ten men
withdrew, followed by a second lot of ten and then another,
until he stood alone with no one to show him the way to the
palace, which he was unable to find on his own.
As he came across a door, he entered and made his way down
the path to find a woman, who it is said was called Taw‘ah.
He said to her: “I am Muslim bin ‘Aqeel. These people have
lied and deceived me. ” She replied: “Are you Muslim?” He
answered: “Yes. ” She said: “You may enter”, as she led him
into one of the rooms of her house. Her son, having seen her
go in and out of the house numerous times, asked: “What is
happening?” As he pleaded with her to tell him, she informed
him of Muslim’s presence after warning him not to tell
anyone, upon which he went to lie down, not speaking to
anyone until the next morning.
125

‘Ubaidullah came out from the palace in the company of the
leaders and noblemen to address the people to request them to
seek out Muslim bin ‘Aqeel and hand him over. That
morning, when the son of the old lady in whose home Muslim
had stayed saw ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Muhammad bin alAsh‘ath, he revealed to him that Muslim bin ‘Aqeel was
staying at their house. Immediately, ‘Abdur- Rahman went to
his father who was sitting with Ibn Ziyad and said to him:
“What is it that brings you here?” He then gave him the news,
at which point Ibn Ziyad said, as he prodded him with his rod:
“Get up and bring him to me within the next hour. ”
At the same time, Ibn Ziyad sent out ‘Amr bin Huraith alMakhzoomi at the head of approximately seventy or eighty
horsemen. Completely unaware that they were surrounding
him, Muslim did not realise he was being attacked until they
set the surrounding area of the house on fire. When they
entered upon him, Muslim jumped up in bewilderment and as
he went to draw his sword on them, he cut his own lips with
it. As they launched rocks at him, he was able to withstand
their attack and fought back remarkably, until he killed them
all. Soon after that ‘Abdur-Rahman arrived and offered him
security as he stretched out his hand to him and mounted him
on his mule after having disarmed him of his sword. When
Muslim realised he was not carrying (his sword), he began to
cry as at that point his death had become apparent to him.
Giving up all hope, he said: “To Allah do we belong and to
Him we shall return. ”
Being certain of his impending death, Muslim turned to
Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath and said: “If it is possible for you
to send word on my behalf to al-Husain instructing him to go
back, then do so. ” Despite Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath
complying with his request, al-Husain failed to believe the
messenger even though he testified that everything he said
was true.
126

As Muslim entered upon Ibn Ziyad, he did not offer greetings
of peace, because of which al-Harasi said to him: “Do you not
send peace on the Ameer (leader)?” He replied: “No. If he
insists on killing me then there is no obligation on me to offer
him greetings of peace, though if he does not want to kill me
then I will send many salutations of peace upon him. ” Ibn
Ziyad then approached him and said: “Allah will surely kill
me if I do not kill a murderer who no one in Islam has yet
killed to keep him away from the people. ” Muslim replied:
“As for you, you have the most right in Islam to do what has
not been done before. As for you, you cannot allow an evil
murderer, a malicious example and an evil way that resembles
the conduct of your forefathers and the ignorant to prevail. ”
At this, Ibn Ziyad began to vilify him, Husain and ‘Ali, while
Muslim stood in silence, without responding or recanting.
After completing his tirade against them, Ibn Ziyad said: “I
will certainly kill you. ” Muslim replied: “Is that so?” He said:
“Yes. ” So Muslim asked: “Then allow me to make some
requests to some of my people. ” Ibn Ziyad said: “Go ahead”,
at which point Muslim looked around at those who were
sitting in his presence, amongst whom was ‘Umar bin Sa‘d
bin Abi Waqqas. Muslim said to him: “You and I are related
therefore I require something from you that is a private matter.
I have a debt in al-Koofah amounting to seven-hundred
Dirhams that I want you to repay for me. Take my body from
Ibn Ziyad and bury me, then seek out al-Husain, as I have
written to him informing him that the people here support him
and so I am certain that he will be determined to make his way
here. ” ‘Umar then stood up and conveyed to Ibn Ziyad what
had been said to him, upon which Ibn Ziyad authorised him
to fulfill all of Muslim’s requests.
Ibn Ziyad then ordered that Muslim bin ‘Aqeel be taken up to
the highest part of the palace, during which he kept extolling
the greatness of Allah, saying the words “La ilaha illallah”
(there is no one worthy of worship but Allah), glorifying and
127

seeking the forgiveness of Allah, and sending prayers and
peace upon the Angels of Allah. Subsequently, Muslim was
executed by beheading, supposedly at the hands of Bukair bin
Humran who brutally threw his head followed by his body
down to the lowest part of the palace. Hani’ bin ‘Urwah alMadhhiji was also charged with the same sentence and was
therefore beheaded publicly in the Sooq ul-Ghanam (Market
of Sheep). Both their heads were sent to Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah in ash-Sham accompanied with a letter to explain
what had happened.
Muslim bin ‘Aqeel departed from al-Koofah on a Tuesday,
eight days past of Dhul-Hijjah, while others state it happened
on a Wednesday, nine days past of Dhul-Hijjah, coinciding
with the Day of ‘Arafat (9 Dhul Hijjah; the day pilgrims
gather in the plains of Arafat during the rites of Hajj) of the
sixtieth year. This occurred just one day after al-Husain had
left Makkah for al-‘Iraq, having left al-Madinah to go to
Makkah on Sunday, two nights before the end of the month
of Rajab of the sixtieth year. He entered Makkah on a Friday
night, three days past Sha‘ban, where he spent the rest of the
month as well as that of Ramadan, Shawwal and DhulQa‘dah. Following this, he left Makkah eight days into the
month of DhulHijjah on Tuesday, specifically on the Day of
Tarwiyah (lit. ‘watering’; 8 Dhul Hijjah, one of the days
marking the rites of Hajj).

128

A Description of al-Husain’s Departure
and an Account of What Later Happened
to Him
When al-Husain received a series of letters from the people of
al-‘Iraq, he began to correspond with them frequently until he
finally resolved to leave Makkah during the days of Tarwiyah
(watering) in order to go to them. The people of Makkah,
however, were concerned for his safety and cautioned him
against going, pleading with him to stay in Makkah. Ibn
‘Abbas is reported to have said: “Al-Husain bin ‘Ali sought
my counsel concerning his departure, so I said to him: ‘If it
were not for people despising me for it, I would have held you
by your head and stopped you from leaving. ’ His reply to me
was: ‘To be killed in such and such a place is more beloved
to me than being killed in Makkah. ’ It was his response to
what I had said that gave me some solace after that. ”
Ibn ‘Abbas then left as Ibn Zubair entered and said to him: “I
do not know why you want to leave us for that nation when
we are the sons of the Muhajireen (Emigrants) and they are
without any leading personalities. Tell me, what is it that you
want to do exactly?” Al-Husain said: “By Allah! I have been
questioning myself over going to al-Koofah since my band of
supporters started writing to me, and so I decided to honour
them with my visit after performing Istikharah (guidance
prayer; seeking the counsel of Allah through prayer and
supplication). ” Ibn Zubair replied: “If I had a band of
supporters like yours, I would not want to give them such an
honour. ” Later that evening, or the following day, Ibn ‘Abbas
went to see al-Husain once again and added: “O my paternal
cousin! I want to have patience although I cannot endure it,
for I certainly fear your death. Verily, the people of al-Iraq are
a treacherous nation, therefore do not be deceived by them.
Stay in this country until the people of al-‘Iraq have expelled
their enemies, then go to them; or if not, go to Yemen, as they
too have a citadel and a nation, and they will not refuse to
129

support you. Keep your distance from the people of al-‘Iraq,
just write to them and let them know of your requests, as I
believe if you do this then you will get what you want. ” AlHusain answered: “O my cousin! By Allah, I know that you
are a compassionate and sympathetic advisor, however, I am
determined to go. ” Ibn ‘Abbas said to him: “If it is necessary
that you go then do not take your children and wives, as by
Allah, I fear that you will be killed like ‘Uthman, while his
wives and children were watching him. ” Ibn ‘Abbas then
asked: “Have you decided to appoint Ibn az-Zubair as your
successor over al-Hijaz? For by Him besides Whom there is
no deity worthy of worship, if I knew that you were going to
do that I would have taken you by your hair and forelock and
made sure we concurred that the people would obey me and
that you put me in charge. ” Once Ibn ‘Abbas left al-Husain,
he encountered Ibn az-Zubair to whom he said: “Your
appointment has been determined, O Ibn az-Zubair”, who
said:
“What is a skylark in a flourishing place?
You are free and safe to lay eggs and tweet;
Peck as you wish and wherever you wish. ”
Ibn ‘Umar stated that he was in Makkah when he heard that
al-Husain bin ‘Ali had left for al-‘Iraq and so he went to catch
up with him, which he did after having travelled for three
whole nights. At that point, he said to him: “Where do you
want to go?” Carrying some scrolls and letters, al-Husain
said: “Al-‘Iraq. These are their scrolls and letters. ” So Ibn
‘Umar said: “Do not go to them”, but al-Husain refused. Ibn
‘Umar then said: “I will narrate a Hadeeth to you. Once,
Jibreel came to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and made him choose between the world and the
Hereafter, so he chose the Hereafter and to never return to the
world. You are a part of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
130

Blessings of Allah be upon him) and, by Allah, no one has
ever neglected or resisted you and Allah has never dissuaded
anyone from you (the family of the Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) ) except for that which was
better for you. ” Despite having said this, al-Husain still
refused to go back. Ibn ‘Umar said that after that, he hugged
him and started to cry, saying: “I call on Allah to protect you
from death. ”
Bishr bin Ghalib is reported to have said that Ibn az-Zubair
said to al-Husain: “Where do you want to go, to a nation who
murdered your father and defamed your brother?” So he said:
“To be killed in such and such a place is more beloved to me
than to be deemed unlawful (i. e. in Makkah). ”
Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri stated: “I was overwhelmed by alHusain leaving so I said to him: ‘Fear Allah for yourself, hold
fast to your house (i. e. the family of theProphet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)) and do not abandon your
leadership. ’”
Jabir bin ‘Abdullah said: “When I spoke to al-Husain, I said
to him: ‘Fear Allah and do not allow the people to fight one
another, for by Allah, you will not be commended for what
you seek to do’, so he renounced me. ”
‘Amrah bint ‘Abdur-Rahman wrote to al-Husain out of
concern for what he intended to do, enjoining him to be
obedient and to stick by his community, informing him that if
he were to go ahead with this then he would lead to his own
destruction. She said: “I witnessed that ‘A’ishah (May Allah
be pleased with her) said that she heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘AlHusain will be killed in the land of Babel. ’” When he read
the letter, he said: “My destruction is therefore inevitable and
will happen. ”
131

Another account states that before al-Husain set off to alMadinah, those people from the Banu AbdulMuttalib tribe
who were to accompany him on his journey were sent ahead
of him. They numbered nineteen men, women and children
from his siblings, offspring and wives. Muhammad, the son
of alHanafiyyah, followed them after meeting al-Husain in
Makkah and warned him that he should not travel on that
particular day; however, al-Husain refused to take his advice.
The people of al-‘Iraq sent to al-Husain messengers and letters
of invitation, upon which he, his family and sixty of his
associates from al-Koofah set out to go to them. This took
place on a Monday on the tenth day of Dhul-Hijjah. It follows
that Marwan wrote to Ibn Ziyad stating: “Al-Husain bin ‘Ali
is on his way to you. He is al-Husain, the son of Fatimah,
daughter of Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and, by Allah, He has not given anyone else
more beloved to us than al-Husain. Be sure to prepare yourself
to say and do the right thing, do not let the public forget him,
and do not let him be the last to be mentioned or greeted. ”
‘Abdullah bin Sulaim al-Asadi and al-Madhri bin alMushma‘ill al-Asadi are reported to have said: “AlHusain circumambulated the House (Ka‘bah), performed the
seven circuits between as-Safa and alMarwah (two hills
located in the Masjid al-Haram, the Holy Sanctuary in
Makkah), cut his hair, completed his ‘Umrah (minor
Pilgrimage) and then headed for al-Koofah, while the rest of
us headed towards Mina.
Abu Mikhanaf narrates in his first account that al-Farazdaq
encountered al-Husain while he was on the road, whereupon
he offered him greetings of peace and said: “May Allah fulfil
your wishes and aspirations, just as you want them to be. ”
Then al-Husain asked him about the affairs of the people and
what was ahead of him, so he said: “The hearts of the people
are with you, while their swords are with the Banu Umayyah
132

tribe. The decree will descend from the Heavens and Allah
will do what He wills. ” AlHusain replied: “You have spoken
the truth. The matter is with Allah, before and after, He does
what He wills and everyday our Lord is engaged in some
affair. ”
Twenty-seven days before his execution, Muslim had written
to al-Husain stating that a leader should not tell a lie to his
people, that the people of al-Koofah were with him and that
he should set out upon reading his letter, which he closed by
offering him salutations of peace. Qais bin Mus-hir asSaidawi subsequently came forth with al-Husain’s letter,
whereupon he ascended the pulpit and began to praise and
glorify Allah. He then said: “O people! Indeed, this is alHusain bin ‘Ali, the best of all Allah’s creation. He is the son
of Fatimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and I am his messenger
to you. ” He then went on to say that al-Husain had departed
from the centre of Dhur-Rummah in al-Hijaz, and that they
should respond and listen to him and obey him. He then
cursed ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and his father and sought
forgiveness for ‘Ali and al-Hasan. Following his address to
the people, Ibn Ziyad ordered him to be taken to the top of the
palace tower and beheaded. Other accounts state that he
ordered his bones to be broken and to be left for dead.
Afterwards, ‘Abdul-Malik bin ‘Umair al-Lakhmi stood over
him and slit his throat, about which he said: “I wanted to
relieve him from suffering any pain. ”
‘Abdullah bin Sulaim al-Asadi and al-Madhri bin alMushma‘ill al-Asadi are reported to have said: “Once we had
completed our Hajj Pilgrimage, we had no other task to
complete except to meet al-Husain and so we went to see him.
Al-Husain had passed by a man from Banu Asad tribe whom
he spoke to and asked questions before his departure. We later
saw that man and so we started to ask him about the people,
to which he said: ‘By Allah! I did not leave al-Koofah until
133

Muslim bin ‘Aqeel and Hani’ bin ‘Urwah had been executed,
prior which I saw them running through the marketplace. ’
When we met with al-Husain, we informed him of what the
man had told us and so he remarked: ‘To Allah we belong and
to Him we shall return. ’” Some of al-Husain’s companions
turned to him and said: “By Allah! You are not like Muslim
bin ‘Aqeel, for if you had gone to al-Koofah the people would
have got to you sooner. ”
Thus, al-Husain continued on his journey until he reached
Zarood (a village not far from Samarqand) where received
news of the death of the messenger he had sent with his letter
to the people of al-Koofah after he had set out from Makkah
and arrived in Hajir. Husain proclaimed: “Our followers have
disgraced us! Therefore whoever among you wishes to go
back then you may do so and there will be no blame on the
one who does so, as we cannot offer him protection. ” At that
point, the people began to disperse in all directions until only
those companions who had set out with him from Makkah
remained. It follows that just before daybreak, he ordered two
of his servant boys to fetch him some water to drink and to fill
up some to take with him on his journey, after which he
embarked on his way until he came to the centre of al‘Aqabah where he stationed himself.
Yazeed ar-Rishk narrated that someone who reported to have
seen al-Husain said: “I saw a tent pitched in the ground within
the waterless desert, so I said: ‘To whom does this belong?’
They said: ‘This belongs to al-Husain. ’ Then I went to the
tent where I found a Shaikh (old man) reciting the Qur’an with
tears flowing down his cheeks and beard. I said: ‘By my father
and mother! O son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)! What brings you
to stay in this country and within this waterless desert in
which no life exists?’ He replied: ‘These are the letters that
the people of al-Koofah sent to me and it seems that I will not
see them without being killed. However, if they choose to do
134

that then they will not invoke the sanctity of Allah except that
it will be violated, as Allah will burden them with a ruler who
will degrade and humiliate them until they become the scum
of the Ummah (nation). ’”It is also narrated that al-Husain
said: “By Allah! They do not invite me other than to suck out
the blood from inside me, and if they do this, Allah will
certainly afflict them with a ruler who will make them the
lowest scum of the Ummah. ” He was killed in Neenawa
(Nineveh) on the day of ‘AShoora (the tenth day of the first
Islamic holy month of Muharram) in the sixty-first year.
Shihab bin Khirash narrated on the authority of a man from
his community who said: “I was assigned to the army that had
been dispatched by Ibn Ziyad to fight against al-Husain. We
were four-thousand strong and it was as we engaged in battle
that I first encountered al-Husain for myself. He had black
hair and a black beard, and I said to him: ‘Peace be upon you,
O Abu ‘Abdullah! ’He said: ‘Peace be upon you too’ in a kind
of nasal tone, then he said: ‘Some mysterious people from
amongst you have been with us since last night’, i. e. he was
referring to thieves. ”
Abu Ma‘shar reported on the authority of some of his elders
that when al-Husain arrived in Karbala’, he said: “What is the
name of this land?” They replied: “Karbala. ’” He said:
“‘Karb’ (suffering) and ‘bala’ (affliction). ’”‘Ubaidullah bin
Ziyad sent out ‘Umar bin Sa‘d against al-Husain who said to
him: “O ‘Umar! Choose one of three options: either that you
leave and go back to wherever you came from; or if you refuse
to do that then take me to Ibn Ziyad and put my hand in his
and let him judge me according to what he sees; or if you
refuse to do either of these things, then you leave me no
choice but to fight you until my death. ” At that point, ‘Umar
sent Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan to Ibn Ziyad with the message,
who then sent him back with his reply, saying: “There is no
option other than for you to relinquish your rule. ” Al-Husain
remarked: “By Allah, I am not prepared to do that. ”
135

Consequently, ‘Umar steadily proceeded towards him with
Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan, to whom Ibn Ziyad had said: “Let
‘Umar proceed to fight alHusain, but if al-Husain kills him
then you take his place and then you will be entrusted with
leadership. ” ‘Umar was backed by almost thirty men
comprising the prominent people of al-Koofah. At that point,
alHusain’s associates said to them: “The son of the daughter
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) has proposed three options to you, therefore will
you not agree to any of them?” For this reason they decided
to switch sides to fight alongside al-Husain.
Husain is reported to have said: “I was informed by Sa‘d bin
‘Ubaidah about the killing of al-Husain who said to me: ‘I saw
al-Husain wearing a loose Jubbah (long outer garment). A
man, supposedly ‘Amr bin Khalid at-Tuhawi, shot an arrow
at him and as I looked to see where the arrow had struck, I
saw that it was caught in al-Husain’s Jubbah. ’”
When al-Husain’s head was brought to Ibn Ziyad it was
placed between his hands, after which he started to prod at his
nose with a stick and say: “Abu ‘Abdullah, certainly you had
hair that was a mixture of black and grey. ” It is said that when
al-Husain’s wives, children and family were brought to Ibn
Ziyad, he said: “The best thing that al-Husain did was to order
them to reside in an isolated place to where he would send
them their means of livelihood to pay for their expenses and
clothing. ”
The servant of Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan is reported to have
said: “When Yazeed came with alHusain’s head and placed it
in his hands, I saw Yazeed crying and he said: ‘If there had
been any relationship between Ibn Ziyad and al-Husain then
he would not have done this (referring to Ibn Ziyad).
’”

136

Also in this year, ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al-‘As led the people
on the Hajj Pilgrimage.

Upon Entering the Sixty-First Year
This year notably commenced with al-Husain bin ‘Ali’s
journey to al-Koofah, where he was later killed on the day of
‘AShoora’ (the tenth day of the holy month of Muharram)
also in this year.

A Description of His Murder
Based on the Accounts of the Communities Involved in this
Affair, Not According to the Claims of those Bias Partisans
who Lie and Make False Accusations
‘Abdullah bin Sulaim al-Asadi and al-Madhri bin alMushma‘ill al-Asadi are reported to have said: “When alHusain was due to embark on his journey, he told two of his
servants just before dawn to fetch him some water to drink
and to take with him for the road. They then set off at
daybreak. ”
Al-Husain took the road left until he decided to halt at his
desired location where he gave orders for his tent to be
pitched, and it was pitched accordingly. Soon after, a
thousand horsemen led by al-Hurr bin Yazeed at-Tameemi,
who formed the vanguard of Ibn Ziyad’s army, arrived at alHusain’s location and stood facing him on the horizon. AlHusain therefore ordered his companions to quench their
thirst and water their horses, including the horses of their
enemies.
When the time for the Zuhr (noon) prayer commenced, alHusain emerged from his tent wearing an Izar (lower body
wrap-like garment), Rida’ (upper body wrap-like garment)
137

and sandals to deliver a sermon to the people until the call to
prayer was established. Then Husain said to al-Hurr and said:
“Do you want to lead your companions in prayer?” He said:
“No, I would rather you lead the prayer and we pray behind
you. ” Thus, al-Husain offered the prayer with them and then
went back into his tent. When the time for ‘Asr (afternoon)
prayer arrived, al-Husain came out and led the people in
prayer again, after which he was brought two saddle bags full
of letters, which he spread out in his hands and read a number
of them. At that point, Al-Hurr said: “We are not like those
people who write to you concerning a matter. In fact, we were
commanded to meet you in person and to not part from you
until we have taken you to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad. ” So alHusain said: “Death is closer to you than that. ” Al-Hurr
therefore said to him: “I was not ordered to kill you but instead
to not separate from you until I take you to Ibn Ziyad in alKoofah. If you refuse, then you should take a road that neither
leads you to al-Koofah nor takes you back to alMadinah. Then
you may write to Yazeed yourself and I will write to Ibn
Ziyad, and perhaps Allah will grant me livelihood and good
health for undergoing something for your sake. ”
Hence, al-Husain took the road left leading to al-‘Adheeb and
al-Qadisiyyah while al-Hurr bin Yazeed travelled alongside
him as he said to him: “O Husain! I make you mindful of
Allah, as I swear if you go into battle you will either kill or be
killed. ” So al-Husain said: “So it is death that you fear for
me? Rather, I say that which the brother of al-Aws said to his
paternal cousin when he encountered him wanting to serve the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). His cousin asked him: “Where are you going, to be
killed?” He replied (in at-Taweel poetry):
“I will proceed; death is not shameful for a young man
If his intentions were truly to be a Muslim warrior,
138

He compared himself with righteous men
And so detached himself from fear as he lived and led the
way. ”
When al-Hurr heard that from him, he decided to desist and
led his associates in the direction of ‘Udhaibul-Hijanat. There,
they encountered four individuals who had arrived from alKoofah having believed al-Husain based on the conviction of
a man known as at-Tirimmah bin ‘Adiyy, who had
proclaimed aloud while riding his horse (in ar-Rajaz poetic
meter):
“O… my she-camel! Do not be afraid of my suppression
And be prepared before the dawn
To carry the best travellers on the best journey
For you will be oriented towards beneficent descent,
The noble, glorious and tolerant.
God has brought him to execute the optimal deed
May God protect him forever and ever. ”
Upon hearing this, al-Hurr had wanted to come between them
and al-Husain but al-Husain prevented him from doing so.
The group of four then approached al-Husain who said to
them: “Tell me about the people you have come from. ” So
Mujammi‘ bin ‘Abdullah al-‘A’idhi, one of the four men,
said: “As for the distinguished amongst them, they are the
most mindful of you. With regard to the rest of the people,
their hearts go out to you and their swords will tomorrow be
a source of fame for you. ”

139

Following this, at-Tirimmah bin ‘Adiyy said to al-Husain:
“Look at what you have. I do not see that you have anyone
except this insignificant small band of supporters and I see
those people who agree with you being suited to those who
are with you. Al-Koofah is replete with horses and armies,
therefore how do you think you will fare with them?I implore
by Allah that if it is possible for you to not go to them then do
not, and if you want to stay in a land which Allah has made
impenetrable until you have decided then come with me and
I will take you to our impassable mountains. ”
Al-Husain said to him: “May Allah reward you”, however he
did not take recourse to his advice and so atTirimmah bid him
farewell and al-Husain departed. When it was night, he
ordered his two servant boys to quench their thirst and then
once he had relaxed, he set off while he was still drowsy and
so he fell asleep. When he woke up, he said: “To Allah we
belong and to Him we shall return. All praise belongs to
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. ”
He took the left road in his journey until he came to Neenawa
(Nineveh) where a riding man came towards al-Koofah with
a bow on his shoulder. The man greeted al-Hurr bin Yazeed,
although he did not greet al-Husain, and then presented alHurr with a letter from Ibn Ziyad which stated that he should
divert al-Husain on his journey to al-‘Iraq, to a town in which
there was no fortress until Ibn Ziyad’s associates and soldiers
arrived. This took place on a Thursday on the second day of
al-Muharram of the sixty-first year. The following day, ‘Umar
bin Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas advanced with an army of four
thousand men which Ibn Ziyad had previously assembled in
ad-Dailam in the outskirts of al-Koofah. Ibn Ziyad had issued
the instructions to them: “Advance towards al-Husain and
once you have annihilated him then station yourselves in adDailam. ” At that point, ‘Umar bin Sa‘d attempted to submit
his resignation to Ibn Ziyad, to which Ibn Ziyad responded:
“If you wish, you may be excused and discharged from your
140

post in this land that has raised you. ” He therefore said: “I
need to contemplate on the matter some more. ” ‘Umar’s
nephew, Hamzah bin al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah, later
advised him: “Be wary of going to alHusain as you may
disobey your Lord and sever your bonds of kinship. But, by
Allah, renouncing the entire authority of the land is better for
you than to meet Allah with al-Husain’s blood on your hands.
” So he said: “Indeed, I will do that if Allah wills. ”
Subsequent to that, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad warned and
threatened him with dismissal and death, and this was the
reason he was compelled to advance against alHusain.
To begin with, ‘Umar bin Sa‘d’s associates denied water to
al-Husain associates, a strategy that forced alHusain to
propose a meeting with ‘Umar bin Sa‘d between the two
armies. Thus, they both turned up with approximately twenty
horsemen on each side and spoke for a long time until part of
the night had passed, while nobody else knew what had been
said. ‘Umar then wrote to ‘Ubaidullah regarding the meeting,
about which he said: “Yes, I accept. ” At that point, ashShamir bin Dhul-Jawshan stood up and protested: “No, by
Allah! He and his associates seek to seize your office of
power. ” ‘Ubaidullah therefore delegated ash-Shamir bin
Dhul-Jawshan to the battlefield while saying to him: “Go and
if al-Husain and his associates have come to claim my
authority then command ‘Umar bin Sa‘d to battle against
them and if he hesitates then decapitate him. If you do that
then you will be made the commander of the people. ”
When ash-Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan presented ‘Umar bin
Sa‘d with ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad’s letter, ‘Umar said: “May
Allah do away with your home and defile what you came here
for. By Allah! I believe that you dissuaded ‘Ubaidullah bin
Ziyad from the three options al-Husain requested you to
propose to him. ” Following this, ‘Umar bin Sa‘d shouted to
his army: “O horsemen of Allah, gallop and rejoice! Ride and
141

advance towards them after Salat ul-‘Asr (afternoon prayer)
on this day of ours! ”
Meanwhile, al-Husain was sitting in front of his tent, reclining
with his sword clutched in his hands. He had just started to
doze off when his sister, Zainab, heard the shouting and so
she hastened to wake him up. Once he became fully alert, he
said: “I saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) in my dream and he said to me: ‘You are
coming to us. ’ Upon hearing this, Zainab struck her face in
lamentation and said: “Woe to us! ”He said: “There is no woe
to you, O sister! Be at ease, the Most Merciful has compassion
on you. ” His brother, al-‘Abbas bin ‘Ali, then came to him
and said: “O brother! The people have come for you. ” He
said: “Go and find out what you can from them. ” So he went
in the company of approximately twenty horsemen and said:
“What do you want?” They said: “We have come by the order
of the Ameer. Either you acknowledge his authority or we will
wage war against you. ” So he said: “Retreat so that I may go
to Abu ‘Abdullah and inform him about this. ”
When al-‘Abbas returned, al-Husain said to him: “Go back
and deter them this evening so that we might pray, seek
forgiveness and supplicate to our Lord tonight, for Allah
knows that I love to pray to Him, recite His Book, seek His
forgiveness and supplicate to Him. ” Hence, al-Husain spent
the first part of the night bequeathing his will to his family
and delivering a sermon to his companions. He then praised
and glorified Allah and sent the most eloquently articulated
prayers on the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), following which he said to his companions: “Whoever
would like to return to his family on this night of his then he
has my permission, for these people certainly want me. ” They
said in response: “Then the people will say that we abandoned
our Shaikh (religious leader; elder), our master and the tribe
of our great paternal uncles! We did not shoot arrows with
them nor did we thrust spears with them nor did we strike
142

swords with them seeking the life of this world, so no, by
Allah, we will not leave. On the contrary, we will assist you
with our own selves, our wealth and our families, and we will
fight with you until we return your rightful place to you. May
Allah make living shameful and ugly once you are gone. ”
‘Ali bin al-Husain, “Zainul-‘Abideen”, is reported to have
said: “I was one of those sitting down on the evening before
my father was killed. As my paternal aunt, Zainab, was giving
me medical treatment, my father and his companions
withdrew into his tent all of a sudden. Huwayy, Abu Dharr alGhifari’s servant, was in my father’s presence as he mended
and tended to his sword, when my father said:
“As time proceeds you are not befriended.
How many friends, in the morning and afternoon,
Over those who pursue you, do you really have?
Time is not satisfied with alternatives. Affairs are nothing
but complicated.
All beings are to traverse this path. ”
He repeated himself two or three times until I memorised it
myself and understood what he wanted. The tears choked me
whenever I repeated them and so I remained silent. I knew
that some affliction was going to befall us and as for my aunt,
she was overcome by sorrow until she could not bear it
anymore, then she said: ‘He bereaves me by his death and
deprives me of life today. Let my father and mother be
sacrificed for you, O Abu Abdullah! Have you put your life
at risk?’ She then slapped her face in lamentation, tore the
front of her garment as a sign of mourning and fell to the floor.
Al-Husain therefore went up to her, poured water on her face
and said: ‘O sister! Fear Allah, be patient and console yourself
143

with the solace of Allah. ’He then forbade her from doing
anything like that after his death. ”
Once ‘Umar bin Sa‘d had finished praying as-Subh (the
morning prayer) with his companions on the Friday -- while
others maintain it was on Saturday -- on the day of ‘AShoora’
(the tenth day of Muharram), he got up and prepared for
battle. At the same time, al-Husayn prayed with his
companions, all together constituting thirty-two horsemen
and forty foot-soldiers, who he subsequently organised into
rows after they had set up their military base out of sight, as
did ‘Umar and his army. In addition, alHusain ordered that his
men dig a trench behind their base, toss firewood, timber and
cane into it and then set it on fire to obstruct access to their
base from behind; and these were the settings of this battle.
Furthermore, al-Husain avoided entering the tent that had
been pitched for him, except when he went in to wash from
time to time, but he otherwise stayed clear of falling into the
trap of being caught in there. He would also enter to scent
himself with Misk (musk) quite frequently and others would
do so after him.
It follows that al-Husain mounted his horse, took up a Mushaf (Arabic copy of the Qur’an), in his hands and then
approached the people with it raised high, calling: “O Allah!
You are my trust during agonising times and my hope during
every hardship. ” He then said: “O people! Carry me off and
return me to my asylum in the ground! ”They said: “What
prevents you from conceding to the authority of your paternal
uncle’s tribe?” He replied: “May God grant me refuge from
degrading myself to them or endorsing the avowal of a slave.
Worshippers of Allah: “Moosa (Moses) said (what means):
[‘Verily, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every
arrogant person who believes not in the Day of Reckoning!
’”] [Ghafir, 40: 27]. His riding camel was then made to kneel
down, after which ‘Uqbah bin Sim‘an ordered it to be strung
up by the neck.
144

At that point, ‘Umar bin Sa‘d advanced with his bow and as
he shot his arrow, he proclaimed: “Bear witness that I was
first to shoot at the people. ” Yasar, the servant of Ziyad, and
Salim, the servant of ‘Ubaidullah, then went out and shouted:
“Who will meet in combat?” Upon obtaining al-Husain’s
permission, ‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Umairal-Kalbi then stepped
forward and first killed Yasar followed by Salim, who
managed to strike ‘Ubaidullah a blow to the left hand that
caused his fingers to fly off. That day, the two sides continued
to contest against each other until al-Husain’s companions
beat the opposition and emerged victorious, primarily due to
the strength of their archers and because they fought
heroically with no defence other than their swords.
Next, Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan led the left-wing of his army
defended by an immense cavalry force towards al-Husain; the
army successfully engaged in battle without Shamir’s
intervention. Following this, however, Shamir bin DhulJawshan (may Allah disgrace him) went to the tent of alHusain and said: “Bring me a torch so that I may blaze
whoever dwells herein. ” At that instant, the women began to
scream and came running out and so al-Husayn retorted: “You
want to burn my family, so may Allah burn you in the
Hellfire! ”
The time for az-Zuhr (afternoon) prayer had come in and so
al-Husain said: “Order them then refrain from battle until we
pray. ” A man from among the people of al-Koofah said: “It
will not be accepted from you anyway. ” So Habeeb bin
Muzahhir shouted back: “Woe unto you! Are your prayers
accepted and not those of the family of the Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?! ”Infuriated, he said,
“Will your prayers be accepted and will not the prayer be
accepted from the family of Yasir?” He then attacked Habeeb
so aggressively that he was killed amidst the fighting (May
Allah have mercy upon them), after which his head was
carried off to Ibn Ziyad.
145

Al-Husain then led his companions in offering the Salat ulkhawf (optional prayer of fear) before they commenced a
brutal battle in which al-Husain’s valiant companions went to
magnificent lengths to defend him. As Shamir launched an
attack on al-Husain’s companions, he shouted:
“Leave God’s enemies, leave Shamir
Who strikes them with his sword without fleeing the
battlefield. ”
The chief member of the Banu Abi Talib tribe from alHusain’s family was his eldest son, ‘Ali bin al-Husain bin
‘Ali, whose mother was Laila bint Abu Murrah bin ‘Urwah
bin Mas‘ood ath-Thaqafi. He was fatally stabbed by Murrah
bin Munqidh bin an-Nu‘man al-‘Abdi because he tried to
shield his father from being targeted, which caused ‘Ali bin
al-Husain to say:
“I am Ali bin al-Husain bin ‘Ali,
We and Allah’s House are the closest to the Prophet.
I swear by Allah that the son of deception will not govern us
You shall see how I will guard my father today. ”
Once he had been stabbed by Murrah, his men surrounded him
and began to cut him into pieces with their swords. Al-Husain
invoked: “May Allah kill the people who killed you my son!
They challenge Allah in their violation of His injunctions!
May ruin befall the world after you go! ”Following his
murder, ‘Abdullah bin Muslim bin ‘Aqeel, ‘Awn and
Muhammad, the sons of ‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far, were also
killed.
Al-Husain remained alone for a whole day with no one
approaching him as no one not wanted to be charged with his
146

murder, until a man from the Banu Badda’ tribe, who it is said
was Malik bin an-Nusair, came to him and struck him on the
head with his sword causing it to bleed. He was wearing a
cloak, which he tore to bandage his wounded head, although
his band quickly filled with blood. So al-Husain said to him:
“May you not eat nor drink therein (in Paradise) but may it be
that Allah impounds you amidst the Zalimeen (oppressors;
wrongdoers). ”
As al-Husain’s thirst intensified, he desperately tried to obtain
some water from the River Euphrates to drink but to no avail.
Soon afterwards, a man, supposedly Husain bin Numair, shot
an arrow that struck al-Husain in his throat, although it did not
kill him. Holding his neck to prevent the blood from gushing
out of his it, he then raised his bloody hands to the sky and
supplicated: “O Allah! Give them their retribution many times
over, kill them wherever they may be and do not leave a single
one of them on the earth! ”He continued to supplicate in this
manner.
Nobody else stepped forward to execute al-Husain’s murder
and so Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan shouted: “Proceed! What
are you waiting for? Do you want them to kill you and bereave
your mothers of their sons?” Immediately, his men raced
towards al-Husain and began to attack him from all angles.
The man who actually stabbed al-Husain with a spear and
caused him to fall to the ground was called Sinan bin Anas
bin ‘Amr an-Nakha‘i, who then dismounted his horse, slit alHusain’s throat and pierced him through the head, which he
then severed and handed over to Khawali bin Yazeed. On the
other hand, some sources indicate that was Shamir bin DhulJawshan himself who murdered al-Husain.
They said that Sinan bin Anas went up to the entrance of
‘Umar bin Sa‘d’s tent and shouted at the top of his voice:
“Overload my mount with silver and gold
147

For it was I who killed the masked king
Who was the best fathered and mothered amongst the people
And who possessed the best ancestry and lineage of all. ”
‘Umar bin Sa‘d shouted: “Enter”, and when Sinan bin Anas
went in, ‘Umar flogged him with a whip and said: “Woe unto
you, you crazy man! By Allah, if Ibn Ziyad were to hear what
you are saying he would break your neck! ”
Seventy-two of al-Husain’s companions were killed in the
battle and were buried by the people of alGhadirah (a
neighbouring town of al-Koofah near to Karbala’) belonging
to the Banu Asad tribe a day after the onslaught (may Allah
bestow His mercy and blessings on them).
Al-Hasan al-Basri is reported to have said: “Sixteen other men
were killed with al-Husain, all of whom were from his Ahl ulBait (members of his family). It is said that ‘Umar bin Sa‘d
commissioned ten horsemen to trample on al-Husain with
their horses on the day of the battle until his body was stuck
to the ground, while hishead was sent with Khawali bin
Yazeed al-Asbahi to Ibn Ziyad. It is said that he also took the
heads of al-Husain’s companions with him, which is in fact a
widely recognised opinion. The number of heads therefore
amounted to seventy-two and this figure does not include all
those who were killed without having their heads’ severed.
Once the heads were delivered to Ibn Ziyad, he sent them to
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah in ash-Sham (the Levant).
Anas is reported to have said: “’Ubaidullah bin Ziyad was
brought the head of al-Husain and it was put in a tray. Ibn
Ziyad started to play with it with a stick and commented on
al-Husain’s handsome features. So Anas said: ‘Al-Husain
resembled the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) more than the others did. ’Anas added: ‘Al-Husain’s hair
was dyed with Wasmah (a kind of plant used as dye). ’”
148

Anas is also reported to have said: “When al-Husain’s head
was brought to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, he started to prod and
play with al-Husain’s nose and mouth with a stick and
commented on his good looks. So I said: ‘By Allah! Indeed, I
saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) kiss where you are poking your stick’, which made
‘Ubaidullah feel uneasy. ”
In another tradition, at-Tirmidhi reports that ‘Umarah bin
‘Umair narrated: “When the heads of Ubaidullah bin Ziyad
and his companions were brought, they were stacked in the
mosque at ar-Rahbah.
So I went to see them and the people were saying: ‘It has
come, it has come! ’And behold there was a snake going
between the heads, until it entered the nostrils of ‘Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad, and it remained there momentarily, then left and
went until it had disappeared. The people then said again: ‘It
has come, it has come! ’ So it did that two or three times”
(Dha‘eef, i. e. weak narration).
Qasim bin Bukhait is reported to have said: “When alHusain’s head was placed in Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah’s hands,
he started to play with his mouth with a stick. He then said:
“Both this (i. e. the head) and us are like what al-Husain bin
al-Humam al-Murri said in his poem (in at-Taweel poetic
meter):
“Women can bring the noses of venerated men down,
They were impious tyrants. ”
Abu Barzah al-Aslami uttered to Yazeed: “By Allah! Perhaps
you should take your stick away from him, for I saw the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) kiss him there. ” He then went on to say: “Will the Day
of Resurrection not come when Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) will be his (al-Husain’s)
149

intercessor and you will come for your intercession, O Ibn
Ziyad?” He then stood up and walked away.
Al-Hasan said: “When al-Husain’s head was brought, Yazeed
started to ridicule it with a stick, singing the following verses:
‘Sumayyah’s descendants are like stones in number
While the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) is barren. ’
As for the rest of al-Husain’s family and wives, ‘Umar bin
Sa‘d entrusted them to whoever would guard and protect
them, after which he mounted them onto a group of riding
camels and sent them off on their journey. When they passed
by the battlefield on which al-Husain and his companions had
fallen, the women began to cry and wail, while Zainab
lamented over her brother, al-Husain, and his family. They
travelled from Karbala’ until they entered al-Koofah where
they were received hospitably and offered provisions and
clothing. Following this, they were made to travel once again
but this time they were taken back to ash-Sham with Shamir
bin Dhul-Jawshan and Muhaffiz bin Tha‘labah al-‘A’idhi
from the tribe of Quraish. As the heads and women were
presented to Yazeed, he called on the women and children to
come and witness the gruesome sight, as he said: “May Allah
revile Ibn Marjanah! If there had been any mercy between
them and him, this would not have happened to them, nor
would you have been summoned for this very reason. ”
Yazeed then ordered an-Nu‘man bin Basheer to send a
trustworthy man to accompany the women and alHusain’s
younger son, ‘Ali bin al-Husain, on their journey to alMadinah and to assign guards and horsemen for their
protection. The women were then taken to Yazeed’s Hareem
(private quarters for women) situated in the house of the
caliph where they were received by the women of
150

Mu‘awiyah’s family who cried and grieved for al-Husain.
They stayed there for a period of three days during which
Yazeed would eat neither dinner nor supper except in the
company of ‘Ali bin al-Husain and his brother, ‘Amr bin alHusain.
Yazeed provided them with provisions by giving them a
generous amount of money as well as clothing before sending
them away under the protection of his ambassador to whom
Yazeed said: “Write to me informing me of every move you
make. ” He then set out with them as he took the desolate road
in order to avert any interception and he continued to remain
in their service until they arrived in al-Madinah.

Chapter
Al-Husain’s murder took place on a Friday on the day of
‘AShoora’ (tenth day of Muharram) of the sixtyfirst year in
place known as at-Tuff in Karbala’, al-‘Iraq. He was aged
fifty-eight or so when he died.
‘Abdullah bin Nujayy narrated that his father said that he was
travelling with ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) on their
way to Neenawa (Nineveh) when they saw al-Husain heading
in the direction of Siffeen. ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with
him) therefore shouted out to him: “Patience, Abu ‘Abdullah!
Patience, Abu ‘Abdullah! By the banks of the Euphrates! ”So
I said: “What do you mean?” He said: “I entered upon the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) one day
and saw that his eyes were flowing with tears, so I said: ‘O
Messenger of Allah! Has somebody upset you?Are your eyes
bothering you?’He said: ‘No. Jibreel was just with me and he
told me that al-Husain will be killed by the banks of the
Euphrates. ’Then he asked me: ‘Do you want to smell its
earth?’I replied in the affirmative and so he stretched out his
hand, grabbed a handful of the dust and then gave it to me,
while I could not hold back my tears. ”
151

The Shee‘ah have exaggerated the events of the day of
‘AShoora’ and have accordingly fabricated a great deal of
narrations based on absurd claims and allegations, none of
which can be verified as true. As for narrations pertaining to
the events and conflicts surrounding al-Husain’s murder in
the Ahadeeth, these are mostly correct. It later emerged that
those who survived after killing him were either afflicted with
some disease or turmoil in the world, while the majority of
them lost their senses.
The Rafidah (Dissenters; Rafidites, a Shee‘ah sect) in the state
of the Banu Buwaih tribe within Baghdad exceeded all
bounds by beating and striking themselves out of remorse on
the day of ‘AShoora’ in addition to scattering ashes and straw
in the streets and marketplaces while crying. Many of them
even deny themselves water to evoke the state of thirst in
which al-Husain died. The women strike their faces with their
hands out of lamentation, as they wail and beat their chests
while walking barefooted through the marketplaces, along
with other horrific innovations and practices.
In fact, the Rafidah and Shee‘ah have contradicted and greatly
deviated from the practices of their ancestors in ash-Sham on
the day of ‘AShoora. ’ It is reported that they used to cook
grain, bathe, apply perfume and wear their finest clothes and
instead celebrated that day with a feast by making a variety of
dishes, thus regarding it as a day to rejoice and be happy as
their way of opposing the dissenters.
Such disastrous practices have been best addressed in a
narration by ‘Ali bin al-Husain, on the authority of his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) who said: “Whoever is stricken with a
calamity and when he remembers it says: ‘inna lillahi wa inna
ilaihi raji‘oon’ (‘To Allah we belong and to Him whe shall
return’), even though it happened a long time ago, Allah will
record for him a reward like that of the day it befell him. ”
152

As for al-Husain’s grave, many people later believed that he
was buried at the place of ‘Ali’s shrine in atTuff by the River
of Karbala. ’It is said that the shrine was venerated on top of
his grave -- Allah knows best.
With regard to al-Husain’s head, a popular opinion amongst
historians and biographers is that Ibn Ziyad sent it to Yazeed
bin Mu‘awiyah, while others deny this view. I consider the
first opinion to be more credible and Allah knows best.
Furthermore, there is a difference of opinion concerning the
place in which his head was buried. Muhammad bin Sa‘d
reported that al-Husain’s head was sent to ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed,
the deputy of alMadinah, who buried it with al-Husain’s
mother in al-Baqee‘ (a fertile patch of land in al-Madinah
where other members of the Prophet’s family were buried).
Ibn Abi Dunya mentions that the head was no longer in
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah’s coffer when he died. It is believed
that it was therefore taken from his coffer and wrapped and
buried within the Bab ul-Faradees in the city of Dimashq
(Damascus).

153

A Chapter Mentioning Some of His Virtues
Abu Nu‘aim is reported to have said: “I heard ‘Abdullah bin
‘Umar saying that a man from the people of al-‘Iraq asked
him about the blood of housefly. Ibn ‘Umar said: ‘Where are
you from?’The man replied: ‘From al-‘Iraq. ’Ibn ‘Umar said:
‘Look at that! He is asking me about the blood of a housefly
while they (the people of al-‘Iraq) have killed the grandson of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). ’Ibn
‘Umar added: ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘They (Hasan and
Husain) are my two sweet-smelling flowers in this world. ’”
Muhammad bin Abu Ya‘qoob is reported to have said that a
man from the people of al-‘Iraq asked ‘Umar about the blood
of a housefly staining the clothes. Ibn ‘Umar said: ‘Look at
that! He is asking me about the blood of a housefly while they
(the people of al-‘Iraq) have killed the grandson of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). ’
Abu Hurairah is reported to have said that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The
one who loves them, loves me, and who hates them, then
surely he hates me. ” Ya‘la bin Murrah reported that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “AlHusain is from me and I am from al-Husain,
therefore whoever loves Allah loves al-Husain; he is Sibt
among the Asbat (from a great tribe, lineage). ”
Abu Sa‘eed is reported to have said that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “AlHasan and al-Husain are masters over the youth in Paradise
except over the two sons of alKhalah (maternal aunt), Yahya
and ‘Eesa (John and Jesus (Peace be upon him). ”
Hudhaifah reported that he went to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to seek forgiveness for
154

himself and his mother, about which he said: “I went to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and after
performing the Zuhr, ‘Asr, Maghrib and ‘Isha’ prayers with
him, I turned and followed him. Upon hearing my voice, the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
‘Who is this? Hudhaifah?’I said: ‘Yes. ’He said: ‘What is your
need, may Allah forgive you and your mother?’He said:
‘Indeed, this is an angel that never descended to the earth
before tonight. He sought permission from his Lord to greet
me and give me glad tidings that Fatimah is the chief of the
women of Paradise, and that al-Hasan and al-Husain are the
chiefs of the youth of Paradise. ’So Hudhaifah said: ‘I seek
forgiveness for me and my mother. ’He (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: ‘Allah has forgiven you, O
Hudhaifah, and your mother. ’”
Abu Hurairah is reported to have said: “We were praying al‘Isha’ (the evening prayer) with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and whenever he
prostrated, al-Hasan and al-Husain pounced on his back, and
whenever he raised his head, they would wrap their arms
around him from behind and pull his head back. He would put
them down on the ground and when he started again they
would repeat the same thing until he had completed the whole
prayer. After this, he sat them on his lap and I went to sit next
to him and said: ‘O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) ! Whenever you put them down,
lightning struck. ’So he said to them: ‘Stay by your mother.
’The lightning continued to strike until they went in. ”
‘Ali is reported to have said: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came in to see me while
I was sleeping. He gave al-Hasan and al-Husain something to
drink and then he got up and began to milk one of our
uncultivable sheep, which thereafter produced an abundant
flow of milk. After he had finished, another one came to him,
however the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
155

him) pushed it aside. Fatimah then said: ‘O Messenger of
Allah! It is as if they love you. ’He said: ‘No, it is because it
quenched its thirst in front of the other. ’Then he said: ‘Verily,
me, you, these two (alHasan and al-Husain) and the one who is asleep will all be in
one place on the Day of Resurrection. ’” Sulaiman bin alHaitham is reported to have said: “Al-Husain bin ‘Ali was
circumambulating the House (Ka‘bah) and he wanted to
overtake the people but there was no space to do so. As alFarazdaq bin Ghalib was looking at him, a man said to him:
‘O Abu Firas! Who is that?’So al-Farazdaq replied (in alBaseet poetic meter):
‘The gravity of his tread is realised by the valley
And he is known by the dwelling, domicile and sacred
places.
This is the son of the best of all Allah’s worshippers.
This is the pious, pure and chaste soul.
The stone (al-Hateem) would touch his palm
Out of gratitude when he would go to greet it. ’”
It is well known that al-Farazdaq would call al-Husain “‘Ali
bin al-Husain (‘Ali, the son of al-Husain’) ” in jest, and not
the son of his father due to the fact that he resembled him so
much.

156

Some Poetry Eulogising Al-Husain
According to ‘Abdullah bin Ibraheem, one poet to have
eulogised al-Husain bin ‘Ali bin Abu Talib (May Allah be
pleased with them) in his poems was Abu Bakr bin Kamil. He
wrote:
“Sing about the Creator’s creation,
So that you may discern the liar and the honest one;
Ask the Most-Gracious for His grace,
None other than the Lord grants sustenance.
Who thinks that people provide livelihood?
Does one not trust the Most-Gracious?
Or does he think that his money is of benefit to him?
If so, you are surely mistaken. ”
According to al-A‘mash, al-Husain bin ‘Ali once said:
“The more money its possessors have The more their
worries increase.
We have fathomed you, O embittering life!
O dwelling of all mortals and ephemeral beings!
An ascetic would not be serene
If he were burdened with offspring. ”
Az-Zubair bin Bakkar recited poetry about al-Husain’s wife,
ar-Rabab bint Unaif, while others say she was the daughter of
Imra’ul-Qais bin ‘Adiyy bin Aws al-Kalbi. She was the
157

mother of al-Husain’s daughter, Sukainah bint al-Husain. He
said:
“By your life! I love the house
Where Sukainah and Rabab dwell.
I love them and on them I am willing to spend my wealth
So that my Admonisher will not have reason to blame me.
And even if they blame me, I will not be compelled
Throughout my entire lifetime until I am entombed. ”
Ar-Rabab’s father embraced Islam at the hands of ‘Umar bin
al-Khattab, after which ‘Umar made him chief of his people.
Once ‘Umar had left, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib approached him to
offer either al-Hasan or alHusain’s hand in marriage to any of
his daughters. Thus, al-Hasan married his daughter Salma and
alHusain married his other daughter, ar-Rabab, while ‘Ali
himself married his third daughter, al-Muhayyah bint Imra’ulQais all within the same hour. Al-Husain deeply loved his
wife, ar-Rabab, which is evident from the way he used to
recite poetry about her.
After al-Husain’s death, many of the Quraish’s nobles sought
her hand in marriage. Her response was: “I would not have
any other (grand) father-in-law after the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) nor would I ever
cohabit with another man after al-Husain. ”
Of the many events that took place following al-Husain’s
murder in this year (i. e. , the sixty-first year), was Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah’s appointment of Salm bin Ziyad, who was just
twenty-four years of age at the time, over Sijistan and
Khurasan. The first task he embarked on was the appointment
and selection of prominent personalities and horsemen by
158

promoting Jihad (fighting for Allah’s Cause). He then set out
with his legion on an expedition against the Turks, taking his
wife, Umm Muhammad bint ‘Abdullah bin ‘Uthman bin
Abul-‘As, with him and in that way making her the first ‘Arab
woman to have crossed over the river into that land.
Prior to this, the Muslims had never spent the winter in that
country and so Salm bin Ziyad was the first to do so. He sent
al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah to the Turk city of Khuwarizm
and laid siege to it until they agreed to reconcile matters at a
sum of twenty million or so.
When news of al-Husain’s murder reached az-Zubair, he
stood up and began address the people, upon which he
denounced the death of al-Husain and his companions and
cursed those who killed him. He displayed his contempt at
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah and further incited the people to turn
against the Banu Umayyah tribe, urging them to put up
opposition and depose Yazeed as caliphate. In consequence
to his stance, many people offered their pledge of allegiance
to Ibn az-Zubair, saying: “With regard to the killing of alHusain, not a single one of us are in disagreement with Ibn
az-Zubair. ” When Yazeed heard what the people were
saying, he was extremely troubled by it and so it was said to
him: “If you permit it, ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed can bring you back
the head of Ibn az-Zubair or otherwise he can lay siege to him
until he leaves the Haram (Holy Sanctuary in Makkah). ”
‘Amr was delegated to begin with, but was soon afterwards
dismissed and replaced by al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah in this year.
Yazeed made him swear that Ibn az-Zubair would be brought
to him in silver shackles.
Abu Ma‘shar states that no biographer has contested the view
that al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah was the Ameer of the Haramain
(Custodian of the Two Sanctuaries) and that he performed the
Hajj Pilgrimage with the people in this year.
159

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year
Al-Husain bin ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with them) along
with scores of his family members were all were killed in
Karbala. ’
Jabir bin ‘Ateek bin Qais, Abu ‘Abdullah al-Ansari, who
participated in the Battle of Badr and the events following it
also died.
Hamzah bin ‘Amr al-Aslami, an honourable Companion,
about whom it is verified in the Saheehain that ‘A’ishah said:
“Hamzah bin ‘Amr asked the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him): ‘Should I observe Sawm (fasting) while
travelling?’The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) answered: ‘You may observe Sawm if you wish
and you may not observe Sawm if you wish. ’” In his
atTareekh [History], al-Bukhari classifies this report by
Hamzah as having a “Jayyid (good) ” chain of narration.
Shaibah bin ‘Uthman bin Abu Talhah al-‘Abdari al-Hajabi,
the possessor of the keys to the Ka‘bah (House in Makkah)
also died. On the authority of his religious guides and
mentors, al-Waqidi said that Shaibah used to say: “By Allah!
Even if all the people believed in Muhammad, I would not
have believed in him. Upon the conquest of Makkah, I went
out with those who left to the Hawazin hoping to seize an
opportunity to take revenge on all who belonged to the
Quraish. On that day, the people were all mixed amongst each
other and so when the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) dismounted his mule, I drew close to him and
unleashed my sword to strike him. At that point, a flame
emerged that almost burned me, so I turned to the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who said
to me: ‘O Shaibah! Come close to me. ’ I did so and then he
put his hand on my chest and said: ‘O Allah! Grant him refuge
160

from the Shaitan (Satan; Devil). ’ And by Allah! That day, he
did not move his hand except that he became dearer to me
than my own hearing and vision. After that, he said: ‘Go and
battle. ’So I advanced towards the enemy and, by Allah, if I
had encountered my own father I would have killed him. Then
once the people had retreated, the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me: ‘O Shaibah, Allah
willed more good for you than you wanted for yourself! ’Then
he told me of all my thoughts and feelings that could not have
been known to anyone but Allah, the Majestic. It was at that
point that I declared my faith and said: ‘I seek the forgiveness
of Allah. ’So the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: ‘Allah has forgiven you. ’”
Amongst those who died was ‘Abdul-Muttalib bin Rabee‘ah
bin al-Harith, an honourable Companion, who moved to
Damascus and owned a house there.
Al-Waleed bin ‘Uqbah bin Abi Mu‘ait, Abu Wahb al-Qurashi
al-‘Abshami, was the half-brother of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan
through their mother. He submitted to Islam on the day of the
Conquest. ‘Umar had entrusted him with the Sadaqat (legally
prescribed alms tax) of the Banu Taghlib tribe and ‘Uthman
had deputed him over al-Koofah. On one occasion, he had
consumed Khamr (wine; alcohol) and then prayed with his
associates during which he stumbled and fell to the floor. As
a result, ‘Uthman flogged him and accordingly dismissed him
from the post in al-Koofah. Hence, when ‘Ali arrived in al‘Iraq, al-Waleed went to ar-Raqqah and bought an estate to
remain in seclusion during the course of wars that were being
fought between ‘Ali and Mu‘awiyah and the events that
followed them. Al-Waleed died later this year while still
residing there and it also became the place where he was
buried.
Umm Salamah, Umm ul-Mu’mineen Hind bint Abu
Umayyah, was first married to her paternal cousin Abu
161

Salamah bin ‘Abdul-Asad who left her a widow. As a result,
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) married her, and their marriage was consummated in the
month of Shawwal in the second year after the Battle of Badr.
She had heard her first husband, Abu Salamah, narrate a
Hadeeth from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) who said: “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: ‘There is no
Muslim who is stricken with a calamity and says what is
enjoined – ‘Inna lillahi wa inna ilaihi raji‘oon. Allahuma’jurni
fi museebati wa akhlif li khairan minha’ (‘Verily, to Allah we
belong and to Him we shall return. O Allah! Reward me for
my affliction and compensate me with something better’) –
but Allah will compensate him with something better. ’” She
went on to say: “When Abu Salamah passed away, I said
exactly that and then I asked myself: “Who is better than Abu
Salamah, the first man to have made the Hijrah (migration)
?At that point, Allah resolved what I had said by giving me
someone better in his place, the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). ” She was one of the
finest of women and slaves of Allah.

Upon Entering the Sixty-Second Year
It is alleged that a delegation of people from al-Madinah was
commissioned to go to Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah who received
them hospitably and bestowed upon them offerings and gifts.
Taking the gifts with them, they then left Yazeed and decided
to renounce him, appointing ‘Abdullah bin Hanzalah
alGhaseel as their authority. It was because of this incident
that Yazeed dispatched a band of troops the following year to
al-Madinah in retaliation; a major event that we shall come to
in the next chapter by the will of Allah, the Sublime.
Yazeed dismissed ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al-‘As from the Hijaz
and appointed al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah bin Abu Sufyan in his
place, who upon entering al-Madinah attended to matters of
162

finance, revenue and property. He also rounded up the three
hundred slaves who had previously belonged to ‘Amr bin
Sa‘eed and imprisoned them. Consequently, ‘Amr made
arrangements with Yazeed for his slaves to be released from
prison by sending word for them to travel to him on the camels
he had made ready for their journey. Thus, they successfully
broke out of prison but did not meet ‘Amr until he reached
Yazeed, who in turn honoured, esteemed and warmly
welcomed him.
Soon after, Yazeed summoned ‘Amr to his council wherein
he reprimanded him for failing to deal with the issue of Ibn
az-Zubair, to which argued: “O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! A
spectator sees what the absent does not. The majority of the
people of Makkah and the Hijaz admire az-Zubair and have
joined forces with him against us. Even if I wanted to offer
resistance, he is wary and on his guard against me, and his
army is stronger than mine. This is the reason why I acted
extremely courteously and in a friendly manner towards him
so that I might stay close and keep an eye on him; in this way
I restricted and prohibited him from many doing things. I even
implemented a system that requires anyone who wants to
enter Makkah to write down their name and the name of their
father, state which country he comes from and for what reason
he wants to enter. Only if he has associates or people who can
confirm his claims is he then permitted to continue on his
journey, otherwise he is rejected and made to return. After
that, you put alWaleed in charge and, if Allah wills, he will
come to you from his office and perhaps notify you of the
extent of my good efforts or endeavours that might then
appease you. By Allah! He is working for you and he writes
to your enemies. ” So Yazeed said: “You are more loyal to me
than the one you were discharged for and I have more
confidence in you. I wanted to appoint him to fix any flaws,
discover any discrepancies, execute any important tasks and
so forth” and he carried on listing things in this manner.
163

As for al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah, he remained in the Hijaz and on
several occasions attempted to attack ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair
who he perceived as a threat that needed to be suppressed.
Another man by the name of Najdah bin ‘Amir al-Hanafa had
also stirred up emotions in al-Yamamah when al-Husain was
killed. He opposed Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah and supported Ibn
az-Zubair, despite them remaining separate and having their
own band of followers. As such, on the night of Arafat, alWaleed bin ‘Utbah incited the masses to oust the supporters
of Ibn az-Zubair and Najdah, but instead he ended up rousing
greater emotion for each of the factions. Following that,
Najdah wrote to Yazeed, saying: “Indeed, you assigned a
clumsy man to us who has no direction for guiding the matter
nor was he able to attend to it wisely. If you had sent us a man
with a soft and gentle nature, you might have hoped for him
to settle matters down by smoothing out any differences. If
you bear that in mind then there might be some reform
between us by the Will of Allah, the Sublime. ” Al-Waleed
was therefore discharged from duty in the Hijaz and replaced
by ‘Uthman bin Muhammad bin Abu Sufyan, who carried the
people’s hopes in spite of his inexperience and naivety
concerning matters of leadership.
Having established his authority in al-Madinah, ‘Uthman sent
out a delegation to Yazeed which included the likes of
‘Abdullah bin Hanzalah al-Ghaseel al-Ansari, ‘Abdullah bin
Abi ‘Amr bin Hafs bin alMugheerah al-Makhzoomi, alMundhir bin az-Zubair and many other noblemen from alMadinah. Yazeed received them hospitably and presented
them with the best offerings and gifts, after which they
departed and returned to al-Madinah -- all except Mundhir bin
az-Zubair. Instead, he travelled to see his companion,
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, in al-Basrah after having been granted
one hundred thousand Dirhams by Yazeed like the rest of the
delegation.

164

Upon their return to al-Madinah, the delegation began to
openly vilify and defame Yazeed by saying: “We went to see
a man who has no Deen (Islam), who drinks Khamr (wine;
alcohol) and who entertains himself with songstresses and
stringed instruments. We testify to you that we have
renounced him. ” As such, the people followed their example
by also renouncing him and instead pledged their allegiance
to ‘Abdullah bin Hanzalah al-Ghaseel until his death, because
of which ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab disapproved of
them. By this time, al-Mundhir bin az-Zubair had returned
from al-Basrah and so he too joined the others in renouncing
Yazeed who he confirmed drank Khamr and got intoxicated
to point of abandoning his prayers. In fact, al-Mundhir
degraded Yazeed more than any of the others had.
When news of this reached Yazeed, he said: “O Allah! Verily,
I bestowed my favours on the delegation and honoured it, yet
it did what I had anticipated! ”In turn, Yazeed retaliated by
sending an-Nu‘man bin Basheer to warn the people of alMadinah against what they were doing and of the definite
consequences of their action. He further demanded that they
revert to “hearing and obeying” him and conform to the
community. After an-Nu‘man had delivered Yazeed’s
instructions and conditions, he threatened them with fear of
Fitnah (trial and tribulation) by which he said to them:
“Verily, Fitnah is disastrous. ” He then went on to say: “You
have no power over the people of ash-Sham”, to which
‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ responded: “What interest do you have
in our community’s disunity and our corrupt affair that has
not yet been rectified by Allah?” An-Nu‘man replied: “By
Allah, if I were with you, I would have done what you have
been calling for. I would have brought those men who seek to
divide you to their knees, confronted them with the sword and
unleashed my fury on them until their deaths. If I were with
you I would have slapped the side of your mule and sent it on
its way to Makkah and left those poor people from the Ansar
(Helpers) killing each other in the streets, mosques and in
165

their own doorways. ” In spite of what he said, the people still
chose to disobey him and refused to listen to his advice, and
so he withdrew. There is no doubt, however, that the situation
escalated to as bad as he said it would.

Amongst Those Prominent People who Died
in This Year:
Buraidah bin al-Husaib al-Aslami:He embraced Islam after
crossing paths with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he was emigrating to
al-Madinah in a place called Kura‘ul-Ghameem. He went out
to participate in the invasion of Khurasan where he died in
Marw (Merv; a town in Turkmen S. S. R) during the caliphate
of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah.
Ar-Rabee‘ bin Khuthaim, Abu Yazeed ath-Thawri alKoofi:He was one of the companions of Ibn Mas‘ood who
said to ar-Rabee‘: “I do not see you except that I am reminded
of the Mukhbiteen (those who are humble before Allah) and
if the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) would have seen you, he would have loved you. ”
Ibn Mas‘ood would often commend and dignify him in this
way.
‘Alqamah bin Qais, Abu Shibl an-Nakha‘i al-Koofi:He was of
one of Ibn Mas‘ood’s senior companions and scholars.
‘Uqbah bin Nafi‘ al-Fihri:He was sent by Mu‘awiyah to
Africa with an army of ten thousand men to conquer it, which
he did, in addition to planning the city of al-Qairawan
(Kairouan in NE Tunisia). He carried out military expeditions
against the Berber nations and the people of ar-Room. He
(May Allah be pleased with him) also died as a martyr.
‘Amr bin Hazm:He was an honourable Companion and was
deputed by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
166

Allah be upon him) over Najran when he was just seventeen
years old and he remained there for some time. He passed
away during the days of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah.
Maslamah bin Mukhallad al-Ansari:He participated in the
conquest of Egypt where he appointed the soldiers to both
Mu‘awiyah and Yazeed’s armies.
Nawfal bin Mu‘awiyah ad-Deeli:He was an honourable
Companion who spent sixty years of his life in Jahiliyyah
(Ignorance) and about the same amount of time in Islam.
Also passing away this year was ar-Rabab bint Imra’ul-Qais,
the wife of al-Husain bin ‘Ali.

Upon Entering the Sixty-Third Year
The Battle of al-Harrah took place in this year due to the
events described previously, relating to the people of alMadinah renouncing Yazeed and alternatively appointing
‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ over the Quraish, as well as ‘Abdullah
bin Hanzalah bin Abi ‘Amir over the Ansar (Helpers) and
Ma‘qil bin Sinan al-Ashja‘iover the Muhajireen (Emigrants)
as his replacement. It was at the beginning of this year that
this became manifest, after which they decided upon
removing Yazeed from their midst altogether. As a result, the
Banu Umayyah tribe, who were almost a thousand strong,
convened in the house of Marwan bin al-Hakam and it was at
that point that the people of al-Madinah seized the opportunity
to surround and besiege them. ‘Ali bin al-Husain (Zainul‘Abideen), on the other hand, chose to dissociate himself from
the conflict and likewise, ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab
did not renounce Yazeed nor did any other member of his
family. Similarly, no one from the Banu ‘Abdul-Muttalib
tribe renounced Yazeed.

167

The Banu Umayyah tribe subsequently wrote to Yazeed
concerning the siege, the abuse, the hunger and thirst, which
deeply stirred Yazeed when he read the letter. He then
summoned ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al-As to read it and advise
him accordingly in terms of who he should send to their aid.
However, ‘Amr refused to go himself, saying: “O Ameer ulMu’mineen! I was dismissed at a time when the affair was
under control and matters were being regulated. As for now,
while the blood of the Quraish is being shed on the earth, I do
not want to resume power over them. Therefore, he who is
distanced from them and from me should be put in charge to
manage the affair. ” Thus, a message was sent to Muslim bin
‘Uqbah al-Murri, who was a feeble, elderly man, notifying
him that he had been entrusted to carry out the task and that
Yazeed would summon ten thousand horsemen to go with
him, while others claim it was twelve thousand. Yazeed’s
public announcer in Damascus therefore instructed the
horsemen to collect their wage of forty Deenar that Yazeed
had promised to each of them.
Al-Mada’ini states that ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘adah al-Fazari had
been instated over Dimashq, Husain bin Numair as-Sakooni
over Hims. Hubaish bin Dulajah al-Qaini over the people of
Jordan, Rawh bin Zinba‘ al-Judhami and Shareek al-Kinani
over the people of Palestine, Tareef bin al-Hashas al-Hilali
over the people of Qinnasreen, and as chief governor, he
instated Muslim bin ‘Uqbah al-Murri from Ghatafan.
With regard to the matter, ‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far said to Yazeed:
“Do you reckon that if they return in obedience it will be
accepted from them?” He said: “They will, as there is nothing
keeping them from doing so. ” Then Yazeed said to Muslim
bin ‘Uqbah: “If you arrive in al-Madinah and you are not
forced out and they listen and obey you, then do not confront
any one of them but instead proceed straight to the deviant Ibn
az-Zubair. ”
168

Yazeed had previously written to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad
instructing him to pay a visit to Ibn az-Zubair in Makkah and
lay siege to him there. However, ‘Ubaidullah refused to
comply and said: “By Allah! I would never join forces with
the immoral in pursuing the murder of the grandson of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) nor would I invade the Bait ul-Haram (the Sacred House
in Makkah) ! ”‘Ubaidullah’s mother was named Marjanah
and when al-Husain was murdered she said to her son: “Woe
unto you! What have you done?! What sin have you
committed?! ”In fact, she strongly rebuked him for it.
It is reported that Muslim travelled with his army to alMadinah where they were met by the Banu Umayyah tribe.
He attempted to make enquires about the events that had
happened, but his task was made difficult when everyone
remained silent. He therefore stationed in al-Harrah, east of
al-Madinah, where he called on the people for a period of
three days but it was to no avail as the people refused to
comply with him. On the contrary, war broke out between the
two sides that resulted in the killing ofscores of nobles and
prestigious figures, including ‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ and his
seven sons, ‘Abdullah bin Hanzalah al-Ghaseel and his halfbrother, Muhammad bin Thabit bin Shammas, and
Muhammad bin ‘Amr bin Hazm. As for the latter, Marwan
passed him while he was down on the ground and said: “May
Allah have mercy on you! How many a room witnessed you
spend long periods of time standing and prostrating in prayer!
”
It follows that Muslim bin ‘Uqbah – or as the Salaf (Pious
Forebears) call him, Musrif bin ‘Uqbah, may Allah revile him
– decided to warrant the slaughter of many of the respected
figures and dignitaries in alMadinah for three days under the
order of Yazeed, may Allah grant him no reward whatsoever,
while seizing a significant amount of wealth and possessions.
169

‘Ali bin al-Husain was then summoned to Muslim and so he
entered into his presence in the company of Marwan bin alHakam and his son, ‘Abdul-Malik, who acted as his guards as
‘Ali bin al-Husain did believe that Yazeed had consented to
what Muslim had done. However, Muslim then said to him:
“If it were not for the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen ordering me to do
this, I would have had you beheaded. ” Then he said: “This
might cause your family to flee out of fear. ” So ‘Ali said:
“Yes, by Allah. ” Then he ordered that he be mounted on his
riding animal and carried away respectfully until he arrived
back home. Muslim then summoned ‘Amr bin ‘Uthman bin
‘Affan, who did not come out with the rest of the Banu
Umayyah tribe, to whom Muslim said: “When you stand
before the people of al-Madinahyou say, ‘I am with you’; and
when you stand before the people of ash-Sham you say, ‘I am
the son of the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen. ’”At that point, Muslim
ordered his beard to be tweezed out in front of him.
Al-Mada’ini states that Muslim bin ‘Uqbah warranted
authority over al-Madinah for three days, killing the people
and seizing the wealth. Additionally, Su‘da bint ‘Awf sent
word of her disapproval to Muslim bin Uqbah, saying: “I am
the daughter of your paternal uncle. Order your associates to
not exploit our camels in such and such a place. ” For this
reason, Muslim said to his associates: “Make it a priority to
seize her camels in particular. ” Similarly, a woman came to
Muslim and said: “I am your slave and my son is in your
captivity. ” So he commanded his men: “Bring him to her
quickly”, and then stood him before her as he beheaded him.
After giving her his head, he then said to her: “Are you not
satisfied that your son was not killed until you spoke on his
behalf?” It is also said that he had sexual intercourse with so
many women that he impregnated a thousand women in those
days outside of marriage.
A group of nobles amongst the Companions of theProphet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had gone missing,
170

one of whom was Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, while Abu Sa‘eed alKhudri had made off and taken refuge in a cave somewhere
in the mountains. He was found by a man from the people of
as-Sham, about whom Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri said: “When I
saw him, I unsheathed my sword and so he went for me and
as he saw me, he was determined to kill me but I surrendered
my sword and said (what means): “Verily, Iintend to let you
draw my sin on yourself as well as yours, then you will be one
of the dwellers of the Fire; and that is the recompense of the
Zalimoon (wrongdoers; sinful) ]” [al-Ma’idah, 5:29]. He
therefore said to him: “Who are you?” Abu Sa‘eed said: “I am
Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri. ” So he said: “The Companion of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ?” I said: “Yes”, and so he let me be.
Al-Mada’ini said: “Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyib was brought to
Muslim who said to him: ‘Pledge your allegiance. ’ So he
said: ‘I pledge allegiance to the path of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.
’ So he was ordered to be executed by beheading and his order
was just about to be carried out when a man testified to his
insanity, on which grounds he was left alone.
Yazeed committed a grave mistake by authorising Muslim bin
Uqbah to exercise his control over alMadinah for three days.
This was because during those three days, Muslim carried out
the most unspeakable and indescribable atrocities to ever be
witnessed by the Prophetic land of al-Madinah, whose
severity is known by Allah alone.
Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas is reported to have said: “I heard the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying:
‘None plots against the people of al-Madinah but that he will
be dissolved (destroyed) like salt is dissolves in water. ”
Muslim narrates on the authority of Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
171

Allah be upon him) said: ‘No one intends ill towards the
people of al-Madinah but Allah will melt him in the Hellfire
like lead, or like salt dissolving in water. ”
Muhammad and ‘Abdur-Rahman, the sons of Jabir bin
‘Abdullah, said: “We went out with our father (after he had
lost his sight) on the day of al-Harrah and he said to us:
‘Wretched are those who caused the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) fear. ’We said: “O father!
Did anyone cause the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) fear?! ’He said: ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘Whosoever
causes the Ansar (Helpers) people of this region to fear them
will be caused to fear what lies between these two’ (then he
placed the palms of his hands on his sides). ”
Ad-Daraqutni said: “Sa‘eed bin ‘Abdul-Hameed draws on the
content of this narration and its chain of transmission, given
that it is narrated by Ahmad bin Hanbal, as evidence that
justifies the cursing of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah. This opinion
is also adopted by al-Khallal, Abu Bakr ‘Abdul-Azeez, the
judge Abu Ya‘la and his son, the judge Abul-Husain. On these
grounds, Abul-Faraj Ibn al-Jawzi permits the cursing of
Yazeed.
In contrast, others have prohibited the act of cursing Yazeed
based on the view that cursing him is a means of cursing his
father and others among the Companions by considering
Yazeed’s misconduct as attributable to his shortcomings and
mistakes. They further maintain that although he was a sinful
Imam (leader), and in the view of the ‘Ulama’ (scholars) even
an Imam is not exempt from the penalty of his sins.
Nevertheless, it is not permissible to insult and defame him
since that would only serve to incite Fitnah (trial, tribulation;
discord) and unease between people, and in this manner
instigate unlawful bloodshed, plunder of wealth and
172

committing corrupt acts with women in accordance with such
immoral behaviour.
The number of eminent Companions and others who died in
this year due to the al-Harrah incident is so extensive that it
would take too long to name them all. However, to mention
just a few prominent figures: Abdullah bin Hanzalah, the
commander of al-Madinah at the time of the battle of of alHarrah, Ma‘qil bin Sinan, ‘Ubaidullah bin Zaid bin ‘Asim
(May Allah be pleased with them) and Masrooq bin al-Ajda‘.

Upon Entering the Sixty Fourth Year
In the first sacred month of this year (Muharram), Muslim bin
‘Uqbah travelled to Makkah, having relieved himself of his
business in al-Madinah, with the intention of killing azZubair. Upon arriving in Thaniyyat Harsha (in a place high up
on the road to Makkah, not far from al-Juhfah), he convened
a meeting with his chief soldiers. He addressed them saying:
“Verily, the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen has enjoined on me that in
the event of my death Husain bin Numair as-Sakooni shall be
my successor, and by Allah, given the choice, I would not
have done the same! ”He then compliantly summoned him
and said: “Look, O son of Barda‘atal-Himar (the donkey’s
saddle) ! Uphold that which you have been endowed with”,
upon which he instructed him to attack Ibn Zubair within the
first three days of arriving in Makkah. He then said: “O Allah!
After my testimony: “La ilaha illallah wa anna
MuhammadarRasoolullah” (There is no god worthy of
worship but Allah and Muhammad is His Messenger), I
would love to carry out no other act than to kill the people of
al-Madinah and reap my reward in the Hereafter. Although if
I were to enter the Hellfire after doing so, then I would
certainly be one of the wretched. ” He died not long after
saying this (may Allah revile him) and according to al-Waqidi
he was buried in alMushallal.
173

Allah then caused his death to be followed by that of Yazeed
bin Mu‘awiyah which took place fifteen or sixteen days
before the end of the month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal and thus,
Allah granted them both nothing of the enjoyment of this life
they had sought and hoped for. On the contrary, al-Qahir (the
Conqueror; one of the ninety-nine Names of Allah) willed that
they be defeated by His servants, deprived of their domains
and separated from al-Mulk (the Kingdom).
Husain bin Numair advanced with his army towards Makkah
and camped at a station just outside of it. OnSaturday, three
days into the month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal of the sixty-fourth
year, Ibn az-Zubair and the people of Makkah assembled their
army and marched outwards until both sides clashed in a
brutal engagement. According to al-Waqidi, on that same
Saturday, the Sacred House, i. e. the Ka‘bah, caught fire from
the fire cannons launched amidst the fighting that caused its
walls to burn down. The people said (in al-Kamil poetry):
“Its shots replicate like a strutting camel
Which are cast on the walls of this mosque. ”
‘Amr bin Hawtah as-Sadoosi began to exclaim:
“What do you reckon of the Umm Farwah cannons
That are engulfed between the mountains of as-Safa and alMarwah?”
Umm Farwah was the name given to the catapult, or others
say it was the name of the fire, since the people of the mosque
ignited the fire while they stood around the Ka‘bah. Because
of this, some material from the cover of the Ka‘bah caught
fire that rapidly spread to its wooden planks and roof. It is said
that the cause of the Ka‘bah burning down was because Ibn
az-Zubair heard the sound of “Takbeer” (the exclamation
“Allah is the Greatest! ”) being shouted from somewhere in
174

the mountains in the dark of the night. Assuming that it could
be the people of ash-Sham, he quickly lit a torch by the
Ka‘bah in order to see where it was coming from. The wind,
however, caused the torch to set fire to the black sheets on the
right-hand corner of the Ka‘bah, which set alight the wooden
planks and roof, eventually causing the entire structure to split
in three.
The siege continued until the beginning of Rabee‘ul-Akhir,
following which the people lamented the death of Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah who died on the fourteenth day of Rabee‘ulAwwal of the sixty-fourth year at the young age of thirty-five
(or it is said thirty-eight, or –nine years). His period in office
lasted for three years and six or eight months. Thus, the people
of ash-Sham were defeated as a result of that battle and were
made to return humiliated. In this respect, the war served to
extinguish the flames of Fitnah (trial; tribulation) within the
Ummah.
It is mentioned that Ibn az-Zubair requested Husain bin
Numair to meet him between the two rows of their armies and
so they came into close contact until their horses crossed
heads. Numair’s horse began to neigh and he slapped it, which
caused Ibn az-Zubair to remark: “What is wrong with you?”
He replied: “Verily the pigeon ate dung from underneath my
horse’s feet and I would hate for it to kill it in the sacred land.
” So he said: “You do this even while you kill the Muslims?”
Husain replied: “Allow us to circumambulate the Ka‘bah and
then we shall return to our country”, which az-Zubair allowed
them to do. Ibn Jareer mentions in his account that Husain and
Ibn az-Zubair postponed their meeting until another night,
upon which they met outside Makkah and in the course of
their conversation Husain said to Ibn az-Zubair: “If this man
(Yazeed) dies then you are the most deserving of this matter
after him. Now then come! Travel with me to ash-Sham as,
by Allah, neither of the two of you will differ on this. ”
175

It is said that due to Ibn az-Zubair’s lack of trust in Ibn
Numair, he used rude language towards him that caused him
to walk away in a huff. Ibn Numair later remarked: “I summon
him to the caliphate and he speaks rudely to me?! ”In fact, the
Banu Umayyah tribe embarked with the army towards ashSham, and upon their arrival there they discovered that
Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah had already been
appointed as the hereditary successor of his father in
Damascus – and Allah knows best whether this is correct.

The Biography of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah
His name was Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan Sakhr
bin Harb bin Umayyah bin ‘Abd Shams, Ameer ulMu’mineen Abu Khalid al-Umawi. He was born in either the
twenty-fifth, -sixth or -seventh year in a place known as al176

Matiroon. According to some, he was born in the Bait Ra’s
(located in ashSham near Dimashq; the name given to one of
the two holy cities there, while the other is the Bait ulMaqdis,
i. e. Jerusalem). He received the pledge of allegiance as the
heir to the caliphate during his father’s lifetime, which he then
assumed after the death of his father in mid-Rajab of the
sixtieth year. He remained in office until his death on 14
Rabee‘ul-Awwal of the sixty-fourth year. His mother was
Maisoon bint Bahdal bin Unaif bin Duljah bin Qunafah bin
‘Adiyy bin Zuhair bin Harithah al-Kalbi.
Mu‘awiyah narrated the Hadeeth on the authority of his father
in a sermon of his: “I heard Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying. ‘If Allah wants to do
good to a person, He makes him comprehend the religion [the
understanding of the Qur’an and Sunnah (tradition) of the
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ]. ’” Another Hadeeth was also narrated on his authority
on the subject of ablution by his son, Khalid, and by ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan. Abu Zur‘ah ad-Dimashqi mentions in his
at-Tabqah [Classification] on the Sahabah that Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah had a fleshy body, large physique, lots of hair, a
big head and that he was tall in stature and good-looking. It
has additionally been mentioned that he had broad fingers that
had visible chicken pox scarring on them.
His father had divorced his mother while she was pregnant
with him and in relation to this it is reported that his mother
saw his father taking the moon from her in a dream. As such,
she related her vision to her mother who said: “If your vision
is true, then you will bear one who will be pledged allegiance
to for the caliphate. ” One day, when he was just a young boy,
his mother, Maisoon, sat combing his hair while his father,
Mu‘awiyah, was with his concubine wife, Fakhitah bint
Qarazah, in the sitting room. After she had finished combing
his hair, his mother looked at him and, pleased by what she
177

saw, she kissed him between the eyes. At this, Mu‘awiyah
said:
“If he dies, Muzainah will no longer prosper.
O Muzainah! Then hang an amulet on him. ”
As Yazeed got up and walked out, Fakhitah followed him with
her eyes until he left the room, at which point she said: “May
Allah curse your mother’s black legs! ”So Mu‘awiyah said:
“Actually, by Allah, he is better than your son, ‘Abdullah (his
other son born by her who was known for being imprudent) !
”So she said: “No, by Allah, he is not! It is just that you favour
Yazeed more. ” He then said: “I will show that he is before
you leave this sitting room. ”
He called on his son, ‘Abdullah and said: “It appears that I
should give you whatever you ask from me here in this sitting
room of mine. ” So ‘Abdullah said: “I want you to buy me a
fast dog and a donkey. ” So Mu‘awiyah said: “O my son! You
are a donkey and you want me to buy you one?! Get up and
leave! ”Mu‘awiyah then said to ‘Abdullah’s mother: “Did you
see that?” He then called on his son, Yazeed, and said to him:
“It appears that I should give you whatever you ask of me here
in this sitting room of mine, so ask me for what you want. ”
Yazeed then fell to the ground in prostration and once he lifted
his head, he said: “Praise be to Allah Who has raised the
Ameer ul-Mu’mineen to his station of rank for a period of
time. I had envisioned this earlier, and so I beseech that you
make me your hereditary heir after you. I further request that
you put me in general command of the Muslims during the
summer period. I also ask that you permit me to perform the
Hajj Pilgrimage upon your return and appoint me as leader
during the Pilgrimage season. Additionally, increase the
maintenance of every man among the people of ash-Sham by
ten Deenar on my account and fulfil the rights of the orphans
within the Banu Jumah, Banu Sahm and Banu ‘Adiyy tribes.
178

” At that point, Mu‘awiyah interrupted: “What is with you and
the Banu ‘Adiyy orphans?” Yazeed replied: “It is because
they gave me their oaths and moved into my home. ” So
Mu‘awiyah said: “I will comply with all your requests. ”
‘Ata’ bin as-Sa’ib and others have reported that Mu‘awiyah
once got angry with his son, Yazeed, and therefore chose to
disown him. As a result, Al-Ahnaf bin Qais said to
Mu‘awiyah: “O Ameer ulMu’mineen! Verily they are our
children, the fruits of our hearts and the pillars of our backs,
just as we are their sheltering sky and safe haven. Therefore,
if they get angry, please them and if they ask for something
then give it to them. Do not be heavy on them so that they
grow tired with your life and desire your death. ” So
Mu‘awiyah said: “How excellent are you, O Abu Bahr! O
boy! Go to Yazeed, offer him greetings of peace from me and
tell him: ‘Indeed, the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen has commanded
that you receive one hundred thousand Dirhams and a
hundred Thawbs (garments). ’”Upon hearing this, Yazeed
said: “Who was with the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen?” So he said:
“Al-Ahnaf. ” Then Yazeed said: “Of course! I will distribute
it! ”He then sent to Al-Ahnaf fifty-thousand Dirhams and fifty
Thawbs.
Yazeed was the first to invade the city of Qustanteeniyyah
(Constantinople) in the forty-ninth year according to the
account of Ya‘qoob bin Sufyan; on the other hand, Khaleefah
bin Khayyat reports that this took place in the fiftieth year.
Yazeed further performed the Hajj Pilgrimage with the people
in this same year upon his return from this military expedition
in the land of ar-Room.
It is verified in a Hadeeth that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The first army
amongst my followers that will invade Qaisar’s city will be
forgiven their sins. ” He was part of the second army that the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had seen
179

while he was sleeping in the house of Umm Haram who said:
“O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)! Invoke that Allah makes me one of them! ”He said:
“You are among the first” , referring to the army of
Mu‘awiyah when they invaded Qubrus (Cyprus) and
conquered it in the twentyseventh year during the caliphate of
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan. Umm Haram was with them and she died
in Qubrus. Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah was the commander of the
second army, although Umm Haram was not part of it. These
events are among the greatest signs of the prophethood of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).
Abu Bakr bin ‘Ayyash said: “Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah led the
Hajj Pilgrimage with the people in the fiftyfirst, -second and
–third year of the Hijrah. ”
Yazeed possessed praiseworthy qualities in terms of his
respect, insight, understanding and eloquent speech, ability to
recite poetry, courage and sound opinion. He was particularly
handsome and demonstrated good social skills, though he was
also weak in the face of temptation and he would sometimes
be neglectful of praying his prayers on time and so often
offered them late.
Imam Ahmad reported on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed alKhudri that he heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying: “There will be
successors to the caliphate after sixty years who will stray
from the prayers and follow lusts and desires; they will be in
error. Then there will be successors after this who will read
the Qur’an but will not practise the implementation of its
injunctions. Those who read the Qur’an are of three types:the
Believer, the Hypocrite and the Insolent. ” Basheer said: “I
said to al-Waleed: ‘Who are these three?’He replied: ‘The
Munafiq conceals its truth, the Fajir seeks to ruin it and the
Mu’min believes in it. ’” (Ahmad).
180

Al-Hasan bin Abul-Hasan said: “There are no two affairs
more corrupt than: 1) the day when ‘Amr bin al‘As signalled
to Mu‘awiyah to raise the Masahif (Qur’an manuscripts)
during the Battle of Siffeen, upon which he ordered for them
be propped up on spearheads. The Khawarij (Dissenters)
therefore ruled by saying: “There is no authority other than
Allah! ” This judgement will continue to have an effect until
the Day of Resurrection. ; and 2) the incident involving alMugheerah bin Shu‘bah who was Mu‘awiyah’s designated
official over al-Koofah. Mu‘awiyah wrote to him saying:
“Upon reading this letter you are dismissed. ” Eventually, alMugheerah went to Mu‘awiyah, who said to him upon his
overdue arrival: “What delayed you from coming here?” He
replied: “An affair with which I have been preoccupied. ” He
said: “And what is that?” Al-Mugheerah said: “Yazeed’s
Bai‘ah (pledge of allegiance) after you. ” Mu‘awiyah said:
“And have you arranged it?” He replied in the affirmative and
so Mu‘awiyah said: “Resume your work. ” Once alMugheerah had left his presence, his associates said to him:
“What have you done?” He said: “I have caught Mu‘awiyah’s
foot in a leather stirrup of error that will remain that way until
the Day of Resurrection. ” Al-Hasan said: “It was because of
this that the pledged allegiance passed on to their sons, i. e.
the caliphate became hereditary, which would have otherwise
remained as appointment through Shoora (consultation)
between the Muslims until the Day of Resurrection. ”
It is said that Yazeed rejoiced when news of al-Husain’s death
first reached him, though he later regretted it. Abu ‘Ubaidah
Ma‘mar bin al-Muthanna said that Yoonus bin Habeeb alJarmi informed him that when Ibn Ziyad killed al-Husain and
his men, he sent their heads to Yazeed who was pleased about
their deaths. This had served to improve his standing with Ibn
Ziyad but it was not long before he regretted what he had
done. ”

181

When the people of al-Madinah renounced their obedience
and dissociated themselves from Yazeed, they appointed Ibn
Mutee‘and Ibn Hanzalah as their leaders, as they represented
two of the staunchest rivals of Yazeed. Other than stating that
he drank Khamr (wine; alcohol) and engaged in some other
impure acts, they did not go as far as to accuse of him of
atheism as some of the Rawafid (Rafidites, a Shi’ite sect; lit.
Renegades) did. Yazeed was a certainly a sinnerbut it is
stillnot permissible to depose a leader on these grounds, the
reason for which is evident from the disorder and Fitnah
(trials; tribulations) that erupted because of what happened in
the case of al-Harrah.
It follows that Yazeed delegated someone to request that they
resume obedience to him, upon which he granted them three
days to do so; however, when they did not comply with his
order, he fought against them. Battling against the people of
al-Harrah might have served as sufficient rectification of the
matter had the army commander not warranted his authority
over al-Madinah for a period of three days, which resulted in
some unspeakable crimes and acts of corruption committed
against the people of al-Madinah.
Nafi‘ is reported to have said: “When the people abandoned
the leadership of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah, Ibn ‘Umar gathered
his children and family together, after which he declared his
faith in Allah and His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) then said: ‘We have pledged our
allegiance to a man in keeping with our covenant with Allah
and His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). Indeed, I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘A flag will be fixed on
the Day of Resurrection for ever betrayer (and perfidious
person) and it will be announced (publicly in front of
everybody) that ‘This is the betrayal (perfidy) of so-and-so,
the son of soand-so’. Certainly, the greatest betrayal, apart
from associating partners with Allah, is committed by a man
182

who pledges his allegiance to a man for the sake of Allah and
His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
but who then violates and breaks that pledge. Yazeed has not
abandoned a single one of you nor has he been immoderate
with any of you in dealing with this matter and therefore the
feud between us and him is forbidden. ”
Zaid bin Aslam is reported to have said on the authority of his
father that Ibn ‘Umar entered upon Ibn Mutee‘ while he was
with him. When he entered, he said: “Welcome to you, Abu
‘Abdur-Rahman”, as they lay down cushions for him to sit on.
He then said: “I have come to you to inform you about a
Hadeeth that I heard from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). He said: ‘Whoever
withdraws his hand from obedience then he will stand alone
(without any authoritative source) on the Day of Resurrection
and whoever dies having disunited himself from the
community then he has died in Jahiliyyah (Ignorance). ”
Yazeed died in Huwwareen, a town in Damascus on 14
Rabee‘ul-Awwal, which is said to have been on a Thursday
in the middle of the sixty-fourth year. He assumed power
following the death of his father in mid-Rajab of the sixtieth
year. He was born in the twenty-fifth year, while others say in
the twenty-sixth or –seventh year, and due to this uncertainly
there are differences of opinion regarding his age upon his
succession to the Khilafah. To relate these very limited
differences of opinion would nevertheless suffice to reveal
their dubious and obscure nature. There are those who claim
he was over forty years of age when he died – and Allah
knows best. In any case, his body was carried to Damascus
where he was buried in the Bab us-Sagheer graveyard. During
his rule, the river that he named after himself was expanded
to reach as far as the foot of Mount Qasiyoon having
previously been just a small stream. His expansion of it
successfully enhanced the flow of water therein.
183

Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah’s Offspring
Amongst them was Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah,
whose patronymic nickname was Abu Laila; Khalid bin
Yazeed, whose nickname was Abu Hashim and about whom
it is said was knowledgeable in the field of Chemistry;
‘Abdullah bin Yazeed who was known Al- Uswar for his
proficiency in archery as one of the most skilled archers
among the ‘Arabs; ‘Abdullah al-‘Asghar; Abu Bakr; ‘Utbah;
‘AbdurRahman; ar-Rabee‘ and Muhammad, all of whom
were born to different women.

The Leadership of Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed
bin Mu‘awiyah
Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman, also known as Abu Yazeed and Abu
Laila al-Qurashi al-Umawi, was a pious and honest man
whose occupancy as Khaleefah did not last for very long. In
fact, it is said that he reigned sovereign for just forty days.
During this time, Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed took so ill that he
was unable to go to the people and as a result, ad-Dahhak bin
Qais led the people in prayer and attended to their affairs on
his behalf. Eventually, Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed passed away
at the age of just twenty-one, while others have reported aged
twenty-three years and eighteen days, while yet others have
stated at the age of just nineteen or twenty. It has also been
claimed that he was just fifteen when he died -- Allah knows
best.
It is narrated that Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed would publicly
exclaim: “As-Salat (prayer) is a daily communion! ”He would
subsequently assemble the people together and say: “O
people! Indeed, I have been entrusted with your affairs while
I am weak and unable. I would therefore like for you to
concede leadership to a man of strength in the same manner
that as-Siddeeq ( i. e. ‘Abu Bakr) endowed ‘Umar. If you will,
184

then appoint a committee for consultation comprised of six
persons from amongst you as ‘Umar bin al-Khattab did; for
just one of you cannot be right concerning it. And so, I have
bequeathed your affairs to yourselves, therefore you should
appoint the one that is most fitting to undertake leadership
over you. ” He then stepped down and entered his house,
anddid not come out until he had died. It is believed that he
was either poisoned or stabbed.

The Leadership of ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair
(May Allah be pleased with him) According
to Ibn Hazm and a Sect who Heralded Him
as the Ameer ulMu’mineen
We have previously mentioned that when Yazeed died, his
army under the commandership of Husain bin Numair asSakooni pulled out of Makkah, after having laid siege to Ibn
az-Zubair within the house in which he had taken refuge, and
returned to ash-Sham. From that point onwards, the situation
deteriorated for Ibn az-Zubair as matters got out of control in
the land of al-Hijaz to the point of chaos. It turned out that the
people had pledged their allegiance to him even though
Yazeed had already received a public pledge there, and so,
upon learning this, Ibn az-Zubair decided to appoint his
brother, ‘Ubaidah bin azZubair, as the deputy of al-Madinah
and to thereafter undertake the task of exiling the Banu
Umayyah tribe. Upon doing so, the Banu Umayyah travelled
to ash-Sham, amongst whom was Marwan bin alHakam and
his son, ‘Abdul-Malik. In the meantime, the people of alBasrah had turned to Ibn az-Zubair after having undergone
much civil strife and turmoil over a long and complex period,
not to mention that they had been subjected to four different
rulers over the duration of just six months. Having made the
journey to Ibn az-Zubayr in Makkah because of their state of
185

unrest as a result of their own actions, Ibn az-Zubair wrote to
Anas bin Malik to lead them in prayer.
In addition to this, he sent ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed al-Ansari to
the people of al-Koofah to perform the prayer and Ibraheem
bin Muhammad bin Talhah bin ‘Ubaidullah to administer the
Kharaj (land tax) and to monitor and examine the affairs of
both major cities. He was also sent to the people of Egypt who
paid homage to him, after which ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Jahdar
was deputed over them, who later yielded the compliance of
the people of al-Jazeerah (the Arabian Peninsula).
Al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah bin Rabee‘ah was instated over alBasrah and then sent to the people of Yemen and Khurasan
where he received their pledge of allegiance, and to adDahhak bin Qais in ash-Sham who also pledged his
allegiance. However, it said that the people of Damascus and
its officials based in Jordan did not offer their pledge of
allegiance for the reason that they had already given a pledge
to Marwan bin al-Hakam at the time when al-Husain bin
Numair returned to ash-Sham from Makkah. A group of the
Khawarij (sect of Dissenters) had rallied around ‘Abdullah
bin az-Zubair in his defense, including Nafi‘ bin al-Azraq,
‘Abdullah bin Ibad and a group of their chiefs. Once he had
established his claim to the caliph, they said amongst
themselves: “You (lot) have certainly made a mistake because
you previously fought alongside this man while you did not
know his views concerning ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan (who they
loathed) ”, upon which they gathered around him in order to
question him about ‘Uthman. As such, he answered their
questions concerning him, though they were displeased by his
mentioning of ‘Uthman’s virtuous characteristics, pure faith,
honesty, loyalty, justice and his good deeds, upright conduct
and fidelity to the truth when it was put before him. As they
listened to him, they began to turn away until they dissociated
themselves from him completely and instead headed for al‘Iraq and Khurasan where it is said they became divided in all
186

aspects of their religion, sect and way of life on every possible
level. The reason for their fragmentation was due to ignorance
and egotistic pursuits that were grounded in a corrupt doctrine
of belief. Despite this, they were still able capture a great
number of cities and towns that later sought to challenge
them, as we shall come to narrate in the forthcoming chapters
by the will of Allah, the Sublime.

The Bai‘ah (Pledge of Allegiance) of
Marwan bin al-Hakam
When Husain bin Numair returned from the land of al-Hijaz
and ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad travelled from alBasrah to ashSham, the Banu Umayyah tribe moved from al-Madinah to
ash-Sham and met with Marwan bin al-Hakam following the
death of Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed who had resolved to pledge
allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair in Damascus. However, the
people of Damascus had pledged their allegiance to adDahhak bin Qais in order that he rectify matters between them
and maintain their affairs until they united as the community
of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
At the same time, ad-Dahhak wanted to pledge allegiance to
Ibn az-Zubair just like an-Nu‘man bin Basheer in Hims, Zufar
bin al-Harith al-Kilabi in Qinnasreen and Natil bin Qais in
Palestine from where Rawh bin Zinba‘ alJudhami had been
exiled. ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and al-Husain bin Numair
continued to press for Marwan bin al-Hakam’s ascension to
power until they changed his mind and made him cautious of
Ibn az-Zubair assuming authority and setting up dominion in
ash-Sham. Thus, they said to him: “You are the Shaikh
(leader; elder) and chief of the Quraish and therefore you have
the most right to pursue this matter. ” All his people from the
Banu Umayyah tribe, along with the people of Yemen, rallied
around him until he eventually agreed with them and began to
say: “It is not too late. ”

187

On the other hand, Hassan bin Malik bin Bahdal al-Kalbi
wrote to ad-Dahhak bin Qais in an attempt to deter him from
offering allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair on the grounds that he
possessed control and influence over the Banu Umayyah tribe
who had done much good towards him, and he went on to
speak of their honour and prestige. Hassan bin Malik had
received the pledged allegiance from the Banu Umayyah tribe
in Jordan at the time when he was calling them to his sister’s
son, Khalid bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan. He
therefore sent a letter to ad-Dahhak concerning it in which he
ordered him to read the letter before the people of Damascus
from the pulpit during Jumu‘ah (Friday prayer). It is said that
the man who delivered the letter to him was called Naghidah
bin Kuraib at-Tabikhi, who was supposedly from the Banu
Kalb tribe, and to whom it was said: “If he does not read the
letter to the people then read it to them yourself. ”
Accordingly, he was given his own copy of the letter upon
which he travelled to ad-Dahhak and ordered him to read the
letter, although when ad-Dahhak refused, Naghidah stood
before the people and read it to them. Only a group of chiefs
believed what he told them, while the rest believed he was a
liar and as a result this caused great Fitnah (discord) to break
out between the people. Amidst the conflict, Khalid bin
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah who was just a young man at the time,
stood up on the second step of the Minbar and was able to
appease and silence the people, which therefore allowed adDahhak to descend from the Minbar and lead the people in the
Jumu‘ah prayer.
Subsequently, ad-Dahhak bin Qais sentenced those who had
believed Naghidah to prison, although this agitated their
respective tribes who rebelled against his decision, thereby
prompting their release. AdDahhak’s actions had further
caused the people of Damascus to become anxious about Ibn
az-Zubair and the Banu Umayyah and so after the Jumu‘ah
prayer, the congregation went to stand before the door of
188

Jairoon, which is why this day came to be known as the “Day
of Jairoon. ”
Al-Mada’ini says: “The people wanted al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah
bin Abi Sufyan to be put in charge over them, although he
refused and died during those nights. When ad-Dahhak bin
Qais ascended the Minbar of the mosque, he delivered a
sermon to inform them of what had happened and thereafter
defamed Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah. At that point, a young man
from the Banu Kalb tribe stood up and began to beat him with
a stick that he had been carrying for that very purpose. The
people who were sitting in their rows consequently turned on
one another such that a huge fight broke out within the
Masjid. Hence, Qais and his supporters called for Ibn azZubair and championed ad-Dahhak bin Qais whilst the Banu
Kalb tribe called for the Banu Umayyah tribe to pledge
allegiance to Khalid bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah and formed
a coalition of zealots in support of Yazeed and his Ahl al-Bait
(members of his family).
Following this, ad-Dahhak got up and went into the Dar ul‘Imarah (similar to the official government headquarters),
shut the door and remained therein, without coming out to the
people until the Fajr (dawn) prayer on Saturday. He then sent
a message to the Banu Umayyah tribe who convened together
and entered upon him in the Dar ul-‘Imarah, amongst whom
was Marwan bin al-Hakam, ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al-‘As, and
Khalid and ‘Abdullah, the two sons of Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah. ”
Al-Mada’ini goes on to say: “Ad-Dahhak apologised to those
who went to see him and agreed that he would go along with
them to see Hassan bin Malik al-Kalbi. After that, they came
to an agreement over who they all considered suitable from
amongst the Banu Umayyah to lead them and then embarked
on their journey together. While they were travelling to alJabiyah on their way to Hassan, they were encountered by
189

Thawr bin Ma‘n bin al-Akhnas to whose tribe Qais belonged.
Thawr said to ad-Dahhak: “Verily, you invited us to pledge
allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair and so we gave you our answer
while you are now on your way to this nomad so that he may
appoint his sister’s son, Khalid bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah, as
his successor. ” Ad-Dahhak said: “So what do you think?” He
replied: “I think that we should disclose what we have been
hiding and that we should call for obedience to Ibn az-Zubair
while fighting against whoever opposes this view. ”
At that point, ad-Dahhak was favourably disposed to what he
had said and so returned to Damacus where he settled along
with those members of his army including Qais and his
supporters. He then summoned his army chiefs and thereafter
the people pledged their allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair;
accordingly, he wrote to Ibn az-Zubair to inform him of it. In
turn, Ibn az-Zubair mentioned what ad-Dahhak had done to
the people of Makkah, thanked him for his good deed and then
wrote to him regarding the deputyship of ashSham. Contrary
to this account, it has been claimed by some that ad-Dahhak
afterwards vowed to establish the caliphate for himself,
although Allah knows best whether that was actually the case.
Therefore, according to al-Mada’ini’s account, ad-Dahhak
first advocated pledging allegiance to Ibn azZubair but he was
then urged by ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad to pursue allegiance for
himself, which Ibn Ziyad did in an attempt to double-cross
Ibn az-Zubair and squash his opposition. Thus, ad-Dahhak
invited the people to pledge allegiance to himself for three
whole days, which caused the people to detest and insult him,
saying: “You urged us to pledge to allegiance to a man and so
we pledged allegiance to him. Then you go and renounce him
for no reason whatsoever after which you call on us to pledge
allegiance to yourself?! ”After they said this, he decided to
reaffirm his allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair but the people
rejected him just as Ibn Ziyad had planned.
190

Having already made an agreement with Marwan, ad-Dahhak
conceded with ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad who managed to
persuade him to push for his own pledge of allegiance. Ibn
Ziyad then had him impeached for breaking his allegiance and
in doing so deceived ad-Dahhak who was in Damacus at that
time and during which Ibn Ziyad would pay him a visit every
day. Ibn Ziyad later advised ad-Dahhak to leave Damascus
and move to the desert, while in the meantime he would
dispatch an army to join him there. It follows that ad-Dahhak
travelled to Marj Rahit, a desolate region in the desert
outskirts, where he remained with his band of troops. At the
same time, the Banu Umayyah tribe assembled with its
adherents in Jordan who had already joined forces with
Hassan bin Malik’s people belonging to the Banu Kalb tribe.
When Marwan bin al-Hakam perceived what had ensued in
the developments surrounding Ibn azZubair’s pledge of
allegiance and the possibility of his dominion, he resolved to
embark on a journey to him with the intention of offering him
his allegiance in return for the security of the Banu Umayyah
tribe. He therefore travelled until he reached Adhri‘at where
he came across Ibn Ziyad as he was on his way back from al‘Iraq. At their meeting, Ibn Ziyad disparaged and dissuaded
him from going ahead. Instead, ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed al-‘As,
Husain bin Numair, Ibn Ziyad and the people of the Yemen
offered to join in association with Marwan to whom they said:
“You are an elder and chief of the Quraish, whereas Khalid
bin Yazeed is just a young man and ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair
is a middle-aged man. You must therefore strike while the
iron is hot and dispense of them. We pledge our allegiance to
you and if you accept then extend your hand to us. ” He then
put his hand out and there, in al-Jabiyah, they pledged
allegiance to Marwan on Wednesday, three days into the
month Dhul-Qa‘dah in the sixty-fourth year.

191

Marj Rahit and the Murder of ad-Dahhak
bin Qais al-Fihri (May Allah be pleased with
him)
It has been previously mentioned that ad-Dahhak was the
deputy of Damascus under Mu‘awiyah bin Abi Sufyan’s
administration, and would lead the prayer on his behalf,
uphold the law and attend to matters of state owing to
Mu‘awiyah's illness. When Mu‘awiyah passed away, he had
taken care of all the formalities attached to his son Yazeed’s
succession and pledge of allegiance, and in the same manner,
when Yazeed died, the people pledged their allegiance to his
son, Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed. It was after his death, however,
that the people of Damascus changed the manner of
succession and instead pledged allegiance to ad-Dahhak until
they were able to reach an alternative agreement, whereby
they extended their allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair and adDahhak did the same.
One day when ad-Dahhak was delivering a public sermon, he
spoke of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah in a criticising and
admonishing manner. The people began to argue with one
another because of it so much so that they turned their swords
on each other within the mosque. Ad-Dahhak managed to
calm the people down, after which he went into the Dar ulImarah (similar to the official government headquarters) and
closed the door behind him. It was after this incident that he
decided to concur with the Banu Umayyah and so he agreed
to travel with them to Hassan bin Malik bin Bahdal who was
in Jordan. Once they reached him, they considered and
decided upon who was suitable for leadership from amongst
their own people. Hassan wanted to pledge allegiance to his
sister’s son, Khalid bin Yazeed (Yazeed was the son of
Maisoon who was the daughter of Bahdal and therefore the
sister of Hassan). Having embarked on the journey with them,
ad-Dahhak shortly afterwards left most of his army in the
lurch and instead returned to Damascus but he was denied
192

entry. He therefore sent his chief troops to pledge allegiance
to Ibn azZubair on his behalf.
The Banu Umayyah, which included Marwan, ‘Amr bin
Sa‘eed, and Khalid and ‘Abdullah, the two sons of Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah, advanced on their journey until they met with
Hassan bin Malik in al-Jabiyah, though they neither possessed
power nor magnanimity in the view of ad-Dahhak bin Qais.
Marwan decided to go to Ibn az-Zubair to pledge allegiance
to him in return for his protection of the Banu Umayyah and
so he accordingly arranged for them to be escorted out of alMadinah. Marwan then set off until he reached Adhri‘at
where he met with ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad as he was on his
way back from al‘Iraq and there he joined forces with him
along with Husain bin Numair and ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al‘As who subsequently urged him to pursue his own pledge of
allegiance. They maintained that he had more right to it on the
grounds that Ibn az-Zubair had disunited the community and
abandoned three of the caliphs before him. They would not
leave Marwan alone and insisted that he comply with them in
that respect. ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad proposed to him: “I will
go to ad-Dahhak for you in Damascus and dissociate from
him and abandon his affairs on your behalf. ” In doing so, he
said that would pay him a visit every day and treat him with
kind companionship so that he might advise him to pursue the
pledge of allegiance for himself and desert Ibn az-Zubair by
saying to him: “You have more right to it than he does, as
obedience to you can ensure peace and security whereas Ibn
az-Zubair is detached from the people. ”
As a result, ad-Dahhak called the people to pledge allegiance
to himself for a period of three days, however, his campaign
was completely rejected. This caused ad-Dahhak to revert to
advocating allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair but this too diminished
him in the eyes of the people. Ibn Ziyad said to him: “Verily,
whoever pursues your aim does not remain in the cities or
fortresses but he should stay in the desert and advocate his
193

claim through the use of soldiers”, and so ad-Dahhak moved
to the desert where he called on the people to pay homage to
himself through his soldiers. It was for this reason that
adDahhak stationed himself in Marj Rahit where he decided
to stay, while Ibn Ziyad was located in Damascus, Marwan
and the Banu Umayyah tribe in Tadmur, and Khalid and
‘Abdullah with their maternal uncle, Hassan, in al-Jabiyah.
It follows that Ibn Ziyad wrote to Marwan instructing him to
announce his claim to the Khilafah publicly, which he did. In
addition to this, he married the mother of Khalid bin Yazeed,
who was also the mother of Hashim and the daughter of
Hashim bin ‘Utbah bin Rabee‘ah and in doing so established
his status.
Following this, the people pledged their allegiance to him and
joined forces with him as they advanced towards Marj Rahit
where ad-Dahhak bin Qais was stationed. At the same time
that ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and his brother ‘Abbad bin Ziyad
were on their way to ad-Dahhak, they met Marwan with his
army of thirteen thousand men, in addition to having Yazeed
bin Abi an-Nims on his side in Damascus. As one of adDahhak’s delegates was on his way back from there, he
crossed paths with Marwan and witnessed the degree of his
weaponry, manpower and fortitude. It is said that at that time,
‘Abdur-Rahman, the son of Ummul-Hakam, was Marwan’s
deputy in Damascus and that Marwan had appointed
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad over the right wing of his army and
‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al-‘As as commander of the left wing.
Ad-Dahhak sent for reinforcements to an-Nu‘man bin
Basheer who extended the people of Hims to him under the
commandership of Shurahbeel bin Dhul-Kala‘, whilst Zufar
bin al-Harith al-Kilabi made his way to him with the people
of Qinnasreen. On account of his allies, ad-Dahhak’s army
comprised of thirty thousand men, with Ziyad bin ‘Amr al‘Uqaili assigned over the right wing and Zakariyya bin
194

Shamir al-Hilali over the left. Eventually, the two armies
clashed in the Battle of Marj Rahit that lasted for a period of
twenty days and during which they engaged in brutal combat
every day. Once the battle had ended, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad
signalled Marwan to use a ploy to beguile the opposition into
going to al-Muwada‘ah by telling him: “Indeed, war is based
on deceit. You and your companions are on the true course
while they are on the false one; you must therefore convey
this to the people. ” Marwan and his men were then able to
trap them into a vulnerable position upon which they carried
out their onslaught. Despite the ability of ad-Dahhak and his
associates to withstand the attack, ad-Dahhak bin Qais was
nevertheless killed as a result of it. The man who allegedly
stabbed him with a spear was called Zuhmah bin ‘Abdullah
from the Bani Kalb tribe who was unaware of who he was
stabbing at the time of impact. Marwan and his associates
continued to fight until the opposition had completely fled
from the battlefield, at which point he shouted: “Do not follow
a schemer! ”He was later brought the head of ad-Dahhak and
it is said that the first person to inform him of his death was
Rawh bin Zinba‘ al-Judhami. In this way, Marwan bin alHakam was able to secure his seat of power in ash-Sham. It is
further narrated that Marwan cried to himself on the day of
Marj Rahit, saying: “Is it that after having become both great
and weak I have been reduced to killing with the sword over
the dominion?”
Ad-Dahhak bin Qais was one of the Sahabah (Companions of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) )
according to authenticnarrations. He narrated a number of
Ahadeeth from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and he was amongst those who participated in the
conquest of Damascus, where he eventually settled.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of al-Hasan that adDahhak bin Qais wrote a letter to al-Haitham at the time of
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah’s death, which read: “Peace be upon
195

you. It follows that I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘Between the two
hands of the clock lies Fitnah (trial, tribulation) like the
twilight of a dark night, Fitnah like smoke which causes the
heart of man to die just as his body dies. A man may wake up
a believer yet be a disbeliever by the evening, or he may spend
the evening as a believer and the morning as a disbeliever.
Indeed, nations sell their principles and faith for a small
worldly price’. Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah has died and you are
our brothers and brethren, therefore do not contest us until we
have resolved the matter for ourselves. ”
This year also witnessed the killing of an-Nu‘man bin Basheer
al-Ansari who was the first infant to be born in al-Madinah
following the Hijrah (migration) to the Ansar (Helpers). At
his birth, his mother carried him in her arms and took him to
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) who supplicatedfor him to be bestowed with wisdom and
gave his mother the good news that he would live a
praiseworthy life, die a martyr and enter Paradise. He
therefore lived a comfortable life in the course of which he
was deputed over al-Koofah by Mu‘awiyah for nine months.
He later went to live in ash-Sham where he occupied the
office of district judge and legislator following Fadalah bin
‘Ubaid.
An-Nu‘man had provided ad-Dahhak bin Qais’ army with
reinforcements from the people of Hims on the occasion of
Marj Rahit and it is said that following the death of ad-Dahhak
bin Qais, an-Nu‘man was killed in a village called Baireen by
a man named Khalid bin Khaliyy al-Kala’i from amongst
them.
One of the things that an-Nu‘man bin Basheer (May Allah be
pleased with him) said was: “Ruin is the work of evil deeds in
times of affliction. ” Al-Haitham bin Malik at-Ta’i reported
that he heard anNu‘man bin Basheer saying as he stood on the
196

pulpit: “I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘Satan has snares and traps,
amongst which is showing ingratitude to Allah’s blessings,
pride concerning His sustenance, arrogance towards His
servants and chasing desires other than for His sake. ’”
From amongst the Hasan (good) and Saheeh (authentic)
Ahadeeth narrated by an-Nu‘man is that he heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) saying: “Both the lawful and unlawful are evident but in
between them there are doubtful (unclear) matters and most
of the people have no knowledge about them. So whoever
saves himself from these doubtful (unclear) things, he saves
his religion and his honour. And whoever indulges in these
doubtful (unclear) things is like a shepherd who grazes (his
animals) near the Hima (private pasture) of someone else and
at any moment he is liable to cross into it. (O people! )
Beware! Every king has a Hima and the Hima of Allah on the
earth is His unlawful (forbidden) things. Beware! There is a
piece of flesh in the body, if it becomes good (reformed), the
whole body becomes good, but if it gets spoilt, the whole body
gets spoilt, and that is the heart. ” (alBukhari and Muslim)
The death of al-Miswar bin Makhramah bin Nawfal, a young
Sahabi also occurred in this year after he was injured with azZubair by the fire cannons as he was standing in prayer in the
Hijr.
In this year, that is, the sixty-fourth year of Hijrah, numerous
wars and tribulations took place and spread across the eastern
lands. A sect of the Shee‘ah was formed by Sulaiman bin
Surad in al-Koofah who threatened to take revenge for alHusain bin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (May Allah be pleased with
him) following his murder in Karbala’ on the day of
‘AShoora’, the 10th al-Muharram, in the sixty-first year. They
felt remorse towards the ones who had gone to al-Husain but
who later betrayed and abandoned him instead of
197

championing his cause upon his arrival in their land. About
this they said:
“You strove to hold on but to no avail. ”

The Destruction and Reconstruction of the
Ka‘bah during the Days of Ibn azZubair
Abu Ja‘far bin Jareer said: “Ibn az-Zubair’s destruction of the
Ka‘bah took place in this year from a fire caused by the
torches that were used during the ballista attack. This quickly
spread to the structure's walls and even to the foundations of
Ibraheem (May Allah be pleased with him) as the people were
circumambulating and praying behind it. The Black Stone
was subsequently placed in a chest lined with silk fabric and
as for the ornaments, garments and other fineries that had
been in the Ka‘bah, they were stored away in a safe until Ibn
az-Zubair had finished rebuilding it in accordance with the
way that the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) had wanted it.
Ibn az-Zubair’s reconstruction of the Ka‘bah, in accordance
with what is stated in the Saheehain and other compilations of
narrations, is based on the authority of ‘A’ishah, Umm ulMu’mineen who narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to her: “Were your
people not close to the period of Ignorance, I would have
demolished the Ka‘bah, and would have included in it alHijr,
that your people (Quraish) ran short of money (so they could
not include it inside the building of
Ka‘bah) ; I would have made for it one door towards the east
and the other towards the west, the people would have entered
in it from one sideand from the other side they would have
come out, and I would have made its door at a level with the
ground and your people raised its door high door to admit into
it whomever they liked and to prevent whomever they liked.
” Thus, Ibn az-Zubair rebuilt it in the way that his maternal
198

aunt, ‘A’ishah, Umm ul-Mu’mineen informed him that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) wanted it – may Allah reward him.
Ibn Jareer says: “‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair led the Hajj
Pilgrimage with the people in this year. He deputed his
brother, ‘Ubaidah over al-Madinah, ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed alKhatmi over al-Koofah and Sa‘eed bin Nimran as its district
judge and legislator-- given that Shuraih refused to occupy the
post during times of Fitnah (tribulation; discord) --‘Umar bin
Ubaidullah bin Ma‘mar at-Taimi over al-Basrah and Hisham
bin Hubairah as its judge and legislator; and ‘Abdullah bin
Khazim over Khurasan. The aforementioned events of Marj
Rahit took place towards the end of this year, resulting in
Marwan bin al-Hakam bin Abul‘As securing the dominion
ofash-Sham after gaining victory over ad-Dahhak and killing
him. It is further said that Marwan entered Egypt and seized
it from its deputy, namely, ‘Abdur-Rahmanbin Jahdam, who
was assigned by Ibn az-Zubair, thereby allowing Marwan and
his associates to assume power over both ash-Sham and
Egypt.

Upon Entering the Sixty-Fifth Year
Approximately 17, 000 people joined in association with
Sulaiman bin Surad, all of whom sought to take revenge on
whoever had killed al-Husain. Sulaiman had delivered a
sermon to them upon their departure from al-Koofah in the
month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal of this year in Nukhailah, wherein
he urged them to undertake Jihad (fighting for Allah’s Cause)
by saying: “Whoever goes out seeking the gold and silk of
this world then we having nothing to offer him. Instead, we
bear swords around our necks, spears in our fists and
provisions that will suffice us until we meet our enemy. ” His
supporters therefore agreed to “hear and obey” under those
circumstances, after which Suliman bin Surad instructed
some of them to target ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and others to
199

attack the heads of the tribes who had killed al-Husain in
alKoofah, such as ‘Umar bin Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas and the
like. However, Sulaiman later retracted these orders and
instead told his army that they should target nobody other than
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, as it was he who assembled and
dispatched the armies against al-Husain and incited the people
to conspire against him. He further refused to negotiate or
accept any requests made by Ibn Ziyad, saying: “Grant him
nothing but the sword”, and it was upon declaring this that he
advanced towards him from ash-Sham to al-‘Iraq with the
people behind him.
It is worth noting here that if this resolution and assembly had
been made before al-Husain ended up in the state that he did,
they could have assisted and benefitted him when he needed
it the most, instead of attempting to do so after four years.
In any case, prior to their departure, everybody refused to
march forth until had they visited al-Husain’s grave and
invoked mercy on him, which led to a crowding of the masses
more than the crowds around the Black Stone. Following this,
they set off towards ash-Sham and as they passed through
Qarqeesiya, Zufar bin al-Harith fortified his position against
them, upon which Sulaiman sent him a message saying: “I do
not intend fighting you, therefore come out to us so that we
might stay with you for a day or so. ” Thus, he complied with
Sulaiman bin Surad’s wishes and said to him: “I was informed
that the people of ashSham had organised an immensely
powerful army in conjunction with Husain bin Numair,
Shurahbeel bin Dhul-Kala‘, Adham bin Muhriz al-Bahali,
Rabee‘ah bin Mukhariq al-Ghanawi and Jabalah bin
‘Abdullah al-Khath‘ami. ” So Sulaiman bin Surad said: “In
Allah we trust as do the Mutawakkiloon (those who depend
and trust in Allah) ”, after which Zufar proposed that they
either enter his city or remain at its border so that should
anyone approach them, they would stand up to them.
However, they refused to accept anything that he said, saying:
200

“Someone from our own country proposed the same thing to
us and we refused him. ” He said: “If you refused that then
hasten to ‘Ain ul-Wardah where the water, city and markets
are all behind you. There is no business between us and you;
you are safe here. ” Then he assured them of his dependability
during wartime whereby he greatly commended Sulaiman bin
Surad and his associates for their efforts and then left. Hence,
Sulaiman bin Surad set off on his journey to ‘Ain ul-Wardah
until he reached its western territories where he stopped and
camped for five days before the arrival of his enemies.

The Event of ‘Ain ul-Wardah
Sulaiman bin Surad and his associates had spent a short period
of respite in ‘Ain ul-Wardah but as the people of ash-Sham
drew nearer, Sulaiman delivered a sermon to his associates in
which he exhorted them towards the Hereafter, disdained their
pleasure in the World and commended the merits of Jihad
(fighting for Allah’s cause). He continued to say: “In the event
that I get killed, your nominated Ameer (Commander) will be
al-Musayyab bin Najabah; if he is killed then it is ‘Abdullah
bin Sa‘d bin Nufail; if he is killed then it is ‘Abdullah bin Wal;
and if he is killed then it is Rifa‘ah bin Shaddad. ” He then
dispatched al-Musayyab bin Najabah with an army of fivehundred horsemen to attack the army of Ibn Dhul-Kala, ‘ who
being unaware of their advance, were caught off-guard. The
outcome was that a small number of them were killed and the
rest wounded. ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad subsequently received
news of this and so he immediately dispatched al-Husain bin
Numair to take the field. Accordingly, Sulaiman bin Surad
and his army encountered him the following morning
standing with an army of twelve thousand men behind him. It
was on a Wednesday, eight days before the end of the month
of Jumadal-Oola, when both sides eventually agreed to
reconcile. The Shamiyyoon (those from ash-Sham) invited
the associates of Sulaiman to submit in obedience to Marwan
bin al-Hakam, while at the same time, the associates of
201

Sulaiman called on the Shamiyyoon to surrender ‘Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad for the murder of al-Husain. In spite of this, both
sides refused to comply with the other’s demands and a grave
battle took place that lasted all day and all night.
By this point, the ‘Iraqiyyoon (those from al-‘Iraq) were
completely surrounded by the Shamiyyeen and so when Ibn
Dhul-Kala‘got up the following day, he discovered that
eighteen thousand horsemen had arrived in his midst. Ibn
Ziyad had vilified and reprimanded him and so on this day the
people clashed in a bitter battle the likes of which no one had
ever witnessed before, not breaking except during prayer
times until the night. When the fighting resumed on the third
day, Adham bin Muhriz had provided assistance to the
Shamiyyeen with ten thousand others and so the battle
commenced on Friday whereby both sides clashed in a severe
battle that lasted until the time of Dhuha (mid-morning
prayer).
Next, the people of ash-Sham turned on the people of al-‘Iraq
until they surrounded them from every angle. At that point,
Sulaiman bin Surad addressed his people and incited them to
undertake Jihad and an intense battle broke out. He then
dismounted his horse and unsheathed his sword, shouting: “O
servants of Allah! Whoever amongst you wants to go to
Paradise, to have his sins pardoned and die by his covenant
then step forth! ”At that instant, masses of people dismounted
their riding animals and unsheathed their swords as he had,
they then marched on foot until they had fully penetrated the
opposition and both sides had become completely drenched
in each other's blood. Sulaiman bin Surad was then killed by
Yazeed bin al-Husain who shot several arrows that hit him,
then missed him, then hit him and so forth until he died. Upon
his death, al-Musayyab bin Najabah raised the banner of war
and waged a brutal attack against the opposition whilst
shouting:
202

“The might of the beasts has become apparent
It is clear in times of turmoil and war
I am braver than the predator that leaps
And seizes its prey from every possible angle. ”
He was subsequently killed in the attack and therefore his son
carried out his father’s will and honoured his comrades by
giving the banner of war to ‘Abdullah bin Sa‘d bin Nufail. He
charged against the opponents with it, saying: “May Allah
bestow His mercy on my brothers, of whom some fulfilled
their oaths while others are waiting to, and they will take
recourse on that for anything! ”At that point, Rabee‘ah bin
Mukhariq launched a dreadful attack against the people of al‘Iraq in which he and ‘Abdullah bin Sa‘d bin Nufail
contended, although the duel came to a draw. Rabee‘ah’s
nephew therefore stepped in to assist his uncle and launched
an attack against ‘Abdullah bin Sa‘d that resulted in his death.
Upon his death, ‘Abdullah bin Wal – who was actually an
official Mufti (authorised to draw and issue Islamic legal
rulings) of jurisprudence – took up the flag, just after they had
observed the ‘Asr (late afternoon) prayer of that day, whilst
inciting the people to Jihad and shouting: “Proceed to Jannah!
”He then organised an attack with his army, however, the men
who were supposed to have defended him split and this
exposed him to the sword of Adham bin Mahriz al-Bahili, the
commander of the Shamiyyeen army, who succeeded in
killing him. Rifa‘ah bin Shaddad was the next to take up the
flag, although he opted to keep his men in seclusion until
darkness emerged and the Shamiyyoon had returned to their
station, while he planned for his remaining soldiers to return
with him to his country.
When the Shamiyyoon prepared for battle the next morning,
they soon discovered that the ‘Iraqiyyoon had retreated and
203

returned to their country, neither leaving behind anyone nor
making any requests from them. Rifa‘ah cut across alKhaboor and passed through Qarqeesiya with those who were
with him where he received food, fodder for the animals and
medical supplies sent by Zufar bin al-Harith. He remained
there for three days during which they recovered and rested
before setting off on their journey again. When they came to
Heet (an area located by the River Euphrates close to
Baghdad), they found that Sa‘d bin Hudhaifah bin al-Yaman
had already departed with those inhabitants of al-Mada’in to
provide reinforcements and assistance to their army. Sa‘d had
heard of their ordeal and of what happened to their army and
so he mourned the death of their companions, invoked
blessings on them, asked for their forgiveness and cried for
their brothers, after which he set out with the people of alMada’in towards them, whilst the people of al-Koofah
returned to their land. A considerable number of the people of
alMada’in were subsequently killed at war.
Al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid remained in prison and it was
from there that he wrote to Rifa‘ah bin Shaddad to pay his
condolences for the men he had lost, invoking mercy on them,
commending those who had upheld their testimonies and
gained immense reward in return. In his letter, he said:
“Salutations upon them whose reward Allah has magnified
and with whom He is surely pleased. By Allah! Not a single
one of them took a step except that Allah granted him a reward
greater that the world itself and everything in it. Indeed,
Sulaiman was rewarded as Allah caused him to die and took
up his soul to be with the souls of the Prophets "Assalam-oAlaikum"the martyrs and the righteous men and women. It
follows that I am the leader al- Ma’moon, fighter against the
cowards and corrupters by the Will of Allah and therefore
return, prepare and rejoice because of it. I call you to the Book
of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) by demanding [recompense
204

for] the blood of the Ahl ul-Bait (family of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ). ”
Much has been said regarding what he meant by this and some
maintain that before their army had proceeded, he informed
the people of their death and destruction according to a vision
that had been revealed to him by the devils. In fact, he claimed
that a devil had gone to him and revealed a vision similar to
the one that was revealed by a devil to Musailimah. Sulaiman
bin Surad’s army later became known as the “Army of the
Repentants. ”
In brief, Sulaiman bin Surad al-Khazraji Abu Mutarrif alKoofi, was a noble, prestigious, devout and spiritual Sahabi.
He narrated Ahadeeth on the authority of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that appear
in the Saheehain and other related books. He also participated
in the Battle of Siffeen alongside ‘Ali.
As for al-Musayyab bin Najabah bin Rabee‘ah al-Fazari, he
set out with Khalid bin Waleed from al-‘Iraq and took part in
the conquest of Damascus. He then returned to al-‘Iraq and
participated with ‘Ali in the Battle of Siffeen and other events.
He was also one of the senior members who went out to claim
requital for the blood of al-Husain (May Allah be pleased with
him).
In this year, Marwan bin al-Hakam and ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed alAshdaq entered Egypt and seized it from the deputy appointed
by ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair, namely, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin
Jahdam.
Marwan further mobilised two armies in this year, the first for
Hubaish bin Dulajah al-Qaini to take to alMadinah and the other for ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad to take to al‘Iraq to challenge the deputyship of Ibn azZubair. While they
were on the road, they encountered the “Army of the
205

Repentants” who had been with Sulaiman bin Surad pursuing
the aforementioned affair at ‘Ain al-Wardah.
Marwan died in the month of Ramadan, the reason for which
was due to his marriage to Umm Khalid, a former wife of
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah, who was known as Umm Hashim
and was the daughter of Hashim bin ‘Utbah bin Rabee‘ah.
Marwan initially wanted to marry her with the intention of
shaming her son, Khalid, in the eyes of the people, as many
people thought that he would attempt to assume power in
succession of his brother, Mu‘awiyah. Marwan therefore
strategically married Khalid’s mother as a means of
undermining him. It so happened that one day, he entered
upon Marwan who was talking about him within his gathering
of companions. Upon taking a seat, Marwan addressed Khalid
by saying: “O son of the succulent backside! ”At that instant,
Khalid left and went straight to his mother to inform her of
what he had said, to which she said: “Keep quiet and do not
let him know that you have told me about it. ” As Marwan
entered upon her later on, he asked: “Has Khalid said anything
bad about me to you today?” She replied: “What reason would
he have to say anything bad about you when he loves you and
looks up to you?” , at which Marwan went to sleep in bed next
to her unaware of the truth. Once he had fallen into a deep
sleep, she picked up a pillow, put it over his face, then put all
her weight on it until she eventually smothered him, and
caused him to die from suffocation. This happened on the
third day of Ramadan of the sixty-fifth year in Damascus
while Marwan was aged sixty-three, or as some have
maintained, aged sixty-one or even eighty-one. His
occupancy of the tenure lasted just nine months, while others
say it was three days short of ten months.

206

The Biography of Marwan bin al-Hakam,
the Patriarch of the Bani Umayyah
(Umayyad) Caliphate that Ruled Thereafter
His name was Marwan bin al-Hakam bin Abul-‘As bin
Umayyah bin ‘Abd Shams and he was affiliated with many
sects given that he was born in the lifetime of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He is mentioned
in the Hadeeth about the Treaty of al-Hudaibiyah, which is
narrated in Saheeh al-Bukhari on the authority of Marwan and
al-Miswar bin Makhramah who heard it from a group of
Sahabah in its entirety.
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan used to honour and show Marwan great
respect so much so that he appointed him as a legal scribe
under his rule. It was during his time in office and because of
him that the affair of ad-Dar (the House) took place during
which ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan was put under siege. The people
insisted that Marwan surrender him, however, ‘Uthman
outright prohibited him from doing so. Because of that,
Marwan fought a tough fight on the day of ad-Dar in which
he killed a number of the Khawarij (Dissenters). He fought on
the left wing of the army in the Battle of Jamal and it is said
that he shot the arrow at Talhah’s knee that ultimately led to
his death -- Allah knows best.
Hanbal said on the authority of Imam Ahmad that Marwan
supposedly occupied a post in the administration of the law,
specifically, during ‘Umar bin al-Khattab’s caliphate. Ibn
Wahb said: “I once heard a ruler talking about Marwan and
he mentioned that Marwan had said: ‘I have been reading the
Book of Allah for forty years to then become involved in the
spilling of blood and this affair. ’”
Ash-Shafi‘i said: “Hatim bin Isma‘eel informed us on the
authority of Ja‘far bin Muhammad who heard it from his
father that al-Hasan and al-Husain prayed behind Marwan,
207

though they did not repeat it and they classed it as a valid
prayer. ”
Tariq bin Shihab is reported to have said: “The first person to
precede the prayer on the day of ‘Eed (Festival) with the
sermon was Marwan and upon doing so a man said to him:
‘You have contradicted the Sunnah’. Marwan therefore
replied: “It had already been abandoned. ” Abu Sa‘eed then
said: “Regarding this, he has judged the matter accordingly. I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) say: ‘Whoever sees something disliked by Allah
then he should change it with his hand; if he is unable to do
that then he should change it with his tongue and if he is still
unable to do that then he should hate it in his heart, and that
is the weakest form of Eeman. ’”
It is said that when he was the deputy of al-Madinah, the
Sahabah would gather around whenever a problem arose and
he would take counsel from them accordingly. It was Marwan
who implemented the rule of See‘an (two-fold dry measure)
as a fairer judgement, which is why it became known as
Sa‘Marwan (the measure of Marwan).
Marwan’s father, al-Hakam, had been one the Prophet’s
staunchest enemies. Nevertheless, he entered the fold of Islam
on the day of the Conquest, after which he moved to alMadinah, however, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) had him expelled to at-Ta’if where he died.
Marwan played a fundamental role in the siege of ‘Uthman
due to his forging of a letter that he then sent to Egypt in
‘Uthman’s name regarding the murder of the delegation.
When Marwan was appointed to a position of authority in alMadinah by Mu‘awiyah, he would insult ‘Ali every Friday on
the pulpit to the point that al-Hasan bin ‘Ali said: “Allah has
cursed your father, al-Hakam, and his progeny. In the words
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him):
208

‘Allah has cursed al-Hakam and his offspring’”-- Allah
knows best.
‘Abdullah bin Abu Madh‘oor said: “Some of the people of
knowledge told me that the last thing Marwan ever said was:
‘Paradise is obligatory on whoever fears the Hellfire’.
Engraved on his ring were the words: ‘All power and might
belongs to Allah. ’”
He died in Damascus at the age of sixty-one, or others say
sixty-three years. On the other hand, Abu Ma‘shar and others
said that at the time of his death he was eighty-one years old.

The Caliphate of ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan
He received the pledge of allegiance during his father’s
lifetime and so when his father passed away on the third day
of Ramadan in the sixty-fifth year, the pledge of allegiance to
him was reaffirmed by the officials of Damascus and Egypt.
In this way, he was able to secure the seat of power that was
previously held by his father who had dispatched two
delegations prior to his death. One of these delegations was
sent with ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad to al-‘Iraq to dispute the
deputyship of Ibn az-Zubair. On its way there, they
encountered the “Army of the Repentants” who had been with
Sulaiman bin Surad at ‘AinulWardah, but who at that point
were pursuing the man who had defeated and killed their
commander and many others amongst them. The second
delegation was sent with Hubaish bin Dulajah to al-Madinah
to eliminate whoever represented Ibn az-Zubair therein.
After the delegation arrived in al-Madinah, they discovered
that Ibn az-Zubair’s deputy, Jabir bin alAswad bin ‘Awf, the son of ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Awf’s
brother, had already fled. The deputy of alBasrah, namely, alHarith bin ‘Abdullah bin Rabee‘ah, had dispatched an army
209

from al-Basrah on behalf of Ibn az-Zubair to advance against
Hubaish bin Dulajah and exile him from al-Madinah. Thus,
when Habaish bin Dulajah heard of their advance, he decided
to go to them himself. In the meantime, Ibn azZubair
posted‘Abbas bin Sahl bin Sa‘d as the deputy of al-Madinah
andordered him to make enquiries about Hubaish and his
army, which he did and was therefore able to precede their
arrival to ar-Rabadhah. There, Yazeed bin Siyah shot an
arrow at Hubaish that proved fatal, in addition to killing some
of Hubaish’s associates, routing the others and laying siege to
five-hundred of them in al-Madinah. After this, they fell
subject to the rule of ‘Abbas bin Sahl who took solace in
killing them and returning the scattered remnants of their
army to ash-Sham.
Ibn Jareer says: “In this year, the might of the Khawarij
intensified in al-Basrah. ” Nafi‘ bin al-Azraq, the chief of the
Khawarij and the chief of the people of al-Basrah, killed
Muslim bin ‘Ubais, the “Knight of the People of al-Basrah. ”
Nafi‘ was subsequently killed by Rabee‘ah as-Saleeti, during
which clash they killed approximately five other commanders
between them, including Qurrah bin Iyas al-Muzani, the
father of Mu‘awiyah and he was a Sahabi. When Nafi‘ bin
Azraq was killed, the Khawarij assigned ‘Ubaidullah bin
Mahooz as their leader who subsequently travelled with them
to al-Mada’in and killed its inhabitants, overthrowing the
Ahwaz and others while seizing the wealth and resources
from al-Yamamah and al-Bahrain. They then went forth to
Asfahan under the commandership of ‘Attab bin Warqa’
arRiyahi where they engaged and routed their armies. When
the Ameer of the Khawarij, Ibn Mahooz was killed, which we
shall elaborate on in more detail, they appointed Qatari bin alFuja’ah as their next Ameer.
The story of their battle with the people of al-Basrah at a place
called Doolab (a place near al-Ahwaz) has been documented
by Ibn Jareer. The Khawarij state was constituted by virtue of
210

the people of 'al-Basrah, who in turn feared the Khawarij’s
infiltration of their city. As such, Ibn az-Zubair sent a message
stipulating the replacement of its deputy, ‘Abdullah bin alHarith, who was renowned in Babbah, with alHarith bin
‘Abdullah bin Abu Rabee‘ah who was renowned in al-Quba‘,
in addition to delegating alMuhallab bin Abi Sufrah al-Azdi
as his official in Khurasan. Hence, when he arrived in alBasrah, the people said to al-Muhallab: “Fighting the
Khawarij is benefiting nobody but yourself. ” So he replied:
“Verily, the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen sent me to Khurasan so I
did not disobey his order. ” The solution of the people of alBasrah was that their former Ameer, al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah
bin Abu Rabee‘ah, should forge a letter to al-Muhallab in Ibn
az-Zubair’s name, ordering him to approach the Khawarij in
order to dissuade them from entering al-Basrah. When the
letter was subsequently read to him, he commanded that the
people of al-Basrah provide financial assistance to his army
at the expense of their Bait ul-Mal (public treasury) so that his
wealth would exceed that of the Khawarij whenever they
decided to make their attack. It is said that they also wrote to
Ibn az-Zubair concerning it, who endorsed their decision and
authorised them to do so. Thus, al-Muhallab courageously
and heroically went out to combat the Khawarij, who
responded to him by equipping themselves with unparalleled
quantities of armour, horses and weaponry.
The Khawarij advanced with great bravery and might into the
turmoil of battle without showing any sign of retreat or
weakness of any sort. Once the location of the battlefield had
been mutually determined, which they supposedly fixed at a
place called Silla or Sillibra, both sides engaged in a lengthy
and vicious battle that they endured with immense
perseverance and fortitude. Al-Muhallab’s army consisted of
approximately three thousand men and it said that the
Khawarij carried out a massive campaign against them, in
which a father neither showed regard for his son nor did
anyone turn around to assist another. The remnants of their
211

beleaguered army were later returned to al-Basrah while alMuhallab was able to get ahead of them to a place high up,
upon which he shouted to them: “Come, O servants of Allah!
” At this point, the three thousand valiant horsemen from his
army gathered before him as he addressed them, saying: “O
people! It might be that Allah, the Sublime, has entrusted
many groups with the ability to defeat their enemy and so only
by bestowing victory on the lesser group were they allowed
to gain the upper-hand. I have never in my life thought any
less of you; you are the horsemen of the metropolis and the
people of victory, and therefore I would never exchange a
single defeated soldier from amongst you for anyone else. I
would not change you except out of madness! ”He then said:
“I have decided that every man amongst you should take
nothing other than ten stones with him and march forward
with us towards their military base. They are now safe and so
their horsemen have gone out in pursuit of your brothers. By
Allah! I do not want their horsemen to return until you have
appropriated their military base and killed their leader! ”
Thus, al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah marched with his army
towards the Khawarij and succeeded in killing a great number
of them, that is, approximately seven thousand people.
‘Ubaidullah bin al-Mahooz killed numerous members of alAzariqah (the name of their particular Khawarij branch),
gaining possession of much of their wealth, while alMuhallab had set aside horses for himself and those who had
returned from their quest to retrieve the defeated soldiers. In
this way they were able to recover some of their defeated
soldiers and the remnants of their army, that were thereafter
taken to Karman and the land of Asbahan. Al-Muhallab
remained in al-Ahwaz until Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair had arrived
in al-Basrah and deposed alHarith bin ‘Abdullah bin Abu
Rabee‘ah therein.
Ibn Jareer says: “Before his death, Marwan bin al-Hakam
instructed his son, Muhammad, to go to alJazeerah -- that was
212

before he had embarked on his journey to Egypt. ”
Muhammad bin Marwan was the father of Marwan al-Himar,
namely, Marwan bin Muhammad bin Marwan, the last caliph
of the Banu Umayyah tribe during whose rule the caliphate
was seized by Abbasiyyoon (Abbasids), which we shall come
to at a later point.
Ibn Jareer goes on to say: “In this year, Ibn az-Zubair
dismissed his brother, ‘Ubaidullah, from holding office in alMadinah and appointed it to his other brother, Mus‘ab. On
that occasion, ‘Ubaidullah gave a speech to the people, in
which he said: ‘Have you not seen what Allah did with the
people of Salih (upon whom be peace) concerning the shecamel worth five-hundred Dirhams?’When his brother heard
of this, he said: ‘Verily, this is vain talk’ and then he dismissed
him. For this reason, Ibn az-Zubair was attributed the name:
Muqawwimun-Naqah (Rectifier of the She-Camel). ”
Ibn Jareer also says: “At the end of the year, Ibn az-Zubair
dismissed ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed al-Khatmi from al-Koofah
and appointed ‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ who was the Ameer of
the Emigrants on the day of al-Harrah after they dissociated
themselves from Yazeed. ”
According to Ibn Jareer: “Al-Basrah witnessed a lethal
outbreak of the plague in this year. ” In contrast to this view,
Ibn al-Jawzi says in al-Muntazam [The Methodology] that
this happened in the sixty-fourth year and it was also said that
this happened in the sixty-ninth year, according to the famous
scholar adhDhahabi and others, they similarly state that the
epidemic mostly effected al-Basrah.
Ibn Jareer says: “In this year, ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair built
the Ka‘bah al-Bait al-Haram (the Sacred House), i. e. he
completed its construction, and in doing so, he inset the Hijr
and gave it two doors, one for entering and the other for
exiting. ”
213

Upon Entering the Sixty-Sixth Year
Al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid ath-Thaqafi al-Kadhdhab
launched an attack in -al-Koofah as revenge for alHusain bin
‘Ali -- it is alleged – expelling ‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ in the
process. The reason for this was that when Sulaiman bin
Surad’s associates returned to al-Koofah defeated, they found
al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid had been imprisoned. As such, he
wrote to them to offer his condolences in addition to
promising them the materialisation of their hopes based on
nothing other than the deception of the Shaitan. In his secret
letter to them, he wrote: “Rejoice, for if I had been let out to
you, I would have unleashed the sword on every one of your
enemies who existed between the east and the west and
amassed them together with the permission of Allah, upon
which I would have exterminated them one by one. May Allah
take care of those who are near to you and make them
righteous, as He does not dissociate anyone except for the
disobedient and rebellious. ”
His letter was read in secret and they replied: “Verily, we want
the same thing as you; therefore when do you want us to help
you break out of prison?” At the same time, he detested the
idea of them getting him out in the face of subjugation to the
deputyship of al-Koofah. Thus, he attempted to mitigate
matters by writing to ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, the
husband of his sister, Safiyyah, who was a righteous woman,
requesting him to appeal for his release from prison to the
deputies of al-Koofah, ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed al-Khatmi and
Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Talhah. Accordingly, Ibn
‘Umar wrote to them on his behalf, although they unable to
reply to his letter in which he wrote: “You are both aware of
the compassion and love that exists between al-Mukhtar and
I based on our family ties and affiliations. I am prepared to
vouch on his behalf before you if you were to set him on his
way. Peace be unto you both. ”
214

Thereupon, they summoned al-Mukhtar in the presence of a
group of his associates for his own security, and ‘Abdullah
bin Yazeed exacted an oath from him that if he treated the
Muslims unjustly or put them to any kind of danger, it would
become incumbent on him to slaughter a thousand camels in
the direction of the Ka‘bah; all of his possessions (comprising
of slaves and free workers) would thereafter fall under their
possession and he would be confined within his own house.
Upon hearing their terms, he started to say: “May Allah damn
them both! As for swearing by Allah, I do not do that as I
consider everything other than taking an oath of disbelief to
be better than that and I will do better than that. With regard
to my slaughtering a thousand camels, I comply. As for
forfeiting my property, I request to be relieved of this charge
as I do not own a single possession. ”
The Shee‘ah (band of adherents) gathered around him until
the number of his associates had increased significantly, at
which point they all pledged their allegiance to him in secret.
Five of his associates in particular had been pursuing his
interests on his behalf and urging the people to give him their
oaths. These were: as-Sa’ib bin Malik al-Ash‘ari, Yazeed bin
Anas, Ahmad bin Sumait, Rifa‘ah bin Shaddad and ‘Abdullah
bin Shaddad al-Jushami. The affair continued to intensify and
grow so momentous that Abdullah bin az-Zubair was forced
to dismiss ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed and Ibraheem bin
Muhammad bin Talhah from al-Koofah. He alternatively
assigned ‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ as its next deputy, while
alHarith bin ‘Abdullah bin Abu Rabee‘ah was posted as the
deputy of al-Basrah.
When ‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ al-Makhzoomi entered alKoofah in the month of Ramadan of the sixty-fifth year, he
addressed the people in a speech in which he said: “Indeed,
the Ameer ul-Mu’mineen is ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair, who
ordered me to deal with you according to the way of ‘Umar
bin al-Khattab and ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan. ” At that point, as215

Sa’ib bin Malik al-‘Ash‘ari stood up and said to him: “We are
not satisfied except with the way of ‘Ali bin Abi Talib to be
adopted in our country. We are neither interested in the way
of ‘Uthman nor the way of ‘Umar and by this, the people
desire nothing other than the best. ” As such, he began to
believe in what some of the Shee‘ah leaders had said and so
he replied: “I will attend to you in the way that you desire. ”
At this point the law administrator, Iyas bin Mudarib al‘Ijli,
went up to Ibn Mutee‘ and said to him : “Is this your reply to
the chiefs among al-Mukhtar’s associates?You are not safe
from al-Mukhtar, therefore summon him and return him to
prison, as my assistants have informed me that he has amassed
forces as if he is planning to launch an attack on a major city.
” ‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ therefore sent Za’idah bin Qadamah
along with another leader to al-Mukhtar to whom they said as
they entered upon him: “The Ameer requires you”, and so
they instructed him to get dressed, saddle his animal and
prepare to be taken away by them. Za’idah bin Qudamah then
read the Verse from the Qur’an (which means): “And
remember when the Disbelievers plotted against you (O
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) to
imprison you, or to kill you, or to persecute you from your
home (i. e. Makkah). ” [al-Anfal, 8:30]
At that point, al-Mukhtar fell to the floor and ordered that a
velvet sheet be placed on him pretending to be sick, saying:
“Inform the Ameer of my condition. ” Following this, they
returned to Ibn Mutee‘and gave him his excuses, which
Mutee‘ believed and accepted.
In the month of al-Muharram of this year, it is alleged alMukhtar decided to embark in pursuit of revenge for alHusain’s murder. His followers advised him against leaving
at that particular time and instead a band of them went forth
to Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyyah to enquire about al-Mukhtar
and what he had called them to do. In brief, he said to them at
their meeting: “Indeed, we do not hate that Allah should grant
216

us victory through whoever He wills amongst His creation. ”
Al-Mukhtar found out about their visit to Muhammad bin alHanafiyyah, which extremely displeased him for fear that
Muhammad bin alHanafiyyah would lie in what he said about
him. In fact, it is alleged that Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyyah
did not permit them to leave without first provoking and
inciting them in the manner of a soothsayer. When they
returned, they informed al-Mukhtar of what Ibn alHanafiyyah had said and this served to fuel his followers’
zealousness to set out with al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid.
Abu Mikhnaf narrates that al-Mukhtar’s chief followers said
to him: “Know that all of al-Koofah’s chiefs on the side of
‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ are hostile towards us, though should
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar anNakha‘i alone pledge allegiance to
you, then he is sufficient for us with regard to all the others. ”
Accordingly, al-Mukhtar sent a delegation out to invite
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar to join them in taking revenge for alHusain by which they reminded him of his father’s preference
of ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him). Ibraheem bin alAshtar replied: “My response to the proposal you put forward
to me is that I should be assigned as head of your affairs. ” In
turn, they said: “That is not possible because the Mahdi
(guided one) who is in charge of this affair has already sent
al-Mukhtar to us as a minister and we are accountable to him”,
to which he made no comment. They then returned to alMukhtar and informed him of what happened and so after
three days of deliberating the matter, al-Mukhtar set out on
his way to him with a delegation of his chief associates. When
al-Mukhtar entered upon Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar he met him
with respect, honoured him and then sat down beside him. He
then invited him to join in association with them, upon which
he took out a letter that he ascribed to Ibn al-Hanafiyyah
calling him to form an alliance with his friends among the
Shee‘ah in order to uphold and assist the family of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) by taking revenge
for al-Husain. Ibraheem bin alAshtar therefore said:
217

“Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah’s letters have already come
to me but of the same nature. ” Al-Mukhtar remarked: “That
was then and this is now. ” So Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar said:
“Who can testify that this is really his letter?” At that point, a
group of al-Mukhtar’s associates stepped forward to declare
it, following which Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar stood up within
the gathering, told al-Mukhtar to remain seated and then
pledged his allegiance to him. To toast the event, he then
ordered that fruits and a honey drink be brought in his honour.
Ash-Sha‘bi (who was present along with his father at the
meeting) said: “When al-Mukhtar left, Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar
said to me: ‘O Sha‘bi! What do think about those who testified
to the letter?’I said: ‘They recite the Qur’an, they are the
chiefs and representatives of their people and I do not believe
that they would testify to other than what they know was true’.
So he said: ‘I have been concealing what really concerns me
about them, but nevertheless I want them to go out and exact
revenge for al-Husain in keeping with the opinion of the
nation. ’”Soon afterwards, Ibraheem began to differ with alMukhtar at his house and with those who complied with him
among his people, after which they agreed upon the view of
the Shee‘ah that they should set out on Thursday night, over
fourteen nights of Rabee‘ul-Awwal of the sixty-sixth year.
Ibn al-Mutee‘ had been notified of the people’s concerns upon
having sought his counsel, because of which he decided to
dispatch law enforcement leaders to every part of al-Koofah
and enjoined on every leader the task of preventing anyone
from leaving his vicinity. It happened that onTuesday night,
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar set out with the intention of paying alMukhtar a visit at his house with a hundred of his men clad in
armour worn underneath their garments. However, on his way
there he encountered Iyas bin Mudarib who asked him:
“Where do you want to go, O Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar, at this
hour?Your affair arouses much suspicion and so, by Allah, I
cannot allow you leave without taking you to the Ameer first
218

so that he can judge what you are up to for himself. ” At that
point, Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar snatched a spear out of one of
the men’s hands standing close by and pierced it through his
throat, causing him to fall to the ground. He then ordered one
of his men to sever his head and so he went to meet alMukhtar with it in his hands, upon which al-Mukhtar said to
him: “Allah has given you glad tidings. Godspeed! ”
Ibraheem then requested al-Mukhtar that he set out on that
very night and so al-Mukhtar gave orders for a fire to be lit
and his associates pronounced the slogans: “O the victorious
who died! O revenge of alHusain! ”
Following their announcement, Shabath bin Rib‘i advanced
against al-Mukhtar in his house, that resulted in a battle
breaking out and al-Mukhtar being put under siege therein
until Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar arrived and got him out. Shabath
then returned to Ibn Mutee‘ and proposed that he should call
a meeting with the leaders and take action, given that alMukhtar had become a serious threat and the situation was
complicated. Meanwhile, close to four thousand Shee‘ah
partisans from all directions had gone to join alMukhtar who
assembled his army the following day after leading them in
the morning prayer in which he recited the Verses (which
mean):
“By those (angels) who pull out (the souls of the
Disbelievers and the wicked) with great violence”
[anNazi‘at, 79:1], and in the second unit: “ (The Prophet
r) frowned and turned away. ” [‘Abasa, 80:1]
Some of those who heard it said: “I have never heard an Imam
(leader of prayer) with a more impeccable pronunciation than
his. ”
At the same time, Ibn Mutee‘ had assembled an army three
thousand strong under the commandership of Shabath bin
Rib‘i and another army of four thousand with Rashid bin Iyas
219

bin Mudarib at its head. On the other side, al-Mukhtar sent
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar amidst six hundred horsemen and six
hundred footmen in the direction of Rashid bin Iyas, while he
sent Nu‘aim bin Hubairah with three hundred horsemen and
six hundred footmen towards Shabath bin Rib‘i. As for
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar, he routed the army of his opponent,
Rashid bin Iyas, who he also killed and then sent news of it to
al-Mukhtar to convey to him the good news. As Nu‘aim bin
Hubairah came into contact with Shabath bin Rib‘i, however,
Shabath was able to defeat and kill him, after which he
pursued al-Mukhtar and succeeded in blockading him. On his
way to al-Mukhtar, Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar was intercepted
by Hassan bin Fa’id al-‘Abasi with his army of approximately
two thousand horsemen from one of Ibn Mutee‘’s defence
detachments, subsequent to which they clashed in battle for
up to an hour. The outcome was Ibraheem’s victory over
Hassan and so he proceeded on his way upon towards alMukhtar to soon discover that Shabath bin Rib‘i had laid siege
to him and his army. This continued to be the case until
Ibraheem was eventually able to oust them out and force them
to retreat. Thus, Ibraheem reached al-Mukhtar and they
subsequently travelled from their location to somewhere
outside al-Koofah, whereupon Ibraheem said to al-Mukhtar:
“Allow us to go to the palace of governorship. ” Since nobody
disputed him, they then loaded up their things for the journey
to sit in the company of the Masha’ikh (Shaykhs, i. e. elders,
religious leaders) and men.
Al-Mukhtar appointed Abu ‘Uthman an-Nahdi as his
successor over those who were present there and then
dispatched Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar ahead of him. In the
meantime, al-Mukhtar mobilised his army as before and
marched towards the palace. In response to that, Ibn Mutee‘
sent out ‘Amr bin alHajjaj with two thousand men, at which
point al-Mukhtardispatched Yazeed bin Anas to deal with
him, while he and Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar went ahead of him
until they entered al-Koofah from the al-Kunasah gateway. In
220

addition to that, Ibn Mutee‘ sent out Shamir bin DhulJawshan (al-Husain’s murderer) with two thousand others,
while al-Mukhtar sent out Sa‘eed bin Munqidh al-Hamadani.
Al-Mukhtar then pursued Shabath’s path to find Nawfal bin
Musahiq bin ‘Abdullah bin Makhramah waiting with five
thousand others. Ibn Mutee‘ subsequently came out of the
palace to the people and appointed Shabath bin Rib‘i as his
successor, at which pointIbraheem made an advancement
against the army of Nawfal bin Musahiq that proved
victorious. He then took up the reins of Ibn Musahiq’s riding
animal that he was especially fond of and let it go with the
intention of spiting Ibn Musahiq so that he would never forget
the name Ibn al-Ashtar.
It follows that al-Mukhtar advanced with his army towards
al-Kunasah where they laid siege to Ibn Mutee‘ within his
palace for three days, along with other nobles like ‘Amr bin
Huraith who were with him. Thus, he was confined within his
house and once Ibn Mutee‘ and his associates were unable to
bear it any longer, they began to consult one another. Shabath
bin Rib‘i proposed that Ibn Mutee‘ take a guarantee of
security for himself and them from al-Mukhtar, regarding
which Ibn Mutee‘ said: “I cannot do this while the Ameer ulMu’mineen is subject to the authority of al-Hijaz and alBasrah. ” Shabath therefore suggested: “I think that you
should go into hiding by yourself until you catch up with your
friend, and when you do, tell him about what is happening and
that we are pursuing his victory and the establishment of his
state. ”
As darkness emerged, Ibn Mutee‘ departed in secret until he
entered the house of Abu Moosa al-Ash‘ari and, as they had
planned, when the people got up the following day, the
leaders took a guarantee for them from Ibn al-Ashtar who
gave them his word. At that point, they came out of the palace
and went to alMukhtar to whom they pledged their allegiance.
Al-Mukhtar then went and entered the palace where he spent
221

the night while the people waited in the mosque and at the
gates of the palace for him to make his appearance.
Accordingly, he went out to the mosque, climbed the pulpit
and delivered an eloquent sermon to the people, following
which he called them to pledge their allegiance, saying: “By
Him who made the sky a canopy for all without exception and
the land a road with many directions. You have not pledged a
more rightly-guided allegiance since your pledge to Ali”,
following which he descended the Minbar and the people
began to enter in allegiance to him based on the Book of
Allah, the Sunnah (Prophetic traditions) of His Messenger and
taking vengeance for al-Husain and the Ahl al-Bait (family of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). A
man then approached al-Mukhtar and informed him that Ibn
Mutee‘ was in the house of Abu Moosa, I think he did not hear
what he said, upon which the man repeated himself three
times, but every time al-Mukhtar appeared not to hear his
speech so the man fell silent. That night, al-Mukhtar sent to
Ibn Mutee‘ a hundred-thousand Dirhams and he said: “Go, for
I have taken your place”, which he did as an act of mercy
because they had been friends prior to this ordeal, and so Ibn
Mutee‘ decided to go to al-Basrah since he despised the idea
of returning to Ibn az-Zubair having been beaten.
Al-Mukhtar gained popularity amongst the people by means
of his good conduct and also because he had granted those
members of his army who fought in battle alongside him a
great deal of wealth from the nine million Dirhams he had in
the Bait al-Mal (Public Treasury). He employed ‘Abdullah
bin Kamil ashShakiri at the head of law enforcement and he
further brought the nobles and people of high-standing
together by organising meetings and gatherings, which
provided reassurance to the patrons who assisted him and
pursued his victory. They said to Abu ‘Amrah Kaisan, the
protector and assistant of ‘Urainah: “Proceed, by Allah, Abu
Ishaq is an ‘Arab and he has abandoned us! ”Abu ‘Amrah
informed him of that, to which he remarked: “On the contrary!
222

They are from me (my people) and I am from them (their
people). ” Then he said (what means): “Verily, We shall exact
retribution from the Mujrimoon (criminals , disbelievers,
polytheists andsinners). ” [As-Sajdah, 32:22]
So Abu ‘Amrah said to them: “Rejoice, as verily he will kill
them and bring you all together”, which pleased them and so
they quietened down.
It follows that al-Mukhtar sent leaders to all corners, cities,
regions and districts of the lands of al-‘Iraq and Khurasan,
raised the flags and banners, determined governorships and
states therein and sat with the people every morning and
evening legislating between them. After having done this for
some time, he then appointed Shuraih as judge over the
people, whereupon a sect of the Shee‘ah demanded an
explanation from him concerning his credibility, saying: “He
testified to Hujr bin ‘Adiyy, he did not meet the requests sent
by Hani’ bin ‘Urwah and ‘Ali bin Abu Talib discharged him
from legislative duty. ” Upon hearing this, Shuraih fell ill and
remained in seclusion within his house, which is why alMukhtar alternatively appointed ‘Abdullah bin ‘Utbah bin
Mas‘ood in his place. He then dismissed him and appointed
‘Abdullah bin Malik at-Ta’i as a judge instead.

223

Chapter
Al-Mukhtar made it his mission to search for al-Husain’s
murderer high and low in pursuit of his death. The reason for
this was that ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad had been deployed by
Marwan from Damascus to penetrate al-Koofah and if he
proved successful then he was to seize it for three days. Ibn
Ziyad therefore embarked on the journey to al-Koofah during
which time he encountered the “Army of the Repentants” in
‘Ain ul-Wardah, as we previously mentioned. It follows that
he continued on his travels until he reached al-Jazeerah (the
Arabian Peninsula) where he found Qais ‘Ailan who were the
defeated supporters of Ibn az-Zubair from the battles of Marj
Rahit and for this reason resented Marwan and his son,
‘Abdul-Malik, after him. Ibn Ziyad was detained for an entire
year because of this encounter, being besieged by Ibn
azZubair’s helpers in al-Jazeerah, subsequent to which he
went to al-Mawsil (Mosul). Upon his arrival, its deputy incharge left for Takreet, immediately after which he wrote to
al-Mukhtar to inform him about it. In response, al-Mukhtar
commissioned Yazeed bin Anas with three thousand other
soldiers of his choice to deal with him, saying: “I will help
224

you with men upon men. ” Yazeed replied: “Do not help me
except by prayer. ”
When news of their departure from al-Koofah reached
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, he mobilised two military
detachments: three thousand under Rabee‘ah bin Mukhariq
and three thousand under ‘Abdullah bin Hamlah. He said:
“Whichever one of you precedes then he will become the
Ameer (Commander) and if you both arrive at the same time
then the choice of Ameer is at the people’s discretion. ” As
such, Rabee‘ah bin Mukhariq went ahead to Yazeed bin Anas
who he met within the outskirts of al-Mawsil near al-Koofah
where they halted with their armies. Yazeed bin Anas had
fallen seriously ill but, in spite of this, he continued to urge
his people to accomplish Jihad (fighting for Allah’s cause)
and he even made a visit to the residential areas on the back
of a donkey, whilst in a terribly feeble state, chanting: “O
lawenforcers of Allah! Be patient and work in the service of
Allah! Fight your enemies and be triumphant! ”
Afterwards, both the right and left wings of their respective
armies underwent a brutal engagement. Warqa’ then launched
an attack on the cavalry unit of the Sham army, which resulted
in their defeat, the fleeing of the Shamiyyoon from the
battlefield and the death of their commander, Rabee‘ah bin
Mukhariq. As al-Mukhtar’s army plundered their military
base, those deserters who had run away returned with a new
Ameer, namely, ‘Abdullah bin Hamlah, who had said to them:
“What has happened to you?” When they told him, however,
he made them go back with him towards Yazeed bin Anas,
who they arrived at later that evening. Thus, they spent the
night there in isolation and it was on the following morning
that both sides got up and assembled their armies; this
happened on the day of al-Adha (Sacrifice) in the sixty-sixth
year. The battle was then fought and the outcome was the
defeat of the Shamiyyoon by al-Mukhtar’s army, who further
succeeded in killing their commander, ‘Abdullah bin Hamlah,
225

seizing their military base and taking three hundred captives
to Yazeed bin Anas, who, on the brink of his death, sentenced
them to execution by beheading. Yazeed bin Anas died that
very same day whereupon his successor, Warqa’ bin ‘Amir,
offered the prayer at his funeral procession and buried him.
Right after his funeral, Yazeed’s associates turned back to
infiltrate al-Koofah.
When news of Yazeed bin Anas’ death and the return of his
army reached the people of al-Koofah they began to spread
false rumours to shake al-Mukhtar by saying: “Yazeed bin
Anas died in battle and his army has been defeated. Soon
enough, Ibn Ziyad will advance against you and when he
does, he will eradicate you and devour your pastures! ”They
then inclined towards ousting out al-Mukhtar, saying: “He is
a grave liar! ”As such, they all conferred to wage war against
him to get rid of him once and for all, regarding which they
said to one another: “He is a grave liar! He prioritised our
slaves over our dignitaries, he claimed that Ibn al-Hanafiyyah
ordered him to take revenge for al-Husain when he said no
such thing and it was in fact al-Mukhtar who said it. ” For
these reasons, the people of al-Koofah anticipated battle, but
not before Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar’s departure from alKoofah, as he had been appointed by al-Mukhtar to advance
with an army of seven thousand against Ibn Ziyad. Therefore,
when Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar set out, those distinguished
individuals who had been part of the army at the time of alHusain’s death, along with others, gathered in the house of
Shabath bin Rib‘i wherein they reached a consensus about
going into battle against al-Mukhtar. Following this, they
called an end to the meeting and every tribe from al-Koofah
subsequently departed in the company of their leader and
headed towards the official palace.
Al-Mukhtar immediately sent word with ‘Amr bin Tawbahto
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar notifying him to make a prompt
return, while in the meantime al-Mukhtar went out to address
226

the people to whom he said: “What are you revolting against?I
have met all your demands”, and he continued to barter with
them in this manner in order to prevent them from rising up
until Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar arrived. As such, he said to them:
“Do you all not believe me concerning Muhammad bin alHanafiyyah?If not, then send someone to him from your side
and I will send someone from mine to question him about it.
” He continued to contest them so much so that when
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar turned up three days later, the people
had become divided into two groups and so al-Mukhtar
attempted to tend to the people of Yemen while Ibraheem bin
al-Ashtar was responsible for the other people, at the head of
whom was Shabath bin Rib‘i. The reason for this was to
prevent Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar from sympathising with his
own people from Yemen whereas al-Mukhtar on the other
hand was particularly stern with them.
It follows that a civil war broke out between the two groups
from al-Koofah who fought for months on end to the point
that it would be too lengthy to recount the details.

The Death of Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan, the
Commander of the Army Detachment
Responsible for Killing al-Husain
The dignitaries of al-Koofah fled to al-Basrah where Mus‘ab
bin az-Zubair was stationed, accompanied by Shamir bin
Dhul-Jawshan (may Allah revile him). Soon afterwards, alMukhtar sent a servant boy (whose name was allegedly Zarbi)
to Shamir, who said to his associates as Zarbi approached
him: “Advance forth and throw me off in your tracks so that
it appears that you have fled from me, in order to deceive this
non-‘Arab infidel. ” Thus, they set off leaving Shamir behind.
However, when Zarbi realised what was happening, Shamir
pretended to befriend him but at the first chance he got, he
struck him a blow from behind and killed him. Leaving
227

Zarbi’s body behind, Shamir wrote a letter to Mus‘ab bin
azZubair who was in al-Basrah, warning him of his advance
towards him and his imminent arrival, as all those who had
fled from Shamir on this occasion had already proceeded
towards Mus‘ab in al-Basrah. It is said that Shamir sent his
message with a non-‘Arab slave whom he had stopped in
nearby village called al-Kaltaniyyah, that was situated by the
river and adjacent to a prominent hill there.
In the course of Zarbi’s journey, he was met by another slave
who asked him: “Where are you going?” He said: “To
Mus‘ab. ” So he asked: “Who sent you?” He replied: “Shamir.
” At that point, the other slave said: “Come with me to my
master”, who happened to be Abu ‘Amrah, al-Mukhtar’s chief
bodyguard who had been sent out in search of Shamir. The
slave therefore took him to Abu ‘Amrah, while in the
meantime, Shamir’s associates advised him to move on from
that particular place. Instead, Shamir remarked: “All this
because of some liar?By Allah! I refuse to move from here for
three days so that I may fill their hearts with terror! ”That
night, Abu ‘Amrah exhorted his army to make haste, put on
their armour and mount their horses, after which they
ambushed Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan and in doing so, took the
blood requital on him by stabbing him with his own spear
while he was naked. He did not cease to give up defending
himself until he was killed and, in fact, when his associates
heard about his death, despite being defeated too, they
exclaimed: “Takbeer! ” (the exhortation “Allahu Akbar”,
meaning “Allah is the Greatest! ”). Al-Mukhtar’s associates
said: “Allahu Akbar! The demon has been killed! ” (may
Allah revile him).
It is said that soon after this, al-Mukhtar gave a speech to his
associates in which he incited them to revolt against the killers
of al-Husain who were living in al-Koofah. Having begun to
pursue his targets in alKoofah, al-Mukhtar had them rounded
up before long and brought to him. He then sentenced them to
228

various forms of execution on account of their specific
crimes, which included burning them to death, severing their
limbs until they bled to death and dropping them from great
heights. Thus, al-Malik bin Basheer was also brought to alMukhtar who said to him: “Are you the one who snatched alHusain’s cloak from him?” He said: “We set out unwillingly,
therefore grant us security. ” Upon hearing that, he ordered
for his hands and legs to be amputated and after having done
so, he was mounted on a horse and made to ride off in
excruciating pain until he died. ‘Abdullah bin Aseed al-Juhani
and others also underwent similar vile executions.

The Death of Khawli bin Yazeed al-Asbahi
Who Struck al-Husain’s Head with His
Sword
Al-Mukhtar sent Abu ‘Amrah, his chief bodyguard, to the
house of Khawli bin Yazeed al-Asbahi, who upon arriving
there interrogated his wife who had come out to them. She
said: “I do not know his whereabouts”, while signalling with
her hand in the direction of the place in which he was hiding.
Her name was al-‘Ayoof bint Malik bin Nahar bin ‘Aqrab alHadrami and she had been angry with her husband since the
night he had presented her with the head of al-Husain, for
which she never ceased to berate him. Hence, they entered
upon him to find him with a wooden vessel over his head, at
which point they carried him away to al-Mukhtar who
instructed him to be put to death in a place close to his house
and then burnt.

The Death of ‘Umar bin Sa‘d bin Abi
Waqqas, the Commander of the Army that
Killed al-Husain
One night, al-Mukhtar said : “Tomorrow, I shall kill a highranking man with hollow eyes and high arched eyebrows,
229

whose death will cause the believers and the Angels to rejoice.
” Al-Haitham bin alAswad, who was present at the time, got
the impression that he was referring to ‘Umar bin Sa‘d and so
he sent his son, al-‘Uryan, to warn him of it. Upon hearing
this, ‘Umar said: “How can this be after we have made a treaty
and pact?” At first, Al-Mukhtar had wanted to portray an
exemplary image of himself to the people upon arriving in alKoofah, and so he had guaranteed ‘Umar bin Sa‘d his safety
except in the event of some mishap.
Abu Mikhnaf says: “According to Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir, alMukhtar wanted to put him in confinement”, which caused
‘Umar bin Sa‘d to feel apprehensive and so he began moving
from place to place until he eventually wound up back home.
When al-Mukhtar found out about him being on the move, he
said: “Certainly not! By Allah, his neck is in chains and he
shall be brought back on his face! If he thinks he can get away
with the blood of al-Husain then he take hold of his feet!
”Thus, he sent Abu ‘Amrah to him, who said when entering
upon him: “Respond to the Commander! ”As ‘Umar got up to
stand, he stumbled over his Jubbah (a long dress-like
garment), at which point Abu ‘Amrah struck him a fatal blow
with his sword. He then severed his head and took it back to
al-Mukhtar who said to ‘Umar’s son, Hafs bin ‘Umar who
was sitting next to him: “Do you know whose head this is?”
After thinking for a short while, he said: “Yes and there is no
good for him after this. ” Al-Mukhtar remarked: “You are
right”, at which point ordered him to be beheaded as well and
for his head to be put with his father’s. He then said: “This is
for al-Husain and that is for ‘Ali bin al-Husain al-Akbar
(referring to the severed heads), but they are no match. By
Allah! Even if I killed every inhabitant of three districts of the
Quraish, they would not even be equal to al-Husain’s
fingertips! ”
This is the context in which the Shee‘ah discovered their
favourite preoccupation, that is, the obsession of taking
230

revenge over the death of al-Husain and his family. There is
no doubt that killing his murders was imperative and that
taking the initiative to do so was favourable, however, it was
Allah’s will that this would be achieved at the hands of alMukhtar, the Liar, who took it upon himself to pursue that
end. As the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said: “Allah may support this religion (i. e. ,
Islam) even with a Fajir (disobedient, evil, wicked) man. ”
Furthermore, Allah, the Sublime, says in His Book, which is
better than any book written by humans: “And thus we do
make the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers) Awliya’
(helpers and friends) of one another in committing crimes,
because of that which they used to earn. ” [al-An‘am, 6:129]
Regarding this, some poets have said:
“There is no hand that the Hand of Allah does not govern
And no oppressor that will not tried with oppression. ”
The allegations of lies and fabrications levied against alMukhtar will be corroborated in the chapter on his biography,
as will the claims he made to have been serving the Ahl ulBait, which he used to pull wool over the eyes of the Shee‘ah
partisans based in al-Koofah. Together, they devised a plan to
establish their own state while opposing and attacking anyone
who challenged them.

231

Chapter
When al-Mukhtar learned that Ibn az-Zubair was losing sleep
over him and that the army of ash-Sham preceding ‘AbdulMalik had targeted him under the commandership of Ibn
Ziyad and many others, alMukhtar began to plot and plan
against Ibn az-Zubair in a bid to subdue him. As a result, he
decided to correspond with Ibn az-Zubair and wrote to him:
“I would have pledged my allegiance to ‘hear and obey’ you
and to offer you my counsel, although when I learned that you
had renounced me, I decided to dissociate myself from you.
Had you complied with the treaty we agreed upon, then I
would have ‘heard and obeyed’ you. ” Notably, al-Mukhtar
kept all his correspondence with Ibn az-Zubair hidden from
the Shee‘ah such that whenever anyone mentioned anything
to do with it to him, he would act unconcerned.
232

When al-Mukhtar’s letter reached Ibn az-Zubair, he wanted to
find out whether what he was saying was the truth or mere lies
and so he summoned ‘Umar bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin alHarith bin Hisham alMakhzoomi to whom he said: “Station
yourself in al-Koofah, as I am appointing you over it. ” ‘Umar
replied: “How can I do this when al-Mukhtar is there?” He
answered: “He claims that he ‘hears and obeys’ us”, following
which he granted him approximately forty thousand Dirhams
to prepare himself. Hence, he embarked on the journey and
upon travelling some of the way he came across Zai’dah bin
Qudamah who had advanced from al-Mukhtar’s side with
approximately five-hundred armed horsemen, in addition to
carrying seventy thousand Dirhams in his possession. AlMukhtar had in fact instructed him by saying: “Give him the
money and if he turns it down then fight him until he
withdraws. ” When ‘Umar bin ‘Abdur-Rahman realised his
earnestness, however, he took possession of the money and
went to alBasrah, where he met up with Ibn Mutee‘ who at
the time was with the commander of al-Basrah, alHarith bin
‘Abdullah bin Abu Rabee‘ah. This took place prior to alMuthanna bin Mukharribah’s unexpected attack, as we
previously mentioned, and before Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair’s
arrival there.
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan sent his paternal cousin, ‘AbdulMalik bin al-Harith bin al-Hakam, at the head of an army to
Wadi al-Qura with the aim of seizing deputyship of alMadinah from Ibn az-Zubair. AlMukhtar wrote to Ibn azZubair saying: “I would like to extend my assistance to you”
, while in reality, his intentions were to cheat and betray him.
Ibn az-Zubair therefore wrote back to him: “If you were to
obey, I would not reject it. In that case, dispatch your soldiers
to Wadi al-Qura to provide assistance to us in the battle
against the Shamiyyoon. ” Thus, al-Mukhtar assembled his
army of around three-thousand strong, amongst whom only
seven hundred were ‘Arab, under the commandership of
Shurahbeel bin Wars al-Hamdani. It was said to him:
233

“Proceed until you enter al-Madinah and when you do so, then
write to me so that I may give you my instructions. ”
However, al-Mukhtar wanted to seize al-Madinah from Ibn
az-Zubair and then go to Makkah to lay siege to him within
its precincts. In fact, Ibn az-Zubair feared that al-Mukhtar was
deploying his army for manipulative purposes and so he sent
al-Abbas bin Sahl bin Sa‘d as-Sa‘idi with a detachment of two
thousand men, ordering him to seek the assistance of the
Bedouin ‘Arabs. In doing so he said to al-‘Abbas: “See if they
obey me, otherwise conspire against them until we annihilate
them. ”
It follows that al-‘Abbas bin Sahl went forth until he
encountered Ibn Wars who was stationed with his army at arRaqeem. They came to an agreement over the access to water,
after which al-‘Abbas said to him: “Do you submit in
obedience to Ibn az-Zubair?” He said: “Of course. He has
instructed us to go to Wadi al-Qura in order to fight with the
Shamiyyeen there. ” So Ibn Wars said to him: “Indeed, I have
not been commissioned with your obedience, rather, I have
been ordered to enter al-Madinah and upon doing so to write
to my companion who gave me the order. ” At this, al-‘Abbas
understood what his intentions were, though he concealed his
realisation so as to not make it obvious to him. Instead he said:
“You are right, therefore do as you see fit. ” ‘Abbas then left
him and his men, after which he sent them large numbers of
camel, sheep and flour, since they had suffered much hunger
before them. Naturally, they began to slaughter and cook the
meat, bake, eat and drink until dark, at which point Abbas bin
Sahl offered to accommodate them for the night. On that very
night, whilst the men were satiated and fatigued, ‘Abbas
decided to take action by attacking and killing their
commander and almost seventy of their men, while taking
many others captive. He later returned just a small number of
the defeated army to alMukhtar in their country.

234

Abu Mikhnaf said: “Yoosuf informed me that as ‘Abbas bin
Sahl entered upon them, he said:
‘I am Ibn Sahl, the tireless knight,
I am magnificent and intrepid when the brave ram turns
coward;
I reach the head of the valiant hero,
With the sword in days of panic till he is beheaded. ’”
When news of their defeat reached al-Mukhtar, he stood up to
address his associates, saying: “The evil Fajir (sinful; corrupt
person) has killed the righteous and good but only because it
was a pre-determined, decreed affair! ”He then sent a message
to Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah with Salih bin Mas‘ood
alKhath‘ami notifying him that he had dispatched an army to
al-Madinah in order to assist him in beguiling Ibn az-Zubair’s
army. He went on to say: “If you think that I should send out
another army to al-Madinah then have a letter delivered to me
in advance and I will comply. ” In response to this, Ibn alHanafiyyah wrote: “In this matter, I desire that all affairs
comply with the utmost obedience to Allah. I obey Allah in
what I keep secret and in what I declare openly, therefore
know that if I wanted to engage in battle, I would find people
coming to my assistance in haste and in great numbers.
However, I stand aloof from them and remain patient until
Allah decrees His judgement for me and He is the Best of
Judges. ” He then said to Salih bin Mas‘ood: “Tell al-Mukhtar
to have Taqwa (fear of and obedience to Allah) and to spare
the spilling of blood. ” Thus, when he Muhammad bin alHanafiyyah’s letter reached him, he said: “Verily, I have
already ordered the enjoining of piety and ease and the
rejection of disbelief and betrayal.
”

235

Chapter
Ibn Jareer says: “In this year, Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar made
the journey to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, which took place
precisely eight days before the end of the month of DhulHajjah. ” Abu Mikhnaf says on the authority of his Mashayikh
(religious leaders; elders): “Al-Mukhtar was expelled from
Jabbanatus-Sabee‘ and the people of al-Kunasah. He then
spent two days with Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar who he
accompanied, prior to dispatching him to the same front that
that he had fought in the battle against the peope of ashSham.
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar set out on the Saturday, eight days
before the end of Dhul-Hijjah of the sixty-sixth year, on which
occasion al-Mukhtar personally escorted Ibraheem in order to
entrust him in the presence of his associates. Al-Mukhtar then
set out with them, as ‘the chair of al-Mukhtar’ was carried on
the back of a grey mule, which they took as a means of
seeking assistance and evoking victory over their enemies.
Once al-Mukhtar had entrusted Ibraheem with three duties, he
236

turned back saying: ‘O Ibn al-Ashtar! Have Taqwa (fear of
and obedience to Allah) in what you conceal inside and
declare openly; Godspeed and hasten towards your enemies
in battle; and remain with the protectors of the seat who are
travelling with you’. Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar therefore started
saying: ‘O Allah! Do not admonish us for what the fools
amongst us have done in keeping with the way of the Banu
Isra’eel (Children of Israel). By Him in Whose Hand is my
soul, they devote oneself to the worship of calf’. It turned out
that once he and his associates crossed the arched bridge, the
bearers of the chair turned away and withdrew.
The reason for the adoption of this seat is mentioned by Tufail
bin Ja‘dah bin Hubairah who said: ‘One day as I was issuing
papers, I passed by the door of a man when he came running
out to me with a chair that he had ridden on that was extremely
filthy. It occurred to me at that point that I should say
something to him about it and so I returned to my place and
sent him a message requesting for him to send me the chair,
which he did. I then gave it to al-Mukhtar, to whom I said: ‘I
have been concealing something from you that I now feel I
should disclose to you’. He asked: ‘What is it?’I said: ‘A chair
that Ja‘dah bin Hubairah used to sit on and it was as if he
considered it to contain some special knowledge’. AlMukhtar then exclaimed: ‘Subhanallah (Glorified is Allah)
that you did not leave it any later than today to tell me! Bring
it to me this instant! ’So I took it to him and having cleaned it
beforehand, this caused a rare ‘Ood (a type of wood) its wood
had been drinking oil. He then instructed me to give twelve
thousand Dirhams then call the people to congregate for the
Salat (prayer) during which he addressed them, saying: ‘There
was not an affair of the past communities except that this
community has had to deal with something similar to it. The
Banu Isra’eel (Children of Israel) had the Ark of the Covenant
that they used to seek help from, and this (i. e. the chair) is
like that for us’. At that point, the Sab‘iyyah (the adherents of
‘Abdullah bin Saba’ who alleged that ‘Ali (May Allah be
237

pleased with him) was first a prophet and then went as far as
to claim he was a god) raised their hands and exclaimed
‘Takbeer! ’ (exhorting ‘Allahu Akbar’ meaning: Allah is the
Greatest! ) three times. At that point, Shabath bin Rib‘i stood
up and rebuked the people almost to the point of declaring that
whoever glorified the chair would be an apostate. He then
suggested that it should be smashed to pieces, taken from the
mosque and thrown out with the rubbish, for which the people
later thanked him. ”
According to sources, after ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad had drawn
near, al-Mukhtar went forth with Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar with
the chair carried on the back of a grey mule wrapped in silk
cloth, with seven men standing to its right and seven men to
its left. When they eventually came face to face with the
Shamiyyoon (as we shall come to), on which occasion the
Shamiyyoon were defeated and Ibn Ziyad was killed, alMukhtar’s supporters attached a special significance to this
chair that ultimately led themto committing Shirk (associating
partners with Allah; idolatry). With regard to this, at-Tufail
bin Ja‘dah (who had given the chair to al-Mukhtar in the first
place) later said: “To Allah we belong and to Him we shall
return; I certainly regret what I have done”, as the more he
spoke to people about the chair, the worse they had to say
about it. Thus, he went away and was never seen again after
that.
Al-Waqidi says: “In this year, the plague struck Egypt, killing
a high percentage of the population. ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin
Marwan also introduced coinage pressing for the Deenar in
Egypt and in doing so became the first person to ever do this.
” Sources also report that ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan
commenced with the construction of the dome on top of the
Baitul-Maqdis (in Jerusalem) and the building of the Masjid
ul-Aqsa (in Jerusalem) itself.

238

When ‘Abdul-Malik determined that he wanted to embark on
these projects, he travelled from Damascus to the BaitulMaqdis with money and labourers where he assigned the
project to Raja’ bin Haiwah, with Yazeed bin Salam as his
respective supervisor. As such, he rounded up builders and
engineers and ordered them to sketch an image of the dome
for him in the courtyard of the Masjid, which he was pleased
with upon its presentation to him. He then allocated the
money to the construction of a building with an eastern dome
and courtyard, and instructed Raja’ bin Haiwah and Yazeed
to spend the money on whatever they considered necessary
and to not hold back in doing so. Accordingly, they covered
all expenditures and even went beyond what was allocated to
them, which facilitated the successful construction of the
dome that continues to stand until today. In the direction of
the Qiblah (facing Makkah), they built seven domes and
placed the point of the Qiblah in the centre of the pulpit that
is still used today. Upon completion of the dome, they erected
two canopies, one made of red felt for the winter and the other
from skin for the summer. The Rock was then enclosed by a
parapet made of Indian oak inlaid with jade behind silk
brocade hung between the pillars. On Mondays and
Thursdays, the keepers would perfume it with musk,
ambergris and saffron in large quantities that would last until
the night, following which the workers would enter the baths
to wash and perfume their bodies, wear embroidered clothes
and fasten their waists with golden belts. They would then
burn incense in embers made of gold and silver containing
rich Misk (musk) and ‘Ood (fragrance) extracted from a
variety of turtledove. After this, they would draw the curtains
open to allow these frangrances to diffuse throughout the
whole city, at which point the public cryer would call: “The
Rock has now been opened, therefore, whoever wishes to visit
it may come forth. ” The people would then hasten without
delay to enter and pray inside it, after which they would leave.
Whoever smelt its incense would say: “This was a day in the
Rock. ”
239

Upon Entering the Sixty-Seventh Year
This year witnessed the death of ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyadat the
hands of Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar an-Nakha‘i after Ibraheem
bin al-Ashtar had departed from al-Koofah on the Saturday,
eight days before the end of Dhul-Hijjah of the previous year.
The sixty-seventh year therefore commenced with his journey
to Ibn Ziyad in the land of al-Mawsil (Mosul) where they later
met in a place called al-Khazir, five Farasikh (a measure of
length; parasang) from the city of al-Mawsil. That night,
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar spent the entire night awake, not
closing his eyes to sleep for a second, and then when it was
almost morning, he got up and gradually mobilised his army
while walking on foot to the peak of the hill until he was able
to obtain a view of Ibn Ziyad’s army. From there, he saw that
no one within the army was about and so at that very instant,
he and his army immediately armed themselves and mounted
their horses. Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar then rode off on his horse
and started waving the flags ofvarious tribes while spurring
them on to attack Ibn Ziyad, saying: “This is the murderer of
the grandson of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) ! Allah has brought him to you and
facilitated this day for you; therefore, you must seize it!
Indeed, he did to the grandson of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) what even Fir‘awn did not
do to the Banu Isra‘eel! This Ibn Ziyad is the murderer of alHusain who made the water of the River Euphrates
inaccessible for him, his wives and children to drink, who
forbade him from withdrawing to his country or from Yazeed
bin Mu‘awiyah until after his death. Relieve your chests of
him by soaking your spears and swords in his blood! This is
the one who did what he did to the family of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Allah has
brought him before you. . . ” and he carried on in this fashion
until he dismounted his horse under his banner.

240

Ibn Ziyad advanced closer with the backing of a dense army,
with Husain bin Numair commanding the right wing and
‘Umair bin al-Hubab as-Sulami commanding the left wing.
He had agreed to meet Ibn alAshtar and threatened that his
people would be defeated by the following day. Shurahbeel
bin Dhul-Kala‘ rode the horse of Ibn Ziyad while Ibn Ziyad
walked on foot with them, whereupon the two sides did not
engage in battle until after the right wing of Husain bin
Numair’s army defeated the left wing of the people of al-‘Iraq.
Their commander, ‘Ali bin Malik al-Jushami, was killed and
his son, Muhammad bin ‘Ali, picked up his banner following
his death but was also killed soon after. The left wing of Ibn
Ziyad’s army then turned back to depart, upon which
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar began to shout: “Come to me, O law
enforcers of Allah! I am Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar! ”He then
uncovered his head so that they could see him for themselves
and upon doing so they drew close to him and began to feel
favourable disposed to him until they joined with him. The
right wing detachment of al-Koofah thereafter lauched an
attack on the left wing detachment of ash-Sham, which
resulted in the defeat of people of ash-Sham who, it is alleged,
then united with Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar. He subsequently
launched an attack with his combined forces and said to the
bearer of his banner: “Enter their ranks with your banner! ”
On that day, Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar fought a brutal battle to
such a degree that he did not strike anyone with his sword
without bringing him to the ground and thus, he increased the
death toll among the people of ash-Sham’s left wing
significantly. They held their ground and fought severely, first
with spears and then with swords, following which Ibraheem
bin al-Ashtar brought the offensive to an end by defeating the
army of ash-Sham and then slaughtering them like lambs. He
then placed the remainder of their army under his authority,
whilst ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad on the other chose to stand his
ground until Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar passed by him and killed
him without knowing it was actually him. He therefore
241

instructed to his associates: “Search for the man whose death
will diffuse the smell of misk (musk) to me by striking him
with the sword and whose arms will then be sent east and his
legs sent west”, while standing under his flag on the banks of
the Khazir river. Following this, they went out in search of
him and after a short while were able to retrieve the body of
Ubaidullah bin Ziyad which they took back to Ibraheem bin
alAshtar, who then struck him with his sword and severed him
in two. He then amputated his head and sent it to al-Mukhtar
in al-Koofah with news of his defeat and victory over the
people of ash-Sham. Furthermore, he killed the chiefs of ashSham, including Husain bin Numair and Shurahbeel bin
DhulKala‘, that resulted in the people of ash-Sham being
placed under the command of al-Koofayyoon (people from alKoofah) who killed a considerable number of them even
though a great number of them had already drowned. They
also seized their wealth and horses from their military base.
Abu Ahmad al-Hakim says: “‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad was
killed on the day of ‘AShoora’ (tenth days of Muharram) in
the sixty-sixth year. ”

242

The Biography of Ibn Ziyad
His name was ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad bin ‘Ubaid, though he
was best known as Ibn Ziyad bin Abu Sufyan. At times he
was called Ziyad bin Abeehi (Ziyad the son of his father) or
Ibn Sumayyah (the son of Sumayyah). He was the
Commander of al-‘Iraq after his father, Ziyad.
Ibn ‘Asakir narratesthat Mu‘awiyah wrote to Ibn Ziyad
requesting him to depute his son to him on a delegation. Upon
his arrival, Mu‘awiyah did not raise any particular issue but
merely engaged in ordinary conversation with him and then
began to question him about some poetry that he knew
nothing about. As such, Mu‘awiyah asked him: “Who
prevented you from learning poetry?” His reply was: “O
Ameer alMu’mineen! I despise mixing the Words of arRahman (the Merciful, one of the ninety-nine names of Allah)
with the words of ash-Shaitan (Satan). ”
One day, Mu‘awiyah asked the people al-Basrah about Ibn
Ziyad, to which they replied: “He is charming but speaks
ungrammatical Arabic. ” So he said: “Does speaking
ungrammatical Arabic not make him more charming?” Ibn
Qutaibah and others have said that the people would like it
when he spoke that way, i. e. in riddles. He would deliberately
speak that way, according to the poet who said:
“Grand utterance is occasionally mistaken
And the best of speech is that which is mistaken. ”
It is said that the people would want him to speak in the
manner of the non-Arabs, while others say that they wanted
him to speak incorrect Arabic, which is more likely to be the
case -- Allah knows best.

243

When Ziyad died in the fifty-third year, Mu‘awiyah appointed
Samurah bin Jundub over al-Basrah for a year and a half, after
which he dismissed him and alternatively appointed
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin Ghailan bin Salamah for six months.
He then dismissed him and appointed Ibn Ziyad in the fiftyfifth year. Later when Yazeed assumed the Khilafah, he
united al-Basrah and al-Koofah, subsequent to which he built
the Baida’ ( a building located in al-Basrah) within his official
headquarters, the door of which he made white like the one
on the palace of Kisra (Khosrau; designation of the Persian
kings in general). He also built the Hamra’ (the Red House)
on the road where they would stop to water the animals, where
he would spend the winter, while spending the summer in the
Baida’.
Sources report that a man once went to Ibn Ziyad and said:
“May Allah make the Ameer more fitting! My wife has died
and I desire to marry her mother. ” So he said to him: “How
much did they give you at the administrative office?” He
answered: “Seven hundred. ” So he said: “O boy! Take away
four hundred from what he was given. ” Then he said: “Due
to your understanding of legal rulings, or the lack of it in your
case, this three hundred (that is left) suffices you!”
Yahya bin Ma‘een says: “Ibn Ziyad ordered Safwan bin
Muhriz to put a Dirham on the ground, which was then stolen
and so Ibn Ziyad said regarding it: ‘It might be a good thing’.
Safwan, however, turned around to the people and said: ‘How
can this be good?’When this reached Ibn Ziyad, he ordered
that Safwan receive an extra two thousand Dirhams. This two
thousand then became four thousand, which, as Ibn Ziyad had
said, turned out to be a good thing in the end.
Ibn Ziyad was somewhat heedless in the sense that he was
inclined to do impermissible and unlawful acts. Both Abu
Ya‘la and Muslim verify a Hadeeth on the authority of
Shaiban bin Farrookh who heard it from Jareer who heard it
244

from al-Hasan that ‘A’idh bin ‘Amr entered upon ‘Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad and said: “O my son! I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘The
worst of guardians are those who are cruel. Beware lest you
be one of them’. So he said to him: ‘Sit down, you are no more
than one of the chaff of the Companions of the Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ’. So he said:
‘Were there chaff amongst them?Rather, the chaff came after
them and among people other than them. ’” It is also narrated
by al-Hasan that ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad entered upon Ma‘qil
bin Yasar who said: “Any man to whom Allah has given the
authority of ruling over people and he does not look after them
in an honest manner will never attain even the scent of
Paradise. ” Another narration reports that when Ma‘qil died,
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad prayed at his funeral, though he did not
attend his burial but instead asked to be excused from it, nor
did he present anything as a gift or offering but instead he rode
off to his palace.
Abu Sulaiman bin Zabr says: “In the sixty-sixth year, it is said
that ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and Husain bin
Numair were killed under the orders of Ibraheem bin alAshtar who sent their severed heads to alMukhtar, who then sent them to Ibn az-Zubair who put them
on public display in Makkah and alMadinah. ” The same
report is given by Ibn ‘Asakir on the authority of Abu Ahmad
al-Hakim and others who say that this happened in the sixtyseventh year in keeping with Ibn Jareer’s account and others.
However, he states that it is unlikely that their heads were sent
to Ibn az-Zubair in this year due to the manifestation and
intensification of hostility between al-Mukhtar and Ibn azZubair that took place in this year as we previously
mentioned. Shortly afterwards, Ibn az-Zubair ordered his
brother, Mus‘ab, to travel from al-Basrah to al-Koofah to lay
siege to al-Mukhtar and fight against him – and Allah knows
best.
245

The Murder of Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid
ath-Thaqafi al-Kadhdhab (the Liar) at the
Hands of Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair and the
People of al-Basrah
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair discharged al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah
bin Abu Rabee‘ah al-Makhzoomi from the office of
deputyship in al-Basrah this year and appointed his brother,
Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair, who was entrusted with suppressing
al-Mukhtar as a threat. When Mus‘ab advanced towards alBasrah, he entered it under a veil and headed straight for the
pulpit, which he ascended and thereby said to the people: “An
Ameer, an Ameer! ”Then he lifted the veil from his head, at
which point the people recognised him and so drew closer to
him. Once they had gathered around him, he opened his
speech with the Verse from alQasas (which means):
“Verily, Fir‘awn (Pharaoh) exalted himself in the land and
made its people sects. ” [28:4], pointing with his hand in the
direction of ash-Sham or al-Koofah. He then said:
“And we wished to do a favour to those who were weak (and
oppressed) in the land, ” [ibid: 5] and he pointed to al-Hijaz.
After that he went on the say: “O people of al-Basrah! I have
been informed that you ascribed names to your leaders and so
I have nicknamed myself al-Jazzar (the Butcher). ” The
people then gladfully joined in association with him.
When the people of al-Koofah were defeated after having
gone out against al-Mukhtar, he killed whoever amongst them
had slain his own. He then set off to meet Ibn al-Ashtar upon
hearing that Ibn Ziyad was dead, while the enemies who
remained in al-Koofah plundered the city in his absence and
then fled to alBasrah from him on account of his lack of
religion and his disbelief, as he made claims to receive divine
inspiration, and because he favoured the slaves over nobility.
246

Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar had resolved that once he had killed
Ibn Ziyad and occupied his respective regions, he would take
control of them himself and humiliate al-Mukhtar. Mus‘ab
had been hoping for this and so he sent a message with
Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath bin Qais to al-Muhallab bin Abu
Sufrah, who was their deputy in Khurasan, to accumulate a
great deal of wealth, forces and equipment. This caused the
people of al-Basrah to rejoice and spur on Mus‘ab who then
mobilised the people of al-Basrah and their followers amongst
the people of al-Koofah to undertake a military and naval
expedition against al-Koofah.
Mus‘ab dispatched ‘Abbad bin al-Husain with the first
detachment whilst appointing ‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah bin
Ma‘mar at the head of his right wing and al-Muhallab bin Abu
Sufrah at the head of his left wing. The chiefs arranged their
banners and tribes, such as those of Malik bin Misma‘, AlAhnaf bin Qais, Ziyad bin ‘Umar, Qais bin al-Haitham and
others. In the meantime, al-Mukhtar set out with his army,
stopping at al-Madhar (a metropolis between Wasit and alBasrah) having assigned Abu Kamil ashShakiri to the
frontline, ‘Abdullah bin Kamil at the head of the right wing,
‘Abdullah bin Wahb alJushami at the head of the left wing
and putting Wazeer bin ‘Abdullah as-Salooli in charge of
cavalry and his chief law enforcer, Abu ‘Amrah, in charge of
the partisans. He then delivered a sermon to the people,
motivating and prompting them to advance forth, and so he
dispatched his armies as he and a number of his associates
made supplications and declared an imminent victory as they
were mounted on their horses. When Mus‘ab had almost
reached al-Koofah, he was intercepted by al-Mukhtar’s
cavalry detachments who were attacked by az-Zubair’s
horsemen and al-Mukhtar’s detachments did not last long
before they were forced to flee the battlefield in their defense,
during which a number of chief leaders as well as many of the
foolish Shee‘ah were killed. The outcome of the battle was alMukhtar’s defeat.
247

Mus‘ab had eliminated a significant portion of al-Mukhtar’s
detachments while taking a further fivehundred of them
captive, whom he later had beheaded all in the same day.
Mus‘ab’s associate, Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath bin Qais, was
also killed amidst the fighting. It follows that Mus‘ab later
demanded that al-Mukhtar’s hand be amputated and nailed to
the side of the mosque where it remained until al-Hajjaj’s
arrival there. Upon enquiring about it, it was said to him: “It
is the palm of al-Mukhtar”, upon which al-Hajjaj ordered for
it to be removed due to the fact that al-Mukhtar belonged to
the same tribe as him and because it served to distinguish alMukhtar as the liar. Al-Hajjaj later took revenge on Ibn azZubair for his death by having him killed and crucified for
months.

The Biography of al-Mukhtar bin Abu
‘Ubaid, the Liar
His name was al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid bin Mas‘ood bin
‘Amr bin ‘Umair bin ‘Awf bin ‘Uqdah bin Ghiyarah bin ‘Awf
bin Thaqeef ath-Thaqafi. His father embraced Islam during
the lifetime of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), although he never saw him and for that reason he
is not classified by most people as one of the Companions of
theProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). On
the other hand, Ibn Atheer does refer to him as having been a
Sahabah in his book UsdulGhabah.
Al-Mukhtar would openly praise Ibn az-Zubair and insult him
in private, just as he would also praise Muhammad Ibn alHanafiyyah and call to him, which he continued to do until he
was able to seize alKoofah by means of partisanship and
advocating revenge for al-Husain. It was based on these
motives that he appealed to a considerable number of Shee‘ah
partisans who supported him in taking up resistance against
Ibn az-Zubair’s deputyship over al-Koofah, deposing his
designated official and establishing the seat of power for
248

himself therein. Having done all this he, he later wrote to Ibn
az-Zubair apologising to him and notifying him that Ibn
Mutee‘ was a collaborator for the Banu Umayyah tribe. He
further stated that he had left al-Koofah and that he and
whoever was with him had submitted in obedience to him,
which Ibn az-Zubair believed, given that he declared it before
the people on the pulpit while delivering a Friday sermon.
Following this, however, he began to pursue al-Husain’s
killers and whoever fought on Ibn Ziyad’s side during the
battle of Karbala’. As such, he killed a great number of them
and vanquished the senior chiefs amongst them, including
‘Umar bin Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas who was the commander of
the army that killed al-Husain, Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan, the
commander of the thousand who turned back to kill alHusain, Sinan bin Abu Anas, Khawli bin Yazeed al-Asbahi
and many more. Consequently, al-Mukhtar felt that he had
now secured his rule, as he thought he no longer had any
enemies or contesters to challenge it and that is why he
decided to reveal his trickery and deception to Ibn az-Zubair,
who in turn delegated his brother, Mus‘ab, as the commander
of al-‘Iraq.
Hence, Mus‘ab travelled to al-Basrah where the people joined
forces with him while various delegations from al-Koofah
also went to see him. Al-Mukhtar’s complacency did not last
long as it was cut short when Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair travelled
to him from al-Basrah with an enormous army and laid siege
to him in al-Koofah. This continued until Allah facilitated alMukhtar’s assassination and beheading, following which his
hand was nailed to the door of the mosque as stated
previously.
It follows that al-Mukhtar’s state inevitably ceased to exist, as
did the rest, which gave the Muslims a great deal to rejoice
about given that he was an untrustworthy person in every
249

way; in fact, he was a liar and a soothsayer who claimed that
inspiration was revealed to him through Jibreel (Gabriel).
Rifa‘ah bin Shaddad is reported to have said: “I used to tend
to al-Mukhtar’s affairs, although when I learned of his lying I
wanted nothing more than to stretch out my sword and slit his
throat. ” It was also narrated that Rifa‘ah bin Shaddad said:
“Were it not for something that I heard from ‘Amr bin alHamiq, I would have separated the head of al-Mukhtar from
his body. I heard ‘Amr saying: ‘The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: ‘If a man
trusts someone with his life and then he kills him, he will carry
a banner of treachery on the Day of Resurrection. ’” (anNasa’i and Ibn Majah on the authority of ‘Abdul-Malik bin
‘Umair)
Muslim narrates in his Saheeh on the authority of Asma’ bint
Abu Bakr that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: “Among Thaqeef there will be a
liar and a great slaughterer. ” The scholars maintain that “the
Liar” refers to al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid for his display of
partisanship and affiliation with soothsaying after having told
his confidantes in secret that he had received revelation.

250

Chapter
Once Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair had established his authority in
al-Koofah, he sent for Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar who at the same
time had been summoned by ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan.
Confused as to what he should do, Ibraheem consulted his
associates on the matter and it was decided that he should go
to his home country, i. e. al-Koofah. Accordingly, Ibraheem
bin al-Ashtar travelled to Mus‘ab bin az-Zubayr who showed
him a great deal of respect, honour and hospitality. Mus‘ab
then dispatched al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah to al-Mawsil
(Mosul), al-Jazeerah (Gulf), Adharbeejan (Azerbaijan) and
Armeeniyah (Armenia) after having appointed ‘Ubaidullah
bin ‘Abdullah bin Ma‘mar, who resided in al-Koofah, as his
successor over al-Basrah during his absence.
This year passed with ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair’s dismissal of
his brother Mus‘ab from al-Basrah, to which he then
appointed to his son, Hamzah bin ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair,
who was a particularly zealous, generous and spontaneous
person so much so that he would at times give until nothing
else remained in his possession, while at others he would
withhold like no one had withheld before; because of this, he
was considered hasty, inconsistent and unpredictable. Thus,
Al-Ahnaf wrote to ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair who subsequently
dismissed Hamzah for the aforementioned reasons and
reinstated Mus‘ab, whose authority therefore extended over
al-Basrah and al-Koofah, which he had already been in his
charge. As a result, Hamzah bin ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair
251

allegedly departed from al-Basrah with a vast amount of
wealth from the Baitul-Mal (Public Treasury), upon which
Malik bin Misma‘ said to him: “We cannot allow you to leave
with our capital ”, and ‘Ubaidullah bin Ma‘mar told him that
he would have to reimburse the money and then prohibited
him from going. In spite of this, Hamzah took off with the
money, though he did not have the audacity to return to his
father in Makkah and so he diverted his route to al-Madinah
instead where he entrusted the money to some of the men
there. Unfortunately for him, all these men squandered the
money he had entrusted to them with and even repudiated
him, except for one man from the Ahlul-Kitab (People of the
Book, i. e. followers of the prophets Moosa and ‘Eesa (Peace
be upon them) ; Jews and Christians) who had taken an oath
of trust to him. When news of what Hamzah had done reached
his father, he said: “May Allah vanquish him! I had hopes that
he would become the pride of the Banu Marwan”, after which
he disowned him.
Abu Mikhnaf mentions that Hamzah bin ‘Abdullah bin azZubair was assigned authority over al-Basrah for a whole year
– Allah knows best.

Amongst the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year
Al-Waleed bin ‘Uqbah bin Abi Mu‘ait and Abul-Jahm, who
was the man who owned the woollen garment mentioned in
the Saheeh Hadeeth. Many more were killed although the list
is too extensive to name them all.

Upon Entering the Sixty-Eighth Year
‘Abdullah reinstated his brother, Mus‘ab, to office in alBasrah where he then resided, while appointing al-Harith bin
‘Abdullah bin Abu Rabee‘ah al-Makhzoomi (nicknamed
“Quba‘ meaning : to grunt”) over al-Koofah and Jabir bin al252

Aswad Az-Zuhri over al-Madinah after having dismissed
‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Ash‘ath, who was also flogged sixty
lashes by Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab for not pledging allegiance
to Ibn az-Zubair. The emperor of ar-Room, Qustanteen bin
Qustanteen (Constantine II) also died in this year in his land
during the battle of al-Azariqah.
Mus‘ab had dismissed al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah from
Persia, which he had conquered, and appointed him over alJazeerah and Adhrabeejan (Azerbaijan) wherein he also
succeeded in triumphing over alAzariqah (a sect of the
Khawarij). ‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah bin Ma‘mar was
alternatively appointed over Persia, though the people
revolted against him and so he turned on them with the sword
and beat them.
The people of Persia had previously been led by their
commander, az-Zubair bin al-Mahooz, who they had
abandoned on the battlefield of Istakhra but he later caught up
with them and killed a vast number of them. On another
occasion, they killed az-Zubair bin al-Mahooz’s son, causing
him to rout their army once again, though this time they fled
to the land of Asbahan (Isfahan) and the surrounding areas.
There they reinforced themselves and enhanced their
numbers, which enabled them to advance upon al-Basrah
while passing through some of the Persian lands, leaving
‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah bin Ma‘mar behind. When Mus‘ab
heard of their advance, he stood up before the people and
started blaming ‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah for allowing them to
mobilise an army in his land to advance against al-Basrah.
‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah had followed them in their tracks and
so when the Khawarij heard that Mus‘ab was ahead of them
and ‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah was behind them, they diverted to
al-Mada’in where they began to murder their women and
children, slitting open the bellies of pregnant women and
committing other despicable acts and atrocities. Thus, the
deputy of al-Koofah, al-Harith bin Abu Rabee‘ah, set out
253

towards them with the backing of the people and in the
company ofsome of the distinguished figures of al-Koofah,
including Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar and Shabath bin Rib‘i.
Upon crossing the Sarat bridge, the Khawarij slashed its ropes
in order to prevent al-Harith and his men from reaching the
people, however, once he ordered for it be repaired, the
Khawarij fled while they had the chance. They were followed
by ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Mikhnaf with an army of six thousand
soldiers who passed through al-Koofah on their way to
Asbahan. There, they did not engage in battle with them but
instead laid siege to ‘Attab bin Warqa’ for a month in the city
of Jubbah until the people could not bear it any longer, at
which point the Khawarij made their attack, killing their
commander az-Zubair bin al-Mahooz and taking possession
of whatever belonged to their army. The Khawarij
subsequently invested Qatari bin al-Fuja’ah with authority
over them and then they headed together to the land of
alAhwaz. Meanwhile, Mus‘ab wrote to al-Muhallab bin Abu
Sufrah (who was in charge of al-Mawsil) ordering him to
counter-attack the Khawarij, as he was the most discerning
person for the job, whilst Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar occupied his
post in al-Mawsil during his absence. Hence, al-Muhallab
disembarked in al-Ahwaz where he fought an intense battle,
the duration of which extended to an unprecedented eight
months.
Ibn Jareer says: “The land of ash-Sham suffered a harsh
drought in this year that made it impossible to carry out any
military expeditions therein due to their fragility and lack of
food and supplies. ” Ibn Jareer goes on to say that the murder
of ‘Ubaidullah bin al-Hurr, who, according to sources, was a
brave man who had held numerous offices and adopted
various stances until one day he decided to neither comply
with anyone from the Banu Umayyah tribe nor from the
family of az-Zubair. Because of this, passed by the official of
a district in al-‘Iraq and other places, appropriated all the
254

money that had been obtained as revenue belonging to the
Baitul-Mal (Public Treasury) whereupon he wrote out an
official authorisation for himself, left with it in his possession
and then spent it all on his companions. As a result, the caliphs
and their leaders dispatched their armies against him in
concert, which he managed to drive away and defeat no matter
how little or great they were, to the point that Mus‘ab bin azZubair and his men were forced to concede defeat to him in
the land of al-‘Iraq. Following this, he arrived in the presence
of ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan who delegated him with an
envoy of ten individuals to whom Marwan said: “Enter alKoofah and let them know that the soldiers shall be arriving
rapidly. ” Following this, he secretly went to see a group of
his brethren regarding the matter, after which he disclosed his
affair and informed the Ameer of al-Koofah, al-Harith bin
‘Abdullah, of what ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan had said. In
response, al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah dispatched an army against
‘Ubaidullah and he was killed in the same place. His head was
carried through al-Koofah and then al-Basrah, and in this
manner the people were relieved of him. ”
Ibn Jareer also says: “The site of ‘Arafat witnessed the bearing
of four different banners in this year, each in affiliation with
a different leader:the first was raised for Muhammad Ibn alHanafiyyah; the second for Najdah al-Haroori and his
associates; the third for the Banu Umayyah tribe; and the
fourth for ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair, all of whom later turned
in their flags in the same order. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar had been
amongst those who were waiting for the deposing of Ibn azZubair, however, this was prolonged for so long that that Ibn
‘Umar remarked: “The delay of his removal resembles the
removal of Jahiliyyah (Ignorance). ” However, once Ibn
‘Umar stood down, so did Ibn az-Zubair, and the status quo
remained at a standstill without any fighting. Jabir bin alAswad bin ‘Awf Az-Zuhri had held the office of deputy of alMadinah under the rule of Ibn az-Zubair, while Ibn azZuabir’s brother, Mus‘ab, occupied the position in both al255

Koofah and al-Basrah. On the other hand, ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan held authority in the kingdoms of ash-Sham and
Egypt -- Allah (SWT) knows best.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
‘Abdullah bin Yazeed al-Awsi, who participated in the Treaty
of al-Hudaibiyah; ‘Abdur-Rahman bin alAswad bin ‘Abd Yaghooth; ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zaid bin alKhattab al-‘Adawi, the son of ‘Umar bin alKhattab’s brother who saw the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and died in alMadinah at
approximately the age of seventy; ‘Abdur-Rahman bin
Hassan bin Thabit al-Ansari; ‘Adiyy bin Hatim bin ‘Abdullah
bin Sa‘d bin Imra’ul-Qais, the honourable Sahabi who lived
in al-Koofah and then in Qarqeesya’; and Zaid bin Arqam bin
Zaid, the honourable Sahabi.

‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas, the Interpreter of the
Qur’an and the Paternal Cousin of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), also Died in this Year:
His name was ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib bin
Hashim bin ‘Abd Manaf bin Qusayy, Abul‘Abbas alHashimi. He was the paternal cousin of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and the
scholar of his nation, as a proficient exegete and interpreter of
the Book of Allah. He was also known as “al-Habr wal-Bahr”
meaning “the scholar and the sea” for his transmission of
many of the sayings of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and those of the Sahabah (Companions of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ). In
fact, many of the Sahabah and communities of the Tabi‘oon
(second and third generations of righteous followers after the
256

time of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ) acquired knowledge under his tutelage. Furthermore,
many teachings can solely be ascribed to him amongst the
Sahabah that attest to the exclusivity of his vast knowledge,
understanding and insight, as well as his virtuous and noble
background (may Allah be pleased with him and please him).
In Saheeh al-Bukhari, Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said:
“The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
died when I was circumcised and boys did not used to get
circumcised until they attained puberty. ” He also said: “The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) died
when I was a ten year old, circumcised boy. ”
Az-Zubair bin Bakkar said on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar that
he called ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas to come to him and said: “I
once saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) call you, stroke your head and put his
saliva in your mouth, saying: ‘O Allah! Make him (Ibn
‘Abbas) a learned scholar in religion (Islam) and teach him
interpretation (of the Book). ’”
‘Amr bin Deenar is reported to have said that Ibn ‘Abbas said:
“I went to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) during the last part of the night and prayed
behind him, after which he took me by the hand and moved
me so that I was opposite him. He was about to start his prayer
so I moved and then he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) prayed. As I was about to leave, the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me: ‘Why did you
move after I put you in front of me?’So I replied: ‘O
Messenger of Allah! Should someone pray in front of you
when you are the Messenger of Allah to whom Allah has
granted this (right)?’ Hewas pleased at my words so he
supplicated to Allah to increase me in knowledge and
understanding. ” Ibn ‘Abbas also said: “Following this, I saw
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
257

him) and I could hear him breathing heavily, then Bilal came
and said to him: ‘The prayer, O Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)! ’, at which point he got
up and prayed without performing Wudhoo’ (ablution) again.
”
Imam Ahmad and othersreport that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Once
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
entered a lavatory and I put down a jug of water for his
ablution. He asked: ‘Who placed it there?’ He was informed
that it was Ibn Abbas who had so, and so he said: ‘O Allah!
Make him (Ibn ‘Abbas) a learned scholar in religion (Islam)
and teach him interpretation of the Qur’an. ” Imam Ahmad
also reports that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) embraced me and said: ‘O
Allah! Teach him wisdom. ’”
Abu Salamah al-Hadrami is reported to have said that he
heard Ibn ‘Abbas saying: “I would constantly be in the
company of the senior Companions of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) from amongst the
Muhajiroon (Emigrants) and the Ansar (Helpers) and I would
ask them about the military expeditions of the Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and the occasions
of revelation attached to them. I would not go to any one of
them except that he would be happy to see me due to my
relationship with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). One day, I began to ask
Ubayy bin Ka‘b (who was sound in knowledge) concerning
the Verses of the Qur’an that were revealed in al-Madinah, to
which he said: ‘Twenty-seven Verses were revealed in alMadinah and the rest were revealed in Makkah. ’”
‘Ali appointed him as the deputy of al-Basrah, he led the Hajj
Pilgrimage with the people on a number of occasions
whereupon he delivered the sermon at ‘Arafat, during which
he interpreted Soorah al-Baqarah, while other narrations state
258

he interpreted Soorah an-Noor. Whoever heard his sermon
would say: “He explained it in such a way that if ar-Room (the
Byzantines) or at-Turk (the Turks) and ad-Dailam heard it
they would have embraced Islam. ”
At times, Ibn ‘Abbas would criticise ‘Ali with regard his legal
judgements, which ‘Ali would accordingly correct. As Imam
Ahmad narratedon the authority of ‘Ikrimah, when Ibn
‘Abbas heard that ‘Ali had burnt some apostates from Islam,
he said: “Had I been in his place I would not have burnt them,
as the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, ‘Do not punish (anybody) with Allah’s punishment’.
However, there is no doubt that I would have killed them, for
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
‘If somebody (a Muslim) discards his religion, kill him. ’”
When this reached ‘Ali, he said: “Woe unto you, Ibn ‘Abbas!
” And in another narration he said: “Woe unto you, Ibn
‘Abbas! Verily he delves into one’s flaws! ”‘Ali would also
dispute his judgements, such as when Ibn ‘Abbas ruled the
permissibility of Mut‘ah (temporary) marriages as permanent
and the eating of the meat of donkeys. On these occasions,
‘Ali said to him: “You are certainly a confused man, as on the
day of Khaibar, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) forbade Mut‘ah (temporary) marriages
and the eating of donkey meat. ’” This Hadeeth is reported in
the Saheehainand others -- Allah, the Perfect and Sublime,
knows best.
Sulaiman at-Taimi sent al-Hakam bin Ayyoob to al-Hasan to
ask Ibn ‘Abbas about the first group of people to gather in the
mosque on the day of Arafat, to which he replied: “The first
person to gather there will be Ibn ‘Abbas; indeed he is a wellversed man”, or also related in a Hadeeth, he is referred to as
a “man of great knowledge. ” He would ascend the pulpit and
read Soorat al-Baqarah, following which he would explainit
Verse by Verse. On the other hand, al-Hasan al-Basri narrates
that ‘Abdullah bin Muslim bin Qutaibah ad-Deenawari said:
259

“Sufyan narrated on the authority of Abu Bakr al-Hudhali
who heard that al-Hasan said: ‘Ibn ‘Abbas was the first man
to give counsel (legal advice) in al-Basrah. He ascended the
Minbar and read Soorat al-Baqarah and Soorat Aal ‘Imran,
whereby he explained them word for word. ’”According to
Ibn Qutaibah, he possessed an abundance of knowledge that
could be described in the way that Allah, the Sublime, says
(what means):
“And we have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant
water. ” [an-Naba’, 78:14],
i. e. , he would speak a lot in a short space of time like a gush
of rain.
Yoonus bin Bukair says: “Hamzah ath-Thumali informed us
that Abu Salih said: ‘I would see Ibn ‘Abbas sitting down and
all of the Quraish would be boasting about him. People would
gather around his door until they blocked the road and
obstructed anyone from coming or going. ’”Abu Salih also
said: “I entered upon him and told him about all the people
who had gathered at his door, upon which he said to me:
‘Bring me a pail of water so that I can perform ablution’. He
performed ablution, sat down and then he said: ‘Go out and
tell them that whoever wishes to ask me something about the
Qur’an and its words may enter’. So I went out and permitted
them to enter to until they filled the entire house and garden,
whereupon he answered their questions and informed them
about even more relevant things. He then said: ‘Your
brothers’, and at that point they would leave. Following that
he said to me: ‘Go out and tell them that whoever wishes to
ask me nothing other than questions pertaining to the Halal
(permissible Islamic injunctions), the Haram (prohibited
Islamic injunctions) and Fiqh (jurisprudence) may enter’. So
I went out and permitted them to enter until they filled the
whole house and garden, whereupon they did not ask him
anything that he did not fully answer, as well as informing
260

them of other similar things. He then said: ‘Your brothers’ and
so they left to allow even more to come in. He said to me: ‘Go
out and say to them that whoever wants to ask me about the
Fara’id (obligatory Islamic duties) or anything related to them
to enter’. So I went out and permitted them to enter to the
point that they filled the whole house and garden, whereupon
he would answer their questions and even more’. He then
said: ‘Your brothers’, at which point they left. After that he
said: ‘Go out and tell whoever wants to ask about the Arabic
language, poetry and any peculiar sayings to now enter’. So I
would go out and permit them to enter until they filled the
house and garden, then he answered all their questions and
told them even more than they had asked him about. He then
said: ‘Your brothers’ and they left. ’”Abu Salih also said:
“The whole of the Quraish tribe would boast of him and I have
never seen anyone like him before. ”

Chapter
Ibn ‘Abbas was assigned the role of the prayer leader of the
Hajjin the thirty-fifth year during the rule of ‘Uthman bin
261

‘Affan at the time when he was besieged. ‘Uthman was killed
while he was away, whereafter Ibn ‘Abbas took part in the
Battle of al-Jamal with ‘Ali, commanded the left wing of the
army on the day of Siffeen, participated in the battle of the
Khawarij and was appointed to power over alBasrah as part
of ‘Ali’s administration. During his absence from al-Basrah,
he would commission ‘AbulAswad ad-Du’ali to lead the
prayer and Ziyad bin Abu Sufyan to oversee the Kharaj (land
tax in Islamic law). The people of al-Basrah were fortunate to
have him instruct them in matters of jurisprudence, teach
them about their ignorance, admonish their criminals and to
give to their poor. He remained in al-Basrah until the time of
‘Ali’s death, while others have said that ‘Ali discharged him
beforehand.
Following this, he went to see Mu‘awiyah who received him
hospitably, honoured him and showed him great respect.
Mu‘awiyah would throw riddles at him that he would solve
instantly, about which Mu‘awiyah used to say: “I have never
seen anyone pose him a question that he could not answer. ”
When news of al-Hasan bin ‘Ali’s death in a letter reached
Mu‘awiyah, Ibn ‘Abbas happened to be with him at the time
and so Mu‘awiyah offered his utmost condolences to him,
which Ibn ‘Abbas responded to in the best of manners.
Mu‘awiyah thereafter sent his son, Yazeed, who sat before
Ibn ‘Abbas and expressed his sympathy to him in the most
eloquently spoken manner; Ibn ‘Abbas was in turn especially
grateful for the gesture. Hence, when Mu‘awiyah died and alHusain wanted to leave to go to al-‘Iraq, Ibn ‘Abbas strictly
forbade him for doing so to the extent that Ibn ‘Abbas wanted
to physically hold him back by his clothes. In fact, Ibn ‘Abbas
had become impaired towards the end of his life, which is one
reason why al-Husain refused to accept his advice, although
when al-Husain was killed, Ibn ‘Abbas grieved so badly that
he would not leave his house.

262

He would say: “O tongue! Grant some good and remain silent
from delivering evil, as if you do not, you will regret it. ” A
man, supposedly called Jundab, came to him and said:
“Entrust with me something (authority). ” So Ibn ‘Abbas said:
“I entrust you with Tawheed of Allah (the Oneness of Allah)
and all that pertains to it, observing the Salat (prescribed
prayers) and giving the Zakat (prescribed charity), as every
good deed that you do after that will be accepted and
increased by Allah. O Jundab! Verily, you cannot put off your
imminent death, therefore pray every prayer as if it were your
last and become an enstranged traveller in the world, as you
ultimately belong to the people of the graves. OJundab! Cry
over your sins and repent for your wrongdoings until the
world feels of lesser value to you than the soles of your
sandals and you desire your departure from it to the Justice of
Allah. Indeed, you will not profit from what you leave behind
except for your good deeds. ”
Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Perfecting what is good is through
hastening to it, considering it unimportant and concealing it,
meaning that one should hasten to give to the needy, perceive
the deed through eyes of the one who receives it and conceal
the deed from the view of the people. One should therefore
not show off one’s deeds, as in exposure lies hypocrisy, the
insincere intentions of the giver and the embarrassment of the
one receiving it in front of the people. ”
In the sixty-eighth year, Ibn ‘Abbas died in Ta’if and
Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah led the prayer at his funeral,
saying: “Today, the learned man of this community has
passed away. ”

A Description of Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with them)
He was so large in stature that if he were sitting down, he
would take up the space of two men. He was particularly fair,
263

tall, handsome and charming. He was completely grey at the
crown of his head, which he would colour with henna (a
reddish-orange cosmetic taken from leaves and stalks of the
henna plant), while other reports state that he would dye it
black. He had an attractive face, he would dress well and he
would frequently apply perfume such that if he passed by
some women, they would say: “That is Ibn ‘Abbas” or “that
man is wearing musk. ” When he lost his eyesight, he suffered
from a paleness that made him look yellow in colour.
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas would wear a suit that was worth a
thousand Dirhams. He had two sons named al‘Abbas and ‘Ali,
the latter of whom was also known as as-Sajjad (prostrator)
for the long periods of time he would spend in prostration
during his prayers and who was also considered the most
handsome member of the Quraish tribe on earth. It was said
that Ibn ‘Abbas would pray a thousand Rak‘ah (units of
prayer) every day and night with complete perfection. He
would later become the patriarch of the Abbasid Caliphs, as it
was his progeny that came to establish the Abbasid Caliphate,
which we shall come to in the forthcoming chapters.
Abu Shuraih al-Khuza‘i al-‘Adawi al-Ka‘bi, Abu Waqid alLaithi, the honourable Sahabi whose name and testimony to
his participation in the battle of Badr often differ from source
to source, also died in this year.

Upon Entering the Sixty-Ninth Year
‘Amr bin Sa‘eed al-Umawi al-Ashdaqwas murdered in this
year by ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, the reason for which was
that at the beginning of this year, ‘Abdul-Malik had set out
with his soldiers towards Qarqeesiya to lay siege to Zufar bin
al-Harith al-Kilabi, who had offered assistance to Sulaiman
bin Surad against Marwan’s army when they fought against
them at ‘Ain Wardah. Zufar bin al-Harith had been defeated
on the day of Marj Rahit and because of this, he decided to
264

denounce Marwan to pledge allegiance to Ibn az-Zubair
instead. Thus, Marwan sent ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad against
Zufar with an army of sixty thousand men to vanquish him in
al-‘Iraq, although when ‘Ubaidullah reached the land of
alJazeerah, he received news of Marwan’s death after having
laid siege to Zufar for some period of time. Following that,
the “Army of the Repentants” advanced against them until
they engaged in battle with ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad who was
able to conquer them and then return to the besieged Zufar bin
al-Harith. When al-Mukhtar later dispatched his army with
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar, they succeeded in destroying the
army of ash-Sham and killing ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad as we
mentioned earlier. It was on that occasion that ‘Abdul-Malik
bin Marwan assembled an army to carry out a military
campaign against Zufar and then against Mus‘ab bin azZubair.
Prior to ‘Abdul-Malik’s departure there, he appointed ‘Amr
bin Sa‘eed al-Ashdaq as his successor over Dimashq who
entrenched the city and took the money from the Bait ul-Mal
(Public Treasury). It has otherwise been claimed that the
money was in the possession of ‘Abdul-Malik; however, he
then abandoned a division of the army and withdrew to
Damascus during the night, with Humaid bin Huraith bin
Bahdal al-Kalbi and Zuhair bin al-Abrad al-Kalbi. When they
arrived in Dimashq, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Ummul-Hakam had
been its deputy under ‘Abdul-Malik’s administration,
although having received information about their arrival, he
fled and left the country. ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed al-Ashdaq
subsequently entered the country and seized the public
treasuries, whereafter he addressed the people and promised
them justice, equity, prosperity and good-fortune. When
‘Abdul-Malik learned of what al-Ashdaq had done, he made
a prompt return to discover that al-Ashdaq had fortified
Dimashq and hung drapes and veils on its fortresses, while alAshdaq isolated himself within an impenetrable Roman
citadel located within the city.
265

‘Abdul-Malik soon arrived in Dimashq and laid siege to him,
because of which a battle broke out that lasted sixteen days.
After it was over, ‘Abdul-Malik contacted al-Ashdaq to say
to him: “I implore you by Allah’s Mercy that you give your
word regarding the affairs of your house (i. e. family), while
we accept Ibn az-Zubair’s authority over us. Fall back on your
pledge, as you have my covenant and pact with Allah, for I
have sworn to Him with conviction that you will be my
successor after me. ” They then began to correspond with one
another until ‘Amr was deluded into opening the gates of
Dimashq and then to agree to call a truce on the grounds that
he would be ‘Abdul-Malik’s heir after him and that everyone
working under ‘Abdul-Malik would then work for him. The
peace treaty was written on a Thursday, whereafter ‘AbdulMalik subsequently entered Dimashq and the Dar ul-Imarah
(official headquarters) as he was accustomed to doing. He
then wrote to ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed al-Ashdaq, saying: “Give back
the people’s provisions that you appropriated from them from
the Bait ul-Mal (Public Treasury). ” ‘Amr replied: “This is
none of your business and this country is not yours, therefore
you should get out of it. ”
The following Monday, ‘Abdul-Malik wrote a letter to alAshdaq in which he ordered him to meet him at his house
within the al-Khadra’ govenrment headquarters. When the
messenger arrived, ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah,
who was the husband of al-Ashdaq’s daughter, Umm Moosa
bint Amr bin Sa‘eed, happened to be with him at the time and
so ‘Amr al-Asdaq sought his advice as to whether he should
go or not, to which he said: “O Abu Sa‘eed! By Allah, you are
dearer to me than my own hearing and eyesight and I reckon
that you are not going to go to him, therefore pledge
allegiance to al-Himyari, the son of Ka‘b al-Ahbar’s wife, as
the greatest of the great are the Banu Isma‘eel tribe who
locked the gates of Dimashq in order to put an end to the
killing and fighting. ” So ‘Amr said: “By Allah! If I were
asleep, it would not frighten me if Ibn az-Zarqa’ woke me up
266

and he would not dare to do that to me. In any case, ‘Uthman
bin ‘Affan appeared to me in my dream yesterday and dressed
me in his shirt. ” He then went on to say to the messenger:
“Send him my greetings of peace and tell him that I will come
to him in the evening, by the will of Allah. ” That evening,
‘Amr put on his coat of armour underneath his clothes and
took up his sword, although when he stood up, he tripped over
the carpet and so his wife and some others who were present
said to him: “We reckon that you should not go to him. ”
Nevertheless, he did not pay any heed to that and proceeded
in the company of a hundred of his slaves.
‘Abdul-Malik had commanded the Banu Marwan tribe to
convene in his presence and that when ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed
arrived at the gate, they should enter and imprison whoever
was with him. Every gate was guarded by a division and so
by the time that ‘Amr had reached the courtyard in which
‘Abdul-Malik was sitting, he was alone without any of his
supporters and had nothing other than a single sword with
him. The first thing he saw upon his entrance was that all of
the Banu Marwan tribe had gathered behind ‘Abdul-Malik,
which immediately caused him to sense that something was
wrong. At that point, he then turned to one of the servants next
to him and whispered: “Woe unto you! Go to my brother
Yahya and tell him to come to me”, however he did not
understand what he said but instead replied: “I am at your
service! ”‘Amr therefore repeated it to him again but he failed
to understand him and said once again: “I am at your service.
” ‘Amr therefore scolded at him: “Woe unto you! Get away
from me and may Allah burn you in
Hellfire! ”
Hassan bin Malik bin Bahdal and Qabeesah bin Dhu’aib had
been in the presence of ‘Abdul-Malik but he permitted them
to leave, which they did and then locked the gates behind
them. After that, ‘Amr approached ‘Abdul-Malik who
welcomed him and sat him down on the cushion beside him.
267

They then began to talk for a long time, following which
‘Abdul-Malik said: “O servant! Take his sword from him. ”
So ‘Amr said: “We belong to Allah, O Ameer ul-Mu’mineen!
”So ‘Abdul-Malik said: “Or do you expect to speak with me
while strapped with your sword?” The servant then took away
his sword and they spoke for another hour, following which
‘Abdul-Malik said to him: “O Abu ‘Umayyah! ”He
responded: “I am at your service, O Ameer ul-Mu’mineen!
”‘Abdul-Malik continued: “After you denounced me, I swore
that I would not be satisfied as your ruler until I had your neck
in a choker. ” At that point the Banu Marwan tribe said: “After
that you released him, O Ameer ul-Mu’mineen! ”He said:
“Then I released him but I was not sure if I should have done
that to Abu Umayyah. ” So the Banu Marwan tribe said:
“Have you fulfilled your oath, O Ameer ul-Mu’mineen?”
Then ‘Amr said: “Swear by it, O Ameer ulMu’mineen! ”At
that point, ‘Abdul-Malik took out a choker from underneath
his cushion and threw it to him, upon which he said: “O
servant! Get up and choke him in it! ” and so the servant
obeyed. ‘Amr then said: “I ask Allah, O Ameer ulMu’mineen, that you release me from this in the view of the
people. ” So ‘Abdul-Malik said: “Are you trying to beguile
me, O Abu Umayyah, even at the point of death?No, by Allah!
We would not release you from it unless we were forced to”,
and then he struck him a blow in the mouth that broke his
jawbone. ‘Amr said: “I ask Allah, O Ameer ul-Mu’mineen,
that He calls the one who is breaking my bones to something
greater than that! ”So ‘Abdul-Malik said: “By Allah! If I
knew that you would continue to please me and put things
right with the Quraish, I would let you go. However, two men
do not meet in a country for the reason that we have met and
then one lets the other one leave as friends. ”
In another narration, the narrator reports that ‘Abdul-Malik
said to him: “Based on what I know, O ‘Amr, two outstanding
personalities cannot coexist. ” Then, when ‘Amr realised that
he meant his death by this, he said to him: “Are you betraying
268

me, O Ibn az-Zarqa’?” The narrator says that they continued
to exchange hostile words with one another until the Mu’aththin (caller to prayer) called the ‘Asr (late afternoon) prayer.
‘Abdul-Malik then stood up to leave for the congregational
prayer, at which point he commanded his brother, ‘Abdul‘Azeez bin Marwan, to carry out his execution. ‘Abdul-Malik
then left and ‘Abdul-‘Azeez approached him with his sword,
whereupon ‘Amr said to him: “I implore by Allah’s Mercy
that you do not follow through with this and allow someone
other than yourself to administer to it”, which caused Abdul‘Azeez to desist.
When the people saw that ‘Abdul-Malik had left and that
‘Amr was not with him, they began to exaggerate and make
assumptions about the fate of‘Amr, which reached ‘Amr’s
brother, Yahya, who immediately set forth with a thousand
supporters and masses of other people to help ‘Amr bin
Sa‘eed. At that instant, ‘Abdul-Malik hastened to enter the
Khadra’, after which Yahya and the others arrived at its door
and started banging on it, shouting: “We heard your voice, O
Abu Umayyah! ”One of the men with them then struck alWaleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik (‘Abdul-Malik’s son) in the head
with his sword and dragged him out, which therefore granted
access to Ibraheem bin ‘Arabi, the renowned poet, who went
in and began to make a public address within the mosque that
caused the people to cry out.
When ‘Abdul-Malik returned, he was unpleasantly surprised
to discover that his brother had not killed him, for which he
scolded him and insulted him and his mother (as they had
different mothers). ‘Abdul‘Azeez then said: “Allah gave me
mercy, O ‘Abdul-Malik, as he is the nephew of ‘Abdul-Malik
bin Marwan! ”‘Abdul-Malik then said: “O boy! Bring me a
spear”, which ‘Abdul-Malik then brandished and beat ‘Amr
with. When this showed no effect, however, ‘Abdul-Malik
beat him a second time but again it was of no use and so he
grabbed him with his hands to then discover that he was fully
269

clad in armour. At that point, ‘Abdul-Malik began to laugh
and said: “Armour as well?! You certainly came prepared! O
boy, bring me my sword! ”So he brought his sword and then
he ordered ‘Amr to fall to the ground, upon which he sat on
his chest and killed him by slitting his throat, as he said (in alBaseet poetic meter):
“O ‘Amr! You will endure my abuse and vilification
Until you say whatever it is that will quench me. ”
It is said that after he slit his throat, ‘Abdul-Malik trembled
vigorously.
Yahya bin Sa‘eed, ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed’s brother, entered the Dar
ul-Imarah (official headquarters) with those who were with
him following his brother’s execution whereupon the Banu
Marwan tribe advanced towards them and they clashed
against one another in combat. Groups from both sides
withdrew, while Yahya on the other hand began to launch
rocks that he had kept hidden in case of a battle. Subsequently,
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan left the mosque, following which
he ascended the pulpit and began to say: “We ask: ‘Where is
al-Waleed (his son) ?’I say they killed him out of spite!
”Ibraheem bin ‘Arabi alKinani (the poet) then stepped forth
and said: “I have al-Waleed with me! He has been inflicted
with some wounds but he is fine. ” At that point, ‘AbdulMalik commanded Yahya bin Sa‘eed’s execution, though his
brother, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan interceded on his behalf
with groups of others who ‘Abdul-Malik had also sentenced
to death. ‘Abdul-‘Azeez therefore interceded on their behalf
too and so ‘Abdul-Malik sentenced his brother to a month in
prison, following which he and ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed’s sons and
their families travelled to al-‘Iraq. There they entered upon
Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair who received them hospitably and
greeted them warmly.
270

The Biography of ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed alAshdaq
His name was ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed bin al-‘As bin Umayyah bin
‘Abd Shams, Abu Umayyah al-Qurashi alUmawi, more
commonly known as al-Ashdaq. He was a noble amongst the
Muslims as well as one of the most respected and popular. He
would give charity abundantly and hold the elite members of
society to account.
It was al-Ashdaq who dispatched the delegation to Makkah
following the battle of al-Harrah at the time when Yazeed bin
Mu‘awiyah sought to battle against Ibn az-Zubair. Abu
Shuraih al-Khuza‘i, however, prohibited it based on the
Hadeeth he heard from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) about the sanctity of
Makkah. Al-Ashdaq replied: “I know that better than you, O
Abu Shuraih! The Haram (i. e. Makkah) does not give refuge
to a sinner or a fleeing murderer or a person running away
after committing crimes” (this Hadeeth appears in the
Saheehain as we mentioned earlier).
Marwan entered Egypt after he started calling people to
pledge allegiance to himself and thereafter established
himself in ash-Sham. ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed then entered Egypt and
subsequently conquered it, after which it was promised that
he would be the Wala al-‘ahd (“guardian; heir”) after ‘Abd alMalik while in the meantime he would be assigned as deputy
of Dimashq. Once Marwan gained more power, however, he
revoked his promise and entrusted it to his son ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
instead, and in this manner betrayed ‘Amr. This did not
happen until after ‘Abdul-Malik had penetrated al-‘Iraq to
fight against Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair and he had returned with
his army to Dimashq, fortified it and responded to its people.
It was following this that ‘Abdul-Malik laid siege to Mus‘ab
and then forced him to surrender on the grounds of
271

deceptively offering him security, after which he killed him
instead (as we shall come to shortly).

Abul-Aswad ad-Du’ali was also amongst the
prominent people who died in this year:
He was the judge of al-Basrah and an honourable Tabi‘i (from
the second or third generation of righteous followers
oftheProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ) ”
whose full name was Zalim bin ‘Amr bin Sufyan bin Jandal.
He embraced Islam during the lifetime of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), although he never
actually saw him in person. He participated in the Battle of
the Jamal with ‘Ali; he died during the rule of ‘Ubaidullah bin
Ziyad, he was trustworthy and he was the first person to speak
on the subject of grammar.
Ibn Khallikan and others maintain that the first person to
impart knowledge of grammar to him was ‘Ali bin Abi Talib
who taught him that speech is made up of nouns, verbs,
prepositions, articles, conjunctions and particles. Following
‘Ali’s example, Abul-Aswad then refined his speech in
accordance with his teachings, which is why he subsequently
called it the science of Nahw (literally: imitating one’s
example, which is the name for grammar today).
Ibn Khallikan further states: “Ibnul-Aswad was a miser so
much so that he would say: ‘If we gave the poor and needy
our money then we would end up like them’. One night, he
fed a poor person supper and after he had finished eating, he
then shackled him and made him spend the night at his house
during which he forbade him from leaving so that he would
not trouble the Muslims with his begging. As such, the poor
person asked to be let go, to which he responded: “How
preposterous! You were given your supper only in order to
free the Muslims from your begging for one night! ”He
272

therefore let him go the following morning. Some well-known
poetry is also ascribed to him (may Allah have mercy on him).

Other Prominent People who died in this
year:
Jabir bin Samurah bin Junadah, who was a Companion and
transmitter of Ahadeeth like his father. He went to stay in alKoofah in this year during which he died. It has otherwise
been said that he died in the sixty-sixth year -- Allah knows
best.
Asma’ bint Yazeed bin as-Sakan al-Ansariyyah who pledged
her allegiance to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), also known as Umm Sulaim, died in this year. She
killed nine of the opposition on the Day of Yarmook in the
battle against ar-Room, which happened to coincide with her
wedding night. She lived in Damascus and was buried in Bab
us-Sagheer.
Hassan bin Malik bin Bahdal, commander Abu Sulaiman alBahdali, who worked in the sevice of pledging allegiance to
Marwan, died in this year.
Yoosuf bin al-Hakam ath-Thaqafi, the father of al-Hajjaj, died
in the year.
‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Hakam, Marwan’s brother, also died
in this year.

273

Upon Entering the Seventieth Year of the
Hijrah
Ar-Room (the Byzantines) rose up and mobilised against ashSham who they had hitherto deemed weak, upon perceiving
the division between the Banu Marwan tribe and ‘Abdullah
bin az-Zubair. ‘Abdul-Malik therefore entered a peace pact
with the emperor of ar-Room who concluded a truce on the
grounds that ‘Abdul-Malik agreed to pay him a thousand
Deenars every Friday, which he did out of fear for ash-Sham.
During this year, Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair travelled to Makkah
with a great deal of money which he distributed there, in
addition to slaughtering a thousand fattened animals and a
further twenty-thousand sheep at the site of the Ka‘bah. After
satisfying the inhabitants of Makkah, he then returned to al‘Iraq and granted some of the chiefs who had been sent from
al-Hijaz a generous amount of money.

Amongst the Nobles who Died in this Year:
‘Asim bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab al-Qurashi al-‘Adawi, the
son of Jameelah bint Thabit bin Abu al-Aqlah, was born
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). He did not transmit any
narrations except for one Hadeeth on the authority of his
father in which the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “When you see night fall, the fasting person
should break his Sawm (fast). ”
Qabeesah bin Jabir bin Wahb al-Asadi, Abul-‘Ala’, who was
one of the senior Tabi‘een (second and third generations of
pious followers), died in this year.
Yazeed bin Ziyad bin Rabee‘ah al-Himyari, the poet, who
wrote satire, died in this year.
274

Bushair bin an-Nadr, the judge of Egypt, died in this year.
Malik bin Yakhamir as-Saksaki al-Alhani al-Himsi, an
honourable Tabi‘i (from the second or third generation of
pious followers) and an alleged Sahabi of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – Allah knows best –
also died in this year.

Upon Entering the Seventy-First Year
This year witnessed the killing of Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair as a
direct result of ‘Abdul-Malik’s advancement against him
from ash-Sham with a vast army. In fact, they encountered
each other in this year after having previously been forced to
wait due to the severe conditions of the winter, due to
whichthey had to return to their countries. It was in this year
that ‘Abdul-Malik made a second advancement towards him,
dispatching a military detachment that entered al-Basrah and
called its people to ‘Abdul-Malik in secret, which some in fact
responded to. In the meantime, Mus‘ab had travelled to alHijaz, however, upon hearing about this, he immediately went
to al-Basrah where he reprimanded the prominent members
of society by censuring him and blaming them for allowing
‘Abdul-Malik’s people to enter. Upon reinstating authority
over them and suspending the roles of some of the senior
officials, Mus‘ab moved on to al-Koofah where he was
informed that Abdul-Malik’s troops were making inroads
from ash-Sham and so he decided to encroach upon them
himself.
Once ‘Abdul-Malik had arrived at a resthouse, he wrote to the
supporters of Marwan who had responded to his delegation.
In their reply to him, they made it a condition that he entrust
them with authority over Asbahan, to which he agreed, given
that they were leaders and chiefs. ‘Abdul-Malik assigned his
brother, Muhammad bin Marwan, at the head of his army;
‘Abdullah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah in charge of the right
275

wing and Khalid bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah in charge of the
left wing. On the other hand, Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair departed
after the people of al-‘Iraq became divided and deserted him.
This made him question and suspect those who claimed to
support him, as he had learnt that they were unwilling to resist
his enemies and because of that, he decided he would only
feel satisfied and assured if he set out independently. In this
regard, he said: “I am following the path of al-Husain bin ‘Ali
when others refused to surrender to him and instead stooped
to support ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad”, at which point he began to
sing to himself:
“Indeed, the first to emulate in at-Taff (in the outskirts of alKoofah) were the Hashimi (Hashemite) family, Who have
ordained for honored people the way of emulation. ”
Subsequent to that, both armies assembled in Dairul-Jathaleeq
wherein Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar, who was the commander of
Mus‘ab’s army from al-‘Iraq, launched an attack on
Muhammad bin Marwan, the commander of the army of ashSham. Upon assuming their positions, ‘Abdul-Malik sat
behind ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah on horseback,
who then launched a successful attack on Ibraheem bin
alAshtar and his soldiers that destroyed them completely.
Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar (may Allah have mercy on him and
forgive him) was killed in the attack, as were many of the
leaders and chiefs who were with him. ‘Attab bin Warqa’,
who was mounted on Mus‘ab’s horse, fled the battlefield and
took refuge with ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, whilst Mus‘ab
stood at the heart of the battlefield, championing the bearers
of the banners and exhorting them tobravery and heroism to
get them to advance to the forefront. However, when no one
moved, he started exclaiming: “O Ibraheem! I do not have
Ibraheem today! The matter has become aggravated, the battle
has intensified, men have grown feeble, the situation has
become constrained and the encounter has magnified. ”
276

Al-Mada’ini says that Yahya bin Isma‘eel bin al-Muhajir’s
father said: “‘Abdul-Malik sent his brother, Muhammad bin
Marwan, to Mus‘ab to offer him his protection but he refused
it and said: ‘Someone like me does not relinquish his position
even if he were to be vanquished! By Allah, the Quraish will
not say that I fled the battlefield! ’Then he said to his son:
‘Proceed ahead of me until I am bereaved of a son’, and so his
son set out and fought to his death. ”
Mus‘ab was subsequently struck by an arrow and suffered a
severe wound, upon which he looked at the perpetrator,
Za’idah bin Qudamah, and cursed him by saying: “O imitators
of al-Mukhtar! ”He then fell to the ground, at which point, a
man – allegedly ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad bin Zabyan atTameemi – went up to him and killed him by cutting off his
head, which he then took to ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan. Upon
receiving it, ‘Abdul-Malik fell into prostration and presented
him with a thousand Deenars, but he refused to take it and
said: “I did not kill him out of obedience to you but out of
revenge for myself. ” His motive originated from the time that
Mus‘ab dismissed him from a position of authority after he
had no long appointed him and so because of this he felt
offended and bitter toward him.
Al-Mada’ini says: “Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair’s murder took place
on Tuesday, 13th Jumadal-Oola, or at the very end of the
seventy-first year according to popular belief. ” He goes on to
say that it could have also been in the seventy-second year –
and Allah knows best.
Ibn Jareer says : “As al-Waqidi asserts, ‘Abdul-Malik
returned to ash-Sham in this year. ” He says: “Ibn az-Zubair
dismissed Jabir bin al-Aswad from al-Madinah in this year
and appointed Talhah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Awf in his place. ”
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair performed Hajj with the people also
in this year and his leadership over al-‘Iraq was discontinued.
277

Najdah al-Haroori, who had overthrown al-Yamamah, was
also killed in this year, on which occasion ‘Abdullah bin
Thawr embarked on his journey there.

The Biography of Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair
(May Allah have mercy upon him)
His name was Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair bin al-‘Awwam bin
Khuwailid bin Asad bin ‘Abdul-Azza bin
Qusayy bin Kilab, Abu ‘Abdullah al-Qurashi, also known as
‘Abu ‘Eesa and al-Asadi. His mother was arRabab bint Unaif
al-Kalbiyyah and he was one of the most handsome, generous
and passionate of people.
Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi says : “He assigned leadership over
the people of al-‘Iraq to his brother,
‘Abdullah, until ‘Abdul-Malik killed him at a resting place
near Awana by the River Dujail at DairulJathaleeq. Even
today, it is well-known that his grave is located there. ”
‘Amir ash-Sha‘bi said: “While I was sitting down, the Ameer,
Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair, summoned me and so I was let into the
Dar ul-Imarah (official headquarters). The curtains were then
drawn open to reveal ‘A’ishah bint Talhah who was sitting
behind them and I had never seen anything or anyone more
splendid or beautiful than her. Mus‘ab then said: ‘Do you
know who this is?’So I said: ‘No’. So he said: ‘This is
‘A’ishah bint Talhah’, at which point she left. She then said
to Mus‘ab: ‘Who was that who you allowed to see me?’He
said: ‘That was ‘Amir ash-Sha‘bi’. So she said: ‘Grant him
something’ and he granted me ten thousand Dirhams. ”
Mus‘ab was amongst the most decent and generous of people.
He would never regard what he gave to someone as too much
or too troublesome, whatever it might have been. In that
manner, he would give to the weak and the strong, the simple
278

and the elite, without differentiation, whereas his brother,
‘Abdullah, on the other hand, was a miser.
Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi narrated in his Tareekh that on one
occasion, Mus‘ab got angry at a man and so he sentenced him
to death by beheading. Upon receiving his sentence, the man
exclaimed: “Allah has consoled the Ameer! What is worse
than having people like me on the Day of Judgement clinging
to your good limbs and to your face which will be
illuminating, and I will be saying: ‘O Allah! Question Mus‘ab
for killing. ’”At that point, Mus‘ab pardoned him and so the
man said: “Allah has consoled the Ameer! If you think that
can grant me a comfortable lifestyle then you may”, and so he
took out a hundred thousand Dirhams for him. The man then
said to Mus‘ab: “I testify to you that half of that will go to Ibn
Qais who says about you:
‘Verily, Mus‘ab is a shooting star from Allah
On whose face, darkness is dispelled. His reign of mercy
has neither
Tyranny nor arrogance.
He fears Allah in executing affairs
And he has prospered as far as piety is concerned. ’”
It is said that he was killed on a Thursday during midJumadal-Oola of the seventy-second year.
Ibn Jareer says: “When news reached ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair
that his brother, Mus‘ab, had been killed, he stood up to
address the people and said: ‘Praise be to Allah to Whom
belongs all creation and affairs. He gives Al-Mulk (The
Kingdom) to whoever He wills and He takes al-Mulk from
whom He wills, just as He raises whoever He wills to a high
station and He debases whoever He wills to a lowly station.
279

All good rests in His Hands and He is Capable of all things.
Allah neither debases those who are true to him nor does he
grant victory to the helpers and associates of the Shaitan
(Satan). News that will both sadden and please us has come
from al-‘Iraq:Our beloved Mus‘ab has been killed and for that
reason we are sad but as for that which will please us, we have
been informed that he died with conviction and saying the
Shahadah (Testimony of Faith, i. e. declaring: ‘There is no
one worthy of worship but Allah’). Indeed, we are saddened
by the disastrous departure of a close intimate who held the
most sound views and who was most patient and generous
towards others. I now grieve over Mus‘ab as I grieved over
az-Zubair before him, unlike when I was free from calamity
in the case of ‘Uthman. Mus‘ab was a servant among the
servants of Allah and a helper amongst His helpers, while the
people of al-‘Iraq are people of hypocrisy and betrayal who
surrendered and pledged allegiance to him at the lowest price.
If we are caused to die, then by Allah, we will not be killed
sitting on our couches like the Banu Abul-‘As tribe, who by
Allah, were neither killed marching in Jahiliyyah (Ignorance)
nor in Islam. We will not die except at the heads of spears or
under the flash of the sword. Indeed, the Banu Abul-‘As tribe
united the people on grounds of desire and fear, because of
which they were persuaded to advance against their enemies
who were in fact better and more honourable than them, while
their own followers did not fight for their sake at all. Has the
World not neglected the Supreme King Whose authority does
not cease and Whose Kingdom does not perish?Rather the
world chooses not to accept it but resorts to recklessness and
desires instead and so I shall not shed tears of sorrow and
remorse over departing from it. This is what I have to say and
I ask Allah for forgiveness for myself and all of you. ”

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
280

Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar, otherwise known as Malik bin alHarith an-Nakha‘i whose father was one of ‘Ali’s senior
chiefs, was appointed as an official to Khurasan and was
amongst those who put up resistance against ‘Uthman and
killed him.
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abza al-Khuza‘i, to whom
Companionship and the transmission of narrations can be
attributed, was employed by ‘Ali over Khurasan, he resided
in al-Koofah which he was in charge of at one point and died
there.
‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Usailah, Abu ‘Abdullah al-Muradi asSunabihi, who was amongst the righteous followers.
‘Umar bin Abu Salamah al-Makhzoomi al-Madani, the
stepson of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) who was born in the land of Abysinnia, stayed with his
mother, Umm Salamah, and he transmitted some Ahadeeth of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on
the authority of the Sahabah (May Allah be pleased with
them).
Safeenah, the Mawla (servant; ally) of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), died in this year.
‘Amr bin Akhtab, Abu Zaid al-Ansari al-A‘raj, undertook
thirteen military expeditions with the Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who once stroked his head
and said: “O Allah! Beautify him! ” As such, he reached the
age of a hundred without turning grey whatsoever and he died
in al-Basrah.
Ghudaif bin al-Harith bin Zunaim as-Sakooni whose
affiliation of Companionship is disputed.
Yazeed bin al-Aswad al-Jurashi as-Sakooni was a pious and
devout believer who lived in ash-Sham in the village of
281

Zabdeen, while others say the village of Jisreen. He owned a
house within the Bab Sharqi, his affiliation of Companionship
is disputed and he transmitted narrations on the authority of
the Sahabah. ‘Amr bin al-Aswad, Abi ‘Iyad al-‘Ansi alHimasi, who was a senior Tabi‘i (from the second and third
generations of righteous followers) and a scholar of ashSham. He practiced Zuhd (asceticism) and Ijtihad
(independent judgement in legal or theological matters) and
would show little partisanship or prejudice. He died in Hims
(the ancient Emesa, a city in central Syria).

Upon Entering the Seventy-Second Year
A severe battle broke out between al-Muhallab bin Abu
Sufrah and the Azariqah branch of the Khawarij (sect of
Dissenters) in a place called Soolaf (a village in Khoozistan).
They spent approximately eight months fighting against each
other in battle due to postponed wars, the detailed account of
which are provided by Ibn Jareer. During that time, Mus‘ab
bin az-Zubair was killed and the people pledged allegiance to
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, who commissioned al-Muhallab
bin Abu Sufrah over al-Ahwaz for which his efforts were
greatly commended and praised by ‘Abdul-Malik. The people
within ‘AbdulMalik’s state later attacked the Ahwaz and
brought about the ruinous defeat of the Khawarij, who were
thereafter forced to flee to neutral lands. Khalid bin
‘Abdullah, the Commander of ‘Abdul-Malik’s army, and
Dawood bin Qahdham pursued them in order to run them out
of the land, while ‘Abdul-Malik sent a message to his brother,
Bishr bin Marwan, to extend four thousand Dirhams to them
as assistance, which he sent with ‘Attab bin Warqa’. As such,
the Khawarij were expelled by those who forcefully pursued
them among the people of ‘Abdul-Malik’s state, although
because the vast majority of their horses died in the process,
most of the soldiers had to return to their families on foot.

282

Ibn Jareer says: “‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan sent al-Hajjaj bin
Yoosuf ath-Thaqafi to lay siege to Makkah in order to target
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair. ” According to Ibn Jareer, the reason
he in particular, and not someone else, was dispatched
because when ‘Abdul-Malik wanted to return to ash-Sham
after Mus‘ab was killed and al-‘Iraq was seized, he instructed
the people to go war with ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair in Makkah.
However, when nobody responded to him, al-Hajjaj stood up
and said: “O AmeerulMu’mineen! I will do it”, after which
al-Hajjaj told ‘Abdul-Malik a story claiming that he had seen
him in a dream and so he said: ‘O Ameer ul-Mu’mineen! I
saw myself take hold of ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair and it was
as if I skinned him like an animal; therefore, send me as I will
surely kill him! ’He subsequently dispatched him with a dense
army comprised of the people of ash-Sham, in addition to
sending a treaty guaranteeing protection to the people of
Makkah provided that they submitted in obedience to him. ”
It is said that al-Hajjaj set out this year during the month of
Jumada with a thousand horsemen from ashSham. He
embarked on the route from al-‘Iraq without passing by alMadinah, instead stopping at-Ta’if from where he began to
dispatch delegations to ‘Arafat. At the same time, Ibn azZubair sent out horsemen to intercept al-Hajjaj, whose
horsemen defeated them. Following this, al-Hajjaj wrote to
‘Abdul-Malik seeking his permission to enter the Haram
(Holy Sanctuary at Makkah) in order to lay siege to Ibn azZubair, stating that his sword had become blunt, his soldiers
had grown bored and his general associates had parted from
him, for which al-Hajjaj additionally requested that he extend
some of his men to him for assistance.
‘Abdul-Malik wrote to Tariq bin ‘Amr commanding him and
his partisans to assume his position alongside al-Hajjaj, as
prior to this, Tariq had intended to return to ‘Abdul-Malik in
al-Madinah. Instead, ‘Abdul-Malik instructed him to station
himself in Wadi al-Qura with his army from al-Madinah and
283

elsewhere, who together were claimed to number
approximately five thousand strong, three thousand of whom
were from ash-Sham. Thus, al-Hajjaj set out on his journey
from at-Ta’if whereupon he stopped at Bi’r Maimoon and
enclosed Ibn az-Zubair inside the mosque.
Upon entering the month of Dhul-Hijjah of this year, al-Hajjaj
performed the Hajj Pilgrimage with the people, during which
he and his comrades were armed with their weapons while
standing on Mount ‘Arafat, which was also the case at the
other stations of the Pilgrimage. As Ibn az-Zubair was under
siege, he was not able to perform the Hajj Pilgrimage this year
and so he ritually had animals slaughtered on the Day of Nahr
(Sacrifice) as a substitute. It is because of this that many of
those were with al-Hajjaj and Tariq bin ‘Amr on the Hajj
Pilgrimage were unable to circumambulate the House (i. e.
the Ka‘bah) and instead remained dressed in their Ihram (Hajj
garments) without completing the second part of the
Pilgrimage rites. This is why al-Hajjaj and his comrades
stopped over at a place between al-Hajoon and Bi’r Maimoon
– Truly, to Allah we belong and to Him we shall return.
Ibn Jareer says: “In this year, ‘Abdul-Malik wrote to
‘Abdullah bin Khazim, the Ameer of Khurasan inviting him
to pledge allegiance to him and further proposing that he
divide up Khurasan with him for a period of seven years.
Upon receiving the letter, he said to the messenger: ‘Was it
Abu’dh- Dhibban who sent you?By Allah, if you were not just
a messenger, I would have killed you already! Nevertheless,
I command you to eat this letter of his! ’And so he ate it.
‘Abdul-Malik therefore went to Bukair bin Wishah, Ibn
Khazim’s deputy over Marw (present-day Mary, town in
Turkmen S. S. R), to promise him leadership of Khurasan on
the provision that he abandon ‘Abdullah bin Khazim, which
he did. Thus, Ibn Khazim advanced against him in battle,
resulting in his own death supposedly at the hands of Wakee‘
bin ‘Umairah with the help of others. It is said that Wakee‘
284

sat on his chest while he was barely alive and when he tried
to move him off, he was unable to do so. As such, Wakee‘
started saying to him: “O supporters of Duwailah (referring to
his brother) ! ” Duwailah had previously been killed by Ibn
Khazim. At that point, Ibn Khazim spat in Wakee‘’s face who
later said: “I never saw anyone spit as much as he did whilst
in that state. ” He then severed his head and sent it to ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan with news of the Muslim victory and
triumph. This in turn delighted ‘Abdul-Malik whowrote to
Bukair bin Wishah confirming his deputyship of Khurasan.
In this year, ‘Abdul-Malik seized deputyship of al-Madinah
from Ibn az-Zubair and appointed it to Tariq bin ‘Amr who
he had sent with reinforcements to al-Hajjaj in the battle
against Ibn az-Zubair.

A Brief Outline of Ibn Khazim’s Life
His name was ‘Abdullah bin Khazim bin Asma’ as-Sulami,
Abu Salih al-Basri, the Ameer of Khurasan who was one of
the bravest horsemen and personalities ever mentioned.
Shaikh Abul-Hajjaj al-Mizzi maintains in his Tahdheeb that
he was a Companion of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) who related narrations that appear in the
compilations of Abu Dawood, at-Tirmithi and an-Nasa’i,
though they are not ascribed to him by name.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
Al-Ahnaf bin Qais bin Mu‘awiyah bin Husain at-Tameemi asSa‘di, Abu Bahr al-Basri, was a respectable and prestigious
devout worshipper who was also well-versed and
knowledgable. He was renowned for the analogies and
examples he would draw. Muhammad bin Sa‘d said about
him: “He was trustworthy, he would speak little and he would
pray for long periods throughout the night. ” Al-Ahnaf bin
285

Qais once said: “Nobody can challenge me except if I were
subject to one of three circumstances:If he were on top of me
such that I would be forced to acknowledge his strength; if he
were underneath me such that I would have to get myself off
from him; and if he were like me such that I would have to
prefer one over the other. ” He also said: “I do not say
anything bad about a person who has just left my presence
and I have never heard a bad word said against me except that
I then bowed my head for having been gotten the better of. ”
A man once insulted him verbally and so when he arrived
amidst his people who were at a gathering, he stood up and
said: “If you have something else to say then say it so that my
people can hear you, because they would certainly punish you
for it. ” Al-Ahnaf died in al-Koofah and Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair
offered the prayer at his funeral and walked with the
procession.
Also among those who died was al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib bin alHarith who narrated many Ahadeeth from the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
‘Abeedah as-Salmani al-Qadi, namely, ‘Abeedah bin ‘Amr,
who was also known as Qais bin ‘Amr asSalmani, al-Muradi
Abu ‘Amr al-Koofi.
Others who Died in this Year include:
‘Abdullah bin as-Sa’ib bin Saifi al-Makhzoomi, the Qari’
(one who recites the Qur’an) for the people of Makkah, to
whom Companionship and the transmission of narrations is
ascribed.
‘Atiyyah bin Busr al-Mazini, to whom Companionship and
the transmission of narrations is ascribed, died in al-Madinah.

286

‘Ubaid bin Nadlah, Abu Mu‘awiyah, al-Khuza‘i al-Koofi,
who was a teacher of Qur’an recitation to the people of alKoofah.
‘Ubaidullah bin Qais ar-Ruqayyat, al-Qurashi al-‘Amiri, who
was a poet died in this year.
‘Abdullah bin Hammam, Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman ash-Sha‘ir, asSalooli, a well-known poet of Fus-ha
(classical Arabic).

Upon Entering the Seventy-Third Year
As we mentioned earlier, al-Hajjaj led the people in the Hajj
Pilgrimage this year, amongst whom was Ibn ‘Umar about
whom ‘Abdul-Malik had written to al-Hajjaj, instructing him
not to differ with Ibn ‘Umar whilst on the Pilgrimage (as we
know from the Saheehain).
This year commenced with the people of ash-Sham laying
siege to the people of Makkah during which alHajjaj lit the
torches of Makkah to facilitate the siege that lasted until its
people left under the protection and in obedience to ‘AbdulMalik. In the company of al-Hajjaj was a band of people who
had approached him from the land of Abysinnia. Thus, they
launched their fire cannons and killed scores of people
alongside them, whilst al-Hajjaj had five fire canons that he
had lit in every direction a means of denying the people access
to food and water, which resulted in them drinking from the
Zamzam (a holy spring in Makkah). During the turmoil, the
Black Stone had been put inside of the Ka‘bah, upon which
al-Hajjaj shouted to his associates: ‘O people of ash-Sham!
To Allah in obedience! ”And so they began to attack Ibn azZubair who allegedly managed to singlehandedly seize them
and chase them out through the Banu Shaibah gateway.
However, they made a second attempt against him but, once
again, he was able to seize them immediately and on that day
287

he killed a group of them whilst saying: “Take hold of them!
I am the son of al-Hawari! ”It was said to Ibn az-Zubair: “Will
you not speak with them for the sake of reconciliation?” He
replied: “By Allah! If they found you inside the Ka‘bah, they
would still butcher you all! By Allah! I will never seek
reconciliation with them! ”It is maintained by others that
when they launched their fire cannons, it began to thunder and
lightning struck so loudly that it drowned out the sound of the
canons being shot. The people, approximately ten thousand of
them, gradually left under the protection of al-Hajjaj and in
doing so abandoned Ibn az-Zubair. In return, Al-Hajjaj
provided them with security and as a result considerably
diminished the number of Ibn az-Zubair’s associates,
including Hamzah and Khubaib, the two sons of ‘Abdullah
bin az-Zubair, who sought the protection of al-Hajjaj for
themselves.
Under these circumstances, ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair went to
see his mother, Asma’ to consult her on the matter of their
betrayal before the people who had left with their children and
families. He told her of how all but a few of his supporters
had deserted him either out of fear or greed and that the
community had shown no patience. He said to her:
“Messengers have been sent by the Bani Umayyah tribe
proposing that I stop the fight, and they would give me
whatever I ask for. Should I just take what I desire from this
world?” She answered him: “O son! You know yourself best.
If you believe that you are on the right path and fighting for
the truth, perservere and be patient in the fight as were your
supporters who died for it; in that case, you should not
surrender to the Banu Umayyah tribe for the sake of your own
neck. But if it is the world that you desire, I would certainly
question what kind of a person you really are, as you would
only be wretched and you have ruined yourself as well as
those associates of yours who were killed alongside you.
Death is in fact better for you than that. ” Pleased by his
mother’s opinion, he bent down to kiss her head and said: “By
288

Allah! I only came hoping to hear what you have just said.
That is my view exactly. ” He then reaffirmed: “By Allah! I
do not desire the world nor do I love the life it has to offer and
I believe that al-Hajjaj does not call me to him except that he
angers Allah through his sinful acts. However, I wanted to
know your opinion on the matter and you have only
reinforced what I already thought. You see mother, I have
been murdered on this day, so do not hold onto your grief but
instead entrust the affair to Allah, for your son neither
succumbed to evil nor dealt in corruption and immorality, nor
did he depart from the rule of Allah nor betray an oath nor
oppress a Muslim or one bound by a contract. I hope because
of that, I have in some way pleased my Lord, the Majestic and
Sublime. O Allah! I do not say this in an attempt to expiate
myself, as Allah, you know me better than myself and others;
however, I say this in order to console my mother and to
dispel her worries over me! ”At that point his mother said: “I
would grieve only if you died for an unjust cause. I look to
Allah to provide me with comfort during my mourning period
over you if you go before me, and for the same to apply to you
if I go before you. So go my son, in order that I might see
what will become of your affairs. ” So he said: “May Allah
reward you with goodness mother and do not neglect your
supplication to Allah before or after what is going to happen.
” She then said: “I would ever supplicate for you, for someone
who killed for the wrong reasons, just you have killed for the
truth! ”After that she said: “O Allah! Show mercy throughout
the standing, weeping and thirst of the midday heat in alMadinah and Makkah and make him dutiful to his father and
I. O Allah! I entrust him to your will and I am pleased with
whatever You decree. Make ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair amongst
those who are patient and thankful. ” She then said to Ibn azZubair: “Come down to me so that I may bid you farewell”,
so he did whereby she kissed and hugged him and then bade
him farewell. As she embraced him, she found that he was
wearing an iron armour, to which she remarked: “O son! What
does one who desires conviction of faith need with an
289

armour?” He replied: “O mother! I wore this purposely to set
your mind at rest and appease you heart. ” So she said: “On
the contrary, my son! Remove it! ”So he took it off and put
on the rest of his clothes during which she told him to tuck up
his garment, upon which he fastened his lower garment in
order to conceal his ‘Awrah (private parts) in the event of him
being killed. She then began to remind him of his father, azZubair, his grandfather, Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq, his
grandmother, Safiyyah bint ‘Abd al-Muttalib, and his
maternal aunt, ‘A’ishah, the wife of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and how he
would be returning to them upon his death as a martyr. He
then left her presence, which was to be their very last
encounter together (may Allah be pleased with them both and
with his father and her father). She said to him as he was
leaving: “Set out to perform your mission wholeheartedly”, at
which point he bid her goodbye while saying (in at-Taweel
poetic meter):
“I am neither on the quest for a prolonged life
Nor do I ascend the stairs fearing death. ”
Catapults had been fired at him that just skimmed his clothes,
though he was not dissuaded by them; rather he continued to
fight against his opposition like a fierce lion that amazed the
people of ash-Sham and others. Then, on Tuesday night on
the 17th Jumadal-Oola of this year, Ibn az-Zubair stayed in
his house and spent the entire night in prayer. He then sat with
his legs drawn up and wrapped in his garment whilst holding
on to his sword, in which position he fell asleep. He later woke
up at the time of Fajr (dawn prayer) according to his habit,
upon which he said: “Say the call to prayer, O Sa‘d. ” The call
to prayer was then given at its usual time, at which point Ibn
az-Zubair performed ablution and offered two units of
superogatory prayer, after which he established the
congregational Fajr prayer, therein reciting Soorat Noon word
290

by word. Upon completing the prayer, he then praised and
glorified Allah, after which he said to his companions: “I will
not be seen today other than dead, for verily I saw the sky split
open in my dreams whereupon I entered into it. By Allah, I
have certainly grown tired of this life and exceeded the age of
seventy-two, which was my father’s age upon his death. O
Allah! I long to meet You so long to meet me too! ”He then
said: “Reveal your faces so that I may look at you”, so they
lifted their helmets from their faces whereupon he began to
motivate and encourage them to engage in battle with patience
and perseverance. He then got up and they embarked towards
al-Hajjoon where they encountered hot rocks being launched
at them from catapults, one of which hit Ibn az-Zubair in the
face causing him to tremble. When he felt the heat of the
blood that poured from his face he quoted the words (in atTaweel poetry):
“Our wounds do not bleed on our backs
But on our feet, blood is dripping! ”
At that point, Ibn az-Zubair tried to pull back, although he was
hit by a fire ball once again but this time it hit him fatally in
the back of his head, causing him to fall to the floor on his
face and even though he gained consciousness after that, he
was unable to stand up. The people then scurried towards him,
at which point a man from the people of ash-Sham grabbed
hold of him, though Ibn az-Zubair was able to beat him by
cutting off his legs as he held himself up by his left elbow.
However, the people continued to charge at him with their
swords in their masses until they eventually overpowered and
killed him (May Allah be pleased with him).
It follows that the people then went to al-Hajjaj and informed
him of Ibn az-Zubair’s death, at which point he fell to the
ground in prostration (may Allah revile him). He then stood
with Tariq bin ‘Amr over Ibn az-Zubair who lay dead on the
291

battlefield, whereupon Tariq said: “No woman has ever given
birth to a more intelligent man than him. ” At that, al-Hajjaj
said: “You praise a man who put up resistance to obeying the
Ameer ul-Mu’mineen?” He said: “Yes. He posed the most
difficulty for us because we blockaded him while he neither
had a fortress nor trench nor force to take vengeance on us,
yet he managed to surpass us in all situations. ” When ‘AbdulMalik heard of this he agreed with Tariq.
Al-Hajjaj subsequently wrote to ‘Abdul-Malik about what
had happened and sent him the head of Ibn azZubair along
with the heads of ‘Abdullah bin Safwan and ‘Umarah bin
Hazm. ‘Abdul-Malik then ordered them to pass by alMadinah and prop their heads up on display, following which
they should go to ashSham and do the same, which they
carried out accordingly.
The heads were sent with a man from al-Azd to ‘Abdul-Malik
who paid him five hundred Deenar for his service. He then
called for some tongs to be brought to him which he used to
pick up the head by the forelock to show his sons who rejoiced
at the death of Ibn az-Zubair (may Allah give them what they
deserve), after which he ordered al-Hajjaj to take Ibn azZubair’s body and crucify him in Thaniyyah Kada’ in alHajoon, also known as Munakkasah. It turns out that he was
still hanging there when ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar passed by,
which caused him to remark: “May Allah have mercy on you,
O Abu Khubaib, for by Allah, you observed the prayer and
fasted much. ” Then he said: “Is it now not time for this one
who has been put up to be brought down?” And so he
summoned al-Hajjaj to take him down from the tree and bury
him there.

292

The Biography of Ameerul-Mu’mineen,
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair (May Allah be
pleased with him)
His name was ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair bin al-‘Awwam bin
Khuwailid bin Asad bin ‘Abdul-‘Uzza bin Qusayy bin Kilab,
whose epithet was Abu Bakr. He was an honourable
Companion (Sahabi) who transmitted narrations (Ahadeeth)
from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
as well as from his father az-Zubair bin al-‘Awwam, ‘Umar,
Uthman and others. The Tabi‘oon (second and third
generations following the righteous Companions) narrated
traditions on his authority. He participated in the Battle of the
Jamal with his father when he was a young boy and attended
‘Umar’s sermon in alJabiyah, which he then narrated in its
entirety to others who were absent.
It is verified on the authority of Hisham from his father who
narrated it from Asma’ that she left Makkah as an Emigrant
while she was still pregnant with ‘Abdullah, and gave birth to
him in Quba’ as soon as they had entered al-Madinah. She
then took him to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) who put his blessed saliva in his mouth,
named him ‘Abdullah and then supplicated to Allah for him.
The Muslims rejoiced greatly at his birth, especially since the
Jews had claimed that they had performed magic on the
Muslims so that no child would be born to the Muslims in alMadinah. Hence, when Ibn az-Zubair was born, the Muslims
exclaimed Takbeer (saying Allahu Akbar; the exaltation
‘Allah is the Greatest! ’).
Salim bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Urwah narrated from his father that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had spoken of adolescents who had reached the prime of
their lives, amongst whom was ‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far,
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair and ‘Umar bin Abu Salamah. It was
said: “O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
293

upon him) ! If you acknowledge their leadership then bestow
your blessings on them so that they will be remembered. ”
They were brought to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair
came rushing towards him, at which the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) smiled and said:
“You are certainly your father’s son”, upon which he
acknowledged his leadership.
It has incorrectly been narrated that Ibn az-Zubair drank the
blood of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) according to the claim that after the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had performed cupping in a
basin, he then gave it to Ibn az-Zubair to pour away but
instead he drank from it. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) then supposedly said to him: “The Fire
will never touch you. Woe unto you and woe unto the people
from you. ” In another narration he said to him: “O ‘Abdullah!
Take this blood and pour it away where nobody can see it”
and so after he had taken the blood from him, he drank it.
When he returned, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said to him: “What did you do with the blood?”
He replied: “I drank it so that I might increase in knowledge
and faith and so that I might have something from the body of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in my body, which is made from the earth. ” At this,
hesaid: “Tell the people that the Fire will never touch you.
Woe unto you and woe unto the people from you! ”
Ibn al-Munkadir is reported to have said: “If you saw Ibn azZubayr praying, it was like seeing the branches of a tree
moving with the wind with fireballs landing here and there. ”
Sufyan said: “It was if he did not care about anything other
than his prayer. ”
When Ibn ‘Abbas was asked about Ibn az-Zubair, he said :
“He was a reciter of Allah’s Book, an adherent of the
294

Prophet’s Sunnah, devoted to Allah, fasting out of fear of
Him, the son of thedisciple of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) whose mother was the
daughter of as-Siddeeq and maternal aunt was ‘A’ishah, the
wife of Allah’s beloved (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him). He was not ignorant of the truth except for what
Allah had blinded him from seeing.
His body was slim though not particulary tall and he bore the
mark of prostration between his eyebrows. He would engage
in worship with great effort, passion and diligence and he
would fast and stand in prayer until it affected his pride. He
had a noble and well-respected personality and his beard was
especially faint, in fact, he did not have much facial hair at all.
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair had been one of those who rebelled
against ‘Uthman on the day of ad-Dar, on the occasion of
which he was inflicted with nineteen different injuries. He
proceeded on foot on the day of the Jamal whereby he was
once again inflicted with nineteen injuries and it was on that
day that he and Malik bin al-Harith bin al-Ashtar engaged in
battle against one another. Thus upon encountering each
other, al-Ashtar wrestled Ibn az-Zubair to the ground,
although he was unable to get back up as Ibn azZubair clasped
him in his arms and began to shout:
“You kill me and Malik; kill Malik with me!”
Once they let go of each other, it is said that Ibn az-Zubair,
who had already suffered some forty-odd injuries on that day,
then killed Ibn al-Ashtar while barely alive himself. It is also
said that ‘A’ishah gave ten thousand Dirhams to the person
who delivered her the good news that Ibn az-Zubair had not
been killed and she fell to the floor in prostration and gave
thanks to Allah. In fact, ‘A’ishah loved Ibn azZubair dearly,
as he was her nephew who was particulary beloved to her. It
is narrated by ‘Urwah that ‘A’ishah never loved anyone after
295

the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and Abu Bakr like Ibn az-Zubair. He said: “I never saw
my father and ‘A’ishah supplicate for anyone else like the
way they supplicated for Ibn az-Zubair. ”
Al-‘Asma‘i said: “When Ibn az-Zubair entered upon
Mu‘awiyah, he saw Mu‘awiyah summon a young boy to him
and then slap him across the head so hard that it made him fall
down in a faint. Once the boy had regained consciousness, Ibn
az-Zubair said to him: “Come close to me”, so he did. He then
said to him: “Slap Mu‘awiyah back. ” He said: “I cannot. ” So
he asked: “And why is that?” He replied: “Because he is my
father”, at which point Ibn az-Zubair lifted his hand and
slapped him so hard that he spun round in a full circle. At this,
Mu‘awiyah said: “You do this to a boy who has not
committed any crime?” He said: “By Allah! He knows the
difference between what will harm him and what will benefit
him and so I only wanted to refine his manners. ”
Ibn az-Zubair’s period of leadership began in the sixty-fourth
year during which he spent the whole year performing the
Hajj Pilgrimage with the people. The Ka‘bah was rebuilt
during his rule in accordance with the instructions of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and in keeping with its original structure as we know
from ‘A’ishah, Ummul-Mu’mineen. He additionally draped it
in silk, while previously it had been covered with a leather
cover.
Ibn az-Zubair was a knowledgable, esteemed and honoured
believer and servant of Allah who would perform prayers and
fast with great humility and sincerity. He was also a
particularly diplomatic person and had a staunchly political
bent of mind. Ahmad states that ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan is
reported to have said that when he was besieged, ‘Abdullah
bin az-Zubair said to him: “If I had nobility behind me I would
have prepared them for you. Are you able to move to Makkah
296

and have whoever desires to come to you to go to you there?”
So ‘Uthman replied: “No. Indeed, I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘A
chieftan from the Quraish in Makkah whose name is
‘Abdullah will abandon his faith; it is as if he carries the sins
of all people. ’”
Muslim bin al-Hajjaj narrates in his Saheehthat Abu Nawfal
said: “I saw ‘Abdullah bin Az-Zubair (hanging) on the road
to al-Madinah while the Quraish and the people were passing
him by. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar was one of those who passed
him, whereupon he stopped and said: ‘Peace be upon you,
Abu Khubaib! Peace be upon you, Abu Khubaib! Peace be
upon you, Abu Khubaib! By Allah, I told you not to do this!
By Allah, I told you not to do this! By Allah, I told you not to
do this! By Allah, as far as I know, you were devoted to
fasting and praying, and you upheld the ties of kinship. By
Allah, a nation of which you are the worst is a good nation’.
When al-Hajjaj heard of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar stopping there
and saying that, he sent a message for Ibn az-Zubair’s body to
be removed from the tree and thrown into the graveyard of the
Jews. After that he sent for Ibn az-Zubair’s mother, Asma’
bint Abu Bakr, to go to him but she outright refused. The
messenger therefore said to her again: ‘Either you will come
or I shall send someone to you who will drag you by your
hair’. However, she refused and said: ‘By Allah, I will not
come until you do that. ’ When al-Hajjaj was informed about
this, he immediately said: ‘Bring me my shoes! ’He then put
on his shoes and set out, puffed up with pride, until he entered
upon her and said: ‘What do you think about what I did to the
enemy of Allah?’She said: ‘I think that you ruined his life in
this world, but he has ruined your life in the Hereafter. I heard
that you said to him: ‘O son of DhatunNitaqain (the woman
with the two girdles) ’. By Allah, as for the woman with two
girdles, she used one of them to hang the food of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and Abu Bakr out of the reach of wild animals, and the
297

other was the girdle that no woman can do without. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), told us: ‘Among Thaqeef there will be a liar and a great
slaughterer’. As for the liar, we have seen him, and as for the
great slaughterer, I do not think that it is anyone but you’. AlHajjaj then got up and left her without commenting. ”
It is a well-known that Ibn az-Zubair’s death took place in the
seventy-third year on Tuesday, 14th Jumadal-Oola, while
others have claimed that it was more likely towards the end of
this month. Malik and others, on the other hand, maintain that
his death occurred at the end of the seventy-second year; the
first opinion, however, is the most correct and common one.
He received the pledge of allegiance on the 7th of Rajab in the
sixty-fourth year. He was born in the first year of the Hijrah,
while others maintain it was in the month of Shawwal of the
second year of the Hijrah. He died having exceeded the age
of seventy – and Allah, the Sublime, knows best.
It is narrated that his mother said to al-Hajjaj: “Is it now not
time for the one who has been hanging to be taken down?”
Al-Hajjaj replied: “Your son is a hypocrite. ” So she said: “By
Allah! He was not a hypocrite! In fact, he used to be devoted
to prayer and fasting! ”At this, he yelled: “Go away old
woman! You are senile anyway! ”She therefore responded:
“By Allah! I am not senile, for I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘Amongst
the Thaqeef there will be a liar and a great slaughterer’. As for
the liar, we have seen him, and as for the great slaughterer, I
do not think that it is anyone but you. ”

Prominent People Killed Alongside Ibn azZubair in Makkah during the Seventy-Third
Year
‘Abdullah bin Safwan bin Umayyah bin Khalaf al-Jumahi
who had reached the age of maturity during the lifetime of the
298

Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
narrated traditions on the authority of ‘Umar and a group of
the Companions (Sahabah). He later transmitted these to some
of the Tabi‘een (second and third generations following the
Companions).
‘Abdullah bin Mutee‘ bin al-Aswad bin Harithah al-Qurashi
al-‘Adawi al-Madani who was born during the lifetime of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who put
his blessed saliva in his mouth and supplicated for blessings
upon him. It is narrated by his father that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “No
man of Quraish is to be captured and killed after this day [the
conquest of Makkah] until the Day of Resurrection. ”
‘Awf bin Malik (May Allah be pleased with him) whose full
name was ‘Awf bin Malik bin Abu ‘Awf alAshja‘i alGhatafani, the honourable Companion who participated in
Mu’tah with Khalid bin al-Waleed and other former leaders
and who also witnessed the conquest of Makkah.
Asma’ bint Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq, the mother of ‘Abdullah bin
az-Zubair, who was also known as Dhatun-Nitaqain [the
woman wearing two girdles].
Ibn Jareer says: “During this year, which is the seventy-third
year, ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Khalid bin ‘Abdullah from alBasrah in order to extend the domain of his brother Bishr bin
Marwan with that of alKoofah, who then travelled to alKoofah where he appointed ‘Amr bin Huraith as his
successor.

Also during this year:
Muhammad bin Marwan undertook a summer military
expedition and defeated ar-Room (the Romans).
299

It is believed that this was the year in which ‘Uthman bin
Waleed carried out a military expedition within Armeeniyyah
(Armenian territority) with an army of four thousand men
against the army of ar-Room (the Romans), which it is
claimed numbered some sixty-thousand men. Nevertheless,
the Muslims were able to defeat them and caused them to
suffer a significantly high death toll.

Others Not Yet Mentioned Who Also Died in
this Year
‘Abdullah bin Sa‘d bin Khaithamah al-Ansari to whom
companionship has been ascribed and who participated in alYarmook. He was known for his devotion to prayer and for
participating in numerous raids and military campaigns.
‘Abdullah bin Abu Hadrad al-Aslami Abu Muhammad to
whom companionship and the transmission of narrations has
been ascribed and who died in al-Madinah.
Malik bin Misma‘ bin Ghassan al-Basri who would exert great
effort in acts of worship and was known for his asceticism.
Thabit bin ad-Dahhak al-Ansari to whom companionship and
the transmission of narrations is ascribed and who died in alMadinah. He was also known as Abu Zaid al-Ashhali and was
one of the people who pledged their allegiance under the tree.
Yahya bin Abu Katheer says: “Abu Qilabah informed me that
Thabit bin ad-Dahhak informed him that he pledged
allegiance to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) under the tree and that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
‘Whoever accuses a believer of disbelief then it is as if he
killed him. ”
Zainab bint Abu Salamah al-Makhzoomiyyah who was the
step-daughter of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
300

upon him) and whose mother gave birth to her in Abysinnia.
The transmission of narrations and companionship has been
ascribed to her.
Tawbah bin al-Humayyir, also known as Majnoon Layla
(Layla’s fanatic).

Upon Entering the Seventy-Fourth Year
During this year, ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Tariq bin ‘Amr
from his post in al-Madinah and instead extended it to alHajjaj bin Yoosuf ath-Thaqafi. He then moved and resided
there for a month, after which he left for Makkah in order to
perform ‘Umrah and then returned to al-Madinah in the month
of Safar where he then stayed for a period of three months. It
was during this time that he constructed a mosque in Banu
Salimah, which has retained that name until today. It is said
that also during this period, al-Hajjaj rebuked and blamed
Jabir and Sahl bin Sa‘d during a sermon in which he addressed
them both harshly and cruelly (may Allah revile him) for not
proving victorious over ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan. He also
allegedly appointed Abu Idrees al-Khawlani as the district
judge of Yemen -- Allah knows best.
Ibn Jareer says: “It was during this year that al-Hajjaj
demolished the Ka‘bah that had been built by Ibn az-Zubair
in accordance with the original building. ” Al-Hajjaj did not
destroy the entire building of the Ka‘bah but he did demoilish
its northern wall so severely that it caused the Black Stone to
fall out. He then covered the hole and put the Black Stone
inside the Ka‘bah without showing any special treatment to
the Stone whatsoever. The other three walls remained as they
were and so did the eastern and western doors that had been
fixed into the ground as we see even today. However, he
completely blocked the eastern door and changed the lower
western door so that it was raised as it had been during the
days of Ignorance, since neither al-Hajjaj nor ‘Abdul-Malik
301

bin Marwan had received the Prophetic knowledge that Ibn
az-Zubair had been imparted by his maternal aunt, UmmulMu’mineen, ‘A’ishah, the daughter of as-Siddeeq (May Allah
be pleased with them).
‘A’ishah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to her: “O ‘A’ishah!
Were your people not close to Jahiliyyah (the Period of
Ignorance), I would have had the Ka‘bah demolished and I
would have included in it the portion which had been left out.
I would have made it at a level with the ground and made two
doors for it: one towards the east and the other towards the
west, as by doing this it would have been built on the
foundations laid by (the Prophet) Ibraheem (Abraham). ”
Since Ibn az-Zubair had reconstructed the Ka‘bah in keeping
with this, when ‘Abdul-Malik later heard this Hadeeth, he
uttered: “We wish we had left it alone and it would have been
that way. ”
In this year, al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah was assigned to the
al-Azariqah war whereby ‘Abdul-Malik instructed his
brother, Bishr bin Marwan, to prepare an army for alMuhallab comprised of the people of al-Basrah and al-Koofah
to advance against the Khawarij of al-Azariqah.
Also in this year, ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Bukair bin Wishah
at-Tameemi from his office in Khurasan and instead
appointed Umayyah bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Khalid bin Aseed
al-Qurashiin order to win the backing of the people.

Remembering Some of the Prominent People
who Died in this Year
Rafi‘ bin Khadeej bin Rafi‘ al-Ansari, an honourable
Companion (Sahabi), who participated in the Battle of Uhud
and the events following it.
302

Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri, Sa‘d bin Malik bin Sinan al-Ansari alKhazraji, was an honourable Companion (Sahabi) and one of
the jurists among their midst. He was considered too young to
participate in Uhud, though he later became the first to
participate in the Battle of Khandaq (the Trench), whereafter
he participated in twelve military campaigns alongside the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). He also narrated many Ahadeeth.
At-Tabari reportsthat Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri said: “I said: ‘O
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ! Which people were afflicted with the biggest tests?’So
he said: ‘The Prophets’. I said: ‘Then who?’He said: ‘The
righteous, some of whom were tested with poverty until they
could not find anything other than a cloak to put around
themselves; one of them became lice-infested to the point that
he could not get rid of them;and one of them rejoiced at a
calamity as one of you rejoices at prosperity. ”

‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, alQurashi al-‘Adawi, Abu ‘AbdurRahman, the
Makkan and later the Madinan
He embraced Islam early on with his father before he reached
the age of puberty and he emigrated with him when he was
just ten years of age. He was considered too young to
participate in the Battle of Uhud, however, he later qualified
to take part in the Battle of the Trench at the age of just fifteen,
whereafter he participated in the events following it. He was
the full brother of Hafsah bint ‘Umar, Ummul-Mu’mineen,
whose mother was Zainab bint Maz‘oon, the sister of
‘Uthman bin Maz‘oon.
‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar was a quarter of the size of most men
due to a disorder he suffered between his shoulders. His body
was yellowish in colour and he would frequently dye his
mustache. He would perfom ablution before every prayer
303

during which he would even put the water in his eyes.
‘Uthman requested his services as a judge, although he
refused in the same manner that his father had done before
him. He participated in al-Yarmook, al-Qadisiyyah, Jaloola’
and the events that happened in Persia in between them. He
also witnessed the conquest of Egypt.
He owned a slave-girl whom he used to love dearly and so he
freed and married her to his slave, Nafi‘, as Allah, the
Sublime, says (what means):
“By no means shall you attain Birr (righteousness; Allah’s
reward) unless you spend (in Allah’s Cause) of that which
you love. ” [Aal ‘Imran, 3:92]
Likewise, he had bought a sturdy camel that pleased him
every time he rode it and so one day he said: “O Nafi‘! Give
this camel away in charity”, whereafter Ibn Ja‘far offered anNafi‘ ten thousand Dirhams for it but he refused to take the
money. Therefore, it was said to him: “What do you want in
order to sell it?” So an-Nafi ‘ said: “I want what is better than
that. It can go for free for the sake of Allah! ”
It is verified in the Saheehon the authority of Hafsah that the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“Verily, ‘Abdullah would be a good man if he were to spend
the night observing prayer” and so since then, ‘Abdullah
would offer prayer throughout the night.
Ibn Mas‘ood says: “Among the youth of the Quraish who
would disdain worldly luxuries the most was Ibn ‘Umar. ”
Jabir says: “There was not a single one of us who was not
inclined towards the world and vice-versa except for Ibn
‘Umar. ” Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab says: “On the day that Ibn
‘Umar died, nobody wanted anything more than to meet Allah
as he would do. ” Az-Zuhri says: “His opinion could not be
matched given that he lived for sixty years after the time of
304

the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
meaning that he witnessed everything pertaining to the affairs
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) as
well as those of his Companions (May Allah be pleased with
them). ”
Malik says: “Ibn ‘Umar reached the age of eighty-six. He
started to issue legal opinions from the age of sixty whereby
people would travel from all over the world to ask his opinion.
” Al-Waqidi and others say: “Ibn ‘Umar died at the age of
seventy-four”, whilst az-Zubair bin Bukair and others
maintain that he died aged seventy-three; the first opinion,
however, is the most correct one – Allah knows best.
It is said that Marwan said to Ibn ‘Umar: “Are you not leaving
for ash-Sham?” To which he replied: “And what will I do with
the people of al-‘Iraq?” So he said: “Make them fight against
the people of ash-Sham. ” He said: “I would not be happy if I
were the king of the earth and all the people were to pledge
allegiance to me if even a single person were killed amongst
them. ”
He died in Makkah, aged eighty-four, after the people had left
upon performing the Hajj Pilgrimage at the end of the year.
He was buried in Muhassab and he was the last Sahabi to die
in Makkah.
Abu Juhaifah says: “Wahb bin ‘Abdullah as-Suwa’i was a
Sahabi who saw the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) but who died before he reached the age of puberty;
nevertheless, he narrated a number of Ahadeeth. ”
Salamah bin al-Akwa‘ bin ‘Amr bin Sinan al-Ansari who was
one of those who pledged allegiance under the tree, as well as
a horseman and scholar among the Sahabah.
Malik bin Abu ‘Amir, al-Asbahi al-Madani, the grandfather
of Imam Malik bin Anas.
305

Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman as-Sulami who taught recitation to the
people of al-Koofah.
Abu Mu‘rid al-Asadi, whose real name was Mugheerah bin
‘Abdullah al-Koofi, was born during the lifetime of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He
visited ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan and presented him with a
poem that eulogised and praised him, and he was renowned
for his poetic talents.
Bishr bin Marwan al-Umawi, the brother of ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan, who was appointed by his brother as the leader of
the people of al-‘Iraq.

Upon Entering the Seventy-Fifth Year
Muhammad bin Marwan, the brother of ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan and the father of Marwan al-Himar, invaded arRoom after having departed from Mar‘ash in this year.
‘Abdul-Malik appointed deputyship of al-Madinah to Yahya
bin al-Hakam bin Abul-‘As, his paternal uncle, after having
dismissed al-Hajjaj.
‘Abdul-Malik appointed al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf ath-Thaqafi as
the deputy of al-‘Iraq in al-Basrah, alKoofah and their
affiliated districts after the death of his brother, Bishr bin
Marwan. ‘Abdul-Malik believed that the people of al-‘Iraq
could not be controlled by anyone other al-Hajjaj due to his
rigidity, compelling nature and astuteness. Thus, he wrote to
him while he was in al-Madinah concerning the leadership of
al-Iraq whereafter he travelled from al-Madinah to al-‘Iraq
with twelve others who then entered al-Koofah in secret,
mounted on camelback. He then stopped at a place near alKoofah in order to bathe, dye his hair and put on his clothes,
after which he then took up his sword, put a fresh shawl
around his shoulders and made his way to the Darul-‘Imarah
306

(official headquarters) where he stayed. This took place on a
Friday after the Mua’dh-dhin (caller to prayer) had made the
call for the congregational Jumu‘ah (Friday) prayer. He then
came out to the people without them knowing and ascended
the pulpit where he sat and remained silent for a long time.
Confused by what they saw, the people began to stop and stare
at him whilst they dropped to their knees in order to pick up
stones to throw at him, as they had done to the previous
official sent to them. However, when he sat there in silence,
the people were startled and therefore became curious to listen
to what he had to say. Eventually, he began by saying: “O
people of al-‘Iraq! O people of dissension and discord! O
people of hypocrisy and ill-manners! By Allah, your affairs
were certainly of interest to me before I came to you and so I
invoked Allah to try you with me and He granted my request.
Yesterday, I managed to lose my whip that I would have used
to discipline you, but this has taken its place instead” – and he
pointed to his sword. He continued, saying: “By Allah! I will
draw it on you until your women fall on their rears and I will
do to you whatever I see fit. ” As they listened to his speech,
the stones started to fall from their hands.
It is also said that he entered al-Koofah at noon while the
people were unaware during the month of Ramadan of this
year. He wore a red turban wrapped around his face, went to
the mosque, climbed the pulpit and said: “I demand the
people’s attention! ”At that point, the people and his
associates amongst the Khawarij suspected him and so they
began to grow anxious until once the people had gathered
around him, he stood up and unveiled his face while saying:
“I’m the son of a popular figure with great reputation
When I take off the turban you will come to know. ”

307

He then said: “By Allah, I will undertake a campaign against
evil and deal with it face to face! Verily, I see heads that have
grown ripe and their time has come to be plucked, and I see
tears of blood streaming between the turbans and beards:
This is the time of intensity; so camels, be strong!
Camels are
engulfed by night
and guided by a
dominant leader.
I am not a
shepherd of
camels or goats,
Nor am I a
butcher of a
plate of meat.
Darkness descends to uncover bravery,
And astuteness in finding its way throught the desert,
As an emigrant, not as an ‘Arab desert nomad. ”
He then said: “O people of al-‘Iraq! I do not intend to
overburden you nor am I filled with hate; however,
I have left intelligence and reason behind me and entered into
the wild. Verily, the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan, prepared the quivers to his arrows, stick by stick,
308

after which he placed me in charge of them. Sure enough, I
will shoot them in your direction and use them to beat you as
long as you continue to live in the valley of mayhem and
discord, practice the ways of error and sin, and choose to
renew your deviation. By Allah! I am not prepared for
anything other than to fulfil my obligation, nor will I fall short
of it, so beware of me, these people and idle talk. By Allah!
You will follow the right path or else I will assign physical
labour for every man amongst you! ”He then went on to say:
“Whoever is found – other than the three who have been sent
by al-Muhallab (referring to those who had turned back from
him after hearing about the death of Bishr bin Marwan, as we
previously mentioned) – his blood will be spilt and his wealth
will be seized. ” He then left the Minbar, entered his house
and did not say anything else after that.
Al-Hajjaj is also reported to have said in this speech of his:
“Allah gives us an example regarding the distortion of the
truth in His saying (what means): “A township
(Makkah), that dwelt secure and content, its provisions
coming to it in abundance from every place, but
(its people) denied the Favours of Allah (with
ungratefulness). So Allah made it taste extreme hunger
(famine) and fear because of that (evil, i. e. denying the
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ) which they used to do. ” [an-Nahl, 16:112]
You are like those people, so straighten your rows and
establish the prayer, otherwise by Allah, I will make you taste
humiliation until you come to understand and I will beat you
with thorny branches until you are set straight. I swear to
Allah! Devote yourselves to justice and equity and steer clear
of false rumours, or saying that so and so told me this news or
that news, or else I will carve you up into pieces with my
sword so that you leave your women as widows and your
children as orphans to prevent you from doing it again. ” And
309

he went on giving a long and cumbersome speech full of
threats and promises of dire actions.
During this year, the people ambushed al-Hajjaj in al-Basrah
when he left al-Koofah following the murder of ‘Umair bin
Dabi’. Thus, he stood before the people of al-Basrah and
addressed them in the same aggressive and harsh manner that
he had addressed the people of al-Koofah. A man, supposedly
by the name of ‘As from the Banu Yashkur tribe, then
approached him and said: “I have been afflicted with a hernia
and because of that Bishr bin Marwan excused me and
commissioned that I should be granted my maintenance from
the Baitul-Mal (Public Treasury). ” Upon hearing the man’s
claim, however, al-Hajjaj refused to accommodate it and
instead sentenced him to death, and so he was killed.
Due to this incident, the people of al-Basrah grew so scared
of him that they left the city and assembled at the
Ramahurmuza arch with ‘Abdullah bin al-Jarood as their
head. Soon after, in the month of Sha‘ban of this year, alHajjaj pursued themalong with an army of commanders from
the major cities. There, they fought a severe battle against
each other during which their commander, ‘Abdullah bin alJarood, was slain along with the chiefs of the tribes who had
been with him. Orders were issued for their heads to be
severed and displayed above the Ramahurmuza bridge and
later to be sent to al-Muhallab to serve as confirmation of his
strengthened position and the undermining of the Khawarij.
Al-Hajjaj subsequently sent a message to al-Muhallab and
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Mikhnaf ordering them to set up
resistance to the al-Azariqah and so they set out with their
supporters towards the Khawarij who they successfully
chased out of Ramahurmuza with hardly any fighting. Hence,
the Khawarij fled to the land of Kazaroon within the Saboor
district. Al-Muhallab’s men persistently followed them in
their tracks to encounter them later during the last ten days of
Ramadan.
310

When it was night, the Khawarij devised a plan of action
against al-Muhallab but they soon discovered to their
disadvantage that he had built a trench surrounding his
military base. For this reason they pursued ‘Abdur-Rahman
bin Mikhnaf who had taken no precaution despite alMuhallab’s instruction to him to build a trench around
himself, which he obviously failed to do. As a result, they
launched their attack on him and fought throughout the night,
until the outcome was in favour the Khawarij who managed
to kill ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Mikhnaf and crush a division of
his army.
Ibn Jareer says: “During this year, the operations of Salih
binMusarrih, a member of the Banu Imru’ulQais tribe, stirred
in motion. ” It is said that he was the first person to depart
from as-Sufriyyah due to having been with those people who
had performed the Hajj Pilgrimage that year, amongst whom
was Shabeeb bin Yazeed and other heads of the Khawarij.
After the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan,
had completed his Hajj Pilgrimage, he learnt that Shabeeb had
tried to assassinate him and so upon his return, he wrote to alHajjaj instructing him to round them all up.
Salih bin Musarrih has already entered al-Koofah and settled
there, besides acquiring a group of followers from the people
of Dara and al-Mawsil whom they trusted and turned to
religiously. He would teach them the Qur’an, issue legal
judgements, narrate stories and spend a lot of time in worship.
Before narrating his stories, he would customarily praise and
glorify Allah, invoke blessings upon the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), and further advocate
asceticism in the world and a longing for the Hereafter. He
would also remind the people to remember death, invoke
mercy on the Shaikhain, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, who he would
speak of favourably. However, after that he would mention
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan (May Allah be pleased with him) and
would insult and defame him, while ascribing things to him
311

as those people who had left the cities had done. After that, he
would encourage his associates to set out with the Khawarij
with the aim of enjoining good and prohibiting evil and to
refute what ‘Uthman had propagated and spread amongst the
people, for which he considered death an insignificant price
to pay and belittled the world and its affairs. These motives
provided considerable appeal to a large number of his
followers.
Shabeeb bin Yazeed al-Harithi wrote to him, since he had
been waiting a long time to make his move and had by this
time grown extremenly anxious. Shabeeb advanced towards
Salih who was stationed in Dara where they had arranged to
meet, and it was there that they disputed and argued until they
eventually concurred that they would set out at the beginning
of the month of Safar the following year (i. e. the seventysixth year). Shabeeb advanced towards Salih with his brother
Musad, al-Muhallal and al-Fadl bin ‘Amir and stationed
approximately one hundred and ten of his valiant soldiers in
Dara. When the time came, they leapt onto their steeds and
raced towards Muhammad bin Marwan, which we shall come
to recount as we cover the events of the next year, by the Will
of Allah.

Those who Died in this Year According to
Abu Mushir and Abu ‘Ubaid:
Al-‘Irbad bin Sariyah as-Sulami Abu Najeeh, the honourable
Sahabi who live in Hims (ancient Emesa, city in central
Syria). He submitted to Islam early on along with ‘Amr bin
‘Abasah (May Allah be pleased with them) and was one of
the nine Bakka’een (Weepers) whose names we mentioned
earlier, who were spoken about in the Qur’an in the words of
Allah (which mean):
“Nor (is there blame) on those who came to you to be
provided with mounts, when you said: ‘I can find no mounts
312

for you’, they turned back with their eyes overflowing with
tears of grief that they could not find anything to spend (for
Jihad). ” [at-Tawbah, 10:92]
He narrated the Hadeeth: “One day, the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) stood up and
delivered a deeply moving speech to us that melted our hearts
and caused our eyes to overflow with tears. It was said to him:
‘O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ! You have delivered a speech of farewell, so enjoin
something upon us. ’ He said: ‘I urge you to fear Allah, and
to listen and obey, even if (your leader) is an Abyssinian
slave. After I am gone, you will see great conflict. I urge you
to adhere to my Sunnah and the path of the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs, to hold fast to it, and to be wary of newly invented
matters, for every innovation is a deviation. ’” (Ahmadand
Ahlus-Sunnahas authenticated by at-Tirmidhi and others)
Abu Tha‘labah al-Khushani, the honourable Sahabi, who
witnessed the Bai‘at ar-Ridhwan, participated in the
campaign of Hunain and was amongst those who went to ashSham and disembarked in Dara, west of Damascus, in the
direction of the Qiblah (towards the Ka‘bah in Makkah),
while it has also been suggested that it was in Bilat, a town in
western Damascus, died in this year – Allah knows best.
Al-Aswad bin Yazeed, the companion of Ibn Mas‘ood and the
same al-Aswad bin Yazeed an-Nakha‘i who we mentioned
was a senior Tabi‘ee (belonging to the second and third
generations of righteous followers), also died in this year. He
was a distinguished figure among Ibn Mas‘ood’s associates
and an eminent person amidst the people of al-Koofah. He
would spend his days fasting and show great reverence for
this act of worship.
Humran bin Aban, the servant of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan who he
bought as a captive of ‘Ain ut-Tamr and who would address
313

the people on his behalf, died in this year – and Allah, the
Sublime, knows best.

Upon Entering the Seventy-Sixth Year
The first event to take place at the beginning of this year on a
Wednesday night during the month of Safar was the meeting
of Salih bin Musarrih, the Ameer of as-Sufriyyah, with
Shabeeb bin Yazeed, a determined and zealous member of the
Khawarij. During that meeting, Salih stood before them
commanding them to have Taqwa (fear; obedience) in Allah,
urging them to carry out Jihad (fighting for Allah’s cause) and
instructing them to not fight against anyone without first
inviting them to join them. Afterwards, they turned their
attention to the riding animals of Muhammad bin Marwan, the
deputy of alJazeerah as appointed by his brother, AbdulMalik, and rode off with them until they reached the land of
Dara where they stayed for thirteen nights after having
fortified their position against the people of Dara, Naseebeen
and Sinjar. Muhammad bin Marwan, the deputy of alJazeerah, subsequently dispatched fivehundred horsemen
headed by ‘Adiyy bin ‘Umairah against them, followed by
another five hundred later on. Accordingly, these one
thousand men embarked on their journey from Harran
towards the Khawarij.
However, it is said that anyone who saw them would have
thought they were being driven to their deaths from the way
they were proceeding and carrying themselves. This was
because the reputation of the Khawarij had preceded them so
much so that the opposition had heard about their might and
the severity of their motives. It was not long before they
encountered the Khawarij who crushed them after having
fought a horrific and gruesome battle. Their military
equipment and weapons were appropriated and the remnants
of their army returned to Muhammad bin Marwan, who was
infuriated by this act. He sent out another one thousand five314

hundred men under the command of al-Harith bin Ja‘wanah
and a further one thousand with Khalid bin Jaz’, to whom he
said: “Whichever one of you is the first to reach them, then let
him be the Ameer of the people. ”
Accordingly, both detachments set out with the backing of
three thousand combatants against the Khawarij who were
down to one hundred and ten men. Once they had arrived at
their destination, Salih faced Khalid bin Jaz’ across a partition
of people whilst Shabeeb faced al-Harith bin Ja‘wanah amidst
the rest of the army. A fierce battle broke out between them
that continued through the entire night. When evening fell,
both sides abstained from fighting as approximately seventy
of the Khawarij had been killed and around thirty of Ibn
Marwan’s associates had fallen. The Khawarij were
eventually put to flight that night, following which they left
al-Jazeerah and set out towards the land of al-Mawsil, passing
through ad-Daskarah (a town situated between Baghdad and
Wasit) on their way. While they were there, al-Hajjaj
dispatched three thousand soldiers under the commadership
of al-Harith bin ‘Umairah against them. In the meantime,
Salih stayed in the land of al-Mawsil with no more than ninety
men. The two sides clashed in battle, prior to which Salih had
formed his comrades into three separate units such that he
joined one of them, Shabeeb joined the unit to his right and
Suwaid bin Sulaiman joined the one to his left. On the
opposite side, al-Harith bin ‘Umairah undertook his campaign
with Abur-Rawwagh ash-Shakiri assigned to the head of his
right wing and az-Zubair bin al-Arwah at-Tameemi to the
head of his left wing.
The Khawarij put up an impressive fight despite their size and
number, whereby as Suwaid bin Sulaiman’s unit became
exposed, Salih bin Musarrih succeeded in killing their
commander. As Shabeeb was thrown to ground from his horse
amidst the fighting, the remaining Khawarij (numbering
seventy or so) ran to his rescue and swept him away into a
315

nearby fortress, while al-Harith bin ‘Umairah swiftly
managed to blockade them inside. Immediately after that,
hecommanded his associates to set the door on fire, which
they did, and then he and his army returned to their military
base and waited for it to burn down so that they could
vanquish the Khawarij once and for all. However, once the
troops had gone and begun to relax, the Khawarij managed to
break free by knocking down the door and upon doing so, they
moved in on al-Harith bin ‘Umairah’s army without delay,
whom they killed en masse. As a result, the rest of al-Harith’s
troops quickly fled to al-Mada’in and at the first opportunity,
Shabeeb and his associates seized al-Harith bin ‘Umairah’s
military base and upon their victory, al-Harith’s army became
the first army Shabeeb had ever defeated. Salih bin Mussarrih,
however, was killed on a Tuesday, ten days before the end of
Jumadal-Akhirah this year.
Also in this year, Shabeeb entered al-Koofah with his wife,
Ghazalah, after being accorded authority by the Khawarij,
who rallied around him and paid homage to him following the
death of Salih bin Musarrih. Al-Hajjaj deployed another army
against him that attacked and routed Shabeeb’s army but who
later managed to defeat them following another attack. He
then travelled to al-Mada’in where he could not obtain any
help and so he moved on until he was able to seize al-Hajjaj’s
riding animals from Kalwadha. He then decided to move in
on the people of al-Mada’in whose soldiers consequently fled
to al-Koofah.
Once the remnants of al-Hajjaj’s army had returned to him, he
decided to dispatch a further four thousand men against
Shabeeb. The army therefore passed through al-Mada’in on
their quest for him, looking high and low and even retracing
their steps, demolishing the places they searched each time
and seizing whatever they found therein, including the people.
Al-Hajjaj was so frantic that he dispatched military
detachments, delegations and reinforcements in quick
316

succession, in contrast to Shabeeb who cared for nothing in
spite of having merely a hundred and sixty horsemen backing
him --which should be considered the most astonishing fact
of this entire story.
Shabeeb diverted his journey to take an alternative road to alKoofah, which he planned to besiege, but upon drawing near
to it, its entire army advanced towards as-Sabakhah to fight
against him. Although he had been informed about this, he
still did not let it bother him, which inevitably caused the
people to feel so afraid of him that they broke away from each
other and returned to al-Koofah where they sought refuge.
Upon arriving there, however, it was said to them: “Suwaid
bin ‘Abdur-Rahman is after you and he is drawing near! ”
Shabeeb arrived at a stop with no knowledge of the
opposition’s position and, fearlessly, he ordered food and
grilled meat to be prepared for him. It was said to him: “The
soldiers have come for you and they know your
whereabouts”, yet he was neither unduly concerned nor did
he take any measures to protect himself. Instead, he said to
ad-Dihqan (who he had asked to prepare his food for him):
“Take the meat, cook it until it is well done and then hurry up
and bring it to me. ” When it was ready, he ate it, then he got
up and performed ablution perfectly, whereafter he offered a
long and contented prayer with his associates. Following that,
he got dressed into his armour, took up his two swords and
put on his metal helmet, then he said: “Saddle up my mule for
me”, to which his brother, Musad, said to him: “Are you going
to ride a mule today of all days, while your enemies are
surrounding you from all directions?” He said: “Yes. ” And
so he mounted the mule, opened the door of the rest housethat
he was in and then went out whilst saying: “I am AbulMudallah and all judgement belongs to Allah! ”He then
proceeded towards the army commander, Sa‘eed bin alMujalid (may Allah have mercy on him), who he attacked and
struck a fatal blow with an iron rod in the head that killed him.
317

He then launched an attack against the other members of the
army causing its commander to fall to the ground, while the
people fled the battlefield and headed for al-Koofah.
Shabeeb subsequently headed for al-Koofah, travelling in the
lowlands, until he reached the lower River Euphrates where
he killed a large number of people. Faced with such an
imminent threat, al-Hajjaj fled from al-Koofah to al-Basrah,
appointing ‘Urwah bin al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah as his
deputy in his absence. Shabeeb then drew near to al-Koofah
with the intention of entering it. Meanwhile, it so happened
that ad-Dahaqeen (who had previously prepared Shabeeb’s
food) informed ‘Urwah bin alMugheerah about Shabeeb’s
whereabouts. Upon finding out, he immediately wrote to alHajjaj who then left al-Basrah as soon as possible and headed
back to al-Koofah. Shabeeb also hastened to enter alKoofah
but al-Hajjaj preceded him, arriving at the time of ‘Asr (the
late afternoor prayer), whereas Shabeeb did not arrive in alMirbad until sunset. It was in the last fews hours of the night
that Shabeeb entered al-Koofah and upon doing so, he headed
straight for the Dar ul-Imarah (official headquarters) where he
beat on its door with an iron rod so hard that it left a mark that
later became known as “the mark of Shabeeb. ” He continued
to travel along the city road in search of the tribal settlements
and upon finding them, he killed the chiefs and respected
figures of the people of al-Koofah. Amongst the people he
killed was Abu Sulaim, the father of Laith bin Abu Sulaim,
‘Adiyy bin ‘Amr and Azhar bin ‘Abdullah al-Amiri, along
with a large number of clans amongst the people of al-Koofah.
Shabeeb was accompanied by his wife, Ghazalah, who was
well known for her bravery, and in this manner she entered
the mosque of al-Koofah, sat on the pulpit and began to
slander the Banu Marwan tribe.
Al-Hajjaj shouted out to the people: “O horsemen of Allah!
Ride off and spread the news! ”At that point, Shabeeb made a
quick exit from al-Koofah and so al-Hajjaj immediately
318

assembled an army of six thousand combatants who marched
after him. As Shabeeb was ahead of them, he decided to take
a nap being overwhelmed by slumber, since he had turned
back to attack al-Hajjaj’s detachment on numerous occasions
during which he succeeded in killing a significant number of
them, including a group of chiefs such as Za’idah bin
Qudamah (who was in fact the son of Shabeeb’s paternal
uncle, al-Mukhtar). When al-Hajjaj was informed about this,
he instructed ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Ash‘ath to wage war
against him, although he turned back when he was unable to
encounter Shabeeb. Al-Hajjaj next sent ‘Uthman bin Qatan
al-Harithi who this time was able to locate his exact
whereabouts and it was towards the end of this year that they
encountered one another. The outcome of the battle was that
‘Uthman was killed along with six-hundred of his comrades,
including nobles such as ‘Aqeel bin Shaddad as-Salooli,
Khalid bin Naheek al-Kindi and al-Aswad bin Rabee‘ah.
With the reccurrence and escalation of all these incidents and
deaths, the issue of Shabeeb grew so out of control that it had
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan and al-Hajjaj quivering, along
with the rest of the leaders and chiefs. ‘Abdul-Malik was
extremely frightened by then, and so he dispatched an army
from ash-Sham to advance against him during the latter part
of this year, even though Shabeeb’s army consisted of a just
small band of associates. Similarly, the hearts of the people
had filled with fear that caused them to start having serious
concerns about Shabeeb and the ordeal he had engendered,
which continued to be the case throughout the following year.
Ibn Jareer says: “During this year, ‘Abdul-Malik introduced
the pressing of the Dirham and Deenar coins and therefore
became the first person in Islamic history to have embossed
them in this way. ” On the other hand, in his book entitled
Ahkam us-Sultaniyyah [The Rules of Leadership], the judge
al-Mawardi says: “There is a difference of opinion concerning
who was the first person to emboss the coin within the Arabic
319

Islamic tradition. ” Whilst Sa‘eed bin al-Mussayab asserts that
the first to emboss the Dirham was ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan, Yahya bin an-Nu‘man al-Ghifari alternatively
narrated from his father that the first person press the Dirham
was Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair under the instructions of his
brother, ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair.
This year also saw the birth of Yahya bin Muhammad bin
Marwan bin al-Hakam, also known as Marwan al-Himar ,
who was the last caliph of the Banu Umayyah (Umayyad)
tribe from whom the Banu’l-‘Abbas (Abbasid) tribe seized
the caliphate.
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan appointed deputyship of alMadinah to Aban bin ‘Uthman after having dismissed his
paternal uncle, Yahya bin Marwan, who he instead assigned
to ash-Sham.
Aban bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, the deputy of al-Madinah, led
the Hajj Pilgrimage with the people; alHajjaj was in charge of
al-‘Iraq and Umayyah bin ‘Abdullah was in charge of
Khurasan – and Allah knows best.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
This Year:
Abu ‘Uthman an-Nahdi al-Quda‘i, whose real name was
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Mull, embraced Islam during the lifetime
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and took part in the campaigns of Jaloola’, al-Qadisiyyah,
Tustar, Nahawand, Adhrabeejan and so forth. He was devoted
to worship, spiritually and intellectually, and he would fast
during the day and pray during the night. He died at the age
of one hundred and thirty in al-Koofah.

320

Silah bin Ashyam al-‘Adawi, a senior Tabi‘ee from al-Basrah,
was especially virtuous and pious and was devoted to worship
and asceticism.
Zuhair bin Qais al-Balawi participated in the conquest of
Egypt where he later lived, companionship has been ascribed
to him and he was killed by ar-Room in Barqah located in alMaghrib (Morrocco).
Al-Mundhir bin al-Jarood also died during this year. He had
been put in charge of the Bait ul-Mal (Public Treasury) by
Mu‘awiyah – and Allah knows best.

Upon Entering the Seventy-Seventh Year
During this year, al-Hajjaj sent out the combatants of alKoofah, who altogether numbered forty thousand, which he
reinforced with another ten thousand. Thus, these fifty
thousand troops disembarked under the commandership of
‘Attab bin Warqa’ who had received orders to target Shabeeb
bin Yazeed wherever he might be. He was given orders to plot
against Shabeeb bin Yazeed and whoever was with him
amongst the thousand other men who had joined him, and to
not repeat their previous actions by trying to escape or flee
from the battlefield.
When Shabeeb received news that al-Hajjaj had dispatched
his soldiers against him, his first response was not to take
immediate action but instead he stood up and addressed his
associates, preaching to them, reminding them of Allah and
urging them to have patience until they encountered their
enemies. Shabeeb then advanced with his associates towards
‘Attab bin Warqa’ whereupon they faced each other at the end
of day before the setting of the sun, at which time Shabeeb
instructed his Mu’ath-thin (caller to prayer), Sallam bin
Sayyar ash-Shaibani, to call the Maghrib (sunset) prayer.
Shabeeb then led his comrades in praying the complete
321

Maghrib prayer, incorporating all the proper bowing and
prostrating, whilst ‘Attab bin Warqa’ lined up his men having
built a trench around himself and his army at the start of the
day. Once Shabeeb had finished the prayer, he waited until
the moon appeared and there was enough moonlight for them
to see, at which point he launched an attack against the right
and left wings of ‘Attab’s army, amongst whom were those
bearing their army’s banners. As he launched the attack, he
shouted: “I am Shabeeb Abul-Madallah and judgement
belongs to Allah alone! ”Shabeeb and his men then
successfully routed them, killing their commander, Qabeesah
bin Waliq, and a group of their chiefs who were with him. He
then turned back to attack the right wing, and then the left
wing, whereby he was able to break them apart and penetrate
into the centre, which he kept on doing until he killed their
commanders, ‘Attab bin Warqa’, and Zuhrah bin Hawiyyah.
The rest of army turned back and retreated, and in the process
they slowly trampled on ‘Attab and Zuhrah with their horses.
Also killed in the battle was ‘Ammar bin Yazeed al-Kalbi,
upon whose death Shabeeb said to his comrades: “Do not
continue to pursue the defeated. ” In this way, al-Hajjaj’s
entire army were defeated without exception andreturned to
al-Koofah humiliated.
When Shabeeb seized the military base of the opposition, he
first took the pledge of allegiance from whoever remained
there amongst them and whom he asked: “Are you fleeing
towards any particular hour?” He then seized what he found
of money and equipment, after which he summoned his
brother, Musad, from al-Mada’in, and together they headed
for al-Koofah. In the meantime, Sufyan bin al-Abrad al-Kalbi
and Habeeb bin ‘Abdur-Rahman al-Hakami from Madhhij
had arrived before al-Hajjaj with six thousand horsemen, in
addition to some people from ash-Sham, which satisfied alHajjaj who decided to use them to assist the people of alKoofah. As such, he stood up and addressed the people,
praising and glorifying Allah, after which he said: “O people
322

of al-Koofah! Allah does not strengthen except the one He
wants to strengthen and he does not grant victory except to
whomever He wants to grant victory. Depart from us so that
you do not witness the death of our enemy among our midst.
Go to al-Heerah and stay with the Jews and Christians, as no
one should fight with us except he who has already been
assigned to do so and who witnessed the killing of ‘Attab bin
Warqa. ’”
This time, al-Hajjaj decided to fight against Shabeeb for
himself, whilst Shabeeb had set out until he reached as-Sarat.
It was there that al-Hajjaj came out to Shabeeb with the
Shamiyyeen (people from ashSham) and others who were
with him. When the two sides stood face to face, al-Hajjaj
looked at Shabeeb who was amidst six hundred of his
comrades and then addressed the people of ash-Sham, saying:
“O people of ash-Sham! You are a people who listen and obey
and who are patient and straight. Do not allow the falsity of
these impure people overtake your rights, so show
forbearance, get off your knees and confront them until they
face the edges of your teeth”, and so they did. Shabeeb then
moved in on him after having arranged his comrades into
three bands, one with him, one with Suwaid bin Sulaim and
the other with al-Mujallal bin Wa’il. Shabeeb commanded
Suwaid to launch an attack and so he attacked alHajjaj’s army
who were able to withstand them until al-Hajjaj approached
them, when they charged at Suwaid all at once, managing to
defeat him in this way.
Al-Hajjaj then shouted: “O people who hear and obey, do it
now! ”, whereupon he ordered the chair on which he was
seated to be brought forward. Shabeeb then instructed alMujallal to launch his attack again, but they repeated what
they had done to Suwaid. Likewise, al-Hajjaj said what he had
said to the others and his seat was moved forward once more.
Following this, Shabeeb made another attack with his
division, which they managed to withstand until he was close
323

enough for him to see the edges of their teeth, they charged
forward in his direction until they clashed and fought a long
and brutal battle against one another. The people of ash-Sham
continued to rally against him until they forced him towards
his comrades and so upon witnessing their ability to
withstand, Shabeeb shouted: “O Suwaid! Launch an attack on
your horse against the people of this road without leaving a
single one of them or al-Hajjaj behind you; we will attack
from the front. ” Suwaid therefore made his attack but it was
to no avail, as alHajjaj had assigned ‘Urwah bin alMugheerah bin Sh‘ubah, along with three hundred horsemen,
to defend his rear in the event that Shabeeb and his men
attempted to attack him from behind – a tactic that proved his
proficiency in the domain of warfare.
Shabeeb appealed to his comrades to undertake a campaign
and issued commands to them regarding it, which al-Hajjaj
was aware of and so shouted: “O people who hear and obey!
Have patience during this single hardship as the Lord of the
heavens and earth does not will something except that it
happens! ”, and so they fell to their knees. At that point,
Shabeeb made an attack on them with all his comrades and
once they drew close to the enemy forces, al-Hajjaj shouted
to the people who then stampeded in his direction. As such,
the people of ash-Sham persisted in their obedience and
continued the onslaught against him until they eventually
gained the upper hand over Shabeeb and his comrades,
causing them to withdraw from their positions. Thereafter,
Shabeeb shouted to his comrades: “O friends of Allah! The
floor, the floor! ”, at which point, he and his comrades
dismounted their riding animals. Al-Hajjaj then shouted to the
people of ash-Sham: “O people who hear and obey! This is
the first victory by Him in Whose Hand is my soul! ”He then
climbed to the top of a nearby mosque so that he could get a
look at both sides and from there he could see that Shabeeb
was with approximately twenty men, most of whom were
nobles. The two sides then fought one of the most intense
324

battles on earth, that lasted all day until eventually both sides
conceded with each other.
Al-Hajjaj had continued to watch what was happening from
his place on top of the Masjid and so when Khalid bin ‘Attab
sought permission from al-Hajjaj after the battle to set out
with a group of men to pursue the Khawarij, al-Hajjaj
consented to it. Hence, he set out with a party of
approximately four thousand men and then entered the
Khawarij military base from behind, killing Musad,
Shabeeb’s brother, and Ghazalah, Shabeeb’s wife, who was
allegedly killed by a man named Farwah bin Daffan alKalbi.
Consequently, al-Hajjaj and his associates rejoiced at their
victory, whilst Shabeeb and his comrades withdrew to the
land of Persia. Nevertheless, al-Hajjaj ordered his people to
go out in search for them, and they eventually caught up with
them and defeated them. Shabeeb, however, had managed to
go off while the opposition continued to pursue him. As he
was riding his horse, he started to fall asleep but since the
search party was drawing closer to him, some of his
associates, who had escaped with him, tried to prevent him
from doing so just then. However, Shabeeb failed to pay heed
and fell back to sleep until his head started to nod. In the
meantime, al-Hajjaj sent a message to his men, saying:
“Leave him to burn in Hell! ”, and so they left him alone and
turned back.
Al-Hajjaj later entered al-Koofah where he delivered a
sermon to the people in which he said: “Shabeeb had never
been defeated before now. After that, Shabeeb decided to
head for al-Koofah once again, however, he was intercepted
by one of al-Hajjaj’s military detachments. This happened on
a Wednesday, and it was on the following Friday that the
Khawarij were vanquished and forced to flee. At the head of
al-Hajjaj’s military detachment – which is said to have
numbered a thousand horsemen – was al-Harith bin
Mu‘awiyah ath-Thaqafi. Shabeeb later launched an attack
325

against al-Harith bin Mu‘awiyah that resulted in his army’s
defeat and left a significant number of them dead, causing the
people to flee to alKoofah and block the roads. Abu’l-Ward,
al-Hajjaj’s patron to a division of his army, went out and
fought Shabeeb until he was eventually killed and his
comrades fled the battlefield and entered al-Koofah. Again,
another commander went out to fight but he, too, was routed
and so Shabeeb and his associates headed for as-Sawad where
they passed by al-Hajjaj’s delegate there and killed him. It
was there that he addressed his associates, saying: “You reap
the rewards of the world over the Hereafter”, at which point
he threw his money into the River Euphrates and then
continued on his way with them to conquer many lands and
kill all who stood in their way.
Some of the chiefs of the beleaguered regions accordingly
went out to pay Shabeeb a visit, during which one of them
told him: “O Shabeeb! Contest us and we shall contest you”,
as he was an old friend of Shabeeb, to which Shabeeb
responded: “Verily, I do not want to kill you. ” So the chief
said: “But I want to kill you, therefore do not tempt yourself
or overstep the line! ” At this, Shabeeb attacked him by
striking a fatal blow over the head that caused his skull to split
open. He then shrouded him in burial garb and buried him.
Following this incident, al-Hajjaj offered a great deal of
money to the armies and military detachments to set out in
search for Shabeeb, yet they could neither suppress nor
control his activities. It was the decree of Allah that he was to
be killed by someone other than them later on this year.

The Murder of Shabeeb by Ibn al-Kalbi
during this Year
The quest for Shabeeb’s assassination began when al-Hajjaj
wrote to his deputy in al-Basrah, al-Hakam bin Ayyoob bin
al-Hakam bin Abu ‘Aqeel, who was his son-in-law,
instructing him to assemble an army of four thousand men to
326

be dispatched in search of Shabeeb under the command of
Sufyan bin al-Abrad, which he did. The armies fought against
each other in a fierce battle during which the Khawarij fled
the battlefield. Then they turned around to attack once again,
and this time managed to kill approximately thirty of Ibn alAbrad’s comrades. By then, night had fallen and so both sides
desisted from continuing the battle whilst continuing to devise
their plans of resistance against each other throughout the
night.
The following morning at sunrise as Shabeeb and two of his
associates crossed over the bridge, their horses began to get
violently agitated to the point that the leg of Shabeeb’s horse
slipped through the bridge, causing him to fall off his horse
into the water. He said to himself: “Whatever Allah ordains
will be done”, whereupon the water began to engulf him and
overflow, and so he said to himself: “This is the decree of the
Almighty, All-Wise”, after which he drowned to death.
When the Khawarij realised that he had fallen in the water,
they turned back and withdrew to their country where they
soon became dispersed and divided. The commander of alHajjaj’s army later went along to the river and pulled Shabeeb
out of the water. He then split open his chest and tore out his
heart, which by that time had turned as solid as a rock. The
people later attempted to smash it to pieces on the ground and
had it propped up in view of the people.
Throughout the course of this year, many battles ensued
between al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah, al-Hajjaj’s deputy, and
the Khawarij of al-Azariqah, whose leader was Qatari bin alFuja’ah, the same renowned valiant horseman whose
comrades had deserted him and then avoided him completely;
in fact, it is said that he would not know anyone wherever he
went. Reports indicate that on numerous occasions,
skirmishes and mishaps occurred throughout the course of
327

this year between al-Muhallab and the Khawarij of alAzariqah, of which Ibn Jareer provides detailed accounts.
He says: “In this year, Bukair bin Wishah, a fomer deputy of
Khurasan, rebelled against the designated deputy of that time,
namely, Umayyah bin ‘Abdullah bin Khalid bin Aseed. In
doing so, Bukair mobilised the people against him and as a
result was able to double-cross and kill him. In fact, before his
death, many other incidents took place between them
according to Abu Ja‘far’s comprehensive account of this
period in history (may Allah have mercy on his soul). ”
This year witnessed the death of Shabeeb bin Yazeed alKhariji, as we just said, who was by far the boldest and most
skilled horseman of his day, the likes of whom was not to be
seen after the era of the Companions.

Among Those Who Died in this Year:
Katheer bin as-Salt bin Ma‘di Karib al-Kindi, who was a
devout noble amongst his people.
Muhammad bin Moosa bin Talhah bin ‘Ubaidullah whose
sister was married to ‘Abdul-Malik.
‘Iyad bin ‘Amr al-Ash‘ari who participated in al-Yarmook
and narrated traditions from a number of the Sahabah and
others. He died in al-Basrah (may Allah have mercy on him).
Mutarrif bin al-Mugheerah bin Sh‘ubah ‘Abdullah who was
the brother of ‘Urwah and Hamzah, all of whom were
affiliated with the Banu Umayyah tribe and employed by alHajjaj within different provinces, specifically, ‘Urwah in alKoofah, Mutarrif in al-Mada’in and Hamzah in Hamdan.

328

Upon Entering the Seventy-Eighth Year
The Muslim army gained immense victories with the opening
of ar-Room and the conquest of Irqeeliyyah in this year. Upon
their return, they were struck by severe rain, blizzards and
cold that affected a vast number of people.
‘Abdul-Malik exclusively assigned Moosa bin Nusair to the
task of invading al-Maghrib (Morocco), following which he
travelled to Tanjah and fought against the kings of that land,
one of whom cut off Moosa’s nose in the course of the
struggle.
‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Umayyah bin ‘Abdullah from office
in Khurasan and instead extended it to alHajjaj bin Yoosuf
ath-Thaqafi who was already in charge of Sijistan.
Abu Ma‘shar says: “Al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik led people
in the Hajj Pilgrimage this year. The Ameer of al-Madinah
was Aban bin ‘Uthman and al-Hajjaj was the Ameer of al‘Iraq, Khurasan, Sijistan and all the provinces across this
region.

Other Prominent People Who Died in this
Year:
Jabir bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin Haram, Abu ‘Abdullah alAnsari as-Sulami, the Companion of the Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to whom many
narrations are ascribed.
Shuraih bin al-Harith bin Qais, Abu Umayyah, al-Kindi,
who was the judge of al-Koofah. ‘Abdur-Rahman bin
Ghanm al-Ash‘ari, a resident of Palestine who narrated
traditions from some of the Companions.

329

Junadah bin Abu Umayyah al-Azdi who participated in the
conquest of Egypt and was appointed as an Ameer over a
naval campaign by Mu‘awiyah.
Al-‘Ala’ bin Ziyad al-Basri who was a righteous worshipper
amongst the people of al-Basrah.
Suraqah bin Mirdas al-Azdi, the acclaimed poet who once
ridiculed al-Hajjaj, who reacted by exiling him to ash-Sham,
where he later passed away.
Others who died this year were: As-Sa’ib bin Yazeed alKindi, Sufyan bin Salamah al-Asadi, Mu‘awiyah bin Qurrah
al-Basri and Zirr bin Hubaish.

Upon Entering the Seventy-Ninth Year
Ash-Sham was afflicted by a severe plague epidemic, the
severity of which continued to intensify throughout the course
of this year.
‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Bakrah carried out a military expedition
against Rutbeel, the king of the Turks, who he later shackled
within his own country. A financial settlement was later
negotiated according to which Rutbeel would be obliged to
pay an annual tax from then onwards.
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan killed al-Harith bin Sa‘eed alMutanabbi’ al-Kadhdhab (the Liar), also known as al-Harith
bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Sa‘eed ad-Dimashqi. Abu Bakr bin
Abu Khaithamah says: “AbdurRahman bin Hassan said: ‘AlHarith was the liar amongst the people of Dimashq and the
slave of Abu’lJulas. His father lived in al-Hoolah and was
known for being a spiritual and devout worshipper so much
so that if he wore a Jubbah, people would go to look at him
worshipping in it, when people would praise him, it would be
like no one had ever heard anyone being praised before and
330

no speech was better than his. Al-Harith claimed that Iblees
(Satan, Devil) had appeared to him and so he wrote to his
father in alHoolah, saying: ‘O father! Come to me quickly, for
I have seen things that I fear the Shaitan has made manifest to
me! ’His father emphasised his sinful claim by writing to him:
‘O son! Yield to what you have been ordered to do, for Allah,
the Sublime, says (what means):
“Shall I inform you (O people! ) upon whom the Shayateen
(devils) descend?’ ‘They descend on every lying, sinful
person. ” [ash-Shu‘ara’, 26: 221-222]
So in that regard you are not lying, by which means continue
with what you are doing’. Similarly, alHarith would go round
the people in the mosque one at a time, attempting to enter
into negotiations with them by getting them to take an oath
with him or reaching some kind of agreement, which he
would then take advantage of if he was satisfied with it or
otherwise he would conceal it. ’”
Abdur-Rahman bin Hassan goes on to say: “He would be seen
doing many strange things, for example, he would go up to
the marble inside of the Masjid and start banging on it with
his hand whilst chanting praises and extolling in a loud voice
until the people present in the Masjid would cry out to him. ”
In fact, I heard the distinguished Shaikh Abul-‘Abbas Ibn
Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him) saying: “He
would bang on a red slab of marble near the Mihrab (a recess
in the mosque indicating the direction of prayer) and he was
a Zindeeq (heretic; atheist). ”
Ibn Abu Khaithamah says in one narration that al-Harith used
to feed the people winter fruits in the summer and summer
fruits in the winter, whereby he would say to them: “Go out
so that I can show you the angels. ” He would take them to
the monastery of al-Murran where he would show them men
331

mounted on horses; he would do this with many people until
it became a custom.
He would also spread his business around the Masjid in order
to make friends and acquire followers and he even got alQasim bin Mukhaimirah to take an oath over something that
al-Harith had manipulatively planned up beforehand. He then
said to al-Qasim: “I am a prophet”, to which al-Qasim
remarked: “You are a liar, O enemy of Allah, and you are not
a prophet!”
During this year, ‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Bakrah carried out a
military expedition against King Rutbeel who occupied the
highest status of all the Turk kings. At times, Rutbeel would
comply with the Muslims whilst at other times he would rebel,
and so al-Hajjaj wrote to ‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Bakrah
instructing him to fight against him with his men until he took
possession of his land, destroyed his citadel and killed his
combatants. Accordingly, he set out in the company of his
soldiers and others from al-Basrah and alKoofah until he
encountered Rutbeel who he eventually defeated and
destroyed his fortress.
The roads and mountain passes within the land were
subsequently blocked and the pathways were obstructed by
the Turks to the point that the Muslims began to think there
was no way of getting out. Thus, ‘Ubaidullah had no choice
but to enter into negotiations with Rutbeel and in doing so
‘Ubaidullah agreed to pay a stipend of seven thousand to
Rutbeel provided that he opened up the roads for the Muslims
to get out and return to their country.
Shuraih bin Hani’, a Sahabi, the oldest companion of ‘Ali and
a favourite amongst the people of alKoofah, had been
delegated to assign people to fight and engage in battle against
the Turks and to oversee the crafting of swords, spears and
arches. Not long afterwards, ‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Bakrah
332

issued alternative orders to stop the venture, which Shuraih
accordingly undermined. In spite of this, a small band of
boisterous and resentful people amongst his subjects failed to
comply with Shuraih’s final decision, and went ahead and
waged a battle against the Turks who unfortunately proved
victorious in wiping out most of the Muslims – to Allah we
belong and to Him we shall return.
It follows that Shuraih daringly fought to his death (may Allah
be pleased with him), and many of his comrades were killed
along with him. The companions of ‘Ubaidullah, who were
just a few in number, set out to visit Rutbeel. Al-Hajjaj found
out about this and immediately wrote to ‘Abdul-Malik to
inform him, in addition to consulting him about dispatching a
vast army to Rutbeel’s country as revenge for the atrocities he
had caused the Muslims in his land to suffer. Having received
al-Hajjaj’s letter, ‘AbdulMalik wrote back to him approving
of his solution, which he ordered him to undertake promptly
and so al-Hajjaj assembled a huge army right away, the details
of which shall be elaborated on in the following year’s
account.
It is said that Shuraih had tendered his resignation to al-Hajjaj
from holding office as judge during this year, which al-Hajjaj
accepted and appointed Abu Burdah bin Abu Moosa alAsh‘ari as his replacement.
Qatari bin al-Fuja’ah at-Tameemi, Abu Na‘amah al-Khariji,
who was popularly known for his valour, was also killed
during this year.
‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Bakrah (may Allah have mercy on him),
the Ameer of the army that had entered the land of the Turks
and killed King Rutbeel, also died during this year, as were
many of his soldiers, including Shuraih bin Hani’, which we
shall come to shortly.
333

Upon Entering the Eightieth Year of the
Hijrah
Makkah was said to have been “swept away” by floods during
this year, as the waters carried off everything in its path.
Al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah crossed the River Balkh
whereafter he resided in Kashsh for two years, waiting and
plotting against the Turks. There were numerous incidents
that occurred between them, the details of which are too many
to document.
In this year, al-Hajjaj assembled forces from al-Basrah, alKoofah and elsewhere to wage war against Rutbeel, the king
of the Turks as well as avenge the army of ‘Ubaidullah bin
Abu Bakrah killed the previous year. He recruited twenty
thousand soldiers from each of the two major cities to form a
vast army of forty thousand men, and appointed ‘AbdurRahman bin Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath as commander.
Ibn al-Ash‘ath subsequently advanced with his army towards
Rutbeel’s domain. Rutbeel found out about this and wrote to
Ibn al-Ash‘ath, apologising for harming the Muslims the year
before, saying that he had been reluctant to do so but that it
was the Muslims who had brought on their death. He sought
reconciliation with Ibn al-Ash‘ath by offering to pay the
Kharaj (land tax under Islamic law) to the Muslims. Ibn alAsh‘ath, however, refused to concede and made plans to enter
his country. Accordingly, Rutbeel gathered together his army
and stood prepared for war whilst every time Ibn al-Ash‘ath
entered a province or city within Rutbeel’s domain, he would
seize its citadel and appoint one of his representatives to
occupy it. Moreover, he assigned armed forces all over the
land to take control of the major cities where he was able to
appropriate vast amounts of wealth and spoils and lead masses
of people into captivity. He then imprisoned the people until
they cultivated the land that belonged to them and harvested
334

its crops. It was not until the following year that the Muslims
advanced against their enemies after having crossed the many
lands and regions, to eventually lay siege to Rutbeel and his
soldiers within their own city, namely, the city of al-‘Uzama’.
There they gained possession of their treasures, wealth and
progeny, and then killed all combatants under Ibn alAsh‘ath’s own instructions.

Prominent People Who Died during this
Year:
‘Umar bin al-Khattab’s servant who embraced Islam.
Jubair bin Nufair bin Malik al-Hadrami to whom
companionship and the transmission of Ahadeeth has been
ascribed and who was a scholar among the people of ashSham.
‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far bin Abu Talib who was an honourable
Sahabi born in the land of Abysinnia and whose mother was
Asma’ bint ‘Umais. He was the last person belonging to the
Banu Hashim tribe that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) saw before he died. He lived in alMadinah and when his father, Ja‘far, died as a martyr in
Mu’tah, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) went to their mother and said: “Do not cry over my
brother after today. Call the sons of my brother to me. ” So
they were taken to him as if they were kids and he said: “Bring
a barber to me” whereupon he shaved their heads and then
said: “As for Muhammad, he resembles our paternal uncle,
Abu Talib, and as for ‘Abdullah, he resembles me and my
family. ” He then took ‘Abdullah’s hand, raised it and said:
“O Allah, make Ja‘far’s family follow after him and bless the
clasp of ‘Abdullah’s right hand”, which he repeated three
times. ‘Abdullah said: “Then our mother came and mentioned
our orphanhood to him. ” So he said to her: “Do you fear
poverty for them while I am their guardian in the world and
335

the Hereafter?” ‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far and ‘Abdullah bin azZubair had pledged allegiance to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) at the age of seven years old,
which was not accepted from anyone other than them.
Abu Idrees al-Khawlani whose real name was ‘A’idhullahbin
‘Abdullah, who was a particulary strong and virtuousbeliever.
Ma‘bad al-Juhani al-Qadari, also known as ‘Abdullah bin
‘Ukaim, narrated the Hadeeth: “Do not make use of the skins
or sinews of dead animals. ”

Upon Entering the Eighty-First Year
‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan conquered the city
of Qaleeqala and won a vast quantity of wealth as spoils for
the Muslims. Bukair bin Wishah, one of the courageous
leaders amongst them, was killed during the struggle by
Baheer bin Warqa’ as-Suraimi.

The Trial of Ibn al-Ash‘ath
The cause of conflict at hand was that al-Hajjaj detested Ibn
al-Ash‘ath, who in turn knew of al-Hajjaj’s hate for him and
of the resentment he felt towards him. Thus, when al-Hajjaj
assigned him to the aforementioned army that was to be
dispatched to the land of Rutbeel, the king of the Turks, he
crossed into the land of the Turks and carried out all the
aforementioned activities with his associates, and stayed there
until they had fortified their position the following year. He
subsequently wrote to al-Hajjaj regarding the matter, who
wrote back to him, disapproving of his opinion to postpone
the matter, undermining his intelligence and rebuking him for
his cowardice and reluctance to wage war while reissuing his
urgent instruction to enter the land of Rutbeel. Al-Hajjaj then
followed up that letter by writing to him a second and third
time, pressuring him to make haste in penetrating Rutbeel’s
336

country, causing Ibn al-Ash‘ath to feel compelled to mobilise
his forces. Although he complied with al-Hajjaj’s orders, he
still expressed his opinion on the matter to his men and
informed them that it was al-Hajjaj, and not he, who insisted
on urgency. Due to this, the people began to defy and revolt,
against him saying: “We reject the enemy of Allah, al-Hajjaj,
and we refuse to listen to and obey him! ”
The people quickly turned to ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Ash‘ath
and pledged their allegiance to him in place of al-Hajjaj and
so, contrary to al-Hajjaj’s instructions, Ibn al-Ash‘ath
approached Rutbeel and reconciled with him on the grounds
that if he proved victorious over al-Hajjaj then Rutbeel would
be permanently exempted from paying the Kharaj (land tax in
Islamic law). Hence, Ibn al-Ash‘ath marched on with his men
towards Sijistan where al-Hajjaj was based with the aim of
waging war against him and seizing control of al-‘Iraq. As
they were halfway into their journey, the men stopped and
said: “By abandoning al-Hajjaj we are abandoning Ibn
Marwan”, and so they decided to renounce their pledges to
both of them. Having heard what they had done, al-Hajjaj
urgently wrote to the Ameerul-Mu’mineen to inform him
about it and prompted him to dispatch his soldiers against
them without delay.
At the same time, al-Muhallab wrote the following letter
to al-Hajjaj:
“It follows that the people of al-‘Iraq have consented and
come forward like a descending stream from a height. There
is not a thing that they respond to without taking recourse to
his opinion first. The people of al-‘Iraq are protective about
their children and women and will behave wickedly if given
the opportunity. In fact, they do not do anything without the
backing of their own people such that they go to great
lengths to appease and please their women and children.
337

That is the reality of the situation and so may Allah grant
you victory over them if He wills. ”
‘Abdul-Malik mobilised and deployed his soldiers from ashSham to al-‘Iraq to assist al-Hajjaj who would assemble them
to advance against Ibn al-Ash‘ath. Al-Hajjaj decided to
disregard al-Muhallab’s honest and sincere advice to him and
instead set out towards Ibn al-Ash‘ath with his soldiers from
alBasrah, stopping off at Tustar where he appointed Mutahhir
bin Hayy al-‘Akki commander along with ‘Abdullah bin
Zumait. Once they reached Dujail, Ibn al-Ash‘ath sent ahead
three hundred of his horsemen, at the head of whom was
‘Abdullah bin Aban al-Harithi. Both sides collided in battle
on the day of al-Adha by the River Dujail whereby al-Hajjaj’s
first dispatchment of men were defeated by alAsh‘ath’s
comrades who managed to kill around one thousand five
hundred of them while appropriating their horses, money and
other material possessions that remained within their military
base. When news of his comrades’ defeat reached al-Hajjaj,
he stood up and addressed the people, saying: “O people!
Return to al-Basrah for it is in need of soldiers. ” As the people
returned, Ibn al-Ash‘ath’s horsemen pursued them until they
encountered one another, whereupon not a single one of alHajjaj’s men managed to escape without being killed. AlHajjaj, however, made off until he reached az-Zawiyah where
he began to marshal his army again, saying: “How right was
al-Muhallab! He is definitely proficient in the domain of war!
He pointed out something to us that we refused to accept. ”
Subsequently, al-Hajjaj disbursed the massive sum of one
hundred and fifty million Deenars on mobilising his army and
building a trench around their military base. Meanwhile, the
people of al-‘Iraq entered the city of al-Basrah where they
joined their families and behaved haughtily towards their
children. Ibn al-Ash‘ath then entered the city and delivered a
sermon to the people in which he made an oath with them and
they in turn pledged allegiance to him on the premise that they
338

renounce ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan and his deputy, al-Hajjaj
bin Yoosuf. In this regard, Ibn al-Ash‘ath said to them:
“AlHajjaj has nothing, so let us go to ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan and fight against him. ” All the Fuqaha’
(jurists), the Qurra’ (reciters of the Qur’an), the Shuyookh
(religious elders) and the young men of alBasrah unanimously agreed to renounce the two of them and
having acquired authority over them, Ibn alAsh‘ath
accordingly gave directions for a trench to be built around the
city. This took place at the end of the month of Dhul-Hijjah
in this year.
Moosa bin Nusair, the Ameer of Morocco under ‘AbdulMalik’s administration also invaded al-Andalus (Andalusia,
Spain) and conquered a number of cities.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
Baheer bin Warqa’ as-Suraimi al-Basri who was one of the
distinguished men of Khurasan.
Suwaid bin Ghafalah bin ‘Awsajah bin ‘Amir, Abu Umayyah
al-Ju‘fi al-Koofi, who participated in alYarmook and narrated
traditions on the authority of the Sahabah.
‘Abdullah bin Shaddad bin al-Had who was a devout
worshipper and scholar.
Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib who was known as both
Abul-Qasim and Abu ‘Abdullah but was more commonly
known as Ibn al-Hanafiyyah.

339

Upon Entering the Eighty-Second Year of
the Hijrah
During the first month of al-Muharram, the battle of azZawiyah between al-Hajjaj and Ibn al-Ash‘ath took place, the
outcome of which saw the people of al-Iraq gain the upper
hand over the people of ashSham in their first encounter. On
another occasion, Sufyan bin al-Abrad, one of the chiefs of
ash-Sham, launched an attack against the right wing of Ibn alAsh‘ath’s army which resulted in their defeat and the death of
a large number of the Qurra’ (reciters of the Qur’an) amongst
Ibn al-Ash‘ath’s associates. In reaction to achieving this
victory, al-Hajjaj fell to the ground in prostration to Allah
after having been on his knees with his sword drawn. He then
started to invoke mercy on Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair, saying:
“There was nobody nobler than him until he fought to his own
death. ”
Amongst Ibn al-Ash‘ath’s associates who were killed was atTufail bin ‘Amir bin Wathilah al-Laithi. When Ibn alAsh‘ath’s associates fled the battlefield, he returned with just
those men who had stayed with him and his followers
amongst the people of al-Basrah. He then set out until he
entered al-Koofah, whilst the people of al-Basrah began to
show support to ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Abbas bin Rabee‘ah bin
alHarith bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib and pledged their allegiance to
him. Al-Hajjaj fought one of the gravest battles for five
consecutive nights, he then withdrew with a party of people
from al-Basrah in order to catch up with Ibn al-Ash‘ath,
appointing Ayyoob bin al-Hakam bin Abu ‘Aqeel as his
deputy over the city in his absence. Thus, Ibn al-Ash‘ath
entered al-Koofah where its people pledged allegiance to him
and agreed to renounce al-Hajjaj and ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan. This aggravated the situation due to the increased
number of followers Ibn al-Ash‘ath had acquired and owing
to the intensity of the status quo, the people became divided
340

in their loyalties and sermons would trigger off extreme
reactions that meant wider repercussions.
This was followed by the Battle of Dairul-Jamajim during the
month of Sha‘ban of this year, according to the account
provided by al-Waqidi. The battle took place when Ibn alAsh‘ath was on his way to alKoofah and its people went out
to meet him, at which point they showed him a great deal of
affection and respect. Only a small band of them who wanted
to put up resistance against him with the support of Matar bin
Najiyah, al-Hajjaj’s deputy, which never materialised. The
people joined in association with Ibn alAsh‘ath and led him
in the direction of the palace. As he entered al-Koofah, Ibn alAsh‘ath gave orders for ladders to be propped up against the
governor’s palace, which allowed him to seize control of it
and force Matar bin Najiyah to climb down. He wanted to kill
him, but Matar pleaded: “Spare me, for I am better than your
horsemen. ” He therefore had him imprisoned, but later
summoned and released him upon receiving his pledge of
allegiance. The people had confidence in Ibn al-Ash‘ath’s
endeavours within al-Koofah and so people travelled from alBasrah to join in affiliation with him, including the likes of
‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-‘Abbas bin Rabee‘ah bin ‘AbdulMuttalib. Bearing this in view, Ibn al-Ash‘ath issued
instructions to ensure that armed forces manned every
direction and for all the roads, passages and openings to be
monitored.
Al-Hajjaj subsequently transported his armies by land from
ash-Sham to al-Basrah, where they would have to pass
through al-Qadisiyyah and al-‘Udhaib. Soon afterwards, Ibn
al-Ash‘ath sent ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-‘Abbas with an
enormous cavalry dispatchment from the two major cities
against al-Hajjaj and so they prevented him from stopping in
al-Qadisiyyah, which gave him no option other than to carry
on until he reached Dair Qurrah. Meanwhile, Ibn al-Ash‘ath
and his armies from al-Basrah and al-Koofah, comprising a
341

vast number of Qurra’ (reciters of the Qur’an) and many
righteous believers, stationed themselves in Dairul-Jamajim.
Upon hearing about this, al-Hajjaj remarked: “Damn Ibn alAsh‘ath! It is as if a bird informed him that I had stopped in
Dair Qurrah so he went to Dairul-Jamajim! ”Ibn al-Ash‘ath
had a force of a hundred thousand combatants altogether who
took maintenance (wages), in addition to approximately the
same number of slaves. Al-Hajjaj, on the other hand, had
managed to swindle a considerable amount of aid from ashSham through the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan. Both sides built trenches around their army bases to
obstruct any external access, whereby the armies would come
out of their trenches everyday and fight an intense
engagement all the way through that resulted in some of the
chiefs of Quraish and others being harmed.
Since the fighting had gone on for a considerable length of
time, the heads of the Ahlul-Mashwarah (People of
Consultation) convened a meeting with ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan, during which they said to him: “If the people of al‘Iraq will be satisfied with the dismissal of al-Hajjaj from his
position of authority over them, then that is easier than war
and bloodshed. ” Upon closing the meeting, ‘AbdulMalik
summoned his brother, Muhammad bin Marwan, and his son,
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, both of whom
arrived with a large number of soldiers behind them. They
collectively wrote a letter to the people of al-‘Iraq that read:
“If dismissing al-Hajjaj from his position over you would
satisfy you, then that is what I will do. I have further retained
your grants for you just like the people of ash-Sham and I will
appoint Ibn al-Ash‘ath as commander of whichever land he
wants, while leadership of al-‘Iraq will go to Muhammad bin
Marwan. If this does not suit the people of al-‘Iraq then alHajjaj can remain as he is and he can take command of the
war with Muhammad bin Marwan and ‘Abdullah bin ‘AbdulMalik at his service and discretion, as will everyone else. ”
342

When al-Hajjaj got news that ‘Abdul-Malik had written to the
people of al-‘Iraq proposing his dismissal in order to appease
them, he became extremely troubled and decided to confront
him about it. He therefore wrote to him: “O AmeerulMu’mineen! In the event that you reconcile with the people
of al‘Iraq, it will not be long before they begin to disobey you
and advance against you; by doing this, you will achieve
nothing other than to make them more audacious towards you.
Did you not see or hear about how the people of al-‘Iraq
ambushed Ibn ‘Affan with al-Ashtar an-Nakha‘i?When he
asked them what they wanted, they told him to dismiss Sa‘eed
bin al-‘As and a full year had not even passed before they
advanced against Ibn ‘Affan and killed him. In their case,
harshness must be met with harshness and may Allah be with
you in whatever you decide, peace be upon you. ”
It is said in Tareekh at-Tabarithat Abdul-Malik refused to treat
the people of al-‘Iraq as al-Hajjaj had described them and
therefore ‘Abdullah and Muhammad announced to them: “O
community of al-‘Iraq! I am ‘Abdullah, the son of AmeerulMu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, who has proposed
such and such to you! ”, and he repeated what his father had
written to them. Muhammad bin Marwan then said: “I am the
messenger of my brother, the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, to you
concerning this affair. ” The people then said: “We will
deliberate over our affair tomorrow and come back to you
with our decision in the evening”, and then left. The following
day, the chiefs gathered together with Ibn al-Ash‘ath who
stood up to address them and ordered them comply with the
offer of dismissing al-Hajjaj, to pledge allegiance to ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan, to keep their grants and to accept the
authority of Muhammad bin Marwan over al-‘Iraq in place of
al-Hajjaj. The people, however, began to show an aversion to
what he had said, saying: “No, by Allah! We do not accept
that. We are greater than them in size and number and they
are in a tight situation, yet they think they can rule over us and
subject us to them?No, by Allah! We will never answer to
343

that! ”They reached a consensus between themselves to reject
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan and the official appointed in his
stead.
When ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdul-Malik and his uncle, Muhammad
bin Marwan, received their decision, they both said to alHajjaj: “Your issue is with them and we are at your service,
as commanded by the Ameerul-Mu’mineen. ” They then
acknowledged his leadership and he similarly acknowledged
their positions of authority, after which al-Hajjaj resumed
managing the war as before. As both sides prepared for battle,
al-Hajjaj assigned ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Sulaim al-Kalbi at the
head of his right wing, ‘Umarah bin Tameem al-Lakhmi at the
head of the left wing, Sufyan bin al-Abrad over the cavalry
and ‘AbdurRahman bin Habeeb al-Hakami over the foot
troops. On the opposite side, Ibn al-Ash‘ath assigned alHajjaj
bin Harithah al-Khath‘ami at the head of the right wing, alAbrad bin Qurrah at-Tameemi at the head of the left wing,
‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Abbas bin Rabee‘ah over the cavalry,
Muhammad bin Sa‘d bin Abu Waqqas Az-Zuhri over the foot
troops and Jabalah bin Zahr bin Qais al-Ju‘fi over the Qurra’
(reciters of the Qur’an), amongst whom was Sa‘eed bin
Jubair, ‘Amir ash-Sha‘bi, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Laila,
Kumail bin Ziyad (who had become lethal and fearless in his
old age), Abul-Bakhtari at-Ta’i and others.
The battle was fought every day and the people of al-‘Iraq
provided their soldiers with supplies and provisions, such as
fodder for the animals and food for the soldiers that came
from different provinces and towns. As for the people of ashSham who were with al-Hajjaj, they suffered from limited
resources and a shortage of food, having lost all their meat
rations, which they still had not been able to find. The war
continued for the duration of this year in which the armies
lived under combat conditions and fought day in and day out.
More often than not, the people of ash-Sham suffered the most
344

setbacks, such as with the death of al-Hajjaj’s associate, Ziyad
bin Ghanm.
This year also witnessed the death of al-Muhallab bin Abu
Sufrah during his expedition in Marw at the age of seventysix (may Allah have mercy on him).
During the month of Jumadal-Akhirah, the AmeerulMu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, dismissed Aban bin
‘Uthman from office in al-Madinah and appointed Hisham
bin Isma‘eel al-Makhzoomi.

Amongst Those Who Died Were:
Asma’ bin Kharijah al-Fazari al-Koofi, a praiseworthy and
particularly generous man.
Al-Mugheerah bin al-Muhallab bin Abu Sufrah, a
praiseworthy, generous and courageous man who had held
many important posts during his time, died this year.
Al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah bin Abu Rabee‘ah al-Makhzoomi,
more commonly known by the nickname Quba’ (Grunt), who
was appointed to office in al-Basrah by Ibn az-Zubair.
Muhammad bin Usamah bin Zaid bin Harithah, one of the
most virtuous and learned of the Sahabah’s sons, died in alMadinah and was buried in al-Baqee‘ (a fertile patch of land
in al-Madinah where other members of the Prophet’s family
were buried).
‘Abdullah bin Abu Talhah bin al-Aswad who was the father
of the Faqeeh (jurist) Ishaq, and whose mother, Umm Sulaim,
conceived him on the night that her son died. The next
morning, Abu Talhah went to see the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to tell him about it and the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“Did you sleep with your wife last night?” Abu Talhah said:
345

“Yes. ” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) then said: “O Allah! Bestow your blessings on them as
regards that night of theirs. ”
‘Abdullah bin Ka‘b bin Malik to whom the transmission of
narrations is ascribed died in al-Madinah during this year.
Sufyan bin Wahb Abu Aiman, al-Khawlani al-Misri, to whom
companionship and the transmission of narrations is ascribed,
and who invaded Morocco and lived in Egypt where he died.
This year also saw the death of Jameel bin ‘Abdullah bin
Ma‘mar bin Subah bin Zabyan, Abu ‘Amr the poet, the friend
of Buthainah. He had sought her (Buthainah’s) hand in
marriage but when he was refused he began to express his
love for her in his poems, for which he became well-known
as the lover of the Arabs. He resided in Wadi al-Qura and was
a modest and respectable Islamic poet who was one of the
most eloquent poets of his time.
‘Umar bin ‘Ubaidullah bin Ma‘mar bin ‘Uthman, Abu Hafs
al-Qurashi at-Taimi, a charitable and honourable chief whose
dominion extended over many lands. He was a deputy of alBasrah under Ibn azZubair and conquered Kabul along with
‘Abdullah bin Khazim, the same person who killed Qatari bin
alFuja’ah.
Kumail bin Ziyad bin Naheek bin al-Haitham an-Nakha‘i alKoofi who narrated traditions on the authority of ‘Umar,
‘Uthman, ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘ood and Abu Hurairah, participated
in the Battle of Siffeen with ‘Ali and was a brave fighter and
warrior, as well a pious and spiritual worshipper. He was
killed by al-Hajjaj in this year at the age of one hundred whilst
in captivity. Al-Hajjaj killed him in an act of revenge for the
time when Kumail bin Ziyad had asked ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan
to strike al-Hajjaj in the face, however, ‘Uthman pardoned
him. Al-Hajjaj therefore said to Kumail: “The likes of you ask
346

the AmeerulMu’mineen to strike me?” , and he ordered him
to be beheaded.
Zadhan Abu ‘Amr al-Kindi, one of the Tabi‘een (second and
third generations following the righteous Companions), also
died in this year. He used to consume intoxicants and play the
Tanboor (a long-necked stringed instrument resembling the
mandolin), however, Allah blessed Zadhan by facilitating his
repentance to Him at the hands of ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ood.
Khaleefah says: “Zirr bin Hubaish, a companion of Ibn
Mas‘ood and ‘A’ishah, died during this year at the age of a
hundred and twenty years. ”
Shaqeeq bin Salamah Abu Wa’il spent seven years of his adult
life in Jahiliyyah after which he embraced Islam during the
lifetime of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).
Ummud-Darda’ as-Sughra, whose name was Hujaimah or
others say Juhaimah, was a devout follower who was an
acclaimed Faqeehah (jurist).

Upon Entering the Eighty-Third Year
This year commenced with preparations for the war between
al-Hajjaj and his associates in Dair Qurrah and Ibn al-Ash‘ath
and his associates in Dair al-Jamajim. They engaged in daily
combat and in the main encounter, the people of al-‘Iraq
proved victorious over the people of ash-Sham to the extent
Ibn alAsh‘ath’s comrades (i. e. the people of al-‘Iraq) defeated
the people of ash-Sham (al-Hajjaj’s comrades) some eighty or
more times. Despite this, al-Hajjaj stood his ground,
determined to resist the opposition without moving from his
position. In fact, any time he happened to gain victory on any
given day, he would strategically move his army closer to the
opposition in a highly proficient manner that demonstrated his
347

expertise in the field of war. Both sides continued to engage
persistently until al-Hajjaj commanded his men to launch an
attack against the detachment of Qurra’ (reciters of the
Qur’an), since it was the role of the Qurra’ to boost their
comrades’ spirits and motivate them before going into battle.
To his disappointment, the Qurra’ managed to withstand the
attack and so he assembled his archers together to attack them
once more, whereupon he did not disengage until they had
killed a large number of them. Al-Hajjaj then attacked Ibn alAsh‘ath’s detachment and those who were with them until he
routed them and caused them to disperse in every direction.
Ibn al-Ash‘ath managed to escape ahead of them along with
the scattered remnants of his army, although al-Hajjaj and his
vast army, at the head of which was ‘Umarah bin Tameem alLakhmi (the commander-in-chief) and Muhammad bin alHajjaj, went after them and chased them out in case they
happened to kill or take anyone captive on their way. AlHajjaj’s army burnt down the provinces, towns and
settlements until they reached Karman where they took over
a palace that had previously belonged to the people of al-‘Iraq.

The Construction of Wasit
Ibn Jareer says : “It was during this year that al-Hajjaj decided
to build (the city of) Wasit, the reason for which was that on
one particular occasion, al-Hajjaj happened to notice a monk
cross the Tigris River who then stood and urinated at the site
of Wasit. He then dug up the land where he had urinated and
disposed of it in the Tigris. At this, al-Hajjaj said: ‘Summon
him to me’, whereupon the monk was brought to him and he
asked him: ‘What caused you to do that?’The monk replied:
‘It is written in our books that a mosque will be built here in
which Allah will always be worshipped so long as there is
someone on the earth who worships Him and Him alone’.
Upon hearing this, al-Hajjaj drafted the plans for the city of
Wasit and constructed a Masjid at that very place. ”
348

This year also marked ‘Ata’ bin Rafi‘’s expedition to
Siqilliyyah.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died
during this Year:
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Hujairah al-Khawlani al-Misri who
narrated traditions on the authority of the Sahabah.
Tariq bin Shihab bin ‘Abd Shams al-Ahmasi who was
amongst those who saw the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) in person, he participated in some forty or
so military expeditions through the eras of as-Siddeeq ( i. e.
Abu Bakr) and ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with them). He
died in al-Madinah during this year.
‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Adiyy bin al-Khiyar reached the age of
maturity during the lifetime of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and narrated traditions on the
authority of the Sahabah.
‘Abdullah bin Qais bin Makhramah who was a former judge
of al-Madinah and who died there during this year.
Marthad bin ‘Abdullah Abul-Khair al-Yazani.
During this year, a group of the Qurra’ and scholars who
fought with Ibn al-Ash‘ath died after getting lost.
Al-Hajjaj killed numerous prominent figures, amongst whom
was ‘Imran bin ‘Isam ad-Duba‘i and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu
Laila who narrated traditions on the authority of some
Sahabah and to whose father companionship has been
ascribed.

349

Upon Entering the Eighty-Fourth Year
Al-Waqidi says: “‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan’s
conquest of al-Misseesah occurred during this year. ”
Muhammad bin Marwan invaded Armeeniyyah (Armenia).
Al-Hajjaj assigned Muhammad bin al-Qasim ath-Thaqafi to
Persia wherein he ordered him to kill the Akrad (Kurds).
‘Abdul-Malik appointed ‘Iyad bin Ghanm at-Tujeebi over
Alexandria.
Moosa bin Nusair conquered a sect from Awrabah within the
land of Morocco.
Al-Hajjaj also killed a group of chiefs among Ibn al-Ash‘ath’s
associates.
‘Utbah bin an-Nuddar as-Sulami, an honourable Sahabi, died
during this year.
‘Imran bin Hittan al-Khariji, who used to belong to the AhlusSunnah wal-Jama‘ah (People of the Prophetic tradition and
Community), married a very beautiful woman from the
Khawarij (sect of Dissenters) who he was very much in love
with, whilst he on the other hand was particularly unpleasant
to look at. He had wanted to convert her to following the
Sunnah (Prophetic tradition) but she refused and instead he
chose to denounce his faith for her and joined her
denomination. He was also a renowned poet at the time of
‘Ali’s murder (t) who said about his death and murderer:
“O struck at the hands of the purportedly pious who
intended
To obtain the Almighty’s satisfaction.
350

I recall that one day I thought him to be The best of people
in performing good deeds.
What honoured people whose tombs are birds’ nests!
Did they not confuse their religion with
Oppression and aggression?! ”
This was also the year of ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Muhammad bin
al-Ash‘ath bin Qais al-Kindi’s ruin. The person referred to
here is Ibn Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath bin Qais, otherwise
called ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Qais bin Muhammad bin alAsh‘ath bin Qais al-Kindi al-Koofi. Abu Dawood and anNasa’i narrate the following Hadeeth from him: “If the two
parties to a transaction disagree and there is no proof, then
what the seller of the goods says is what counts, or they may
cancel the transaction. ” Abul-‘Umais is reported to have said
that al-Hajjaj killed him when he was aged over ninety – Allah
knows best.
Ayyoob bin al-Qirriyyah (al-Qirriyyah being his mother while
his father’s name was Yazeed bin Qais bin Zurarah bin
Muslim, an-Namari al-Hilali) was an illiterate ‘Arab who
would speak the most eloquent and articulate rhetoric. He was
a companion of al-Hajjaj and upon arriving in the presence of
‘Abdul-Malik, he was sent as a messenger to Ibn al-Ash‘ath
who said to him: “Since you are a spokesperson, disassociate
from al-Hajjaj or else I will slit your throat” and so he did as
asked and stayed with him. When al-Hajjaj realised what had
happened after summoning him, he sentenced him to death by
beheading. However, after doing so he regretted it and
deemed it pointless, or as the saying goes, “Striving to achieve
something that is no longer profitable. ”
Rawh bin Zinba‘ bin Salamah al-Judhami Abu Zur‘ah, an
honourable Tabi‘i (second or third generation following the
351

righteous Companions), narrated traditions on the authority of
his father to whom companionship was ascribed.
Tameem ad-Dari, ‘Ubadah bin as-Samit, Mu‘awiyah, Ka‘b alAhbar and others also died during this year.

Upon Entering the Eighty-Fifth Year
Al-Hajjaj dismissed Yazeed bin al-Muhallab from authority
in Khurasan and appointed his brother, alMufaddal bin alMuhallab, instead. This was because on one occasion, alHajjaj arrived in the presence of ‘Abdul-Malik after having
passed by a monastery in which it was said a wise, old scholar
belonging to the Ahlul-Kitab (i. e. Christians and Jews) dwelt.
While he was there, al-Hajjaj called him and said: “O Shaikh
(religious elder) ! Do you find anything in your books that
mentions you and us?” He said: “Yes. ” Al-Hajjaj asked:
“And what description does it give of the AmeerulMu’mineen?” He replied: “It says that he is a bald-headed
ruler and that whoever stands in his way will be brought to
the ground. ” So he said: “And then who?” He replied: “A
man by the name of al-Waleed. ” He said: “And then what?”
He answered: “A man who is named after a prophet will
conquer the people. ” He then asked: “And do you know about
me?” He said: “I have already mentioned you. ” “And do you
know what will come of me?” He said: “Yes. ” So he said:
“And who will rule over al-‘Iraq after me?” He answered: “A
man by the name of Yazeed. ” So he asked: “Will that be in
my lifetime or after me?” So he said: “I do not know. ” He
then asked: “And what description do you find of him?” He
said: “He is a double-crossing traitor. I do not know anything
other than that. ” It is reported that al-Hajjaj understood that
as referring to Yazeed bin al-Muhallab.
Ibn Jareer says : “During this year, Moosa bin ‘Abdullah bin
Khazim was killed in Tirmidh (Tirmiz). ” He mentions that
this took place following the murder of his father when
352

neither he nor his associates could find a land to take refuge
in, as each time he approached a place, its ruler would appear
with an army to battle against him. He persisted in looking for
a place until he reached Tirmidh whose king was considered
weak and so he called for a truce with him, in addition to
sending him gifts and offerings to the point that he and the
king went hunting together. The king felt that he should offer
to prepare some food and so he called on Moosa bin
‘Abdullah bin Khazim to bring along one hundred of his
associates for the banquet. Moosa therefore deliberately chose
a hundred of his bravest men to enter the country and eat with
the ruler, but after they had finished eating, Moosa went into
the king’s room and reclined on his bed, and said: “By Allah!
I am not getting up from here until this house either becomes
my house or my grave. ” At this, the people of the palace flew
into a rage such that even his associates were divided on what
stance they should take. Following this incident a battle broke
out between them and the people of Tirmidh, the outcome of
which was the death of a significant portion of the Tirmidh
population whilst the remainder of them fled. Moosa
subsequently summoned the rest of his army to seize the land
and fortify it from their enemies.
The king also fled and took refuge with his brothers, the
Turks, from whom he sought assistance to regain his territory.
They told him regarding this: “If a group of merely one
hundred men ran you out of your land, then we do not have
the capacity to fight against them. ” The king therefore moved
on to another sect of the Turks to seek their assistance and,
fortunately for him, they willingly dispatched an envoy of
missionaries with him to Moosa in order to hear what he had
to say. Having sensed them coming, Moosa gave orders, in
the blistering heat, for his associates to kindle a fire, put on
winter clothing and huddle around it as if they were seeking
warmth from it. Hence, when the king of Tirmidh arrived with
the envoys, they witnessed what his associates were doing in
the extreme heat and so they asked them: “What is this we see
353

you doing?” They replied: “We feel cold in the summer and
agony in the winter. ” Bewildered and confused, the delegates
then spoke amongst themselves, saying: “Who are these
people?They cannot be anything other than Jinn (Jinn: a
species created from smokeless fire) ! ”Having drawn this
conclusion, they immediately returned to their king and
informed him of it, saying: “We absolutely do not have the
capacity to fight against these beings. ”
Disappointed by their reluctance to help him, the ruler of
Tirmidh just about managed to mobilise an army with another
sect of people who went forth and laid siege to Tirmidh. AlKhuza‘i had also gone along and laid siege to them and so
while he and his army fought during the first part of the day,
the non-‘Arabs fought during the latter part. Moreover,
Moosa managed to contrive a wicked plan against them that
succeeded in killing a significant number of combatants,
which caused ‘Umar al-Khuza‘i to fear for himself and his
army, on which grounds he decided to reconcile with Moosa.
One day, ‘Umar al-Khuza‘i entered upon Moosa whilst he
was alone in his room and because he had not known that
‘Umar was carrying a weapon, ‘Umar said to him: “I am
armed. ” Moosa jumped up from his bed and saw that he was
carrying a sword. At that moment, ‘Umar al-Khuza‘i took it
and struck him with it until he turned cold, after which ‘Umar
ran away. From that day on, the associates of Moosa bin
‘Abdullah al-Khazim remained divided.
Ibn Jareer says: “In this year, ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan
decided to dismiss his brother, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan,
from holding office in Egypt. ”

354

‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan
His name was ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan bin al-Hakam bin
Abul-‘As bin Umayyah bin ‘Abd Shams, Abul-Asbagh, alQurashi al-Umawi.
‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan narrated the following Hadeeth
on the authority of his father, as well as from ‘Abdullah bin
az-Zubair, ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir and Abu Hurairah, that appears
in the Musnad of Ahmad and the Sunan of Abu Dawood ,
which states that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: “The most evil (traits) in a man
are severe stinginess and uninhibited cowardice. ”
Muhammad bin Sa‘d says: “He used be insecure about his
speech as he would speak ungrammatical Arabic but he then
studied Arabic until he improved and refined his speech, after
which he became one of the most eloquent and articulate
among the people. The reason he had developed a complex
was because on one occasion, a man came to him to complain
about his Khatan (son-in-law) and so ‘Abdul-‘Azeez said to
him: “Man khatanak?” (which means: “Who circumcised
you?) ”. Confused as to why he was asking him that, the man
answered: “The man who circumcises everyone else. ”
Startled by his reply, ‘Abdul-Malik shouted to his scribe:
“Woe unto him! What did he answer me?” So his scribe said:
“O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! You should have said: “Man
khatanuk?” (meaning: “Who is your son-in-law?” ) ”, i. e. he
used incorrect vowels that rendered a completely different
meaning. From then on, he swore to himself that he would not
leave his house until he had acquired proficiency in the Arabic
language. He therefore spent an entire week studying Arabic
grammar before he emerged as one of the most eloquently
spoken people.
He would later give generously to anyone who spoke correct
Arabic, whilst withholding from anyone who spoke
355

ungrammatically, which is why the people exerted great effort
to acquire knowledge of Arabic during his era. One day,
‘Abdul-‘Azeez said to a man: “Mimman anta?” (literally
meaning: “From who are you?” but semantically means:
“Who are you?” ). As the man replied: “From the Banu
‘Abdud-Dar tribe”, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez said: “You will find this
(i. e. the outcome of your answer) in your stipend”, whereafter
he deducted one hundred Deenar from it for his unsatisfactory
answer.
Al-Qa‘qa‘ bin Hakeem is reported to have said that ‘Abdul‘Azeez bin Marwan wrote to ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar saying:
“Present your need to me. ” So Ibn ‘Umar wrote back to him,
saying: “Verily the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: ‘The upper hand is better than the
lower hand; the upper hand is that of the giver and the lower
hand is that of the beggar. ’”
When death approached ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, he was brought
some money amounting to three-hundred measures of gold
that had been bequeathed to him, at which point he said: “By
Allah! I would rather it were a heap of dung in Najd. ” He
added: “I would rather that I was not known and that instead
I was this flowing water or this plant in the ground of al-Hijaz.
” He also said: “Bring me my shroud in which you will wrap
me”, whereupon he started to say: “Wretched are you that
shortens your length and lessens your quantity! ”
Actually, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan was certainly one of the
most popular rulers owing to his immense generosity and
munificence. He was the father of the rightly-guided caliph,
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, who inherited his father’s fine
qualities and excelled him in many things.

356

The Pledge of ‘Abdul-Malik to His Son, alWaleed, and then to His Brother, Sulaiman
bin ‘Abdul-Malik After Him
The pledge of allegiance to al-Waleed took place first in
Damascus, followed by the rest of the provinces, during this
year after the death of ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan, which was
followed by the pledging of allegiance to Sulaiman as his
succcessor. However, when it came to receiving the pledge
from alMadinah, Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab refused to pledge
allegiance to anyone during the lifetime of ‘AbdulMalik and
so Hisham bin Isma‘eel, the deputy of al-Madinah, sentenced
him to be flogged sixty lashes, dressed in clothes made from
straw, mounted on camel-back and then taken round the city
on it. He was therefore taken to Thaniyyat Dhabab – the place
where they would crucify and execute people sentenced to