In Saheeh Muslim, narrated from Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood, he
said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “There was no Prophet except that he had
disciples guiding with his guidance and following his way.
After them there are successors ”– and in another narration,
“successive leaders,” – “they shall preach that which they don’t
practice, and they shall do that which they aren’t ordered. So
whoever strives against them with his hand then he is a
believer, and whoever strives against them with his heart then
he is a believer and whoever strives against them with his
tongue then he is a believer and there is no mustard seed’s
amount of Eeman beyond that.”
Narrated by Safeenah the Mawla of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), he said that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 328

him) said, “The Caliphate after me is for 30 years, thereafter
kingship.” In a narration, “Thereafter, Allah will give his
kingdom to whomsoever he wills.” This is exactly what
happened because Abu Bakr’s Caliphate was for two years and
four months minus 10 nights, and the Caliphate of Umar was
for 10 years, 6 months and 4 days. And the Caliphate of
Uthman was for 12 years minus 12 days, and the Caliphate of
Ali Ibn Abu Talib was for 5 years minus 2 months. I say: And
the completion of the 30 is with the Caliphate of Al-Hasan Ibn
Ali approximately 6 months in duration until he resigned in
favour of Mu‘awiyah in the year 40 from the Hijrah as shall be
explained later in detail.
Narrated by Abdur Rahman Ibn Abu Bakrah, he said: I heard
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say, “the Caliphate of Prophethood is for 30 years. Then
Allah will give his kingdom to whomsoever he wills.”
Mu‘awiyah said, “We are pleased with kingship.”
This Hadith has a clear refutation against the Rafidah who deny
the Caliphate of the three Imams (Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman), and a refutation against the Nawasib (a sect that has
enmity toward Ali and his descendants) from the tribe of
Umayyah and those that followed the people of Ash-Sham in
denying the Caliphate of Ali Ibn Abu Talib. If it is said: What
is the reconciliation between this Hadith of Safeenah and the
Hadith of Jabir Ibn Samurah mentioned earlier in Saheeh
Muslim, “This religion shall remain upright among the people
in the era of the 12 Caliphates, all of them are from Quraish?”
The answer is that from the people are those that said: This
religion shall remain upright until 12 Caliphates pass. After that
the disarray occurred after them during the rule of the Umayyah
tribe. Others said: Rather this Hadith contains a glad tiding of
the existence of 12 just Caliphs from the Quraish even if not by

www.sunniconnect.com l 329

succession, i.e., one following the other and the successive
Caliphate only occurred with the Caliphate after the
Prophethood for 30 consecutive years. Then after that there
were the upright Caliphs from them was Umar Ibn AbdulAzeez Ibn Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam Al-Umawi. Many of the
Imams have stated his Caliphate, justice and from being from
the upright Caliphs to the extent that Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said
about him, “Nobody’s statement from any of the Tabi‘een is an
authority except for the statement of Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez.”
And from those that are mentioned from them is Al-Muhtadi
Bi’amrillah AlAbbasi and Al-Mahdi whose existence has been
prophesied at the end of time is from them also by means of
text that he is from Ahlul-Bait (from the family of the Prophet)
and his name is Muhammad Ibn Abdullah. He is not the one
whose arrival is anticipated in Sirdab Samarra (a tunnel in Iran)
because he doesn’t exist, completely. Only the ignorant from
the Rafidah are waiting for him. In the Saheehain from the
Hadith of Az-Zuhri from Urwah, from ‘A’ishah that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said to ‘A’ishah, “I wanted to call your father (Abu Bakr)
and your brother and write a note lest someone says or wishes
that other than Abu Bakr should be the Caliph.” The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Yet
Allah and the Believers refuse everyone apart from Abu Bakr
to be the Caliph.” This is what happened because Allah gave
him leadership and all the Believers gave allegiance to him.
In Saheeh Al-Bukhari: A woman said, “O Messenger of Allah,
what shall I do if I come and I can’t find you?” It is as though
she was implying death. He replied, “If you can’t find me then
go to Abu Bakr.”
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain, from the Hadith of Ibn
Umar and Abu Hurairah that the Messenger of Allah (Peace

www.sunniconnect.com l 330

and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “While I was asleep
I saw that I was standing over a well. Then I took what Allah
willed from it and Ibn Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr) came and drew
a bucket or two in a weak manner, and Allah will excuse his
weakness. Then Umar Ibn Al-Khattab came and the bucket
turned into a very large one in his hands. I have never seen such
might in a person in doing such strenuous work. He drank until
he quenched his thirst and then gave (water) to all the people,
who drank to their satisfaction.” Ash-Shafi‘i said, “The dreams
of the Prophets are revelation and his statement, ‘And he drew
in a weak manner,’ is (a parable of) his short era and near death
and also his engagement in the wars against the apostates from
conquering (the lands) that Umar obtained in his long era (as
Caliph).”
I say: In the Hadith is a prophecy of their leadership and it
occurred just as he mentioned in its exactness. And for this
reason it has been mentioned in the Hadith that Ahmad,
Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban narrated from the Hadith
of Rib‘i Ibn Hirash from Hudhaifa Ibn Al-Yaman from the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he
said, “Follow the two that shall come after me; Abu Bakr and
Umar.”
Narrated by Abu Dharr is the Hadith of Abu Dharr concerning
the glorification of the stones in the hand of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), then Abu
Bakr, then Umar, then Uthman and his statement after that
“This is the Caliphate of my Ummah.”
It has been narrated in the Saheeh from Abu Musa, he said: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) entered a place (the well of Arees) and hung his legs at
the middle of the edge of the well. I said to myself that I will

www.sunniconnect.com l 331

be the gatekeeper of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) so I sat behind the gate then a man came and said,
“Open the gate.” I asked, “Who are you?” He replied, “Abu
Bakr.” I informed the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and he said, “Open for him and give him
glad tidings of Paradise.” Then Umar came and he said the
same thing. Then Uthman came and he said, “Give him
permission and give him glad tidings of Paradise after a trial
that shall afflict him.” He entered while saying, “Allah is the
One Whose help is sought.”
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari from Anas, who
said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) ascended Uhud and Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman
were with him. Then the mountain shook with them. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) hit it with his feet and said, “Remain firm, (O) Uhud,
because there is none but a Prophet, a Siddeeq (Abu Bakr) and
two martyrs.”
This is from the signs of Prophethood, for all of them were
martyred but the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) has been particularized out with the highest
level of Messengership and Prophethood and Abu Bakr was
particularized with the highest level of Siddeeqiyyah (believing
in the Prophet).
It has been affirmed in the Saheeh the testimony for the 10
guaranteed Paradise; rather for all those that were part of the
Bai‘atur-Ridwan in the Year of Hudaibiyah and there were
1,400 Companions and it has been said 1,300 and even 1,500.
All of them continued upon correctness and uprightness until
he died.

www.sunniconnect.com l 332

It has been affirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari, the glad tidings for
Okkashah that he is from the people of Paradise so he was
killed as a martyr in the Battle of Al-Yamamah.
In the Saheehain, from Abu Hurairah that he heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say, “70,000 from my Ummah will enter Paradise without
any reckoning with their faces glowing like the glowing of the
moon on a clear night.” Then Okkashah Ibn Mihsan Al-Asadi
stood dragging a tiger skin on him. He said, “O Messenger of
Allah, ask Allah to make me from them.” Then the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “O Allah,
make him from them.” Then a man from the Ansar stood and
said, “O Messenger of Allah, ask Allah to make me from
them.” He replied, “Okkashah succeeded you to it.”
This Hadith has been narrated from many ways which provides
certainty, i.e., in the authenticity of this Hadith and we shall
mention it in the chapter “Description of Paradise.” We shall
mention in the war against the apostates (Ahlur-Riddah) that
Tulaihah Al-Asadi (false prophet) killed Okkashah as a martyr.
Then Tulaihah recanted from what he claimed of Prophethood
and repented to Allah. He came to Abu Bakr, performed the
Umrah and his Islam was good means he became a righteous
Muslim.
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from the Hadith of Abu
Hurairah that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “While I was asleep I felt as though
two bracelets were placed in my hand and I broke them. Then
it was inspired to me in the dream to blow them, so I blew them
and they flew. I interpreted it as two liars that shall exit, one
(chief) from San‘a (Yemen’s capital) and the other (chief) from
Al-Yamamah (Riyadh and surrounding areas).” It has been

www.sunniconnect.com l 333

mentioned about the delegations that came to the Prophet that
he said to Musailimah when he came with his people and began
to say, “If Muhammad gives me this affair (leadership) after
him then I will follow him.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) stood in front of him and
said, “By Allah, if you ask me for this branch I wouldn’t give
it to you and if you turn away, Allah will indeed slay you and I
see in you that which I was shown about you (i.e., the dream he
had).” It occurred likewise, Allah got him slaughtered and
humiliated, and broke him and defeated him in the Battle of
Yamamah just as he had killed Al-Aswad Al-Ansi in San‘a,
based upon what we will narrate, if Allah wills.
It has been affirmed in the other Hadith that Musailimah wrote
after that to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him): In the Name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most
Beneficent. From Musailimah the messenger of Allah, to
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah. Greetings to you. To
proceed, I have been given a share in the matter after you, the
cities are yours and the rural areas are mine. However, the
Quraish are transgressors.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) wrote to him: In the Name of Allah, the Most Merciful,
the Most Beneficent. From Muhammad the Messenger of
Allah, to Musailimah the Liar. Peace on those that follow
guidance. To proceed, the Earth belongs to Allah; He inherits
it to whoever He wills and the end result is for the Believers.
Allah (SWT) made the end for Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his Companions because
they are the Muttaqoon (those that have fear of Allah) and they
are the just Believers. Many Ahadeeth have been narrated from
many ways from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be

www.sunniconnect.com l 334

upon him) regarding the prophecy of the apostasy that occurred
in the era of Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq fought against
them with the armies of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) until they returned to the religion of Allah
in flocks, and to the sweet water of Eeman after it had turned
bitter. Allah says: O you who believe! Whoever from among
you turns back from his religion (Islam), Allah will bring a
people whom He will love and they will love Him; humble
toward the Believers, stern toward the disbelievers. (Soorah AlMa’idah: 54) The commentators of the Qur’an said: That was
in reference to Abu Bakr and his Companions.
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from ‘A’ishah in the story
of the secret discussion the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) had with his daughter Fatimah and his
mention to her that Jibreel used to listen to him recite the
Qur’an once every year that he said, “And he made me recite
the Qur’an twice this year and I see that is only because my
time to die has come near.” Then she wept, and he told her in
whispers to her that she was head of the women in Paradise and
he is the first of his family who is going to follow him (i.e. die),
and this is what happened. Al-Baihaqi said, “The scholars have
differed over how long Fatimah lived after the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him); it is said 2
months, and it is said 3 months, and it is also said 6 and 8
months.” He added And the most authentic narrations is the
narration of Az-Zuhri from Urwah from ‘A’ishah that she said:
Fatimah lived for 6 months after the death of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).” It is
collected in the Saheehain.

www.sunniconnect.com l 335

And from the book, Signs of Prophethood, in
the chapter about his informing of future
unseen matters
From this is what has been affirmed in the Saheehain from
‘A’ishah, who said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “There were people that
were inspired in the nations and if there is one in my nation it
will be Umar Ibn Al-Khattab.”
Narrated by Tariq Ibn Shihab, he said, “We used to say that
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab speaks from an angel’s tongue.” We have
mentioned in the biography of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab many
matters from his discoveries and that which he used to mention
from matters of the unseen like the story of Sariyah Ibn Zunaim
and that which is similar to it.
From this is what Al-Bukhari narrated from ‘A’ishah: The
wives of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) gathered with him one day and said, “O Messenger of
Allah, who is the first from among us going to catch up with
you (i.e., who is going to die first then be with you)?” He
replied, “The one who has the longest arm.” Sawdah was the
one with the longest arm so she was the first to catch up to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). This is what has been mentioned in Al-Bukhari’s Saheeh
that it was Sawdah.
That which Muslim narrated from ‘A’ishah Bint Talhah, from
‘A’ishah, the Mother of the Believers, that she mentioned the
Hadith as mentioned above and in it Zainab had the longest
arms from among us because she used to work with her hand
and used to give in charity.” This is well-known among the
historians that Zainab Bint Jahsh was the first of the Prophet’s

www.sunniconnect.com l 336

wives to die. Al-Waqidi said: She died in Year 20 and Umar
Ibn Al-Khattab prayed upon her (the funeral prayer).
I say: As for Sawdah then she died in the end of the rule of
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab also, as mentioned by Abu Khaithamah.
From that is what Muslim narrated from the Hadith of Usair Ibn
Jabir from Umar Ibn Al-Khattab regarding the story of Uwais
Al-Qarani and the Prophet’s mention of him that he is the best
of the Tabi‘een and that he had leprosy so he prayed to Allah
and He removed it from him except for a place on his body the
size of a Dirham. He was good to his mother and he
commanded Umar to ask him to seek forgiveness from Allah
for him. This man was found in the era of Umar upon the exact
description that he mentioned in the Hadith. I have mentioned
the ways of this Hadith and its words and the explanation of it
in detail in that which I compiled from the Musnad of Umar Ibn
Al-Khattab.
Narrated by Umm Waraqah Bint Nawfal: When the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) fought in
Badr, she said: “O Messenger of Allah, allow me to come with
you in the battle, I shall nurse your wounded, so that Allah may
grant me martyrdom.” He replied to her, “Stay in your house,
because Allah will grant you martyrdom.” She used to be called
Ash-Shaheedah (the Martyr) and she had memorized the
Qur’an and asked the Prophet’s permission to have a guard who
would watch over her. She had a pact that her slave boy and
girl be free when she dies, so they stood by her at night and
smothered her in her blanket until she died. Umar woke up in
the morning, stood in front of the people and said, “Whoever
has knowledge about these two or saw them then he should
bring them. Then he gave the order (after they were found) and

www.sunniconnect.com l 337

crucified them and they were the first two who were crucified
in Madinah.
From that is what Al-Bukhari narrated from Awf Ibn Malik in
his Hadith from him concerning the six signs after his death and
a part of it: “Then a plague that will take you like Qu‘asalGhanam (a disease that causes animals to excrete a fluid from
its nose then die suddenly after).” This occurred in the era of
Umar and that is the plague of Amawas (a village near
Jerusalem) in the Year 18 and many from the most noble of
Companions died from it, from them was; Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal,
Abu Ubaidah, Yazeed Ibn Abu Sufyan, Shurahbeel Ibn
Hasanah, Abu Jandal Ibn Suhail Ibn ‘Amr and his father and
Al-Fadl Ibn AlAbbas Ibn Abdul-Muttalib.
Narrated Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal, who said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Six (matters)
are from the signs of the hour; my death, the conquering of
Jerusalem, a plague that will afflict the people like Qu‘asalGanam, a trial its realm will enter the house of every Muslim,
and that a man would be given 1,000 Dinars and dislike it and
that the Romans will go to war and they will come to you with
80 big banners and under each banner there are 12,000 men.”
Narrated Abdullah Ibn Hayyan that he heard Sulaiman Ibn
Moosa mention that the plague afflicted the people in (shortly
after) the Battle of Amwasah and Amr Ibn Al-As stood and
said, “O people, this illness is impurity so stay away from it.”
Then Shurahbeel Ibn Hasanah stood and said, “O people, I have
just heard the statement of your companion and, by Allah, I
have embraced Islam and prayed and Amr is more misguided
than the camel of his household. It is nothing other than a
plague that Allah has sent so remain patient.” Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal
stood and said, “O people, I have just heard the statements of

www.sunniconnect.com l 338

these two companions of yours, this plague is a mercy upon you
and the call (Da‘wah) of your Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). I indeed heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, ‘You are going
to journey to Sham and reach called, the Land of Amwasah,
and a plague is going to exit which leaves marks like the marks
of ulcers, and then by it Allah causes you and your children to
die as martyrs and purify your wealth.’ O Allah, you know that
I heard this from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). So give Mu‘adh and his family the
greatest portion from it and don’t cure him from it.” He added,
“He was afflicted in his index finger and began to say, ‘O Allah,
bless it because when you bless something which is small then
it becomes big’.” Thereafter, his son was afflicted and he
entered upon him and recited the Verse: (This is) the truth from
your Lord. So be you not one of those who doubt. (Soorah AlBaqarah: 147) So he replied: Insha’Allah (if Allah wills), you
shall find me of As-Sabireen (the patient ones, etc.).” (Soorah
As-Saffat: 102).
Narrated by Hudhaifah: Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said, “Who
among you remembers the statement of Allah’s Messenger
((Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) about
afflictions?” I said, “I know it as the Prophet had said it.” Umar
said, “No doubt, you are bold. How did he say it?” I said, “A
man's afflictions (wrong deeds) concerning his wife, children
and neighbors are expiated by (his) prayers, charity, and
enjoining good.” (The sub-narrator, Sulaiman, added that he
said, “The prayer, charity, enjoining good and forbidding
evil.”) Umar said, “I did not mean that, but I ask about that
affliction which will spread like the waves of the sea.” I said,
“O chief of the Believers! You need not be afraid of it as there
is a closed door between you and it.” He asked, “Will the door
be broken or opened?” I replied, “No, it will be broken.” He

www.sunniconnect.com l 339

said, “Then, if it is broken, it will never be closed again?” I
replied, “Yes.” We were afraid to ask what that door was. We
asked Masrooq to inquire, and he asked Hudhaifah regarding
it. Hudhaifah said, “The door was Umar.” We further asked
Hudhaifah whether Umar knew what that door meant.
Hudhaifah replied in the affirmative and added, “He knew it as
one knows that there will be a night before tomorrow morning.
I informed him from Hadiths not fictitious stories.” The subnarrator said, “We were afraid to ask him. We ordered Masrooq
to ask him, and he asked: Who is that door. He replied: Umar.”
This is what happened after the murder of Umar, trials fell on
the people and their existence was reaffirmed with the murder
of Uthman Ibn Affan.
Narrated by Salim from his father, who said: The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saw Umar
wearing a garment and asked him, “Is your garment new or is
it washed?” He replied, “Washed.” He said, “Wear new
(clothes), and live praiseworthy and die as a martyr.” The
narrator said: I think he said, “May Allah provide you with the
pleasure of your eyes in this world and the hereafter.”
That which he mentioned in the Hadith occurred for indeed he
was martyred while he was standing in Fajr prayers in his
Mihrab (place where Imam stands) in the Prophet’s Mosque.
The Hadith of Abu Dharr has been mentioned earlier
concerning the glorification of the stones in the hands of Abu
Bakr, Umar and then Uthman and then the Prophet’s statement
after that, “This is the Caliphate of Prophethood.”
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from Abu Moosa AlAsh‘ari: One day, I performed my Wudoo’ in my house and set
forth with the determination that I would stick to Messenger of

www.sunniconnect.com l 340

Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and spend
the whole day with him. I came to the Mosque and asked about
him. The Companions told that he had gone in a certain
direction. Abu Moosa added: I followed him inquiring until I
came to Bi’r Arees (a well in the suburb of Al-Madinah). I sat
down at the door till he had relieved himself and performed
Wudoo’. I went to him and saw him sitting on the platform of
the well with his shanks uncovered and his legs dangling in the
well. I greeted him and returned to the door of the garden,
saying to myself, “I will be the doorkeeper of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) today.'' Abu
Bakr came and knocked at the door. I said; "Who is that?'' He
said: "Abu Bakr.'' I said, "Wait a moment.'' Then I went to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Abu Bakr is at the door
seeking permission to enter.'' He said, "Admit him and give him
the glad tidings of Jannah.’’ I returned and said to Abu Bakr:
“You may enter and Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) has given you the glad tidings of
(entering) Jannah.’’ Abu Bakr came in and sat down on the
right side of Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and suspended his legs into the well and
uncovered his shanks, as the Messenger of Allah had done. I
returned to the door and sat down. I had left my brother at home
while he was performing Wudoo’ and intending to join me. I
said to myself: “If Allah intends good for him (i.e., to be
blessed to come at this time and receive the glad tidings of
entering Jannah), He will bring him here.’’ Someone knocked
at the door and I said, “Who is it?’’ He said, “Umar Ibn AlKhattab.’’ I said, “Wait a moment.’’ I proceeded toward the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and greeted him and said, "Umar is at the door, seeking
permission to enter.” He said, "Let him in and give him the glad
tidings of entering Jannah.’’ I went back to Umar and said to

www.sunniconnect.com l 341

him, “the Messenger of Allah has given you permission as well
as glad tidings of entering Jannah.’’ He entered and sat down
with Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on his left side and dangled his feet into the well. I
returned to the door and sat down and said to myself: "If Allah
intends good for my brother, He will bring him here.'' Someone
knocked at the door and I said, "Who is it?'' He said, "Uthman
Ibn Affan.'' I said, "Wait a moment.'' I went to the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
informed him about his arrival. He said, "Let him in and give
him glad tidings of entering Jannah together with a tribulation
which he will have to face.’’ I came back to him and said, “You
may enter; and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) gives you the glad tidings of entering
Jannah together with a tribulation that will afflict you.’’ He got
in and saw that the elevated platform round the well was fully
occupied. So he sat on the opposite side. Sa‘eed Ibn AlMusayyab, a sub-narrator, has reported: I interpreted it (the
order in which they sat down) indicated the places of their
burial they (the graves of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), Abu Bakr and Umar) were together and
the grave of Uthman was away from theirs.
Another narration adds: Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari said: The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ordered
me to guard the door. When Uthman was told (about the
misfortune) he praised Allah and said: "Allahul-Musta‘an (His
help is to be sought).’’
Narrated ‘A’ishah, who said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Call some of my
Companions for me.” I replied, “Abu Bakr?” He said, “No.” I
asked, “Umar?” He replied, “No.” I asked, “Uthman?” He said,
“Yes.” When Uthman arrived (Al-Baihaqi) he said: He leaned

www.sunniconnect.com l 342

and began to whisper to him and Uthman’s color changed. Abu
Sahlah said: When it was the day of the house (siege, i.e., when
Uthman was murdered) and he was present therein, we said, “O
Leader of the Believers, are you not going to fight?” He replied,
“No, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) has taken my promise and I am going to make
myself patient upon that (i.e., not to fight and that he will be
martyred).”
Al-Baihaqi narrated from the Hadith of Moosa Ibn Uqbah: My
grandfather informed me, the father of my mother, Abu
Habeebah, that he entered the house while Uthman was
surrounded in it. And he heard Abu Hurairah seek permission
from Uthman to speak, so he allowed him. He stood and praised
Allah and extolled Him and said, I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “You
are going to experience trials and discord after me.” Then
someone from the people said to him, “Who shall we stick by,
O Messenger of Allah? – or (he said): What do you command
us?” He replied, “Stick to the faithful and his companions,” and
he was indicating to Uthman by that.
Narrated by Abdullah Ibn Masood from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “The affair of
Islam shall remain intact for 35 years – or he said 36 or 37 years
– and if they perish then the path of those who perished. If their
religion remains then it will remain established for 70 years.”
Al-Baihaqi said: It has reached me that in this was an indication
to the tribulations that occurred, from them was the murder of
Uthman in year 35. In this Hadith, there is an indication to the
tribulations that occurred in the era of Ali. And he meant by 70
years the kingdom of Banu Umayyah tribe, because between
the establishment of the kingdom for them and the time when

www.sunniconnect.com l 343

callers appeared (in support of the Al-Abbasi movement) in
Khurasan and the weakness of the Banu Umayyah’s tribe is
close to 70 years.

Another Hadith
Narrated by Umm Dharr, she said: When Abu Dharr’s death
was near, I cried. He said, “What causes you to cry?” I replied,
“How can I not cry when you are going to die in an open plain
of the earth and I have no strength to bury you and I don’t have
a sheet of cloth that is sufficient for you so I can cover you with
it.” He replied, “Don’t cry, be happy because I heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say to a group of people, ‘A man from among you shall
die in a plain of the earth, a group from the Muslims will
witness him (shall pray on him).’ There is none from that group
except that he died in a village or a group and I am the one who
die in a plain of land. By Allah, I am not lying nor was I told a
lie.”
The Hadith concerning his death is renowned in Ar- Rabadhah
in the Year 33 in the Caliphate of Uthman and from those
people that came to him while he was about to die was
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood and he is the one who offered prayers
on him. He came to Madinah and lived for 10 days there and
then he died.
Narrated Abud-Darda’, who said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I am going
to leave you (i.e. die) until the Pond. I will wait whoever comes
to me from you then I will be disputed with about one of you,
so I will say: He is from my Ummah. It will be said, ‘Do you
know what they did after you’?” Abud-Darda’ said: I feared
that I may be from those (who are repelled). I came to the

www.sunniconnect.com l 344

Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and mentioned that to him. He replied, “You are not from
them.” The sub-narrator said: Abud-Darda’ died before
Uthman died and before the tribulations occurred.
I say: Sa‘eed Ibn Abdul-Azeez said, that Abud- Darda’ passed
away with two years remaining from Uthman’s Caliphate. And
Al-Waqidi, Abu Ubaidah and others said that he passed away
in Year 32.

A mention of his briefing concerning the
tribulations toward the end of Uthman’s era
and the Caliphate of Ali Ibn Abi Talib
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from Usamah Ibn Zaid:
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) stood on a balcony (rooftop) of a high-rise building from
the high-rise buildings of Madinah and said, “Do you see what
I see? I indeed see the places where the tribulations will occur
around your houses like the places where the rain drops.”
Imam Ahmad and Muslim narrated from Abu Idrees Khawlani:
I heard Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman say, “By Allah, I am the most
learned of the people concerning every tribulation that is going
to occur from now until the Hour. That isn’t because the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) informed me about something from that which he told me
in secret and didn’t inform anyone else about it. But the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) mentioned when he was talking to a group that I was in.
He was asked about the tribulations. “From them are three
matters which will not leave anything from them, like the wind
of summer. From them are small (matters) and from them are
big (matters).” Hudhaifah said, “Then that group left and I
www.sunniconnect.com l 345

stayed (i.e., to hear the rest of the story).” This is the wording
of Ahmad.
Al-Baihaqi said: Hudhaifah died after the first tribulation, the
murder of Uthman and before the last two tribulations (from
the three mentioned in the Hadith above) in the era of Ali.
I say: Al-Ijli and others from the historians said: The death of
Hudhaifah was after the murder of Uthman by 40 days, and he
is the one who said, “If the murder of Uthman was any
guidance, the Ummah would have milked yoghurt from it.
However, it was misguided, so the Ummah milked blood from
it.” He said, “If one of you was to move for what you did to
Uthman then it would have been appropriate for him to dance.”
Narrated by Zainab Bint Jahsh, the wife of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), she said: The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) woke up from his
sleep with a red face and said, “There is no god deserving of
worship except Allah; woe be unto the Arabs from an evil that
has drawn nearer. Allah has opened (a hole) from the barrier of
Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj similar to this, and he made a circle with
his index finger and his thumb and the finger next to it. I said,
“O Messenger of Allah, are we going to perish when there are
righteous people among us?” He said, “Yes, if evil increases.”
Abu Dawood As-Sijistani (Afghani) narrated in his Sunan from
Sa‘eed Ibn Zaid, who said: We were with the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), when he mentioned a
tribulation and magnified its affair. We said, “O Messenger of
Allah, if this reaches us, it shall destroy us.” He replied,
“Rather, being killed is enough for you (i.e., you won’t be
destroyed).” Sa‘eed said, “I saw that my brothers were killed.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 346

Hudhaifah said, “There is no one from the people who will be
affected by the tribulations except that I will fear for him with
the exception of Muhammad Ibn Maslamah because I heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say, ‘The tribulations will not harm you’.” This Hadith
has a broken chain (in effect, it is weak).
Ahmad narrated from Abul-Ash‘ath As-San‘ani, he said:
Yazeed Ibn Mu‘awiyah sent me to Ibn Az- Zubair. When I
arrived in Madinah I entered upon so-and-so – Ziyad (a subnarrator) forgot his name – and said, “The people have done
that which they have done, so what do you think?” He said,
“My close friend Abul-Qasim (the Prophet) advised me, ‘If you
reach any of these tribulations, then go to (Mount) Uhud and
break the blade of your sword and sit in your house’. The
Prophet added, ‘If anyone enters your house, go to your bed, if
he goes to your bed, sit on your knees and say: Return with my
sin and your sin so you become from the dwellers of the fire
and that is the reward of the oppressors.’ I broke the blade of
my sword and sat in my house.”
(Translator’s note: The tribulations which are referred to here
are in reference to the fights and wars that occurred between
the Muslims like in the time of Ali, Mu‘awiyah and Yazeed and
also when the word Fitnah, i.e., tribulation mentioned earlier).
Narrated by Bint Uhban Al-Ghifari, Ali came to Uhban and
said, “What prevents you from following me?” He said, “My
close friend and son of your uncle (the Prophet) advised me,
‘There will be discord, tribulations and differences. If that
happens, break your sword and sit in your house and take a
sword made out of wood’.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 347

Narrated Abu Hurairah, who said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “There shall
be tribulations, the one who sits is better than the one who
stands. And the one who stands is better than the one who walks
and the one who walks is better than the one who runs.
Whoever exposes himself to it, he will be destroyed by it, and
whoever finds a place of refuge or a safe place, he should stay
in it”.
Narrated Ibn Mas‘ood from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) that he said, “There will be injustice and
matters that you disapprove.” They said, “O Messenger of
Allah, then what do you command us?” He replied, “You fulfill
the rights that are incumbent on you and you ask Allah for what
(rights) belong to you.”
Narrated by Abu Bakrah from the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “There will be a time
of tribulations, then there will be a tribulation and the one who
walks in it will be better than the one who runs. The one who
sits will be better than the one who stands in it, the one who lies
in it will be better than the one who sits. When it arrives, the
one who has sheep should tend to his sheep, the one who has
land should tend to his land, the one who has camels should
tend to his camels.” A man from the people said, “O Prophet of
Allah, May Allah sacrifice me for you, what if someone doesn’t
have sheep, or land, or camels what should he do?” He replied,
“He should take his sword, strike its edge on a stone and then
escape if he can. O Allah, I have conveyed.” A man said, “O
Messenger of Allah, May Allah sacrifice me for you, what if
someone compels me by my hand and takes me to one of the
two rows or one of the two parties – Uthman (the sub-narrator)
had doubt (i.e., over: “one of the two rows or two parties”) –
then a man stabs me with his sword and kills me, what shall be

www.sunniconnect.com l 348

from my affair?” He said, “He will return with your sin and his
sin and be from the dwellers of the fire.” This is what Muslim
narrated from the Hadith of Uthman Ash-Shahham. This is a
mention of the arrival of tribulations and many Ahadeeth have
been narrated with this meaning.
Narrated by ‘A’ishah when she came to Al-Haw’ab (a place
between Makkah and Al-Basrah), she heard the barking of dogs
and said: I think I am going to return. The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to us: “Who
from among you (addressing his wives) will the dogs of
AlHaw’ab bark at.” Az-Zubair said to her, “Are you going to
return? Maybe Allah will bring peace between the people with
you.” This chain is on the condition (in accepting authentic
narrations) of the Saheehain and they didn’t narrate it.
Narrated by Ibn Abbas, he said: When the allies of Ali went to
Basrah and knew that the people of Basrah had gathered for
Talhah and Az-Zubair they found that difficult and felt it in
their hearts. Then Ali said, “By the One besides Whom there is
no god worthy of worship except Him, he will defeat the people
of Basrah and kill Talhah and Az-Zubair. And 6,550 men from
Kufah will face you or he said 5,500.” AlAjlah (a sub-narrator)
had doubt (over this figure). Ibn Abbas said: That fell in my
heart and when I went to Kufah I thought that I should have a
look. If it was as he said then it was a matter that he heard and
if not then it was propaganda. I met a man from the army and
asked him, and, by Allah, he said that which Ali mentioned. Ibn
Abbas said: And that is what the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) informed him.
Narrated by Abu Harb Ibn Abul-Aswad (Ad-Deeli) from his
father – the Hadith of each of them merged with the other – he
said, “When Ali and his companions approached Talhah and

www.sunniconnect.com l 349

Az-Zubair and the rows (of the two sides) drew closer to each
other Ali emerged upon the mule of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and shouted, “Call
Az-Zubair Ibn Al-Awwam for me because I am Ali.” Then AzZubair was called and came until the necks of their animals
were tangled together, and Ali said: I ask you in Allah’s Name,
do you remember when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) met you at such-and-such
place and said, O Zubair, do you love Ali?” You said, “Shall I
not love the son of my maternal uncle and the one who is on
my religion?” He replied, “O Ali, do you love him?” I said, “O
Messenger of Allah, shall I not love the son of my paternal aunt
and the one who is on my religion?” The Prophet said, “O
Zubair, you are going to fight him while you are going to be the
wrong doer.” Az-Zubair said, “Indeed, by Allah, I forgot it
since I heard it from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and now I have remembered
it. By Allah, I shall not fight you.” Az- Zubair returned on his
riding animal splitting the rows. His son Abdullah Ibn AzZubair came to him and said, “What is wrong with you?” He
replied, “Ali reminded me of a Hadith I heard from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), I heard him say, ‘You are going to fight him while you
are the wrongdoer’, so I shall not fight him.” He asked, “So you
came to fight? You only came to make peace between the
people and that Allah reconciles this matter.” He replied, “I
have taken an oath not to fight him.” He said, “Then free your
slave Jarjis and stand till you reconcile between the people.”
He freed his slave and stood, and when the affair of the people
differed he went on his horse.
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from the Hadith of
Hammam Ibn Munabbih, from Abu Hurairah, he said: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 350

him) said, “The Hour shall not be established until two great
parties of the Believers fight, their call is one.”
These two parties are the people of the camel (i.e., the party of
‘A’ishah as she was on a camel and when it was struck the war
ended) and the people of Siffeen (the place of the first battle
between the allies of Ali and his opponents). That is because
they both call to Islam and they only disputed over matters
pertaining to leadership and considering the beneficial matters
that benefit the Ummah and the general folk. Leaving the battle
was more appropriate than making it, as was the school of
thought of the majority of the Companions as we shall mention.
Narrated by Safwan Ibn Amr, he said: The people of Sham
(party of Ali’s opposition) were 60,000 and 20,000 of them
were killed and the people of Iraq (party of Ali) were 120,000
and 40,000 were killed from them.
However, Ali and his allies were the closest of the two parties
to the truth than Mu‘awiyah. The allies of Mu‘awiyah were the
ones who revolted against them as has been affirmed in Saheeh
Muslim from Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri. He said: Somebody who
is better than me informed me – i.e., Abu Qatadah – that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said to Ammar, “The rebellious group shall kill you (and
Ammar was from the allies of Ali).”
Narrated by Abu Ubaidah Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ammar Ibn
Yasir from a Mawla of Ammar, who said: Ammar fell ill with
an illness that made him weak, and he fell unconscious but
recovered while we were crying around him. He asked, “Why
are you crying? Do you fear that I will die on my bed? My
beloved has informed me that the rebellious party shall kill me
and my last provision in this world is diluted Laban.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 351

Narrated by Ibn Mas‘ood, he said: I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “When
the people differ, Ibn Sumayyah will be with the truth.” It is
well-known that Ammar was in the army of Ali in the Battle of
Siffeen and the allies of Mu‘awiyah from Ash-Sham killed him
and a man with the name of Abul-Ghadiyah killed him, and he
was a man from the common folk. It has been mentioned that
he was a Companion and Abu Umar Ibn Abdul-Barr and others
mentioned him from the names of the Companions, and he was
Abul-Ghadiyah Muslim. It has been said that his name was
Yasar Ibn Uzaihir Al-Juhani from Quda‘ah and it is said he was
a Muzani (tribesman), yet it has also been mentioned they were
two. He lived in Ash-Sham and then moved to Wasit, Ahmad
narrated a Hadith from him and he has another Hadith with
another compiler of Hadith. The scholars said that he was the
murderer of Ammar Ibn Yasir and he used to mention the
description of his murder of Ammar and he wouldn’t be
ashamed of that. We shall mention his biography when we
speak of his murder of Ammar in the era of Mu‘awiyah in the
Battle of Siffeen. Whoever has mentioned that he fought in the
Badr has made an error.
Narrated by Hanzalah Ibn Khuwailid Al-Anazi, he said: While
I was with Mu‘awiyah two men came disputing over the head
of Ammar, every one of them said: I killed him. Abdullah Ibn
Amr said, “Each of you should prefer that it was the other of
you because I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, ‘The rebellious party will
kill him.’ Mu‘awiyah said, “Take your insane (son) away from
us, O Amr. Why are you with us?” Abdullah said, “My father
complained about me to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he said, ‘Obey your father
as long as he lives and don’t disobey him.’ I am with you but I
won’t fight.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 352

Narrated by Abdullah Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Nawfal, who said, “I
was traveling with Mu‘awiyah who was returning from Siffeen
and along with him was Amr Ibn Al-As. Abdullah Ibn Amr
said, “O my father, didn’t you hear what the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to
Ammar, ‘Woe be unto you, O Ibn Sumayyah. The rebellious
party shall kill you’!” He said: Then Amr said to Mu‘awiyah,
“Do you not hear what he says?” Mu‘awiyah said, “The
prohibition never ceases to come to me. Did we kill him? The
ones that killed him are the ones who brought him (to us).”
The statement of Mu‘awiyah: “That the one who killed him is
the one who brought him to our swords,” is a very far
interpretation. Because that would imply that the leader of the
army is the one who killed those who died in the way of Allah
as he would have brought him to the swords of the enemies.
Amr said to Abdur Rahman Ibn Awf, “Do you not know that
we used to read in the Qur’an: Strive hard in Allah’s cause as
you ought to strive (with sincerity and with all your efforts that
His Name should be superior) (Soorah Al-Hajj: 78) in the end
of time just as you made Jihad at the beginning of time?” Abdur
Rahman Ibn Awf said, “When is that, O leader of the
Believers?” He replied, “When the tribesman of Umayyah
become leaders and the tribesman of Al-Mugheerah become
the ministers.” Al-Baihaqi mentioned it here and it is as though
he was using it as an evidence for the chapter which he
mentioned after it concerning the two arbitrators and the
outcome of their affair.

www.sunniconnect.com l 353

Chapter concerning his briefing about the
two arbitrators which were sent in the era of
Ali
The two arbitrators were from the best of the Companions and
they were Amr Ibn Al-As As-Sahmi from the party of AshSham (Mu‘awiyah) and the second was Abu Moosa Abdullah
Ibn Qais Al-Ash‘ari from the party of Iraq (Ali). They were
only chosen in order to bring peace between the people and
agree on a matter which entails ease for the Muslims and saving
their blood. This is what occurred and because of them none
was misguided due to them except for the Khawarij sect.
Because they rebuked the two leaders for their use of
arbitration, rebelled against them and labeled them as
disbelievers. Ali Ibn Abu Talib fought against them and Ibn
Abbas challenged their views. Then some of them returned to
the truth yet the remainder continued until most of them were
killed at An-Nahrawan and in areas from their defeated stances
as we shall mention.

The Prophet’s mention of the exit of the
Khawarij
Narrated by Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri: While we were with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and he was distributing something, Dhul-Khuwaisirah
came – and he was a man from the tribe of Tameem – and said,
“Be just, O Messenger of Allah.” He replied, “Woe to you, and
who will be just? You have indeed lost if I was not just.” Umar
said, “O Messenger of Allah, give me permission so that I may
strike his neck.” He replied, “Leave him, for he has companions
and if you compare your prayers with theirs, and your fasting
with theirs, you will look down upon your prayers and fasting

www.sunniconnect.com l 354

in comparison to theirs. They recite the Qur’an but it doesn’t
leave their throats. They will leave this religion just as an arrow
darts through the games body in which case, if the point of the
arrow was examined, nothing will be found on it, and when its
stem was examined, nothing will be found on it; and if its
feathers are examined nothing will be found on it. The arrow
has been too fast to be smeared by dung and blood. The sign by
which these people are recognized will be a black man. One of
his upper arms will be like the breast of a woman or like a
moving piece of flesh and they will appear at a time of discord
between the people (Muslims).” Abu Sa‘eed said, “I testify that
I heard this Hadith from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and I testify that Ali fought
against them while I was with him, then he ordered that man be
sought. He was searched for and brought and I saw that he was
bearing the description that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) made about him.”
Muslim narrated in his Saheeh from Abu Sa‘eed, who said: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “A group shall emerge at a time of discord between
the Muslims, the nearest of the two parties to the truth shall kill
it.” He also narrated it from the Hadith of Abu Ishaq AthThawri from Habeeb Ibn Abu Thabit from Ad-Dhahhak AlMishraqi from Abu Sa‘eed from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Muslim narrated from (Yusair) Ibn Amr, who said, “I asked
Sahl Ibn Hunaif, did you hear the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) speak about those
Khawarij?” He replied, “I heard him, then he pointed toward
the East - and in another narration, toward Iraq - and said, 'A
group shall emerge, they shall recite the Qur’an with their
tongues yet it doesn’t pass their throats. They shall leave this

www.sunniconnect.com l 355

religion just as an arrow passes through its game, they have
shaved heads.'”
In the Saheehain from Ali: I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “A group will
emerge toward the end of time, with new teeth (young people),
with foolish aspirations, and they speak with words from the
best of creation (i.e., the Prophet’s sayings), their faith will not
pass their throats. Wherever you meet them then kill them, for
lies a reward for the one who kills them till the Day of
Resurrection.”
Narrated by Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas, he said: The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) mentioned
the man with a (female) breast and said, “The devil of the
mountain spring is like the one who tends to horses, a man from
Bajeelah shall bring him.” He was known as: Al-Ashhab or Ibn
Al-Ashhab; he is the sign of an oppressive people. Sufyan said:
Ammar (Ad-Duhni) that a man brought him known as AlAshhab or Ibn Al-Ashhab.
Narrated by Abu Sa‘eed, he said: I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “There
will be someone from you who will fight in defense of the
interpretation of the Qur’an just as I fought in defense of its
revelation.” Abu Bakr said, “Is that me, O Messenger of
Allah?” He replied, “No.” Umar said, “Is that me, O Messenger
of Allah.” He replied, “No, but he is Khasifun-Na‘l.” He
intended Ali.
Narrated from Lahiq, he said, “The ones who rebeled against
Ali in An-Nahrawan were 4,000 in iron. The Muslims mounted
them and killed them and they didn’t kill from the Muslims

www.sunniconnect.com l 356

except 9, and if you wish then go to Abu Barzah, for he will
testify to that.”
I say: The narrations from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) concerning fighting against
the Khawarij are Mutawatirah (many in number providing
certainty in the narrations’ authenticity) because they are from
many paths that provide certainty with the Imams of this field
(i.e. Hadith). And its occurrence in the era of Ali is known by
necessity among all the people of knowledge. And as for how
they rebeled, and Ibn Abbas’ debating with them concerning
that and the return of many of them to him then it shall be
mentioned - if Allah wills - at its appropriate place.

The Prophet’s mention of Ali Ibn Abi Talib’s
murder, and then it occurred exactly as he
mentioned
Narrated Ammar Ibn Yasir, who said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to Ali when
he was made in charge of the Battle of Al-Ushairah, “O Abu
Turab – because of what he saw upon him from Turab (soil) –
shall I not inform you of the two worst men the people?” We
said, “Indeed, O Messenger of Allah.” He replied, “Uhaimir
Thamood, the one who slayed the she-camel (see Soorah
Shams) and the one who will hit you on this, O Ali – (he pointed
to) the top of his head – until this is wet from it,” (he pointed
to) his beard (i.e. until his beard will be full of blood).
Narrated by Zaid Ibn Wahb, he said: The leader of the Khawarij
came to Ali and said to him, “Fear Allah because you are going
to die.” He replied, “No, by the One Who cleaves the grain and
the One Who created human being, but I am going to be
murdered from a blow to this which will dye this – and he
www.sunniconnect.com l 357

pointed to his beard – is a fixed covenant and a decreed decree
and he has failed who invents (such falsehood).”
It is renowned from Ali that when Abdur Rahman Ibn Muljam
Al-Khariji stabbed him while he was exiting for the morning
prayer at the door, Ali remained alive for two days since the
stabbing and Ibn Muljam was held. Ali nominated his son AlHasan for being the Caliph as shall be mentioned and
commanded him to lead the armies and said to him, “Ali
doesn’t flow like the river.” When he died, Abdur Rahman was
killed by means of Qawad (punishment for murder) and it is
mentioned that he was killed by means of Hadd (punishment).
And Allah (SWT) knows best. Al-Hasan Ibn Ali led the armies
and went to Mu‘awiyah as shall be explained later.

The Prophet’s mention of the event between
Mu‘awiyah and Al-Hasan and the nobility of
his grandson Al-Hasan by resigning
Narrated by Abu Bakrah, he said: The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) took Al-Hasan Ibn Ali one day
and he ascended the pulpit with him and said, “This son
(grandson can be called “son” in Arabic) of mine is Sayyid
(noble) and Allah will bring peace with him between two great
parties of the Muslims.”
Al-Bukhari said from Al-Hasan (Al-Basri) in the book of Sulh
(peacemaking):
By Allah, Al-Hasan Ibn Ali led large battalions like mountains
against Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abu Saufyan. Amr Ibn Al-As said (to
Mu‘awiyah), “I surely see battalions which will not turn back
before killing their opponents.” Mu‘awiyah who was really the
best of the two men said to him, “O Amr! If they killed those

www.sunniconnect.com l 358

and those killed these, who would be left with me for the jobs
of the public, who would be left with me for their women, who
would be left with me for their children?”
Then Mu‘awiyah sent two Quraishi men from the tribe of AbdShams called Abdur Rahman Ibn Sumurah and Abdullah Ibn
Amir Ibn Kuraiz to Al-Hasan saying to them, “Go to this man
(i.e. Al-Hasan) and negotiate peace with him and talk and
appeal to him.” They went to Al-Hasan and talked and appealed
to him to accept peace. Al-Hasan said, “We, the offspring of
Abdul-Muttalib, have got wealth and people have indulged in
killing and corruption (and money only will appease them).”
They said to Al-Hasan, “Mu‘awiyah offers you so-and-so, and
appeals to you and entreats you to accept peace.” Al-Hasan said
to them, “But who will be responsible for what you have said?”
They said, “We will be responsible for it.” Whatever Al-Hasan
asked they said, “We will be responsible for it for you.” AlHasan concluded a peace treaty with Mu‘awiyah.
Al-Hasan (Al-Basri) said: I heard Abu Bakr say, “I saw Allah’s
Messenger on the pulpit and Al-Hasan Ibn Ali was by his side.
The Prophet was looking once at the people and once at AlHasan Ibn Ali saying, ‘This son of mine is a Sayyid (i.e., a
noble) and may Allah make peace between two big groups of
Muslims through him’.”
The affair occurred exactly how the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) mentioned. When the
leadership was passed to Al-Hasan Ibn Ali and he led the
armies of Iraq, and Mu‘awiyah came to him and they met at
As-Siffeen based upon what Al-Hasan Al-Basri mentioned,
then Al-Hasan Ibn Ali was inclined toward bringing peace. He
addressed the people and resigned from leadership and gave it
to Mu‘awiyah and that was in the Year 40. The leaders of the

www.sunniconnect.com l 359

two armies gave allegiance to him and Mu‘awiyah became in
charge of the Ummah. That year was named the Year of
Congregation due to the unification in it upon one man. We
shall narrate that in detail if Allah wills. The period of the
continuous Caliphate that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) made an indication toward
ended with this year, as was mentioned earlier in the Hadith of
Safeenah, his Mawla, that he said, “The Caliphate after me is
for 30 years, thereafter there shall be kingship,” and in another
narration, “biting.” And it has been mentioned in another
narration from Mu‘awiyah that he said, “We are pleased with
it as kingship.”

The Prophet’s mention of the expedition of
the sea to Cyprus which was in the era of
Mu‘awiyah
Malik narrated from Anas Ibn Malik that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would enter
upon Umm Haram Bint Milhan (the aunt of the Prophet through
weaning) and she would feed him and she was married to
Ubadah Ibn As-Samit. Once he entered upon her and fed him
and she sat and inspected his head for lice. The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) slept, and
when he woke laughing she said: “What causes you to laugh,
O Messenger of Allah?” He replied: “I saw a people from my
nation battling in the path of Allah riding the waves of this sea,
kings on thrones” – or he said “like kings on thrones.” Ishaq
(the sub-narrator) doubted. Then I said, “O Messenger of Allah,
supplicate to Allah that He makes me from them,” so he prayed
for her and slept again. Then he woke laughing again and she
asked him, “What causes you to laugh, O Messenger of Allah?”
He replied, “I saw a people battling in the path of Allah,” as he

www.sunniconnect.com l 360

mentioned the first time. She said: “O Messenger of Allah,
supplicate to Allah that He makes me from them.” He replied,
“You are from the first of them.” Anas said: Then Umm Haram
rode the sea in the era of Mu‘awiyah. She fell from her riding
animal when she left the sea and died.
The Hadith has also been narrated by Al-Bukhari from
Abdullah Ibn Yoosuf and by Muslim from Yahya Ibn Yahya,
both of them from Malik.
Narrated by Khalid Ibn Ma‘dan that Umair Ibn Al-Aswd AlAnsi informed him that he came to Ubadah Ibn As-Samit while
he was staying on the coast of Hims (in Syria) in an apartment
he owned with Umm Haram. Umair said: Umm Haram
informed us that she heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “The first army from my
Ummah to battle in the sea is granted Paradise.” Umm Haram
said, “O Messenger of Allah, am I from them?” He replied,
“You are from them.” She said: Then the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “The first army that
battles against the city of Qaisar shall have their sins forgiven.”
I said, “Am I from them, O Messenger of Allah?” He said,
“No.”
It is similar to the meaning of the first Hadith. Also in this
Hadith there are 3 signs of the Prophethood. The first is the
mention of the first battle at sea which occurred in Year 27 with
Mu‘awiyah when he was on an expedition to Cyprus while he
was a governor of Syria (Sham) under Uthman Ibn Affan.
(Second) Umm Haram Bint Milhan who accompanied Ubadah
Bin As-Samit - her husband, one of the chiefs in the night of
the Aqabah (Pact). She died when she was returning from the
battle although it has been mentioned in Sham according to
what was mentioned earlier in the narration of Al-Bukhari. Ibn

www.sunniconnect.com l 361

Zaid said: She died in Cyprus in the Year 27. (Thirdly) the
second battle was the Battle of Constantinople with the first
army which went their and the leader (of the army) was Yazeed
Ibn Mu‘awiyah and that was in Year 52, Abu Ayyoob, Khalid
Ibn Zaid Al-Ansari was with them when he died there. And this
woman was not with them because she had died before that in
the first expedition.
So this Hadith has 3 signs from the signs of the Prophethood;
the mention of the 2 battles, the mention that the woman is from
the first and not the last and this is exactly what happened.

Information of the war against India
Narrated Abu Hurairah, who said: My close friend informed me
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “There will be an army from this Ummah that will
go to Sind (an area now a province of Pakistan) and Al-Hind
(India).” If I reach it and become martyred then so be it, and if
I – he (Abu Hurairah) mentioned a word – return then I am Abu
Hurairah the free whom was freed by him (the Prophet) from
the fire.” Only Ahmad narrated this Hadith.
The Muslims went to battle in India at the time of Mu‘awiyah
in Year 44 and there were events that occurred there which
shall be explained later. And the great King Mahmood Ibn
Subuktikeen of Ghaznah (Ghazni a city in modern
Afghanistan) in around Year 400 invaded the land of India and
he fought therein, he killed, captured, carried of slaves and
gained war booty. He even entered Somanath and destroyed the
biggest idol (Shiva) which they worshiped and he took its
earrings and chains (or necklaces) and then returned safe and
victorious as shall be mentioned.

www.sunniconnect.com l 362

Section concerning this Prophet’s mention of
the war against the Turks as it happened
Al-Bukhari narrated from Abu Hurairah from the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), he said, “The Hour
shall not be established until you fight a people with fur sandals
(shoes) and until you fight the Turks, small-eyed red-faced
Dhulful-Unoof (small short noses with raised tips). Their faces
are like covered shields (i.e. round and full of meat) and you
will find from the best of the people are those who have hatred
for this affair (i.e. Islam) until he enters it. And the people are
like earthly treasures (metals, gems, etc., i.e., they’re all
different and also the true nature of them are never changed.
That’s why he said after this); the best of them in Jahiliyyah
(pre-Islamic ignorance) is the best of them in Islam. There shall
come a time upon one of you that if he were to see me, then that
would be more beloved to him than if he were to have similar
to his family and his wealth.”
Narrated Abu Hurairah that the Prophet said, “The Hour will
not be established until you fight Khooz and Kirman from the
non-Arabs; with red faces, small (chisel type) noses and small
eyes; their faces are like covered shields, their sandals (shoes)
are from fur.”
The point is that fighting against the Turks occurred toward the
end of the era of the Companions, they fought against the Great
Al-Qan (or Khan) and severely destroyed him based upon that
which we will mention when we come to it.

Another narration from Abdullah Ibn Salam
Narrated by Qais Ibn Ubad, he said: I was in the mosque when
a man with the mark of humility came and prayed two short

www.sunniconnect.com l 363

units (Raka‘ahs). The people said that he was a man from the
people of Paradise. When he left, I followed him until he
entered his house and I also entered with him and spoke to him.
When he felt comfortable, I said to him, “The people said suchand-such when you entered the mosque.” He replied, “Allah is
glorified, by Allah, it isn’t appropriate for anyone to say that
which he doesn’t know and I shall inform you that I had a
dream which I saw at the time of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) so I narrated it to him. I
saw that I was in a green garden – Ibn Awn (sub-narrator) said
that he mentioned its greenness and spaciousness – in the
middle of it there was an iron pillar, the bottom of it was in the
ground and the top of it was in the sky at the top of it there was
a handhold. I was told to climb it. I said that I couldn’t. Then
he brought a Minsaf – Ibn Awn said it means a young servant
(Waseef) - and then he lifted my clothes from behind me and
said to climb on it. I climbed till I took hold of the threshold
and he said, “Hold on to the threshold.” Then I woke up and it
was in my hand. The man said: I came to the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and informed him. He
said, “As for the garden, it is the garden of Islam and as for the
pillar, it is the pillar of Islam. As for the threshold, it is the firm
threshold, you shall die upon Islam.” He said, The narrator was
Abdullah Ibn Salam.

The mention of the death of Maimoonah Bint
Al-Harith in Sarif
Al-Bukhari narrated in At-Tareekh from Yazeed Ibn AlAsamm, he said: Maimoonah became ill in Makkah and she
didn’t have anyone from her nephews present. She said, “Take
me out of Makkah because I am not going to die there. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) informed me that I won’t die in Makkah.” They
www.sunniconnect.com l 364

transported her to Sarif under the tree which the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) first had
intercourse with her in a tent (which they were in). She i died
there and her death was in Year 51 upon the correct opinion.

Narrations regarding the Prophet’s mention
of the murder of Hujr Ibn Adiyy and his
companions
Narrated by Ali Ibn Abi Talib, he said, “O people of Iraq, 7
people shall be killed from you at Adhra’, their example is like
the example of the companions of the ditches (see Soorah AlBurooj).” Then Hujr Ibn Adiyy and his companions were
killed. Ya‘qoob Ibn Sufyan said: Abu Nu‘aim mentioned:
Ziyad Ibn Sumayyah mentioned Ali Ibn Abi Talib on the pulpit
when Hujr took some stones and those around him and threw
them at Ziyad. He wrote to Mu‘awiyah and said, “Hujr threw
stones at me while I was on the pulpit.” Mu‘awiyah wrote to
him that he should bring Hujr to him. When he was near
Damascus he sent a group to him and met them at Adhra’and
killed them.
Al-Baihaqi said, “Ali wouldn’t say something like this unless
he heard it from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him).”
Narrated Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam, who said: I entered with
Mu‘awiyah upon the Mother of the Believers, ‘A’ishah, and
she said, “O Mu‘awiyah, you killed Hujr and his companions
and you did that which you did. Do you not fear that I have a
man hiding who is going to kill you?” He replied, “No, I am in
the house of security. I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, ‘Faith restricts Fatk
(to kill someone when he is unaware), the Believer doesn’t
www.sunniconnect.com l 365

perform Fatk’. O Mother of the Believers, what do you need
me for other than that?” She said, “Make peace.” He said,
“Then leave me and Hujr till we meet with our Lord.”

Narration of Rafi‘ Ibn Khadeej
Al-Baihaqi narrated from Yahya Ibn Abdul-Hameed Ibn Rafi‘
from his grandmother that Rafi‘ Ibn Khadeej was hit – Amr (the
sub-narrator) said I don’t know which of the two he mentioned,
either Battle of Uhud or Battle of Hunain – by an arrow in his
chest. He came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and said, “O Messenger of Allah, take
the arrow out for me.” He said to him, “O Rafi‘ if you wish, I
will pull the arrow and its head out together. And if you wish,
I will pull the arrow out and leave the arrow head and testify
for you that you are a martyr on the Day of Resurrection.” He
said, “O Messenger of Allah, pull out the arrow and leave the
arrow head and testify for me that I am a martyr on the Day of
Resurrection.” The narrator said: He lived till the Caliphate of
Mu‘awiyah when his wound opened and he died after Asr
(evening) prayers. This is what was mentioned in this narration
that he died during the leadership of Mu‘awiyah. Al-Waqidi
and others mentioned that he died in Year 73 and it is also
mentioned 74, yet Mu‘awiyah’s death was in Year 60 without
any controversy. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

The Prophet’s informing of trials that will
occur after his death at the hands of
youngsters from Banu Hashim
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood narrated that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Soon others will be
preferred to you, and there will be things which you will not
like.” The companions of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
www.sunniconnect.com l 366

Allah be upon him) asked, “O Allah's Messenger! What do you
order us to do (in this case)?” He said, “(I order you) to give
the rights that are on you and to ask your rights from Allah.”
(Recorded by Al-Bukhari)
Abu Hurairah related that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “This branch from
Quraish will ruin the people.” The companions of the Prophet
asked, “What do you order us to do (then) O Messenger of
Allah?” He said, “I would suggest that the people keep away
from them.” (Recorded by Al-Bukhari)
Sa‘eed Al-Umawi narrated that he was in the company of
Marwan and Abu Hurairah, when he heard Abu Hurairah say:
I heard the trustworthy, truly inspired one (i.e. the Prophet) say,
“The destruction of my followers will be brought about by the
hands of some youngsters from Quraish.” Marwan asked,
“Youngsters?” Abu Hurairah said, “If you wish, I would name
them: They are the children of so-and-so and the children of soand-so.” (Recorded by Al-Bukhari)
Abu Hurairah narrated that he heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “The
destruction of my followers will be brought about by the hands
of some youngsters.” (The subnarrator from Abu Hurairah)
said: Marwan who was in our midst in the gathering and had
not yet held any political position said, “May Allah curse those
youngsters!” It was then that Abu Hurairah said, “If I wish to
mention then and say they are the children of so-and-so and the
children of so-and-so I would do so.” (The sub-narrator said):
My father, my grandfather and I then visited Banu Marwan
after they had gained authority and we found them pledging
allegiance to young boys. There were among these some who
pledged allegiance while he was still a baby. My grandfather

www.sunniconnect.com l 367

then told us, ‘Perhaps, these are those I heard Abu Hurairah
mention’.” (Recorded by Ahmad)
In another version by Ahmad, Abu Hurairah narrated: I heard
my beloved one Abul-Qasim (the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him)) say: “The destruction of my followers
will be brought about by the hands of some thoughtless
youngsters from Quraish.”
Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri narrated that he heard the Messenger of
Allah (May Allah be pleased with him) say: “There will be
successors after the passage of sixty years who will neglect
prayer and pursue desires; so they are going to meet evil. Then
there will be successors who will read the Qur’an but it will not
go beyond their collarbones. Three kinds of people will read
the Qur’an: a true believer, a hypocrite and a sinner.” Basheer
(a sub-narrator) asked Al-Waleed (another sub-narrator): What
do these three mean? The latter replied: “The hypocrite
disbelieves in the Qur’an; the sinner turns the Qur’an into a
source of earning a living and the believer believes in (and acts
upon) it.” (This version is exclusively recorded by Ahmad)
Ash-Sha‘bi said: When Ali Ibn Abi Talib returned from
Siffeen, he addressed the people saying, “O you people, do not
detest the commandership of Mu‘awiyah. For, if you lose him,
then you will see heads being removed from their bases like
colocynth.”
Abu Hurairah would stroll in market of Al-Madinah and would
say, “O Allah! Do not keep me alive till the sixtieth year! It is
better for you to hold on to Mu‘awiyah’s temples. O Allah, do
not keep alive till the time youngsters will assume leadership.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 368

It was reported that Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah narrated that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “This affair (of the Ummah) shall remain just and
standing upon justice until it will be defiled by a man from
Banu Umayyah.” (This narration is weak due to interruptions
in its chain of transmitters)
Abu Dharr narrated that he heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: “The first
person to change my way is a man from Banu Umayyah.” AlBaihaqi said, “It is likely that the man being referred to in this
Hadith is Yazeed Ibn Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
People have varying stances concerning Yazeed Ibn
Mu‘awiyah. Some love him and are loyal to him; and these are
people of Sham (especially) from among the Nawasib. As for
the Rawafid, they ferociously attack him and invented many
lies against him. Many or most of these Rawafid even go as far
as calling him an atheist, but he was not! Some people neither
love him nor insult him for they knew that he was not an atheist
as he is being falsely portrayed by the Rawafid. They do not
love him because of heinous occurrences and extremely
repulsive events that took place during his caliphate. Among
the most atrocious of these events was the murder of Husain
Ibn Ali at Karbala. However, he knew nothing about this
murder and was, possibly, neither pleased nor grieved by it.
Another instance was the event of Harrah.

Murder of Husain Ibn Ali
Abdullah Ibn Wahb Ibn Zam‘ah related on the authority of
Umm Salamah who narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) one day slept and

www.sunniconnect.com l 369

then woke up, disturbed. He slept again and woke up but less
disturbed. He then slept again and woke while holding a
handful of red sand which he twisted in his hand. I said, “O
Messenger of Allah, what is this sand?” He said, “(Angel)
Gabriel told me: This (meaning Husain, the Prophet’s
grandson) would be killed in the land of Iraq. Then I said to
Gabriel: Show me the sand from the land in which he would be
killed. And this is the sand’.”
Abdullah Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) narrated
that Al-Husain (the Prophet’s grandson) was sitting in the
bosom of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) when Gabriel asked him, “Do you love him?” The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) responded, “How should I not love him while he is the
fruit of my heart?!” It was then that Gabriel said, “But your
followers will kill him. Should I show you the place of his
grave?” He then took a handful of red dust.
Ummul-Fadl Bint Al-Harith i narrated that she came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and told him, “O Messenger of Allah, I had a terrible
dream last night.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) asked, “What is it?” She said, “I saw it in my
dream that a part of your body was cut off and put in my lap.”
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
“You have seen something good. That is Fatimah! If Allah
wills, she will have a baby boy that will be put in your lap (as
his wet-nurse).” Later, Fatimah had Husain and he was put in
my lap as prophesied by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). One day, I entered upon the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and put
Husain on his lap. Then I turned around and saw the tears
rolling down from the Prophet’s eyes. I said, “O Messenger of

www.sunniconnect.com l 370

Allah, may my father and mother be sacrificed upon you! What
happened?” He said, “Gabriel came to me and informed me that
my followers would kill this son of mine.” I said, “Is that so?”
He said, “Yes, and he even brought me the red dust of the place
in which he would be killed.”
She also narrated that she came to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and told him, “I
saw in my dream that in my house or my room a part of your
body.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Allah willing, Fatimah will give birth to a baby boy
that you will nurse.” As it turned out, Fatimah had Husain and
he was given to me to nurse and I nursed him along with
Qutham. One day, I brought him to Allah’s Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He took him and placed
him on his chest and the boy urinated. His lower garment was
wetted by the urine and then rapped the boy’s shoulders. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) then said, “You have hurt my son, may Allah reform
you!” Or he said, “May Allah have mercy upon you!” I then
asked him to give me his garment so that I could wash it but he
said, “It is only a baby girl’s urine that is washed off. As for a
baby boy’s, water is only sprinkled on it.”
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) narrated that he
saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) in a dream, dusty and disheveled and holding a bottle
of blood. He said, “May my father and mother be sacrificed on
you, O Messenger of Allah! What is this?” He said, “This is the
blood of Husain and his companions. I have been collecting it
all day.” Ibn ‘Abbas continued, “We enumerated that day and
we found that he was killed on that day. May Allah be pleased
with him.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 371

Qatadah said, “Al-Husain was killed on Friday, the Ashoora’
day, in the Year 61 A.H. He was aged fiftyfour years, six
months and fifteen days.”
The reason for killing Husain was that the people of Iraq wrote
a letter to him, requesting him to come to them so that they
could pledge allegiance to him as the caliph. He received many
letters in this regard from the general public and from his
cousin, Muslim Ibn Aqeel. When ‘Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad, whom
Yazeed Ibn Mu‘awiyah appointed as the governor of Iraq knew
about this letter, he sent for Muslim Ibn Aqeel and had him
beheaded. He then threw his body from atop of his palace to
the public square. This caused commotion and disunity among
people.
Meanwhile, Husian who had mobilized an army from Hejaz in
preparation for marching to Iraq did not know what had
happened to Muslim Ibn Aqeel. So, he set out in the company
of about three hundred strong convoy, comprising members of
his household and his followers. Some of the Prophet’s
companions such as Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri, Jabir Ibn
Abdullah, Ibn Abbas and Ibn Umar warned Husain against
going to Iraq but he did not listen to them.
Abdullah Ibn Umar offered Husain the best advice on this
matter. He tried in vain to convince him that he would not
achieve his goal but Husain rejected the advice.
Ash-Sha‘bi said: Ibn Umar came to Al-Madinah and he was
informed that Husain Ibn Ali had left for Iraq. He caught up
with him after a journey of about two or three nights. He asked
him, “Where are you going?” Husain said, “Iraq.” And there
were books and scrolls with him. Ibn Umar advised, “Do not
go to these people.” Husain then showed him the books and

www.sunniconnect.com l 372

scrolls and said, “These are their books and scrolls containing
their messages and pledges of allegiance.” Thereupon Ibn
Umar said to him, “Allah gave His Prophet Muhammad (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to choose between the
wealth of this world and that of the Hereafter, and he chose that
of the Hereafter and did not want that of this world. And you
are of the blood of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). By Allah! None of you will ever attain
this (position of worldly authority). For, Allah has not diverted
away from you but for what is better for you. So, go back.” But
Husain refused and repeated, “These are their books and scrolls
containing their messages and pledges of allegiance.” It was
then that Ibn Umar hugged him and said, “I wish you Allah’s
protection as a victim of murder.” In actuality, the
understanding of Abdullah Ibn Umar that none of the members
of the Prophet’s household had never assumed – and will never
assume – the absolute and independent political authority and
complete control was correct and accurate. Uthman Ibn Affan
and Ali had also made the similar statement that none of the
members of the Prophet’s household will ever attain absolute
political authority.
As for the Fatimid caliphs that once controlled Egypt, most
scholars are of the opinion that they are just pretenders (and not
descendants of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him)). Ali was a member of the Prophet’s household, yet
he never enjoyed complete authority as his three predecessors
had done. Neither did his control cover all parts of the Muslim
lands. In addition to this, things were made difficult for him.
As for his son Hasan, when he came with the army of his father
and he and the people of Sham reached an agreement and truce
and he saw that it would be in the interest of all to forgo
authority, he relinquished it for the sake of Allah, and in order

www.sunniconnect.com l 373

to preserve the blood of the Muslims. May Allah reward him
with good and be pleased with him.
When Ibn Umar advised Husain against going to Iraq and his
advice was rejected, he hugged him and bade him farewell
saying, “I wish you Allah’s protection as a victim of murder.”
What Ibn Umar had expected to happen did occur. For, when
Husain mounted his ride and continued with his journey to Iraq,
Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad sent a detachment of four thousand men
to accost him under the leadership of Amr bin Sa‘d Ibn Abi
Waqqas, who had asked Ubaidullah to excuse him but the latter
refused to do so. The two groups met each other at a place
called Karbala. Then Husain and those who were with him
sought refuge at a place where reeds were grown. And they
stayed behind it.
The two groups faced each other and Husain asked members of
the other group to grant him one of the three things: to allow
him to go back to where he came from, to be sent to one of the
warfronts where he could fight in the way of Allah and get
martyred or to be left to go to Yazeed Ibn Mu‘awiyah and
surrender himself to him to take whatever decision he wished
regarding him. They refused to grant him any of the three
options and they told him that they could only take him to
Ubaidullah who could then decide to do whatever he wanted
with him.
Husain flatly rejected the idea of meeting Ubaidullah and, as a
result, fighting ensued between him and Ubaidullah’s troops
which culminated in his being killed – may Allah have mercy
upon him. The soldiers then brought Husain’s head to
Ubaidullah who started scratching the former’s incisors with a
rod he was holding. Anas Ibn Malik was present there; and he
said rather disgustingly, “You this! Take off your rod. On many

www.sunniconnect.com l 374

occasions, I had seen the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) kissing these incisors!”
Ubaidullah then commanded that members of Husain’s family
and the remnants of those who were with him be sent to Yazeed
in Syria. There was also a report that he sent with them
Husain’s head that was put in front of Yazeed.
People composed many eulogies on Husain and the eulogy
mentioned by Al-Hakim An-Naisaboori, who has some Shiism
in him, is one of the best. The meaning of the eulogy goes thus:
They brought your head, O son of Muhammad’s daughter,
drenched in his own blood;
By killing you, O son of Muhammad’s daughter, it is as if they
had publicly and intentionally killed a Messenger!
They killed you thirstily without having any consideration for
the Qur’an or its meaning;
They are glorifying Allah for your being killed while in their
murdering you, they have murdered glorification of Allah and
proclamation of His oneness.

The event of Harrah that also occurred
during the time of Yazeed
Ayyoob Ibn Basheer Al-Mu‘awi narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went out in
one of his journeys. When he arrived at the Harrah of Zuharah,
he halted and made Istirja‘. This troubled those who were with
him; for they thought that the Istirja‘ had to do with their
journey. Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said, “O Messenger of Allah,

www.sunniconnect.com l 375

what did you see?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) answered, “It has nothing to do with this journey
of yours.” His Companions then said, “Then what is the matter,
O Messenger of Allah?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) answered, “The best ones from among my
Companions will be killed in this Harrah.” This is a Mursal
report.
Regarding the following Verse: “And if the enemy had entered
from all sides (of the city), and they had been exhorted to AlFitnah (i.e. to renegade from Islam to polytheism), they would
surely have committed it.” (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:14)
Ibn Abbas said, “The interpretation of this Verse only came to
light exactly sixty years (after Hijrah).” He then said, quoting a
part of the Verse, “They would surely have committed it.”
Abu Dharr narrated: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked me, ‘O Abu Dharr, what
will you do when you see people killing one another so much
so that there is lot of bloodshed?’ I said, ‘Allah and His
Messenger know best.’ He then said, ‘You should sit down in
your house and shut your door.’ I said, ‘What if I am not left
alone?’ The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, ‘Then join the ones you belong to and stay with
them.’ I said, ‘Should I take up my weapon?’ He said, ‘Then
you will be involved in what they are doing. But if you fear that
that you might be terrified by the clinging of the sword, then
cover your face with the edge of your garment so that the killer
to bear the burden of his sin and that of yours’.”
The cause of the battle of Harrah is that a delegation from AlMadinah went to Yazeed in Damascus who honored them and
gave them generous gifts. He gave their leader, Abdullah Ibn

www.sunniconnect.com l 376

Hanzalah close to a hundred thousand Dirhams. When
members of this delegation returned to their people, they
informed them of religious violations that Yazeed used to
commit such as consumption of alcohol and immoralities that
such violations led to, the greatest of which is delaying prayers
until their times expired as a result of drunkenness. They,
therefore, resolved to stop recognizing him as the commander
of the faithful, and an announcement to that effect was
promptly made near the Prophet’s pulpit.
When Yazeed heard what the people of Al-Madinah had done,
he sent a detachment of fighters under the commandership of a
man called Muslim Ibn ‘Uqbah – the righteous predecessors
call him “Musrif” Ibn ‘Uqbah – to quell the rebellion. When he
arrived at Al-Madinah with his troops, he launched a ferocious
attack on the city for three days during which he killed lots of
people that hardly any of its residents was able to escape. Some
scholars from among the righteous predecessors claim that
about a thousand virgins were raped during the invasion.
Imam Malik said, “During the war of Harrah, seven hundred
men from among the memorizers of the Qur’an were killed.”
The narrator from him said, “I thought he said that three of them
were Companions of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him).” This took place during the caliphate of Yazeed.
Laith said, “The war of Harrah took place on the 26th (or 27th)
of Dhul-Hijjah, Year 63 A.H.”
Musrif Ibn ‘Uqbah then went to Makkah with the intention of
killing Abdullah Ibn Zubair who had escaped from pledging
allegiance to Yazeed. It was at this time that Yazeed died and
Ibn Zubair was becoming more powerful in his control of
Hejaz. He then seized Iraq and Egypt.

www.sunniconnect.com l 377

After the death of Yazeed, pledge of allegiance was given to
his son Mu‘awiyah Ibn Yazeed. He was a righteous man but he
did not rule for long. He ruled only for forty or twenty days,
according to some reports. May Allah have mercy upon him.
Marwan Ibn Hakam then seized Syria and ruled it for nine
months and died. He was succeeded by his son, Abdul-Malik
who faced a stiff challenge from Amr Ibn Sa‘eed Ibn AlAshdaq who was the governor of Al-Madinah during the
caliphate of Mu‘awiyah, his son Yazeed and Marwan Ibn
Hakam. After the death of Marwan, Amr Ibn Sa‘eed claimed
the latter had made a will that he should assume the caliphate
after him. So he made things difficult for Abdul-Malik that he
had to wage a war against him until he killed him in the Year
70 A.H. or 69 A.H. according to some narrations.
The reign of Abdul-Malik continued until he was finally able
to defeat Ibn Zubair in the Year 73 A.H. Abdullah Ibn Zubair
was killed in Makkah by Hajjaj Ibn Yoosuf Ath-Thaqafi with
the command of Abdul-Malik after a long siege in which the
Ka‘bah was struck with ballista just because Ibn Zubair was
taking shelter in the Sacred Mosque. Hajjaj carried on his siege
and attack on the mosque until he finally killed Ibn Zubair.
After the murder of Ibn Zubair, Abdul-Malik entrusted the
caliphate to his four sons after him: AlWaleed, Sulaiman,
Yazeed and Hisham, in that order.
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Seek refuge with Allah
from the (occurrences of) the beginning of year seventy (A.H.)
and from leadership of youngsters.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 378

The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also
said, “This world will not come to an end before the appearance
of a wicked son of a wicked one.”
Abu Hurairah also narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “The (average) age
of my followers is between sixty and seventy years.”
Muhammad Ibn Yazeed Ibn Abi Ziyad Ath-Thaqafi said: Qais
Ibn Kharashah and Ka‘b marched together until they arrived at
Siffeen. Ka‘b Al-Ahbar halted and spoke about many Muslims
who were killed there.
He also mentioned that the incidence was mentioned in the
Torah.
Muhammad Ibn Yazeed also reported from Qais Ibn Kharashah
that he pledged allegiance to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he would always say
the truth. The Messenger of Allah(Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) then told him, “Qais, perhaps, you will live long
and reach a time when you will be under the control of a ruler
you will not be able to say the truth in their presence.” Qais
replied, “By Allah! I will not pledge allegiance to you on
something except that I fulfill it.” Thereupon the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Then no
human being can harm you.”
So Qais lived till the time of Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad Ibn Abi
Sufyan who held something against him and summoned him.
When he was brought to him he said, “Are you the one claiming
that no human being can harm you?” Qais answered in the
affirmative. Ubaidullah then said, “Today, you will know that
you are a liar!” He then called for the tormentor. (Before the
arrival of the tormentor, Qais slanted and died!)

www.sunniconnect.com l 379

Another Miracle
Abbas Ibn Abdul-Muttalib said that he sent his son Abdullah to
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
concerning an affair. When Abdullah arrived at the Prophet’s
place, he found a man with him, so he turned back and did not
talk to him due to the position of that man. When Abbas met
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), he told him about that. The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) then said, “Did he really
see the man?!” Abbas answered in the affirmative. The prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) then said, “Do you
know that man? He is (Angel) Gabriel. Abdullah Ibn Abbas
will not die until he loses his eyes; but he will be endowed with
great knowledge.”
The prophecy came true, for Abdullah Ibn Abbas died in the
Year 68 A.H. after he had become blind.
Unaisah Bint Zaid Ibn Arqam narrated on the authority of her
father that the Messenger of Allah entered upon her father Zaid
to visit him when he was sick. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) told Zaid: “There is nothing
wrong with you concerning your ailment. But are you going to
do if you are endowed with long life after me and you go
blind?” Zaid said, “Then I will expect my reward from Allah
and have patience.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Then you will enter
Paradise without reckoning.” As it turned out, Zaid Ibn Arqam
became blind after the death of Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). He then regained his vision
and became blind again and then died.

www.sunniconnect.com l 380

Jabir Ibn Samurah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Thirty liars and
charlatans will appear before the establishment of the Hour;
each of them will claim that he is a prophet.”
Abdullah Ibn Zubair narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The Hour
will not be established before the appearance of thirty liars.
Among them are: Musailimah, Al-Ansi and Al-Mukhtar. The
worst Arab tribes are Banu Umayyah, Banu Haneefah and
Banu Thaqeef.”
It is reported on the authority of Asma’ Bint Abi Bakr (May
Allah be pleased with him) that she told Hajjaj Ibn Yoosuf:
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) has informed us that a liar and a great slaughterer
shall appear from the tribe of Thaqeef. We know the liar
already. As for the great slaughterer, I have no doubt that it is
you!”
Abul-Muhayyah related from his father who said: After Hajjaj
Ibn Yoosuf had killed Abdullah Ibn Zubair, he visited Asma’
Bint Abu Bakr (Abdullah’s mother) and said, “O mother, the
commander of the faithful commanded me that I should treat
you well. What can I do for you?” Asma’ said, “I am not your
mother. But I am the mother of the crucified one. I do not need
anything from you. But wait and let me tell you what I heard
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say.
He told us that in Thaqeef, there would be born a great liar and
a great murderer. The liar we have seen, and as far as the
murderer is concerned, I do not find anyone else besides you.”
Hajjaj then said, “Great murderer of the hypocrites.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 381

Abdullah Ibn Umar narrated that he heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: “A great
liar and a great slaughterer will appear from among the tribe of
Thaqeef.”
There are successive reports about Mukhtar Ibn Abi Ubaid the
liar. He used to claim that he was a prophet and that Angel
Gabriel brought him revelations. Ibn Umar, who was the
husband of Mukhtar’s sister, was told that Mukhtar claimed
that he received inspiration. The response he gave was: “Yes,
he is correct. For, Allah says: And certainly, the Shayateen
(devils) do inspire their friends (from mankind) to dispute with
you. (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:121)”
Rifa‘ah Ibn Shaddad said: “I was planning to do something
against Mukhtar, the liar. So, one day, I entered upon him and
he said to me, ‘Angel Gabriel had just got up from this chair!’
I made for my sword to kill him but I remembered a Hadith that
Amr Ibn Al-Hamiq Al-Khuza‘i related to me that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, ‘If a man trusts another man concerning his life and
the latter killed the former, a flag of treachery would be raised
for him on the Day of Resurrection.’ I then refrained from
carrying out my plan.”
Abu Adhabah related: “A man came to Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
and informed him that the people of Iraq had pelted their leader
with stones. So he set out angrily and led us in a prayer in which
he forgot to perform some of its rites. The people started
saying, ‘Subhanallah! Subhanallah!’ When he concluded the
prayer, he faced the people and said, ‘Who among you is from
Syria?’ A man got up and another man also got up. I then got
up as a third or fourth person. Umar then said, ‘O you people
of Syria! Get ready for the people of Iraq for Shaitan has laid

www.sunniconnect.com l 382

egg there and hatched. O Allah! They have caused me
confusion, so cause them confusion and hasten their
punishment by making the Thaqafi boy their ruler who will rule
them by the law of the age of ignorance, will not accept any
good deed done by the righteous ones among them and will not
forgive the mistakes done by anyone of them.”
Al-Hasan narrated that Ali Ibn Abi Talib said about the people
of Kufah: “O Allah, as I have trusted the people of Kufah and
they betrayed me and I was sincere with them and they acted
treacherously toward me, impose on them an excessively cruel
and arrogant youngster from Thaqeef who would usurp their
wealth and judge them in the way of the time of ignorance.” At
the time of Hasan’s death, Hajjaj was not yet born. This
narration is, however, interrupted.
Ali was reported to have said, “The overbearing youngster who
will rule the cities will usurp their goods, kill their noble
members and strike terror in their hearts. He will cause them
insomnia and Allah will impose him on those who claim to be
Ali’s supporters.”
Habeeb Ibn Abi Thabit narrated that Ali said to a man, “You
will not die before you meet the Thaqeef boy.” He was asked,
‘Who is the youngster of Thaqeef, O commander of the
faithful?” He said, “It will be said about him on the Day of
Resurrection, ‘One of the corners of Hell will be occupied by a
man who is about twenty or twenty odd years of age. (In this
world), he will not leave out a sin except that he commits it.
Even if there are no more sins to be committed and nothing is
left but a closed door that could be broken, he will break it. He
will kill those who disobey with those who obey him.” This
narration is full of irregularities; and its attribution to Ali is
questionable.

www.sunniconnect.com l 383

Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez said, “If each nation was to present out
its evil one, and we also present Hajjaj as our devil one, we
would certainly defeat them.”
Abu Bakr Ibn Ayyash narrated from Asim Ibn An-Najood who
said, “There was no sin against Allah that Hajjaj did not
commit.”
Hajjaj died in the Year 95 A.H.

The Prophetic allusion to the reign of Umar
Ibn Abdul-Azeez, crown of the Umayyads
Hudhaifah narrated that he asked the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), “Is there any bad
time after this good one?” He said: “Yes.” I asked: “Will there
be a good time again after that bad time?” He said: “Yes, but
therein will be a hidden evil.” I asked: “What will be the evil
hidden therein?” He said: “(That time will witness the rise of)
the people who will adopt ways other than mine and seek
guidance other than mine. You will know good points as well
as bad points.”
Al-Baihaqi and others interpreted this second good time as the
reign of Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez.
Hudhaifah also related that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The Prophethood shall
remain with you as long as Allah wills. He will then remove it
whenever He wills. Then, there will be a caliphate that will
follow the path of Prophethood. It will also abide as long as
Allah wills. He will then remove it when he wills to do so. After
this, there will be a strong kingdom, and it will abide as long as
Allah wills. He will then remove it. After this, there will be a

www.sunniconnect.com l 384

coercive kingdom, and it will last as long as Allah wills. He
will then remove it. After that, a caliphate that will follow the
path of Prophethood will emerge.”
A sub-narrator of this Hadith added: “Then Umar Ibn AbdulAzeez came, accompanied by Yazeed Ibn Nu‘man. I then wrote
to him to tell him about this Hadith. I included in my letter to
him, ‘I hope that you will be the commander of the faithful after
the coercive kingdom.’ Yazeed took the letter from me and
gave it to Umar who was very happy when he read it.”
Qatadah narrated that Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez said: “In my
dream, I saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) while Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali
were with him. He said to me, ‘Come closer.’ And I came closer
to him until I stood before him. He then looked up to me and
said, ‘Indeed, you will assume leadership of this Ummah and
you will rule them with justice’.”
Nafi‘ narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar who said: “It
reached us that Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said, ‘There will be
among my descendants a man who will assume the leadership
of this Ummah and who will fill the earth with justice.” Nafi‘
said, “I have no doubt that the man is Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez.”
This issue of his rule had already been known before he
assumed authority; rather before he was born. It was already
known that a man from Banu Umayyah shall attain the
leadership of this Ummah and that he will be called, “The
fissure-headed man of Banu Marwan.”
His mother is Arwa Bint Asim Ibn Umar Ibn Al-Khattab; and
his father is Abdul-Azeez Ibn Marwan, appointed by his
brother Abdul-Malik Ibn Marwan as the governor of Egypt.

www.sunniconnect.com l 385

Abdul-Malik used to honor Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez and would
send him gifts which the latter would accept. He once sent him
a gift of one thousand dinars which he accepted.
One day, Umar entered his father’s enclosure and a horse
kicked him, causing him a fissure on his forehead. His father
wiped off the blood from his head, saying, “If you were the
fissure-headed man of Banu Marwan, then you are indeed
fortunate.” The people used to say, ‘The fissure-head man and
the defective man are the most just of Banu Marwan’.” The
fissure-headed one is Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez and the flawed
man is Yazeed Ibn Al-Waleed Ibn Abdul-Malik. It is about
Yazeed that a poet said:
I saw Yazeed Ibn Al-Waleed a blessed man strong enough to
bear the burdens of governance.
After the death of Sulaiman Ibn Abdul-Malik, Umar Ibn AbdulAzeez ruled for two-and-a-half years during which he filled the
earth with justice and the wealth was so abundant that one
would be worried about finding a needy person to whom he
could give his alms.
Abu Ma‘n Al-Ansari said: While Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez was
traveling to Makkah on a desert, he saw a dead snake and asked
those who were with him to bring him the digger, for he wanted
to bury it. They said, “We will do that.” He said, “No!” He then
dug a hole and folded the snake in a piece of cloth and buried
it. Then a caller called, “May Allah have mercy on you,
Surraq!” Umar asked the caller, “Who are you, may Allah have
mercy upon you?” The caller said, “I am a person from among
the Jinns and this is Surraq. And no one remained alive from
among the Jinns who pledged allegiance to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) except me

www.sunniconnect.com l 386

and him. I bear testimony that I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “Surraq, you
will die in a desert and the best of my Ummah (at that time)
will bury you!”

Another narration of questionable
authenticity in which Wahb Ibn Munabbih is
praised and Ghailan is disparaged
Abu Hurairah was reported to have narrated that the Messenger
of Allah said: “Shaitan will make a screaming sound in Sham
that will make two-thirds of its residents deny predestination.”
Al-Baihaqi said, “This and other reports allude to Ghailan and
what occurred in Sham of denial of predestination, which he
was instrumental in. Ghailan was eventually killed.

Allusion to Muhammad Ibn Ka‘b Al-Qurazi
and his memorization of the Qur’an and
knowledge of Tafseer
Abu Burdah Az-Zafari related from his father from his
grandfather who narrated that he heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: “There will
come out from the two tribes of soothsayers a man who will
study the Qur’an in such a way that none will do after him.”
Rabee‘ah Ibn Abi Abdur-Rahman said that the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “There will be from
among the two tribes of soothsayers a man who will study the
Qur’an in such a way that none will do after him.” Rabee‘ah
said, “The scholars believe that the man is Muhammad Ibn
Ka‘b Al-Qurazi. Abu Thabit said, “The two tribes of
soothsayers are Quraizah and Nadeer.

www.sunniconnect.com l 387

Prophesy about a disturbance that would
occur after a hundred years fulfillment of
that prophesy
Abdullah Ibn Umar said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) led us in ‘Isha prayers one
night during his last days. After concluding the prayer, he stood
up and addressed us, “Do you realize (the importance of) this
night? Nobody present on the surface of the Earth tonight will
be living after the completion of one hundred years from this
night.”
Jabir Ibn Abdullah said: I heard Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say this one month before his
death, “You asked me about the Last Hour whereas its
knowledge is with Allah. I, however, take an oath and say that
none upon the Earth, the created beings (from amongst my
Companions), would survive at the end of one hundred years.”
This and similar Ahadeeth are cited by some scholars to support
a view that Khidr no long exists.

Another Hadith
Abdullah Ibn Busr said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) put his hand on my head and
then said, “This boy will live for a hundred years.” And
Abdullah Ibn Busr lived for hundred years.
Other narrators of this report added: There were warts of Ibn
Busr’s face and the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “And he will not die until the warts on his face
are gone.” And, indeed, the warts on his face disappeared
before he died.

www.sunniconnect.com l 388

His informing about Al-Waleed and the
strong threat against him
Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab said: Umm Salamah’s brother had a
baby boy and he was named Al-Waleed. When the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) heard that
he said, “You are naming (your sons) after your tyrants. A man
will appear in this Ummah whose name will be Al-Waleed. He
will be more harmful to my Ummah than the Fir‘awn to his
people!”
Abu Amr Al-Awza‘i said: “The people used to think that it was
Al-Waleed Ibn Abdul-Malik. We then realized that it was AlWaleed Ibn Yazeed due to the tribulation people suffered
because of him that they eventually revolted against him and
killed him.”
Az-Zuhri said: “If Al-Waleed Ibn Yazeed assumed the
caliphate, then he is the one meant in the report; if not, then the
one meant is Al-Waleed Ibn Abdul-Malik.”
Al-Hasan said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “A man will appear whose name
shall be Al-Waleed. He will be made to occupy one of the
corners of Hellfire.”

Another Hadith
It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “When the rulers from among the children of AbulAs reached forty men, they will use the religion to deceive
people, enslave the servants of Allah and distribute the money
belonging to Allah among themselves.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 389

It is reported on the authority of Abu Dharr that he heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say, “When the rulers from among the tribe of Banu
Umayyah reached forty men, they will take people as slaves,
they will take the money belonging to Allah as their personal
property and they will use Allah’s Book to deceive people.”
This is also a narration with a missing link between Rashid Ibn
Sa’d and Abu Dharr.
Abu Sa‘eed narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “When the rulers from
among the tribe of Banu Abul-As reach thirty men, they will
use Allah’s religion to deceive, they will take Allah’s money as
something to be distributed among themselves and they will
take people as slaves.”
Amr Ibn Murrah, who was a companion of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Al-Hakam Ibn
Abul-As came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) seeking permission to enter upon him.
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
recognized his voice and said, “Allow him in. He is a snake or
son of a snake. May Allah curse him and all his offspring except
the believers among them – and these are few. They will be
honored in this world but will be disgraced in the Hereafter.
They are deft in trickery and deception. They will have much
in this world but in the Hereafter they will have no share.”
Rashid Ibn Sa‘d reported that when Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam was
born, he was given to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) to supplicate for him and he refused and said,
“Son of Zarqa’! Destruction of my people shall be in his hand
and in the hands of his descendants.” This is a Mursal report.

www.sunniconnect.com l 390

His informing about rulers of Banu Umayyah
in general and alluding to the length of their
rule
Abu Hurairah reported that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “I saw in my dream children of Hakam
or children of Abul-As leaping unto my pulpit like monkeys.”
The narrator said: The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was never seen thereafter laughing until he died.
Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab narrated: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), in his dream, saw
members of Banu Umayyah tribe on his pulpit, and he was
saddened by that. It was then inspired to him, “It is just the
authority of this world that they are given.” Then, he became
happy. This is an interpretation of Allah’s statement:
“And We made not the vision which we showed you (O
Muhammad) but a trial for mankind.” (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:60)
Yoosuf Ibn Mazin Ar-Rasibi said: A man stood up to Al-Hasan
Ibn Ali after he had pledged allegiance to Mu‘awiyah and told
him, “You have blackened the faces of the Believers!” AlHasan responded, “Do not blame me, may Allah have mercy
on you! For, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) saw Banu Umayyah (in his dream)
delivering speech on his pulpit one after the other. He was
grieved by that and it was revealed to him: “Verily, We have
granted you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) Al-Kawthar (a river in Paradise).” (Soorah AlKawthar 108:1) It was also revealed to him: “Verily! We have
sent it (this Qur’an) down in the night of Al-Qadr (Decree) And
what will make you know what the night of Al-Qadr (Decree)
is? The night of Al-Qadr (Decree) is better than a thousand

www.sunniconnect.com l 391

months (i.e. worshipping Allah in that night is better than
worshipping Him a thousand months, i.e. 83 years and 4
months).” (Soorah Al-Qadr 97:1-3) This is the lifespan of Banu
Umayyah rule.
Al-Qasim (a sub-narrator) said: We estimated the period of
Banu Umayyah’s rule and found that it was exactly one
thousand months, not a day more and not a day less.
Umm Darda related that she heard Abud-Darda’ say: “When
the young caliph of Banu Umayyah kills a wronged person
between Sham and Iraq, obedience to the authority will be
taken for granted and blood will be shed unlawfully.” The
young caliph is Al-Waleed Ibn Yazeed.
However, matters like this can only be accepted if they are
authentically attributed to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) alone.

About the rule of descendants of ‘Abbas –
they emerged from Khurasan with black flags
in the Year 132 A.H.
Aban Ibn Al-Waleed Ibn ‘Uqbah Ibn Abu Mu‘ait said:
Abdullah Ibn Abbas came to Mu‘awiyah while I was present.
Mu‘awiyah presented him with generous gift and then asked
him, “Abul-Abbas, are going to have a state?” Ibn Abbas said,
“Excuse from that, O commander of the faithful.” When
Mu‘awiyah insisted, he answered in the affirmative.
Mu‘awiyah then asked, “Who will be your supporters?” He
replied, “The people of Khurasan.”
Ibn Abbas said: I passed by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) while Angel Gabriel was with

www.sunniconnect.com l 392

him, and I thought he was Dihyah Al-Kalbi. Gabriel said to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), “Now his
dress is dirty; but his offspring shall wear black.”
Abu Maisarah, the freed slave of Abbas said that he heard
Abbas say: I was with the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) one night when he said, “Look, can you see
something in the sky?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “What did you
see?” I said, “Pleiades.” He said, “Your offspring shall rule this
nation for years the number of these Pleiades.”
Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair narrated: Ibn Abbas heard us say: “Twelve
rulers and twelve rulers. Then the Hour will be established.”
And he said, “How stupid you are! After that, there will be
rulers from our household: Al-Mansoor, As-Saffah, AlMahdi.” He continued to mention the names until he reached
‘Eesa (Jesus).
Thawban narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “At this treasure of yours,
three of the sons of the caliph will be killed and none of them
will be able to become caliph before he will be killed. Then
people with black flags will come from Khurasan and they will
kill you in a way that you have not seen before. Then Allah’s
Caliph Al-Mahdi will come. When you hear about him, you
should go and pledge allegiance to him even if you have to get
to him crawling on snow. For, he is the Allah’s caliph, the
Mahdi.”
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) mentioned some
youngsters from Banu Hashim and his eyes swelled with tears.
He also mentioned flags and then said, “He who lives to that

www.sunniconnect.com l 393

time should come to the flags, even if has to do crawling on the
snow.”
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “Black flags will come out from
Khurasan and nothing will be able to stop them until they are
erected at Bait ulMaqdis.”
Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “After some
time and appearance of trials, a man will emerge that will be
known as ‘Saffah’. He will be extremely generous with
money.”
The above are narrations about coming out of black flags from
Khurasan and about caliphate of ‘AsSaffah’ – he is Abul-Abbas Abdullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ali
Ibn Abdullah Ibn Abbas Ibn AbdulMuttalib. His caliphate
occurred around Year 130 A.H. He then emerged in the
company of his supporters bearing black flags for their symbol
is black, in emulation of the color of the turban the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was wearing when
he was entering Makkah on the day of its conquest. He was
wearing a helmet and over it was a black turban. As-Saffah then
sent his uncle Abdullah to go and fight the Umayyads. He
defeated them in the Year 132 A.H. and the last of the Umayyad
caliphs – Marwan Ibn Muhammad Ibn Marwan, who was
nicknamed Al-Himar – took to flight.

Information about twelve leaders that are all
from Quraish
They are not the twelve ones whose leadership the Shiite
rejecters are claiming. For, only two from among the Imams

www.sunniconnect.com l 394

that the Shiites claim ever attained positions of authority. These
two are: Ali Ibn Abi Talib and his son Al-Hasan alone. The last
of the Imams claimed by the Shiites is the one they call
“AlMahdi Al-Muntazar” and is living at a hidden basement!
But the reality is: there is no existence for such a person.
The ones we are talking about here are those authentically
mentioned in the Hadith; and they are: Abu Bakr, Umar,
Uthman, Ali. Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez is also included,
according to the consensus of the scholars.
Jabir Ibn Samurah narrated: I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: “There will be
twelve caliphs.” He then said something I did not hear and I
asked my father (Samurah Ibn Jundub) about that and he told
me that he said, “All of them are from Quraish.”
Ibn Mas‘ood narrated that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “There would be caliphs after me the
number of the companions of Prophet Moosa.”
Jabir Ibn Samurah narrated that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The affairs of the people
will continue to be conducted (well) as long as they are
governed by twelve men.” Then the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said words which were
obscure to me. I asked my father: What did the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say? He said:
All of the (twelve men) will be from the Quraish.”
Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan narrated that the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Authority of ruling
will remain with Quraish, and whoever bears hostility to them,
Allah will destroy him as long as they keep the religion

www.sunniconnect.com l 395

established.” Al-Baihaqi commented, “As long as they keep the
institutions of the religion established even if they are negligent
as far as personal observance of the injunctions of the religion
is concerned.”
The four caliphs are: Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali. Their
caliphate was legitimized through an explicit statement of
Allah’s Messenger: “The caliphate after me shall be for thirty
years.”
Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman said: “There will be twelve kings
from Banu Umayyah after Uthman.” He was told, “Caliphs?”
He said, “No, kings.”
There is in Tawrah that is in the hands of the people of the
scripture something like this: “Allah gave Ibraheem the glad
tiding about Ishma‘eel that He would make him blessed,
multiply his descendants and raise up twelve great men from
among them.” Abul-Abbas Ibn Taimiyyah said: “These are the
ones mentioned in the Hadith recorded by Jabir Ibn Samurah.
They will be scattered within the Ummah and the Hour will not
be established until they are all found.”
Yahya Ibn Abu Amr Ash-Shaibani said: “There was none
among the caliphs who did not control the Sacred Mosque (in
Makkah) and Al-Aqsa Mosque (in Jerusalem).”

Information about things that occurred in the
Abbasid Caliphate till today
It is reported that a man came to Abdullah Ibn Abbas while
Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman was in his company. The man asked
Ibn Abbas about the interpretation of Allah’s statement, “HaMeem. ‘Ain-SeenQaf.” (Soorah Ash-Shoora 42:1-2) But he did

www.sunniconnect.com l 396

not answer him, he bowed his head instead. The man repeated
the question and yet Ibn Abbas did not give him any answer. It
was then that Hudhaifah said, “I will tell you. I know why he
disliked the question. The Verses were revealed concerning a
man from his household whose name is Abdul-Ilah or
Abdullah. He will come to one of the rivers of the East. He will
establish two cities that will be totally separated by the river.
Every tyrant and obstinate ruler shall come there.”
Ka‘b said: “In the Year 160 A.H., the reason of the reasonable
and wisdom of the wise shall diminish.”

A Hadith purported to be in reference to
Imam Malik Ibn Anas
Abu Hurairah is reported to have narrated that the Prophet said:
“Soon, people will undertake journey in search of knowledge
and they will not find anyone more knowledgeable than the
scholar of Al-Madinah.”

Another Hadith purported to be in reference
to Muhammad Ibn Idrees AshShafi‘i
Abdullah bin Mas‘ood is reported to have narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “Do not insult the Quraish. For, its scholars will fill
the Earth in knowledge. O Allah, as you have stricken the
earlier generation of Quraish with affliction, bestow Your favor
on its later generation.”
Hafiz Abu Nu‘aim Al-Asbahani said, “He is Ash-Shafi‘i.”
Anas Ibn Malik narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “My nation consists
www.sunniconnect.com l 397

of five generations. The first generation that is made of forty
years is that of people of righteousness and piety; then the
generation that follows them until one hundred and twenty
years will be that of people of mutual compassion and
relationship; then the generation that followed them until one
hundred and sixty years is that of people of mutual enmity and
severed relationship. Then there will be a lot of killings.”
Anas narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: “My nation consists of five
generations and each generation is of forty years. My
generation which includes my Companions is that of people of
knowledge and faith. The second generation that is between
forty and eighty years consists of people of righteousness and
piety.”
Imran Ibn Husain narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The best of people
are members of my generation; then they are followed by those
who come after them and then by those who come after them.
Then a people will come that will so much love fat. They will
bear testimony before they are asked to do so.”
In a version of the same Hadith recorded by Al-Bukhari, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “The best of my followers are those living in my
generation (i.e. my contemporaries), and then those who will
follow the latter”. Imran added, “I do not remember whether he
mentioned two or three generations after his generation but the
Prophet added, ‘There will come after you, people who will
bear witness without being asked to do so, and will be
treacherous and untrustworthy, and they will vow and never
fulfil their vows, and fatness will appear among them’.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 398

Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood narrated that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The people of my
generation are the best, then those who follow them, and then
those who follow the latter.
After that there will come some people whose witness will go
ahead of their oaths, and their oaths will go ahead of their
witness.”

Another Hadith
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood was reported to have narrated that the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The
seventh generation of Abbas’ children will call into disbelief
but people will not answer him. Members of his household will
then tell him, ‘You want to drive us out of our livelihood?’ And
he will say, ‘I am only leading you on the path of Abu Bakr and
Umar.’ They will still refuse to follow him. Then an enemy of
his from among members of his household from Banu Hashim
will kill him. When he will pounce on him, there will be a
disagreement among them.” He then mentioned a long
disagreement that will occur among them until the appearance
of As-Sufyani. This content of this report fits Abdullah AlMa’moon who called people to an erroneous belief that the
Qur’an was created; but Allah saved His servants from the evil
of this belief.

Another Hadith
Abdur-Rahman Ibn Jubair reported on the authority of his
father who related that he heard Abu Tha‘labh Al-Khushani
saying at Fustat during the caliphate of Mu‘awiyah who had led
the Muslims in war against the Constantinople: “Allah will not
fail to detain this nation for less than half a day. When you see

www.sunniconnect.com l 399

Sham as a table of food for one man and his family, it is then
that Constantinople will be conquered.”
Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Indeed I
hope that my people will not fail to have their Lord detain delay
them for half a day.” Sa‘d was asked, “What is half a day?” He
said, “Five hundred years.” This is one of the signs of
Prophethood. For, it means that the Muslim Ummah will be
delayed for half a day which means five hundred years as
interpreted by the Companions. This interpretation was taken
from Allah’s statement, “And verily, a day with your Lord is as
a thousand years of what you reckon.” (Soorah Al-Hajj 22:43)

Another Hadith
Abu Hurairah said that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “The Hour will not be established till
a fire will come out of the land of Hejaz, and it will throw light
on the necks of the camels in Busra.”
Abu Shamah recorded in his work, Tareekh that the fire came
out on Friday 5th of Jumadal-Akhirah in the Year 654 A.H. and
that the fire continued to rage for a month or more.
Shaikh Shihabuddeen mentioned that the people of Al-Madinah
escaped to the Prophet’s Mosque in the days of the raging fire.
They repented to Allah from their sins and sought His
forgiveness beside the Prophet’s grave. They also freed their
slaves and gave alms to the poor and the needy. One of their
poets composed a poetic passage in this regard.

www.sunniconnect.com l 400

Another Hadith
Abu Hurairah narrated that he heard the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: “If you live for a time,
you would certainly see people get up (in the morning) in the
wrath of Allah and getting into the evening under the curse of
Allah, and there would be in their hands (whips) like the tail of
an ox.” Abu Hurairah also reported that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Two are the
types of the denizens of Hell whom I did not see: people having
flogs like the tails of the ox with them and they would be
beating people, and the women who would be dressed but
appear to be naked, who would be inclined (to evil) and make
their husbands incline toward it. Their heads would be like the
humps of the bukht camel inclined to one side. They will not
enter Paradise and they would not smell its odor whereas its
odor would be smelt from such and such distance.” The women
who would be dressed but appear to be naked are the ones
whose dresses would not cover their nakedness. They rather
reveal more of their nakedness. They are inclined in their walk
in order to attract the attention of men. Our time is afflicted
with many of these women.

Another Hadith
Talhah Ibn Amr Al-Basri said: I came to Al-Madinah and I did
not know anybody there. I lodged at Suffah in the company of
a man with whom I shared a mudd of dates every day. One day,
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) led the people in prayer. When he finished the prayer, a
man from among the dwellers of Suffah said, “O Messenger of
Allah, our bellies have become hurt for consuming dates alone
(and nothing else) and our coarse cotton garments have become
ripped.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah

www.sunniconnect.com l 401

be upon him) got unto the pulpit and addressed them, “By
Allah, had I found bread or meat, I would have fed you with it.
However, you will come to realize it and whoever lives to that
time from among you will be served (delicious food in) bowls
and they will wear garments that will as expensive as the
material used for covering the Ka‘bah.” Talhah added: I and
my companions stayed for eighteen days eating nothing but
Bareer. We then came to our Ansar brothers who supported us.
Al-Hakim added in his version, “They said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah, which situation of ours is better, now or then?’ He said,
‘Your situation today is better than your situation then. Today
you are brethren but then you will be striking each other’s
necks.”
Abu Moosa Yuhannas narrated that the Messenger of Alla
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “When my
people walk arrogantly and they are served by the Romans and
the Persians, then Allah will allow some of them to subjugate
others.”

Another Hadith
Abu Hurairah reported that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Allah will raise for this
community at the end of every hundred years the one who will
reform its religion for it.”
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“A group of my followers will keep on following Allah's Laws
strictly and they will not be harmed by those who will
disbelieve them or stand against them till Allah's Order (the
Hour) will come while they will be in that state.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 402

In another version by Al-Bukhari, there is this addition: “And
they will be in Sham.”
Many of the scholars from among the righteous predecessors
opined that they are those who follow the Hadith. This also is
one of the signs of Muhammad’s Prophethood for the followers
of Hadith in Sham – especially in the city of Damascus – are
more than its followers in other Muslim regions, and all praise
is due to Allah. It is also mentioned in a Hadith that we are
going to quote soon that Sham would be stronghold of the
Muslims at the time of tribulations.
It is also recorded by Muslim on the authority of An-Nawwas
Ibn Sam‘an that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) mentioned that ‘Eesa, son of Maryam,
would come down from heaven on to the white minaret, east of
Damascus.

Miracles of the Messenger of Allah(Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that are
similar to or greater than miracles of
Prophets
One of his exclusive miracles is the glorious Qur’an which
falsehood cannot approach from before it or from behind it; (it
is) a revelation from a (Lord who is) Wise and Praiseworthy.
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Every Prophet was
given miracles because of which people believed, but what I
have been given, is Divine Inspiration which Allah has revealed
to me. So I hope that my followers will outnumber the
followers of the other Prophets on the Day of Resurrection.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 403

Jabir Ibn ‘Abdillah (May Allah be pleased with him) narrated
that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said: “I have been given five things which were not given to
anyone else before me: Allah made me victorious by awe, (by
His frightening my enemies) for a distance of one month's
journey; the earth has been made for me (and for my followers)
a place for praying and a thing to perform Tayammum.
Therefore anyone of my followers can pray wherever the time
of a prayer is due; the booty has been made Halal (lawful) for
me yet it was not lawful for anyone else before me; I have been
given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection);
and every Prophet used to be sent to his nation only but I have
been sent to all mankind.”
Allah (SWT) says:
“And (remember) when Allah took the Covenant of the
Prophets, saying: ‘Take whatever I gave you from the Book
and Hikmah (understanding of the Laws of Allah), and
afterward there will come to you a
Messenger (Muhammad) confirming what is with you; you
must, then, believe in him and help him’.”
Allah said: “Do you agree (to it) and will you take up My
Covenant (which I conclude with you)?” They said: “We
agree.” He said: “Then bear witness; and I am with you
among the witnesses (for this).” Then whoever turns away
after this, they are the Fasiqoon (rebellious: those who turn
away from Allah’s Obedience).” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:8182)
Imam Ash-Shafi‘i said: “There was no Prophet who was as
blessed as Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). ‘Eesa was blessed with a miracle of restoring life to the
dead. As for Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be

www.sunniconnect.com l 404

upon him) the palm-tree trunk on which he used to reclined on
whenever he gave sermons groaned in sadness – and its
groaning was heard – because the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) left it when a pulpit was erected for him.
This is, indeed, a greater miracle.”

About that which is given to Nooh (Peace be
upon him)
Allah (SWT) says:
Then he invoked his Lord (saying): “I have been overcome, so
help (me). So, We opened the gates of the heaven with water
pouring forth. And We caused springs to gush forth from the
earth. So, the waters (of the heaven and the Earth) met for a
matter predestined. And We carried him on a (ship) made of
planks and nails. Floating under Our Eyes, a reward for him
who had been rejected. And indeed, We have left this as a sign.
Then is there any that will remember (or receive admonition)”.
(Soorah Al-Qamar 54:1015)
Anas Ibn Malik said: This nation (the Muslims) have three
qualities if they were found in Children of Isra’eel, other
nations would not have been able divide them. The narrator
said: We asked him, “O Abu Hamzah, what are they?” He said,
“We were in the Suffah with the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when a woman emigrant
came to him along with her son who had reached the age of
puberty. He made the woman join the Muslim women and
made her son join us. He had stayed for long before he was
stricken by the plague of Al-Madinah and he then passed away.
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) closed
his eyes and commanded that he be prepared for burial. When
we are about to wash him, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of

www.sunniconnect.com l 405

Allah be upon him) said, ‘Anas, go to his mother and inform
her.’ I went to inform her. When she came, she sat at her son’s
feet, held them and then said, ‘O Allah, I submit to you
willingly; I renounced idols out of piety and I emigrated to you
hoping for your pleasure. So do not give the idol worshippers
the chance to gloat over what has befallen me and do not put
on, on account of this affliction, a burden that I cannot bear.’
By Allah, she had not finished her talk before her son shook his
feet and removed the sheet from his face. That son of her
outlived the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and outlived his mother as well.”
“(During the caliphate of Umar), he mobilized an army and
appointed Al-Ala’ Ibn Al-Hadrami as its commander and I was
among the fighters. We came to the battlefront and realized that
the enemy had blocked our access to water while it was very
hot and our animals were extremely thirsty. That was on a
Friday. When it was close to sunset, the commander led us in
performing two (supererogatory) Raka‘ahs. He then raised his
hands toward the sky at a time we could not even see any trace
of cloud, and supplicated. By Allah, he had hardly put his hands
down before Allah sent a wind and clouds were formed. There
was rain pouring until the valleys and ponds were filled with
water. We drank there from and gave water to our animals.
Then we approached our enemies who had crossed the gulf to
the peninsula.
“The commander stood on the gulf and said, ‘O Allah, the
Most High and the Greatest! O Allah, the Most Forbearing
and the Most Generous.’ He then said, ‘Cross the river, in the
Name of Allah!’ and we crossed the river with water touching
nothing of the hooves of our animals! After a short while, we
launched a surprise attack against the enemy and took many
captives. We returned to the gulf and the commander

www.sunniconnect.com l 406

repeated what the same statement and we crossed with water
touching nothing of the hooves of our animals. And we did
not stay there but a little.”
Anas then mentioned the death of Al-Ala’ (the commander) and
how they buried his remains in a land that ejected dead bodies
buried in it – as they came to know later. They then dug his
grave to remove his body in order to take it elsewhere for burial
but they did not find the corpse there. What they could only
discover was that the grave was filled with shining lights.
Thereupon, they poured the dust back into the grave and moved
away.

A story similar to that of Al-Ala’
Al-Baihaqi recorded on the authority of Sulaiman Ibn Mihran
Al-A‘mash who related from some of his companions that he
said: We arrived at the Tigris (Dajlah) River while the nonArabs were at the other side of it. A man from among the
Muslims said, “Bismillah! (In the Name of Allah)!” He then
leapt with his horse over the water; and the people also said,
“Bismillah!” and they leapt over the water. When the enemies
saw them, they were frightened and they cried, “Crazy! Crazy!”
They then fled. In this campaign, the Muslims lost nothing but
a bowl that was hanging on a saddle. On the contrary, they
gained lots of spoils which they divided among themselves.
The war booties were so abundant that each fighter would seek
for someone with whom he could swap a portion of his share
with. We have already mentioned in the history and times of
Umar, and also in our Tafseer that the first person to invade
Tigris at that time was Abu Ubaidah Ath-Thaqafi, the
commander of the Muslim armies during the caliphate of Umar,
and that he looked at Tigris and recited Allah’s statement:“And

www.sunniconnect.com l 407

no person can ever die except by Allah’s Leave and at an
appointed term.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:145)
He then mentioned Allah’s Name and made a thrust with his
horse and his fighters followed him in doing so.

Another similar story
Sulaiman Ibn Al-Mugheerah related that Abu Muslim AlKhawlani came to Tigris while it was throwing up woods. He
walked on the water and then turned to his companions and said
to them, “Are you missing any of your belongings so that you
can supplicate to Allah concerning that?”
Humaid Ibn Hilal Al-Adawi said: I was with Abu Muslim AlKhawlani in an army. When we arrived at a terribly roaring sea,
we asked the residents of the village about a ford through which
we could cross and they told us that the nearest ford was about
a two nights journey from there. Abu Muslim then said in
supplication, “O Allah, You made the Children of Isra’eel cross
the sea. We are Your slaves and upon Your path. Allow us to
cross this river today.” He then turned to the group and said,
“Cross, in the Name of Allah!” The narrator said: I was on a
horse and I said to myself, “I would be the first one to leap
forward after Abu Muslim’s horse.” And the Muslims crossed
the river while the water barely reached up to the horses’
bellies. After all of them had crossed, Abu Muslim turned to
the group and said, “Did any of you lose anything that we may
invoke Allah to return it to him?”
These supernatural events with which Allah honored His
sincere servants are part of the miracles of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), as it has been previously
established. For, these sincere servants were able to attain this

www.sunniconnect.com l 408

honor due to their following of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
At the end of his work, Dala’il An-Nubuwwah, Hafiz Abu
Nu‘aim made a comparison between merits and virtues of other
Prophets and those of Prophet Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). He also discussed the
people’s belying of our Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and their persecuting him and mocking his status
with Allah so much so that the foolish one, Uqbah Ibn Abi
Mu‘ait threw intestine of a camel on his back while he was
prostrating. The Prophet did not raise his head from prostration
till his daughter Fatimah came and removed those intestines
from his back, and invoked evil on whoever had done that evil
deed. The Prophet said, “O Allah! Destroy the chiefs of
Quraish, O Allah! Destroy Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham, Utbah Ibn
Rabee’ah, Shaibah Ibn Rabee’ah. Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu’ait
Umayyah Ibn Khalaf (or Ubayy Ibn Kalaf).” Later on all of
them killed during the Battle of Badr and their bodies were
thrown into a well except the body of Umayyah or Ubayy,
because he was a fat person, and when he was pulled, the parts
of his body got separated before he was thrown into the well.
Also, when the Quraish came to confront the Muslims during
the Battle of Badr with all their forces and the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saw them;
he raised his hands up and supplicated: “O Allah! These are
Quraish people. They have come in their arrogance and
haughtiness. They have argued with and belied Your
Messenger. O Allah, subdue them in the morning!” As a result,
seventy of their leaders were killed and seventy of their
notables were taken as captives. Had Allah wanted, he would
have exterminated them to the last person. But out of His
forbearance and in order to honor His Prophet (Peace and

www.sunniconnect.com l 409

Blessings of Allah be upon him), He spared those of them He
had predestined that they would believe in Him and His
Messenger. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had invoked Allah upon Utbah Ibn Abi Lahab to send on
him a dog in Sham; and the invocation materialized when
Utbah was killed by a lion at Zarqa’ valley near Busra.

Hadiths on seeking rain
Anas and others narrated that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was delivering the Khutbah (sermon) on
the pulpit on a Friday, when a Bedouin stood up and said, “O
Allah’s Messenger! The livestock are dying and the families
(offspring) are hungry: please pray to Allah to bless us with
rain.” Allah’s Messenger raised both his hands toward the sky
and at that time there was not a trace of cloud in the sky. Then
the clouds started gathering like mountains. Before he got down
from the pulpit I saw rain-water trickling down his beard.
On this occasion some of his Companions recollected a poetic
passage that his uncle Abu Talib composed about him whose
meaning goes thus:
His is the white face through which rainfall is sought;
He is a benefactor of orphans and a supporter of widows;
He is the resort of those who face impending perish from
among the clan of Hashim;
They always find favor and support from him.
Abu Nu‘aim said: “Prophet Nooh (Peace be upon him) spent
nine hundred and fifty years among his people calling them
unto Allah. In spite of these long years, the number of those
www.sunniconnect.com l 410

who believed in him and rode on the ark with him was less than
a hundred men and women. As for our Prophet Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), people from the
East and the West believed in him within a short span of twenty
years. The world tyrants and kings such as the Kisra (Chosrau
of Persia) and the Qaisar (Caesar of Rome) reckoned with him
for fear of losing their kingdoms. The Negus of Abyssinia and
the chieftains embraced Islam. Those who could not embrace
Islam agreed to humiliatingly pay the Jizyah. These are peoples
of Najran, Hajar, Ailah, Ukaidir Doomah, to mention just a
few. They all surrendered to Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) for Allah made him victorious by
frightening his enemies whenever he was at a distance of one
month’s journey from them. Many conquests were made and
people entered in the religion of Allah in groups. Allah says:
“When there comes the Help of Allah (to you, O Muhammad
against your enemies) and the conquest (of Makkah). And
you see that the people enter Allah’s religion (Islam) in
crowds.” (Soorah An-Nasr 110:12)
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) did not leave this world until after Allah has put under his
control Makkah, Al-Madinah, and most of Yemen and
Hadramawt. He was survived by one hundred thousand or more
Companions. Then his successors, Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman, respectively, continued with the conquests after him
until the East and West from the eastern sea to the western sea
were brought under the rule of Islam as the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had himself informed us:
“Allah drew the ends of the world near one another for my sake.
And I have seen its eastern and western ends. And the dominion
of my Ummah would reach those ends which have been drawn
near me.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 411

He also said: “When Qaisar is ruined, there will be no Qaisar
after him; and when Kisra is ruined, there will be no Kisra after
him. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, you will spend their
treasures in Allah’s
Cause.”
Concerning Allah’s statement, “And We have sent you (O
Muhammad) not but as a mercy for Al’Alameen (mankind,
Jinns and all that exists).” (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:107), Ibn
Abbas commented: “Those who believed in Allah and His
Messenger will attain the mercy in this world and the Hereafter.
As for those who did not believe, they will be counted among
the ones who deserve hastened punishment of this world such
as tribulations, strikes and swallowing by the earth.”
Allah (SWT) says:
“Have you not seen those who have changed the Blessings of
Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet
Muhammad and his Message of Islam), and caused their
people to dwell in the house of destruction?”
(Soorah Ibraheem 14:28)
Ibn Abbas said: “The blessing is Muhammad, and those who
changed the blessing into disbelief are the unbelievers of
Quraish and any other people that belie him for Allah says:
“But those of the sects (Jews, Christians and all the other
non-Muslim nations) that reject it (the Qur’an), the Fire will
be their promised meeting-place.” (Soorah Hood 11:17)
Abu Nu‘aim said: If it is said that Allah has described Nooh
with one of His beautiful Attributes in Soorah Al-Isra’ (17:3),
we can also say that He has described Muhammad with two of
His Attributes; and that is in His statement, “For the Believers
www.sunniconnect.com l 412

(he peace be upon him is) full of pity, kind, and merciful.”
(Soorah At-Tawbah 9:128)
Allah addressed the Prophets and Messengers with their names:
He would say, “O Nooh!”, “O Ibraheem!”, “O Moosa!”, “O
Dawood!”, “O Yahya!”, “O Eesa, son of Maryam!” But
whenever He addressed Prophet Muhammad, he would say, “O
Messenger!” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:41) “O Prophet!” (Soorah
Al-Anfal 8:64) “O you wrapped in garments!” (Soorah AlMuzzammil 73:1); “O you enveloped (in garments)!” (Soorah
Al-Muddaththir 74:1) These appellations are like honorary
nicknames.
Whenever the polytheists accused their Prophets of foolishness
or craziness, each of the accused Prophets personally refuted
the accusation and defended themselves. Prophet Nooh (Peace
be upon him) said: “O my people! There is no error in me, but
I am a Messenger from the Lord of Al-’Alameen!” (Soorah
AlA‘raf 7:61) Prophet Hood (Peace be upon him) also said the
same. When Fir‘awn said to Prophet Moosa (Peace be upon
him): “O Moosa (Moses)! I think you are indeed bewitched.”
(Soorah Al-Isra’ 17:101) Moosa responded: “Verily, you know
that these signs have been sent down by none but the Lord of
the heavens and the Earth as clear (evidences, i.e., proofs of
Allah’s Oneness and His Omnipotence.). And I think you are,
indeed, O Fir’awn (Pharaoh) doomed to destruction (away
from all good)!” (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:102)
But whenever Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was accused of anything, it is Allah Himself Who
refuted the accusation and defended His Messenger. Examples
of this are in the following Verses: And they say: “O you
(Muhammad to whom the Dhikr, the Qur’an) has been sent
down! Verily, you are a madman! Why do you not bring angels

www.sunniconnect.com l 413

to us if you are of the truthful?” (Soorah Al-Hijr 15:6-7) Allah
himself responded: “We send not the angels down except with
the truth (i.e., for torment), and in that case, they (the
disbelievers) would have no respite!” (Soorah Al-Hijr 15:8)
And they say: “Tales of the ancients, which he has written
down, and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon.”
Say: “It (this Qur’an) has been sent down by Him (Allah) (the
Real Lord of the heavens and Earth) Who knows the secret of
the heavens and the Earth. Truly, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.” (Soorah Al-Furqan 25:5-6)
Or do they say: “(Muhammad is) a poet! We await for him
some calamity by time!” Say (O Muhammad to them): “Wait!
I am with you among the waiters!” (Soorah At-Toor 52:30-31)
Allah (SWT) also says: “It is not the word of a poet: little is that
you believe! Nor is it the word of a soothsayer (or a foreteller),
little is that you remember! This is the Revelation sent down
from the Lord of
Al-’Alameen.” (Soorah Al-Haqqah 69:41-43)
“And verily, those who disbelieve would almost make you
slip with their eyes (through hatred) when they hear the
Reminder (the Qur’an), and they say: “Verily, he
(Muhammad) is a madman!” But it is nothing else than a
Reminder to all Al-’Alameen.” (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:51-52)
“Noon. By the pen and by what they (the angel) write (in the
Records of men) You (O Muhammad) are not, by the Grace of
your Lord, a madman. And verily, for you (O Muhammad) will
be an endless reward. And verily, you (O Muhammad) are on
an exalted standard of character.” (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:1-4)

www.sunniconnect.com l 414

And indeed We know that they (polytheists and pagans) say:
“It is only a human being who teaches him (Muhammad)” The
tongue of the man they refer to is foreign, while this (the
Qur’an) is a clear Arabic tongue.” (Soorah An-Nahl 16:103)
Abu Nu‘aim said what means: “Allah destroyed his people with
barren wind which was wind of wrath while Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was supported with
wind during the Battle of Confederates. Allah says: “O you
who believe! Remember Allah’s Favor to you, when there
came against you hosts, and We sent against them a wind and
forces that you saw not. And Allah is Ever AllSeer of what you
do.” (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:9)
Abdullah Ibn Abbas said: During the Battle of the
Confederates, the southern wind went to the northern wind and
said to her, “Let us go and support Muhammad, the Messenger
of Allah.” The northern wind said, “The free one does not go
out in the night.” So Allah sent the easterly wind to support
them. That is what is referred to in Allah’s statement: “And We
sent against them a wind and forces that you saw not.”
(Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:9) This is corroborated with the
Prophet’s saying: “I was granted victory with AsSaba (easterly wind) and the nation of ‘Ad was destroyed by
Ad-Daboor (westerly wind).”

About miracle granted to Prophet Saleh
(Peace be upon him)
Abu Nu‘aim said: If it is said that Allah brought out a she-camel
from the mountain as a sign and proof for Prophet Salieh
against his people and He gave her a time of drink and Saleh’s
people a time of drink, each on a known day; our response to
this is: Allah has given Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of

www.sunniconnect.com l 415

Allah be upon him) an equivalent of or what was greater than
that. Prophet Saleh’s camel did not talk to him neither did she
spoke in support of his Prophethood or messengership. As for
Muhammad, a camel clearly testified to his messengership by
addressing him as “Messenger of Allah”. He also complained
to him about what he suffered from his owners that they starved
him and extremely burdened him.

About the miracle granted to Prophet
Ibraheem (Peace be upon him)
The erudite scholar, Abul-Ma‘ali Ibn Az-Zamlakani – may
Allah have mercy upon him said: “As for dying out of fire that
occurred for Prophet Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) the fire of
the Persians has also died out in honor of our Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when
he was born, and that fire had never died out for a thousand
years. There period between the dying out of the fire and his
call to Prophethood was forty years. As for Prophet Ibraheem
(Peace be upon him) the fire only died out when he had direct
contact with it. The Persian fire died out in honor of our Prophet
while the distance between him and the fire was a journey of
months.”
Our Shaikh then said, “This is in addition to the fact that some
members of this Ummah were thrown into fire and it did not
have any effect on them. One of these is Abu Muslim AlKhawlani.”
Shurahbeel Ibn Muslim Al-Khawlani narrated that Al-Aswad
Ibn Qais Ibn Dhil-Khimar Al-Ansi claimed to be a prophet in
Yemen. He sent for Abu Muslim Al-Khawlani and when he
was brought to him, he said to Abu Muslim, “Do you bear
testimony that I am a Messenger of Allah?” Abu Muslim said,

www.sunniconnect.com l 416

“I can’t hear you!” Al-Aswad then said, “Do you bear
testimony that Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger?” He replied,
“Yes, I do.” He then asked him, “Do you bear testimony that I
am a Messenger of Allah?” Abu Muslim said, “I can’t hear
you!” He asked him once again, “Do you bear testimony that
Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger?” Abu Muslim answered
again in the affirmative. Al-Aswad them commanded that a
huge fire be set and he ordered that Abu Muslim be thrown into
it. When he was thrown into it, he walked out of the fire without
any harm. Then someone advised Al-Aswad to expel Abu
Muslim from the region lest he turn his followers against him.
So, he asked him to leave the region and he complied.
By the time he arrived at Al-Madinah, the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had died and Abu
Bakr had assumed the caliphate. Abu Muslim tied his camel at
the door of the Mosque, entered the Mosque and started praying
behind a pillar. When Umar Ibn Al-Khattab saw him, he went
to him and asked him who he was. Abu Muslim replied that he
was a man from Yemen. Umar then asked him, “What
happened to the man who that liar had thrown into a fire?” He
said, “His name is Abdullah Ibn Thuwab.” Umar then asked
him, “Tell me, by Allah, are you the man?” He said, “Yes.”
Umar then embraced him and cried. He took him to Abu Bakr
and let him sit down between himself and Abu Bakr. He then
said, “Praise be to Allah who allowed me to live long enough
to see from among the Ummah of Muhammad someone who
experienced what Prophet Ibraheem experienced.”
Abu Bishr Ja‘far Ibn Abi Wahshiyyah narrated that a man from
the tribe of Khawlan embraced Islam but his people wanted him
to remain upon disbelief and, as a result, threw him in a fire.
And he came out of the fire unscathed. When the man came to
Abu Bakr, the latter asked him to seek forgiveness for him. But

www.sunniconnect.com l 417

he told him, “It is you who deserves to be asked for such.” Abu
Bakr said, “But you were thrown into fire and you came out
unscathed!” The man then asked forgiveness for Abu Bakr and
later left for Sham. And the people would liken him to
Ibraheem (Peace be upon him). The man was Abu Muslim AlKhawlani.
Abul-Ma‘ali said: As for Ibraheem’s being thrown into fire
with a ballista, the similar had happened in the Muslims’ war
against Musailimah Al-Kadhdhab. Musailimah’s followers had
sought protection behind a fence where they dug a deep trench
in which they fortified themselves and they kept all the doors
to the fence locked, according to the narration of Al-Bara’ Ibn
Malik. Al-Bara’ said that he told his fellow Muslims, “Put me
on a shield, and hold me on it with the tips of the spears. Then
throw me up very high across the fence.” They did as he
requested. He fell into the trench and engaged in fighting
against the polytheists until he was able to kill ten or more. He
then opened the door for the Muslims. It was this unique
operation that caused the defeat of the polytheists. He also
killed Musailimah Al-Kadhdhab.
If some people say that Prophet Ibraheem, in addition to being
a Prophet, was exclusively honored as friend of Allah, the
response is that Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was not only honored as a friend of Allah but also
as Allah’s specially beloved one. And to be loved is more subtle
in meaning than to be a friend.
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood narrated that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “If I were to choose a
bosom friend I would have definitely chosen Abu Bakr as my
bosom friend, but he is my brother and my Companion and

www.sunniconnect.com l 418

Allah, the Exalted and Glorious, has taken your brother and
Companion (meaning Prophet himself) as a friend.”
Ka‘b Ibn Malik is reported to have said, “The last thing I heard
from our Prophet five days before he died was, ‘There was not
a prophet who did not have a friend from among his people and
my friend is Abu Bakr. But Allah has chosen your Companion
(meaning himself) as a friend.”
Jundub Ibn Abdullah said that he heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), five days before
his death, say: “I stand acquitted before Allah that I took any
one of you as friend, for Allah has taken me as His friend, as
he took Ibraheem as His friend. Had I taken any one of my
Ummah as a friend, I would have taken Abu Bakr as a friend.
Beware of those who preceded you and used to take the graves
of their prophets and righteous men as places of worship, but
you must not take graves as mosques; I forbid you to do that.”
Urwah Ibn Ruwaim Al-Lakhmi narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Allah
shortened the time for me. We I and my followers are the last
(of all nations, in existence) and the first (to enter Paradise) on
the Day of Resurrection. I am saying without being pompous:
Ibraheem is a friend of Allah, Moosa is a chosen servant of
Allah and I am a beloved servant of Allah. I will be leader of
the children of Adam on the Day of Resurrection. I will hold
the Banner of Praise under which every Prophet, sincere
servant of Allah and martyr will stand on the Day of
Resurrection. I will be the first one for whom gates of Paradise
will be opened. Allah has assented to my request concerning
you on three things: that He will not destroy you with an
epidemic, that He will not allow your enemy to wreak

www.sunniconnect.com l 419

(devastating) havoc on you and that you will not have
consensus on error.”
As for the jurist Abu Muhammad Abdullah Ibn Hamid, he
made a long statement concerning the Divine friendship. He
said among other things:
“Khaleel is someone who worships his Lord in hope and fear.
Allah says about Prophet Ibraheem, “Verily Ibraheem was
Awwah (one who invokes Allah with humility, glorifies Him
and remembers Him much) and was forbearing.” (Soorah AtTawbah 9:114)
Habeeb is someone who worships his Lord in love as if he is
seeing Him. Some scholars say that Khaleel is someone who
worships his Lord while expecting a reward from Him while
Habeeb is someone who worships his Lord with an expectation
to meet Him. Some say Khaleel is someone who reached his
Lord through an intermediary as seen in Allah’s statement,
“Thus did we show Ibraheem the kingdom of the heavens and
the Earth that he be one of those who have Faith with certainty.”
(Soorah Al-An‘am 6:75) while Habeeb is the one who reaches
his Lord without an intermediary as shown in Allah’s
statement, “And was at a distance of two bows’ length or (even)
nearer.” (Soorah An-Najm 53:9) Allah informs us about His
Khaleel that he said: “And Who, I hope will forgive me my
faults on the Day of Recompense, (the Day of Resurrection).”
(Soorah Ash-Shu’ara 26:82) And He says about His Habeeb:
“That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the
future.” (Soorah Al-Fath 48:2)”
Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “I would be in a
position on the Day of Resurrection that the entire creation will

www.sunniconnect.com l 420

turn to me, including even Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) (for
intercession).”
Abu Nu‘aim said: If it is said that Prophet Ibraheem (Peace be
upon him) was screened away from Numrood with three
screens, this can countered by the fact that Prophet Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was screened away
from those who wanted to kill him with five screens. Allah says
about him, “And We have put a barrier before them, and a
barrier behind them, and We have covered them up, so that they
cannot see.” (Soorah Ya Seen 36:9) These are three screens.
Allah then says, “And when you (Muhammad) recite the
Qur’an, We put between you and those who believe not in the
Hereafter, an invisible veil (or screen their hearts, so they hear
or understand it not).” (Soorah Al-Isra’ 17:45) So, these are five
screens.
It is recorded in the book of Tafseer that when a Soorah was
revealed in condemnation of Umm Jameel, Abu Lahab’s wife,
and her husband and the Soorah clearly stated that both of them
would enter the Hellfire and that they were losers, she took a
big rock and wanted to stone the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with it. On her way, she
passed by Abu Bakr who was sitting beside the Prophet but she
did not see the Prophet. She asked Abu Bakr, “Where is your
Companion?” Abu Bakr answered, “What is the matter?” She
said, “He has composed a poem to disparage me!” He said, “He
did not disparage you.” Thereupon she said, “By Allah, if I see
him I will hit me with this rock.” She then went back home
saying in rhymed tone, “mudhammam, we reject; and his
religion, we forsake!”
Equally, he was screened from Abu Jahl who wanted to step on
the Prophet’s head while he was prostrating in prayer. In his

www.sunniconnect.com l 421

attempt at trampling on the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), Abu Jahl saw a trench of fire and a great
horror. And the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was screened by the Angels’ wings. Abu Jahl quickly
backtracked in terror while trying to protect himself with his
hands. When the Quraish men saw him they said, “What is
wrong with you?” And he told them what he saw. It was in
reference to this that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Had he proceeded and
done what he wanted to do, the Angels would have seized him
piece by piece.”
Also, when he set out in the eve of his migration, the polytheists
laid in wait for him. They assigned some men to keep watch on
him at the entrance of his house. They gave them an instruction
that whenever he wanted to go out, they should kill him. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) asked Ali to sleep on his bed. He then went out to them
while they were there sitting at his door. He sprinkled dust on
their heads one by one while saying, “May these faces be
deformed!” He then went out without anyone of them seeing
him. He met Abu Bakr at his house and both of them took
refuge at the cave of Thawr, as has already been explained in
the Seerah. We also mentioned that a spider screened the
entrance of the cave with its web to prevent his pursuers from
knowing his place.
It is authentically recorded that Abu Bakr said while he and the
Prophet were in the Cave, “If any of them should look under
his feet, he would see us.” But the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “O Abu Bakr! What do you think
of two (persons) the third of whom is Allah?”

www.sunniconnect.com l 422

Also, Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘shum was miraculously
prevented from reaching the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he was pursuing them.
His horse was made to fall on the ground and he was unable to
get it up until the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) extracted from him a promise that he would not do
him any harm as earlier mentioned when discussing the
Prophet’s emigration.
Ibn Hamid, in his work, discussed Prophet Ibraheem’s laying
down his son for sacrifice to Allah in obedience to Him. He
then mentioned that Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) had similar experience during the Battle
of Badr when he laid down his life that the enemy was able to
attack him, inflict injury on him in his head and break his teeth.
He then said, “They said that Ibraheem (Peace be upon him)
was thrown in the fire by his people and Allah turned the fire
to coldness and safety for him. We are also saying the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was given a similar miracle. When he arrived at Khaibar,
a Khaibari woman poisoned him and the poison turned to
coldness and safety in his bowel until the end of his life, despite
the fact that poison normally burns the bowel like fire. This has
also been mentioned earlier while discussing the conquest of
Khaibar. This is supported by the fact that Bishr Ibn Al-Bara’
Ibn Ma‘roor with whom the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) shared the poisoned meat died
soon after eating it. It was only after the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had taken a bite from the goat
arm that it informed him that it was poisoned. Much of the
poison was put on the goat arm because the enemies had
learned that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) loved that part of the goat. However, by Allah’s

www.sunniconnect.com l 423

permission, the poison did not do him any harm until he left
this world. We have equally mentioned in the biography of
Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed AlMakhzoomi, the conqueror of Sham,
that he was brought a poisonous liquid and he sipped it in the
presence of the enemy to frighten them and no harm happened
to him.
Prophet Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) defeated Numrood with
the proof of his Prophethood as indicated in Allah’s statement,
“So the disbeliever was utterly defeated.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah
2:258)
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) has also recorded a similar feat. The denier of
Resurrection, Ubayy Ibn Khalaf, brought him a disintegrated
bone. He rubbed it and said to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), as narrated to us by Allah: “Who will
give life to these bones after they are rotted and have became
dust?” (Soorah Ya Seen 36:78) There and then, Allah revealed
to His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
to tell him:
“He will give life to them Who created them for the first time!
And He is the All-Knower of every creation!” (Soorah Ya Seen
36:79) And Ubayy went away defeated and disgraced. And this
is stronger proof.
It is also worth mentioning that Allah gave Muhammad victory
over this obdurate when he challenged him to a duel during the
Battle of Uhud. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was able to kill him with a spear which he shot at
him that made him fall off his horse. When he was asked the
reason for his fall, he said, “By Allah, I am afflicted with that
which if the entire people of Dhul-Majaz were afflicted with it,

www.sunniconnect.com l 424

they would all die. By Allah, if Muhammad had only spat on
me, he would have killed me.” It is to be recalled that this
Ubayy Ibn Khalaf had prepared a horse and a spear with which
he wanted to fight the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). He had even boasted that he would be
the one to kill him. But the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “Rather, I will be the one to kill him!”
And that was what happened in the Battle of Uhud.
If it is said that Prophet Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) broke
the idols of his people for the sake of Allah, then Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) broke three
hundred and sixty idols erected around the Ka‘bah. He merely
pointed to them and they started falling and disintegrating.
Ibn Umar narrated: “On the day of the Conquest of Makkah,
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) stood, while there were three hundred and sixty statues
around the Ka‘bah. Shaitan had glued these statues to the
Ka‘bah with lead and copper. As soon as the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) moved close to any of
these statues with a staff he was holding, the statue would fall
without even touching it, and he would say, “And say: Truth
has come and Batil (falsehood, i.e. Shaitan or polytheism) has
vanished. Surely! Batil is ever bound to vanish.” (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:81) With this statement, the statues would fall on their
faces. This miracle is more impressive than the one mentioned
earlier.
As for Allah’s statement, “Thus did we show Ibraheem the
kingdom of the heavens and the Earth that he be one of those
who have Faith with certainty.” (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:75) and
the succeeding Verses, Allah also has the following to say
about Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him):

www.sunniconnect.com l 425

“Glorified (and Exalted) be He (Allah) (above all that (evil)
they associate with Him) Who took His slave (Muhammad) for
a journey by night from Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah) to
the farthest mosque (in Jerusalem), the neighborhood whereof
We have blessed, in order that We might show him
(Muhammad) of Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, lessons, signs,
etc.). Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.” (Soorah
Al-Isra’ 17:1)
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, in the Hadith of Ru’ya, “And everything became
manifest to me and I became well-acquainted.”
Concerning the tribulation faced by Prophet Ya‘qoob (Peace be
upon him) who lost his son Yousuf (Peace be upon him), and
his patience and seeking his Lord’s help in bearing that loss,
Ibn Hamid mentioned that that Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) faced similar, rather greater
tribulation in the form of losing his son Ibraheem and he bore
the loss with exceptional patience. It was on this occasion that
he said, “The eyes are shedding tears and the heart is grieved,
and we will not say except what pleases our Lord, O Ibraheem!
Indeed we are grieved by your separation.”
This is in addition to the death of three of his daughters:
Ruqayyah, Umm Kulthoom and Zainab; and his uncle Hamzah,
the lion of Allah and His Messenger, was also martyred in the
Battle of Uhud. He bore all these losses with patience and
sought reward of that patience from Allah.
As regards the handsomeness of Prophet Yoosuf (Peace be
upon him), Ibn Hamid also mentioned the handsomeness of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), his sweetness and the awe he commanded in terms of his

www.sunniconnect.com l 426

physical appearance, utterances, guidance, characteristic and
manners. Rubayyi‘ Bbint Mu‘awwidh said, “Had you seen him,
you would think that you are looking at an emerging sun (in
beauty).”
As for the tribulation that Prophet Yoosuf (Peace be upon him)
faced as a result of his handsomeness such as his separation
from his loved ones and his exile, Ibn Hamid mentioned what
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) experienced what is equivalent to that: He emigrated from
Makkah to Al-Madinah, and was thereby forced to leave his
hometown, family and companions who were there.

About miracles of Prophet Moosa (Peace be
upon him)
The greatest of the miracles given to Prophet Moosa (Peace be
upon him) are the nine signs that Allah refers to in His saying:
“And indeed We gave to Moosa nine clear signs.” (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:101) The majority of the scholars are of the view that
the signs were: his staff that turned to a snake whenever he
shook it; his hand that shined and illuminated like the moon
whenever he put it under his armpit and then removed it; the
years of famine; the sea that split into two for the Children of
Isra’eel to escape to safety and drowning of Fir‘awn and his
followers; his invocation against the people of Fir‘awn when
they belied him that they should be visited with the flood; the
locusts; the lice; the frogs; and the blood.
Among other signs that Allah gave to Prophet Moosa (Peace be
upon him) were shading of the Children of Isra’eel by the cloud
while they were in the wilderness; coming of manna and quails
from the heaven. He also prayed for water for them and Allah

www.sunniconnect.com l 427

gave them water that came out of a rock that had three springs.
Moosa would strike it with his staff, and from each spring
thereof would gush out. Each of those from among the Children
of Isra’eel who worshipped the calf was made to die; Allah then
resurrected them. There is also the story of the cow and other
wonderful signs with which Prophet Moosa (Peace be upon
him) was blessed.
The great scholar Ibn Zamlakani said: As for Moosa’s staff that
became a snake, Muhammad was given a sign that was more
astounding. Pebbles have glorified Allah in his hands, though
they are inanimate things. The Hadith regarding this is
authentic and famous. There are also reports that these pebbles
glorified Allah in the hands of Abu Bakr, then Umar, then
Uthman. It is in reference to this that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was reported to have said,
“This is the Caliphate of Prophethood.”
There is also a report that Abu Muslim Al-Khawlani had a
rosary which he used for glorifying Allah. One day, he was
asleep while the rosary was in his hand. It then turned and
started rolling in his arm, glorifying Allah! Abu Muslim turned
and saw the rosary glorifying Allah while circling around his
arm and saying, “Glory be to You, the Grower of plants, the
Everlasting Lord!” He then called on his wife, Umm Muslim,
to come and see one of the strangest things he had ever seen.
She came, while the rosary was still making the glorification of
Allah. But when she sat down beside her husband, it kept silent.
Clearer than all the above and more authentic is the Hadith
recorded by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘ood who said: “We used to hear the food glorifying Allah,
while it was being eaten.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 428

Muslim also recorded on the authority of Jabir Ibn Samurah that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “Indeed, I know a rock in Makkah that used to salute
me before I was commissioned (as a Prophet). I can still
recognize it now.” Some people said it is Al-Hajar Al-Aswad
(the Black Stone that is in Ka‘bah).
Ali narrated: “I went out with the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and whenever he passed
by a tree or a rock, it would salute him.” We have also
mentioned earlier that the first time Angel Gabriel conveyed
revelation to him, he would not pass by any tree or stone
without them greeting him, saying, “Peace be upon you, O
Messenger of Allah!” A tree answered his call and came to him;
and there were other two trees that carried out his needs and
then returned to their roots. The Ahadeeth about these two
events are authentic.
However, actions of these trees and rocks do not necessarily
mean that they were given souls (like that of living things). For,
they may have been propelled by an unseen propeller. But his
statement, “Surrender to me by the will of Allah!” indicates that
the trees had a feeling of being addressed, especially with their
doing what he ordered them to do. The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also commanded a
bunch of dates to come down from the tree and it did, hopping
on the ground until it stood in front of him. He then addressed
it, “Do you bear witness that I am the Messenger of Allah?”
The bunch testified to that three times and then went back to its
place on the tree. This is the most comparable example.
However, there is some oddity in this narration.
The narration recorded by Imam Ahmad and classified as
authentic by At-Tirmidi is the one narrated by Ibn Abbas that a

www.sunniconnect.com l 429

Bedouin man came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and asked him, “How can I
know that you are the Messenger of Allah?” The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, “Tell me:
if I called this bunch of dates and it responded, will you testify
that I am the Messenger of Allah?” The man answered in the
affirmative. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) then called the bunch to come dome down from the tree
and it fell on the ground, hopping until it stood in front of the
Messenger of Allah. He then commanded it, “Go back!” And it
went back to its place. The Bedouin man then said, “I testify
that you are, indeed, the Messenger of Allah.”
Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said: A man (from
the clan of Amir) came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) while he was at a place where
there were bunches and trees and said to him, “What is this that
your companions are saying?” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to him, “Shall I show you
a sign?” The man said, “Yes.” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) then called a branch of that
tree and it comes down hopping toward him until it stood right
in front of him. It then started prostrating and raising his head.
The
Prophet then ordered it to go back to it place and its complied.
The Amiri man returned to his people and said to them, “O you
members of Amir Ibn Sa‘sa‘ah clan. By Allah! I will never
belie him again in whatever he says!”
Abdullah Ibn Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) narrated
that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) invited a man to Islam and the man asked him, “Do
you have any proof to support what you are saying?” The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) answered,

www.sunniconnect.com l 430

“This tree.” He then called the tree that was on the edge of the
valley and it started coming unto him hopping on the ground
until it stood in front of him. He then asked it to testify to his
being the Messenger of Allah which it promptly did three
times. It then went back to its root. The Bedouin man returned
to his people. But before he went he told the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), “If they follow me, I
would bring them to you; but if they did not, then I will come
back to you and stay in your company.”
As for the groaning of the palm trunk which the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to recline on when
he gave sermons, it is caused by his leaving it. When a pulpit
was built for him, he ascended it and started giving sermons,
abandoning the palm trunk he used to recline on before. The
trunk then started groaning and crying until the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) got down from the pulpit
and patted it and pacified it. He then asked it to choose between
being turned into a fresh branch and being planted in Paradise,
thereby becoming a fruitful tree from which sincere servants of
Allah will eat. It chose to become a planted tree in Paradise. It
then became quiet. This Hadith is famous. It is successively
narrated from a great number of the Companions; and the event
took place in the presence of a large number of people.
Our Shaikh said, “These are inanimate things and plants that
had groaned and talked. This is qualified enough to be cited as
equivalent of Prophet Moosa’s staff that turned into a snake.”
We shall make mention of this when we speak about miracles
of Prophet ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him).
Amr Ibn Sawwad narrated that Ash-Shafi‘i asked him, “What
is it that Allah gave any Prophet that He did not give to

www.sunniconnect.com l 431

Muhammad?” He answered, “He gave ‘Eesa resurrection of the
dead.” Ash-Shafi‘i said, “He gave Muhammad the trunk on
which he used to recline on while making sermon until a pulpit
was erected for him. When it was erected for him and he left
the trunk, it was heard groaning in grief. This is greater than
restoring life back to the dead.” The chain of this narration to
Ash-Shafi‘i is credible.
He said, “This is greater than that” because a tree trunk is not a
living thing yet it was made to have feelings and sentiment
when the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
abandoned it for the pulpit. So, it groaned in sorrow for missing
the Prophet’s companionship until he descended from the
pulpit and comforted it.
As for the fact that Allah spoke with Prophet Moosa (Peace be
upon him), we have mentioned earlier how He spoke with
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) during the night of Isra’ in addition to having the honor of
glancing at Allah’s noble Countenance. And this is greater.
This is supported by the statement, “And he was called: O
Muhammad! I have completed what I have made obligatory
upon My slaves and I have lightened the burden for them.” The
context of the rest of the story also serves as guidance to that.
As for the Prophet’s glancing at his Lord, it has been a famous
controversial topic among the earlier and later generations of
scholars.
Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) was reported to
have affirmed the glance but believed that it was with the heart
and not with the eyes. There are also Ahadeeth in Al-Bukhari
and Muslim in which ‘A’ishah denied that the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saw his Lord.

www.sunniconnect.com l 432

Muslim recorded on the authority of Abu Dharr: I asked the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him): Did you see your Lord? He said: “He is a Light; how
could I see Him?”
Ibn Hamid said: Allah addressed Moosa, “And I endued you
with love from Me.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:39) And He said to
Muhammad, “Say (O Muhammad to mankind): “If you (really)
love Allah then follow me (i.e., accept Islamic Monotheism,
follow the Qur’an and the Sunnah), Allah will love you and
forgive you your sins. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:31)
As for the hand which Allah has made a proof for Moosa
against Fir‘awn after mentioning that the staff that turned to a
snake as indicated in His noble statement, “Put your hand in
your bosom, it will come forth white without a disease; and
draw your hand close to your side to be free from fear (which
you suffered from the snake, and also your hand will return to
its original state). These are two Burhans (signs, miracles,
evidences, proofs, etc.) from your Lord to Fir’awn (Pharaoh)
and his chiefs.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:32) And in His statement,
“Another Sign. That We may show you (some) of Our Greater
Signs.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:22-23)
He had given Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) the splitting of the moon – by his pointing at it – into
two parts: one, behind the mountain of Hira and the other in
front of it. This has been mentioned earlier in the successively
narrated Ahadeeth in this regard. This is in addition to Allah’s
statement, “The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been
cleft asunder (the people of Makkah requested Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to
show them a miracle, so he showed them the splitting of the

www.sunniconnect.com l 433

moon). And if they see a Sign, they turn away, and say: “This
is continuous magic.” (Soorah Al-Qamar 54:1-2) And this,
incontestably, is greater miracle, more obvious and more
impactful.
In his long Hadith on his repentance, Ka‘b Ibn Malik said, “And
whenever the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was happy, his face became brightened and
illuminated like a split moon.”
Ibn Hamid said, “If it is said that the Moosa was given an
illuminating hand, we will say that Muhammad was given what
was greater than this. He was given a light that shone on his
right and left sides wherever he sat down at and whenever he
left a place.
We have mentioned in the Seerah while discussing Tufail AdDawsi’s embrace of Islam that he asked the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to give him a sign
that would help make his people embrace Islam. The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed for him and
he went back to his people. When he arrived at the mountain
trail close to the dwellings of his people, a light emanated from
in front of him like a lamp. He supplicated, “O Allah! Not in
this place for they will think it is a punishment!” The light then
shifted to the edge of his whip, and it appeared to them like a
lamp. So Allah guided them to Islam through Tufail as a result
of the Prophet’s blessing and the supplication he made thus: “O
Allah! Guide the clan of Daws and bring them!” It is on account
of this that Tufail was called, “the light man!”
Thabit related on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik that Abbad
Ibn Bishr and Usaid Ibn Hudair came out from the house of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 434

him) in a very dark night and the staff of one of them let out an
illumination like that of a lamp in the light of which they both
walked. When they parted ways, the staff of each of them had
illumination.
Muhammad Ibn Hamzah Ibn Amr Al-Aslami narrated from his
father who said, “We undertook a night journey in the company
of the Messenger of Allah and it was very dark. My fingers
became illuminated that the convoy made use of the light
produced therefrom to find their way.”
As regards Prophet Moosa’s invocation of flood, it is,
according to some interpretation, a deterrent death. Other signs
such as draught and famine were inflicted so that they might
return to following Moosa (Peace be upon him) and stop
disobeying him. However, the signs increased them in nothing
but greater transgression. Allah says:
“They said (to Moosa) “Whatever Ayat (proofs, evidences,
Verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) you may bring to us, to
work therewith your sorcery on us, we shall never believe in
you.” So We sent on them: the flood, the locusts, the lice, the
frogs, and the blood (as a succession of) manifest signs, yet
they remained arrogant, and they were of those people who
were Mujrimoon (criminals, polytheists, sinners). And when
the punishment fell on them they said: “O Moosa(Moses)!
Invoke your Lord for us because of His Promise to you. If you
remove the punishment from us, we indeed shall believe in you,
and we shall let the Children of Isra’eel go with you.” But when
We removed the punishment from them to a fixed term, which
they had to reach, behold! They broke their word! So We took
retribution from them. We drowned them in the sea, because
they belied Our Ayat and were heedless about them.” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:132-136)

www.sunniconnect.com l 435

The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) invoked Allah against the Quraish when they persisted in
their opposition of him. He invoked Allah to put them to trial
with seven years of famine like the one interpreted by Prophet
Yoosuf (Peace be upon him) And they were afflicted with
famine so much so that they ate everything. The situation was
so terrible that one of them would see nothing between the
heaven and the Earth but cloud out of extreme hunger. Ibn
Mas‘ood has cited this event as interpretation of Allah’s
statement: “Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring
forth a visible smoke.” (Soorah Ad-Dukhan 44:10)
As for splitting of the sea for Moosa (Peace be upon him) as a
result of Allah’s command for to strike it with his staff when
their pursuers nearly caught up with them, the sea split into two,
each part looking like a huge mountain. This is undoubtedly a
great and an astounding miracle as well as an exceedingly
overwhelming proof. However, Prophet Muhammad’s pointing
to the full moon with his noble hand and its splitting into two
as a result in response to the demand of the Quraish people who
were witnesses to it is a greater sign and more convincing proof
of his Prophethood and his position in Allah’s estimation. No
greater physical miracle was ever reported from any other
Prophet.
Ibn Hamid said: They say that Moosa (Peace be upon him)
struck his staff against the sea and it split and that is a great
miracle for him. Our response to this is that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was given a
similar miracle. Ali said: When we went to Khaibar, we were
at Yashkhab valley. We estimated it and found it to be fourteen
feet deep. The people said, “O Messenger of Allah, there is
enemy behind us and the valley in front of us” in similarity to
what Allah informs us about the followers of Prophet Moosa:

www.sunniconnect.com l 436

“And when the two hosts saw each other, the companions of
Moosa said: “We are sure to be overtaken.” (Soorah AshShu‘ara 26:61) The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) then said, “O Allah, You have given
every Messenger a proof. Show me Your Grace!” He then
mounted his ride and his Companions also did the same and the
horses and camels crossed without their hooves being seen.
And there was victory.
But this narration is without a chain of narrators and I have
never come across it with either a sound, fairly sound or weak
chain in any of the recognized books. And Allah (SWT) knows
best.
As for Moosa’s being shaded with cloud in wilderness, it can
be compared with the incidence of the cloud that the Baheera,
the Christian monk saw about Prophet Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) being shaded by a cloud in the
midst of his co-travelers while he was 12 years old. He
accompanied his uncle Abu Talib to Sham on a trade trip. This
miracle is more astounding, first, in the sense that it occurred
before he started receiving any revelation for he was being
exclusively shaded by the cloud on this occasion and this is
more manifest that the cloud of the Children of Isra’eel and
others. Secondly, the Children of Isra’eel were shaded by the
cloud due to their need as a result of severe heat.
We have also earlier mentioned while discussing signs of
Muhammad’s Prophethood that when he was asked to
supplicate for the rain due to the extreme hunger, famine and
drought they were suffering from, he raised his hands and said,
“O Allah, give us water! O Allah, give us water! O Allah, give
us water! O Allah, send down rain upon us! O Allah, send down
rain upon us! O Allah, send down rain upon us!” Anas (the

www.sunniconnect.com l 437

narrator of the Hadith) said: By Allah, we did not see any cloud
or any patch of it, and there was neither any house or building
standing between us and the (hillock) Sal‘. There appeared a
cloud in the shape of a shield from behind it, and as it (came
high) in the sky it spread and then there was a downpour of rain.
By Allah, we did not see the sun throughout the week. And
when the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
was asked to supplicate that the rain should be stopped, he
raised his hand and said: O Allah, let it (rain) fall in our suburbs
and not on us, O Allah (send it down) on the hillocks and small
mountains and the river-beds and at places where trees grow.”
As soon as he gestured with his hands toward a side, the cloud
moved toward that side and Al-Madinah became like the
hollowness of a chaplet around which rain fell but itself was
not affected by the rain.
As for sending down of manna and quails to the Children of
Isra’eel, the Messenger of Allah(Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), had miraculously turned little food in abundance
that sufficed a great number of people on many occasions as
we have mentioned earlier while discussing signs of
Prophethood. During the Battle of the Trench, he turned the
meager food and a Sa‘ of barley that Jabir had into abundant
food which more than a thousand hungry men ate to their fill.
He also fed a large group of people from his handful – peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him.

As for Allah’s statement, concerning Moosa
(Peace be upon him) and the Children of
Isra’eel:
And (remember) when Moosa asked for water for his people,
We said: “Strike the stone with your stick.” Then gushed forth

www.sunniconnect.com l 438

therefrom twelve springs. Each (group of) people knew its own
place for water.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:60) The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) inserted his
hand into a small bowl that was wide enough to spread his hand
in it and water started gushing out of the bowl in-between his
fingers like springs. He did the same on many other occasions
such as the day of the Campaign of Hudaibiyah, the day his
Companions in Al-Madinah asked him for water and his
supplication was answered with exactness without having more
or less than what was needed. These are instances of greater
and more astounding miracle than the one that occurred to
Prophet Moosa (Peace be upon him).
Abu Amrah Al-Ansari narrated: “We were with the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in one of
the battles and there was no food and people passed their night
in hunger. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) then called for a small pot and it was brought in front of
him. He also called for water and it was poured into the pot. He
then spit into it and said whatever Allah willed him to say. Then
he put his finger in it. I swear by Allah, I saw the water gushing
out of the fingers of Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) like springs. Thereupon he asked people
to drink and fill their water skins and vessels.”

Holding of sun for Prophet Yoosha‘ (Joshua)
Ibn Noon Ibn Afrayeem Ibn Yoosuf Ibn
Ya‘qoob Ibn Ishaq Ibn Ibraheem (peace be
upon them)
Yoosha‘ was the Prophet of the Children of Isra’eel after
Prophet Moosa (Peace be upon him). He was the one who led
them out of the wilderness into Jerusalem after a siege and a

www.sunniconnect.com l 439

fight. The victory was achieved in the afternoon of a Friday. It
was near sunset and Saturday was approaching so they could
not continue fighting. Yoosha‘ looked at the sun and addressed
it thus: “You are under Allah’s command and I, also, am under
Allah’s command.” He then supplicated to Allah: “O Lord!
Delay the sunset for me.” So Allah delayed it for him until he
was able to conquer the city. The sun then set afterward.
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “A prophet amongst the
prophets carried out a holy military expedition, so he said to his
followers, ‘Anyone who has married a woman and wants to
consummate the marriage, and has not done so yet, should not
accompany me nor should a man who has built a house but has
not completed its roof nor a man who has sheep or she-camels
and is waiting for the birth of their young ones.’ So, the prophet
carried out the expedition and when he reached that town at the
time or nearly at the time of the ‘Asr prayers, he said to the sun,
‘O sun! You are under Allah’s Order and I am under Allah’s
Order O Allah! Stop it (i.e. the sun) from setting.’ It was
stopped till Allah made him victorious.”
This Prophet was Yoosha‘, son of Noon, according to the
narration recorded by Imam Ahmad on the authority of Abu
Hurairah that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “The sun was never stopped (from
setting) for any human but Yoosha‘ (Peace be upon him) during
the nights on which he marched to Jerusalem.”
Abul-Ma‘ali Ibn Az-Zamlakani said: As for delaying of the
sunset for Prophet Yoosha‘ so that he could fight the tyrants,
what was greater than that had occurred to our Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). The
moon split into two for him and splitting of the moon is more

www.sunniconnect.com l 440

extraordinary than delaying of the sunset. Narrations about
splitting of the moon are successively and authentically
recorded. One part of the spilt moon was at the back of the
mountain and the other was at its front. The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to the people:
“Bear witness!” The Quraish, however, were not convinced.
They claimed that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was just pulling the wool over their eyes. But
some travelers arrived and informed them that they actually
saw the moon split. It is in this regard that Allah revealed His
noble statement:
“The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been cleft asunder
(the people of Makkah requested Prophet Muhammad (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to show them a miracle,
so he showed them the splitting of the moon). And if they see
a sign, they turn away, and say: 'This is continuous magic.'”
(Soorah Al-Qamar 54:1-2)
Also, the sun was delayed for the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) twice. At-Tahawi
recorded a narration he regarded as authentic that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was receiving revelations while his head was on Ali’s lap.
And he did not lift his head until after the sunset and Ali had
not performed ‘Asr prayers. Thereupon the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) supplicated, “O Allah, if it was
in Your service and in obedience of Your Messenger, return the
sun for him (that he may perform his ‘Asr prayers).” And the
sun rose again that it was seen. Ali then got up and performed
‘Asr. The sun then set.
The second occasion was on the morning after the night he was
taken on a night journey from the Sacred Mosque in Makkah to

www.sunniconnect.com l 441

Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem and from there to the heaven.
The Makkah pagans asked him about things in Jerusalem and
Allah showed it to him as if it was there in front of him and he
described all that he saw there to them. They also asked about
a caravan of theirs that was on a trade journey and he informed
them, “It will reach you at sunrise.” However, the caravan was
late; but in order to attest to truthfulness of His Messenger,
Allah delayed the sun from rising until after the caravan had
arrived.

Concerning merits granted to Prophet Idrees
(Peace be upon him) such as his being
Elevated
Allah says about him: “And We raised him to a high station.”
(Soorah Maryam 19: 57)
In response to this, we can say that our Prophet Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was given what
was better, greater and more perfect in that Allah elevated his
mentioning in this world and in the Hereafter. Allah says: “And
have We raised high your fame.” (Soorah Ash-Sharh 94:4)
There is no preacher, intercessor or worshipper who does not
say in his sermon, intercession or prayer, “I testify that there is
no deity worthy of being worshipped except Allah and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” So, his name is always
mentioned along with the Name of his Lord, in attestation to
the Verse quoted above. Allah sent Angel Gabriel to tell
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
“Whenever My Name is mentioned, your name will also be
mentioned.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 442

Anas Ibn Malik narrated that the Messenger of Allah said,
“When I finished from what Allah ordered me to do of the
matter of the heavens and the Earth, I said, ‘O My Lord, there
was no Prophet before me whom You have not honored. You
made Ibraheem Your friend, You addressed Moosa directly,
You subdued mountains for Dawood, You made the wind
subservient to Sulaiman and You resurrected the dead for
‘Eesa. What are You going to honor me with?’ Allah said,
‘Have I not given you what is better than all that? Whenever I
am mentioned, you are also mentioned along with Me. I have
allowed your followers to know the Qur’an by heart, and this I
have not allowed any other nation. And I revealed to you a word
from the treasures of My Throne: La hawla wa la quwwata illa
billah’.”
Abu Hurairah and Anas narrated that the Prophet, when he was
relating the events of Al-Isra’ wal-Mi‘raj that “When Allah
showed me of His Signs, I observed a nice fragrance and I said
to Gabriel, ‘What is this?’ He said, ‘This is Paradise.’ I said, ‘O
my Lord, bring me my people!’ Allah, High and Exalted, said,
‘I am Allah, there is no god but I, You will have what I have
promised you: Every male and female Believer who did not
associate any partner with Me. He who spends his wealth in My
cause, I shall reward him; he who relies on Me, I shall suffice
him; and he who asks from Me, I shall grant his request. His
wealth will not diminish. As for you, yours is that which you
have asked. Excellent is the abode of the pious.’ I said, ‘I am
pleased!’ When we reached the Lote Tree, I fell in prostration.
I then raised my head and said, ‘O Allah, You took Ibraheem
as Your friend; You directly addressed Moosa; You gave
Dawood the Psalms and You honored Sulaiman with a great
kingdom.’ Allah then said in response, ‘Indeed, I have elevated
for you your name. It will not be valid for your followers to
make any sermon without testifying that you are My

www.sunniconnect.com l 443

Messenger. I have made hearts of your followers like books
(i.e. they will read the Qur’an by heart); and, from under My
Throne, I have blessed you with the last Verses of Soorah
AlBaqarah.'”
Abu Zur‘ah, in his version of the above report, has this addition:
“And he (the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) met the souls of the past Prophets (peace be upon
them) and they all praised their Lord. Muhammad also praised
his Lord and then said to the Prophets, ‘You all praised your
Lord and I am also praising my Lord: All praise is due to Allah
Who sent me as a mercy to mankind and as a giver of glad
tiding and warner to the entire humanity. He sent down to me
the Criterion in which everything is explained and made my
nation the best nation ever evolved for mankind. He made my
followers the just nation; the last of all nations but the first to
enter Paradise. Allah expanded my heart, removed my burden
and made me the first and the last’!” It was then that Prophet
Ibraheem said to the other Prophets, “Muhammad has excelled
you with this!”
As mentioning of Muhammad’s name among the past nations
and earlier centuries, Al-Bukhari recorded on the authority of
Ibn Abbas who narrated that Allah did not send a Prophet
without making him undertaking a covenant that if Muhammad
was sent while he was still alive, he would follow and support
him and that they would command their followers that if they
would be alive when Muhammad would be sent, they would
believe in him and follow him. All the Prophets informed their
respective people about Muhammad and the last of them in this
was Prophet ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him). He has indeed
informed the Children of Isra’eel of the imminent advent of
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). And
monks and priests also spoke of his impending appearance.

www.sunniconnect.com l 444

As for elevating his mentioning among the latter generations, it
manifests in the fact that his religion would be everlasting and
would abrogate all other religions. It shall remain the only
unabrogated Divine religion till the end of the time. There will
always be among his followers a group that will remain
victorious upon the Truth, and whoever opposes this group will
never be able to harm it until the establishment of the Hour.
Muhammad’s name is also perpetuated by the fact that, at every
elevated ground five times a day, testimony is borne while
making the call to prayer that there is no deity worthy of being
worshiped except Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allah. Likewise, no preacher will deliver sermon on Friday
without mentioning his name in his sermon.

Concerning the virtue of Prophet Dawood
(Peace be upon him)
Allah (SWT) says:
“And indeed We bestowed grace on Dawood (David) from Us
(saying): ‘O you mountains. Glorify (Allah) with him! And you
birds (also)! And We made the iron soft for him.’ Saying:
‘Make you perfect coats of mail, and balance well the rings of
chain armor, and work you (men) righteousness. Truly, I am
All-Seer of what you do’.” (Soorah Saba’ 34:10-11)
While discussing his biography, we have mentioned how
Prophet Dawood (Peace be upon him) was blessed with a good
voice and that Allah subjected the birds to him that glorified
Allah along with him. The mountains also hearkened to his call
and celebrated the glory of Allah with him. Prophet Dawood
was a fast reader. He would order his animals to be saddled and

www.sunniconnect.com l 445

he would finish reading the Psalms before the saddling was
finished. He only ate from what he earned by his hand.
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) also had a beautiful voice when he read the Qur’an. Jubair
Ibn Mut‘im narrated that he heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) read Soorah AtTeen in Maghreb prayers and that he had never heard any voice
more beautiful that his.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would recite the Qur’an with measured recitation as he
has been commanded by Allah. As for the birds’ celebration of
Allah’s glory along with Prophet Dawood that of the lifeless
mountains is more wonderful.
Abu Nu‘aim argued that if birds were made subservient to
Dawood, huge and ferocious animals were made obedient to
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). Examples of this are a straying camel that prostrated in
front of him and the wolf that spoke about his Prophethood and
believed in his call and message.
As for Prophet Dawood’s eating from earnings of his own
hands, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) also ate from the earnings of his hands. He used
to herd sheep for the people of Makkah. And he would say,
“There was no Prophet who had not herded sheep.” He also
traveled to Sham to conduct a partnership business for
Khadeejah. It is in reference to this Allah says:
And they say: “Why does this Messenger (Muhammad) eat
food, and walk about in the markets (as we)? Why is not an
angel sent down to him to be a warner with him? Or (why) has

www.sunniconnect.com l 446

not a treasure been granted to him, or why has he not a garden
whereof he may eat?” And the Zalimoon (polytheists and
wrongdoers) say: “You follow none but a man bewitched.” See
how they coin similitudes for you, so they have gone astray,
and they cannot find a (Right) Path.” Till His statement: “And
We never sent before you (O Muhammad) any of the
Messengers but verily, they ate food and walked in the
markets.” (Soorah AlFurqan 25:7-20)
After Allah(SWT) permitted him to do Jihad in Al-Madinah, he
would eat from what Allah had made lawful for him of war
booties that were not made lawful for the Prophets before him.
He said, “I was sent with the sword on the threshold of the Hour
that Allah alone should be worshipped without associating any
partner with him. My provision is put under the shade of my
spear. Ignominy and disgrace are made the lot of whoever
opposes my command. And whoever copies a people has
become one of them.”
As for softening iron for Dawood (Peace be upon him), it is
indeed one of the greatest miracles. He could mold iron into
anything he wanted without using fire as easily as he molded
dough. With steel, he made armors and shields and Allah
commanded him how to do that. He tells us that He commanded
him: “And balance well the rings of chain armor.” (Soorah
Saba’ 34:11)
It has been mentioned earlier while discussing the Battle of the
Trench in the fourth or fifth year of Hijrah that that when
Muslims were digging the trench, there was a rock they could
not break so they told the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) about it. He went to the rock,
after having tied a small rock on his belly out of excessive
hunger. He struck the hard rock three times. The first strike

www.sunniconnect.com l 447

generated a sparkling that revealed to him the palaces of Sham;
the second strike generated a sparkling that revealed palaces of
Persia and the third revealed palaces of San‘a’ (in Yemen). The
rock then dissolved as it was a heap of dust. There is no doubt
that dissolution of the rock that does not even dissolve when
exposed to fire is greater in miracle than softening of steel that
easily reacts when exposed to fire.
Abu Nu‘aim said: If it is said that Allah softened steel for
Dawood (Peace be upon him) that he made from it perfect coats
of mail, this can be countered by the fact that hard rocks were
also softened for Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) that they turned into a cave in which he hid from the
polytheists during the Battle of Uhud. On this occasion, Allah
softened for him the mountain that he was able to insert his
head therein. And this is more astounding.
As regards Allah’s statement: “And gave him Al-Hikmah
(Prophethood) and sound judgment in speech and decision”,
(Soorah Sad 38:20), the Hikmah that Allah gave Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
the law he sent him with was more complete than the ones He
gave to all the Prophets who came before him (peace be upon
them all).
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “I have been given the
keys of eloquent speech.”
There is no doubt that the Arabs are the most eloquent people
and the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
was the most eloquent of all Arabs. He was endowed with
combination of all excellent qualities.

www.sunniconnect.com l 448

About Prophet Sulaiman (Peace be upon him)
(Solomon) and that which he was honored
with
Allah, High and Exalted says:
“So, We subjected to him the wind; it blew gently by his order
whithersoever he willed, And also the
Shayateen (devils) from the Jinns (including) every kind of
builder and diver. And also others bound in fetters. (Allah
said to Sulaiman) “This is Our gift: so spend you or
withhold, no account will be asked (of
you).” And verily, for him is a near access to Us, and a
good (final) return (Paradise).” (Soorah Sad 38:36-40)
He (SWT) also says:
“And to Sulaiman (We subjected) the wind strongly raging,
running by his command toward the land which We had
blessed. And of everything We are the All-Knower. And of the
Shayateen (devils from the
Jinns) were some who dived for him, and did other work
besides that; and it was We Who guarded them.”
(Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:81-82)
In another place in the Qur’an, He (SWT) says:
“And to Solomon (We subjected) the wind, its morning (stride
from sunrise till midnoon) was a month’s (journey), and its
afternoon (stride from the midday decline of the sun to sunset)
was a month’s (journey i.e. in one day he could travel two
months’ journey). And We caused a fount of (molten) brass to
flow for him, and there were Jinns that worked in front of him,
by the Leave of his Lord. And whosoever of them turned aside

www.sunniconnect.com l 449

from Our Command, We shall cause him to taste of the torment
of the blazing Fire. They worked for him what he desired,
(making) high rooms, images, basins as large as reservoirs, and
(cooking) cauldrons fixed (in their places). “Work you, O
family of Dawood (David), with thanks!” But few of My slaves
are grateful.” (Soorah Saba’ 34:12-13)
Abdullah Ibn Amr bin Al-As narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “When
Sulaiman finished from building Jerusalem, he asked Allah for
three things: He asked Allah to bless him with a judgment that
would correspond with His, and that request was granted; he
asked Allah for a kingdom the like of which no one would be
blessed with after him, and it was also granted; and after he
finished building the mosque, he invoked Allah for anyone who
would come to the mosque for the purpose of praying therein
and not for other purpose that Allah should cleanse him from
his sin as he was the day he was born.”
Abu Nu‘aim said: If it is said that the wind was subjected to
Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) that he traveled on the wind
throughout the land of Allah that he could travel two month’s
journey in one day, the response is that Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) achieved what was greater
than that. He was made to travel in a single night between the
Sacred Mosque in Makkah and Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem,
which is a month’s journey, and from there he was taken to the
heavens, which is a journey of fifty thousand years, in less than
a third of the night. He entered the heavens one by one and saw
their wonders. He was allowed to see Paradise and Hell, actions
of his followers were showed to him, and he led the Prophets
in prayer; and was made to penetrate the Divine barrier. All this
happened in one single night. Then which of the two
miraculous journeys is greater and more astounding?!

www.sunniconnect.com l 450

As for subjecting to Sulaiman the Jinns that worked for him
what he desired, making high rooms, images, basins as large as
reservoirs, and cooking cauldrons fixed in their places, Allah
blessed Muhammad with what was more. He sent the favored
Angels down to support him on more than one occasion:
During the Battles of Uhud, Badr and Hunain as it has been
adequately discussed in their proper places. And this is greater
and more awe-inspiring than subjecting the Jinns.
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Last night a big demon
(‘ifreet) from the Jinns came to me and wanted to interrupt my
prayers (or said something similar) but Allah enabled me to
overpower him. I wanted to fasten him to one of the pillars of
the mosque so that all of you could see him in the morning but
I remembered the statement of my brother Sulaiman (as stated
in Qur’an): My Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me a kingdom
such as shall not belong to anybody after me. (Soorah Sad
38:35)” (The sub-narrator) Rawh said, “He (the demon) was
dismissed and humiliated.”
Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri narrated that he was performing the Fajr
prayers behind the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and he was interrupted in his recitation in
that prayer. When he finished praying, he said: “If you had only
seen me struggling with Shaitan and trying to strangle him with
my hands that I felt the coldness of his saliva inbetween my two
fingers – the thumb and the index fingers. Had it not been for
the supplication of my brother Sulaiman, I would have had him
tied to one of the pillars of the mosque so that the children of
Al-Madinah would find something to play with.”
It is authentically reported that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) also said: “When the month of

www.sunniconnect.com l 451

Ramadan starts, the gates of the heaven are opened and the
gates of Hell are closed and the devils are chained.” This is a
manifestation of the blessings of Allah ordained for His
Prophet of fasting in the month of Ramadan and praying during
its nights.
It is true that Allah combined Prophethood and kingdom for
Sulaiman as he did for his father, Dawood (Peace be upon him).
However, He has asked His servant Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to choose between being made
a king and a prophet or a servant of Allah and His messenger.
He consulted Angel Gabriel on this and the latter advised him
to choose being a servant and a messenger. There is no doubt
that the status of Messengership is higher. Our Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was also offered the
treasures of the Earth and he rejected them saying: “Had I
wanted, I would have made Allah turned the mountains of the
Earth into gold for me. But I prefer to go hungry on a day and
eat my fill on the other.”
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “While I was sleeping,
the keys of the treasures of the world were brought to me and
put in my hand.”
It was also reported on the authority of Jabir that the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “I was given
keys of the treasures of the world upon a piebald horse. They
were brought to me by Gabriel in a piece of silk brocade.”
Abu Umamah narrated that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: “My Lord offered to turn the plain
of Makkah into gold for me and I said, ‘No, My Lord. But I
would prefer to go hungry on a day and eat my fill on the other.

www.sunniconnect.com l 452

Whenever I am hungry I will humbly beseech You and
remember You; and whenever I eat my fill, I will praise and
thank You’.”
Abu Nu‘aim said: It is known that Sulaiman (Peace be upon
him) understood the languages of birds and ants; for Allah says:
He said: “O mankind! We have been taught the language of
birds.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:16)
However, Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was given the like of that and more. We have
earlier mentioned how animals, the trunk and trees spoke to
him and how pebbles glorified Allah in his hands, how these
creatures called him and he responded to their calls, how a wolf
affirmed his Prophethood, how birds glorified Allah in
obedience to him, how a gazelle spoke with him and
complained to him and how a lizard addressed him and testified
to his Prophethood.
Not only that, a goat’s arm informed him that it was poisoned
and the Jews who put poison in the said meat confessed to that.
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also
said: “Indeed, I know a rock in Makkah that used to salute me
before I was commissioned (as a Prophet). I can still recognize
it now.” And this is greater and more astounding. Because the
rock is absolutely lifeless when compared to birds and ants that
are animals that have lives.

About miracles granted to ‘Eesa (Jesus)
(Peace be upon him)
One of the manifestations of ‘Eesa uniqueness is that he was
created through a Divine word from a female without male as

www.sunniconnect.com l 453

He created our mother Hawwa (Eve) from a male without a
female and our father Adam from neither male nor female.
Another of his characteristics is that he is alive and has not died.
He is still physically alive in the nearest heaven, and he shall
descend to the Earth before the Day of Resurrection upon the
white eastern minaret at Damascus. When he descends, he will
fill the Earth with justice and fairness as it has been filled with
injustice and wrong. He will judge by the laws of Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Prophet ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was blessed with many
miracles of which was restoring life to the dead. Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also
has similar miracles and more for he was blessed with giving
life to the inanimate things; and this is a greater miracle than
restoring life to dead humans. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) did speak with a poisoned goat
meat. And this is far more astounding miracle than restoring
life to dead humans.
It is authentically reported from Anas who narrated: “We
entered upon a man from among the Ansar who was
indisposed. We were still with him when he breathed his last.
We then spread his garment and covered him while his aged
mother sat near his head. One of us looked at her and said, ‘O
Woman, bear this affliction of yours with patience and hope for
the reward of your patience from Allah.’ The woman said,
‘What happened? Is my son dead?’ We replied in the
affirmative. She said, ‘Are you telling the truth?’ We said,
‘Yes.’ She then spread her hands up unto Allah and said, ‘O
Allah, You surely know that I embraced Islam and migrated to
Your Messenger in order that You may help me during times
of hardship and ease. Do not inflict on me this calamity today.’

www.sunniconnect.com l 454

She hardly finished her entreatment to Allah that her son
removed the garment from his face and sat down. We did not
leave him until after we had a meal with him.”

Another story
There is a story of Zaid Ibn Kharijah who spoke after he had
died and testified in support of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman that they were truthful. The story is popular and
narrated with many chains of narrations.
Al-Bukhari recorded in his work At-Tareekh Al-Kabeer: “Zaid
Ibn Kharijah Al-Khazraji Al-Ansari participated in the Battle
of Badr. He died during the reign of Uthman. He was the one
who spoke after death.”
Our Shaikh said: One of the miracles of ‘Eesa is that he healed
the insane. Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) also did the same.
Ya‘la Ibn Murrah narrated that a woman brought a young son
of hers who was mentally deranged and that he had never seen
anyone mental derangement more severe than the boy’s. The
woman said, “O Messenger of Allah, this son of mine is
afflicted as you can see and, as a result, we also are troubled.
Every day, we see in him what hurts us.” Thereupon the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Bring him to me.” The woman raised the boy up to
him and put him between the Prophet and the waist of the
animal he was riding. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) opened the boy’s mouth and
spit into it and then said, ‘In the Name of Allah, I am a servant
of Allah! Go out, O enemy of Allah!’ He then gave the boy

www.sunniconnect.com l 455

back to her. The boy was healed instantly and his family never
experienced any trouble from him again.”
Ibn Abbas narrated that a woman brought her son to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and said, “O Messenger of Allah, he is mentally deranged
and his derangement often occurs whenever we want to eat
thereby spoiling for us the pleasure of eating.” The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) wiped on
his chest and supplicated for him. The boy then vomited
forcefully that something like a black puppy came out of his
mouth and moved away.”
Ibn Abbas also narrated: A woman from the Ansar came to
Allah’s Messenger(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
while he was in Makkah and said, “O Messenger of Allah, this
vicious one has overwhelmed me.” He said, “Be patient upon
the situation you are in and (as a reward for that) you will come
on the Day of Resurrection free from sins and reckoning.” The
woman said, “By the One Who has sent you with the Truth, I
shall be patient until I will meet Allah. But I fear that this
vicious one might strip me naked.” The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) then supplicated
for her. And whenever he feared that he would come to her, the
cover of Ka‘bah would appear to her and she would hold on it
and say, “Go away!” and he would go away from her.
As for Prophet ‘Eesa’s healing the blind and making them see,
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) restored an eye of Qatadah Ibn Nu‘man to its socket after
it was gorged out and it fell on his cheek.

www.sunniconnect.com l 456

One of Qatadah’s grandsons, Asim Ibn Umar Ibn Qatadah
entered upon Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez and said, in a poetic
passage the meaning of which goes thus:
I am the son of the one whose eye fell on his cheek;
And the eye was restored perfectly by the hand of the selected
Prophet.
The eye then returned as it used to be;
How excellent the eye is and how excellent the cheek is!

Story of the blind man who Allah restored his
vision through supplication of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
Uthman Ibn Hunaif narrated that a blind man came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and said, “O Messenger of Allah, invoke
Allah for me to heal me of my blindness.” The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked him to
make ablution and perform two Raka‘ahs and to make the
following supplication: ‘O Allah, I beseech You in the name of
Your Prophet Muhammad, the Prophet of mercy. I am seeking
intercession with You through him to grant this request of
mine.’ The man did as he had been instructed and he was
healed.

Another story
Habeeb Ibn Fuwaik narrated that his father went to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) with his blind eyes. The Prophet asked him, “What

www.sunniconnect.com l 457

happened to you?” He said, “I was tending my camels when I
slipped on a snake egg and my eyes were injured.” Thereupon,
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) spit into his eyes and he started seeing again. His son,
Habeeb added: “And I saw my father inserting thread into the
needle even at age eighty.”
It is also authentically reported that Ali was suffering from eye
trouble. So, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) spat in his eyes and his eyes were cured immediately as if
he had never any eye trouble. He also rubbed the leg of
Abdullah Ibn Ateek, whose leg was broken on the night he
assassinated Abu Rafi‘ and he was cured as he had never had
any ailment whatsoever.
Al-Baihaqi reported that he also rubbed Muhammad Ibn
Hatib’s burned hand and it was immediately cured. He rubbed
Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa’s wounded leg and he was cured; and he
invoked Allah to cure Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas and he was healed.
Al-Baihaqi also reported that the Prophet’s uncle, Abu Talib
was ill and asked his nephew to invoke his Lord for him. The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) did and
his uncle was cured from that ailment.
As for the story of Food Table about which Allah says:
(Remember) when Al-Hawariyyoon (the disciples) said: “O
‘Eesa (Jesus), son of Maryam (Mary)! Can your Lord send
down to us a table spread (with food) from heaven?” ‘Eesa
(Jesus) said: “Fear Allah, if you are indeed believers.” They
said: “We wish to eat thereof and to satisfy our hearts (to be
stronger in Faith), and to know that you have indeed told us the
truth and that we ourselves be its witnesses.” ‘Eesa (Jesus), son
of Maryam (Mary), said: “O Allah, our Lord! Send us from the

www.sunniconnect.com l 458

heaven a table spread (with food) that there may be for us - for
the first and the last of us - a festival and a sign from You; and
provide us sustenance, for You are the Best of sustainers.”
Allah said: “I am going to send it down unto you, but if any of
you after that disbelieves, then I will punish him with a torment
such as I have not inflicted on anyone among (all) Al-’Alameen
(mankind and Jinns).” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:112-115)
The point here is that whether the table of food was actually
sent down or not, the Prophet’s tables of food had always been
supplied from the heaven. His Companions used to hear the
food glorifying Allah while it was being eaten in front of him.
On many occasions, he made little food enough for tens,
hundreds and thousands of people. Peace and blessings of Allah
be always with him.
As for ‘Eesa’s statement to the Children of Isra’eel, “And I
inform you of what you eat, and what you store in your houses.”
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:49) this is an easy thing to do for the
Prophets, even the pious servants of Allah.
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) did inform of termites’ eating of the unwarranted
document that Quraish had hung on the roof of the Ka‘bah on
boycotting the Banu Hashim and Banu Al-Muttalib (the
Prophet’s clans) to force them to surrender him. As a result of
the boycott, the Prophet’s entire clan (with the exception of
those who supported the Quraish such as Abu Lahab) were
exiled in the valley of Abu Talib (where no one transacted with
them). Allah then sent termites that ate up the document with
the exception of the part thereof on which Allah’s Name was
written and Allah inspired this to His Prophet. The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) informed
his uncle Abu Talib of this while they were still in the valley.

www.sunniconnect.com l 459

Abu Talib then went to the Quraish and informed them of what
his nephew had told him. They checked the document and
found it as the Prophet had informed.
On the day of the Battle of Badr when Abbas (his uncle, who
was then a polytheist and was taken captive) was asked to
ransom himself with money and he claimed that he had no
money, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said to him, “Where is the money that you and
Umm Fadl (your wife) buried under the door and you told her
that if you were killed the money should be for the kids?”
Abbas replied, “By Allah, this is something known only to
Allah beside me and Umm Fadl!”
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also
informed his Companions of the death of the Negus who died
in Abyssinia (though nobody came to inform him). He then
performed funeral prayer on him.
He was on his pulpit giving a sermon when he predicted the
martyrdom of the commanders who were on the warfront in the
Battle of Mu’tah and it happened as he predicted and in the
succession he specified.
Ibn Hamid has mentioned, as equivalent to Prophet ‘Eesa’s
travels on the Earth, Prophet Muhammad’s struggles in the way
of Allah; and as equivalent to Prophet ‘Eesa’s ascetic life,
Prophet Muhammad’s turning away from treasures of this
world when they were offered to him. He said, “I prefer to go
hungry on a day and eat my fill on the other.” He also had wives
who spent a month or two without finding any food to cook.
Their only food would be dates and water. In some cases, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would tie a rock to his belly out of hunger. He and

www.sunniconnect.com l 460

members of his family never enjoyed the luxury of eating wheat
bread for three consecutive nights. And his bed was made of
animal skin stuffed with palm fibers.
The Angel gave the pious Maryam the glad tiding of having a
son in the person of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him). As an
equivalent for that, when Aminah, the Prophet’s mother, was
pregnant of him, she was given glad tiding about him in her
dream and she was told, “You are carrying the leader of this
nation. So, name him ‘Muhammad’.”
---End of the book –
www.sunniconnect.com

www.sunniconnect.com l 461

1

The Caliphate of Banu Ummayah
Taken from

Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah

By: Ibn Katheer
Translation & Researched By: Darussalam Research Center
Copyright: Darussalam Publishers & Distributers

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying and recording or by any information storage
and retrieval system, without the written permission of the
publisher.

2

Contents
Preface To The Revision.................................................... 12
Publisher’s Preface............................................................. 18
The Rule of Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan (May Allah be
pleased with him) ............................................................... 20
The Merits of Mu‘awiyah bin Abi Sufyan (May Allah be
pleased with him) ............................................................... 21
The Emergence of a Sect of al-Khawarij (Dissenters) ....... 22
Upon Entering the Forty-Second Year............................... 24
Upon Entering the Forty-Third Year ................................. 25
Upon Entering the Forty-Fourth Year................................ 29
Upon Entering the Forty-Sixth Year .................................. 34
Upon Entering the Forty-Seventh Year ............................. 35
Upon Entering the Forty-Eighth Year................................ 36
Upon Entering the Forty-Ninth Year ................................. 36
Al-Hasan bin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib ........................................ 37
The Fiftieth Year of the Hijrah .......................................... 44
Upon Entering the Fifty-First Year .................................... 50
3

Upon Entering the Fifty-Second Year ............................... 55
Remembering the Prominent People who Died in this Year
........................................................................................... 55
Upon Entering the Fifty-Third Year .................................. 58
Upon Entering the Fifty-Fourth Year ................................ 61
Remembering the People who Died in this Year ............... 62
Upon Entering the Fifty-Fifth Year ................................... 67
Remembering the Prominent People Who Died in this Year
........................................................................................... 67
Upon Entering the Fifty-Sixth Year ................................... 73
Upon Entering the Fifty-Seventh Year .............................. 75
Upon Entering the Fifty-Eighth Year................................. 75
A Strange Story .................................................................. 76
Remembering The Prominent People who Died................ 79
Upon Entering the Fifty-Ninth Year .................................. 88
The Story of Yazeed bin Rabee‘ah bin Mufarrigh al-Himyari
and the Two Sons of Ziyad, ‘Ubaidullah and ‘Abbad ....... 88
Amongst the Prominent People who Died in this Year ..... 90
The Sixtieth Year of the Prophetic Hijrah ....................... 101
The Biography of Mu‘awiyah (May Allah be pleased with
him), Events from the Days of His Rule and References to
His Virtuous Deeds and Manners .................................... 102
The Women He Married Who Bore His Sons and Daughters
......................................................................................... 113
The Leadership of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah and the Events and
Trials that Took Place During His Rule........................... 116
The Story of al-Husain bin ‘Ali, the Reason for His Departure
from Makkah to al-‘Iraq in Pursuit of Power and the Cause
of His Death (May Allah be pleased with him) ............... 119
4

A Description of al-Husain’s Departure and an Account of
What Later Happened to Him .......................................... 129
Upon Entering the Sixty-First Year ................................. 137
A Description of His Murder ........................................... 137
Chapter ............................................................................. 151
A Chapter Mentioning Some of His Virtues .................... 154
Some Poetry Eulogising Al-Husain ................................. 157
Amongst the Prominent People who Died in this Year ... 160
Upon Entering the Sixty-Second Year ............................. 162
Upon Entering the Sixty-Third Year................................ 167
Upon Entering the Sixty Fourth Year .............................. 173
The Biography of Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah ....................... 176
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah’s Offspring................................. 184
The Leadership of Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah
......................................................................................... 184
The Leadership of ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair (May Allah be
pleased with him) According to Ibn Hazm and a Sect who
Heralded Him as the Ameer ulMu’mineen ...................... 185
The Bai‘ah (Pledge of Allegiance) of Marwan bin al-Hakam
......................................................................................... 187
Marj Rahit and the Murder of ad-Dahhak bin Qais al-Fihri
(May Allah be pleased with him) .................................... 192
The Destruction and Reconstruction of the Ka‘bah during the
Days of Ibn azZubair ....................................................... 198
Upon Entering the Sixty-Fifth Year ................................. 199
The Event of ‘Ain ul-Wardah .......................................... 201
The Biography of Marwan bin al-Hakam, the Patriarch of the
Bani Umayyah (Umayyad) Caliphate that Ruled Thereafter
......................................................................................... 207
5

The Caliphate of ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan ................... 209
Upon Entering the Sixty-Sixth Year ................................ 214
Chapter ............................................................................. 224
The Death of Shamir bin Dhul-Jawshan, the Commander of
the Army Detachment Responsible for Killing al-Husain227
The Death of Khawli bin Yazeed al-Asbahi Who Struck alHusain’s Head with His Sword........................................ 229
The Death of ‘Umar bin Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas, the
Commander of the Army that Killed al-Husain............... 229
Chapter ............................................................................. 232
Chapter ............................................................................. 236
Upon Entering the Sixty-Seventh Year............................ 240
The Biography of Ibn Ziyad ............................................ 243
The Murder of Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid ath-Thaqafi alKadhdhab (the Liar) at the Hands of Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair
and the People of al-Basrah ............................................. 246
The Biography of al-Mukhtar bin Abu ‘Ubaid, the Liar.. 248
Chapter ............................................................................. 251
Amongst the Prominent People Who Died in this Year .. 252
Upon Entering the Sixty-Eighth Year .............................. 252
Chapter ............................................................................. 261
A Description of Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
them) ................................................................................ 263
Upon Entering the Sixty-Ninth Year ............................... 264
The Biography of ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed al-Ashdaq ................ 271
Upon Entering the Seventieth Year of the Hijrah ............ 274
Upon Entering the Seventy-First Year ............................. 275
The Biography of Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair (May Allah have
mercy upon him) .............................................................. 278
6

Upon Entering the Seventy-Second Year ........................ 282
A Brief Outline of Ibn Khazim’s Life .............................. 285
Upon Entering the Seventy-Third Year ........................... 287
The Biography of Ameerul-Mu’mineen, ‘Abdullah bin azZubair (May Allah be pleased with him) ......................... 293
Prominent People Killed Alongside Ibn az-Zubair in Makkah
during the Seventy-Third Year ........................................ 298
Others Not Yet Mentioned Who Also Died in this Year . 300
Upon Entering the Seventy-Fourth Year ......................... 301
Remembering Some of the Prominent People who Died in
this Year ........................................................................... 302
‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, al-Qurashi al-‘Adawi,
Abu ‘AbdurRahman, the Makkan and later the Madinan 303
Upon Entering the Seventy-Fifth Year ............................ 306
Upon Entering the Seventy-Sixth Year............................ 314
Upon Entering the Seventy-Seventh Year ....................... 321
The Murder of Shabeeb by Ibn al-Kalbi during this Year 326
Upon Entering the Seventy-Eighth Year ......................... 329
Upon Entering the Seventy-Ninth Year ........................... 330
Upon Entering the Eightieth Year of the Hijrah .............. 334
Upon Entering the Eighty-First Year ............................... 336
The Trial of Ibn al-Ash‘ath .............................................. 336
Upon Entering the Eighty-Second Year of the Hijrah ..... 340
Upon Entering the Eighty-Third Year ............................. 347
The Construction of Wasit ............................................... 348
Upon Entering the Eighty-Fourth Year............................ 350
Upon Entering the Eighty-Fifth Year............................... 352
‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan ............................................. 355
7

The Pledge of ‘Abdul-Malik to His Son, al-Waleed, and then
to His Brother, Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik After Him... 357
Upon Entering the Eighty-Sixth Year .............................. 359
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, the Father of the Khulafa’alUmawiyyeen (Umayyad Caliphate)................................. 360
The Khilafah of al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik, the Founder of
the Damascus Mosque ..................................................... 366
Upon Entering the Eighty-Seventh Year ......................... 367
Upon Entering the Eighty-Eighth Year............................ 371
Upon Entering the Eighty-Ninth Year ............................. 374
Upon Entering the Ninetieth Year of the Hijrah .............. 376
Upon Entering the Ninety-First Year ............................... 382
Upon Entering the Ninety-Second Year .......................... 383
Upon Entering the Ninety-Third Year ............................. 385
The Conquest of Samarqand ............................................ 386
Upon Entering the Ninety-Fourth Year ........................... 392
The Death of Sa‘eed bin Jubair (May Allah have mercy upon
him) .................................................................................. 394
Remembering The Prominent People Who Died in this Year
......................................................................................... 395
Upon Entering the Ninety-Fifth Year .............................. 400
The Biography of al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf ath-Thaqafi and an
Account of his Death ....................................................... 400
Chapter ............................................................................. 404
Demeaning and Audacious Statements Attributed to al-Hajjaj
......................................................................................... 408
Upon Entering the Ninety-Sixth Year.............................. 414

8

The Superiority of the Grand Mosque of Damascus
According to the Accounts and Sayings of the Best of Men
......................................................................................... 431
References Made in Connection with the Head of Yahya bin
Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) ....................................... 434
“The Door of the Clock” .................................................. 436
The Inauguration of the Umayyad Mosque ..................... 437
Chapter ............................................................................. 439
The Biography of al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik, the Founder
of the Mosque of Damascus ............................................ 440
The Caliphate of Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik ................. 443
The Motive Behind Qutaibah bin Muslim’s Murder ....... 445
Upon Entering the Ninety-Seventh Year ......................... 446
Upon Entering the Ninety-Eighth Year ........................... 449
Upon Entering the Ninety-Ninth Year ............................. 452
The Caliphate of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez .................... 458
The 100th Year of the Prophetic Hijrah ........................... 462
Upon Entering the 101st Year.......................................... 468
The Biography of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, the Famous
Umayyad .......................................................................... 469
Chapter ............................................................................. 471
Chapter ............................................................................. 477
The Cause of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s Death (May Allah
be pleased with him) ........................................................ 479
The Caliphate of Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik .................... 482
Upon Entering the 102nd Year of the Hijrah ................... 483
Maslamah’s Governorship over the Provinces of al-‘Iraq and
Khurasan .......................................................................... 487
The Battle between the Turks and Muslims..................... 487
9

Upon Entering the 103rd Year of the Hijrah.................... 489
Upon Entering the 104th Year ......................................... 490
Upon Entering the 105th Year ......................................... 491
The Caliphate of Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan 493
Upon Entering the 106th Year of the Hijrah .................... 494
Upon Entering the 107th Year ......................................... 495
Upon Entering the 108th Year ......................................... 499
Upon Entering the 109th Year ......................................... 499
Upon Entering the 110th Year of the Prophetic Hijrah.... 499
Upon Entering the 111th Year ......................................... 507
Upon Entering the 112th Year ......................................... 508
Upon Entering the 113th Year ......................................... 509
Upon Entering the 114th Year ......................................... 511
Upon Entering the 115th Year ......................................... 512
Upon Entering the 116th Year ......................................... 512
Upon Entering the 117th Year ......................................... 513
Upon Entering the 118th Year ......................................... 515
Upon Entering the 119th Year ......................................... 516
The Hundred and Twentieth year of the Hijrah ............... 521
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-First Year ............ 524
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Second Year ....... 526
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty Fourth Year ......... 536
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty Fifth Year ............ 542
The Caliphate of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed bin Abdul Malik, the
Depraved (May he be defaced and distanced from Allah)
......................................................................................... 546
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Sixth Year ........... 551
10

An Account of his Assassination and the downfall of his
Dominion ......................................................................... 552
A Mention of how Yazeed bin Al-Waleed – Also known as
‘The Deficient’ – Killed Al-Waleed bin Yazeed ............. 555
The Caliphate of Yazid Bin al-Walid Bin Abdul Malik Bin
Marwan ............................................................................ 560
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Seventh Year ...... 569
The Entry of Marwan Al-Himar into Damascus, His taking
over the Caliphate And the Ouster of Ibraheem bin AlWaleed ............................................................................. 572
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Eighth Year......... 577
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Ninth Year .......... 583
The Emergence Abu Muslim Al-Khurasani in Khurasan 584
The Killing of Al-Karmani .............................................. 590
The Killing of Shaiban bin Salamah Al-Haroori ............. 594
An Account of Abu Hamzah Al-Khariji’s Entry and
Occupation of Madinah For a period of three months Until
his departure..................................................................... 594
Then Began the Hundred and Thirty-First Year .............. 597
An Account of how Ibraheem bin Muhammad, the Imam was
killed ................................................................................ 600
An Account of How Marwan Al-Himar was killed ......... 605
A Brief Account of the Life of Marwan Al-Himar .......... 608

11

Preface To The Revision
In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most
Merciful
All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who revived knowledge of
His religion and caused it to blossom forth after it had all but
disappeared, and Who demolished the false conjectures of the
apostates. I praise Him and I seek refuge with Him from the
sins which weigh upon the backs of mankind. I worship Him
and seek His help and guidance in removing hindrances and
difficulties in the practice of my religion. I bear witness that
none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, Alone,
without partners and I bear witness that Muhammad – who,
by Allah’s leave, brought about the dawn of faith to the
darkness and misguidance which existed in the hearts of
mankind – is the slave and Messenger of Allah. May the
Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon him in perpetuity.
O Allah! We seek Your favor and through You we seek to
ward off affliction. We ask You to protect us and to grant us
mercy. Our Lord! Make not our hearts deviate after You have
already guided us. Make it easy for us to perform our deeds
in the way that You have taught us. Make us grateful for what
You have given us and make plain a path for us which leads
to You. Open up the doors between us and You by which we
may arrive before You. To You belong the keys to the heavens
and the Earth and You are Most Able to do all things.
Among the blessings which Allah has bestowed upon us, the
community of Muslims, is that He has made it easy for us to
follow the path of guidance and He has opened the doors of
knowledge by making available to us these new publications,
which present to us the writings of the early scholars and
reveal to us what they said regarding legal verdicts, history,
events, information and lessons. These scholars opened a
clear beacon of light for all those Muslims seeking guidance,
12

and they set up for us a signpost in which there is neither
deviation nor crookedness. Whoever follows it will arrive
safely at his desired destination and whoever diverts from it
will be lost forever. They have written these books and
treatises and made clear to us therein events, information and
virtues. Among such books is this unique work, Al-Bidayah
Wan-Nihayah, by the Imam, the Hafiz, the master scholar of
ahadeeth, ‘Imaduddeen Isma‘eel Ibn Katheer Al-Qurashi
(May Allah be pleased with him). This book was greeted with
approval by the vast majority of Muslims. No Islamic library
would be complete without it. In it, the author has recorded
what Allah, Most High, has made easy for him about the
history of mankind, from the beginning of creation, starting
with the creation of the Throne and the Kursi (chair), the
heavens and the Earth and all that they contain and all that lies
between them, such as the angels, the jinn and the devils. He
also described how Adam was created, and told the stories of
the prophets up to the days of the Children of Isra’eel and the
Days of Ignorance (Jahiliyyah), until the advent of Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
which heralded the end of Prophethood. He then recorded his
Seerah. Then he recorded the events which took place up to
his own time. He also spoke of the trials and battles, the signs
of the approach of the Hour, then the sending forth of mankind
and the terrors of the Resurrection, which he described in
detail. He then described the Hellfire, with all its horrors, and
Paradise and all the good things contained therein. He called
this particular volume of his book: An-Nihayah Fil-Fitan
Wal-Malahim (The Ending in Trials and Battles). As for the
book which is in our hands today, it is Al-Bidayah.
By Allah’s Grace, I came to know Brother Abdul Malik
Mujahid, the general manager of Darussalam Publishing in
Riyadh. He visited me in my humble office in Damascus and
suggested to me the idea of creating a summarised version of
this wonderful book. I prayed for Allah’s Guidance in the
matter and sought help from Him in completing the project.
13

Allah enabled me to make the acquaintance of a number of
people of knowledge and experience in this field and a plan
of action for the work was written. It consisted of ten principal
points and we then started the task, seeking help from the Lord
of the heavens and the Earth. All of us exerted our utmost
efforts in this task, making repeated revisions and corrections,
until we reached the point where, by Allah’s Permission, we
completed it and it was published in the form which is in your
hands today.

The Plan of Action for This Book:
1. Summarization of the text. This was achieved by
concentrating on the most important events narrated in the
book. In doing so, we took care not to leave out any
important details which would cause loss of meaning or
import.
2. We relied on a number of printed and handwritten copies
of the book and in cases where any contradiction or
omission was found, we succeeded in establishing the
most accurate and authentic text.
3. We left out the ahadeeth which proved to be baseless or
weak and confined ourselves to the ahadeeth which are
authentic or hasanand those which are acceptable due to
the existence of other supporting narrations. On rare
occasions, when it was found that there were no other
ahadeeth in the chapter, we included some weak ahadeeth
whose weakness was not of an extreme nature.
4. We performed takhreej of the ahadeeth with ascription of
the number of the section and the page, the number of the
ahadeeth and in many cases, the precise location of the
hadeeth in the original source, then the ruling on its
authenticity, if it was not from the Saheehain, because the
ahadeeth therein do not require any ruling on their
14

authenticity and they have been widely accepted by the
Muslim Ummah. As for the ahadeeth in this book, we
have relied on the opinions of the Imams and scholars of
Hadith – including the earlier scholars, the later scholars
and those of the present day. On some occasions, we have
recorded the weak ahadeeth, while making it plain that
they are not authentic. We have not omitted them because
the author has included them in order to warn the people
against them due to their widespread popularity amongst
the Muslims in general. In such cases, we desired not to
oppose the author in this effort and so we left them, at the
same time making the scholars’ ruling on them clear, so
as to warn the people against them.
5. We summarised the asaneedpresent in the book, in most
cases mentioning only the Companion who narrated the
Hadith, or the person who reported it from him.
6. We omitted many of the Isra’eeliyyatfound in this book
which the author referred to in the preface, where he said:
“We do not record the Isra’eeliyyat except those which the
Lawgiver has permitted, i. e. , those which do not
contradict the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
These are stories which are neither believed nor belied and
they have been recorded because they provide details of
unclarified narratives that we have, or they provide names
for people and places that have only been mentioned in
passing in our Revelation, due to there being no benefit in
specifying them for us. Thus we have reported them in
order to provide extra detail and not with the intention of
citing them as evidence or placing any reliance on them.
Only the Book of Allah and the authentic Sunnah of His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
may be relied and depended upon. It is from Allah that we
seek help and it is He in Whom we place our trust; there
15

is no help and no power except in Allah, the Almighty, the
All-Powerful, Most Wise and Most High.
7. In some instances, we have referred back to the original
manuscript in order to verify the wording of a Hadith from
its source. In some cases, the author has combined two
narrations of the same Hadith together and so where this
has occurred, we have noted it and separated the two
narrations, placing our own words between brackets, i. e.
, (and in another narration…) and we have also identified
the source of the addition in the footnotes.
8. We have written the Qur’anic Verses in the Uthmani
script, in conformity with the copy of the Qur’an
published by Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah Printing
Complex.
9. We vowelized the words of many of the ahadeeth in the
book and, in addition, the poetic verses, wherever
possible.
10. We mentioned the meters of the poetic verses between
parentheses.
11. We explained the meanings of some difficult or obscure
words, relying on dictionaries, books containing
ghareebahadeeth and narrations and other sources.
12. We furnished a brief biography of the author, Hafiz Ibn
Katheer, though in reality, he requires no introduction and
no description.
Finally, I ask Allah, Most High, to accept this humble work
from us and to acknowledge it as having been done purely and
sincerely with the aim of pleasing Him and to grant us and our
brothers, who assisted us in the production of this book,
pardon and forgiveness in religious and secular matters. In
addition, we ask Him that He include this work in the weight
16

of our good deeds on the Day of Resurrection – a Day on
which neither wealth nor sons will benefit anyone – except
for those whom Allah has blessed with pure hearts.
And our final declaration is that all praise and thanks are due
to Allah, and we invoke blessings and peace upon Prophet
Muhammad and upon all his righteous family and
Companions until the Day of Reckoning.
Yoosuf Al-Hajj Ahmad,
The humble slave of Allah. Damascus, Ash-Sham (Syria).
2nd of Dhul-Hijjah, 1428 A. H.

17

Publisher’s Preface
Verily, all praise and thanks are due to Allah (SWT). We seek
His help and we ask forgiveness from Him. We seek refuge
with Allah from the wickedness in ourselves. Whomsoever
Allah guides, there is none who can misguide him and
whomsoever He sends astray, there is none who can guide
him. I bear witness that none is worthy of worship except
Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger.
He sent him with guidance and the true Religion and with the
light (of truth), the admonition and wisdom, at a time when
no Messengers were sent for a long period, when there was
little religious knowledge and the people had gone astray,
when the Hour was drawing nearer. Whoever obeys Allah and
His Messenger has followed the right course, while whoever
disobeys Allah and His Messenger erred from it and gone far
astray.
The book Al-Bidayah (The Beginning) by the Hafiz, the
Imam, the scholarly critic, Ibn Katheer is an incomparable
work regarding the study of the events and their chronological
order, the knowledge of which he strove hard to acquire. He
began by describing the start of creation – from the creation
of the Throne and the Kursi and the heavens and the Earth and
all that is in them and all that lies between them, such as the
angels, the jinn and the devils and he described the manner of
Adam’s creation. He recounted the stories of the Prophets and
the events that took place therein, up to the times of the
Children of Isra’eel and the Days of Ignorance, which ended
with the advent of the final Prophet, Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Then he gave a
detailed description of his life and what happened after that,
up to the time in which he lived. He then wrote a separate
volume called An-Nihayah Fil- Fitan Wal-Malahim (The
Ending With Trials and Great Battles).

18

Furthermore, Allah inspired us to undertake the noble task of
making this book easily accessible to both the students and
the scholars and then to translate it into several languages, by
Allah’s Permission.
I suggested to my brother, Yoosuf Al-Hajj, the necessity of
summarizing this book in a suitable manner, through the
omission of unbeneficial repetition, weak ahadeeth, lengthy
poems, etc. I am thankful to Brother Yoosuf for assembling a
team that consisted of Abdul Malik Wadih, Abu Muslim AlJaza’iri, Muwaffeq Khaleel Hammad, and himself.
Darussalam funded the entire project, paying each team
member for his contribution and work. After they completed
their portion of the project, the work then went through
numerous people in the Research Division of Darussalam,
who meticulously went through the work, adding and
subtracting materials. After this, the project went through
another round of editing of the Arabic material before it was
sent to the translation department. The translation was then
checked for accuracy and then sent for editing, resulting in the
final project that you see before you. All praise and thanks be
to Allah for allowing us to produce such a classical work for
the first time in the English language.
O Allah! We ask that You bless us with sincerity and success
and that You spread goodness through our hands.
Abdul Malik Mujahid
Jumadal-Oola 1431 A. H.

19

The Rule of Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan
(May Allah be pleased with him)
The first monarchy began with the rule of Mu‘awiyah, making
him the first king in Islam and the best of them all.
It is reported that Mu‘adh bin Jabal and Abu ‘Ubaidah said
that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “This affair began as a mercy and prophecy,
then it will be a mercy and Khilafah (caliphate), then as a
matter of domination and tribulation, then as an insolent,
fatalistic and corruptive matter in the land by which silk,
fornication, adultery, and alcohol are regarded as acceptable
and lawful. Eventually, these corruptive things will become a
means of sustenance and victory for them until they meet with
Allah, the Majestic” (its chain of narration is Jayyid, i. e.
“good”).
‘Amr bin Yahya bin Sa‘eed bin al-‘As reported from his
grandfather, Sa‘eed, who said: “The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) once looked at Mu‘awiyah
and said: ‘O Mu‘awiyah, if you get to rule then fear Allah and
be just to the people. ’Mu‘awiyah said: ‘Due to that statement
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), I
was convinced that I would one day be held accountable for
undertaking the task (of the caliphate). ’”
Abu Darda’ is reported to have said that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“While I was sleeping, I dreamt that the Book was taken away
from beneath my pillow. I thought that I had lost my mind and
so I followed it, whereupon I saw that it was being taken to
ash-Sham (the Levant). Indeed, in times of trial and
tribulation, faith will remain in ash-Sham. ”

20

The Merits of Mu‘awiyah bin Abi Sufyan
(May Allah be pleased with him)
His name was Mu‘awiyah bin Abi Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb,
Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman, al-Qurashi al-Umawi. Mu‘awiyah, his
father and his mother, Hind bint ‘Utbah bin Rabee‘ah bin
‘AbdShams, embraced Islam on the day of the Conquest. His
father was amongst the nobles of Quraish in Jahiliyyah (i. e. ,
the preIslamic era of ignorance) as a high-ranking chief
possessing a vast amount of wealth. Upon Abi Sufyan’s
submission to Islam, he said to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him): “O Prophet of Allah! Give
me three things. ” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said: “Yes. ” He said: “I have the best and most
beautiful woman of all the Arabs, my daughter, Umm
Habeebah bint Abi Sufyan. Will I give her to you in
marriage?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “Yes. ” He said: “Make Mu‘awiyah your
scribe. ” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “Yes. ” He said: “And appoint me as a commander
so that I can fight the Kuffar (disbelievers) as I used to fight
the Muslims. ” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “Yes. ” This implies that Mu‘awiyah would
later record down the revelations received by the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) along
with the other scribes of revelation (may Allah be pleased
with them).
When ash-Sham (the Levant) was conquered, ‘Umar deputed
Mu‘awiyah to Dimashq (Damascus) after his brother, Yazeed
bin Abi Sufyan, and he continued to have authority over it
under ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, who further extended his authority
to include another country. It was Mu‘awiyah who built the
QubbatulKhadra’ (The Green Dome) in Dimashq (Damascus)
where he lived for forty years.

21

Mu‘awiyah appointed Fadalah bin ‘Ubaid as the judge for
ash-Sham (the Levant), followed by Abu Idrees al-Khawlani,
and as the chief of law enforcement, he appointed Qais bin
Hamzah. His scribe and protector was Sarjoon bin Mansoor
ar-Roomi, about whom it is said: “He was the first to employ
an entourage, the first to inscribe en masse (i. e. , produce)
and bind books, and he was the first statesman of his kind
(may Allah be pleased with him). ”

The Emergence of a Sect of al-Khawarij
(Dissenters)
When Mu‘awiyah entered al-Koofah and al-Hasan and his
family left and headed to the Hijaz, the Khawarij (a sect of
dissenters claimed to number around five hundred
individuals) said: “There is no doubt that Mu‘awiyah is
coming”, upon which they proceeded to al-Koofah under the
commandership of Farwah bin Nawfal to wage war against
him. Mu‘awiyah therefore dispatched a cavalry detachment
comprised of the people of ash-Sham against them, and due
to this, the Khawarij army subsequently launched a relentless
attack against its people that forced them out of their land. As
a result, Mu‘awiyah said to the people of al-Koofah: “I will
not make peace with you until you desist from your calamity.
” So they went to the Khawarij who said to them: “Woe unto
you for what you seek to attain. Is Mu‘awiyah not your enemy
and our enemy?” He has prompted us to fight against him. If
we beat him, then we have relieved you of him and if he beats
us, then you have been relieved of us. ” At this, they said:
“No, by Allah! Not until we fight against you ourselves! ”At
that point, the Khawarij said: “May Allah have mercy on our
brothers from the people of an-Nahr, for they knew better than
you do, O people of alKoofah. ” It follows that a battle broke
out between the two sides, which resulted in the people of
alKoofah defeating the Khawarij and expelling them from the
land.
22

It was in this year that Humran bin Aban ambushed al-Basrah,
which he managed to besiege and dominate, forcing
Mu‘awiyah to dispatch an army to kill him and his faction.
Following this, Abu Bakr ath-Thaqfi went to Mu‘awiyah to
request his pardon on their behalf, which Mu’awiyah granted
them and released them. He subsequently appointed Busr bin
Abi Artat as governor of al-Basrah. Towards the end of this
year, however, Mu‘awiyahput ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amir in charge
of al-Basrah, even though he had intended to appoint ‘Utbah
bin Abi Sufyan. The reason for this was that Ibn ‘Amir told
him: “I possess great wealth and trusts, which, if you do not
put me in charge of them, will perish. ” Thus, he fulfilled his
request in that matter and entrusted him with the position.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
Rifa‘ah bin Rafi‘ bin Malik bin al-‘Ajlan who was present at
al-‘Aqabah, the battle of Badr and the events following it.
Rukanah bin ‘Abd [Yazeed] bin Hashim bin Muttalib alQurashi who was the one whom the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had wrestled with and
thrown to the ground, despite Rukanah being considered one
of the strongest men among the Quraish. This wrestling of
Rukanah to the ground, in fact, constitutes one of the miracles
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
He embraced Islam in the year of the Conquest.
Safwan bin Umayyah, Abu Wahb al-Qurashi, who fled from
the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on
the day of the Conquest. He later returned and submitted to
Islam, and later bettered himself to the point of becoming a
noble amongst the Muslims, just as he had been during
Jahiliyyah (Ignorance; the pre-Islamic era).

23

‘Uthman bin Talhah bin Abi Talhah who entered Islam at the
beginning of the eighth year just prior to the Conquest. He
was the one from whom the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) had taken the key to the Ka‘bah (the most
sacred site in Islam situated in Makkah) in the year of the
Conquest. However, he returned them to him reciting the
words of Allah, the Sublime (which mean):
“Verily, Allah commands that you should render back the
trusts to those to whom they are due. ” [anNisa’, 4:58]
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
therefore said to him: “Take it, O ‘Uthman, permanently and
rightfully, for it will not be taken out of your possession
except by an oppressor. ”
‘Amr bin al-Aswad al-‘Ansi who was a humble and devout
worshipper.
‘Atikah bint Zaid bin ‘Amr bin Nufail bin ‘Abdul-‘Uzza, who
was the sister of Sa‘eed bin Zaid, one of the ten promised
Paradise. She embraced Islam, performed the migration and
was one of the finest women and worshippers of her time.

Upon Entering the Forty-Second Year
The Muslim invasions of al-Lan (a vast region within historic
Armenia) and ar-Room (generally the Balkans and Anatolia)
took place in this year. The Muslim forces defeated many of
the leading opposition commanders and successfully
annihilated their army, because of which they were able to
gain and avail of war booty.
In this year, the Khawarij, who had been pardoned by ‘Ali on
the day of an-Nahrawan after having released their wounded
and establishing an agreement with their forces, were stirred
once again upon receiving news of ‘Ali’s death. They invoked
24

Allah’s mercy on his murderer, Ibn Muljam began to praise
Allah for the murder of ‘Ali. It was following this incident
that they resolved to dissent from the people on the grounds
that they were allegedly “enjoining the truth and forbidding
evil. ”
Also in the forty-second year of the Hijrah, Ziyad bin Abeehi
advanced against Mu‘awiyah having been denied access to
him for close to one year by way of a fortress that came to be
known as the “Fortress of Ziyad. ”

Upon Entering the Forty-Third Year
This was the year in which Busr bin Abi Artat invaded the
land of ar-Room (the Balkans and Anatolia), which he was
able to penetrate as far as the city of Qustanteeniyyah
(Constantinople).
The Khawarij and the soldiers of al-Koofah fought an
immense battle against each other in this year. Some three
hundred Khawarij fighters assembled under the
commandership of al-Mustawrid bin ‘Ullafah, and so, alMugheerah bin Shu‘bah accordingly mobilised an army of
nearly three thousand soldiers under the command of Ma‘qil
bin Qais to advance against them. Upon encountering the
opposing force, Ma‘qil faced Abur-Rawwagh who stood at
the forefront of three hundred Khawarij fighters in a place
called alMadhar. There, they battled until the Khawarij army
had been routed, however, they then turned back to launch a
second attack and this time defeated Ma‘qil bin Qais’ army
without suffering any losses themselves. At that point,
Ma‘qil’s army retreated to their stations and awaited the
arrival of their Ameer (Commander), Ma‘qil bin Qais, who
came and led his comrades in prayer. He then proceeded with
his soldiers to engage in a fierce battle against the Khawarij
that lasted all night, after which both sides eventually pulled
back. In the meantime, Ma‘qil bin Qais assembled the right
25

and left wings of his army and aligned their rows until the
time of sunrise, at which point the Khawarij launched their
attack and the two sides battled for over an hour. Ma‘qal bin
Qays then launched a single decisive attack against them that
they managed to withstand, until the Khawarij were
eventually forced to hastily withdraw. In fact, they fled from
the battlefield before their eyes until they crossed the Dijlah
(River Tigris) into the land of Bahuraseer (one of the capitals
of Persia).

‘Amr bin al-‘As was amongst those who died
in this year:
Abu ‘Abdullah, also known as Abu Muhammad, who had
been sent to an-Najashi (by the Makkans) to intercept and
bring back the Muslims who had migrated to his country. Due
to Abu ‘Abdullah’s honest and sincere character, however, he
did not force the Muslims to return but instead he, along with
Khalid bin al-Waleed and ‘Uthman bin Talhah al-‘Abdari,
entered the fold of Islam six months before the conquest of
Makkah. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) had instated him to a position of authority
over ‘Uman (Oman), which he occupied throughout the
lifetime of the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and during the rule of as-Siddeeq (the Verifier of
the Truth, i. e. Abu Bakr).
At-Tirmidhi states that ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir said: “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: ‘The people submitted to Islam whilst ‘Amr bin alAs believed. ’
Another Hadeeth (Prophetic narration) states: “Ibn al-As is
worth two believers. ” Regarding the virtues of ‘Amr bin alAs, it states: “The blessings of the Ahl al-Bait (the family of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) are
‘Abdullah, the father of ‘Abdullah and the mother of
26

‘Abdullah” (narrated in the section dealing with the virtues of
‘Amr bin al-‘As).
He was notoriously shrewd among the ‘Arabs, possessing
bravery and good judgement as just some of his many good
qualities. ‘Amr bin al-As is reported to have said: “I
memorised a thousand proverbs from the Messenger of Allah
(SWT) I. ” He also recited the following poetry:
“If a person does not abandon a food that he likes,
And does not drive a tempted heart away from what it
bounds for,
It will achieve an aim that leaves only disgrace,
Just like if similar dishonours were mentioned they would
be found in abundance. ”
Yazeed bin Abi Habeeb narrated that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin
Shimasah said to him: “When ‘Amr bin al-As witnessed death
he would cry. His son, ‘Abdullah, once said to him: ‘Why do
you cry?Are you anxious about death?’ ‘Amr bin al-As
replied: ‘No, by Allah! But about that which comes after
death. ’ So his son said: ‘But you have been on the best path.
’Then he began to recall the friendship of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his
victories in ash-Sham (the Levant). ‘Amr then said: ‘You
have left out that which is better than all of this: the testimony
that there is only One God.
Indeed, I passed through three states. The first one was when
I was a disbeliever and so I found myself to be one of the
staunchest adversaries of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). Had I died at that point in
time, I would have definitely been a dweller of the Hellfire.
Then I pledged allegiance to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and no one became
27

dearer and more respectable to me than him (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). I found that I was so much
in awe of him that I could not find the courage to look him
fully in the face and so I was the most timid person towards
him (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Had I died
in those days, the people would have said: ‘Congratulations
to ‘Amr! He embraced Islam and was on the right path. He
had every reason to hope for Paradise. ’
However, I was then put in a position of authority, amongst
other things, such that I now do not know where I stand. When
I die, do not cry for me and let neither a female mourner nor
fire accompany me. When you bury me, wrap me in my cover
and fill my grave with earth such that my right side has no
more earth than my left side and neither place me in a coffin
nor make me a headstone. Then stand around it for a time
sufficient for a camel to be slaughtered and its meat to be
distributed so that I may be at ease by your closeness. ”
Muhammad bin Maslamah al-Ansari also died in this year. He
entered the fold of Islam at the hands of Mus‘ab bin ‘Umair
before Usaid bin Hudair and Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh. He was present
at Badr and the events following it, with the exception of
Tabook. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) deputed him over al-Madinah according
to one account, while other sources indicate that he was
appointed to a place called Qarqaratul-Kudr. He was amongst
those who disassociated themselves from the wars of the
Camel, Siffeen and so on, and was known for having taken up
a wooden sword. He left behind ten sons and six daughters
and he (May Allah be pleased with him) was described as
being very dark-skinned and bald.

‘Abdullah bin Salam (Abu Yoosuf alIsra’eeli) was also amongst those who died in
that year:
28

He was a religious authority among the Jews and his
submission to Islam came at the time when the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) reached the
famous palm tree in alMadinah. ‘Abdullah said: “When the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) reached al-Madinah, the people were startled by him,
including myself, though when I saw his face, I knew that it
was not the face of a liar. The first thing I heard him say was:
‘O people! If you spread Salam (the greeting of peace)
between the people, give food to others to eat, maintain the
bonds of kinship and pray throughout the night while others
are asleep, you will enter Paradise in peace. ”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) testified to ‘Abdullah as one of those who will
enter Jannah (Paradise) and therefore receive his (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) intercession on the Day of
Judgment.

Upon Entering the Forty-Fourth Year
This was the year of ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Khalid bin alWaleed’s invasion of the land of ar-Room (the Balkans and
Anatolia) with the Muslim army who passed the winter there.
It was also the year in which Busr bin Abi Artat carried out a
naval military expedition.
Mu‘awiyah discharged ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amir from his post in
al-Basrah because he was too soft natured and lenient. Ibn
Jareer said that when ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amir complained to
Ziyad about the corruption of the people, about which Ziyad
said: “Unsheathe the sword on them”, Ibn ‘Amir replied: “I
would hate to reform them at the expense of my own
corruption. ”
Abi ‘Uthman narrated: “When Ziyad was claimed (to belong
to Abu Sufyan), I met Abu Bakr to whom I said: “What is that
29

which you all have done?Verily, I heard Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas
saying that he heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘In Islam, whoever
claims to belong to somebody other than his (real) father, and
he knows that he (whom he claimed) is not his (real) father,
will be forbidden to enter Paradise. ’”
This year also saw the death of Umm Habeebah, UmmulMu’mineen (Mother of the Believers, i. e. , a wife of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and the
daughter of Abi Sufyan. Her real name was Ramlah and she
was the sister of Mu‘awiyah. She entered Islam very early and
migrated with her husband, ‘Abdullah bin Jahsh, to the land
of al-Habashah (Abyssinia). While there, however, her
husband coeverted to Christianity and despite his efforts to
persuade her to do the same, she held on to her Deen Way of
Life, i. e. Islam) (may Allah be pleased with her). His
conversion led to their divorce. Habeebah was the name of her
eldest child who she gave birth to in al-Habashah, while some
maintain that it was in Makkah prior to the Hijrah. Her
husband died there while in that state, and was thereby cursed
and shamed by Allah (SWT).
Afte Ramlah was widowed, the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent ‘Amr bin Umayyah
al-Amri to an-Najashi (Negus, the Emperor of Ethiopia)
proposing to marry her to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). Offering her consent, she
chose Khalid bin Sa‘eed as her legal guardian at the marriage
ceremony. On behalf of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), an-Najashi offered Khalid a bridal dower
of four hundred Deenar. He later made arrangements for her
to travel to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in al-Madinah in the seventh year.
When her father came to visit her during the year of the
Conquest at the time when he was proposing a treaty, she
30

forbade him from sitting on the mattress of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Abu
Sufyan, feeling grieved at her attitude, said to her: “By Allah,
O daughter! Is this mattress not worthy of me or am I not
worthy of it?” She curtly replied:This is the mattress of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), and you are an impure polytheist. I did not want you to
sit on it. ” On hearing this, he said to her: “By Allah, O
daughter! You have succumbed to evil and deviated from
your father. ” This alone serves to define her as one of the
Ummahatul-Mu’mineen (Mothers of the Believers) and a
pious and virtuous woman (may Allah be pleased with her).
‘Awf bin Harith is reported to have said that he heard ‘A’ishah
saying: “Umm Habeebah called me to her side as she was on
her deathbed and said: ‘We have things pertaining to co-wives
between us. ’ ‘A’ishah replied: ‘May Allah forgive both you
and I. There is nothing that you did that I have not already
forgiven you for. ’Umm Habeebah remarked: ‘You have
made me happy, may Allah make you happy too. ’” Upon

Entering the Forty-Fifth Year
In this year, Mu‘awiyah instated al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah alAzdi over al-Basrah; he then dismissed him after four months
and appointed Ziyad, who was resolute, shrewd, dominating
and articulate, in his place.
Ziyad entered al-Basrah at the beginning of Jumadal-Oola
(the fifth month of the Islamic calendah), from which point
onwards he continued to exercise his authority and unsheathe
his sword until the people refrained from openly committing
offenses out of fear of him.
Marwan bin al-Hakam, the governor of al-Madinah, led his
people on the Hajj Pilgrimage in this year.

31

Zaid bin Thabit al-Ansari, one of the scribes of the Revelation
who wrote down the official Mus-haf (the pure Arabic written
copy of the Qur’an) under the orders of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan
in ash-Sham, also died in this year. He was an exceptionally
intelligent man who was highly skilled in the art of inscribing
and reporting witnessed accounts. Remarkably, he learned the
language that the Jews used in their books and scriptures in
just fifteen days. As Abul-Hasan bin al-Bara’ said: “He
learned Persian from the messenger of Kisra (Khosrau; the
designation of the Persian kings in general) in eighteen days
and he learned Ethiopian, Latin and Coptic from the servants
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him). ”
He was fifteen years of age when he participated in alKhandaq (Battle of the Trench). A Hadeeth also narrates:
“The most knowledgeable person amongst them with regars
to the Fara’id (religious injunctions) is Zaid bin Thabit. ”
He passed away in this year at the age of almost sixty and it
was Marwan bin al-Hakam, the deputy of alMadinah, who
prayed over him at his funeral. Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Today, a
great scholar has died” and Abu
Hurairah said: “The religious Scholar of this Ummah Muslim
nation; community of believers) has died. ”
Salamah bin Salamah bin Waqsh also died in this year at the
age of seventy without having begotten any offspring. He was
present at Badr and the events following it.
‘Asim bin ‘Adiyy, upon whose departure to Badr, the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) appointed as the
authority over the elite of Quba’, died when he was a hundred
and twenty-five years of age. He participated in the battle of
Uhud, which took place between the Muslim army from
alMadinah led by the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and the Makkans led by Abu Sufyan, and the
32

events after it. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) commanded him and Malik bin ad-Dukhshum to
burn down the infamous Masjid ad-Dirar (a mosque built by
the hypocrites to conspire against the Muslims near Quba’ in
al-Madinah).
Hafsah bint ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, Ummul-Mu’mineen
(Mother of the Believers), also died in this year. Before her
marriage to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) she was married to Khunais bin Hudhafah
as-Sahmi. They had migrated to al-Madinah together, ;
however, he died after the battle of Badr. Upon completing
her ‘Iddah (the prescribed time of waiting at the end of a
marriage, usually about three months), her father (‘Umar)
offered her hand in marriage to ‘Uthman following the death
of his wife, Ruqayyah, the daughter of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), but he refused. He then
approached Abi Bakr about marrying his daughter, however,
he did not give him any respons whatsoever. It was not long
after that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) himself married Hafsah. When ‘Umar
told Abu Bakr of his displeasure at Abu Bakr’s refusal to
comment when he had offered Hafsah’s hand to him, Abu
Bakr said: “The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) had mentioned Hafsah earlier but I could not
disclose the secret of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). Had he not, I would have married her. ”
It is narrated in a Hadeeth that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) divorced Hafsah and
then re-married her. In another narration, Jibreel ordered him
to re-marry her, stating: “Verily, she fasts and performs prayer
throughout the night; she is your wife in Paradise. ”

33

Upon Entering the Forty-Sixth Year
This year, it was ‘Utbah bin Abi Sufyan, the brother of
Mu‘awiyah, who led the people in performing the Hajj
Pilgrimage.
Amongst the people who died was Salim bin ‘Umair, one of
the Bakka’een (the ones who cried) mentioned in the Qur’an.
He participated in the battle of Badr and all the events
following it.
Suraqah bin Ka‘b, who also participated in the battle of Badr
and all the events following it, died in this year.
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Khalid bin al-Waleed al-Qurashi alMakhzoomi was, like his father (Khalid bin alWaleed), a
popular hero renowned for his bravery. He was an honourable
and influential person among the people of ash-Sham and he
was present at the battle of Siffeen with Mu‘awiyah. He died
from poisoning and his life has been celebrated in the
following elegy (at-Taweel poetry):
“Your father was he who led the army westwards
To ar-Room (Byzantium) after having imposed land taxes on
the Persians.
How many young men did you then rouse from slumber
By beating the reins while their arms were crippled from
drowsiness?
The two alignments were unmatched; the one of Khalid
And the other from Damascus with the hooded cloak. ”
Harim bin Hayyan al-‘Abdi, one of ‘Umar bin al-Khattab’s
officials, who had met with Uwais al-Qarni, and was an
34

intellectual and scholar to the people as well as a devout
servant. It is said that when he was buried, a cloud was cast
solely over his grave and rained on it until plants and herbage
had grown out.

Upon Entering the Forty-Seventh Year
Mu‘awiyah dismissed ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin al-‘As from
Egypt and appointed Mu‘awiyah bin Hudaij in his place.
Of those who died were Qais bin ‘Asim al-Minqari, a noble
from the days of Jahiliyyahi. e. , the preIslamic era of
ignorance) and later in Islam. He was amongst those who
prohibited Khamr (wine; alcohol) both in the Jahiliyyah and
in Islam, the reason being that one day he got drunk and
committed an offense, after which he fled. When he came to
his senses, he was told about what he had done and as a result
he forbade it upon himself, saying (in al-Wafir poetic meter):
“I realized that drinking wine is demeaning,
It brings shameful deeds and scandalizes honoured men.
I pledge I will not drink again in my lifetime,
And I will not use it even to cure an ailment. ”
His submission to Islam was occasioned by the arrival of the
Bani Tameem (tribe). There are some Ahadeeth (Prophetic
narrations) reporting that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “He is a chief of the
tent-dwellers. ”
He was generous, commendable and honarable. A poet recited
on the day of his death:
“The ruin of Qais was not the ruin of one,
35

But the entire structure of a nation has been demolished. ”

Upon Entering the Forty-Eighth Year
This is the year in which Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman al-Qainipassed
the winter with the Muslims in the land of Antakiyah
(Antioch, ancient city in Syria). ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir’s naval
invasion against the people of Egypt took place and Marwan
bin al-Hakam, the deputy of al-Madinah, led the people in
performing the Hajj Pilgrimage.

Upon Entering the Forty-Ninth Year
Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah invaded the land of ar-Room (the
Balkans and Anatolia) which penetrated as far as alQustanteeniyyah (Constantinople). He was accompanied by a
group of the Sahabah (Companions of theProphet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) including Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn
‘Abbas, Ibn Zubair and Abu Ayyoob al-Ansari. It is verified
in Saheeh al-Bukhari that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The first army
amongst my followers who will invade Qaisar’s city will be
forgiven of their sins. ” They were the first army to carry out
a military expedition there, which they were able to penetrate
with great difficulty.
Abu Ayyoob, Khalid bin Zaid al-Ansari died in this year.
Mu‘awiyah dismissed Marwan from his post in al-Madinah
and appointed Sa‘eed bin al-As on his place.
This was also the year in which al-Koofah was afflicted with
the plague and as a direct result, Mu‘awiyah united al-Koofah
and al-Basrah under the sole governorship of Ziyad. This was
the first time the two localities had ever been united. As such,
Ziyad would reside in al-Koofah for a period of six months
and in al-Basrah for the remaining six months.
36

Remembering the Prominent People who
Died in this Year:
Al-Hasan bin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib
Abu Muhammad al-Qurashi al-Hashimi was the grandson of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), the son of his daughter, Fatimah az-Zahra’, the Raihah
(sweet basil) of his world. His face resembled that of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he
was born in mid-Ramadan (the Islamic calendar month of
fasting) in the third year of the Hijrah. He was the eldest child
of his parents and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) loved him dearly. The
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would
sometimes stick his tongue out at him, hug him and joke
around with him. At times, al-Hasan would go up to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) while he was prostrating in prayer and climb onto his
back. He would sit on top of him for so long that the
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would
have to prolong the prayer. The Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) also used to take him up on
the Minbar (pulpit) with him.
It is verified in Ahadeeth that while the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was giving a sermon, he saw
al-Hasan and al-Husain in front of him and so he went down
to them, hugged them and then returned to the Minbar with
them. He said: “Your wealth and your children are only a
trial” [atTaghabun, 64:15]. Indeed, I saw these two sons of
mine walking and stumbling over and so I could not refrain
from going down to get them. ”
It is verified in Saheeh al-Bukhari that ‘Uqbah bin al-Harith
narrated: “Once Abu Bakr offered the ‘Asr (afternoon) prayer
and then went out walking when he saw al-Hasan playing
37

with some boys. He lifted him on his shoulders and said: ‘May
my parents be sacrificed for your sake! (You) resemble the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and not
‘Ali, ’ which caused ‘Ali to laugh. ”
It is reported that Isma‘eel bin Abu Khalid said that he heard
Abu Juhaifah saying: “I saw the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and al-Hasan bin ‘Ali certainly
resembles him. ”
It is reported that Ibn Abi Mulaikah said: “Fatimah would
jump out at al-Hasan and startle him, saying: ‘O my father, in
the likeness of the Prophet; and not resembling ‘Ali. ”
Hani’ reported that ‘Ali said: “Al-Hasan resembles the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) from between his chest to the top of his head, while alHusain resembles him (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in what is below that area. ”
Usamah bin Zaid reported that Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to put him on his knee
and put al-Hasan bin ‘Ali on the other and then hug them and
say: “O Allah! Please be merciful to them as I am merciful to
them. ”
Bara’ bin Azib is reported to have said: “I saw the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while al-Hasan
was on his shoulders, saying: ‘O Allah! I love him, so love
him too. ’”
It is reported that Abu Hurairah said: “I was with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in one of the markets of al-Madinah. He left the market
and so did I. Then he asked three times: ‘Where is the small
child?’So he said: ‘Call al-Hasan bin ‘Ali. ’So al-Hasan bin
‘Ali got up and started walking, wearing a necklace of beads
around his neck. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
38

be upon him) stretched out his hand like this, and al-Hasan
did the same. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) embraced him and said: ‘O Allah! I love him, so
please love him as well as those who love him too. ’Since
Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said that, nothing or no one has been dearer to me than
al-Hasan. ”
Abu Hurairah is reported to have said: “Every now and then
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came
out to us while carrying Hasan and Husain on each of his
shoulders until we were finished with him. A man said to him:
‘O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ! You certainly do love them?! ’So he said: ‘Whoever
loves them, loves me, and whoever annoys them, annoys me’”
(only narrated by Ahmad).
‘A’ishah and Umm Salamah, the Mothers of the Believers,
reported that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) wrapped al-Hasan, al-Husain and their mother and
father in his mantle and said: “O Allah! These are Ahlu Baiti
(the members of my family) so remove all abominations from
them and purify them completely. ”
Another narration reported by ‘Ali, Abu Sa‘eed, Buraidah and
Hudhaifah states that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Al-Hasan and alHusain are the chiefs of the youth of Paradise and their father
is even better than them. ”
‘Abdullah bin Shaddad reported from his father that, on one
occasion, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) led the ‘Isha’ (night) prayer and when he
went into prostration he prolonged it. Once they completed
the prayer, the people enquired about it. He said: “This son of
mine – meaning al-Hasan – climbed on top of me and I hated
to rush even out of necessity. ”
39

Abu Hurairah reported that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said regarding al-Hasan and
al-Husain: “Whoever loves them, loves me, and whoever
annoys them, annoys me. ”
As-Siddeeq (the Verifier of the Truth, i. e. Abu Bakr) would
honour, respect and love al-Hasan, as did ‘Umar bin alKhattab and ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, who honoured and loved
both al-Hasan and al-Husain dearly.
When al-Hasan used to pray the Morning Prayer in the Masjid
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), he would sit on his prayer mat and invoke Allah
through words of remembrance until the rising of the sun. The
nobles would sit in his company and they would speak with
him, then he would get up and go to the Mothers of the
Believers to greet them with salutations of peace.
It is said that Allah shared out al-Hasan’s wealth three times,
he departed from his wealth twice for the sake of Allah, the
Majestic, and he performed the Hajj Pilgrimage twenty-five
times, once while walking with guiding animals in front of
him.
It is also said he married often, never having less than four
wives, and he would habitually divorce and remarry. In fact,
it is said that he had all together married seventy women and
it has also been said that he once divorced two women in one
day. On one occasion, ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him)
said to the people of al-Koofah: “Do not marry him as he
divorces too often. ” So they said: “By Allah, O
AmeeralMu’mineen! If he were to approach us every day for
the purpose of marriage, he could marry whoever he pleased
just so that we might have a relationship by marriage with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). ”
40

‘Ali bin al-‘Abbas at-Tabarani said: “On the ring of al-Hasan
bin ‘Ali was engraved the words (in alKamil poetic meter):
“Dedicate yourself as much as you can to Godliness,
As destiny befalls you, O young man!
You became blinded with joy,
Not seeing your beloved and treasured ones in their graves.
”
‘Amr bin al-Asamm is reported to have said that he said to alHasan bin ‘Ali: “Indeed, these Shee‘ah (Party of ‘Ali) allege
that ‘Ali will be sent back before the Day of Resurrection. ”
He said: “By Allah, they tell lies! They are not his followers,
since if we knew that he was going to be sent back, we would
not have married off his women or divided up his wealth. ”
Ibn Shawdhab is reported to have said: “When ‘Ali was
murdered, al-Hasan advanced forth with the people of al-‘Iraq
while Mu‘awiyah advanced forth with the people of ashSham (the Levant) until they encountered each other. AlHasan, however, hated to fight and so Mu‘awiyah vowed to
entrust the Khilafah (caliphate) to him as his successor if he
relinquished his status as Khaleefah (caliph). The companions
of al-Hasan used to say (addressing him): “O Dishonour of
the Believers! ”So he would reply: “Dishonour is better than
the Hel-fire. ”
The settlement of peace was reached on the grounds that
Mu‘awiyah agreed to pay al-Hasan the money belonging to
the Baitul-Mal (Public Treasury) based in al-Koofah.
Accordingly, al-Mu‘awiyah granted him his full share of it,
precisely five million Deenars, and some say seven million,
in addition to the annual Kharaj (land tax in IslamicLaw)
collected from al-Basrah, and others say from a place called
Darabjird. However, the people of this district refused to pay
41

the Kharaj to him and so in recompense for their refusal,
Mu‘awiyah paid him six million Dirhams every year. Not
once did al-Hasan fail to receive the payments from
Mu‘awiyah and, in the year in which he died, Mu‘awiyah had
treated him with exceptional deference by sending him
jewels, rare offerings and gifts. It was not long after this that
he died.
Yazeed bin Khumair is reported to have said: “I heard ‘AbdurRahman bin Jubair bin Nufair al-Hadrami say that his father
said: ‘I said to al-Hasan bin ‘Ali: ‘People are claiming that
you want to assume the Khilafah (caliphate). ’He replied: ‘I
had the skulls of the ‘Arabs at my disposa; they would make
peace with whomever I made peace with and they would go
to war with whoever I went to war with. Then, I left it (the
Khilafah) seeking the Face of Allah and now would I seek to
avenge it with billy goats from the people of al-Hijaz?! ’”
‘Imran bin ‘Abdullah is reported to have said that he saw alHasan bin ‘Ali in his sleep with the words (which mean):
[“Say:He is Allah, the One”] (al-Ikhlas, 112:1) written
between his eyes. This made him happy and so he went to
inform Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab who said: “If one sees this
vision then it means that nothing more remains for that
person. ” Just days later, al-Hasan died.
‘Umair bin Ishaq narrated: “I and another man from the
Quraish entered the presence of al-Hasan bin ‘Ali, at which
point he stood up and headed for the exit. Once he was outside
he said: ‘I have spat out a section from my liver and regained
my strength after having been poisoned several times before,
though it has never been as severe as this time. ’ Then he
began to say to the man who was with me: ‘Ask me before
you fail to ask. ’ So the man said: ‘I was not going to ask you
anything. May Allah restore you to health’, then we left him.
The following day, we returned to him and he was suffering
from the agony of death. Al-Husain then came in and sat by
42

the head of his brother whereupon al-Hasan said to him: ‘O
brother! Who is this friend of yours? ’He replied: ‘Do you
want to kill him?’He said: ‘Yes. ’So he said: ‘I believed he
was my friend. Allah is the Most Sever Avenger’ – and in
another narration he says: ‘To Allah belongs the greatest
retribution and punishment – for he will not get away with
having killed me even if you kill him yourself. ’”
Abu Nu‘aim said: “When al-Hasan bin ‘Ali’s pain intensified,
he started to grow anxious. A man came to see him and said:
‘O Abu Muhammad! Why are you anxious?What is there
except the separation of your soul from your body?You are
proceeding towards your parents, ‘Ali and Fatimah, your
grandparents, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and Khadeejah, your paternal uncles, Hamzah and
Ja‘far, your maternal uncles, al-Qasim, at-Tayyib, at-Tahir
and Ibraheem, and your maternal aunts, Ruqayyah, Umm
Kulthoom and Zainab. ’Then he expressed his concern. ” In
another narration the person who said this to him was his
brother, al-Husain, whereupon al-Hasan said to him: “O
brother! I have been concerned with the command of Allah
like nothing else and I have seen a creature from the creation
of Allah like no one else. ” Then al-Husain started to cry.
It is narrated that Jabir bin ‘Abdullah saw al-Hasan bin ‘Ali
on the day of his death. Conflict almost broke out between alHusain bin ‘Ali and Marwan bin al-Hakam after al-Hasan
instructed his brother to bury him with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) but if some battle
or mishap were to occur because of it then he should be buried
within al-Baqee‘ (a fertile patch of land in alMadinah where
other members of the Prophet’s family were buried). Even
though Marwan was in a remote and distant place at that time,
he objected to allowing al-Hasan to be buried with the
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in a
bid to please Mu‘awiyah. In fact, Marwan never ceased to be
an enemy of the Banu Hashim tribe until his death. As Jabir
43

recalls: “That day, I spoke to Husain bin ‘Ali to whom I said:
‘O Abu ‘Abdullah! Fear Allah, for your brother did not like
what you see (i. e conflict). Therefore bury him in al-Baqee‘
with his mother’, so he did. ”
Masses of people congregated for his Janazah (funeral) to the
point that there was no space remaining in the fertile area. The
men and women cried for seven days, the women of Banu
Hashim continued to lament him for a month and they
mourned him for a year.
Although it is well known that he died in the year 49 A. H. ,
some maintain that it happened in the fiftieth year.

The Fiftieth Year of the Hijrah
Mu‘awiyah led the Hajj Pilgrimage with the people this year,
while according to others, his son Yazeed did. Sa‘eed bin al‘As was the deputy of al-Madinah in this year.
Yahya bin Sa‘eed bin Deenar reported on the authority of his
father that Mu‘awiyah was determined to transfer the Minbar
(pulpit) of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) from al-Madinah to Dimashq (Damascus) in addition to
taking possession of the staff that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to hold in his hand when
delivering sermons. One day, Mu‘awiyah stood up on the
Minbar while he was holding the staff of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and so Abu Hurairah and
Jabir bin ‘Abdullah approached him and said: “O AmeeralMu’mineen! We invoke Allah that you do not do this. It is not
right that you remove themMinbar from its place as
designated by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) ano take his staff away from alMadinah. ” It follows that Mu‘awiyah refrained from doing
so, although he added six stairs to the Minbar, an act for which
he later apologised to the peoplo.
44

In this year, Mu‘awiyah discharged Mu‘awiyah bin Hudaij
from Egypt and appointeo Maslamah bin Mukhallad from
Africa instead.
‘Uqbah bin Nafi‘ al-Fihri invaded and conquered the African
lands under the orders of Mu‘awiyah. He later succeeded in
planning the construction of the city of al-Qairawan
(Kairowan in modern day Tunisia) despite being faced with
harsh jungle terrain, predatory animals, wild beasts and
strange creatures that had roamed freely across the land upon
his invasion. There, he invited the indigenous people to
submit to Allah, the Sublime, though the city was not
developed until the predatory animals and wild creatures had
fled. Many of the local Berbers (natives) subsequently
submitted to Islam.
Midlaj bin ‘Amr as-Sulami, an honourable Sahabi
(Companion of theProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), died in this year. He had participated in all the
major events alongside the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Jubair bin Mut‘im Abu Muhammad, otherwise known as Abu
‘Adiyy al-Madani, arrived as a Mushrik (Idolator; Polytheist)
captive of Badr, but when he heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) reciting the verse
from Soorat-Toor (which means):[“Or were they created by
nothing?Or were they themselves the creators?” ] [at-Toor
52:35], Islam penetrated his heart and on the day of Khaibar
he embraced it. He was a particularly astute and resourceful
person among the Quraish and was best known for his noble
lineage, which he shared with as-Siddeeq Verifier of the
Truth, i. e. Abu Bakr). It is widely accepted that he died in the
fifty-eighth year.
Al-Hakam bin ‘Amr bin Mujadda‘ al-Ghifari was also an
honourable Sahabi. Ziyad bin Abeehi deputed him over the
45

invasion of Jabalal-Ashall, wherein the Muslim army gained
an abundance of gold, silver and other valuables as part of the
war booty. When Ziyad’s letter, in which he informed him of
Mu‘awiyah’s instructions to submit the gold and silver from
the war booty to Mu‘awiyah’s Baitul-Mal (Public Treasury),
reached al-Hakam, he responded: “Certainly, adhering to
commands stipulated in the Book of Allah takes priority over
adhering to the commands stipulated by Mu‘awiyah. In fact,
the Book of Allah is at odds with the letter of Mu‘awiyah, as
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
‘There is no obedience to creation in disobedience to the
Creator. ’” He then called on the people to take their due of
the booty without leaving so much as the Khumus (one-fifth
of the war booty paid as tax).
Dahiyah bin Khaleefah al-Kalbi, also an honourable Sahabi,
was a particularly attractive person and it was for this reason
that Jibreel (Angel of Revelation) would often appear in his
image. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) dispatched him on a mission to Qaisar (Caesar). He
embraced Islam very early on and although he was not present
at Badr, he did participate the events after it, including alYarmook. He lived in al-Mezuzah (east Damascus) until his
death during the Khilafa (caliphate) of Mu‘awiyah.
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Samurah, Abu Sa‘eed al-‘Abshami, also
died in this year. He embraced Islam on the day of the
Conquest, it is said that he was present at Mu’tah and he
owned a house in Dimashq (Damascus). He passed away in
al-Basrah in the fiftieth year and Ziyad offered the prayer at
his funeral. He left behind numerous sons and his epithet
during the days of Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic era
ofignorance) was Abd Kulal , others say ‘Abd Kaloob and
some say ‘Abdul-Ka‘bah. For this reason, the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) named him ‘AbdurRahman. He served as one of the two ambassadors who
mediated between Mu‘awiyah and al-Hasan. The Messenger
46

of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to
him: “O ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Samurah! Do not seek to be a
ruler because if you are entrusted with authority upon asking
for it, then you will be held responsible for it; but if you are
given it without asking for it, then you will be helped in it by
Allah. ”
‘Uthman bin Abul-As ath-Thaqafi, Abu ‘Abdullah at-Ta’ifi,
also died in this year of the Hijrah. He went to the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the
delegation of Thaqeef, after which the Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) employed him over Ta’if. He
remained appointed over it during the rule of Abu Bakr and
‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him).
As for ‘Aqeel bin Abu Talib, ‘Ali’s brother, he entered Islam
prior to the treaty of al-Hudaibiyah and was present at Mu’tah.
‘Amr bin Umayyah ad-Damri, an honourable Sahabi,
submitted to Islam following the battle of ‘Uhud. The first
event he participated in was Bi’r Ma‘oonah (the Well of
Ma‘oonah) and he could neither been beaten nor matched in
terms of horsemanship.
This year also saw the death of ‘Amr bin al-Hamiq bin alKahin al-Khuza‘i who submitted to Islam prior to the
Conquest and later performed the Hijrah (Migration).
Reference is made to him in anarration in which the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) invoked Allah to grant him enjoyment throughout his
youth and as such he was aged eighty before any grey hair
appeared in his beard. In spite of this, he was one of the four
who opposed the Khilafah (caliphate) of ‘Uthman and who
then revolted with the Shee‘at ‘Ali (Party of ‘Ali) in the
battles of the Camel and Siffeen. He was a member of Hujr
bin ‘Adiyy’s band of supporters who were wanted by Ziyad,
and so he fled to al-Mawsil (Mosul). In response to this,
47

Mu‘awiyah sent a message to his deputy to send out a search
party for them, and soon after, he was found hiding out in
cavern wounded from a venomous snake bite. They then
chopped off his head and sent it to Mu‘awiyah who exhibited
it to spectators in ash-Sham and elsewhere. In fact, ‘Amr bin
al-Hamiq’s head was the first to have been put up on display
in this manner. Mu‘awiyah subsequently sent the head to
‘Amr’s wife, Aminah bint ash-Shareed, who was confined in
Mu‘awiyah’s prison. Upon receiving his head in her cell, she
placed her palm on the front of his face and kissed his mouth,
saying: “You kept him from me for a long time and then you
grant him back to me dead. I welcome this gift gladly and
happily! ”
As for Ka‘b bin Malik al-Ansari as-Sulami, the poet of Islam,
he entered the fold of Islam very early on, participating in the
pact of al-‘Aqabah, though not in Badr. As the Saheehain [i.
e. al-Bukhari and Muslim] maintain, he was one of the three
who were pardoned for staying behind following the invasion
of Tabook.
Al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah, also known by the epithets Ibn
Abi ‘Amir binMas‘ood, Abu ‘Eesa and Abu
‘Abdullah, was an elite ‘Arab and a highly influential figure.
He embraced Islam in the year of alKhandaq after killing thirteen men from Thaqeef. He
participated in al-Hudaibiyah and on the day of asSulh
(Conciliation), he stood with his unsheathed sword over the
head of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him). Muhammad bin Sa‘d described him by saying:
“Al-Mugheerah had extremely red hair that was fairly long
(but not long, flowing hair as this was considered as a sign of
evil among the ‘Arabs), thin lips, an oversized head, huge
arms, broad shoulders and a square face. ”
Ash-Sha‘bi said: “There were four judges: ‘Umar, ‘Ali, Ibn
Mas‘ood and Abu Moosa. And there were four astute and
48

resourceful people: Mu‘awiyah, ‘Amr, al-Mugheerah and
Ziyad. ”
Ibn Wahb said that he heard Malik say that al-Mugheerah bin
Shu‘bah said: “The man who has one woman shares her
menstrual cycle and her illnesses. The man with two women
lies between two blazing fires. The man who has four women
is delighted, though if he were to marry all four at once, he
would divorce them all at once. ”
As for Juwairiyah bint al-Harith, Ummul-Mu’mineen , the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) captured
her in the invasion of al-Muraisee‘ that was carried out against
the Banu al-Mustaliq tribe. Her father was the king of the tribe
and after her submission to Islam, the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) released and
married her. In fact, she had initially been allotted to Thabit
bin Qais bin Shammas as part of his share of the war booty.
However, she approached the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) to plead her case to him as the daughter
of the chief of her trib, by which she requested that he allocate
her to his share, to which he asked: “Or is there something
better than that?” She said: “And what is that, O Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ?” He
replied: “That I pay your ransom, release you and marry you.
” Upon freeing her, the people began to say: “Does the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) marry
those captives who have been released from Banu alMustaliq, that is, some hundred women and girls?” So
‘A’ishah said: “I do not know of any woman who has brought
greater Barakah (blessings) among her people than she. ”
Her original name was Barrah; it was the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who named her
Juwairiyah. Reports mention how she was a very beautiful,
elegant and gracefully refined woman. She died in the fiftieth
year of the Hijrah.
49

With regars to Safiyyah bint Huyayy bin Akhtab, UmmulMu’mineen, she was the beautiful descendant of Haroon
(Aaron), the brother of Moosa (Moses) (Peace be upon him).
She was taken captive when the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) conquered Khaibar, and
had been assigned to Dahiyah bin Khaleefah al-Kalbi’s share
of the spoils. He later mentioned her beauty and that she was
the daughter of the king to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and, upon hearing this, the
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) chose
her for himself while compensating Dahiyah. By this time,
Safiyyah had entered Islam and on the way back from
Khaibar, the Muslim army halted at a place called as-Sahba’
(Saddar-Rawhah) where the marriage was consummated.
Umm Shareek al-Ansariyyah was the lady who proposed to
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
which some sources state he accepted and others state he did
not. She was also the one who drank from a Pail of rainwater
after the Mushrikeen (Idolaters) denied her of water. It was
actually because of this that she accepted Islam. Her name
was Ghuzayyah, she embraced Islam very early on and it is
said that she died in this year.

Upon Entering the Fifty-First Year
This year witnessed the killing of Hujr bin ‘Adiyy and his
associates. He was referred to as “Hujr alKhair” or as well as
“Hujr al-Adbar” in defamation of his father who had fled from
the battlefield and was consequently called “the one who turns
his back. ”
Hujr had invaded ash-Sham (the Levant) with the army that
conquered ‘Adhra’ and participated in the battle of Siffeen
with ‘Ali as his commander. It is said that the site of his grave
is a well-known place in ‘Adhra’ (a town in Damascus). He
was an ascetic and devout worshipper, he was loyal and
50

dutiful to his mother, and he prayed and fasted a great deal.
Abu Ma‘shar said: “He was always in a state of Wudhoo’
(ablution) and he would not perform Wudhoo’ without
praying two Rak‘ah (units of prayer) after it. ”
It is narrated that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Harith said to
Mu‘awiyah: “Did you kill Hujr bin al-Adbar?” To which
Mu‘awiyahreplied: “Murdering him was more beloved to me
than killing a hundred thousand of those who were with him.
” Ibn Jareer and others maintain that Hujr and his associates
slandered ‘Uthman by ascribing unjust claims to him and
criticised his governors and commanders. They championed
“the party of ‘Ali” and acted harshly and rigidly in the Deen
(Way of Life, i. e. Islam). ”
Sources report that when he was taken in chains from alKoofah to ash-Sham, his daughters met with him on the way
and were crying. He leaned towards them and after remaining
silent for an hour he said: “Verily, it is Allah Who provides
you with food, drink and clothes. He remains Alive after me
(my death) and therefore you must fear and worship Him
alone. As for me, if I am killed, it is martyrdom and if I return
to you, I am honoured. By Allah, my Khaleefah (caliphate) is
incumbentupon you! ”He then departed with his associates in
chains and it is said that he requested to be buried with his
chains, following which he and his associates were taken to
the steppes of ‘Adhra’ where they were executed. Despite
this, a funeral prayer was offered for them and they were
buried in the direction of the Qiblah (towards the Ka‘bah in
Makkah) (may Allah have mercy on them and pardon them).
Abul-Aswad is reported to have said that Mu‘awiyah went to
see A’ishah who said: “What prompted you to kill the people
of ‘Adhra’, Hujr and his associates?” He said: “O Umm alMu’mineen! I believed that their murder was in the interest of
the Ummah Muslim nation) while leaving them would have
meant corrupting the Ummah. ” She replied: “I heard the
51

Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say: ‘A people from ‘Adhra’ with whom Allah and the
dwellers of Heaven are angry will be killed. ’” The chain of
narration for this Hadeeth is classified as weak.
In this year, Ziyad assigned ar-Rabee‘ bin Ziyad al-Harithi as
governor over the land of Khurasan
(Khorasan, a historic region that covered parts of modern day
Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Iran, Uzbekistan,
Turkmenistan and Western areas of Pakistan) following the
death of al-Hakam bin ‘Amr. ArRabee‘peacefully conquered
Balkh (a small city in Afghanistan), wherein he yielded its
booty, and during which he invaded the territories beyond the
river. Before him, al-Hakam bin ‘Amr had been the first to
cross over the river, thus making al-Hakam’s servant boy the
first person to have drunk from it. At that time, al-Hakam
performed Wudhoo’ (ablution) in the river, offered two
Rak‘ah (units of prayer) on its banks and then returned from
duty. It was because ar-Rabee‘ invaded this territory that he
was able to seize and conquer it.
Sources report that Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah led the people in
the Hajj Pilgrimage in this year. Ibn alJawzimentions that this
was also the year in which he died.
As for Jareer bin ‘Abdullah al-Bajali, he submitted to Islam in
Ramadan (the ninth Islamic calendar month of fasting) in the
tenth year of the Hijrah. He bravely came forward after the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had just said in a sermon: “One to whom good fortune
and prosperity belongs will boldly come forward from the
road between the two mountains. On his face is the mark of a
king. ” Then when Jareer proceeded, the people scurried to
look at him and he was just as the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) described him – All
praise is for Allah.
52

It is narrated that when Jareer went to sit in the company of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), he spread out his cloak for him and said: “When a
distinguished man from a nation comes to you, honourhim. ”
On one occasion, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent him to Dhul-Khalasah –
a house that was honoured by the tribe of Daws in the days of
Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic era of Ignorance). However, Jareer
told the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that he could not sit firmly on horses. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) then stroked his chest with
his hand and said: “O Allah! Make him firm and make him
both a guiding and rightly-guided man. ” He then set out and
had it destroyed.
It states in the Saheehain that Jareer said: “The Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) did not screen himself
from me (i. e. d never prevented me from entering upon him)
since I embraced Islam, and when he saw me, he would
receive me with a smile. ” ‘Umar bin al-Khattab used to say:
“Jareer is the Yoosuf (Joseph) of this Ummah Muslim nation).
” Jareer was still residing in al-Jazeerah (the Arabian
Peninsula) when he passed away in a place close to the Sarat
Mountains (the greatest mountain terrain within the Arab
world) during the fifty-first year of the Hijrah.
As for Ja‘far bin Abu Sufyan bin al-Harith bin‘AbdulMuttalib, he entered the fold of Islam along with his father
who submitted in some place located between Makkah and alMadinah in the year of the Conquest.
Harithah bin an-Nu‘man al-Ansari an-Najjari participated in
the battles of Badr, Uhud, al-Khandaq and in all other
occasions. He was one of the most outstanding Companions
such that it is narrated that he even saw Jibreel (Gabriel) with
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) sitting down and talking after Khaibar, and that he saw
53

Jibreel on the day of Banu Quraizah in the form of Dihyah. It
is also true that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) heard Harithah reciting in Paradise.
As for Sa‘eed bin Zaid, he was one of the ten to have been
promise Paradise. He and his wife Fatimah, embraced Islam
before ‘Umar and undertook the Hijrah. Reports describe him
as having long hair that he had washed by Sa‘d bin Abi
Waqqas at the age of seventy-odd years.
With regars to ‘Abdullah bin Unais al-Juhani, Abu Yahya alMadani, an honourable Companion, he participated in al‘Aqabah though he was not present at Badr. He took part in
the events thereafter and it was he and Mu‘adh who smashed
the idols of the Ansar (Helpers). A narration ascribed to him
in the Saheeh states that Abdullah bin Unais said that LailatulQadr (the Night of Power) falls on the twentythird night of the
month. He was sent by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to Khalid bin Sufyan alHudhali who killed him with a thicket. After that, the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went to him a
stick and said: “This is a symbol of what lies between you and
I on the Day of Judgement” (referring to the stick). It was then
buried with him in his shroud.
As for the honourable Companion, Abu Bakrah Nufai‘ bin alHarith, it is said that his real name was Masrooh. He was
known as Abu Bakrah (Father of the Pulley) because he came
down from the fortress on the day of Ta’if on a pulley. The
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) freed
him as well as everyone else who came down on that day.
His mother’s name was Sumayyah who was also the mother
of Ziyad. He would keep away from conflict and dissension
such that he never attended anything in relation to these
issues. Abu Barzah al-Aslami offered the prayer at his funeral,
54

as the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
had joined them in ties of brotherhood.
This year saw the death of Ummul-Mu’mineen, Maimoonah
bint al-Harith al-Hilaliyyah, who the Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had married in the seventh
year of the Hijrah, also known as the year of Umratul-Qada’
(the Minor Pilgrimage of Completion). It is said her original
name was Barrah but Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) changed it to Maimoonah. She died in
Sarif located between Makkah and al-Madinah where the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
consummated his marriage with her. The son of her sister,
Abdullah bin ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them),
performed the prayer at her funeral procession.

Upon Entering the Fifty-Second Year
Sufyan bin ‘Awf al-Azdi undertook a military expedition in
the land of ar-Room where he and the Muslim forces passed
the winter. It was there that he died. Also in this year, Sa‘eed
bin al-As, the deputy of al-Madinah, led the Hajj Pilgrimage
with the people.

Remembering the Prominent People who
Died in this Year
Khalid bin Zaid bin Kulaib, Abu Ayyoob al-Ansari alKhazraji, took part in the battles of Badr, al‘Aqabah and in all
other events. He also participated in the battle of alHarooriyyah with ‘Ali. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) stayed at his house upon arriving in alMadinah where he spent a month while the Masjid (mosque)
and its apartments were being built.
During his stay, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was given the lowest room of his house while
55

Abu Ayyoob stayed in the highest. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), however, requested that he
be moved to the top of the house and that Abu Ayyoob and
his wife stay in the bottom, so he did as the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked.
When his wife, Umm Ayyoob, said to Abu Ayyoob: “Have
you not heard what people are saying (the slander) about
‘A’ishah?” He replied: “Have you done that before, O Umm
Ayyoob?” So she said: “No, by Allah! ”He then said: “By
Allah, she is better than you. Allah revealed the Verse (which
means):[‘Why then did not the believers, men and women,
when you heard it (the slander), think good of their own
people and say: ‘This charge is an obvious lie?’”] [an-Noor,
24:12]. Abu Ayyoob died in the land of ar-Room not far from
the enclosure of al-Qustanteeniyyah (Constantinople).
Abu Zabyan is reported to have said: “Abu Ayyoob undertook
a military expedition with Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah during
which Abu Ayyoob said: ‘If I die then take me into the land
of the enemy and bury me beneath your feet in the place where
you will encounter them. ’Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah replied: ‘I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) say: ‘Whoever dies while not associating any
partner with Allah will enter al-Jannah (Paradise). ’It is
reported that when the death of Abu Ayyoob drew near, he
said: “I used to conceal something from you which I heard
from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him). He (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said: ‘Had you not committed sins, Allah would have brought
into existence a creation that would have committed sin and
then Allah would have forgiven them. ’”
Al-Waqidi said: “Abu Ayyoob died in the land of ar-Room in
the fifty-second year. He was buried in alQustanteeniyyah
(Constantinople) and his grave used to irrigate ar-Room
during rainless seasons. ”
56

Abu Ayyoob narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Two men head
towards the Masjid (mosque) where they pray. When they
leave the prayer, one’s prayer is worth more (weightier) than
the other, whose is not even worth the weight of a mustard
seed. ” Abu Humaid as-Sa‘idi said: “And how is that, O
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ?” He replied: “One of them was more pious concerning
the sacred injunctions of Allah and more eager to perform
good deeds, whilst the other was doing it out of a sense of
obligatios. ”
Abu Ayyoob reported that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to a man that had asked
him to teach and instruct him: “When you pray, pray like a
man bidding farewell; do not say anything for which you will
have to apologise; and give up hope for what other people
have. ”
This year saw the death of Abu Moosa ‘Abdullah bin Qais alAsh‘ari al-Yamani who was a reciter of the Qur’an and Faced
(jurist) from the Companions. Reports indicate that he had the
nicest voice of all the Companions, as Abu ‘Uthman anNahdisaid: “I have never heard a voice echo, dip or resemble
a wind instrument in a nicer manner than the voice of Abu
Moosa. ” This is verified in a narration in which the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said to him: “You have been given one of the musical
wind instruments of the family of Dawood (David). ” ‘Umar
used to say to him: “Remind us of our Lord, O Abu Moosa!
”, so he would recite to them and they would listen.
This was also the year of ‘Imran bin Husain’s death.
‘Abdullah bin Amir had appointed him as the chief judge of
al-Basrah, however, having served for some period of time he
later sought permission to resign, which he was granted. He
continued to live there until his death.
57

Ka‘b bin ‘Ujrah al-Ansari Abu Muhammad al-Madani, was
an honourable Companion and it was regarding him that the
Verse about al-Fidyah (redemption from the omission of
certain religious duties, by a material donation or a ritual act
according to Islamic Law), with particular reference to
observing the Hajj Pilgrimage in his case, was revealed.
Mu‘awiyah bin Hudaij bin Jafnah was a supporter of ‘Uthman
in the days of ‘Ali’s Khilafah (caliphate) in Egypt. He
absolutely refused to pledge allegiance to ‘Ali, which is why
when Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan annexed Egypt, he
honoured Hudaij by appointing him as its deputy after the
regime of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin al-‘As. He remained in
Egypt until his death.
Hani’ bin Niyar who participated in al-‘Aqabah, Badr and the
events following it also died this year.

Upon Entering the Fifty-Third Year
This was the year in which ‘Abdur-Rahman bin UmmulHakam invaded the land of ar-Room, where he passed the
winter season. This year saw the Muslim conquest, led by
Junadah bin Abu Umayyah, of Jazeerah Roodis (the Island of
Rhodes), whose army greatly excelled the force of the Kuffar
(Disbelievers) as they barricaded them by sea, cutting off all
available access routes. Mu‘awiyah subsequently rewarded
the victors with generous annuities and grants.
Sa‘eed bin al-‘As, the governor of al-Madinah, led the Hajj
Pilgrimage this year.
Jabalah bin al-Aiham al-Ghassani died in this year.
Ar-Rabee‘ bin Ziyad al-Harithi also died in this year, and he
was deputy of Ziyadover Khurasan.

58

Ruwaifi‘ bin Thabit, an hunourable Companion who had
participated in the conquest of Egypt died in Barqah.
This was also the year in which Ziyad bin Abu Sufyan passed
away. He was otherwise known as Ziyad bin Abeehi (Ziyad,
the son of his father) and Ziyad bin Sumayyah (Ziyad, the son
of Sumayyah, i. e. his mother’s name) and he served as a
general and administrator. It was in the month of Ramadan of
the fiftythird year that he died from plague. The cause of his
death was stated in the letter he wrote to Mu‘awiyah, in which
he said: “Verily, I have commanded over al-‘Iraq for you, to
my left and my right, but to no avail]. He also requested to be
deputed over al-Hijaz (west of present-day Saudi Arabia).
However, when news of this reached the people of al-Hijaz,
they went to ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar complaining to him about
it for fear that if Ziyad was appointed as a successor over
them, he would treat them brutally as he had treated the people
of al-‘Iraq. Upon hearing the appeals of the people, Ibn ‘Umar
stood up, faced the Qiblah (direction of the Ka‘bah) and
supplicated for Ziyad whild the people were saying Aameen.
Subsequently, Ziyadycontracted plague in his hand which
drove him to despair and so he consulted Shuraih about
amputating it, to which Shuraih advised: “I do not consider
this appropriate. If your motive to do so is because you do not
want to meet Allah as a maimed person, then perhaps
amputating your hand is out of fear of meeting His; otherwise
if it is for the sake of remaining amongst the people as a
maimed person, even your son condemns it. ” In this manner,
he convinced Ziyad to desist from doing so, although when
Shuraih went out afterwards, some people started to shout:
“Why did you not leave him to cut off his hand?” He
answered: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: ‘One who is consulted is entrusted’.
”
It is narrated that he summoned one hundred and fifty
physicians to treat him, which included three physicians who
59

had previously treated Kisra bin Hurmu. , however, they were
unable to reverse his fate. It follows that he died in the third
day of Ramadan in this year after having ruled over al-‘Iraq
for five years. He was buried in ath-Thawiyyah outside of alKoofah. It was intended for him to emerge as the next
authority over al-Hijaz, but when the news of his death
reached ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, he said: “Depart, O Ibn
Sumayyah! For there remains no world for you now and you
have not yet been accustomed to the Hereafter. ”
When Ziyad was dying, his son said to him: “O father! I have
prepared sixty garments to shroud you for the grave. ” Ziyad
replied: “My son, death draws near to your father. Either these
garments are better than the one who wears them or else they
ruin quickly. This is an extraordinary thing. ”
Sa‘sa‘ah bin Najiyah was a noble amongst his people during
the days of both Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic era of Ignorance)
and in Islam. It is said that he saved three hundred and sixty
female infant girls from being buried alive, yet others
maintain it was four hundred and some have said ninety-six.
Therefore, when he submitted to Islam, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“Allah has rewarded you with Islam. ”
Of the popular figures that died in this year was Jablah bin alAiham al-Ghassani, the king of the Christian ‘Arabs. His
name was al-Mundhir bin al-Harith and he was the son of
Mariah, who was called ‘the owner of two earrings. ’He later
embraced Islam and wrote to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to inform him of it.
Conversely, Ibn Asakir is of view of that he never submitted
to Islam, rather this was the opinion of al-Waqidi and Sa‘eed
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez.
On this subject, al-Waqidi says: “He participated in the battle
of al-Yarmook on the side of ar-Room during the days of
60

‘Umar bin al-Khattab’s rule. He then entered the fold of Islam
(still during the days of ‘Umar), though he later committed
apostasy and returned to Christianity, whereby he returned
with his people to the land of ar-Room. ‘Umar was deeply
troubled when he realised what he had done and concerning
it said to Hassan: ‘Verily, your friend, Jabalah, has committed
apostasy in Islam. ’Hassan replied: ‘Indeed, we belong to
Allah and to him we shall return. ’”
During his rule in this year, Mu‘awiyah sent ‘Abdullah bin
Mas‘adah al-Fazari as a messenger to the king of ar-Room.
There, he met with Jabalah bin al-Aiham who seemed
extremely happytwith his extravagant worldly life, and with
all the wealth, servants, gold and horses he possessed. Jabalah
said to ‘Abdullah: If I knew that Mu‘awiyah was going to allot
me part of the land of Bathniyyah, give us our houses and
twenty villages from the Ghootah (the name of the fertile
oasis on the south side of Damascus) in addition to granting
us rewards, I would return to ash-Sham. ” When ‘Abdullah
bin Mas‘adah informed Mu‘awiyah of what he had said,
Mu‘awiyah remarked: “He wants me to give him that?! ” He
then sent a letter to him concerning it, but Jabalah died before
he could receive it -- may Allah defile him.

Upon Entering the Fifty-Fourth Year
Muhammad bin Malik spent the winter in the land of ar-Room
while Ma‘n bin [Yazeed] as-Sulami prepared a military
expedition for the summer. Mu‘awiyah discharged Sa‘eed bin
al-‘As from governorship in al-Madinah and replaced him
with Marwan bin al-Hakam.
Also in this year, Mu‘awiyah dismissed Samurah bin Jundab
from al-Basrah and appointed Ziyad as his successor,
Mu‘awiyah instated him in office for a period of six months,
however, he then dismissed him and appointed ‘Abdullah bin
‘Amr bin Ghailan in his place.
61

Remembering the People who Died in this
Year
Usamah bin Zaid bin Harithah al-Kalbi, Abu Muhammad alMadani, the servant of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) whose mother was Barakah,
Umm Aiman, the wetnurse of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), who was appointed by
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) to a position of command following the murder of his
father. Some people began to discredit his authority, to which
the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said: “If you are criticising ‘Usamah’s leadership, you used to
criticise his father’s leadership before. By Allah! He was a
worthy leader and was one of the dearest persons to me, and
(now) this (i. e. ‘Usamah) is one of the dearest to me after him
(Zaid). ”
It is verified in Saheeh al-Bukhari that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to sit with
both al-Hasan and Usamah on his lap and say: “O Allah! I
love them, so love them too. ” Usamah had many virtues and
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
passed away when he was nineteen years of age. When ‘Umar
used to see Usamah, he would say: “Peace be upon you, O
Ameer (Commander)! ”
Thawban bin Bujdud, the servant of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), was of ‘Arab
origin but had fallen captive and so the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) bought and
released him. In spite of having attained his freedom,
Thawban continued to stay in the company of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while on his
travels and at home. However, after the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) died, he went to live in
arRamlah (Palestine), following which he moved to Hims (the
62

ancient Emesa, city in central Syria) where he settled.
According to the Saheeh he remained there until his death in
this year.
Al-Harith bin Rib‘i, Abu Qatadah al-Ansari, “the Knight of
Islam”, participated in the battle of Uhud and the events
following it. As we mentioned in the account about the day of
Dhi Qarad, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “The best horseman among us today
was Abu Qatadah and the best of our foot soldiers was
Salamah bin al-Akwa‘. ”
Hakeem bin Hizam, Abu Khalid al-Makki, his mother was
Fakhitah bint Zuhair and the nephew of Khadeejah bint
Khuwailid, the wife of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and the mother of his
children with the exception of Ibraheem. It is said that
Hakeem’s mother gave birth to him inside the Ka‘bah,
thirteen years prior to the event of al-Feel (the Army of
Elephants).
He was extremely beloved to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). It was Hakeem who first
bought Zaid bin Harithah (as a slave), though he later sold him
to his maternal aunt, Khadeejah, who presented him to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) as a gift, and who later freed him. Hakeem also bought
Hullat Dhi Yazan and then gave her to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who clothed her
and said: “I have not seen anything in her that is better than
him (Hakeem). ” In spite of this, it was not until the day of the
conquest of Makkah that Hakeem and all of his children
embraced Islam. Thus, he lived in Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic era
of Ignorance) for sixty years and in Islam for sixty years. He
was a noble of the Quraish, one of the most prestigious in fact,
and was renowned for his lineage amongst them. He used to
perform good deeds, give in charity and maintain good ties
63

with kith and kin, and he was a manumitter (of slaves) in both
Jahiliyyah and Islam. When he submitted to Islam, he asked
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) about
his previous deeds, to which he replied: “You became Muslim
with all your previous good deeds (i. e. without losing their
reward). ”
He participated in the battle of Hunain with the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who gave
him a hundred camels. He had asked the Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) for something, and he
gave it to him. He then asked him for something else and so
he gave it to him, then he said: “O Hakeem! This wealth is
green and sweet (i. e. as tempting as fruit), and whoever takes
it without greed then he is blessed in it, and whoever takes it
with greed, he is not blessed in it and he is like one who eats
and never gets satisfied. ” Hakeem said: “By Him who sent
you with the Truth, I will never demand anything from
anybody after you till I die. ” Afterwards, Abu Bakr called
Hakeem to give him something but he refused to take it, as he
did with ‘Umar on another occasion.
Hakeem passed away during this year while on the right path
at the age of a hundred and twenty, and Allah knows best.
Huwaitib bin ‘Abdul-‘Uzza al-‘Amiri, an honourable
Companion, entered the fold of Islam in the year of the
Conquest. He lived a long life and was one of the men
appointed by ‘Umar to renew the boundary markers of the
Haram (Holy Sanctuary in Makkah). He fought in the battle
of Badr on the side of the Mushrikeen (polytheists) and
accounts of that day testify to him witnessing the Angels (who
had gathered) between the heavens and earth. He took part in
the treaty of al-Hudaibiyah and he sought for the Sulh
(Conciliation). At the time of the Umratul-Qada’ (the Minor
Pilgrimage of Completion), he and Suhail had ordered the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
64

him) to get out of Makkah, they then threatened Bilal that
none of the Companions were allowed to remain in Makkah
upon the setting of the sun. However, despite his staunch
opposition to Islam at that time, Allah does as He wills.
Hence, at the time of the Conquest, it is reported that Huwaitib
said: “I grew so scared that I ran away, in the course of which
I encountered Abu Dharr (who was a friend of mine in
Jahiliyyah) who said to me: ‘O Huwaitib, what is wrong?’I
said: ‘I am scared. ’ He said: ‘Do not be scared, for he is the
most righteous and friendly of people. I am your neighbour,
so come with me. ’ I then returned with him, whereupon we
went and stood next to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who was with Abu Bakr and
‘Umar in the valley. Abu Dharr had taught me to say: ‘Peace,
mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you, O Prophet! ’When
I said that he said: ‘Huwaitib?’I said: ‘Yes. I testify that there
is only One God and that you are the Messenger of Allah. ’He
said: ‘Praise be to Him Who has guided you. ’ He was
delighted by this and then I bequeathed forty thousand
Deenars to him as he had requested. I later took part in Hunain
and at-Ta’if with him and he gave me a hundred camels from
the spoils of Hunain as my reward. ”
Al-Waqidi said: “Huwaitib lived in Jahiliyyah for sixty years
and in Islam for sixty years. ” He died this year in al-Madinah
at the age of a hundred and twenty, while others claim that he
died in ash-Sham (the Levant).
Sa‘eed bin Yarboo‘ bin ‘Ankathah bin ‘Amir bin Makhzoom
embraced Islam in the year of the Conquest, he participated
in the battle of Hunain and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) gave him fifty camels as his
share of the booty. His original name was Surma, or Asram
according to another narration, though he was later named
Sa‘eed (which was considered a better name). He was also
one of the men appointed by ‘Umar to renew the boundary
markers of the Haram (Holy Sancturay in Makkah) during
65

which he lost his eyesight. ‘Umar later went to him to express
his sympathy over it.
Marrah bin Sharahbeel al-Hamdani was also referred to as
“Murrah at-Tayyib” and “Murrah al-Khair. ” Every day and
night he would pray a thousand Rak‘ah (units of prayer) and
when he grew old, he prayed four hundred Rak‘ah. It is said
that he would remain in prostration for so long that his
forehead would “eat the earth. ” When he was dying, he saw
a vision in his sleep in which the place where he was sleeping
was full of light. It was said to him: “Where is your house?”
To which he replied: “It is a house whose dwellers neither
depart from it nor die. ”
An-Nu‘aiman bin ‘Amr bin Rifa‘ah bin al-Harith took part in
the battle of Badr and the events following it. It is said he was
one of those who consumed Khamr (wine; alcohol), for which
reason the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) lashed him. On this occasion, a man amidst the people
said: “O Allah, curse him! How frequently he has been
brought to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on such a charge! ”The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “Do not curse him; for he loves
Allah and his Messenger! .
Sawdah bint Zam‘ah al-Qurashiyyah al-Amiriyyah, UmmulMu’mineen (Mother of the Believers) had married the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) after
Khadeejahhaving previously been married to as-Sakran bin
‘Amr, the brother of Suhail bin ‘Amr. When she grew old, the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
considered divorcing her, while other accounts state that he
did actually divorce her. She then asked that he keep her
amongst his women and in turn she would offer her appointed
day with him to ‘A’ishah. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) agreed to this after the following Verse
was revealed (which means):[“And if a woman fears cruelty
66

or desertion on her husband’s part. ” ] [an-Nisa’, 4:128]. She
was a pious and ascetic worshipper, as ‘A’ishah adds: “I
would not like to be in any other woman’s shoes except for
those of Sawdah, except that she possesses a solitude that
causes even her shadow to make haste. ”

Upon Entering the Fifty-Fifth Year
In this year, Mu‘awiyah discharged ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin
Ghailan from al-Basrah and appointed ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad
to take his place. Marwan bin al-Hakam, the deputy of alMadinah, led the Hajj Pilgrimage with the people. Also in this
year, Mu‘awiyah discharged ‘Abdullah bin Khalid bin Aseed
from al-Koofah and assigned it to ad-Dahhak bin Qais (May
Allah be pleased with him).

Remembering the Prominent People Who
Died in this Year
Arqam bin Abul-Arqam embraced Islam very early on, and
during its advent, his house was used as a hiding place and a
place of refuge from the Quraish for the early Muslims and
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). Arqam took part in Badr and the events following it. He
died al-Madinah in this year and Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas offered
his funeral prayer in fulfilment of Arqam’s wishes (may Allh
be pleased with them both). He was around eighty years of
age when he died.
Sahban bin Zufar, whose speech brought about the saying:
“An asylum is more fluent that Sahban. ”
Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas, Abu Ishaq al-Qurashi az-Zuhri, was
one of the ten promised Paradise and one of the six Ashabuash-Shoora (Companions of Consultation) who the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had been
67

pleased with when he died. He embraced Islam very early on,
with some claiming at the age of seventeen years.
He fought in the Battle of Badr and the events following it and
he was the first person to shoot an arrow for Allah’s Cause.
He was known for being a courageous horseman from among
the commanders of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he is mainly renowned
for being an outstanding commander-in-chief of the Muslim
army during the days of Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq), as well as in
the days of ‘Umar.
It is verified in Saheeh Muslim that Sa‘d’s son, ‘Umar, came
to him while he was occupied with his camels. Upon seeing
him like that, ‘Umar said to him: “The people are contending
with one another over leadership and you are here?” So he
struck him on the chest and said: “Be quiet, my son! I heard
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say: ‘Allah loves the slave who is pious, free from want
and hidden (from the eyes of the people). ’
Sa‘d said: “Indeed, I was the first person to shoot an arrow at
the Mushrikeen (polytheists) and the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had never sacrificed his
parents for anyone before me in reference to which I heard
him say: ‘Shoot arrows! Let my father and mother be
sacrificed for you!
’”
It is reported that Qais heard Sa‘d saying: “By Allah, I was
the first Arab to shoot an arrow for the Cause of Allah and at
that time we had nothing to eat other than the leaves of the
Hublah tree, such that our stools used to be similar to that of
the sheep. Now the Banu Asad tribe wants to reprimand me
for something concerning it! I would be a loser and all my
efforts would be in vain (if I learnt Islam anew from them). ”
68

It is reported that Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas said: “I saw the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on the day of the Battle of Uhud accompanied by two
men fighting. They were dressed in white and were fighting
with extreme bravery, I had never seen them before, nor did I
see them again after that” [it is said that they were the angels
JibreelandMeeka’eel].
‘A’ishah narrated: “One night, the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was unable to sleep and so
he said: ‘Would it be that a righteous man from my
Companions guard me tonight. ’Suddenly, we heard the
clatter of arms, whereupon the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) asked: ‘Who is it?’It was said: ‘I am
Sa‘ad, O Messenger of Allah! I have come to guard you. ’The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) then slept
so soundly that we heard him snoring. ”
Anas bin Malik is reported to have said: “While we were
sitting in the company of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), he said: ‘A man from the
people of Paradise is about to appear before you’, after which
Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas turned up. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) continued to say this until
the next day and Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas would keep on turning
up right afterwards. After the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) stood up, ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin al-‘As
turned to Sa‘d and said: ‘I have angered my father, so I swore
that I would not stay at home for three nights and that I would
stay with you until my vow is fulfilled’, so he agreed to let me
stay with him. After spending a night with Sa‘d, ‘Abdullah
bin ‘Amr claimed that Sa‘d did not got up once throughout
the night to observe the night prayer but instead spent it
turning over his bed in remembrance of Allah, exclaiming
“Allahu Akbar” (Allah is the Greatest) until he got up for Fajr
(dawn) prayer. He then prayed the prescribed prayer after
completing Wudhoo’ (ablution), following which he began to
69

eat his breakfast. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr spent no more than
three nights and days with him during which time he only
heard him say good things.
After the three nights had passed, ‘Abdullah was unimpressed
with Sa‘d’s behaviour and so said to him: ‘There is no longer
anger or separation between my father and I. However, I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) say three times in three gatherings: ‘A man from
the people of Paradise is about to appear before you’, and it
was you that turned up each time. For this reason, I wanted to
stay with you so that I might observe your deeds and emulate
you in order to present that which I have not yet put forth.
However, I did not see you do much, so what is it that caused
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to say
this about you?’So Sa‘d replied: ‘What is there other than
what you already saw? ’When he said that, ‘Abdullah walked
away but he called him back and so he returned to him. He
then said: ‘What is there other than what you saw of me not
harbouring any bad feelings or thoughts towards the Muslims,
nor do I have bad intentions about them or say bad things
about them. ’ ‘Abdullah then said: ‘This is what has made you
attain such a high degree, which I am not capable of. ’
In another narration, Sa‘d said: “The Verse (which means):
[‘but if they strive to make you join anything as a partner (in
worship) with Me, of which you have no knowledge, then
obey them not’] [al-‘Ankaboot, 29:8] was revealed
concerning me. ” This is because when he accepted Islam, his
mother vowed that she would not eat or drink until he
renounced his faith. He therefore said to her: “O mother! You
know that, by Allah, if you had a hundred souls and one soul
after the other were to depart, I would still not abandon this
religion, for anything. Therefore if you want to eat then eat;
and if you do not want to eat, then do not. ” Then this Ayah
(Qur’anic Verse) was revealed.
70

Jabir reports that: “We were with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when Sa‘d
entered, so the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: ‘This is my maternal uncle, so let a
man see his maternal uncle’” (narrated by at-Tirmidhi). Sa‘d
belonged to the Banu Zahrah tribe who were relatives of
Aminah, the mother of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). He was not Aminah’s brother nor was he
related to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) through lineage or suckling but nevertheless was
beloved to him (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
It is verified in the Saheehain [i. e. al-Bukhari and Muslim]
that ‘Amir bin Sa‘d reported that his father (Sa‘d bin Abi
Waqqas) said: “[When I fell ill], the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) came to pay me a visit. I said:
‘O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ! I have a great deal of property and no heir except my
only daughter. Shall I give two-thirds of my property in
charity?’He said: ‘No. ’ I said: ‘Half of it?’He said: ‘No. ’ I
said: ‘One-third of it?’He said: ‘You may do so, though onethird is also too much, for it is better for you to leave your
offspring wealthy than to leave them poor, which might cause
them to ask others for help. And whatever you spend (for
Allah’s sake) you will be rewarded for, even if it be a morsel
of food that you may put in the mouth of your wife. ’I said:
‘O Allah’s Messenger! ’Will I remain behind and fail to
complete my Hijrah (Migration) ?’The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: ‘If you are left behind
after me, whatever good deeds you will do for Allah’s sake
will enhance you and raise you high. Perhapyou will have a
long life so that some people might benefit from you while
others (enemies) might be harmed by you. ’Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) later
commiserated with Sa‘d bin Khawlah, as he died in Makkah.
”
71

Ahmad narrates on the authority of Yahya bin Sa‘eed from alJa‘d bin Aws from ‘A’ishah bint Sa‘d who said that her father
(Sa‘d) said: “The Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) put his hand on his forehead, then wiped his
face, chest and stomach and said: ‘O Allah! Cure Sa‘d and let
him complete his Hjirah (Migration). ” Sa‘d said: ‘I then felt
the cold relief of the Prophet’s hand on my liver for up to an
hour. ’
It is reported that Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq said that he heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say to Sa‘d: “O Allah! Make his arrow strike the target,
answer his supplication and make him beloved to your
servants. ”
It is narrated by Mut‘im bin al-Miqdam and others that Sa‘d
said: “O Messenger of Allah! Supplicate to Allah to answer
my supplications. ” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “Verily, Allah does not answer a
person’s supplication until his subsistencbecomes good
(lawful). ” So he said: “O Messenger of Allah! Then
supplicate to Allah to make my subsistence good”, so he did.
It is said that Sa‘d would be cautious even about the seeds he
would find in his farm, returning them to where they came
from.
Az-Zuhri said: “When the time of death approached Sa‘d, he
demanded for his old Jubbah (woollen cloak). Then he said:
‘Shroud me in this, for it is in this that I encountered the
Mushrikeen spolytheists) on the day of Badr and I have been
keeping it hidden until this day. ’”
Sa‘d passed away in al-‘Aqeeq just outside of al-Madinah. He
was then carried on the shoulders of men to al-Madinah where
Marwan offered his funeral prayer, which was attended by the
righteous UmmahatulMu’mineen (the Mothers of the
72

Believers). He was subsequently buried in al-Baqee‘ (a fertile
patch of land in al-Madinah where other members of the
Prophet’s family were buried). He passed away at the age of
eighty according to most sound account.
It is said that Sa‘d was short and sturdy with rough fingers and
coarse nails (which was considered a commendable quality in
a man). He was flat-nosed and had a hairy body, he would dye
his hair black and he left behind an inheritance amounting to
two hundred and fifty thousand.
Fadalah bin ‘Ubaid al-‘Ansari al-Awsi first took part in the
battle of Uhud and he participated in the Bai‘at ar-Ridwan
(Pledge of Satisfaction). He entered ash-Sham (the Levant)
and held the office of judge in Dimashq (Damascus) after Abi
ad-Darda’ during the era of Mu‘awiyah.
Qutham bin al-Abbas bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib most resembled
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) of all
his contemporaries. He was deputed over al-Madinah during
the days of ‘Ali and he took part in the conquest of Samarqand
(Samarkand), specifically the territories beyond the river
where he was martyred (may Allah have mercy on him).
Ka‘b bin ‘Amr Abul-Yusr al-Ansari as-Sulami participated in
the Pledge of al-‘Aqabah and the battle of Badr, which was
thday he took al-‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib prisoner, and he
took part in all subsequent events with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).

Upon Entering the Fifty-Sixth Year
Junadah bin Abi Umayyah spent the winter in the land of arRoom, while other accounts differ by stating it was ‘AbdurRahman bin Mas‘ood. It is also said that this was the year in
which Yazeed bin Shajarah undertook a naval expedition
against ar-Room, while ‘Iyad bin al-Harith invaded by land.
73

This was also the year when, Mu‘awiyah performed the
‘Umrah Pilgrimage in the month of Rajab and al-Waleed bin
‘Utbah bin Abi Sufyan led the Hajj Pilgrimage with the
people.
Mu‘awiyah assigned Sa‘eed bin ‘Uthman to the province of
Khurasan after discharging ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad. When
Sa‘eed arrived there, he encountered the Turks of Samarqand,
killing a large number of them, and according to Qutham bin
al-‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib, a group of Muslims were
martyred.
This was the year in which Mu‘awiyah called on the people,
including those within the outlying territories, to pledge
allegiance to his son, Yazeed, to be his heir to the Khilafah
(caliphate) after him. Almost all the subjects offered their
allegiance, with the exception of ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu
Bakr,
‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, al-Husain bin ‘Ali, ‘Abdullah bin AzZubair and Ibn ‘Abbas. Because of this, Mu‘awiyah passed
through al-Madinah on his way back from Makkah upon
completion of his ‘Umrah Pilgrimage, where he summoned
each one of the five aforementioned individuals and
threatened, intimidated and imprisoned them. The speaker
who addressed Mu’aawiyah sharply, with the greatest
firmness amongst them was ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr
as-Siddeeq, while ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin alKhattab was the
most soft spoken amongst them. Mu‘awiyah then delivered a
sermon, having stood these five men below the pulpit in full
view of the people, after which the people pledged allegiance
to Yazeed as they stood in silence without displaying their
disagreement or opposition for fear of being humiliated and
threatened. This was done in the other regions of the country
in order to facilitate the progress of pledging allegiance to
Yazeed.

74

On the other hand, Mu‘awiyah was criticised for putting
Yazeed in charge by Sa‘eed bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, who
requested that he assume his position as leader, despite Sa‘eed
saying: “By Allah, if the Ghootah (the name of the fertile oasis
on the south side of Damascus) were filled with men like you,
Yazeed would be dearer to me than all of you put together. ”

Upon Entering the Fifty-Seventh Year
In the month of Shawwal of this year, Mu‘awiyah discharged
Marwan bin al-Hakam from al-Madinah and appointed alWaleed bin ‘Utbah bin Abi Sufyan in his place, whoep
rformed the Hajj Pilgrimage for the people.
‘Uthman bin Hunaif al-Ansari al-Awsi died this year. He had
been appointed by ‘Umar as deputy of alKoofah, although
when Talhah and Zubair offered ‘A’ishah their loyalty,
‘Uthman bin Hunaif was prohibited from cooperating with the
Darul-Imarah (official headquarters), which ordered that his
beard, eyebrows and eyelashes be plucked out in order to set
an example to others. Thus, when ‘Ali came and the state was
handed over to him, ‘Uthman bin Hunaif said: “O AmeerulMu’mineen! I left you with a beard and I have been reunited
with you beardless. ” ‘Ali then smiled and said: “Your reward
for that is with Allah. ”

Upon Entering the Fifty-Eighth Year
During this year, Yazeed bin Shajarah was killed at sea and
al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah bin Abi Sufyan led the Hajj Pilgrimage
with the people.
Mu‘awiyah appointed ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Abdullah bin
‘Uthman bin Rabee‘ah ath-Thaqafi, Ibn
Ummul-Hakam (the son of Ummul-Hakam who was the sister
of Mu‘awiyah), over al-Koofah. Ibn Ummul-Hakam,
however, had a bad reputation among the people of al-Koofah
75

and as a result was exiled from the land. He went to see his
maternal uncle, Mu‘awiyah, to tell him what had happened,
after which Mu‘awiyah appointed him over Egypt. At that
time, however, Ibn Ummul-Hakam came across Mu‘awiyah
bin Hudaij who had just arrived to pay Mu‘awiyah a visit.
When Mu‘awiyah bin Hudaij entered upon Mu‘awiyah, he
also found Mu‘awiyah’s sister, Ummul-Hakam, who said to
him: “He is not welcome here! listening to one good thing is
better than seeing him. ” Mu‘awiyah bin Hudaij replied:
“Take it easy, O Ummul-Hakam! You wanted your son who
is a wrongdoer to be appointed as a ruler over us even though
he would treat us in the same way that he treated our brothers
among the people of al-Koofah, though Allah did not allow it.
If that would have happened then we would have beaten him
severely until he bowed his head, which the one sitting down
(meaning Mu‘awiyah) would not have liked. ” Then
Mu‘awiyah turned to her and said: “Stop. ”

A Strange Story
This story is relates to an incident that took place between an
adolescent from the Bani ‘Udhrah tribe and Ibn UmmulHakam. In short, the story goes that one day the adolescent
from Bani ‘Udhrah was sitting down to eat with Mu‘awiyah.
Suddenly, the adolescent stood up and started to recite some
poetry in which he evoked his deep love for his wife, Su‘ad.
Bewildered at his behaviour, Mu‘awiyah drew close to him
and queried him about the matter, to which he said: “O
Ameerul-Mu’mineen! I had been married to the daughter of
my paternal uncle and I spent all that I owned of camels and
goats on her. Once I had barely anything left, her father began
to dislike me and made a complaint about me to your
administrative officer in al-Koofah, namely, Ibn UmmulHakam, whereby he informed him of her beauty. As a result,
I was imprisoned behind bars and persuaded to divorce her,
then once she had completed her ‘Iddah (period of waiting),
76

she was granted ten thousand Dirhams by your administrative
officer who later married her himself. And now I come to you,
O Ameerul-Mu’mineen, while you are saddened,
apprehensive and troubled by your affairs. So I ask, is there
any freedom from sorrow?” Then he began to cry and recite:
“My heart is flamed
With sparks of fire;
My body is emaciated
And my colour has gone pale;
My eyes shed tears of sorrow
Their tears are abundant;
Love is an arduous ailment
With which a doctor is puzzled;
In love, I have been greatly burdened
My nights are not ordinary nights;
Endurance is vanishing
And my days are not ordinary days. ”
Feelint sorry for him, Mu‘awiyah wrote to Ibn UmmulHakam reprimanding him and condemning him for what he
had done, and therefore ordered him to divorce Su‘ad
irrevocably. When Mu‘awiyah’s letter reached him, he deeply
sighed and said: “I had wanted the Ameer al-Mu’mineen to
let me spend at least a year with her before he exposed me to
the sword. ” He then tried to persuade himself to divorce her
but he could not bring himself to do so, such that even the
77

messenger who delivered Mu‘awiyah’s letter began to urge
him to do it himself. Finally, he decided to divorce having
explained to her what had happened and then he sent her away
with the messenger to be taken to Mu‘awiyah. As she stood
before Mu‘awiyah, however, he saw that she was as beautiful
as they had claimed and upon questioning her, he considered
her the most eloqueny and well spoken, as well as the most
beautiful and graceful, of women. At that, he said to her
cousin (the adolescent): “O Bedouin! Is it any consolation that
she is the most desirable woman?” He said: “Yes, if you
separatd my head from my body. ” He then recited:
“Do not make an example out of me for others, As an
appellant swelter on its way to the fire.
Bring Su‘ad back to the bewildered and grieved,
Whose evenings and
mornings are spent in sorrow
and commiseration. He who
has been befallen by
solicitude,
The heart is ignited in flames.
I pledge I will not forget her affection,
Until I am entombed.
How can I be consoled while my heart is fond of her
And the heart has become unwilling to maintain patience. ”

78

Mu‘awiyah said: “Then we shall let her choose between me,
you and Ibn Ummul-Hakam”, at which point she spoke up
and said:
“If I were dressed in rags and tatters
And in need for wealth,
It would be favourable to my father and neighbour
And to the possessors of Dirham and Deenar
That I dare the flames of Hell as one who is faithless. ”
Then, Mu‘awiyah laughed and accordingly ordered that the
adolescent receive ten thousand Dirhams, a means of
transport and a riding animal. Once she had completed her
‘Iddah, Mu‘awiyah returned her to him so that they could be
remarried.

Remembering The Prominent People who
Died
Sa‘eed bin al-‘As al-Qurashi al-Umawi died in this year. His
father was killed in the Battle of Badr as a disbeliever. He
grew up in the house of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan (May Allah be
pleased with him) and was nine years of age when the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) died. Of all the people, he most resembled the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in his manner of
speech and he was one of the twelve men -- amongst whom
were the likes of Ubayy bin Ka‘b and Zaid bin Thabit -- to
have learned the Qur’an and written it down. ‘Uthman
appointed him as the deputy over al-Koofah after al-Waleed
bin ‘Uqbah was dismissed, during which time he succeeded
in conquering Tabaristan and Jurjan (provinces of Khurasan).
79

When ‘Uthman passed away, he stayed aloof from the
ensuing Fitnah (trials and tribulations) and did notparticipate
in the battles of al-Jamal and Siffeen. He was endowed with
upright conduct and a good heart.
Ibn ‘Asakir said: “He owned a house in Dimashq (Damascus)
which became known as the “blessed house” and the
“watering place of ease. ” He later returned to al-Madinah
where he resided until his death. He was eminent, generous
and praiseworthy. ”
Ibn ‘Umar is reported to have said that a woman went to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in the cold of winter and said: “I vow to give this Thawb
(garment worn by men) to the noblest ‘Arab. ” So he said:
“Give it to this youth” (referring to Sa‘eed bin al-‘As) as he
was standing there. Thus, these garments were named “asSa‘eediyyah” after him.
Shaddad bin Aws bin Thabit bin al-Mundhir bin Haram, Abu
Ya‘la al-Ansari al-Khazraji, was an honourable Companion
and the brother of Hassan bin Thabit. Shaddad travelled to
Palestine and the Bait ul-Maqdis (the House of Holiness, in
Jerusalem) in the same year that he died, aged seventy-five.
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amir, the son of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan’s
maternal uncle, was born during the lifetime of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) rubbed
his saliva in his mouth and he swallowed the saliva of the
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) at his
birth and it was said: “He has been quenched. ” He was also
appointed deputy over al-Basrah and assigned leadership over
Persia.
He was the first to adopt the basin at ‘Arafat that channelled
the flow of the special spring water into it. He remained in al80

Basrah until the killing of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan and thereafter,
he took the money belonging to the Bait ul-Mal (public
treasury) and handed it over to Talhah and Zubair with whom
he sided throughout the Battle of the Camel. Following this,
he travelled to Dimashq (Damascus), though he is not
mentioned in any reports as having participated in the Battle
of Siffeen.
Mu‘awiyah was married to his daughter, Hind, a beautiful
woman about whom it is said that she used to amorously
follow him to work. One day, when he looked in the mirror
and saw her face in the reflection next to his, with all the grey
hair that he had in his beard, he decided to divorce her. He
then went to visit her father to inform him of his decision and
told him that she deserved to be married to a much younger
man, since his face had become “like a page from the Qur’an
manuscript. ”
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with
them) was the eldest son of Abu Bakr asSiddeeq and was well
known for his jokes and jocular manner. His mother was
Umm Rumman, the mother of ‘A’ishah, and thus, he was her
full brother. He fought alongside the Mushrikeen (polytheists)
in the battles of Badr and Uhud, during which there are several
accounts of how he sought to kill his own father, Abu Bakr,
who was on the opposing side. The story goes that as his
father Abu Bakr advanced towards his son, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to him:
“Save yourself. ” He later entered the fold of Islam during the
time of the truce, i. e. al-Hudaibiyah. He migrated prior to the
Conquest and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) provided him with provisions amounting
to forty Wasq from Khaibar every year. He was among the
nobles of the Muslims.
It was ‘Abdur-Rahman who entered upon the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on the day
81

that he died while ‘A’ishah was supporting the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on her chest. ‘AbdurRahman had a fresh Siwak (stick used for cleansing the teeth)
with him and he was cleaning his teeth with it. Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
looked at it, so ‘Abdur-Rahman took the Siwak, cut it, shook
it, made it soft with water and then gave it to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who cleaned his
teeth with it in the best way that he had ever done so. After he
had finished, he lifted his hand (or his finger) and said: “O
Allah! Let me be with the highest companions”, and then he
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) died.
‘A’ishah would say that Allah mixed her saliva with the saliva
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
He died while his head was resting between her chin and chest
and on the day on which she received the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) in her house.
‘Abdur-Rahman participated in the conquest of al-Yamamah,
and killed seven people on that day. He died in a place known
as al-Hubshi, and was carried on the shoulders of men to
where he was buried at the peak of Makkah. When ‘A’ishah
went to visit him in Makkah, she said: “By Allah! If I had seen
you, I would not have cried for you and if I had been with you,
I would not have moved you from the place in which you died.
”
Ibn Sa‘d reported that one day Ibn ‘Umar saw that a tent had
been pitched over the grave of ‘AbdurRahman, which had
been put there by ‘A’ishah before she left, so he ordered for it
to be taken down and said: “Verily, it is his deeds that will
shelter and protect him. ”
‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib, al-Qurashi alHashimi, was the son of the paternal uncle of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and was
82

a year younger than his brother, ‘Abdullah. Their mother was
Umm ul-Fadhl , Lubabah bint al-Harith al-Hilaliyah.
‘Ubaidullah was noble, handsome and graceful, resembling
his father in his good looks. It has been reported that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would ascribe great qualities in describing ‘Abdullah
and ‘Ubaidullah and say: “Whoever beats me (in a
competition, race, etc) is such and such”, then they would win
over him and climb on his back and chest and he would hug
and kiss them.
‘Ubaydullah was appointed by ‘Ali bin Abi Talib during his
caliphate as a deputy over Yemen and he led the Hajj
Pilgrimage with the people in the thirty-sixth and thirtyseventh year. When he and his brother arrived in al-Madinah,
it was said that ‘Abdullah enriched the people with knowledge
whilst ‘Ubaidullah enhanced their nobility.
He died in the fifty-eighth year in al-Madinah, while some
maintain in Yemen, and there is only one narration on this
subject.
It is reported that ‘Ubaydullah bin ‘Abbas said that
Ghumaisa’, or Rumaisa’, the wife of Rifa‘ah alQurazi, went
to Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) to complain about him, saying: “O Messenger of Allah!
Rifa‘ah divorced me irrevocably. After him, I married
‘Abdur-Rahman bin az-Zubair al-Qurazi who proved to be
impotent. ” Her husband then turned up and accused her of
lying, claiming that she was only saying this because she
wanted to return to her first husband. Allah’s Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) therefore said to
her: “Perhaps you want to return to Rifa‘ah? But no, you
cannot return to Rifa‘ah until you enjoy the sexual
relationship (i. e. , consummate your marriage) with ‘AbdurRahman and he with you. ”
83

Among those who died this year was Umm ul-Mu’mineen
‘A’ishah bint Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq, the most beloved wife of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), the “Lady above the Seven Heavens” (may Allah be
pleased with her). Her mother wasUmm Rumman bint ‘Amir
bin ‘Uwaimir al-Kinaniyah and ‘A’ishah’s epithet was Umm
‘Abdullah, which she was named by the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with reference to
her sister’s son, ‘Abdullah bin Zubair. It has also been said
that she miscarried the unborn child of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who he had named
‘Abdullah.
She was the only virgin that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) married. He never received Wahy
(Divine inspiration; revelation) in the bed of any other woman
and none of his other wives loved him like she did. The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) married
her in Makkah after the death of Khadeejah, about which the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said that
‘A’ishah was shown to him two or three times in his dreams
being given to him by a man carrying her in a silken cloth.
The man said to him: “This is your wife. ” So the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “I
uncovered it and behold, it was ‘A’ishah. ” He then said to
himself: “If this dream is from Allah, He will cause it to come
true. ” Hence, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) asked Abu Bakr for ‘A’ishah’s hand in marriage,
who said: “O Messenger of Allah! Is she lawful for you to
marry?” He said: “Yes. ” At this, Abu Bakr said: “But am I
not your brother?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) replied: “You are my brother in Islam and she
(‘A’ishah) is lawful for me to marry”, so the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) married her
and she was blessed with him (peace and blessings upon him).

84

When the people of falsehood slandered her and levied false
accusations against her, Allah cleared her of these claims and
declared her innocence in the revelation of ten Ayat (verses
of the Qur’an; signs) that were received gradually.
Among her distinct favours (may Allah be pleased with her)
was that she was allocated two days with the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him):her own day and the day
she was given by Sawdah as a means of conciliating with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) died in her house on her allocated day while his head
was between her chin and chest. Allah mixed the saliva of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with hers
during the final hours of his time in the world and in his first
hour of the Hereafter. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was later buried in her house.
‘A’ishah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Verily, it is comforting
to me that I saw the white of ‘A’ishah’s palms in Paradise. ”
Another quality of ‘A’ishah is that she was the most
knowledgeable wife of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), in fact, she is regarded as the most
knowledgeable of all women. It is verified in Saheeh alBukhari that ‘Amr bin al-‘As is reported to have said: “O
Messenger of Allah! Who is the most beloved person to you?”
He said: “‘A’ishah. ” I asked: “And among the men?” He said:
“Her father. ”
It is also narrated in Saheeh al-Bukhari that Abu Moosa
reported that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “Many men have reached the level
of perfection but none amongst the women have reached this
level except for Maryam, the daughter of ‘Imran, Khadeejah
bint Khuwailid, and Asiyah, the wife of Fir‘awn. And there is
85

no doubt that the superiority of ‘A’ishah above other women
is like the superiority of Thareed (a meat and bread dish) to
other meals. ”
‘A’ishah narrated that Halah bint Khuwailid, Khadeejah’s
sister, once asked the permission of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to enter. Upon hearing her
voice, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
remembered the way Khadeejah used to ask permission and
that upset him. He said: “O Allah! Halah! ”So, ‘A’ishah
became jealous and said: “What makes you remember an old
woman amongst the old women of Quraish with a toothless
mouth and red gums who died long ago, and in whose place
Allah has given you someone better than her?” [al-Bukhari].
Abu Salamah narrated that ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased
with her) said: “Once, Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me: ‘O ‘A’ishah! This
is Jibreel (Gabriel) greeting you. ’I said to Allah’s Messenger
: ‘Peace and Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him, you
see what I don’t see. ’”
It is verified in Saheeh al-Bukhari that the people used to send
presents to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on ‘A’ishah’s day with him. ‘A’ishah said: “My
companions, i. e. , the other wives of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) gathered in the house of
Umm Salamah and said: ‘O Umm Salamah! By Allah, the
people choose to send presents on the day when ‘A’ishah has
her turn and we too love good things (i. e. presents, etc. ) as
she does. You should tell Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to tell the people to send their
presents to him wherever he may be, irrespective of whose
turn it is. ’Umm Salamah told this to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who then turned away from
her. The wives continued to say this and so she returned to
him and repeated herself, but the Prophet (Peace and
86

Blessings of Allah be upon him) turned away again, and after
she had done this a third time, the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “O Umm Salamah!
Don’t trouble me by harming ‘A’ishah, for by Allah, the
Divine Revelation never came to me while I was under the
blanket of any woman amongst you except her. ”
It is also mentioned that the wives of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent his daughter, Fatimah,
to tell him: “Your wives request that you treat them and the
daughter of Abu Bakr on equal terms. ” At this, he said: “O
my daughter! Don’t you love who I love?” She replied in the
affirmative, then he said: “Then love this one (i. e. ‘A’ishah).
”
On another occasion, the wives of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent Zainab bint Jahsh to see
him (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while he was
with ‘A’ishah, upon which Zainab used harsh words and
raised her voice at her. ‘A’ishah’s response to Zainab silenced
her, which caused the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) to look at ‘A’ishah and say: “She is really the
daughter of Abu Bakr! ” It has also been narrated that when
‘Ammar came shouting to the people and inciting them to kill
Talhah and az-Zubair in the days of the Battle of al-Jamal,
‘Ammar and al-Hasan bin ‘Ali ascended onto the pulpit of alKoofah whereupon ‘Ammar heard somebody insulting
‘A’ishah and so he said to him: “Silence, you despicable
outcast! By Allah! She is the wife of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the world and
in the Hereafter, it is only a trial from Allah to see whether it
is He you obey or her. ”
‘A’ishah died in the fifty-eighth year and there isconsensus
that this happened in the month of Ramadan (the month of
fasting; the ninth month in the Islamic calendar). She
requested to be buried in al-Baqee‘ (a fertile garden in which
87

family members of theProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) were buried) at night, and that Abu Hurairah
should offer the funeral prayer after the time of Witr (the night
prayer performed after Isha’ (night prayer) and before Fajr
(dawn) prayer). At the time of her death, she was aged sixtyseven and she was just eighteen when the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) died.

Upon Entering the Fifty-Ninth Year
In this year, Mu‘awiyah discharged Ibn Umm ul-Hakam from
duty in al-Koofah and appointed Nu‘man bin Basheer in his
place. Mu‘awiyah also appointed ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Ziyad
as ruler of Khurasan after dismissing Sa‘eed bin ‘Uthman bin
‘Affan from the post, while ‘Abdur-Rahman’s brother,
‘Ubaidullah, was assigned to al-Basrah and ‘Abbad bin Ziyad
to Sijistan. ‘Abdur-Rahman governed over Khurasan until the
time of Yazeed.

The Story of Yazeed bin Rabee‘ah bin
Mufarrigh al-Himyari and the Two Sons of
Ziyad, ‘Ubaidullah and ‘Abbad
Ibn Jareer recalls on the authority of Abu ‘Ubaidah, Ma‘mar
bin al-Muthanna, and others that Ibn Mufarrigh, a well-known
poet, was with ‘Abbad bin Ziyad in Sijistan who had assigned
him to fight in the war against the Turks. During the war, the
soldiers were troubled by a shortage of fodder for their riding
animals and as a result, Ibn Mufarrigh satirized Ibn Ziyad in
a poem (al-Wafir, name of the poetic meter) in which he
ridiculed his appearance, saying:
“Had all beards been made of grass
We would feed the Muslims’ horses with it. ”

88

‘Abbad bin Ziyad had a remarkably big beard and so when he
heard the satire it offended him. He summoned Ibn Mufarrigh,
who ran away instead of responding to the summons. ‘Abbad
bin Ziyad subsequently wrote to his brother, ‘Ubaidullah, who
took the satirical verses to Mu‘awiyah and read them to him,
informing him that Ibn Mufarrigh had fled upon being
summoned and requesting that Mu‘awiyah grant them a
warrant for his death. However, Mu‘awiyah said: “Do not kill
him; rather, discipline without going so far as to kill him. ”
When ‘Ubaidullah returned to al-Basrah, he summoned Ibn
Mufarrigh who had sought refuge with ‘Ubaidullah’s fatherin-law, and who had agreed to let him stay at his home.
Consequently, ‘Ubaidullah ordered that Ibn Mufarrigh be
given laxatives and then saddled on a donkey upon which he
should be taken round the market places until his bowels give
way in view of the people. After he had suffered this
humiliation, he then ordered him to be exiled to Sijistan to the
area under his brother, ‘Abbad bin Ziyad. At that point, Ibn
Mufarrigh said to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad:
“Water cleanses what you have done
Whilst my statement is firmer than the power of excretion! ”
It follows that the people of Yemen appealed to Mu‘awiyah
concerning Ibn Mufarrigh’s affair as they said that he had
been sent to ‘Ubaidullah’s brother, ‘Abbad, who was going to
kill him. Mu‘awiyah therefore summoned Ibn Mufarrigh to
him and as he stood before Mu‘awiyah, he began to cry and
complain to him about what Ibn Ziyad had done to him, to
which Mu‘awiyah said: “You certainly made a mockery of
him. Did you not say that (i. e. the satire) ? ”Ibn Mufarrigh,
however, denied saying any of it and told Mu‘awiyah that it
was ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Hakam, the brother of Marwan,
who had said it but he wanted him to take the blame for it.
Upon hearing this, Mu‘awiyah was so angered by
89

‘AbdurRahman bin al-Hakam that he withheld all benefits
from him until ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad felt satisfied again.
‘Uthman bin Muhammad bin Abu Sufyan led the Hajj
Pilgrimage with the people in this year.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year
The poet Hutai’ah, his name is Jarwal bin Aws bin Malik bin
Ju’ayyah bin Makhzoom, Abu Mulaikah, was given the
epithet “the short poet” on account of his height. He left
Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic period of ignorance) by embracing
Islam during the days of as-Siddeeq ( i. e. , Abu Bakr). He
was renowned for his derisive speech and sarcasm that was so
profound that he even ridiculed his own father and mother, his
maternal uncle and paternal uncle, and even himself and his
wife. About his mother, he said (in atTaweel poetry):
“Abdicate from me and move far away,
May the Lord relieve the worlds of your existence;
You are like a sieve when trusted with a secret,
And a brazier for the gossipers among us;
May God afford you evil through incompetence,
And repay you with the recalcitrance of your children. ”
He would often criticise himself by saying such things as (in
at-Taweel):
“Today, my lips were determined to speak
Words that I do not know to whom they address;
90

I see a face that has been malformed by its Creator
What an ugly face whose owner is blemished. ”
When the people complained about him to Ameer ulMu’mineen ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, he summoned and
imprisoned him. In fact, the prime reason for his
imprisonment was because az-Zibriqan bin Badr complained
to ‘Umar that Jarwal bin Aws had mocked him, saying (in alBaseet poetry):
“Relinquish good traits and do not pursue them;
Be seated, as you are an eater and wearer. ”
Upon imprisoning him, ‘Umar said: “O malicious person! I
am preventing you from harming the Muslims. ” Following
this, ‘Amr bin al-‘As spoke to ‘Umar on his behalf and had
him released on the condition that he would vow not to
ridicule people and repent for what he had done. It is also said
that ‘Umar had wanted to cut off his tongue, were it not for
the people who pleaded for his release, which ‘Umar agreed
to.
When Hutai’ah was summoned before the court, he was told
to plead his case. He therefore said: “I will plead to you; with
poetry”, upon which he started to recite:
“Poetry is complex and long to deliver’’’
If one attempts to climb what he does not know,
He makes the mistake of falling into ruin. ’
Poetry is not for he who oppresses and wrongs it,
And instead of making it comprehensible, he makes it
nonsensical. ”
91

‘Abdullah bin Malik, Abu Muhammad, entered the fold of
Islam very early on after having befriended the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He was
known for being pious, upright and for fasting frequently.
Qais bin Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah al-Ansari al-Khazraji was an
honourable Companion like his father. He appears in
Ahadeeth (narrations) in the Saheehain [i. e. al-Bukhari and
Muslim] that allude to performing the Janazah (funeral rites),
the fasting of ‘AShoora’ (the 10th day of the Islamic month
of Muharram), the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) washing in their house, as well as
others. He served the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) for ten years.
Qais was a courageous, praiseworthy, generous and obedient
noble man. ‘Ali deputed him over alMadinah and he did not
seek to apply himself in the service of Mu‘awiyah until he had
been discharged from duty in Egypt by ‘Ali. Qais stood by
‘Ali, participating in the battles of Siffeen and an-Nahrawan
with him, and continued to support ‘Ali until he was killed,
after which he travelled to al-Madinah.
An old woman once said to Qais: “I want to raise a complaint
to you about the lack of mice in my house. ” So he said:
“There could not have been a more striking analogy than this!
Fill her house with bread, meat, animal fat and dates! ”
Qais bin Sa‘d is reported to have said: “Had I not heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say: ‘The treacherous and deceitful are in the Hellfire’ ,
I would have been the most deceitful person of this Ummah
(Muslim nation). ”
‘Amr bin Deenar is reported to have said: “Qais bin Sa‘d had
a huge physique and a small head. He had a very thin and
flimsy beard, and when he mounted a donkey his feet would
92

touch the ground. He died in al-Madinah towards the end of
Mu‘awiyah’s caliphate. ”
Ma‘qil bin Yasar al-Muzani, an honourable Companion who
participated in al-Hudaibiyah, was the one who raised the
branches of the tree away from the face of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while the
people were giving their pledges underneath it. This occasion
is referred to in the Qur’an in which Allah, the Sublime, says
(what means):
“Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they
gave the Bai‘ah (pledge) to you, O Muhammad, under the
tree. ” [al-fath, 48:18]
He was appointed by ‘Umar as governor of al-Basrah, and he
built a dam during this period to channel the high water levels
of the river. It was accordingly named the River Ma‘qil, and
it is also said that he owned a house there (in al-Basrah).
Al-Hasan al-Basri said that ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad went to see
Ma‘qil bin Yasar when he was suffering from a fatal illness.
Ma‘qil said to him: “I am going to tell you a narration I heard
from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that I would not tell you if I were not in this state. Verily, I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) say: ‘Any man to whom Allah has given the
authority of ruling people and who does not look after them
in an honest manner, will never attain even the smell of
Paradise. ’”

The Prominent People who Died in that
Year:
Abu Hurairah ad-Dawsi (May Allah be pleased with him),
whose real name was ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Sakhr, died in this
year. It is verified in the Saheeh that the Messenger of Allah
93

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would call him
“Abu Hirr” and “Abu Hurairah”, meaning “Father of the
Kitten”, as he would carry a kitten around with him. His
mother’s name was Maimoonah bint Sabeeh and she entered
the fold of Islam and died as a Muslim. Abu Hurairah
submitted to Islam in the year of the Battle of Khaibar. He had
a tanned complexion, broad shoulders and hair that he wore
braided into two sections.
It is verified in Saheeh al-Bukhari that Abu Hurairah once lost
his slave during the night. The slave then came when he was
sitting with the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), at which the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “O Abu Hurairah! Your slave has come back.
” Abu Hurairah said: “Indeed, I would like you to witness that
I have manumitted him for the sake of Allah, the Majestic. ”
This happened at the time when Abu Hurairah recited the
following verses of poetry:
‘What a long, tedious, tiresome night!
Nevertheless, it has delivered us from the land of Kufr
(disbelief). ’
Abu Hurairah constantly stayed in the company of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) after embracing
Islam, so much so that he neither parted from him while at
home or during his travels. He was particularly eager to listen
to the narrations of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) to acquire juristic knowledge and understanding
from him, and he would bind his stomach in order to quell
hunger pangs.
It is reported on the authority of Yazeed bin ‘Abdur-Rahman
bin Udhainah as-Suhaimi – a blind man – that Abu Hurairah
said: “By Allah! Allah has not created a believer who hears or
sees me and does not love me. ” Yazeed bin ‘Abdur-Rahman
94

said: “And what have you done to deserve this, O Abu
Hurairah?” He said: “My mother was a Mushrikah
(polytheist) and I invited her to embrace Islam but she refused
to do so. One day, I called her to Islam and she told me
something concerning the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that I hated hearing. So I
went to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) crying and said: “O Messenger of Allah! I
invited my mother to submit to Islam but she refused. I tried
to call her to it today, upon which she told me something
concerning you that I hated, so please supplicate that Allah
guides the mother of Abu Hurairah. ” At this, the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “O Allah!
Guide the mother of Abu Hurairah. ” Having heard about the
supplication of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), Abu Hurairah’s mother rushed to his doorstep but
she found it was locked, although she could hear water
running and the sound of footsteps coming from inside and so
she shouted: “O Abu Hurairah! I know you are there! ”He
then opened the door to see her wearing her a loose outer
garment and a Khimar (veil) that she had put on in a hurry.
She said: “I declare that there is only One God and that
Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger. ” Abu Hurairah
said: “I then went back to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and cried out of happiness as
I had cried from sadness. I said to the Messenger of Allah: ‘O
Messenger of Allah! Please supplicate to Allah to make me
and my mother beloved to His believing servants and to make
them beloved to me’, so he said: ‘O Allah! Make these two
servants of yours, this man and his mother, loved by Your
believing servants and make them loved by these two. ’I then
said: ‘Allah has not created a believer who hears or sees me
or my mother and does not love me. ’” (This has been reported
by Muslim).
Salim Mawla an-Nasriyeen reported that he heard Abu
Hurairah saying that he heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace
95

and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: “Verily,
Muhammad is a human being and I get angry as other humans
get angry, and I have taken a covenant with You that will not
be broken. Therefore, any person among the Muslims whom
I have abused, upon whom I have invoked a curse or whom I
have whipped, make it a source of purity and mercy for him
and bring him closer to You on the Day of Resurrection. ”
Abu Hurairah said: “One day, the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) picked up a beating rod to
hit me with. This beating is more beloved to me now than
possessing red camels, as I am a believer and Allah answers
the supplications of His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). ”
Ibn Abi Dh’ib reported from Sa‘eed al-Maqburi that Abu
Hurairah said: “I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! I hear many
Ahadeeth (narrations) from you but I forget them. ’Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
‘Spread your Rida’ (upper wrap-like garment). ’So I did
accordingly and then he moved his hands as if filling them
with something (and emptied them into my Rida’) and then
said: ‘Take and wrap this sheet over your body. ’I did this
and after that I never forgot anything again. ” (al-Bukhari).
‘Abdur-Rahman al-A‘raj said that he heard Abu Hurairah say:
“You all allege that Abu Hurairah narrates too many
Ahadeeth on the authority of the Messenger of Allah. In fact,
Allah knows best whether what I say is true or not. I was a
poor man keeping the company of Allah’s Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and was satisfied with
what he put in my stomach. I used to be present whilst they
(the Muhajireen and the Ansar) were tending to their business
in the market places and dealing with their money. One day,
I was sitting with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who said: ‘Whoever spreads
his sheet before I finish this statement of mine and then
gathers it over his chest will never forget anything that I say.
96

’So, I spread out my Rida’ (garment) which was the only one
I owned until the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) finished his statement and then I gathered it over
my chest. By Him in Whose Hands is my soul, from that day
on I have not forgotten anything that I heard from him. ”
It is reported that Abu Hurairah said: “O Messenger of Allah!
Who will be most fortunate to gain your intercession on the
Day of Resurrection?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “O Abu Hurairah! I knew that none
would ask me about this Hadeeth before you, as I know your
eagerness to learn Ahadeeth. The most fortunate person to
have my intercession of the Day of Resurrection will be the
one who says: ‘None has the right to be worshipped but Allah’
sincerely from the bottom of his heart. ”
Abu Hurairah narrated: “I have memorised two kinds of
knowledge from Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). I have conveyed one of them to you and
if I convey the other then my throat will be cut. ” This vessel
of knowledge that was not disclosed pertained to the trials and
tribulations, that is, the battles and wars, that later ensued
between the people. Abu Hurairah possessed knowledge of
these events regarding which, if he were to convey
information before they occurred, many people would have
accused him of lying and rebuked whatever he told them of
the truth.
Abu Salih is reported to have said that Abu Hurairah
memorised the most from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) of all the Companions,
though he was not the most virtuous amongst them. ArRabee‘ states that ash-Shafi‘i said: “Abu Hurairah was the
most learned of his contemporaries in memorising the
narration of Hadeeth. ”

97

Hammam bin Munabbih is reported to have said that he heard
Abu Hurairah say: “There is nobody amongst the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) who can narrate more Ahadeeth than
me, except for ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr, as he can write whereas I
cannot. ”
Abu Hurairah said that a Hadeeth ascribed to him once
reached ‘Umar who sent for him. ‘Umar said: “You were with
us on the day that we were with the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the house of so and
so?” He said: “Yes. I thought you would not ask me about
that. ” ‘Umar said: “I did not ask you. ” So Abu Hurairah said:
“On that day, the Messenger of Allah said: ‘Whoever tells a
lie against me (intentionally) then surely let him occupy the
Hellfire. ” So he said: “Then go ahead and narrate it. ”
Ibn ‘Umar is reported to have said that on one occasion he
passed by Abu Hurairah who was narrating that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “He who accompanies the funeral procession and
remains with it until the funeral prayer is offered will have a
reward equal to one Qiraat. If he waits until the dead body is
buried, he will have a reward equal to two Qiraats. They
asked: ‘What are two Qiraats?’He said: ‘They are as huge as
two mountains. ’” Then he said: “I was not preoccupied
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) with planting trees or trading
in the marketplaces. Instead, I would request that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) teach me something or give me something to eat. ” Ibn
‘Umar said to him: “O Abu Hirr! The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) made it your duty to teach us
his Ahadeeth. ”
Abu ‘Uthman an-Nahdi is reported to have said: “Abu
Hurairah would observe the night prayer for a third of the
98

night, spend a third of it with his wife and third of it with his
child, meaning that he would pray, then sleep, then wake up,
then spend time with his wife, then sleep and so on.
The Saheehain reports that Abu Hurairah said: “My Khaleel
(friend, i. e. theProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ) advised me to observe three things and I shall not leave
them until I die:
(1) to observe Sawm (fasting) three days every (lunar) month;
(2) to offer the Dhuha prayer (at sunrise) ; and
(3) to offer Witr (the night prayer performed after Isha’ (night
prayer) and before Fajr (dawn prayer) ) before sleeping. ”
‘Ikrimah said: “Abu Hurairah would glorify Allah every night
by doing twelve thousand Tasbeehah (exhortations of Allah;
chants). ”
Maimoon bin Abu Maisarah is reported to have said: “Abu
Hurairah would have two outcries every day. In the first one
of the day he would say: ‘The night has gone and the day has
come and the family of Fir‘awn (Pharoah) have been
submitted into the Hellfire. ’Then in the evening he would
say: ‘The day has gone and the night has come and the family
of Fir‘awn (Pharoah) have been submitted into the Hellfire.
’Nobody would hear his voice other than when he was
seeking refuge in Allah from the Hellfire.
It is reported that Abu Hurairah was leading the prayer one
day with the people and after they had completed it he raised
his voice and said: “All praise belongs to Allah Who has made
the Deen (way of life, i. e. Islam) the establishment of prayer,
and made Abu Hurairah an Imam (leader) of it after he had
been working for the daughter of Ghazwan who would feed
him. ” Then he said: “By Allah, O people of Islam! My labour
for them was for a small piece of dry bread whereby I would
99

be on duty throughout the dark and misty night. Then Allah
willed that I marry her and after that I would mount a horse
when they did, work when they did, and dismount when they
did. ”
Muhammad bin Seereen reported that Abu Hurairah said to
his son: “Do not wear gold, as I fear the heat of the flames for
you. ”
When death approached him, he cried and so it was said to
him: “What are you crying for?” He said: “I am not crying
over this world, rather I am crying about the distance of my
journey and my lack of provisions. I have ascended and
descended between Paradise and the Hellfire and I do not
know which of them will take me. ”
It is reported that when Abu Hurairah would pass by a Janazah
(funeral procession) he would say: “They have gone and we
will be going tomorrow, or they will be called on tomorrow
and we are going today. Deep spiritual exhortation and hasty
heedlessness; the first goes with you and renders the other one
senseless. ”
It has also been narrated that he cried when death approached
him, so it was said to him: “Why are you crying?” He said:
“Due to a lack of provisions and the harshness of the desert,
and because I am ascending and descending either to Paradise
or to the Hellfire, and yet I do not know to which I am going.
”
‘Umair bin Hani’ is reported to have said that Abu Hurairah
said: “O Allah! Do not let me exceed the age of sixty”; ‘Umair
notes that he died at that age or a year before it. On the
contrary, al-Waqidi maintains: “He died in the fifty-ninth year
of the Hijrah at the age of seventy-eight. ”
It was Abu Hurairah who offered the funeral prayer upon the
death of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) in the
100

month of Ramadan, and at the funeral of Umm Salamah (May
Allah be pleased with her) in the month of Shawwal in the
fifty-ninth year. Abu Hurairah passed away in the same year
following their deaths, while others say that Umm Salamah’s
death occurred after the death of Abu Hurairah. It is said that
al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah bin Abi Sufyan offered the prayer at his
funeral, which took place at the time of ‘Asr (the afternoon
prayer). He died in his home which was located in al-‘Aqeeq
and was then carried to al-Madinah where he was buried in
al-Baqee‘ (a fertile patch of land in al-Madinah where other
members of the Prophet’s family were buried), may Allah be
pleased with him and bestow His mercy on him.

The Sixtieth Year of the Prophetic Hijrah
Malik bin Abdullah invaded the city of Sooriyyah in this year
and according to al-Waqidi’s account, Junadah bin Abu
Umayyah penetrated the island of Roodis (Rhodes).
Mu‘awiyah took Bai‘ah (pledge of allegiance) for Yazeed
from a delegation that had arrived in Dimashq (Damascus) to
offer their friendship and alliance to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad.
Mu‘awiyah also caught a fatal illness which eventually killed
him in the month of Rajab of this year.
It is said that while Mu‘awiyah was on his death-bed Yazeed
was out hunting, so Mu‘awiyah summoned ad-Dahhak bin
Qais al-Fihri, who was an administrator of law in Dimashq
(Damascus) at the time, and Muslim bin ‘Uqbah to convey
greetings of peace to Yazeed and to tell him that he should
assume authority over the people of al-Hijaz. He further
advised him that should the people of al-‘Iraq ask him to
dismiss the official designated over them every day, then he
should do so, as the dismissal of one person beloved to him is
better than a hundred thousand swords turning on him. He
also said that he should assume sound control over the people
of ash-Sham so that they would become his allies and in turn,
he should grant them their full rights. He went on to say that
101

he did not fear the Quraish on Yazeed’s behalf except for
three people:al-Husain, Ibn ‘Umar and Ibn az-Zubair.
Ibn Jareer says: “There is a consensus that he died in this year
in the month of Rajab. His monarchy began in the month of
Jumada of the forty-first year from the time al-Hasan bin ‘Ali
relinquished the caliphate to him in Adhruh; thus, the duration
of his rule was precisely nineteen years and three months.
Before that, he served as the deputy of ash-Sham for
approximately twenty years, although this claim is disputed.
He was aged seventy-three when he passed away.

The Biography of Mu‘awiyah (May Allah be
pleased with him), Events from the Days of
His Rule and References to His Virtuous
Deeds and Manners
His name was Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb and
he was one of the Prophet’s scribes of Revelation. His mother
was Hind bint ‘Utbah bin Rabee‘ah bin ‘Abd Shams. He
entered the fold of Islam in the year of the Conquest.
In terms of his appearance, he was fair and tall, bald with a
white head and he had a beard that he used to colour with
henna. He was mild-tempered, dignified, dominant and noble
amongst the people, generous, just and astute.
Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said that Abu Sufyan said: “O
Prophet of Allah! Give me three things. ” The Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Yes. ” He said: “I
have the best and most beautiful woman of all the ‘Arabs, my
daughter, Umm Habeebah bint Abu Sufyan. Will I give her to
you in marriage?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said: “Yes. ” He said: “Make Mu‘awiyah your
scribe. ” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “Yes. ” He said: “And appoint me as a commander
102

so that I can fight the disbelievers as I used to fight the
Muslims. ” It has also been said that the first of these three
things was that Abu Sufyan wanted the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to marry his other daughter,
‘Azzah bint Abu Sufyan, in addition to Umm Habeebah;
however, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) replied: “That is not (legally) permissible for me. ”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: “I was playing with some children when
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) approached us and so I said to myself: ‘He has come for
me! ’ so I hid behind the door. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) came up to me, and patted
me on the shoulder and said: ‘Go and call Mu‘awiyah for me.
’I returned and said: ‘He is having his meal. ’He said to me
once again: ‘Go and call Mu‘awiyah for me. ’I returned once
again and said: ‘He is eating his food. ’So he (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: ‘May Allah not fill his
stomach! ’It was said that he never felt satiated from that
moment onwards. ”
Mu‘awiyah enjoyed the benefits of this Du‘a’ (supplication)
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in
the world and with respect to the Hereafter. As for the first, it
is said that on his journey to ash-Sham as the Ameer, he would
eat seven times a day whereupon he would be brought a large
dish containing a large quantity of lamb and onions, which he
would finish by himself. In fact, he would eat lamb seven
times a day, as well as desserts, fruits and various other things.
He would say: “By Allah! I am not full, though I am fatigued.
This is a favour desired by every king. ” As for the Hereafter,
Muslim reports in his collection of narrations based on the
Hadeeth from al-Bukhari’s narrations, that is ascribed to a
number of the Companions who said that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “O
Allah! I am but a human being and so should I ever insult a
believer, supplicate against him or harm him in any way, then
103

let that be a means of bringing him closer to you on the Day
of Resurrection. ”
Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said: “Jibreel (Gabriel) came
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and said: ‘O Muhammad! Convey peace to
Mu‘awiyah and bequeath glad tidings to him, for he is the
trustworthy of Allah concerning His Book, Revelation and
favours. ”
Al-‘Irbad bin Sariyah as-Sulami is reported to have said: “I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) calling us to observe Suhoor (the meal before
dawn time) in the month of Ramadan, saying: ‘Get up for the
blessed meal! ’ Then I heard him saying: ‘O Allah! Teach
Mu‘awiyah the Book and knowledge of the Reckoning and
protect him from punishment. ” ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu
‘Umairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) mentioned Mu‘awiyah and
said: “O Allah! Make him one of the rightly-guided and
guide others through him. ”
Abu Idrees al-Khawlani is reported to have said: “When
‘Umar bin al-Khattab discharged ‘Umair bin Sa‘d from ashSham and appointed Mu‘awiyah, the people said: ‘‘Umar has
discharged ‘Umair and appointed Mu‘awiyah. ’So ‘Umair
said: ‘Do not mention Mu‘awiyah’s name except in a good
manner, for verily, I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘O Allah! Guide
others through him. ’”
‘Abdullah bin Busr narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) sought the
counsel of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar concerning a matter and said:
“Advise me on something”, to which they said: “Allah and
His Messenger know best. ” So he said: “Summon
Mu‘awiyah for me”, upon which Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
104

remarked: “As for the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and these two men from
Quraish (i. e. themselves), is our judgment not sufficient
enough that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) sends for an adolescent from the
Quraish?” Nevertheless, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “Call Mu‘awiyah”, and they
complied. As Mu‘awiyah stood before them, the Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Keep him
present when dealing with your affairs and make him a
witness of them, as he is indeed strong and trustworthy. ” It is
also reported that he added: “And entrust him with your
affairs. ”
Ibn Abi Mulaikah said: “Mu‘awiyah once offered one Rak‘ah
(unit) of Witr (the night prayer performed after Isha’ (night
prayer) and before Fajr (dawn prayer) ) when a manumitted
slave of Ibn ‘Abbas was present. The freed slave then went to
Ibn ‘Abbas and told him about Mu‘awiyah offering one
Rak‘ah Witr, to which Ibn Abbas said: “Let him be, for he
was in the company of Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). ”
It is reported that Mu‘awiyah said to the people: “You offer
Salat (prayer) which we, the Sahabah (Companions) of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) never
saw him offering, and which he forbade from offering, i. e. ,
the two Rak‘ah after the prescribed ‘Asr (afternoon) prayer. ”
‘Urwah narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) that Hind bint ‘Utbah bin Rabee‘ah
(Mu‘awiyah’s mother) said: “O Allah’s Messenger! Before I
embraced Islam, there was no family on the face of this earth
that I wanted to degrade more than yours. But today, there is
no family on the face of this earth that I wish to honour more
than yours. ” Allah’s Messenger (g) said: “I thought likewise;
by Him in Whose Hands is Muhammad’s soul! ”Hind said:
105

“O Allah’s Messenger! My husband, Abu Sufyan, is a miser.
Is it sinful for me to feed my children from his property?” He
said: “No, if you take for your needs what is reasonable. ” The
extolment of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) -- “By Him in Whose Hands is Muhammad’s
soul!” -- was made in reference to the fact that Hind and her
family, who sought to discredit and humiliate the Muslims
when they were in a state of disbelief, later desired to honour
and strengthen Islam upon their acceptance of it, and hence
Allah strengthened them and the people of her tribe.
Mu‘awiyah is reported to have said: “I observed the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) performing Wudhoo’ (ablution) and when he finished,
he looked at me and said: ‘O Mu‘awiyah! If you get to rule
then fear Allah and be just to the people. ’ Due to that
statement of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), I was convinced that I would one day be held
accountable for undertaking the task (of the caliphate). ”
According to al-Qasim bin Mukhaimirah, Abu Maryam alAzdi said that he entered upon Mu‘awiyah who said: “What
blesses us with your presence, O Abu Fulan (Father of so and
so – a common ‘Arab expression)?” I said: “A Hadeeth I
heard that I want to tell you. I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘Whoever
Allah entrusts with authority over the affairs of the Muslims
and he neglects the needs and wants of the poor amongst
them, Allah will neglect him and his needs and wants. ” He
added that Mu‘awiyah appointed a man in charge of
addressing the people’s needs upon hearing this Hadeeth.
Abu Mijlaz is reported to have said: “Mu‘awiyah went out to
the people as they were opposing him concerning something,
so he said: ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say: ‘Whoever desires to
106

imitate those who rebel sets up a seat for himself in the
Hellfire. ’”
In another narration, it states that Mu‘awiyah went out to see
Ibn ‘Amir and Ibn az-Zubair, upon which the former showed
opposition to him whereas the latter did not. As such
Mu‘awiyah said to them: “Be seated. Verily, I heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say: ‘Whoever imitates the rebellious servants sets up a
seat for himself in the Hellfire. ’”
Mu‘awiyah narrated: “I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘If Allah wants
to do good to a person, He makes him comprehend the Deen
(i. e. Islam) [understand the Qur’an and Sunnah (Prophetic
tradition, i. e. legal ways of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). I am just a distributer, but it is Allah,
the Majestic, Who gives. (And remember) that this nation
[true Muslims; followers of Islamic Monotheism] will remain
obedient to Allah’s injunctions [i. e. , follow the Book] and
they will not be harmed by anyone who will oppose them (by
going on a different path) until Allah’s order (the Day of
Judgement) is established. ” Another narration adds the
words: “while they remain on the right path” to the end.
On one occasion, Mu‘awiyah narrated this Hadeeth as he was
delivering a sermon, after which he said: “Malik bin
Yukhamur reported on the authority of Mu‘adh who said that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: ‘And they are in ash-Sham (the Levant). ’By this,
he was urging the people of ash-Sham to challenge the people
of al-‘Iraq. “And indeed, the people of ash-Sham are the
victorious sect over those who contested them” ; this is what
prompted Mu‘awiyah’s justification in urging the people of
ash-Sham to fight against the people of al-‘Iraq.

107

Mu‘awiyah performed the Hajj Pilgrimage in the fiftieth year
of the Hijrah, and his son Yazeed performed it in the
following year, during which, or just after it, he went on to
invade the land of ar-Room (Anatolia and the Balkans), with
a company of senior Companions. There, they laid siege to alQustanteeniyyah (Constantinople), about which the Saheeh
verifies that: “The first army to invade alQustanteeniyyah will
be forgiven of their sins. ”
When Imam Ahmad was asked about what had happened
between Mu‘awiyah and ‘Ali, he recited the Verse (which
means): “That was a nation who has passed away. They shall
receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you
earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do. ” [alBaqarah,
2:134]
Sa‘eed bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez narrated that when ‘Uthman was
murdered, the people had no military incursions to carry out
until it reached the ‘Aam ul-Jama‘ah (the Year of the Party;
Community). This was the year in which Mu‘awiyah initiated
sixteen expeditions against the land of ar-Room after having
dispatched a military detachment in summer that
subsequently spent the winter there. As they blockaded one
place, they would move on to another, until Yazeed and a
number of the Companions successfully undertook a series of
invasions. It follows that Yazeed’s army crossed into the Gulf
and besieged alQustanteeniyyah (Constantinople) under
Constantine IV, whereafter they commandered its people and
victoriously returned with them to ash-Sham. Accounts of the
event maintain that the last thing
Mu‘awiyah instructed them to do was, in his words, “Wring
the neck of ar-Room. ”
Az-Zuhri stated that Mu‘awiyah led the Hajj Pilgrimage with
the people twice during the era of his caliphate.
108

Al-‘Utbi said that as ‘Amr entered upon Mu‘awiyah to notify
him of thedeaths of some of the Companions, he said the
words: “Innalillahi wa innailaihi raji‘oon (to Allah we belong
and to Him we shall return). ” ‘Amr bin al-‘As thereafter
recited (in al-Wafir poetic rhyme):
“The righteous die whilst you remain alive
As if death has overlooked you and not caused you to die. ”
Mu‘awiyah replied (in al-Wafir poetic meter):
“Do you wish me dead whilst you stay alive?
I will not die until you are dead. ”
Ash-Sha‘bi reported that the first time Mu‘awiyah gave a
sermon sitting down when he was very corpulent and had a
big stomach.
Az-Zuhri said: “I asked Sa‘eed bin Musayyab about the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and he said to me: ‘Listen, O az-Zuhri.
Whoever dies loving Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Ali,
testifying to the ten who were promised Paradise, and
invoking mercy on Mu‘awiyah, then it is his right that Allah
does not dispute his account (on the Day of Judgement). ’”
When Ibn Mubarak was asked about Mu‘awiyah, he said:
“What I say concerning someone is based on what the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, which is: ‘Allah hears who praises Him’, followed
by: ‘To our Lord belongs all praise. ’” It was said to him:
“Who is better between him (Mu‘awiyah) and ‘Abdul‘Azeez?” He replied: “According to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), the dirt from
Mu‘awiyah’s nostrils was better and more superior than Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez. ”
109

Al-Mu‘afa bin ‘Imran was asked who was better out of
Mu‘awiyah and ‘Abdul-‘Azeez , upon which he got angry and
said to the person who asked the question: “Do you liken the
men from the Sahabah to the men from the Tabi‘een (the
second and third generations of pious followers) ?Mu‘awiyah
was the scribe and one who preserved Allah’s Revelation and
the Companion and relative-by-marriage of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who said: ‘Make
Du‘a (supplication) for me, my Companions and my relatives.
Whoever insults them incurs the curse of Allah, the Angels
and all people.
’”
A man from al-Madinah wrote a letter to Mu‘awiyah bin Abi
Sufyan (May Allah be pleased with him), which read:
“If men were to birth to their sons,
And their organs outgrew,
And they got accustomed to its ailments,
They would be like plants as harvest time approached. ”
Mu‘awiyah remarked: “He mourns me. ”
Sources mention that towards the end of his life, Mu‘awiyah
took a turn for the worse after having caught a virus that
affected him to the point that if he would cover or wrap
himself up with something heavy it would pain him. For this
reason, he was made a Thawb (dress-like garment worn by
men) from the feathers of a bird, which nevertheless still felt
heavy on his body when put on and so he said to himself:
“May you perish in confinement! You have ruled for forty
years: as a commander for twenty of them and a caliph for the
other twenty; and this is the condition of your fate?May the
earth perish and all who love
it! ”
110

Muhammad bin ‘Uqbah said that when death approached
Mu‘awiyah, he said: “I wish I were an ordinary man from the
Quraish living in Dhu Tuwa and that I had never been
invested with authority as caliph. ”
Muhammad bin Seereen said: “When Mu‘awiyah was on the
brink of death, he began to mark out the floor. Then he turned
his face and marked out another spot on the floor, after which
he started to cry and say: ‘O Allah! Indeed, You said in Your
Book (what means): “Verily, Allah forgives not that partners
should be set up with Him (in worship), but He forgives
everything else to whom He wills. ” [an-Nisa’, 4:48].
Therefore, O Allah, make me amongst those You will forgive.
’”
Al-‘Utbi narrated from his father that when Mu‘awiyah was
dying, he quoted the following Verses to those present (in atTaweel poetry):
“Death is inevitable because of what we are;
Consciousness of what lies after death is much more awful
and lurid. ”
Then he said: “O Allah! Reduce my lapses, pardon the
shortcomings and overlook my ignorance, for You are AllForgiving. My mistakes are all my own and not attributable
to You; only You can forgive me and grant me refuge. ”
It is reported that he passed out and once he regained
consciousness, he said to his family: “Fear Allah, for verily
He safeguards whoever shows regard for something for His
sake and He does not safeguard whoever shows a disregard
for something for His sake”, and upon uttering this he died
(may Allah bestow His mercy on him).
There is consensus of opinion that he died in Dimashq
(Damascus) in the month of Rajab of the sixtieth year. Some
111

have stated that it took place on a Thursday in mid-Rajab of
the sixtieth year, whilst others claim it was on a Thursday,
eight days before the end of Rajab in the sixtieth year.
His son, Yazeed, offered the prayer at his funeral and he
ordered him to be buried dressed in the Thawb (dress or
garment worn by men) that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to wear, which
Mu‘awiyah had put away especially for the day of his death.
He also requested that the nail clippings and hair belonging to
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that
he had gathered be placed in his mouth, nose, eyes and ears.
Contrary to this, some have claimed that his son, Yazeed, was
absent and so it was ad-Dahhak bin Qais who offered the
prayer after the Zuhr (noon) prayer in the mosque located in
Damascus. He was then buried, according to some, in the Dar
ul-Imarah (the House of Authority, i. e. official headquarters),
which was a particularly green and fertile place. Others
maintain that he was buried in the Bab us-Sagheer (Gateway
of the Young) graveyard with the general masses -- Allah
knows best. He died at the age of seventy-eight, though it is
also said that he passed away at the age of eighty and this
latter opinion is the most popular.
Yazeed was in the town of Huwwareen and when they arrived
at the mountain pass of al-‘Uqab, he encountered the people
bearing a great burden. It was there that the people gave him
salutations for assuming power and paid their condolences for
the loss of his father all the way until he reached the Bab usSagheer graveyard where he dismounted his horse at the tomb
of his father. He then entered and offered a prayer for his
father after he had already been buried.
Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdul-Hakam said that he
heard ash-Shafi‘i say: “At the time when Mu‘awiyah fell ill,
112

he sent a message to his son Yazeed, who upon receiving it
said as he mounted his horse (in al-Baseet poetry):
“A messenger arrived by horse with a sheet of paper,
The heart dreaded what the paper contained;
We said to him: ‘Woe! What is this paper of yours?’
He said: ‘The caliph is sick and bed-bound’’;
The earth then shook and almost caused us to faint,
As if one of its pillars had collapsed or been uprooted;
We hastened to Khoos Mudammarah,
Where we speedily traversed the mountain passes;
Not caring if death befell our mounts,
Or if we died from the wilderness due to our own
weaknesses. ”

The Women He Married Who Bore His Sons
and Daughters
He had a son named ‘Abdur-Rahman, whose name he adopted
as his Kunyah (nickname; lit. “father of” or “mother of”), and
a son named ‘Abdullah who was known for being indecisive
and weak-minded. Their mother was Fakhitah bint Qarazah
and Mu‘awiyah later married her sister, Kanood bin Qarazah,
after he had divorced her. He was also married to Na’ilah bint
‘Umarah al-Kalbiyyah, who he was very pleased with, and to
Maisoon bint Bahdal who bore him his most popular child,
Yazeed.

113

Ibn Jareer mentions that Maisoon also bore him a daughter
who is said to have died at a young age and was a widow of
‘Umar bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan. She lived in Dimashq by a
fishing port facing ZuqaqurRumman.
Hind, the daughter of Mu‘awiyah, was married to ‘Abdullah
bin ‘Amir. It is said that as she entered upon him in al-Khadra’
within the vicinity of the mosque, he started to come on to her
(and wanted to sleep with her) but she outright refused and so
he hit her, which caused her to scream. As a result, this drew
the attention of the neighbours who began to shout and yell,
at which point Mu‘awiyah jumped up and rushed to see what
all the noise was about. The neighbours said: “We heard the
voice of our lady so we cried out. ” Mu‘awiyah therefore went
to see Hind and to his surprise he found her crying,
whereupon he turned to Ibn ‘Amir and said: “Woe unto you
for striking out like this on such a night! ”Then he said to him:
“Get out of here”, and so he left Mu‘awiyah and his daughter
alone. Mu‘awiyah then said to Hind: “O daughter! Whosoever
marries you is he who Allah has made permissible to you; or
have you not heard the saying of the poet concerning this (in
atTaweel poetic meter)?
“With bashful women, illicit experiences are very hard to
attain
While in licit dealings, they are obedient. ”