‘Abdul-Muttalib Ibn Ibn Hisham Hashim, who was of the
descendants of Ishmael (Peace be upon him), son of Ibraheem AlKhaleel (Peace be upon him).
Sunniconnect.com
249

Allah, Most High, says, But when he came to them with clear
proofs, they said, “This is plain magic.” (Soorah As-Saff 61:6)It is
possible that the pronoun ‘he’ refers to ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him)
and it is also possible that it refers to Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Then He encouraged His believing slaves to help Islam and its
adherents and to assist its Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and support him in establishing the Religion and
propagating it, saying, O you who believe! Be you helpers (in the
Cause) of Allah as said ‘Eesa, son of Maryam, to AlHawariyyoon,
“Who are my helpers (in the Cause) of Allah?” (Soorah As-Saff
61:14) means who will assist me in calling the people to Allah? AlHawariyyoon said, “We are Allah’s helpers (i.e. we will strive in
His Cause)!” (Soorah As-Saff 61:14) This took place in a village
known as An-Nasirah, which is why they became known as Nasara
(Nazarenes). Allah, Most High, says, Then a group of the Children
of Isra’eel believed and a group disbelieved. (Soorah As-Saff
61:14) That is, when 'Eesa (Peace be upon him) called the Children
of Isra’eel and others to Allah, Most High, some of them believed,
while others disbelieved. Among those who believed in him were
the people of Antioch in their entirety, according to what has been
reported by more than one of the scholars of Seerah, history and
tafseer. He sent three messengers to them, one of whom was Simon
the Pure and the people believed and responded positively to their
preaching. But it is not they who are referred to in Soorah Ya Seen,
according to what we have already established in the story of the
people of the town. Others from among the Children of Isra’eel
disbelieved, and they were the majority of the Jews. Allah
supported those who believed in him against those who disbelieved
afterward and they became victorious over them and conquered
them, as Allah, Most High, says, And (remember) when Allah said,
“O ‘Eesa! I will take you and raise you to Myself and clear you (of
the forged statement that ‘Eesa is Allah’s son) of those who
disbelieve, and I will make those who follow you (Monotheists,
who worship none but Allah) superior to those who disbelieve (in
Sunniconnect.com
250

the Oneness of Allah, or disbelieve in some of His Messengers, e.g.
Muhammad, ‘Eesa, Moosa, etc., or in His Holy Books, e.g. the
Tawrah, the Injeel, the Qur’an) till the Day of Resurrection.
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:55) So those who are closest to the truth will
always be victorious over those who are farthest from it. And
because the saying of the Muslims about him is the truth, of which
there is no doubt, i.e. that he is the slave of Allah and His
Messenger, they were victorious against the Christians, who were
excessive in their claims regarding him and ascribed to him a status
above that which Allah has designated for him.
And because the Christians were closer to the truth regarding him
than the Jews – may Allah’s Curse be on them – the Christians
were victorious over the Jews during the period up to the time of
Islam and its followers.

The Story of the Table Spread
Allah, Most High, says, (Remember) when Al-Hawariyyoon (the
Disciples) said, “O, ‘Eesa, son of
Maryam! Can your Lord send down to us a table spread (with food)
from heaven?” ‘Eesa said, “Fear Allah, if you are indeed
Believers.” They said, “We wish to eat thereof and to be stronger
in faith, and to know that you have indeed told us the truth and that
we ourselves be its witnesses.” ‘Eesa, said, “O, Allah, our Lord!
Send us from heaven a table spread (with food) that there may be
for us – for the first and the last of us – a festival and a sign from
You; and provide us sustenance, for You are the Best of
sustainers.” Allah said, “I am going to send it down unto you, but
if anyone of you after that disbelieves, then I will punish him with
a punishment such as I have not inflicted on anyone among (all)
Al‘Alameen.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 112-115)
We have already mentioned in the Tafseer the traditions reported
regarding the descent of Al-Ma’idah (the Table Spread) on the
authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas, Salman Al-Farisi, ‘Ammar Ibn
Sunniconnect.com
251

Yasir and others from among the Salaf. Among those narrations, it
was stated that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) ordered AlHawariyyoon to fast for thirty days and when they had completed
the fast, they requested of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) that a table
(spread with food) be sent down from the heaven to them, so that
they might eat from it and in order that the faith in their hearts might
be strengthened, knowing that Allah had accepted their fast and
answered their request, and that they should have an ‘Eid in which
they could break their fast and it would be sufficient for the first of
them to the last of them, for the wealthy among them and the poor
among them. But ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) cautioned them
against this and feared for them that they would not show gratitude
for it, or fulfill the conditions attached to it, but they would not
accept from him aught but that he ask this for them from his Lord,
the Almighty, the All-Powerful. When they refused to give up this
request, he stood up to pray and donned a coarse hair shirt, bowed
his head and his eyes filled with tears as he wept and entreated
Allah to answer his supplication by granting their request. So Allah
sent down to them a table from the heaven. The people saw it
descend gradually from between two clouds. It continued to
descend by degrees and all the while it was descending, ‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him) was asking his Lord, the Almighty, the AllPowerful to make it a mercy and not an affliction and to make it a
(source of ) blessing and salvation. It continued to come down until
it stood before ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him). It was covered with a
cloth and so he uncovered it, saying, “In the Name of Allah, the
Best of Providers.” When it was uncovered, they saw that on it were
seven fish and seven loaves. It was also said that there was vinegar
and also that there were pomegranates and other fruits. It had a very
strong aroma. Allah said to it, “Be!” – and it was. Then ‘Eesa
ordered them to eat from it. They said, “We will not eat until you
eat.” He said, “But it was you who asked for it in the first place!”
But they refused to eat from it first. So he ordered the poor and
needy, the sick and the lame to eat from it. They numbered about
one thousand, three hundred and they all ate from it, after which all
who were sick, lame or infirm were cured. On seeing the situation
Sunniconnect.com
252

of those who had eaten from it, the people regretted not having done
likewise. It was said that it then descended once a day and the
people would eat from it, the last of them eating as much as the
first. It was said that this continued until as many as seven thousand
had eaten from it. Then it descended every day, just as the people
used to drink from the shecamel of Saleh (Peace be upon him) day
after day. Then Allah commanded ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) to
restrict its use to the poor and needy, and not the rich. This upset
many people and the hypocrites among them began to gossip about
it. This led to the whole table being raised up and those who had
spread gossip and tittle-tattle about it were transformed into swine.”
And Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jareer both narrated on the authority of
‘Ammar Ibn Yasir (May Allah be pleased with him) from the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said,
“The table descended from the heaven with bread and meat and
they were commanded not to cheat, hoard the food or keep it for
the morrow, but they cheated, hoarded the food and kept it for the
morrow and so they were transformed into apes and swine.
Then Ibn Jareer narrated it on the authority of Bundar, who reported
on the authority of Ibn Abi ‘Adiyy, who in turn reported on the
authority of Sa‘eed, who likewise reported on the authority of
Qatadah, who in turn reported on the authority of Khilas, on the
authority of ‘Ammar (May Allah be pleased with him), in a
mawqoof form. And this is more correct. It was narrated thus by
way of Simak, on the authority of a man from Banu ‘Ijl, who
reported on the authority of ‘Ammar (May Allah be pleased with
him), in a mawqoof form. And that is the correct view, and Allah
knows better.
The narration of Khilas, on the authority of ‘Ammar (May Allah be
pleased with him) is munqati‘. And even if this Hadith was
authentic in a marfoo‘ form, it would be a decisive criterion in this
story, because the scholars have disagreed regarding whether or not
the table descended. The majority of scholars hold that it
Sunniconnect.com
253

descended, as proven by these traditions and it is also clear from
the text of the Qur’an, in particular, His Words: “I am going to send
it down unto you…” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:115), as confirmed by
Ibn Jareer At-Tabari. And Allah knows better.
And Ibn Jareer has narrated, with an authentic chain of narrators up
to Mujahid and Al-Hasan Ibn AbulHasan Al-Basri that they both
said that it did not descend and that they refused its descent when
Allah said, “…but if anyone of you after that disbelieves, then I
will punish him with a punishment such as I have not inflicted on
anyone among (all) Al-‘Alameen.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:115),
which why it was said that the Christians do not know the story of
the Table Spread and why it is not mentioned in their Scripture,
although it must have been transmitted by numerous people who
witnessed it. And Allah knows better.

Section
Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya said, “We were informed by a man
(whose name is omitted) that he said that Hajjaj Ibn Muhammad
was informed by Abu Hilal Muhammad Ibn Sulaiman, who
reported on the authority of Bakr Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Muzani that he
said, “Al-Hawarriyyoon lost their Prophet, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him), and it was said to them, “He has gone to the sea.” So they set
out in search of him and when they reached the sea, they found him
walking on the water, the waves lifting him up and then lowering
him again, as they rose and fell. He was wearing a garment, half of
which he was using as a lower garment and half of which he was
using as an upper garment. He advanced toward them and one of
them – Abu Hilal said that he believed he was one of the best of
them – said, “Shall I not come to you, Oh, Prophet of Allah?” He
said, “Certainly.” So he placed one of his feet on the water, then he
went to place the other foot, but he said, “O! I am afraid that I will
drown, O, Prophet of Allah!” ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said to
him, “Give me your hand, Oh, you of little faith! If mankind had as
Sunniconnect.com
254

much faith as the equivalent of a single hair, he would be able to
walk on water.”
This was narrated by Abu Sa‘eed Ibn Al-‘Arabi, on the authority of
Ibraheem Ibn Abil-Jaheem, who reported on the authority of
Sulaiman Ibn Harb, who in turn reported on the authority of Abu
Hilal, who reported something similar on the authority of Bakr.
Then Ibn Abid-Dunya said, “I was informed by Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali Ibn Al-Hasan Ibn Shaqeeq, who said, “I was informed by
Ibraheem Ibn Al-Ash‘ath, who reported on the authority of AlFudail Ibn ‘Iyad that he said, “It was said to ‘Eesa, the son of
Maryam (Peace be upon him), “O ‘Eesa! By what thing do you
walk on water?” He said, “By faith and certainty.” They said, “We
have believed as you have believed and we are certain as you are
certain.” He said, “Then walk!” So they walked with him on the
wave, but they sank. ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said to them,
“What is wrong with you?” They said, “We feared the wave.” He
said, “Did you not fear the Lord of the wave?” So he took them out
and then struck the earth with his hand and took up a handful of it,
then he opened his hand and in one of his hands was gold, while in
the other was mud or small stones. He asked them, “Which of them
is more pleasing to your hearts?” They said, “This gold.” He said,
“To me, they are equal.”
We have mentioned previously in the story of Yahya (Peace be
upon him), son of Zakariyya (Peace be upon him), on the authority
of some of the Salaf that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) used to wear a
hair shirt and eat the leaves of the trees and he would not take
shelter in a house or with any family and he had no money and he
did not store up anything for the morrow. Some of them said that
he used to eat from the (earnings of) his mother’s spinning (peace
be upon them both).
And Ibn ‘Asakir narrated on the authority Ash-Sha‘bi that he said,
“Whenever the Hour was mentioned in the presence of ‘Eesa
Sunniconnect.com
255

(Peace be upon him), he would cry out and say, “It is not fitting that
the Hour should be mentioned in the presence of the son of
Maryam.” Then he would be silent.
And it is reported on the authority of ‘Abdul Malik Ibn Sa‘eed Ibn
Abjar that when ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) heard a religious
exhortation, he would cry loudly.
It is reported on the authority of ‘Abdur-Razzaq that he said,
“Ma‘mar informed us that he was told by Ja‘afar Ibn Burqan that
‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) used to say, “O Allah! I have arrived at
a situation where I cannot repel that which I hate and I possess not
the ability to acquire what I want. The situation is now in the hands
of other than me and I have become pledged to my work, so there
is no poor person who is poorer than I. O Allah! Let not my enemy
triumph over me and let not my friend be unfortunate because of
me. Let me not suffer any affliction in my Religion and let not those
who show no mercy or compassion to me gain mastery over me.”
Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad reported on the authority of Yoonus Ibn ‘Ubaid
that he said, “‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) used to say, ‘No one
achieves true faith until he cares not about consuming (the good
things in) this world.”
Al-Fudail also said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) used to say, ‘I
thought about the creation and I discovered that He Who was not
created is more delightful to me than those who are created’.”
Ishaq Ibn Bishr reported on the authority of Hisham Ibn Hassan,
who reported on the authority of AlHasan that he said, “Verily,
‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) will be the head of the ascetics on the
Day of
Resurrection. He added, “And those who will flee with their sins
will be gathered on the Day of Resurrection with ‘Eesa (Peace be
upon him).”
Sunniconnect.com
256

He said, “One day, while ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was sleeping
on a rock and enjoying his sleep there, Iblees came to him and said,
‘O ‘Eesa! Do you not claim that you do not desire anything of the
material things of this life? Then this rock is one of the material
things of this life.’ Upon hearing this, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him)
took the rock and threw it at him, saying, ‘This is for you and the
life of this world’.”
Mu’tamir Ibn Sulaiman said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) came out
to his companions, wearing a woollen cloak, a garment and pants
and he was barefoot and weeping. His hair was dishevelled, his skin
jaundiced, due to hunger and his lips were dry, due to thirst. He
said, “Peace be upon you, Oh, Children of Isra’eel! I am the one
who has relegated the life of this world to its true place, by Allah’s
Permission, without wonder or pride. Do you know where my
abode is?” They said, “Where is your abode, oh, Spirit of Allah?”
He said, “My abode is the mosques, my perfume is water, my food
is hunger, my light is the moon at night, my warmth in the winter
is the sun, my sweet basil is the vegetation of the earth, my
garments are of wool and my distinguishing characteristic is fear of
the Lord of the Might. My companions are the chronically sick and
the needy. In the morning, I have nothing and in the evening, I have
nothing. But I am in good spirits and have no cares. So who is richer
and gets profits more than I?
(Narrated by Ibn ‘Asakir)
It was narrated in the biography of Muhammad Ibn Al-Waleed Ibn
’Aban Ibn Hibban Abul Hasan Al‘Uqaili Al-Misri that he said,
“We were informed by Hani’ Ibn Al-Mutawakkil Al-Iskandarani,
who reported on the authority of Haiwah Ibn Shuraih that he said,
“Al-Waleed Ibn Abil-Waleed informed me on the authority of
Shufayy Ibn Mati‘, who reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Allah, Most High,
revealed to ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), ‘O ‘Eesa! Move from place
to place, so that you are not recognized and subjected to harm, for
Sunniconnect.com
257

by My Power and Might, I will give you a thousand hawra’ as
wives and I will surely give you a wedding banquet that will last
for four hundred years’.” This Hadith is ghareeb; and it was
declared by the narrator to be marfoo‘. It could be marfoo‘ from the
narration of Shufayy Ibn Mati‘, on the authority of Ka‘b Al-Ahbar,
or someone else from among the Isra’eelites. And Allah knows
better.
Al-Mubarak narrated on the authority of Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyainah, who
reported on the authority of Khalaf Ibn Hawshab that he said, “
‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said to Al-Hawariyyoon, ‘Just as the
kings have left wisdom to you, likewise, leave for them the life of
this world’.”
said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said, “Ask me, for verily, I am
tenderhearted and verily, I am insignificant in my own sight’.”
Isma‘eel Ibn ‘Ayyash reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
Deenar, who reported on the authority of
Ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him) said to AlHawariyyoon, ‘Eat barley bread and
drink pure water, and depart the world safe and secure. In truth, I
say to you that verily, the sweetness of the life of this world is the
bitterness of the Hereafter, and the bitterness of the life of this
world is the sweetness of the Hereafter. And verily, the slaves of
Allah are not those who lead lives of luxury and ease. I truth, I say
to you that verily, your evil is like a scholar whose desires affect
his knowledge and so he wishes that all of the people were like him.
And something like it was narrated on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him).
Abu Mus‘ab reported on the authority of Malik that he informed
him that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) used to say, “O Children of
Isra’eel! It is incumbent on you to drink pure water, eat vegetables,
the fruit of the arak tree and barley bread; and beware of wheat
bread, because you will not fulfill the gratitude for it.”
Sunniconnect.com
258

And Ibn Wahb reported on the authority of Sulaiman Ibn Bilal, who
reported on the authority of Yahya Ibn Sa‘eed that he said, “‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him) used to say, ‘Traverse this world and do not
become too comfortable in it.’ And he used to say, ‘Love of this
world is the head of every sin, and looking cultivates desire in the
heart'."
Wuhaib Ibn Al-Ward related something similar and he added, “And
it may be that desire causes those who have it to inherit long
sadness.”
And it is reported from ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) that he said, “O
weak son of Adam! Fear Allah wherever you are and be in this
world like a guest. Take the mosques as your abode and teach your
eyes to weep, your body to be patient and your heart to
contemplate. And do not be preoccupied with tomorrow’s
sustenance, because it is a sin.”
It is also reported from him that he said, “None of you can make a
home on a wave of the sea, so do not take this world as an abode.”
And regarding this Sabiq Al-Barbari says,
You have houses in Mistan As-Suyool, And can a house be built
on water, whose foundation is mud?
And Sufyan Ath-Thawri said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), the son
of Maryam said, 'Love of this world and love of the Hereafter
cannot reside together in the heart of a Believer, just as water and
fire cannot remain together in a vessel'.”
Ibraheem Al-Harbi reported on the authority of Dawood Ibn
Rasheed, who reported on the authority of Abu ‘Abdullah As-Soofi
that he said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said, ‘The one who seeks
the life of this world is like the one who drinks seawater; the more
he drinks, the thirstier he becomes, until it kills him’.”
Sunniconnect.com
259

And it is reported from ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) that he said,
“Verily, Shaitan is with the life of this world, his plot is with
wealth, his ability to make evil things seem fair is with desire and
his ability to establish himself is with lusts.”
Al-A’mash reported on the authority of Khaithamah that he said, “
‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) used to put food for his companions and
he would stand over them and say, ‘Thus must you behave toward
guests’.”
Al-A’mash also narrated that a woman said to ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him), “Blessed be the womb that bore you and the breast that fed
you.” He said, “Blessed be he who recites the Scripture and pays
heed to
it.”
It was also reported from him that he said, “Blessed be he who
weeps when he recalls his sin, guards his tongue and whose abode
suffices him.”
It was also reported from him that he said, “Blessed be the eye that
sleeps and does not speak to itself of sin, but pays attention to that
which is not sinful.”
And it was reported on the authority of Malik Ibn Deenar that he
said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) and his companions passed by a
corpse and they said, ‘How malodorous is its smell!’ He said, ‘How
white are its teeth’!” He said this in order to forbid them from
backbiting.
And Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya said, “Al-Husain Ibn ‘AbdirRahman related to us on the authority of Zakariyya Ibn ‘Adiyy that
he said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), said, ‘Oh, company of
Disciples! Be content with the meanest of this world’s provisions,
while safeguarding your Religion, as the people of this world are
Sunniconnect.com
260

content with the least of Religion, while safeguarding their share of
this world’s provisions.’
Zakariyya said, and regarding this, the poet said,
“I see men with the least Religion who are content, But I do not
see them content with a life of little provision, Be satisfied with
the Religion over the worldly riches of kings, As kings are
satisfied with their worldly riches over the Religion.”
And Abu Mus‘ab reported on the authority of Malik that he said, “
‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), the son of Maryam said, ‘Do not speak
excessively about matters other than remembrance of Allah, as it
will harden your hearts, for verily, a hard heart is far from Allah,
but you know not. And look not at the sins of the slaves, as if you
are lords, but instead, look at them as if you are slaves, because the
mankind consists of only two types of men: Those who are
protected and those who are put to trial. So be compassionate
toward those who are put to trial and praise Allah for His
Protection.’
And ‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak said, “Sufyan informed us, on the
authority of Mansoor, who reported on the authority of Salim Ibn
Abul-Ja‘d that he said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said, ‘Work
for Allah and do not work for your stomachs. Look at this bird,
how it eats and goes away and it neither tills the soil nor harvests,
yet Allah provides it with sustenance. So if you say, ‘We have
larger stomachs than this bird…’, then look at these animals, such
as cows and donkeys, for they eat and then go away and they
neither till the soil nor harvest, yet Allah provides them with
sustenance.’
And Safwan Ibn ‘Amr said, “It was reported on the authority of
Shuraih Ibn ‘Ubaid, who reported on the authority of Yazeed Ibn
Maisarah that he said, “Al-Hawariyyoon said to the Maseeh (Peace
be upon him), “O Maseeh of Allah! Look at the Mosque of Allah,
Sunniconnect.com
261

how fine it is! He said, Ameen, Ameen! In truth, I say to you, Allah
will not leave a single stone of this Mosque standing; He will
destroy it because of the sins of its people. Verily, Allah does not
do anything because of the gold, silver and stone that so impress
you. Verily, righteous hearts are more beloved by Allah than these
things. Because of them (the hearts of mankind), Allah makes the
earth and because of them, He destroys it, if they are not righteous.”
Al-Hafiz Abul-Qasim Ibn ‘Asakir reported in his Tareekh on the
authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him)
that he said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) passed by a ruined city
and the buildings impressed him, so he said, “O my Lord!
Command this city to answer me.” So Allah revealed to the city,
“O you ruined city! Answer ‘Eesa!” The city called out, “O ‘Eesa,
my beloved! What do you want of me?” He said, “What happened
to your trees, your rivers and your palaces? And where are your
inhabitants?” It replied, “My beloved! The true Promise of your
Lord was fulfilled and my trees became dry, my rivers dried up, my
palaces were destroyed and my inhabitants died.” ‘Eesa (Peace be
upon him) asked, “So where is their wealth?” The city replied,
“They gathered it together, including the lawful and the unlawful
and placed it in my belly (i.e. they buried it); to Allah belongs the
inheritance of the heavens and the Earth.” So ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him) called out, “I am amazed at three persons: (i) the one who
seeks the life of this world, while death is seeking him, (ii) the
builder of palaces, when the grave will be his abode and (iii) the
one who laughs in a loud voice, while the Fire lies before him. Son
of Adam, you are not sated by much (wealth), nor are you content
with little. You gather your wealth for those who do not praise you
and you go to a Lord who will not pardon you. You are no more
than a slave of your stomach and your desire. Your stomach will
only be filled (i.e. with Fire) when you enter your grave. And you,
O son of Adam, will see the piling up of your wealth in the scale of
another.”

Sunniconnect.com
262

This Hadith is very strange, but there is a good admonition in it,
which is why we have included it.
Sufyan Ath-Thawri reported on the authority of his father, who
reported on the authority of Ibraheem AtTaimi that he said, “‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him) said, “O company of Disciples! Make your
treasure in the heaven, because the heart of a man is where he has
stored it.”
And Thawr Ibn Yazeed reported on the authority of ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
Ibn Zibyan that he said, “ ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), the son of
Maryam, said, Whoever learned and taught and acted (upon his
learning), he will be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.”
And Abu Kuraib said, “It was narrated that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him) said, 'There is no goodness in knowledge that does not cross
the valley with you, but instead the caller carries you across'.”
And Ibn ‘Asakir narrated with a chain of narrators that is ghareeb,
on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with him) in a marfoo‘ form that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) stood
before the Children of Isra’eel and said, “O company of Disciples!
Do not speak of the underlying wisdoms (in religious matters) to
people who are not qualified to understand them (i.e. the ignorant
folk), for you may do injustice thereby to them (the underlying
wisdoms) and do not withhold them from those who are qualified
to understand them (i.e. the religious scholars), for you will thereby
do injustice to them (the scholars). (Religious) matters may be
divided into three categories: (i) a matter, the integrity of which and
the logic behind which is apparent, (ii) a matter, the sin and error
of which is clear and (iii) a matter which is unclear to you; such
matters you should refer to Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful.”
And ‘Abdur-Razzaq said, “We were informed by Ma‘mar, on the
authority of a man who reported on the authority of ‘Ikrimah that
he said, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said, 'Do not cast pearls to
Sunniconnect.com
263

swine, because swine will not do anything with pearls. And do not
give wisdom to one who does not desire it, for wisdom is better
than pearls, and those who do not desire it are worse than swine'.”
Wahb and others related something similar from him, namely, that
he said to his companions, “You are the salt of the earth, so if you
go bad, there will be no cure for you; verily, there are two traits of
ignorance in you: laughing at things that are not remarkable and
early morning without wakefulness.”
And that it was said to him, “Who is the worst of people in causing
discord and dissent?” He said, “It is the scholar who commits
mistakes, for when the scholar errs, many err with him.”
It was also reported from him that he said, “O scholars of evil! You
have placed the world above your heads and the Hereafter beneath
your feet. Your words are a cure and your deeds are a medicine.
Your likeness is as the likeness of an oleander tree: it impresses
those who look upon it, but it kills those who eat of it.”
And Wahb said, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said, “O scholars of
evil! You have sat at the gates of Paradise, but you will not enter it
and you do not call the needy to enter it; verily the wickedest of
people with Allah is a scholar who seeks the life of this world
through his knowledge.”
And Makhool said, “Yahya (Peace be upon him) and ‘Eesa (Peace
be upon him) met and ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) shook Yahya’s
hand; he was laughing and Yahya (Peace be upon him) said to him,
“O son of my aunt! Why do I see you laughing, as if you have been
saved?” ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) replied, “Why do I see you
frowning, as if you have despaired?” So Allah revealed to them
both: “The most beloved of you two to Me is the one who is
friendliest toward the other.”

Sunniconnect.com
264

And Wahb ibn Munabbih said, “‘Eesa stood with his companions
near a grave, as its occupant was being lowered into it. They began
to discuss the grave and its narrowness, and he said, “You were in
a place narrower than it: your mothers’ wombs. If Allah likes to
widen it, He will do so.”
And Abu ‘Umar Ad-Dareer said, “Whenever ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him) thought about death, his skin would drip blood.”

Sunniconnect.com
265

A Description of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him)
Eesa’s Ascension to the Heaven, to the
Protection of His Lord and Exposition of the
Lies of the Jews and Christians, Who Claimed
That He Was Crucified
Allah, Most High, says, {And they (the disbelievers) plotted (to kill
‘Eesa), but Allah planned too. And Allah is the Best of planners.
And (remember) when Allah said, “O, ‘Eesa! I will take you and
raise you to Myself and clear you (of the forged statement that
‘Eesa is Allah’s son) of those who disbelieve, and I will make those
who follow you (Monotheists, who worship none but Allah)
superior to those who disbelieve (in the Oneness of Allah, or
disbelieve in some of His Messengers, e.g. Muhammad, ‘Eesa,
Moosa, etc., or in His Holy Books, e.g. the Tawrah, the Injeel, the
Qur’an) till the Day of Resurrection.
Then you will return to Me and I will judge between you in the
matters in which you used to dispute.”} (Soorah Al ‘Imran 3:54,
55)
And He, Most High, says, {Because of their breaking the covenant,
and of their rejecting the Ayat of Allah, and of their killing of the
Prophets unjustly, and of their saying: “Our hearts are wrapped
(with coverings, i.e. we do not understand what the Messengers
say)” – nay, Allah has set a seal upon their hearts because of their
disbelief, so they believe not but a little. And because of their (the
Jews’) disbelief and uttering against Maryam a grave false charge
(that she has committed illegal sexual intercourse); and because of
their saying (in boast): “We killed the Messiah, ‘Eesa (‘Eesa), son
of Maryam, the Messenger of Allah,” - but they killed him not, nor
crucified him, but the resemblance of ‘Eesa (‘Eesa) was put over
another man (and they killed that man), and those who differ
Sunniconnect.com
266

therein are full of doubts. They have no (certain) knowledge, they
follow nothing but conjecture. For surely, they killed him not (i.e.
‘Eesa, son of Maryam). But Allah raised him (‘Eesa) up (with his
body and soul) unto Himself (and he is in the heavens). And Allah
is All--powerful, Most Wise. And there is none of the people of the
Scripture (Jews and Christians), but must believe in him (‘Eesa, son
of Maryam, as only a Messenger of Allah and a human being]),
before his (‘Eesa’s [‘Eesa’] or a Jew’s or a Christian’s death (at the
time of the appearance of the Angel of Death). And on the Day of
Resurrection, he (‘Eesa) will be a witness against them} (Soorah
An-Nisa’ 4:155-159). Allah, Most High, informs us that He raised
him up to the heaven after He had caused him to sleep, according
to what has been authentically and decisively reported, saving him
from those Jews who wished to harm him and complained of him
to one of the disbelieving rulers of that time.
Al-Hasan Al-Basri and Muhammad Ibn shaq said that his name was
Dawood Ibn Yoora and he ordered that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him)
be killed and crucified. They surrounded him in an abode in Bait
AlMaqdis on a Friday evening/Saturday night. When the time for
them to enter came, Allah cast his likeness onto the face of one his
companions who was present with him, and He raised ‘Eesa (Peace
be upon him) from the skylight of that house to the heaven, while
the people of the house looked on. They entered and found that
young man upon whom Allah had cast his likeness. They took him,
thinking that he was ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) and crucified him.
They placed thorns on his head, in order to humiliate him. Most of
the Christians, who had not witnessed what happened to ‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him), accepted the Jews’ claim that they had
crucified him and because of that, they went far astray. Allah, Most
High, informs us in His Words: {And there is none of the people of
the Scripture (Jews and Christians), but must believe in him (‘Eesa,
son of Maryam, as only a Messenger of Allah and a human being),
before his (‘Eesa’s or a Jew’s or a Christian’s death) at the time of
the appearance of the Angel of Death)} (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:159).
That is, after his descent to the earth at the end of time, before the
Sunniconnect.com
267

Day of Resurrection. At that time, he will descend and kill the pigs
and break the crosses; he will abrogate the jizyah and he will accept
naught but Islam (i.e. submission to Allah, Alone, without
partners), as we have made clear in the ahadeeth accompanying the
explanation of this Noble Qur’anic Verse in Soorah An-Nisa’. And
we shall relate this in detail in the Book of Trials and Battles, in the
information pertaining to Al-Maseeh AdDajjal; and we shall also
mention what has been related regarding the descent of Al-Maseeh
Al-Mahdi (Peace be upon him) from the Owner of Power (Allah),
to kill Al-Maseeh Ad-Dajjal, the liar, who will call to misguidance
and error.
And Ibn Abi Hatim narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “When Allah
intended to raise ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) up to the heaven, he
came out to visit his companions and in the house he found twelve
men, including Al-Hawariyyoon, i.e. he came out to them from an
opening in the house and his head was dripping with water. He said,
“Among you is the one who will deny me twelve times, after having
believed in me.” Then he said, “Which of you will have my likeness
cast upon him and be killed in my place, then he will be with me in
my rank (in Paradise)?” On hearing this, a youth, who was among
the youngest of them, stood up; but ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said
to him, “Sit down.” Then he repeated his request to them, and the
young man stood up again, but he said to him once more, “Sit
down.” Then he repeated his request to them for a third time and
the young man stood up again and said, “I.” ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him) then said, “Let it be you.” And so ‘Eesa’s likeness was cast
upon him and ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was raised up from a
skylight in the house to the heaven. The pursuers from among the
Jews arrived and they took the young man and killed him. Then
they crucified him and one of them rejected him (i.e. ‘Eesa (Peace
be upon him)) twelve times, after having believed in him. They
split into three groups; one of them said, “Allah was among us for
as long as He willed, then He ascended to the heaven.” These were
the Jacobites. A second group said, “The son of Allah was among
Sunniconnect.com
268

us for as long as he willed, then Allah raised him up to Him.” These
were the Nestorians. The third group said, “Allah’s slave and His
Messenger was among us for as long as He (Allah) willed and then
Allah raised him up to Him.” These are the Muslims. But the two
disbelieving groups prevailed over the Muslim group and they
killed them. After that, Islam remained completely effaced until
Allah sent Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).” ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said,
“And that is the meaning of Allah’s Words: {So We gave power to
those who believed against their enemies, and they became the
uppermost.} (Soorah As-Saff 61:14) This chain of narrators is
authentic up to ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), according to the conditions for acceptance stipulated by
Muslim.
Ibn Ishaq said, “Among them there was another man, whose name
was (Sergius) and he was concealed by the Christians; it was he on
whom the appearance of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was placed and
he was crucified in his place.” He said, “Some of the Christians
claim that the one who was crucified in place of Maseeh (Peace be
upon him) and on whom his likeness was cast Yoodus Zakariyya
Yoota Judas Iscariot – and Allah knows better.”
Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “The age of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) on
the day when he was raised up to the heaven was thirty-four years.”
And in the hadeeth it was stated that: “The people of Paradise will
enter it wearing shabby clothes and hairless, wearing kohl on their
eyes, and they will be aged thirty-three years.” In another hadeeth:
“….on the birthday of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) and with the good
looks of Yoosuf (Peace be upon him).”
As for the hadeeth narrated by Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, in
which it is stated that ‘A’ishah (may Allah be Pleased with her)
used to say, “Fatimah informed me that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) told her that: “There
was no Prophet who was succeeded by another Prophet except that
Sunniconnect.com
269

the Prophet who came after him lived for half of his lifespan.” He
also informed her that: “ ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, lived for a
hundred and twenty years, so I do not think that I will live beyond
sixty years.” This is the wording of Al-Fasawi and it is ghareeb.
Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir said, “The truth is that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him) did not attain this age. Sufyan ibn
‘Uyainah narrated on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Deenar, who
reported on the authority of Yahya Ibn
Ja‘dah that Fatimah said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me, “ ‘Eesa, the son of
Maryam, remained among the Children of Isra’eel for forty years.”
But this is munqati‘. Jareer and Ath-Thawri reported on the
authority of Al-A‘mash that Ibraheem said, “ ‘Eesa remained
among his people for forty years.” And it is narrated on the
authority of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali (May Allah be
pleased with him) that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was raised up on
the night of the twenty-second of Ramadan; and on the same night,
‘Ali died, five days after being stabbed.”

A Description of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), His
Character and His Virtues
Allah, Most High, says, {‘Eesa, son of Maryam, was no more than
a Messenger; many were the
Messengers that passed away before him. His mother (Maryam)
was a Siddiqah (i.e. she believed in the Words of Allah and His
Books [see Verse 66:12])} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:75)
It was said that he was named Al-Maseeh (the Messiah) because of
his mash of the earth, i.e. his traveling in it and his flight with his
Religion from the trials of that time caused by the Jews’ denial of
him and the lies they invented against him and his mother (peace
be upon them both). It was also said that he was called Al-Maseeh
because his feet were anointed.
Sunniconnect.com
270

Allah, Most High, says, {And in their footsteps, We sent ‘Eesa
(‘Eesa), son of Maryam, confirming the Tawrah that had come
before him, and We gave him the Injeel (Gospel), in which was
guidance and light} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:46). And He, Most
High, says, {And indeed, We gave Moosa the Book and followed
him up with a succession of Messengers. And We gave ‘Eesa
(‘Eesa), the son of Maryam, clear signs and supported him with
Rooh ul-Quds (Jibra’eel).} (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:87). And the
Verses regarding this are extremely numerous. We have mentioned
previously the hadeeth confirmed in the Saheehain: “There is no
child born except that Shaitan stabs its side when it is delivered,
causing it to cry out. The only exceptions to this are Maryam and
her son; he went to stab him, but the stab struck a barrier protecting
him.”
We have already related the hadeeth of ‘Umair ibn Hani’, on the
authority of Junadah, who reported on the authority of ‘Ubadah
(May Allah be pleased with him), who reported from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that he said, “Whoever bore witness that ‘La Ilaha ill-Allahu
Wahdahu la Shareeka Lahu wa Anna Muhammadan ‘Abduhu wa
Rasooluhu wa Anna ‘Eesa ‘Abdullahi wa Rasooluhu wa
Kalimatuhul-Latee Alqaha Ila Maryama wa Roohun Minhu walJannatu Haqqun, wanNone haqqun (who testify that none has the
right to be worshipped except Allah, Alone, without partners and
Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger, and ‘Eesa is Allah’s
slave and His Messenger and His Word, which He cast into
Maryam and a Spirit from Him, and that Paradise is true, and the
Fire is true),’ Allah will admit him to Paradise, according to his
deeds.” (Narrated by Al-Bukhari (and this is his wording) and
Muslim.
And Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated on the authority of Abu
Moosa (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, ‘If a person teaches his slave girl good manners, educates her
Sunniconnect.com
271

properly, and then manumits and marries her, he will get a double
reward. And if a man believes in ‘Eesa and then believes in me, he
will get a double reward. And if a slave fears his Lord (i.e. Allah)
and obeys his masters, he too will get a double reward.’
And ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) said,
“The Prophet mentioned Al-Maseeh Ad-Dajjal in front of the
people saying, Allah is not one-eyed while Al-Maseeh Ad-Dajjal is
blind in the right eye and his eye looks like a bulging grape. While
sleeping near the Ka‘bah last night, I saw in my dream a man of
brown color, the best one can see amongst brown color and his hair
was so long that it fell between his shoulders. His hair was lank and
water was dribbling from his head and he was placing his hands on
the shoulders of two men while circumambulating the Ka‘bah. I
asked, “Who is this?” They replied, “This is ‘Eesa, son of
Maryam.” Behind him I saw a man who had very curly hair and
was blind in the right eye, resembling Ibn Qatan (a pagan Arab) in
appearance. He was placing his hands on the shoulders of a person
while performing tawaf around the Ka‘bah. I asked, “Who is this?”
They replied, “Al-Maseeh Ad-Dajjal.”
And it is reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “You will be
gathered barefoot, naked and uncircumcised.” He then recited:
{…as We began the first creation, We shall repeat it, (it is) a
promise binding upon Us. Truly, We shall do it.} (Soorah AlAnbiya’ 21:104) He added, “The first to be dressed on the Day of
Resurrection, will be Ibraheem, and some of my companions will
be taken toward the left side (i.e. to the Hellfire), and I will say,
“My Companions! My Companions!” It will be said, “They
reneged against Islam after you left them.” Then I will say as the
pious slave of Allah (i.e. ‘Eesa) said: {“And I was a witness over
them while I dwelt amongst them, but when You took me up, You
were the Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things.
(This is a great admonition and warning to the Christians of the
Sunniconnect.com
272

whole world). If You punish them, they are Your slaves, and if You
forgive them, verily, You, only You are the Almighty, the Most
Wise.”} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:117,118)
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) that he said, “None spoke in cradle but three:
(The first was) ‘Eesa, (the second was) a man from Banu Isra’eel
called Juraij. While he was offering his prayers, his mother came
and called him. He said (to himself), “Shall I answer her or keep on
praying?” (He went on praying) and did not answer her, his mother
said, “O, Allah! Do not let him die till he sees the faces of
prostitutes.” So while he was in his hermitage, a lady came and
sought to seduce him, but he refused. So she went to a shepherd
and presented herself to him to commit illegal sexual intercourse
with her and then later she gave birth to a child and claimed that it
belonged to Juraij. The people therefore came to him and
dismantled his hermitage and expelled him out of it and abused
him. Juraij performed the ablution and offered prayer, and then
came to the child and said, “O, child! Who is your father?” The
child replied, “The shepherd.” (After hearing this) the people said,
“We shall rebuild your hermitage of gold,” but he said, “No, of
nothing but mud.” (The third was the hero of the following story:)
A lady from Banu Isra’eel was nursing her child at her breast when
a handsome rider passed by her. She said, “O, Allah ! Make my
child like him.” On that, the child left her breast, and facing the
rider said, “O, Allah! Do not make me like him.” The child then
started to suck her breast again. (Abu Hurairah (May Allah be
pleased with him) further said, it is as if I were now looking at the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) sucking his
finger [by way of demonstration].”) After a while the people passed
by, with a slave girl and she (i.e. the child’s mother) said, “O,
Allah! Do not make my child like this (slave girl)!” On that, the
child left her breast and said, “O, Allah! Make me like her.” When
she asked why, the child replied, “The rider is one of the tyrants
Sunniconnect.com
273

while this slave girl is falsely accused of theft and illegal sexual
intercourse.”
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “I am the
nearest of all the people to the son of Maryam, and all the Prophets
are paternal brothers, and there has been no Prophet between me
and him (i.e. ‘Eesa).”
And it is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be
pleased with him) from the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “The
Prophets are paternal brothers; their Religion is one, but their
mothers are different. I am the nearest of all the people to ‘Eesa,
son of Maryam, because there was no Prophet between me and him
and he will descend, so if you see him acknowledge him, for he is
a well-built man, whose complexion is somewhere between red and
white. He will descend while wearing two long, light yellow
garments. His head appears to be dripping water, even though no
moisture touched it. He will break the cross, kill the pig, and abolish
the jizyah and will call the people to Islam. During his time, Allah
will destroy all religions except Islam and Allah will destroy AlMaseeh Ad-Dajjal. Safety will then fill the earth, so much so that
the lions will mingle with camels, tigers with cattle and wolves with
sheep. Children will play with snakes, and they will not harm them.
‘Eesa (‘Eesa) will remain for forty years and then he will die and
the Muslims will offer the funeral prayer over him and bury him.”
And Hisham ibn ‘Urwah narrated on the authority of Saleh, the
freed slave of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “He will remain in the world for forty years.” And details of
his descent at the end of time will be given later, insha’Allah, in the
Book of Battles; we have also explained it in the Tafseer, in the
explanation of the Words of Allah, Most High, in Soorah An-Nisa‘:
Sunniconnect.com
274

{And there is none of the people of the Scripture (Jews and
Christians), but must believe in him (‘Eesa, son of Maryam, as only
a Messenger of Allah and a human being), before his (‘Eesa’s or a
Jew’s or a Christian’s) death (at the time of the appearance of the
Angel of Death). And on the Day of Resurrection, he (‘Eesa) will
be a witness against them.”} (Soorah An-Nisa‘ 4:159) and His
Words: {And he (‘Eesa, son of Maryam) shall be a known sign for
(the coming of) the Hour (Day of Resurrection) (i.e. ‘Eesa’s
descent to the earth)} (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:61) and we have
explained how he will descend on the White Minaret in Damascus,
after the iqamah for the Fajr prayer will be called, and the Imam of
the Muslims will say to him, “Advance, O, Spirit of Allah!” But he
will reply, “No. Some amongst you are commanders over others.
This is the honor from Allah for this Ummah (Nation).

The Differing of the Companions of Al-Maseeh
(Peace be upon him) (the Messiah)
The companions of Maseeh (the Messiah) disagreed after he had
been raised up to the heaven, holding a number of divergent
opinions, according to ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) and others among the Imams of the Salaf, as we
have related in the explanation of the Words of Allah, Most High:
{So We gave power to those who believed against their enemies,
and they became the uppermost.} (Soorah As-Saff 61:14).
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and others
said that some of them said, “His slave and His Messenger was
among us, then Allah raised him up to the heaven.” Others said,
“He is Allah.” Still others said, “He is the son of Allah.” But it is
the first that is the truth, and the other two sayings are terrible
disbelief, as He, Most High, says, {Then the sects differed (i.e. the
Christians about ‘Eesa), so woe unto the disbelievers (those who
gave false witness by saying that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah) from
the meeting of a great Day (i.e. the Day of Resurrection, when they
will be thrown in the blazing Fire).} (Soorah Maryam 19:37). They
Sunniconnect.com
275

also disagreed regarding the transmission of the Gospels, holding
four conflicting views in the matter, ranging from exaggeration to
understatement and from distortion to alteration. Then three
hundred years after Maseeh (Peace be upon him), the Great
Calamity occurred and the four Patriarchs and all of the bishops,
the priests, the deacons and the monks differed regarding the
Maseeh (Peace be upon him), holding opinions too numerous to be
defined and determined. They held a council and sought judgment
from Emperor Constantine, the founder of Constantinople. This
was the first council, and the emperor supported the view of the
largest sect, who were agreed on one of those opinions. They were
known as Melkites. The emperor also refuted the opinions of others
and declared them to be apostates. Those who claimed that ‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him) was a slave from among the slaves of Allah
and a Messenger from among His Messengers were isolated and so
they settled in the deserts and wildernesses. There they built
hermitages, monasteries and religious retreats. They contented
themselves with abstemious lives and they did not mix with those
other sects. The Melkites built huge churches. They took the
buildings erected by the Greeks and altered their mahareeb from
their original direction, which was toward the North Star, so that
they faced toward the east.

Description of the Building of Baitlaham
(Bethlehem) and Al-Qumamah
Emperor Constantine built Bethlehem at the location of the birth of
the Maseeh and his mother made
Hailanah Al-Qumamah, that is, over the grave of the crucified one,
and they accepted the claim of the Jews, that it was the Maseeh
(Peace be upon him). In fact, both of them were guilty of disbelief.
They fabricated laws and religious rulings, including some that
contradicted the Tawrah, and they declared lawful things that were
unlawful, according to the text of the Tawrah, such as swine flesh.
They prayed toward the east, though the Maseeh (Peace be upon
him) did not pray toward anything except the rock of Bait AlSunniconnect.com
276

Maqdis, and all of the Prophets after Moosa (Peace be upon him)
did likewise. Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), the Seal of the Prophets prayed toward it after his migration
to Al-Madinah, for sixteen or seventeen months. Then he changed
the direction of his prayer toward the Ka‘bah, which was built by
Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel (Peace be upon him). They put images in the
churches, and there had been no images in them prior to that. They
corrupted the beliefs which are maintained by their children and
their men and their womenfolk, and they call this a trust, but in fact,
it is the greatest disbelief and betrayal. All of the Melkites and
Nestorians are the followers of Nestorius, the organizers of the
second council. The Jacobites are the followers of Jacob
Baradaeus, the organizers of the third council. They share the same
creed, but they differ in their elucidation of it. Here I will describe
it – and the one who describes disbelief is not a disbeliever – in
order to reveal the weakness of their arguments, the depth of their
disbelief and the stupidity which leads the one who proclaims it to
the blazing Fire; and they say, “We believe in One God, the Master
of all, the Creator of the heavens and the earth – all that is seen and
all that is unseen – and (we believe) in one Lord, ‘Eesa, the Maseeh,
the only begotten son of God, born of the Father, before time, light
of light, the God of Truth, from the God of Truth, born not created,
equal to the Father in essence, who existed for the sake of us,
mankind and in order to save us, he descended from the heaven and
took on human form from the Holy Spirit and from the Virgin
Maryam, the God Incarnate, who was crucified during the reign of
Mulatis, the Nabatean. He suffered and was buried and then he
arose on the third day, as is reported in the Scriptures. Then he
ascended to the heaven and sat on the right of the Lord. And also
he will come in his physical body to order the affairs of the living
and the dead. His Kingdom is eternal. And (we believe in) the Holy
Spirit, the Life-giving Lord, who proceeded from the Father, with
the Father. And (we believe in) the son, before whom all prostrate.
And he acknowledged his right to be worshipped, due to his having
died for our sins, according to People of the Scriptures.
Sunniconnect.com
277

The Book of the Stories of the People of
the Past
We refer to those from the Children of Isra’eel and others up to the
end of their time period, excluding the times of the Arabs and their
Jahiliyyah (Days of Ignorance). We shall present that after we
complete this section, if Allah, Most High, wills. He, Most High,
says, {Thus We relate to you (O, Muhammad) some information of
what happened before. And indeed We have given you from Us a
Reminder (this Qur’an).} (Soorah Ta Ha 20:99). And He, Most
High, says, {We relate unto you (O, Muhammad) the best of stories
through Our Revelations unto you, of this Qur’an. And before this
(i.e. before the coming of Divine Inspiration to you), you were
among those who knew nothing about it (the Qur’an). ) (Soorah
Yoosuf 12:3)

The Story of Dhul-Qarnain
Allah, Most High, says, {And they ask you about Dhul-Qarnain.
Say, “I shall recite to you something of his story.” Verily, We
established him in the earth, and We gave him the means of
everything. So he followed a way. Until, when he reached the
setting place of the sun, he found it setting in a spring that was
hami’ah. And he found near it a people. We (Allah) said (by
inspiration), “O, Dhul-Qarnain! Either you punish them, or treat
them with kindness.” He said, “As for him (a disbeliever in the
Oneness of Allah) who does wrong, we shall punish him; and then
he will be brought back unto his Lord, Who will punish him with a
terrible torment (Hell). But as for him who believes (in Allah’s
Oneness) and works righteousness, he shall have the best reward,
(Paradise), and we (Dhul-Qarnain) shall speak unto him mild words
(as instructions).” Then he followed another way, until, when he
came to the rising place of the sun, he found it rising on a people
for whom We (Allah) had provided no shelter against the sun. So
Sunniconnect.com
278

(it was)! And We knew all about him (Dhul-Qarnain). Then he
followed (another) way, until, when he reached between two
mountains, he found, before (near) them (those two mountains), a
people who scarcely understood a word. They said, “O, DhulQarnain! Verily! (Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj) are doing great mischief in
the land. Shall we then pay you a tribute in order that you might
erect a barrier between us and them?” He said, “That (wealth,
authority and power) in which my Lord had established me is better
(than your tribute). So help me with strength (of men), I will erect
between you and them a barrier. Give me pieces (blocks) of iron.”
Then, when he filled up the gap between the two mountain cliffs,
he said, “Blow,” till when he made it (red as) fire, he said, “Bring
me molten copper to pour over it.” So they
(Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj) were made powerless to scale it or dig
through it. (Dhul Qarnain) said, “This is a Mercy from my Lord,
but when the Promise of my Lord comes, He will level it down to
the ground. And the Promise of my Lord is ever true.”} (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:83-98). Allah, Most High, mentions DhulQarnain and
He praises him for his justice and tells how he traveled to the East
and to the West and achieved dominion over vast provinces and
territories and subdued their inhabitants. He traveled among them
dispensing perfect justice and authority confirmed (by Allah),
victorious, all-conquering and just. The truth is that he was one of
the just kings. It was also said that he was a Prophet and that he was
a Messenger. The strongest claim is that he was one of the angels.
This was related from the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Umar ibn
Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him). He heard a man
saying to another, “O, Dhul-Qarnain!” On this, he said, “Be silent!
Is it not sufficient for you to take the names of the Prophets, but
instead you adopt the names of the angels?” This was narrated by
As-Suhaili.
And Wakee‘ narrated on the authority of Isra’eel, who reported on
the authority of Jabir, who in turn reported on the authority of
Mujahid, who likewise reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn
‘Amr (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “Dhul-Qarnain
Sunniconnect.com
279

was a Prophet.” And Al-Hafiz ibn ‘Asakir narrated on the authority
of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said,
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “I do not know whether Tubba’ was a cursed one or not.
And, I do not know whether hudood (the prescribed penalties) are
expiatory for their people or not. And, I do not know whether DhulQarnain was a Prophet or not.” From this source, this narration is
ghareeb.
Scholars have disagreed regarding his name; Az-Zubair ibn Bakkar
narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) that his name was ‘Abdullah ibn Ad-Dahhak ibn
Ma‘add. And it was said that his name was Mus‘ab ibn ‘Abdullah
ibn Qinan ibn Mansoor ibn ‘Abdullah ibn AlAzad ibn Ghawth ibn
Nabt ibn Malik ibn Zaid ibn Kahlan ibn Saba’ ibn Qahtan.
And it has been narrated in a hadeeth that he was from Himyar and
that his mother was a Roman woman and that he was known as the
“Philosopher”, because of his intellect. One of the Himyarites
composed a poem expressing pride in the fact that he was one of
their ancestors; he said:
Dhul-Qarnain my ancestor, was a Muslim,
A king to whom the kings submitted and gathered,
He traveled to the East and to the West,
Seeking to fulfill the Commands of a Wise Guide,
He saw the disappearance of the sun when it set,
In a muddy, black pool of water,
After him came Bilqees and she was my aunt,
She ruled them until the hoopoe came to her.
Sunniconnect.com
280

Regarding the Words of Allah, Most High: {And they ask you
about Dhul-Qarnain} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:83) the reason for them
was because Quraish asked the Jews for something with which to
test the knowledge of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and they said to them, “Ask him about a man
whoever traveled throughout the Earth and about some young men
whose deeds no one knows.” So Allah, Most High, revealed the
story of the inhabitants of the cave and the story of DhulQarnain;
this is why He says, {Say, “I shall recite to you something of his
story.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:83). That is, useful and sufficient
information in explanation of his affairs and description of his
situation. He says, {Verily, We established him in the earth and We
gave him the means of everything} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:84). That
is, We made broad his kingdom in the lands and We gave him the
tools with which to achieve his great goals and his grand designs.
And it is reported on the authority of Habeeb Ibn Hammad that he
said, “I was with ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib when a man asked him about
Dhul-Qarnain and how he reached the East and the west, and he
said to him, “Allah subjugated the clouds to him and all necessary
means were extended to him, and He extended the light for him.”
Then he said to him. “Shall I tell you more?” But the man remained
silent and so ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) also remained
silent.
And it is reported on the authority of Al-Hasan that he said, “DhulQarnain was a king who lived after Nimrod and it is told that he
was a righteous Muslim who traveled to the East and to the West.
Allah extended his life for him and supported him, so that he
subdued the lands, amassed great wealth, conquered the cities and
killed (many) men. He roamed throughout the lands and found
great citadels. He journeyed on until he reached the farthest points
of east and west, which is why Allah says, {And they ask you about
Dhul-Qarnain. Say, “I shall recite to you something of his story.”}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:83). That is, information (about him). {Verily,
We established him in the earth, and We gave him the means of
everything} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:84). That is, knowledge with
Sunniconnect.com
281

which to find the ways to camping places. {…and We gave him the
means of everything} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:84). That is, knowledge.
Qatadah and Matar Al-Warraq said that it means knowledge of the
different parts and features of the earth.
And He, Most High, says, {So he followed a way} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:85). {Until, when he reached the setting place of the sun…}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:86). That is, in the earth; he reached a place
where no one could proceed further and he stopped on the shore of
the western ocean, which is known as Oceanus and in which lie the
islands known as Al-Khalidat, which are at the beginning of the
lines of longitude, according to one of two opinions held by
scholars of geography; the second opinion is that they are on the
coast of this sea, as we mentioned previously. There he witnessed
the setting of the sun, i.e. he followed a route until he reached the
furthest point that could be reached in the direction of the sun’s
setting, which is the west of the Earth. {…he found it setting in a
spring that was hami’ah} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:86). What is meant
by it is the sea, i.e. he saw the sun as if it were setting in the ocean.
This is something which everyone who goes to the coast can see: it
looks as if the sun is setting into the sea but in fact it never leaves
its path, in which it is fixed. This is why Allah says, {he found}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:86), i.e. it appeared to him and He does not
say: “it was setting in a spring that was hami’ah, i.e. muddy. Ka‘b
AlAhbar said, “It is black mud.” Some recited it as “hamiyah”, i.e.
boiling. This was due to the fierceness of the sun’s light and its
rays.

A Description of Dhul-Qarnain’s Quest For the
Spring of Life
Allah, Most High, says, {We (Allah) said (by inspiration), “O,
Dhul-Qarnain! Either you punish them, or treat them with
kindness.” He said, “As for him (a disbeliever in the Oneness of
Allah) who does wrong, we shall punish him; and then he will be
Sunniconnect.com
282

brought back unto his Lord, Who will punish him with a terrible
torment (Hell).”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:86-87). That is, the
punishments of this world and the Hereafter will be combined on
him. He began with the punishment of this world, because it is a
greater deterrent to the disbelievers. {“But as for him who believes
(in Allah’s Oneness) and works righteousness, he shall have the
best reward, (Paradise), and we (Dhul Qarnain) shall speak unto
him mild words (as instructions).”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:88). And
He began with the most important thing and that is the reward of
the Hereafter and He bestowed His Favor on him, and that was
justice, knowledge and faith. Allah, Most High, says, {So he
followed a way} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:85). That is, he followed a
path, returning from the West to the East; and it was said that his
return spanned twelve years. {Until, when he came to the rising
place of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We (Allah)
had provided no shelter against the sun} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:90)
That is, they had no houses or shelters to protect them from the heat
of the sun. Many of the scholars said, “But when the heat of the sun
was intense, they sought refuge in burrows in the ground which
they had made, and which resembled graves. Allah, Most High,
says, {So (it was)! And We knew all about him (Dhul-Qarnain)}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:91). That is, We know what he was following
and We protected him and preserved him during his travels. All of
this was from the West of the land to the east of it.
And He, Most High, says, {Then he followed (another) way, until,
when he reached between two mountains, he found, before (near)
them (those two mountains), a people who scarcely understood a
word.} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:92) That is, they did not understand his
language because of their isolation from other peoples. It was said
that they were the Turks, the sons of Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj’s paternal
uncle (i.e. their cousins). They informed him that these two tribes
had committed acts of aggression against them, spread corruption
throughout their land and practiced highway robbery and they paid
him a tribute in return for which they asked him to make a barrier
which would prevent these two tribes from reaching them. He
Sunniconnect.com
283

refused to accept the tribute, being content with the great wealth
that Allah had given him. {He said, “That (wealth, authority and
power) in which my Lord had established me is better (than your
tribute).”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:95). Then he requested that they
gather for him men and materials, in order that he might build a
barrier between them and their enemies. That barrier took the form
of a dam between two mountains which was the only route by
which Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj could attack them. The rest of it was
taken up by vast seas and towering mountains. So he built it, as
Allah says, from iron and molten copper. It was said that the Arabic
word ‘qitr’ used in the Verse means lead, but the first interpretation
is the correct one. Instead of bricks, he used iron and instead of
mud, he used copper. This is why Allah, Most High, says, {So they
(Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj) were made powerless to scale it} (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:97). That is, they could not climb it with ladders or
anything else. {…or dig through it} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:97). That
is, with pickaxes or other digging implements. So He has compared
the easiest thing with the easiest thing and the most difficult with
the most difficult. {He (Dhul-Qarnain) said, “This is a Mercy from
my Lord.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:98). That is, Allah has ordained
the barrier’s existence in order for it to be a Mercy for His slaves,
that it might prevent their enemies from reaching them via that
route. {“…but when the Promise of my Lord comes…”} (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:98). That is, the time when He has ordained that they
shall sally forth against the people at the end of time. {He will level
it down to the ground} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:98). That is, He will
flatten it; and there is no escaping this event, which is why He says,
{“And the Promise of my Lord is ever true.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:98). This is like His Saying: {Until, when Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj
are let loose (from their barrier) and they swiftly swarm from every
mound. And the true promise (Day of Resurrection) shall draw near
(of fulfillment). Then, (when the mankind is resurrected from their
graves), you shall see the eyes of the disbelievers fixedly staring in
horror. (They will say), “Woe to us! We were indeed heedless of
this; nay, but we were zalimoon.”} (Soorah Al-Anbiya’21:96-97).
This is why He says here (in Soorah Al-Kahf ), {And on that day
Sunniconnect.com
284

(i.e. the day when Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj will come out), We shall
leave them to surge like waves on one another} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:99). That is, the day when the barrier will be breached,
according to the authentic hadeeth. {…and the Trumpet will be
blown, and We shall collect them all together} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:99)

Sunniconnect.com
285

Mention of the Nations of Ya’jooj and
Ma’jooj, a Description of Them, What
Has Been Related Regarding Them and a
Description
It is reported on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri (May Allah
be pleased with him) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “Allah, Most High, will say, on the
Day of Resurrection, “O, Adam!” Adam will reply, “Labbaik wa
Sa‘daik, and all the good is in Your Hand.” Allah will say, “Bring
out the people of the fire.” Adam will say, “O, Allah! How many
are the people of the Fire?” Allah will reply, “From every one
thousand, take out nine-hundred and ninety-nine.” At that time
children will become hoary headed {and every pregnant woman
will drop her load, and you shall see mankind as in a drunken state,
yet they will not be drunken, but severe will be the Torment of
Allah.} (Soorah Al-Hajj 22:2).” The Companions of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked, “O, Messenger
of Allah! Who is that (excepted) one?” He said, “Rejoice with glad
tidings; one person will be from you and one thousand will be from
Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj.”
In another narration, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “Rejoice with glad tidings, for among you there are
two nations (i.e. Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj), wherever they go, they
defeat the people through strength of numbers.”
This proves that their numbers are great and that they outnumber
the mankind by many times. They are from the progeny of Nooh
(Peace be upon him), because Allah, Most High, informs us that He
answered the supplication of His slave, Nooh (Peace be upon him)
against the people of the Earth, in His Words: {And Nooh said,
“My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth!”}
Sunniconnect.com
286

(Soorah Nooh 71:26) and He said {Then we saved him and those
with him in this ship} and His statement {And, his progeny, them
we made the survivors}
As for the claim that Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj were created when Adam
(Peace be upon him) had a nocturnal emission and his sperm
became mixed with the earth and that this resulted in their creation
and they are not descended from Eve, this was related by Shaikh
Abu Zakariyya An-Nawawi in his explanation of Saheeh Muslim
and others, but they declared it to be weak – and it is only fitting
that it should be so deemed, since there is no evidence for it. Indeed,
it contradicts what we have mentioned, which is that all of the
people today are descended from Nooh (Peace be upon him),
according to the text of the Qur’an.
If it was said, how does the hadeeth in the Saheehain prove that
they are the ransom of the Believers on the Day of Resurrection
and that they will be in the Fire, though no Messenger was sent to
them and
Allah has said, {And We never punish until We have sent a
Messenger (to give warning)} (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:15)’ the answer
is that they will not be punished until the evidence has been
established against them and they have been given a chance to offer
their excuses, as Allah, Most High, says, {And We never punish
until We have sent a Messenger (to give warning)} (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:15). So if they lived during the time before the sending of
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), then it
means that Messengers from among them came to them, in which
case, the evidence has been established against them. But if Allah
had not sent Messengers to them, then they will fall under the ruling
of the people of the Fatrah and those whom the call (to Islam) did
not reach. And the hadeeth which has been reported from sources
on the authority of a number of the Companions (May Allah be
pleased with them) from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him): “Verily, those who are thus will
be tested in the fields of the Resurrection and whoever answered
Sunniconnect.com
287

the caller (to Islam) will enter Paradise, while those who refused
will enter the Fire.” We have recorded the hadeeth with its various
chains and different wordings and the opinions of the Imams
regarding it in our Tafseer, in the explanation of Allah’s Saying:
{And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger (to give
warning)} (Soorah Al-Isra’ 17:15). It was related by Shaikh AbulHasan Al-Ash‘ari that there was a consensus (among the scholars)
of AhlAs-Sunnah wal-Jama‘ah regarding this. Their being tested
does not necessarily mean that they will be saved, nor does it
contradict the information regarding them which states that they are
the inhabitants of the Fire, because Allah informs His Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) of what He wills from
the knowledge of the unseen, and He has informed him that these
people are from among the wretched and that their characteristics
prevent them from accepting the truth and acting upon it, so they
do not accept the preaching of the caller (to Islam) until the Day of
Resurrection. So it is known from this that they are the worst
rejecters of the truth in this world, even when it comes to them
therein, because in the fields of the Resurrection, some of those
who rejected guidance in the life of this world will be guided, for
there is even greater reason to believe there, because of the terrors
that will be seen (on that Day), than in the life of this world – and
Allah knows better – as He, Most High, says, {And if you only
could see when the mujrimoon (criminals, disbelievers, polytheists,
sinners, etc.) shall hang their heads before their Lord (saying), “Our
Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back (to the world),
we will do righteous good deeds. Verily, we now believe with
certainty.”} (Soorah As-Sajdah 32:12). And He says, {How clearly
will they (the polytheists and disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah)
see and hear on the Day when they will appear before Us!} (Soorah
Maryam 19:38). As for the hadeeth in which it is stated that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
called them (to Islam) on the night of Al-Isra’ and that they did not
accept his call, it is munkar; indeed, it is fabricated, and the person
who fabricated it was ‘Amr Ibn As-Subh.
Sunniconnect.com
288

As for the barrier, we have mentioned previously that Dhul-Qarnain
built it from iron and copper and he closed off the path between the
towering mountains thereby; and no mightier construction on the
face of the Earth is known, nor any more beneficial one to mankind
in their earthly life. Al-Bukhari narrated that a man said to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), “I saw the
barrier.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
asked, “How did you find it (i.e. what was it like)?” The man said,
“I found it (i.e. it looked) like al-burd ul-muhabbar (a striped
cloak).” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “You have seen it.” This is how Al-Bukhari reported it, in a
mu‘allaq form and in an apocopate form. But I have not seen it with
a connected chain of narrators which is acceptable to me, although
Ibn Jareer narrated it in his Tafseer in a mursal form. He said,
“Bishr informed us that Yazeed told him, “I was told by Sa‘eed,
who reported on the authority of Qatadah that he said, “It was
mentioned to us that a man said, “O, Messenger of Allah! I have
seen the barrier of Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj.” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Describe it to me.” He said,
“It was like al-burd ul-muhabbar (a striped cloak), with black and
red stripes.” On hearing this, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “You have seen it.”
And if it was asked, then how can we reconcile the Saying of Allah,
Most High: {So they (Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj) were made powerless
to scale it or dig through it} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:97) and the
hadeeth narrated by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Zainab Bint
Jahsh, the Mother of the Believers (may Allah be Pleased with her),
who said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) awoke from sleep with a red face and he was saying:
There is no god but Allah; there is a destruction in store for the
Arabs because of the turmoil which is near at hand as the barrier of
Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj has been opened like this,” and he (in order to
explain it) made a ring with the help of his thumb and forefinger. I
said, “O, Messenger of Allah, would we be destroyed even though
there are pious people amongst us?” The Prophet (Peace and
Sunniconnect.com
289

Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Yes, when evil
predominates.” ’ The answer is: As for the opinion of those who
hold that this is an indication of the opening of the gates of evil and
trials and that this is simply a metaphor, there is no ambiguity. And
as for the opinion of those who consider it to be information about
a tangible thing, as appears obvious, then there is also no
ambiguity, because His Saying: {So they (Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj)
were made powerless to scale it or dig through it} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:97), i.e. in that time, because this wording is in the past tense
and so it does not negate the possibility that they might do so in the
future, if Allah permits them to penetrate it by degrees, until the
appointed time is reached and the (Divine) Ordainment is
concluded and they emerge, as Allah, Most High, says, {And they
swiftly swarm from every mound} (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:96). But
another hadeeth is more detailed than this, and it is that which was
narrated by Imam Ahmad in his Musnad on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him), who reported from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that he said, “Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj will excavate the barrier every
day until, when they begin to see the rays of the sun, their leader
will say, “Return, and you will dig it tomorrow.” So they will return
to it and when they come back, they will find that the barrier has
become stronger than it was before. This will continue until their
time comes and Allah wishes to send them forth. They will dig until
they begin to see sunlight, then the one who is in charge of them
will say, “Go back; you can carry on digging tomorrow, if Allah
wills.” In this case, he will make an exception by saying “if Allah
wills,” thus relating the matter to the Will of Allah. They will return
on the following day and find the hole exactly as they left it. They
will carry on digging and come out against the people. They will
drink all the water, and find the hole exactly as they left it and the
people will entrench themselves in their fortresses. Ya'jooj and
Ma’jooj will fire their arrows into the sky, and they will fall back
to earth with something like blood on them. Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj
will say, “We have defeated the people of earth, and overcome the
people of Heaven.” Then Allah will send a kind of worm in the
Sunniconnect.com
290

napes of their necks, and they will be killed by it... “By Him in
Whose Hand is the soul of Muhammad, the beasts of the earth will
become fat after grazing on their flesh and their blood.” So we are
informed in this hadeeth that: “they (Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj) will
excavate the barrier every day until, when they begin to see the rays
of the sun,” this is due to the thinness of the barrier. Now if it is
authentic, it can be understood to mean that this work of theirs will
be at the end of time, when their emergence is near, or the meaning
of His Words: {…or dig through it} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:97) could
be that they have made a small hole in it, and that does not negate
the possibility that they dig it, but do not penetrate it. And Allah
knows better.
Based on this, it is possible to reconcile this hadeeth with what has
been recorded in the Saheehain, on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him): “…the barrier of (Ya’jooj and
Ma’jooj) has been opened like this.” That is, a hole has been opened
in it. And Allah knows better.

Sunniconnect.com
291

The Story of the Companions of the Cave
Allah, Most High, says, {Do you think that the People of the Cave
and the inscription (the news or the names of the People of the
Cave) were a wonder among Our Signs? (Remember) when the
young men fled for refuge (from their disbelieving folk) to the cave,
they said, “Our Lord! Bestow on us mercy from Yourself and
facilitate for us our affair in the right way!” Therefore We covered
up their (sense of) hearing (causing them to go into a deep sleep) in
the cave for a number of years. Then We raised them up (from their
sleep), that We might test which of the two parties was best at
calculating the time period that they had tarried. We narrate unto
you (O, Muhammad) their story with truth: Truly, they were young
men who believed in their Lord (Allah) and We increased them in
guidance. And We made their hearts firm and strong (with the light
of faith in Allah and bestowed upon them patience to bear the
separation of their kith and kin and dwellings, etc.) when they stood
up and said, “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the Earth,
never shall we call upon any ilah (god) other than Him; if we did,
we should indeed have uttered an enormity in disbelief. These our
people have taken for worship alihah (gods) other than Him
(Allah). Why do they not bring for them a clear authority? And who
does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah.” (The
young men said to one another,) “And when you withdraw from
them and that which they worship, except Allah, then seek refuge
in the cave, your Lord will open a way for you from His Mercy and
will make easy for you your affair (i.e. will give you what you will
need of provision, dwelling, etc.).” And you might have seen the
sun when it rose, declining to the right from their Cave, and when
it set, turning away from them to the left, while they lay in the midst
of the cave. That is (one) of the Ayat (proofs, evidences, signs) of
Allah. He whom Allah guides is rightly guided; but he whom He
sends astray, for him you will find no waliyy (guiding friend) to
lead him (to the right Path). And you would have thought them
awake, while they were asleep. And We turned them on their right
and on their left sides, and their dog stretching forth his two
Sunniconnect.com
292

forelegs at the entrance (of the cave or in the space near to the
entrance of the cave [as a guard at the gate]). Had you looked at
them, you would certainly have turned back from them in flight,
and would certainly have been filled with awe of them. Likewise,
We awakened them (from their long deep sleep) that they might
question one another. A speaker from among them said: “How long
have you stayed (here)?” They said, “We have stayed (perhaps) a
day or part of a day.” They said, “Your Lord (Alone) knows best
how long you have stayed (here). So send one of you with this
silver coin of yours to the town, and let him find out which is the
good lawful food and bring some of that to you. And let him be
careful and let no man know of you. For if they come to know of
you, they will stone you (to death or abuse and harm you) or turn
you back to their religion, and in that case you will never be
successful.” And thus We made their case known to the people, that
they might know that the Promise of Allah is true, and that there
can be no doubt about the Hour. (Remember) when they (the people
of the city) disputed among themselves about their case, they said,
“Construct a building over them, their Lord knows best about
them,” (then) those who won their point said (most probably the
disbelievers), “We verily shall build a masjid over them.” (Some)
say they were three, the dog being the fourth among them; (others)
say they were five, the dog being the sixth, guessing at the unseen;
(yet others) say they were seven, the dog being the eighth. Say (O,
Muhammad), “My Lord knows best their number; none knows
them but a few.” So debate not (about their number, etc.) except
with the clear proof (which We have revealed to you). And consult
not any of them (people of the Scripture, Jews and Christians) about
(the affair of) the people of the cave. And never say of anything, “I
shall do such and such thing tomorrow,” except (with the saying):
“If Allah wills!” And remember your Lord when you forget and
say, “It may be that my Lord guides me unto a nearer way of truth
than this.” And they stayed in their cave three hundred years, and
add nine. Say, “Allah knows best how long they stayed. With Him
is the unseen of the heavens and the Earth. How clearly He sees,
and hears (everything)! They have no waliyy (helper, disposer of
Sunniconnect.com
293

affairs, protector, etc.) other than He, and He makes none to share
in His Decision and His Rule.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:9-26)
The reason for the sending down of the story of the Companions of
the Cave and the information regarding Dhul-Qarnain was,
according to what has been reported by Muhammad Ibn Ishaq in
his Seerah and by others was that Quraish sent a message to the
Jews, asking them about matters with which they might test the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and questions that they might ask him, in order to see what his
answer might be. The Jews said, “Ask him about people who went
out in the past and it is not known what they did. And ask him about
a man who traveled throughout the Earth. And (ask him) about the
Spirit.” So Allah, Most High, revealed: {And they ask you (O,
Muhammad) concerning the Rooh (the Spirit)} (Soorah Al-Isra’
17:85) and: {And they ask you about Dhul-Qarnain} (Soorah AlKahf 18:83). And here He says, {Do you think that the people of
the cave and the Inscription (the news or the names of the people
of the cave) were a wonder among Our Signs?} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:9). That is, it is not a great wonder, compared with the
information that We have conveyed to you, the clear Signs and the
strange wonders. And the Arabic word ‘kahf’ means a cavern in a
mountain.
It is apparent from the context that their people were polytheists,
who worshipped idols. Many of the scholars of tafseer, historians
and others said that they lived during the era of a king whose name
was Daqyanoos (Dacianus) and they were the sons of leading
members of society. It was also said that they were the sons of
kings. It happened that they gathered on a day that was a religious
holiday for their people and they saw their people occupied in
prostration to their idols and glorification of their graven images.
They looked with discerning eyes and Allah removed the veil of
ignorance from their hearts and inspired them with guidance, so
they knew that their people were not following guidance and they
abandoned their religion and instead worshipped Allah, Alone,
without partners. It was said that when Allah inspired each one of
Sunniconnect.com
294

them with belief in His Oneness (Tawheed), they withdrew from
the people. These young men gathered in one place, as confirmed
by the hadeeth in Saheeh Al-Bukhari: “The spirits are massed
armies. Those of them that knew one another are friendly. Those
that did not know one another disagree.” So each of them asked the
other about his situation and his circumstances and they informed
one another about their own individual conditions. They agreed to
withdraw from their people, to wash their hands of them and to flee
with their Religion from them – and this is what has been legislated
in times of trial and tribulation and the appearance of evil. Allah,
Most High, says, {We narrate unto you (O, Muhammad) their story
with truth: Truly! They were young men who believed in their Lord
(Allah) and We increased them in guidance. And We made their
hearts firm and strong (with the light of faith in Allah and bestowed
upon them patience to bear the separation of their kith and kin and
dwellings, etc.) when they stood up and said, “Our Lord is the Lord
of the heavens and the Earth, never shall we call upon any ilah
(god) other than Him; if we did, we should indeed have uttered an
enormity in disbelief. These our people have taken for worship
alihah (gods) other than Him (Allah). Why do they not bring for
them a clear authority?”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:13-15). That is, a
clear evidence for what they are following. {“These our people
have taken for worship alihah (gods) other than Him (Allah). Why
do they not bring for them a clear authority? And who does more
wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah. (The young men
said to one another,) “And when you withdraw from them and that
which they worship, except Allah…”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:15,16).
That is, when you abandon their religion and wash your hands of
the idols that they worship besides Allah. This was because they
used to associate partners with Allah, as Al-Khaleel said, {“Verily,
I am innocent of what you worship, except Him (i.e. I worship none
but Allah Alone) Who did create me, and verily, He will guide
me.”} (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:26, 27). Likewise, one of these
young men said, “Since you have withdrawn from your people in
your religion, remove yourselves physically from their midst, in
order to avoid them bringing their evil to you.” {“…then seek
Sunniconnect.com
295

refuge in the cave, your Lord will open a way for you from His
Mercy and will make your affair easy for you (i.e. will give you
what you will need of provision, dwelling, etc.).”} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:16). That is, He will cause a veil to descend over you and you
will be under His Protection and He will make your end to be good,
as stated in the hadeeth: “O, Allah! Make the end of all of our
affairs us from the humiliation of this world and the punishment of
the Hereafter.” Then Allah, Most High, describes the cave in which
they sought refuge and how its entrance faces toward the north and
its interior faced toward the qiblah. And that was the most
beneficial place, with its interior facing toward the qiblah and its
entrance facing north. He says, {And you might have seen the sun,
when it rose, declining} (Soorah AlKahf 18:17). The Arabic word
(‫رروورروو‬
َ‫ ) تت◌َ اازَ ز‬was also recited ( َّ ‫وو‬
َ َ◌ َ‫{ ) زت‬to the right from
َ
َ ‫رر‬
their cave, and when it set, turning away from them to the left}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:17). So He informs us that the sun, i.e. during
the summer time or close to it, when it first rose, appeared to those
in the cave on the western side of it, then it gradually departed from
it. And that is the meaning of its declining toward the right. Then it
rose into the sky and departed from the doorway of the cave. Then
when it began to set, it entered it little by little from the eastern side,
until the time when it set, as may be seen from a similar position.
And the wisdom behind the sun’s entering at different times is so
that the air therein did not become spoiled. {…while they lay in the
midst of the cave. That is (one) of the Ayat \of Allah} (Soorah AlKahf 18:17). That is, their remaining in this situation for a period
lasting many years, during which they did not eat or drink and their
bodies did not receive any form of nourishment is one of Allah’s
Ayat and a proof of His Great Omnipotence. {He whom Allah
guides is rightly guided; but he whom He increases in error, for him
you will find no waliyy (guiding friend) to lead him (to the right
Path). And you would have thought them awake, while they were
asleep} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:17,18). Some of the scholars said that
this was because their eyes remained open, so that they would not
become decayed by being closed for an extended period of time.
{And We turned them on their right and on their left sides} (Soorah
Sunniconnect.com
296

Al-Kahf 18:18). It was said that every year they were turned once
from one side to the other. It is also possible that they were turned
more often than that. And Allah knows better. {…and their dog
stretching forth his two forelegs at the entrance} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:18). Shu‘aib Al-Jaba’i said that the name of their dog was
Humran. Others said that the word ‘al-waseed’ used in the Verse
means the entrance to the cave. What is meant is that the dog that
was with them when they withdrew from their people remained
with them, but it did not enter the cave with them; instead, it lay
down at the cave’s entrance and placed its front paws at the
threshold. It was his nature and habit to lie down at their door as if
guarding them. It was sitting outside the door, because the angels
do not enter a house in which there is a dog, as was reported in an
authentic hadeeth, nor do they enter a house in which there is an
image, a person in a state of ritual impurity or a disbeliever, as was
narrated in the hadeeth that has been graded hasan. The blessing
they enjoyed extended to their dog, so the sleep that overtook them
overtook it too. This is the benefit of accompanying good people,
and so this dog attained fame and stature. It was said that it was the
hunting dog of one of the people which is the more appropriate
view, or that it was the dog of the king’s cook, who shared their
religious views, and brought his dog with him. And Allah knows
better. Much has been related regarding this dog, but most of it was
obtained from Isra’eeliyyat and most of it is lies and of no benefit,
such as their dispute regarding its name and its color.
But Allah has related what is most beneficial regarding their
situation and what is most important concerning their affair, and
He has described their situation so that it is as if the listener was
witnessing and the one who was informed saw the cave as it was
described and their situation therein, and how they turned from side
to side and how their dog lay with its paws stretched out at the
threshold. Allah says, {Had you looked at them, you would
certainly have turned back from them in flight} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:18). That is, because Allah had made them appear dreadful, so
that no one could look at them without being filled with terror,
Sunniconnect.com
297

because of the frightening appearance they had been given. This
was so that no one would come near them or touch them until the
appointed time when their sleep would come to an end as Allah
willed, because of the wisdom, clear proof and great mercy
involved in that. It is possible that the address in His Words: {Had
you looked at them…} is to mankind in general and not only to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
as in His Words: {Then what (or who) causes you to deny the
Recompense (i.e. Day of Resurrection)?} (Soorah At-Teen 95:7).
That is, O, mankind. And this is because it is the nature of mankind
to flee from the sight of terrifying things in most cases, which is
why He says, {Had you looked at them, you would certainly have
turned back from them in flight} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:18). This
proves that hearing about something is not the same as seeing it, as
stated in the hadeeth, because the information has been given, but
the flight and fear has not occurred. Then Allah informed us that
He awakened them from their slumber, after they had slept for three
hundred and nine years. And when they awoke, they asked one
another, {“How long have you stayed (here)?” They said, “We
have stayed (perhaps) a day or part of a day.” They said, “Your
Lord (Alone) knows best how long you have stayed (here). So send
one of you with this silver coin of yours to the town.”} (Soorah AlKahf 18:19). That is, take these dirhams of yours, i.e. that you have
with you, to the city. It was said that the name of the city was
Dafsoos. {“…and let him find out which is the good, lawful food.”}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:19). Azka means purest. {and bring some of
that to you} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:19). That is, some of that food,
that you may eat of it. They said this because of their asceticism
and their piety. {And let him be careful} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:19).
That is, when he enters the city. {and let no man know of you, for
if they come to know of you, they will stone you (to death or abuse
and harm you) or turn you back to their religion, and in that case
you will never be successful.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:19, 20). That
is, if you return to their religion after Allah had saved you from it.
And all of this is because of their belief that they had slept for a day
or part of a day, or more than that, and they did not realise that they
Sunniconnect.com
298

had slept for more than three hundred years and that the states and
countries and those who ruled them had completely changed, and
that the generation among whom they had lived had gone and been
replaced by others, who had likewise gone and been replaced by
others. And when one of them – whose name, it was said, was
Teedhoosis – set out, he arrived at the city in disguise, so that none
of his people should recognize him, based on his belief (that they
had only slept for a short while). The country had changed beyond
recognition and the inhabitants he met did not recognize him. It was
said that he fled from them and it was also said that rather, he
informed them about himself and his companions and what had
befallen them. The people then went with them, in order that he
might show them their place. When they approached the cave, he
entered it and went to his brothers and informed them of their true
situation and of the length of time they had slept. When he told
them, they realized that this had been ordained for them by Allah
through His Omnipotence. It was said that they continued to sleep
and it was also said that rather, they died after that. As for the
people of the city, it was said that they were not guided to their
place in the cave and that Allah kept their situation secret from
them. It was also said that they were unable to physically enter it
and that they were in fear of them.
They differed regarding their case and some of them said:
{“Construct a building over them…”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:21).
That is, seal up the doorway of the cave over them, so that they may
not exit from it, or so that no harm may reach them. Others – and it
was their opinion that was implemented – said, {“We verily shall
build a masjid over them.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:21). That is, a
place of worship, so that it might become a blessed place for those
righteous people who live around it. This was something
wellknown to those who came before us. But in our religious law,
according to what has been confirmed in the Saheehain from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him):
“May Allah curse the Jews and Christians for they built the places
of worship at the graves of their Prophets.” He was warning his
Sunniconnect.com
299

Companions (May Allah be pleased with them) against doing what
they had done. As for His Words: {And thus We made their case
known to the people, that they might know that the Promise of
Allah is true, and that there can be no doubt about the Hour}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:21). That is, We revealed their circumstances
to the people. Many of the scholars of tafseer said that it means that
the people might know that the Promise is true and that there can
be no doubt of the Hour, when they knew that these people had
slept for more than three hundred years and then woke up as they
were before, without any change in them, because He Who caused
them to remain as they were is Able to return their bodies, even
though they had been eaten by worms and to give life to the dead,
even though their bodies and their bones had crumbled. And this is
something which the Believers do not doubt. {Verily! Our Word
unto a thing when We intend it, is only that We say unto it, “Be!”
and it is} (Soorah An-Nahl 16:40). It is also possible that the
pronoun in His Words: {that they might know} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:21) refers to the Companions of the Cave, because their
knowledge of this was deeper and more profound than that of
others. It is also possible that it refers to everyone. And Allah
knows better. Then He, Most High, says, {(Some) say they were
three, the dog being the fourth among them; (others) say they were
five, the dog being the sixth, guessing at the unseen; (yet others)
say they were seven, the dog being the eighth} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:22). Allah mentions the dispute among the people regarding
their number and He relates three sayings. He declares the first two
to be weak and He confirms the third and this proves that it is the
truth. Since, if there were other opinions, He would have related
them. And if this third saying was not the correct one, He would
have declared it to be weak. So this proves what we have said. And
since there is no avail in disputes such as these and no benefit in
them, Allah guided His Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) to the correct behavior in such cases in which the people
dispute, telling him to say, “Allah knows better.” And this is why
He says, {Say (O, Muhammad), “My Lord knows best their
number.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:22) and He says, {“…none knows
Sunniconnect.com
300

them but a few.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:22). That is, of mankind.
{So debate not (about their number, etc.) except with the clear
proof (which We have revealed to you)} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:22).
That is, gently and politely and do not become engaged in
arguments in cases such as these or seek pronouncements from any
person. This is why Allah, Most High, left their number unclear at
the beginning of the story, saying, {They were young men who
believed in their Lord (Allah)} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:13). And if
there was any great benefit in specifying their number, the Knower
of the unseen and the seen would have mentioned it. And He, Most
High, says, {And never say of anything, “I shall do such and such
thing tomorrow,” except (with the saying), “if Allah wills!” And
remember your Lord when you forget and say, “It may be that my
Lord guides me unto a nearer way of truth than this.”} (Soorah AlKahf 18:23,24)
This is a great etiquette to which Allah, Most High, has guided him
and which He has encouraged His creation to follow; and that is,
that if a person says, “I will do such-and-such in the future,” it is
legislated that he should not do so without adding, “…if Allah
wills,” so that he will achieve his objective, because the slave does
not know what will happen on the morrow and he does not know if
this thing that he intends is ordained for him or not. And the
addition of the words: “…if Allah wills,” is not a condition, rather
it is a statement of certainty, which is why, ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) said that a person may say “…if
Allah wills,” even if it is a year later, it means that if he forgets to
say it when he makes the oath or when he speaks, and he
remembers it later, even a year later, the Sunnah is that he should
say it, so that he will still be following the Sunnah of saying “…if
Allah wills,” even if that is after breaking his oath, as we said earlier
in the story of Sulaiman (Peace be upon him), when he said,
“Tonight I will go around to seventy women (according to some
reports, it was ninety or one hundred women) so that each one of
them will give birth to a son who will fight for the sake of Allah.”
It was said to him (according to one report, the angel said to him),
Sunniconnect.com
301

“Say, ‘If Allah wills’,” but he did not say it. He went around to the
women but none of them gave birth except for one who gave birth
to a half-formed child. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “By Him in Whose hand is
my soul, had he said, “If Allah wills,” he would not have broken
his oath, and that would have helped him to attain what he wanted.”
According to another report, “…they would all have fought as
horsemen in the cause of Allah.” At the beginning of this Soorah
we discussed the reason why this Ayah was revealed: when the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was asked
about the story of the People of the Cave, he said, “I will tell you
tomorrow.” Then the revelation was delayed for fifteen days.
And He, Most High, says, {And remember your Lord when you
forget} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:24). This is because forgetfulness
might be from Shaitan and mentioning Allah repels him from the
heart, so that the one who forgets might remember what he had
forgotten. And He, Most High, says, {and say, “It may be that my
Lord guides me unto a nearer way of truth than this.”} (Soorah AlKahf 18:24). That is, when a matter is unclear or a situation is
difficult, or the sayings of the people are obscure regarding
something, then ask Allah and He will make the matter easy for
you and facilitate it for you. Then He says, {And they stayed in
their cave for three hundred years, and add nine} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:25). Because there is a great benefit in knowing the length of
time they remained in the cave, Allah, Most High, informs us about
it. The extra nine years referred to means in lunar years, since one
hundred solar years equals one hundred and three lunar years and
so three hundred solar years is equivalent to three hundred and nine
lunar years. {Say, “Allah knows best how long they stayed.”}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:26). That is, if you are asked about a matter
similar to this and no information has been conveyed to you, then
refer the matter to Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful. {“With
Him is the unseen of the heavens and the Earth.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:26). That is, He is the Knower of the unseen and no one has
access to it except those of His creation whom He wills. {How
Sunniconnect.com
302

clearly He sees, and hears (everything)!} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:26).
Ibn Jareer said, “The language used is an eloquent expression of
praise.” The phrase may be understood to mean, how much Allah
sees of everything that exists and how much He hears of everything
that is to be heard, for nothing is hidden from Him! {They have no
waliyy (helper, disposer of affairs, protector, etc.) other than He,
and He makes none to share in His Decision and His Rule.”}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:26). That is, your Lord, Who is the sole Owner
of the Dominion and Disposer of affairs, Alone, without partners.

The Story of the Two Men: The Believer and the
Disbeliever
Allah, Most High, says in Soorah Al-Kahf, after relating the story
of the People of the Cave {And put forward for them the example
of two men; unto one of them We had given two gardens of grapes,
and We had surrounded both with date-palms; and had put between
them green crops (cultivated fields, etc.). Each of those two gardens
brought forth its produce, and failed not in the least therein, and We
caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them. And he had
property (or fruit) and he said to his companion, in the course of
mutual talk, “I am more than you in wealth and stronger in respect
of men.” (See Tafseer Qurtubi, Vol. 10, page 403). And he went
into his garden while he was unjust to himself. He said, “I think not
that this will ever perish. And I think not the Hour will ever come,
and if indeed I am brought back to my Lord, (on the Day of
Resurrection), I surely shall find better than this when I return to
Him.” His companion said to him, during the talk with him, “Do
you disbelieve in Him Who created you out of dust (i.e. your father
Adam), then out of a nutfah (mixed semen drops of male and
female discharge), then fashioned you into a man? But as for my
part (I believe that) He is Allah, my Lord and none shall I associate
as partner with my Lord. It was better for you to say, when you
entered your garden, ‘That which Allah wills (will come to pass)!
There is no power but with Allah.’ If you see me less than you in
Sunniconnect.com
303

wealth and children, it may be that my Lord will give me something
better than your garden, and will send on it husban from the sky,
then it will be a slippery earth. Or the water thereof (of the gardens)
becomes deep-sunken (underground) so that you will never be able
to seek it.” So his fruits were encircled (with ruin). And he
remained clapping his hands with sorrow over what he had spent
upon it, while it was all destroyed on its trellises, he could only say,
“Would that I had ascribed no partners to my Lord!” (Tafseer Ibn
Katheer). And he had no group of men to help him against Allah,
nor could he defend or save himself. There (on the Day of
Resurrection), Al-Walayah (the protection, power, authority and
kingdom) will be for Allah (Alone), the True God. He (Allah) is
the Best for reward and the Best for the final end. (La ilaha ill-Allah
– none has the right to be worshipped but Allah).} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:32-44)
Some of the people said that this is a parable set forth and it is not
necessarily the case that it happened, but the majority are of the
opinion that it actually happened. And His Saying: {And put
forward for them the example} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:32). That is,
for the disbelievers of Quraish, regarding their refusal to gather
with the weak and the poor and their belittling of them and the
arrogance they displayed for them, as He, Most High, says, {And
put forward to them a similitude; the (story of the) dwellers of the
town, when there came Messengers to them} (Soorah Ya Seen
36:13). {“I am more than you in wealth and stronger in respect of
men.” (See Tafseer Al-Qurtubi, Vol. 10, page 403)} (Soorah AlKahf 18:34). That is, I possess larger gardens; and what he meant
by it was that he was better than his companion, i.e. what benefit
do you gain from spending what you possess in the way that you
do (i.e. giving in charity, etc.)? It would be better for you to do as I
have done, so that you might be as I am (i.e. wealthy). So he
behaved arrogantly toward his companion. {And he went into his
garden while he was unjust to himself} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:35).
means, he was not following the way that was pleasing to Allah.
{He said, “I think not that this will ever perish.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf
Sunniconnect.com
304

18:35). He said this when he saw how vast his lands were, how
much water there was and how fine the fruits on its trees were; and
if it has perished all of these trees, they would have been replaced
by others better than these, which plants are productive, due to the
plentiful supply of water. Then he said, {“And I think not the Hour
will ever come.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:36). He placed his reliance
in the splendor of the transient life of this world and denied the
existence of the Hereafter, which everlasting and permanent. Then
he said, {“…and if indeed I am brought back to my Lord, (on the
Day of Resurrection), I surely shall find better than this when I
return to Him.”} (Soorah AlKahf 18:36). That is, even if there is a
Hereafter and a Return, I will certainly find there something better
than this. This was because he deluded by his earthly life and
believed that Allah had not given him all that except because of His
Love for him and His Benevolence toward him, as Al-‘As ibn Wa’il
said to Khabbab ibn Al-Aratt, according to the information given
to us by Allah in His Words: {Have you seen him who disbelieved
in Our Ayat (this Qur’an and Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)) and (yet) says, “I shall certainly be given
wealth and children (if I will be alive [again]).” Has he known the
unseen or has he taken a covenant from the Most Beneficent
(Allah)?} (Soorah Maryam 19:77,78). And Allah, Most High, tells
us that when man is given Blessings from Allah, {…he is sure to
say, “This is for me (due to my merit), I think not that the Hour will
be established. But if I am brought back to my Lord, surely, there
will be for me the best (wealth, etc.) with Him.”} (Soorah Fus And
when this ignorant man was bedazzled by what he had been granted
in this earthly life, denied the Hereafter and claimed that if there
was an Afterlife, he would find therein with his Lord something
better than that which he had been given in this life. His companion
heard his words and {(he) said to him, during the talk with him}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:37). That is, while he was disputing with him.
{“Do you disbelieve in Him Who created you out of dust (i.e. your
father Adam), then out of a nutfah (mixed semen drops of male and
female discharge), then fashioned you into a man?”} (Soorah AlKahf 18:37). That is, do you reject the Return, when you know that
Sunniconnect.com
305

Allah created you from dust, then from a nutfah and then formed
you into a man, blessed with hearing and sight, and you have
knowledge, strength and understanding? So how can you reject the
Return, when Allah is Able to create you from nothing? {“But as
for my part (I believe) that He is Allah, my Lord.”} (Soorah AlKahf 18:38). That is, but I say and believe something contrary to
what you say and believe: {“He is Allah, my Lord and none shall I
associate as partner with my Lord.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:38). That
is, I do not worship anything except Him and I believe that He will
send forth the bodies (of mankind) after they have rotted away,
revive the dead and gather the remaining bones. And I know that
Allah has no partners in His Creation or in His Dominion and that
there is none worthy of worship but He. Then he guided him toward
the thing that was more fitting for him to do whenever he entered
his gardens, saying, {It was better for you to say, when you entered
your garden, ‘That which Allah wills (will come to pass)! There is
no power but with Allah’.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:39). For this
reason, it is preferred for every person who sees something in his
wealth, his family or his situation that favorably impresses him to
say likewise.
Then the Believer said to the disbeliever, {“It may be that my Lord
will give me something better than your garden.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:40). That is, in the abode of the Hereafter. {“…and will send on
it husban from the sky.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:40). ‘Abdullah ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Ad-Dahhak and Qatadah
said that it means a punishment from the heaven; and it would
appear that it refers to blinding, heavy rain, which ruins crops and
trees. {“…then it will be a slippery earth.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:40). And that is smooth ground in which there is no vegetation.
{“Or the water thereof (of the gardens) becomes deep-sunken
(underground).”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:41). And that is the opposite
of a free-flowing spring. {“…so that you will never be able to seek
it.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:41). That is, you will never be able to
reclaim it. Allah, Most High, says, {So his fruits were encircled
(with ruin)} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:42). That is, a Command (from
Sunniconnect.com
306

Allah) came to him which encircled all of his crops and ruined and
destroyed his garden. {And he remained clapping his hands with
sorrow over what he had spent upon it, while it was all destroyed
on its trellises} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:42). That is, they were totally
destroyed and could not be returned. And that was the opposite of
what he had expected when he said, {“I think not that this will ever
perish.”} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:36) and he regretted the words of
disbelief in Allah, the Great, that he had spoken, saying, {“Would
that I had ascribed no partners to my Lord!” (Tafseer Ibn Katheer)}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:42). Allah, Most High, says, {And he had no
group of men to help him against Allah, nor could he defend or
save himself. There (on the Day of Resurrection} (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:43). That is, there was no one who could compensate him for
what had befallen him and he himself had no ability to do such a
thing, as Allah, Most High, says, {Then will (man) have no power,
nor any helper there} (Soorah At-Tariq 86:10). And He says, {(On
the Day of Resurrection) Al-Walayah (the protection, power,
authority and kingdom) will be for Allah (Alone), the True God}
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:44). Some of them understood this Verse to
begin with the word ‘Hunalika’ (There), (rather than as the final
word of the previous verse) and this is also correct, as He, Most
High, says, {The sovereignty on that Day will be the true
(sovereignty), belonging to the Most Gracious (Allah), and it will
be a hard Day for the disbelievers} (Soorah Al-Furqan 25:26). So
the Judgment which cannot be repelled, prevented or overcome is
in that situation; and in every situation the true Judgment is for
Allah. Others recited AlHaqqu rather than Al-Haqqi, making the
Word an adjective for Al-Walayah – and the meanings of both are
inseparable. {He (Allah) is the Best for reward and the Best for the
final end. (La ilaha ill-Allah – none has the right to be worshipped
but Allah).} (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:44). That is, His Treatment of a
person is the best reward for him, which is the Recompense. As for
being the Best for the final end, it refers to the end in this life and
in the Hereafter. It may be inferred from this story that no one
should depend on the life of this world, be misled by it or place
one’s faith in it. Instead, he should direct his attention toward
Sunniconnect.com
307

obedience to Allah and dependence on Him. And that which is in
Allah’s Hand is more dependable than that which is in his hands.
We may also understand from it that whoever gives precedence to
something over obedience to Allah and spending in His Cause, he
will be punished because of that and it might be taken from him, so
that he receives the opposite of that to which he aspired. We may
also infer from it that it is obligatory to accept the advice of one’s
brother, when he is concerned for our wellbeing and that when one
opposes good advice, it entails evil consequences and ruin for him.
In addition, we can derive from it that regret does not benefit once
Allah’s Ordainment has been fulfilled. And it is Allah from Whom
we seek Help and upon Him we depend.

The Story of the Companions of the Garden
Allah, Most High, says, {Verily, We have tried them as We tried
the people of the garden, when they swore to pick them in the
morning, without saying, ‘Insha’ Allah (if Allah wills)’. Then there
passed by on the (garden) something (fire) from your Lord at night
and burned it while they were asleep. So the (garden) became black
by the morning, like as-sareem (in complete ruins). Then they
called out to one another as soon as the morning broke, saying, “Go
to your tilth in the morning, if you would pick the fruits.” So they
departed, yatakhafatoona, (saying,) “No miskeen (poor man) shall
enter upon you into it today.” And they went in the morning with
strong intention, thinking that they have power. But when they saw
it, they said, “Verily, we have gone astray,” (Then they said), “Nay!
Indeed we are deprived!” The best among them said, “Did I not say
to you: ‘Why do you not glorify?’ They said, “Glory to our Lord!
Verily, we have been zalimoon (wrongdoers, etc.).” Then they
turned, one against another, in reproach. They said, “Woe to us!
Verily, we were taghoon (transgressors, disobedient, etc.) We hope
that our Lord will give us in exchange a better (garden) than this.
Truly, we turn to our Lord (wishing for good, that He may forgive
our sins, and reward us in the Hereafter).” Such is the punishment
(in this life), but truly, the punishment of the Hereafter is greater, if
Sunniconnect.com
308

they but knew} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:17-33). And this is a parable
set forth by Allah for the disbelievers of Quraish, regarding the
Blessing that He bestowed on them, i.e. the sending of the great and
noble Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to
them and how they greeted him with denial and opposition, as He,
Most High, says, {Have you not seen those who have changed the
Blessings of Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his Message of
Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction?
Hell, in which they will burn – and what an evil place in which to
settle!} (Soorah Ibraheem 14:28, 29). ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him) said, “They are the disbelievers of
Quraish. So Allah, Most High, set forth for them the parable of the
Companions of the Garden; their garden contained all kinds of
crops and fruits, which were ripe and ready to be harvested. This is
why He says, {when they swore…} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:17).
That is, to one another. {…to pick them} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:17).
That is, to harvest the fruits of the garden. {…in the morning}
(Soorah Al-Qalam 68:17). means, at daybreak, so that no poor or
needy person should see them and they would not have to give them
anything; and they swore an oath to that effect, but they did not
add: ‘Insha’ Allah’ (if Allah wills) and so Allah invalidated their
oath and brought destruction on their garden, burning it and leaving
it blackened and ruined, so that nothing useful remained of it,
which is why He says, {Then there passed by on the (garden)
something (fire) from your Lord at night and burned it while they
were asleep. So the (garden) became black by the morning, like assareem (in complete ruins)} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:19-20). That is,
like a black night, empty of any light. And this Treatment
invalidated their intention. {Then they called out one to another as
soon as the morning broke} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:21). means, they
woke up from their sleep and they called out to one another, saying,
{“Go to your tilth in the morning, if you would pick the fruits.”}
(Soorah Al-Qalam 68:22). That is, go to your orchard early in the
morning and pick the fruit before the sun has properly risen and
many questions are asked. {So they departed, yatakhafatoon
Sunniconnect.com
309

(saying,)} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:23). That is, conversing with one
another in low voices, saying, {“No miskeen (poor man) shall enter
upon you into it today.”} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:24). That is, they
consulted upon this and agreed upon it. {And they went in the
morning with strong intention, thinking that they have power.}
(Soorah Al-Qalam 68:25) That is, they went out to gather the fruits,
believing that they had strength and power over their garden and
concealing this bad intention in their hearts. ‘Ikrimah and AshSha‘bi said that {and they went in the morning with strong
intention, thinking that they have power} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:25)
means that they were angry with the poor. But As-Suddi erred
widely in his interpretation when he said that the word hard was the
name of their cultivated land. {But when they saw it…} (Soorah
Al-Qalam 68:26). That is, they reached the garden and looked at
the disaster that had befallen it, after it had been ripe for harvesting,
beautiful and magnificent to behold. And they had been thus
transformed because of their bad intention. When they saw what
had happened, {they said, “Verily, we have gone astray,”} (Soorah
Al-Qalam 68:26). That is, we have taken the wrong path to it. Then
they changed their minds and realized with certainty that it was
actually the correct path, so they said, {“Nay! Indeed we are
deprived!”} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:27). That is, we have been
punished because of our bad intention and deprived of the blessing
of our cultivation. {The awsat among them said} (Soorah AlQalam 68:28). ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), Mujahid and others said that it means: the fairest and the best
of them said, {“Did I not say to you: ‘Why do you not glorify’?”}
(Soorah Al-Qalam 68:29). It was said by Mujahid, As-Suddi and
Ibn Jareer At-Tabari that this means: Why did you not say, ‘Insha’
Allah’ (if Allah wills)?” It was also said that it means: Why did you
not say something good, instead of the wicked thing that you said?
{They said, “Glory to our Lord! Verily, we have been zalimoon
(wrongdoers, etc.).” Then they turned, one against another, in
reproach. They said, “Woe to us! Verily, we were taghoon
(transgressors and disobedient, etc.)} (Soorah Al-Qalam 68:29).
When it was no longer of any use to them, they expressed their
Sunniconnect.com
310

regret and acknowledged their sin after the punishment had been
inflicted on them and when it availed them nothing. Allah, Most
High, says, {Such is the punishment (in this life)} (Soorah AlQalam 68:30). That is, thus do We punish those who disobey Our
Command and show no compassion for the poor and needy among
Our creation. {…but truly, the punishment of the Hereafter is
greater} (Soorah AlQalam 68:33). means, more terrible and more
severe than the punishment of this world. {…if they but knew}
(Soorah Al-Qalam 68:33). And the story of these people resembles
that of those in the story mentioned by Allah in His Words: {And
Allah puts forward the example of a township (Makkah), that dwelt
secure and well content; its provision coming to it in abundance
from every place, but it (its people) denied the Favors of Allah
(with ungratefulness). So Allah made it taste the extreme of hunger
(famine) and fear, because of that (evil, i.e. denying Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) which
they (its people) used to do. And verily, there had come unto them
a Messenger (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)) from among themselves, but they denied him, so the torment
overtook them while they were zalimoon.} (Soorah An-Nahl
16:112,113). It was said that this parable was set forth for the
people of Makkah. It was also said it referred to the people of
Makkah themselves and that Allah set forth the parable of them, for
them. And this does not contradict the first opinion. And Allah
(SWT) knows better.

The Story of the People of Ailah, Who
Transgressed the Laws of Their Sabbath
Allah, Most High, says, {And ask them (O, Muhammad) about the
town that was by the sea, when they transgressed in the matter of
the Sabbath (i.e. Saturday): when their fish came to them openly on
the Sabbath day, and did not come to them on the day they had no
Sabbath. Thus We made a trial of them for they used to rebel
Sunniconnect.com
311

(Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:154). And when a community among them
said, “Why do you preach to a people whom Allah is about to
destroy or to punish with a severe punishment?” (The preachers)
said, “In order to be free from guilt before your Lord (Allah), and
perhaps they may fear Allah.” So when they forgot the reminders
that had been given to them, We rescued those who forbade evil,
but We seized those who did wrong with a severe punishment
because they used to rebel (disobey Allah). So when they exceeded
the limits of what they were prohibited, We said to them, “Be you
monkeys, despised and rejected.” (It is a severe warning to the
mankind that they should not disobey what Allah commands them
to do, and be far away from what He prohibits them)} (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:163166)
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid,
‘Ikrimah, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others said that they were the
people of Ailah. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him) added that it lies between Madyan and At-Toor (which is in
Sinai). They said that they adhered to the religious teachings of the
Tawrah, according to which the Sabbath was sacrosanct. The fish
were accustomed to being left alone on the Sabbath, because it was
unlawful for the Jews to catch them or to undertake any activities
on that day, such as trading and business. So the fish were plentiful
on that day, swimming near the surface, coming from hither and
thither, feeling safe and at ease, and the Jews did not disturb them
or alarm them. {…and did not come to them on the day they had
no Sabbath} (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:163). This was because they used
to try to catch them on days other than the Sabbath. Allah, Most
High, says, {Thus We made a trial of them} (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:163). That is, We tested them through the plentiful fish on the
Sabbath. {…for they used to rebel (see also Soorah An-Nisa’
4:154)} (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:163). That is, because of the sins of
disobedience they had previously committed. So when they saw the
profusion of fish, they resorted to duplicity, by placing nets, ropes
and artificial pools of water on Friday for the purpose of fishing
before the Sabbath. When the fish came in abundance on Saturday
Sunniconnect.com
312

as usual, they were caught in the ropes and nets for the rest of
Saturday. During the night, the Jews collected the fish after the
Sabbath ended. Allah was Angry with them and cursed them for
their duplicity, which went against His Command and entailed an
apparent adherence to the law, while actually circumventing it. So
when a group of them did that, the remainder of them split into two
factions: (i) those who rebuked them for their deed and their
subterfuge, in contravention of Allah’s Command and His Law at
that time; and (ii) those who did not do it, but did not forbid it,
indeed, they rebuked those who forbade it and they said, {“Why do
you preach to a people whom Allah is about to destroy or to punish
with a severe punishment?”} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:164). They said,
“What is the benefit of forbidding these people, when they have
already merited the Punishment (of Allah) and it is inevitable?” The
group which rebuked the sinners replied to them, saying, {“In order
to be free from guilt before your Lord (Allah), and perhaps they
may fear Allah.”} (Soorah Al-‘Araf 6:16). That is, regarding to
what He has commanded us to do of ordering that which is good
and forbidding that which is evil, and we fulfill it out of fear of His
Punishment. {“…and perhaps they may fear Allah.”} (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:164). That is, perhaps these sinners may abandon this deed
that they are doing and Allah may preserve them from His
Punishment, if they turn back and listen. Allah, Most High, says,
{So when they forgot the reminders that had been given to them…}
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:165). That is, they paid no heed to those who
forbade them from doing this disgraceful and detestable deed. {We
rescued those who forbade evil} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:165). And they
were the group who commanded that which is good and forbade
that which is evil. {…but We seized those who did wrong} (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:165). And they were those who committed the sin.
{…with a severe punishment} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:165). And that
was an extremely painful one. {…because they used to rebel
(disobey Allah)} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:165). Then He explains the
Punishment that befell them in His Words: {So when they
exceeded the limits of what they were prohibited, We said to them,
“Be you monkeys, despised and rejected.” (It is a severe warning
Sunniconnect.com
313

to the mankind that they should not disobey what Allah commands
them to do, and be far away from what He prohibits them).}
(Soorah AlA‘raf 7:166)
What is meant here is that Allah, Most High, destroyed the
wrongdoers and saved the Believers who rebuked the sinners, and
He passed over those who remained silent. The scholars divided
into two groups regarding them. One held the opinion that they
were among those who were saved, while the other opined that they
were among those who were destroyed. The correct opinion is the
first, according to the investigators and it was the preferred opinion
of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), the
Imam of the Qur’anic exegetes. He reached this opinion as a result
of a debate with his freed slave, ‘Ikrimah and because of this he
clothed him in a garment, as a mark of honor and respect. I say:
The only reason why they were not mentioned with those who were
saved is because, although they inwardly expressed their
disapproval of this sinful act, they did not express any outward
censure of it, by verbally condemning it, which is the middle level
of the three levels, the highest of which is to express disapproval
by one’s hand; after that comes verbal condemnation and the third
level is to condemn it in one’s heart. And since they were not
mentioned, it means that they were saved along with the others who
were saved, because they did not commit that evil deed; indeed,
they censured it.

The Story of Luqman – Peace be upon him
Allah, Most High, says, {And indeed We bestowed upon Luqman
Al--Hikmah (wisdom and religious understanding, etc.) saying:,
“Give thanks to Allah,” and whoever gives thanks, he gives thanks
for (the good of) his ownself. And whoever is ungrateful, then
verily, Allah is Free of all wants, Worthy of all praise. And
(remember) when Luqman said to his son when he was advising
him, “O, my son! Join not others in worship with Allah. Verily!
Joining others in worship with Allah is a great zulm (wrong)
Sunniconnect.com
314

indeed. And We have enjoined on man (to be dutiful and good) to
his parents. His mother bore him in weakness and hardship upon
weakness and hardship, and his weaning is in two years, give
thanks to Me and to your parents, unto Me is the final destination.
But if they (both) strive with you to make you join in worship with
Me others that of which you have no knowledge, then obey them
not, but behave with them in the world kindly, and follow the path
of him who turns to Me in repentance and in obedience. Then to
Me will be your return, and I shall tell you what you used to do.
“O, my son! If it be (anything) equal to the weight of a grain of
mustard seed, and though it be in a rock, or in the heavens or in the
earth, Allah will bring it forth. Verily, Allah is Subtle (in bringing
out that grain), Well -Aware (of its place). O, my son! Aqim-is-salah (perform as--salah prayers), enjoin (on people) al--ma‘roof
(Islamic Monotheism and all that is good), and forbid (people) from
al--munkar (i.e. disbelief in the Oneness of Allah, polytheism of all
kinds and all that is evil and bad), and bear with patience whatever
befalls you. Verily, these are some of the important
commandments. And turn not your face away from men, nor walk
in insolence through the earth. Verily, Allah likes not each arrogant
boaster. And be moderate in your walking, and lower your voice.
Verily, the most disagreeable of sounds is the sound (braying) of
the ass.”} (Soorah Luqman 31:12-19)
It is reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah
be pleased with him) that he said, “Luqman was an Abyssinian
carpenter.” Qatadah reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn AzZubair that he said, “I said to Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah, “What has come
to you regarding the case of Luqman?” He said, “He was of short
stature and snub-nosed, and he was from Noobia.”
It has been widely reported from the majority of scholars that he
was a wise man and a Waliyy, but not a Prophet. Allah, Most High,
has mentioned him in the Qur’an and praised him and related his
words of admonition to his son, who was the most beloved of
Allah’s creation to him and of all mankind, the person for whose
Sunniconnect.com
315

welfare he was most concerned. Among the first words of
admonition that he addressed to his son was his saying: {“O, my
son! Join not in worship others with Allah. Verily! Joining others
in worship with Allah is a great zulm (wrong) indeed.”} (Soorah
Luqman 31:13). So he forbade him from such a sin and warned him
against it.
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah that he said,
“When {It is those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah and
worship none but Him Alone) and confuse not their belief with
zulm (wrong i.e. by worshipping others besides Allah)} (Soorah
Al-An‘am 6:82) was revealed, the Companions of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) were
distressed by this, and said, “Who among us does not confuse his
belief with zulm?” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “That is not what it means. Have you
not heard what Luqman said, {“O, my son! Join not in worship
others with Allah. Verily, joining others in worship with Allah is a
great zulm (wrong) indeed.”}?” It was (also) narrated by Muslim.
Then Allah, Most High, commanded us to be dutiful and kind to
our parents and set forth the parents’ rights over their children and
He confirmed it. He commanded us to treat parents well, even if
they be disbelievers; but He told us that they are not to be obeyed
if they order us to enter their religion. He then informed us
regarding Luqman that he advised his son, {“O, my son! If it be
(anything) equal to the weight of a grain of mustard seed, and
though it be in a rock, or in the heavens or in the earth, Allah will
bring it forth. Verily, Allah is Subtle (in bringing out that grain),
Well -Aware (of its place).”} (Soorah Luqman 31:16). He forbids
him from being unjust to mankind, even if the injustice is as
insignificant as a mustard seed, for Allah, Most High, will ask
about it and He will bring it forth at the time of the Reckoning and
place it in the scale, as He, Most High, says, {Surely! Allah wrongs
not even of the weight of an atom (or a small ant).} (Soorah AnNisa’ 4:40) and He, Most High, says, {And We shall set up
Sunniconnect.com
316

balances of justice on the Day of Resurrection, then none will be
dealt with unjustly in anything. And if there be the weight of a
mustard seed, We will bring it. And Sufficient are We as
Reckoners.} (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:47) He informed him that
even if this injustice was as insignificant as a mustard seed and it
was concealed within a solid rock, without any door or window in
it, or it fell into something in the depths of the earth or it was in the
wide expanse of the heavens, Allah would certainly know its
location. {“Verily, Allah is Subtle (in bringing out that grain),
Well- Aware (of its place).”} (Soorah Luqman 31:16). That is, His
Knowledge is precise, so the smallest atoms – whether they be
apparent or hidden – are known to Him, as He, Most High, says,
{And with Him are the keys of the ghaib (all that is hidden), none
knows them but He. And He knows whatever there is in (or on) the
earth and in the sea; not a leaf falls, but He knows it. There is not a
grain in the darkness of the earth nor anything fresh or dry, but is
written in a Clear Record} (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:59). And He says,
{And there is nothing hidden in the heaven and the earth, but is in
a Clear Book (i.e. Al-Lawh Al-Mahfooz)} (Soorah An-Naml
27:75) and He says, {(Allah, He is) the Knower of the unseen, not
even the weight of an atom (or a small ant) or less than that or
greater, escapes from His Knowledge in the heavens or in the earth,
but it is in a Clear Book (Al--Lawh Al--Mahfooz)} (Soorah Saba’
34:3)
As for His Saying: {“O, my son! Aqim-is--salah (perform as-salah).} (Soorah Luqman 31:17), it means: Perform the prayer with
all its obligatory acts regarding its limits, its timings, its bowing, its
prostration, its repose, its humility and all that has been legislated
therein. And refrain from whatever is prohibited therein. Then he
said, {…enjoin (on people) for al--ma‘roof (Islamic Monotheism
and all that is good), and forbid (people) from al--munkar (i.e.
disbelief in the Oneness of Allah, polytheism of all kinds and all
that is evil and bad)} (Soorah Luqman 31:17). That is, (forbid
them) with all your power and to the utmost of your ability, i.e. if
Sunniconnect.com
317

you are able to do so, by your hand, if not, by verbal censure and if
that is not possible, then by expressing hatred for the evil in your
heart. Then he commanded him to be patient, saying, {…and bear
with patience whatever befalls you} (Soorah Luqman 31:17). This
is because the one who enjoins al-ma‘roof and forbids al-munkar
may expect to be opposed and suffer harm; but the end result will
be in his favor. This is why he ordered him to be patient in the face
of that (opposition), for it is well known that the end result of
patience is relief from suffering. And He, Most High, says, {Verily,
these are some of the important commandments} (Soorah Luqman
31:17). That is, your enjoining alma‘roof and forbidding al-munkar
and your patience in the face of harm is among the most important
of commandments, which are unavoidable and from which there is
no escape. {“And turn not your face away from men.”} (Soorah
Luqman 31:18). ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Sa‘eed ibn Jubair, Ad-Dahhak, Yazeed
ibn Al-Asamm, Abul-Jawza’ and others said that it means: do not
behave arrogantly toward the people, turning your cheek away
from them when you speak to them and when they speak to you.
According to the scholars of Arabic language, the root meaning of
the verb sa‘ara (used in the Verse) is a disease which afflicts camels
in their necks, causing them to twist their heads to one side. So a
proud man, who turns his face away when he speaks to people or
when they speak to him is compared to the camel afflicted with this
disease.
Abu Talib says in his poem:
In the past, we did not approve of injustice,
If they arrogantly turned their cheeks,
We would oppose it.
And ‘Amr ibn Hunayy At-Taghlibi said:
Sunniconnect.com
318

If a tyrant arrogantly turned his cheek,
We would stand firm against him and oppose him.
And Luqman said, {“…nor walk in insolence through the earth.
Verily, Allah likes not each arrogant boaster.”} (Soorah Luqman
31:18). He forbade his son to walk with a strutting gait out of a
sense of selfimportance and boastfulness before the people, as He,
Most High, says, {And walk not on the earth with conceit and
arrogance. Verily, you can neither rend nor penetrate the earth, nor
can you attain a stature like the mountains in height} (Soorah AlIsra’ 17:37). That is, you cannot traverse the lands by the speed of
your walk using this gait of yours. Nor by your pounding of the
earth with your feet can you penetrate it. Nor by your lofty
behavior, your haughtiness and pride can you attain the height of
the mountains, so be slow and deliberate, for you cannot outrun
your destiny. And it has been confirmed in a hadeeth that the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “While
a man was strutting with pride due to his (fine) cloaks, Allah caused
the earth to swallow him up and he will continue falling into it until
the Day of Resurrection.” And in another hadeeth, the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Beware of
letting your izar (lower garment) hang down, because it is a form
of pride and Allah does not like it.” For He, Most High, says in this
Verse, {“Verily, Allah likes not each arrogant boaster.”} (Soorah
Luqman 31:18). And when he forbade him to display arrogance in
his gait, he ordered him to walk moderately, for one must walk and
so he prohibited him from evil (when doing so) and ordered him to
do good (by walking without pride), saying, {“And be moderate in
your walking.”} (Soorah Luqman 31:19). That is, neither walk
remarkably slowly, nor exceedingly quickly, but between those two
extremes, with an upright posture, as He, Most High, says, {And
the slaves of the Most Beneficent (Allah) are those who walk on
the earth in humility and sedateness, and when the foolish address
them (with bad words) they reply back with mild words of
gentleness} (Soorah Al-Furqan 25:63). Then he said, {“…and
Sunniconnect.com
319

lower your voice.”} (Soorah Luqman 31:19). That is, when you
speak, do not raise your voice, because the loudest voice and
{Verily, the most disagreeable of sounds is the sound (braying) of
the ass.} (Soorah Luqman 31:19)
And it has been confirmed in the Saheehain that one should seek
Allah’s Protection upon hearing the braying of a donkey at night,
because it see a devil. This is why raising one’s voice without need
is forbidden, especially when one sneezes; in such a case, it is
preferred to lower one’s voice and cover one’s face, as confirmed
by the hadeeth which describes the action of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). As for raising
the voice when saying the Adhan (calling for prayer) when calling
a group to fight and at the time of destruction and the like, that is
lawful. This is what Allah, Most High, has related concerning
Luqman in the Qur’an of wisdoms, admonitions and useful,
comprehensive advices to attain goodness and repel evil. Many
traditions have been transmitted relating stories pertaining to his
life and the admonitions he proffered and there is a book which
relates (advices, admonitions, etc.) from him, called Hikmatu
Luqman (the Wisdom of Luqman); we shall quote from that as
much as is easy for us, if Allah wills.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Luqman,
the wise, used to say, “Verily, when Allah entrusts something, He
protects it.”
And Ibn Abi Hatim reported on the authority of Al-Qasim Ibn
Mukhaimirah that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Luqman said to his son
when he was admonishing him, “O, my son! Beware of wearing a
mask, for it is deception by night and it is humiliation by day.” He
also said, “Luqman said to his son, “O, my son! Wisdom has made
the poor to sit on the thrones of kings.”
Sunniconnect.com
320

And on the authority of ‘Awn Ibn ‘Abdullah said, “Luqman said to
his son, “O, my son! If you go to the meeting place of a people, cast
the arrow of Islam (i.e. salutation of peace) at them, then sit down
in their vicinity and do not speak until you see that they have
spoken. Then if you find them observing the remembrance of
Allah, cast your arrow with their arrows (i.e. join them). But if they
observe anything else, then turn away from them and seek others
(who remember Allah).”
It is reported on the authority of Hafs Ibn ‘Umar that he said,
“Luqman placed a bag of mustard seeds by his side and began to
advise his son, giving him a piece of advice for each mustard seed
that he withdrew, until he had exhausted the supply of mustard
seeds. Then he said, “O, my son! I have given you advice, the like
of which, if it was given to a mountain, it would have split open.”
He (Hafs) said, “Then his son became like one cleft asunder.”

The Story of the Companions of the Ditch
Allah, Most High, says, {By the heaven, holding the big stars. And
by the Promised Day (i.e. the Day of Resurrection). And by the
witnessing day (i.e. Friday), and by the witnessed day (i.e. the day
of ‘Arafat [Hajj] the ninth of Dhul-Hijjah). Cursed were the people
of the ditch (the story of the boy and the king). Fire supplied
(abundantly) with fuel, when they sat by it (fire), and they
witnessed what they were doing against the believers (i.e. burning
them). They had nothing against them, except that they believed in
Allah, the Almighty, Worthy of all Praise! To Whom belongs the
dominion of the heavens and the Earth! And Allah is Witness over
everything. Verily, those who put into trial the believing men and
believing women (by torturing them and burning them), and then
do not turn in repentance, (to Allah), will have the torment of Hell,
and they will have the punishment of the burning Fire.} (Soorah
Al-Burooj 85:1-10)
Sunniconnect.com
321

We have spoken about this in detail in the tafseer of this Soorah, all
praise and thanks be to Allah. Muhammad Ibn Ishaq claimed that
it was after the sending of the Maseeh, but he was contradicted by
others. They claimed that they lived before him. More than one
mentioned that this deed was perpetrated many times against
Believers by disbelieving tyrants. But these mentioned in the
Qur’an have been mentioned in a hadeeth that is marfoo‘ and a
tradition transmitted by Ibn Ishaq, but they both contradict each
other; here we present both of them for you to read:
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Suhaib (May Allah be
pleased with him) that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “Among the people who came before
you, there was a king who had a sorcerer, and when that sorcerer
became old, he said to the king, “I have become old and my time is
nearly over, so please send me a boy whom I can teach magic.” So
he sent him a boy and the sorcerer taught him magic. Whenever the
boy went to the sorcerer, he sat with a monk who was on the way
and listened to his speech and admired them. So, when he went to
the sorcerer, he passed by the monk and sat there with him; and on
visiting the sorcerer the latter would thrash him. The boy
complained about this to the monk. The monk said to him,
“Whenever you are afraid of the sorcerer, say to him, ‘My people
kept me busy.’ And whenever you are afraid of your people, say to
them, ‘The sorcerer kept me busy’.” The boy continued in this way
(for some time). Then a huge terrible creature appeared on the road
and the people were unable to pass by. The boy said, “Today I shall
know whether the sorcerer is better or the monk is better’.” So he
took a stone and said, “O, Allah! If the deeds and actions of the
monk are more liked by You than those of the sorcerer, then kill
this creature so that the people can cross (the road).” Then he struck
it with a stone killing it and the people passed by on the road. The
boy came to the monk and informed him about it. The monk said
to him, “O, my son! Today you are better than I, and you have
achieved what I see! You will be put to trial. And in case you are
put to trial, do not inform (them) about me.” The boy used to treat
Sunniconnect.com
322

the people suffering from congenital blindness, leprosy, and other
diseases. There was a courtier of the king who had become blind
and he heard about the boy. He came and brought a number of gifts
for the boy and said, “All these gifts are for you on the condition
that you cure me.” The boy said, “I do not cure anybody; it is only
Allah who cures people. So, if you believe in Allah and supplicate
to Him, He will cure you.” So he believed and supplicated to Allah
and Allah cured him. Later, the courtier came to the king and sat at
the place where he used to sit before. The king said, “Who gave
you back your sight?” The courtier replied, “My Lord.” The king
then said, I did?” The courtier said, “No, my Lord and your Lord –
Allah.” The king said, “Do you have another Lord beside me?” The
courtier said, “Yes, your Lord and my Lord is Allah.” The king
tortured him and did not stop until he told him about the boy. The
boy was then brought to the king and he said to him, “O, boy! Has
your magic reached to the extent that you cure congenital
blindness, leprosy and other diseases?” He said, “I do not cure
anyone. Only Allah can cure.” The king said, “I?” The boy replied,
“No.” The king asked, “Do you have a Lord other than me?” The
boy answered, “My Lord and your Lord is Allah.” So he tortured
him also until he told him about the monk. Then the monk was
brought to him and the king said to him, “Abandon your religion.”
The monk refused and so the king ordered a saw to be brought
which was placed in the middle of his head and he fell, sawn in
two. Then it was said to the man who used to be blind, “Abandon
your religion.” He refused to do so, and so a saw was brought and
placed in the middle of his head and he fell, sawn in two. Then the
boy was brought and it was said to him, “Abandon your religion.”
He refused and so the king sent him to the top of a mountain with
some people. He told the people, “Ascend up the mountain with
him till you reach its peak, then see if he abandons his religion;
otherwise throw him from the top.” They took him and when they
ascended to the top, he said, “O, Allah! Save me from them by any
means that You wish.” So the mountain shook and they all fell
down and the boy came back walking to the king. The king said,
“What did your companions (the people I sent with you) do?” The
Sunniconnect.com
323

boy said, “Allah saved me from them.” So the king ordered some
people to take the boy on a boat into the middle of the sea, saying,
“If he renounces his religion (well and good), if he refuses, drown
him.” So, they took him out to sea and he said, “O, Allah! Save me
from them by any means that you wish.” So they were all drowned
in the sea. Then the boy returned to the king and the king said,
“What did your companions do?” The boy replied, “Allah, saved
me from them.” Then he said to the king, “You will not be able to
kill me until you do as I order you. And if you do as I order you,
you will be able to kill me.” The king asked, “And what is that?”
The boy said, “Gather the people in one elevated place and tie me
to the trunk of a tree; then take an arrow from my quiver and say:
‘In the Name of Allah, the Lord of the boy.’ If you do this, you will
be able to kill me.” So he did this, and placing an arrow in the bow,
he shot it, saying, “In the Name of Allah, the Lord of the boy.” The
arrow hit the boy in the temple, and the boy placed his hand over
the arrow wound and died. The people proclaimed, “We believe in
the Lord of the boy!” Then it was said to the king, “Do you see
what has happened? That which you feared has taken place. By
Allah, all the people have believed (in the Lord of the boy).” So he
ordered that ditches be dug at the entrances to the roads and it was
done, and fires were kindled in them. Then the king said, “Whoever
abandons his religion, let him go, and whoever does not, throw him
into the fire.” They were struggling and scuffling in the fire, until a
woman and her baby whom she was breastfeeding came and it was
as if she was being somewhat hesitant of falling into the fire, so her
baby said to her, “Be patient mother, for verily, you are following
the truth!”) This is how it was narrated by Imam Ahmad in his
Musnad and Muslim also narrated it in his Saheeh.
Some of them claimed that the incident of the ditch was repeated
many times throughout the world, as Ibn Abi Hatim reported, on
the authority of ‘Abdur-Rahman ibn Jubair, who said, “The ditch
was in Yemen during the reign of Tubba‘, in Constantinople, who
set the fires in which he threw the Christians who were holding fast
to the Religion of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) (Islamic
Sunniconnect.com
324

Monotheism). It also took place in Iraq, in the land of Babylon
during the lifetime of Bukhthnassar, who erected an idol and
ordered the people to prostrate themselves before it. Danyal (Daniel
(Peace be upon him)) and his two companions refused and
thereupon, he set a great fire and threw them into it. However,
Allah, Almighty, saved them from the fire and caused the nine men
who had oppressed them to fall into the fire they themselves had
made. Asbat reported on the authority of As-Suddi that he said
regarding Allah’s Words: {Cursed were the people of the ditch}
(Soorah Al-Burooj 85:4), “There were three ditches: one in AshSham, another in Iraq and the third in Yemen.” (Narrated by ibn
Abi Hatim)

Chapter Regarding the Permissibility of
Narrating and Speaking About the
Stories of the Children of Isra’eel
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he reported from the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Relate
from me, but do not lie about me; and whoever lies about me, let
him prepare his seat in the Fire. And relate (the stories) of the
Children of Isra’eel, for there is no objection (to that).”
He (Imam Ahmad) also said, “It is reported on the authority of Abu
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri (May Allah be pleased with him) that he reported
from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that
he said, “Do not write down anything that I say except the Qur’an;
and if anyone has written down anything from me aside from the
Qur’an, he should erase it.” And he said, “Relate (the stories) of the
Children of Isra’eel, for there is no objection (to that). Relate from
me and do not lie about me.” Hammam said, “I think he said,
“…intentionally… then let him prepare his seat in the Fire.” This
is how it was narrated by Muslim.
Sunniconnect.com
325

And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah
that ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him) came
to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with a
book which he had obtained from one of the People of the Scripture
and he read it to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
became angry and said, “O, Ibn Al-Khattab! Are you all going to
fall into chaos? By Him in Whose Hand is my soul, I have brought
it (Islam) to you clean and pure. Do not ask them about anything so
that they will not tell you of something true which you might
declare false, or something false which you might declare true. By
Him in Whose Hand is my soul, if Moosa was alive, he would have
no alternative but to follow me.” (Ahmad was alone in narrating
this; and its chain of narrators conforms to the criteria for
acceptance stipulated by Muslim). These ahadeeth are proof that
they had altered, distorted and falsely interpreted the Divine
Scriptures that were in their hands, and they omitted parts of it,
especially those that were translated into Arabic – for they did not
have comprehensive knowledge of them when they were in their
own language, so how could they explain them in another
language? Due to this, huge errors and baseless beliefs occurred in
their translations, in addition to the fact that they had bad intentions
and silly notions. This is apparent to anyone who reads the
Scriptures that are in their hands and studies the bad interpretations,
wicked substitutions and alterations therein. From Allah we seek
help, and He is the Best Protector and the Best Helper.
And according to what they have said, the Tawrah, of which they
reveal some and conceal much, contains distortions, substitutions,
alterations and bad interpretations, which are clear to anyone who
reads them and studies what they (the Jews) said, what they
revealed and what they concealed and (one may see) how they
permit explanations based on unsound foundations and
constructions, which are false in meaning and wording. Ka‘b AlAhbar was one of the best of those who transmitted from them; he
embraced Islam during the Caliphate of ‘Umar (May Allah be
Sunniconnect.com
326

pleased with him) and he used to transmit things from the People
of the Scripture. ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) used to
approve of some of what he transmitted, because it was in
agreement with the truth and also, he wished to strengthen his faith.
But many people enlarged on the information that he had and he,
himself, overdid it in transmitting these things, many of which are
not worth the ink with which they are written, while others are,
without doubt, baseless. Others are correct, because they
correspond with the truth which is in our hands. Al-Bukhari
narrated on the authority of Humaid Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman, who said
that he heard Mu‘awiyah speaking to a group of Quraish in AlMadinah and he mentioned Ka‘b Al-Ahbar. He said, “Though he
is one of the most truthful of those who relate from the People of
the Scripture, we found that some of what he said was lies (i.e. he
transmitted these lies unintentionally).”

The Story of Juraij, One of the Slaves of Banu
Isra’eel
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “None spoke in
the cradle except three: ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, Juraij’s
companion; Juraij was a man of worship, he had a place of worship
and while he was in it, his mother came in and called upon him. He
said to himself; ‘My Lord, my mother or my prayer?’ So he
continued praying and she left. The next day also she came and
called upon him while he was in prayer. He said to himself; ‘My
Lord, my mother or my prayer?’ So he continued praying and again
she left. The following day she came again and called upon him
while he was in prayer, he said to himself; ‘My Lord, my mother
or my prayer?’ So he continued praying. She said: ‘O, Allah, do not
allow him to die until he sees the faces of prostitutes.’ The Children
of Isra’eel knew of Juraij and his worship. There was a very
beautiful prostitute who offered to seduce him. She attempted to do
so but he did not pay any attention to her. She then approached a
Sunniconnect.com
327

herdsman who used to seek refuge in his place of worship, she
offered herself to him and he slept with her. She became pregnant,
and when she gave birth she claimed that it was the child of Juraij.
The people went to him, invoked curses over him, destroyed his
place of worship and attacked him. He said, “Why are you doing
this?” They responded, “You fornicated with this woman and she
bore you a child.” He said, “Where is the child?” So they brought
him the child. He said, “Leave me until I pray.” When he finished
praying he came to the boy and poked him in his stomach. He said,
“O, child, who is your father?” The baby boy responded, “So-andso the herdsman.” So the people turned to Juraij, kissing him and
asking him for forgiveness. They offered to rebuild his place of
worship in gold, but he refused and asked them to rebuild it from
mud just as it was before, and so they did. [There was also a baby
who was being breastfed by his mother when a rider in fine
garments passed by on an agile animal. His mother said, “O, Allah!
Make my child like him.” The baby stopped suckling and looked at
him, then he said, “O, Allah! Do not make me like him.” He then
continued suckling…” Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with
him) said, “It is as if I can see Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) right now, as he is illustrating the
scene of the baby’s suckling with his forefinger in his mouth.” He
continued, “They passed by a slave girl who was being beaten by
people who were accusing her of committing fornication and theft.”
She was saying, “Sufficient is Allah for me.”
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘Abdur-Rahman AlA‘raj that he heard Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him)
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) say, “While a woman was nursing her child, a rider
passed by and she said, “O, Allah! Don’t let my child die till he
becomes like this (rider).” The child said, “O, Allah! Don’t make
me like him,” and then returned to her breast (sucking it). (After a
while) they passed by a lady who was being pulled and teased (by
the people). The child’s mother said, “O, Allah! Do not make my
child like her.” The child said, “O, Allah! Make me like her.” Then
Sunniconnect.com
328

he said, “As for the rider, he is an infidel, while the lady is accused
of illegal sexual intercourse (falsely) and she says: “Allah is
sufficient for me (i.e. He knows the truth).” And it has been
reported regarding those who spoke in the cradle also that Yoosuf’s
witness did so, and the son of Fir‘awn’s wife’s maidservant. And
Allah knows better.

The Story of Barseesa
This is the opposite of the case of Juraij, for he resisted temptation,
while Barseesa succumbed to it.
Ibn Jareer narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood (May
Allah be pleased with him) regarding this Verse: {(Their allies
deceived them) like Shaitan (Satan), when he says to man,
“Disbelieve in Allah.” But when (man) disbelieves in Allah,
Shaitan says, “I am free of you, I fear Allah, the Lord of the
‘Alameen!” So the end of both will be that they will be in the Fire,
abiding therein. Such is the recompense of the zalimoon.} (Soorah
Al-Hashr 59:16,17) – that he said, “Once there was a woman
grazing sheep and goats. She had four brothers. She used to seek
shelter at night at a monk’s cell. The monk committed adultery with
her and she got pregnant. Shaitan came to him and said, “Kill the
woman and then bury her for you are a reputable and highly
respected man (i.e. do not risk your own reputation for such a
simple woman).” The monk killed her and then buried her.
Thereupon, Shaitan visited her four brothers in a dream while they
were asleep and said to them, “The monk committed adultery with
your sister and, he killed her and buried her in such-and--such a
location because she got pregnant. In the morning, one of them
said, “By Allah! Last night I dreamt of something and I do not
know whether to relate it to you or just keep it to myself.” They
said, “Relate it to us.” He did so and one of them said, “By Allah!
I saw the same dream.” Another said the same. And the fourth one
said the same thing. They agreed that there must be something
serious about that dream. They went to the king and appealed for
Sunniconnect.com
329

his help against the monk. The king’s troops came to arrest him and
he was taken away. On the way, Shaitan came to the monk (and
whispered in his ears), “I caused you to fall into this. No one else
can save you from this. Prostrate yourself before me just for once
and in return, I will save you from this.” Thereupon, the monk
prostrated himself before Shaitan. When they presented themselves
before the king, Shaitan said to him, “I am free of you! Finally, the
monk was killed.” It was likewise narrated thus on the authority of
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Tawoos,
Muqatil ibn Hayyan.
And in a narration on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (May Allah
be pleased with him) that he said, “A monk worshipped Allah,
Alone for sixty years. Shaitan exerted himself to seduce him, but
could not. He went to a woman and touched her with evil
(maddened her). The woman had brothers who were visited by
Shaitan, who told them to take her to that monk to receive treatment
and cure. They took her to the monk and he treated her. Afterwards,
she stayed for a while at his cell (house). One day, he was attracted
to her and he committed adultery with her. She got pregnant and he
killed her (to conceal his first crime). Her brothers came (after
knowing the matter) and Shaitan appeared again for the monk and
said, “I am your friend, I did not find a solution or way to mislead
you, but (finally) I did this to you. So obey me and I will save you
from this. Prostrate yourself before me and you will be saved.” The
monk did so. Then, Shaitan said: {“I am free of you, I fear Allah,
the Lord of the ‘Alameen!”} (Soorah Al-Hashr 59:16)

The Story of the Three Who Took Refuge
in the Cave
Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “While three persons were traveling, they were overtaken by
rain and they took shelter in a cave in a mountain. A big rock fell
Sunniconnect.com
330

from the mountain over the mouth of the cave and blocked it. They
said to each other. “Think of good (righteous) deeds which you did
for Allah’s sake only and invoke Allah by giving reference to those
deeds so that Allah may relieve you from your difficulty. One of
them said, “O, Allah! I had my parents who were very old and I
had small children for whose sake I used to work as a shepherd.
When I returned to them at night and milked (the sheep), I used to
start giving the milk to my parents first before giving to my
children. And one day I went far away in search of a grazing place
(for my sheep), and did not return home till late at night and found
that my parents had slept. I milked (my livestock) as usual and
brought the milk vessel and stood at their heads, and I disliked to
wake them up from their sleep, and I also disliked to give the milk
to my children before my parents, though my children were crying
(from hunger) at my feet. So this state of mine and theirs continued
till the day dawned. (O, Allah!) If you considered that I had done
that only for seeking Your pleasure, then please let there be an
opening through which we can see the sky.” So Allah made for
them an opening through which they could see the sky. Then the
second person said, “O, Allah! I had a cousin whom I loved as
much as a passionate man loves a woman. I tried to seduce her, but
she refused till I paid her one hundred dinars. So I worked hard till
I collected one hundred dinars and went to her with that. But when
I sat between her legs (to have sexual intercourse with her), she
said, “O, slave of Allah! Be afraid of Allah ! Do not deflower me
except legally (by marriage contract).” So I left her. O, Allah! If
you considered that I had done that only for seeking Your pleasure,
then please let the rock move a little to have a (wider) opening.” So
Allah moved that rock to make the opening wider for them. And
the last (third) person said “O, Allah! I employed a laborer for
wages equal to a faraq (a certain measure) of rice, and when he
finished his job he demanded his wages, but when I presented his
due to him, he gave it up and refused to take it. Then I kept on
sowing that rice for him (several times) till I managed to buy with
the price of the yield some cows and their shepherd. Later on the
laborer came to me and said, “(Oh slave of Allah!) Be afraid of
Sunniconnect.com
331

Allah, do not be unjust to me and give me my due.” I said (to him),
“Go and take those cows and their shepherd.” So he took them and
went away. (So, O, Allah,) if You consider that I did that for the
purpose of seeking Your pleasure, then please remove the
remaining part of the rock.” And so Allah released them (from their
difficulty).”

The Story of the Three Men: the Blind, the
Leper and the Bald
Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated from more than one source on the
authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) say, “Allah willed to test three men from the Children
of Isra’eel, who were a leper, a blind man and a baldheaded man.
So He sent them an angel who came to the leper and said, “What
thing would you like most?” He replied, “Good color and good
skin, for the people have a strong aversion to me.” The angel
touched him and his illness was cured, and he was given a good
color and beautiful skin. The angel asked him, “What kind of
property do you like best?” He replied, “Camels (or cows – the
narrator is in doubt, for either the leper or the baldheaded man
demanded camels and the other demanded cows).” So he (i.e. the
leper) was given a pregnant she-camel and the angel said (to him),
“May Allah bless you in it.” The angel then went to the baldheaded
man and said, “What thing would you like most?” He said, “I would
like good hair and wish to be cured of this disease, for the people
feel repulsion for me.” The angel touched him and his illness was
cured, and he was given good hair. The angel asked (him), “What
kind of property do you like best?” He replied, “Cows.” The angel
gave him a pregnant cow and said, “May Allah bless you in it.” The
angel went to the blind man and asked, “What thing would you like
best?” He said, “(I would like) that Allah may restore my eyesight
to me so that I may see the people.” The angel touched his eyes and
Sunniconnect.com
332

Allah gave him back his eyesight. The angel asked him, “What kind
of property do you like best?” He replied, “Sheep.” The angel gave
him a pregnant sheep. Afterwards, all the three pregnant animals
gave birth to young ones, and multiplied and brought forth so much
that one of the (three) men had a herd of camels filling a valley, and
one had a herd of cows filling a valley, and one had a flock of sheep
filling a valley. Then the angel, disguised in the shape and
appearance of a leper, went to the leper and said, “I am a poor man,
who has lost all means of livelihood while on a journey. So none
can satisfy my need except Allah and then you.” In the Name of
Him Who has given you such a nice color and beautiful skin, and
so much property, I ask you to give me a camel so that I may reach
my destination. The man replied, “I have many obligations (so I
cannot give you one).” The angel said, “I think I know you; were
you not a leper to whom the people had a strong aversion? Were
you not a poor man, and then Allah gave you (all this property)?”
He replied, “(This is all wrong), I got this property through
inheritance from my forefathers.” The angel said, “If you are telling
a lie, then let Allah make you as you were before.” Then the angel,
disguised in the shape and appearance of a bald man, went to the
bald man and said to him the same as he told the first one, and he
too answered the same as the first one did. The angel said, “If you
are telling a lie, then let Allah make you as you were before.” The
angel, disguised in the shape of a blind man, went to the blind man
and said, “I am a poor man and a traveler, whose means of
livelihood have been exhausted while on a journey. I have nobody
to help me except Allah, and after Him, you. I ask you in the Name
of Him Who has given you back your eyesight to give me a sheep,
so that with its help, I may complete my journey.” The man said,
“No doubt, I was blind and Allah gave me back my eyesight; I was
poor and Allah made me rich; so take anything you wish from my
property. By Allah, I will not stop you from taking anything (you
need) of my property which you may take for Allah’s sake.” The
angel replied, “Keep your property with you. You (i.e. three men)
have been tested and Allah is pleased with you and is angry with
your two companions.”
Sunniconnect.com
333

The Hadeeth of the Man Who Borrowed a
Thousand Dinars From His Companion and
Repaid It
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that a man from among the Children of Isra’eel asked some of the
Children of Isra’eel to lend him a thousand dinars. The second man
required witnesses. The former replied, “Allah is sufficient as a
witness.” The second said, “I want a surety.” The former replied,
“Allah is sufficient as a surety.” The second said, “You are right,”
and lent him the money for a certain period. The debtor then
traveled across the sea. When he finished his work, he searched for
a ship so that he might reach in time for the repayment of the debt,
but he could not find any. So he took a piece of wood and made a
hole in it, inserted in it one thousand dinars and a letter to the lender
and then closed (i.e. sealed) the hole tightly. He took the piece of
wood to the sea and said, “O, Allah! You know well that I took a
loan of one thousand dinars from so-and-so. He demanded a surety
from me but I told him that Allah’s Guarantee was sufficient and
he accepted Your Guarantee. He then asked for a witness and I told
him that Allah was sufficient as a Witness, and he accepted You as
a Witness. No doubt, I tried hard to find a ship so that I could pay
his money but could not find, so I hand over this money to You.”
Saying that, he threw the piece of wood into the sea till it went out
far into it, and then he went away. Meanwhile, he started searching
for a ship in order to reach the creditor’s country. One day the
lender came out of his house to see whether a ship had arrived
bringing his money, and all of a sudden he saw the piece of wood
in which his money had been deposited. He took it home to use for
fire. When he sawed it, he found his money and the letter inside it.
Shortly after that, the debtor came bringing one thousand dinars to
him and said, “By Allah, I had been trying hard to get a boat so that
I could bring you your money, but failed to get one before the one
Sunniconnect.com
334

I have come by.” The lender asked, “Have you sent something to
me?” The debtor replied, “I have told you I could not get a boat
other than the one I have come by.” The lender said, “Allah has
delivered on your behalf the money you sent in the piece of wood.
So you may keep your one thousand dinars and depart guided on
the right path.”
Imam Ahmad narrated it thus with a chain of narrators, while AlBukhari narrated it in a mu‘allaq form, in a place other than his
Saheeh, on the authority of Al-Laith Ibn Sa‘d, indicating his firm
belief that it is authentic.

Another Story Similar to This Story, Regarding
Truth and Trustworthiness
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah
be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “A man bought a piece
of land from another man, and the buyer found an earthenware jar
filled with gold in the land. The buyer said to the seller, “Take your
gold, as I have bought only the land from you, but I have not bought
the gold from you.” The (former) owner of the land said, “I have
sold you the land with everything in it.” So both of them took their
case before a man, who asked, “Do you have children?” One of
them said, “I have a boy.” The other said, “I have a girl.” The man
said, “Marry the girl to the boy, spend of the money on both of them
and give the rest of it in charity.”

Another Story
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri
(May Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “There was a man
among the Children of Isra’eel who murdered ninety-nine persons.
Then he set out asking (whether his repentance could be accepted
Sunniconnect.com
335

or not). He came upon a monk and asked him if his repentance
could be accepted. The monk replied in the negative, so the man
killed him. He kept on asking till a man advised him to go to suchandsuch a village. (So he set out for it) but death overtook him on
the way. While dying, he turned his chest toward that village
(where he had hoped his repentance would be accepted), and so the
angels of mercy and the angels of punishment quarreled among
themselves regarding him. Allah ordered the village (toward which
he was going) to come closer to him, and ordered the village (from
where he had come) to move further away, and then He ordered the
angels to measure the distances between his body and the two
villages. He was found to be one hand span closer to the village
(toward which he was heading) and so he was forgiven.”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
performed the Fajr prayer, then he faced the people and said,
“While a man was driving a cow, he suddenly mounted it and struck
it. The cow said, “We have not been created for this, but we have
been created for plowing.” On that the people said astonishingly,
“Glorified be Allah! A cow speaks!” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I believe this, and Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar believe it too,” although neither of them was present
there. While a person was amongst his sheep, a wolf attacked and
took one of the sheep. The man chased the wolf till he saved it from
the wolf, where upon the wolf said, “You have saved it from me;
but who will guard it on the day of the wild beasts when there will
be no shepherd to guard them except me (because of riots and
afflictions)?” The people said surprisingly, “Glorified be Allah! A
wolf speaks!” The Prophet said, “I believe this, and Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, believe it too,” although neither of them was present there.”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he reported from
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he
Sunniconnect.com
336

said, “Amongst the people who came before you there used to be
muhaddithoon (i.e. persons who can guess things that come true
later on, as if those persons have been inspired by a Divine Power),
and if there is any such person amongst my followers, it is ‘Umar
ibn Al-Khattab.”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated in his Saheeh, on the
authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “The Prophet said, “While a dog was going round
a well and was about to die of thirst, an Isra’eelite prostitute saw it
and took off her shoe and gave it water to drink. So Allah forgave
her because of that (good deed).”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “A woman was punished because of a cat which she had
imprisoned till it died. She entered the Fire because of it, for she
neither gave it food nor water as she had imprisoned it, nor set it
free to eat from the vermin of the earth.”
Another hadeeth: Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri (May Allah be pleased with him) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “Among the Children of Isra’eel there was a woman who was
short in stature and so she made two sandals out of wood and she
used to walk between two short women. She had a gold ring and
she placed the best of perfumes and musk underneath its stone and
when she passed by the meeting-place, she would shake it and it
would diffuse its fragrance.”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu
Mas‘ood (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “One of
Sunniconnect.com
337

the sayings of the prophets which the people have got, is: “If you
do not feel ashamed, then do whatever you like.”
Another hadeeth: “Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “A man
entered upon his family and when he saw how needy they were, he
went out to the desert. When his wife saw that, she went to the
millstone and set it up, then she went to the oven and lit it. After
that, she said, “O, Allah! Provide us with sustenance.” Then she
looked, and saw that the jafnah had become filled and she went to
the oven and saw that it had become filled. Then her husband
returned and said, “Did you get something after me?” His wife said,
“Yes, from our Lord.” He stood up and went to the millstone.” This
was mentioned to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and he said, “If he had not lifted it up, it would have
continued turning until the Day of Resurrection.”

The Story of the two Repentant Kings
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “While a man from
among those who lived before you was in his kingdom, he began
to think, and he realized that all of that would be cut off from him
and that his (royal) situation had diverted him from the worship of
his Lord, so he stole away from his palace one night and went to a
neighboring kingdom. He arrived at the coast and there he found
work of brick-making. With the wages he was paid, he sustained
himself and gave the remainder as charity. He continued doing this
until news of him, his worship and his virtue was conveyed to the
king. The king sent a message to him calling for his presence. But
he refused to go to him. The king repeated his demand again and
again, but he refused to go to him. The king said, “Who is he, and
who am I?” So he mounted his horse and rode to him. When the
man saw him, he turned away from him and fled. When the king
saw this, he raced in pursuit of him but he did not catch up with
him, so he called out to him, “O, slave of Allah! You have nothing
Sunniconnect.com
338

to fear from me.” So the man stood still until the king caught up
with him. The king asked him, “Who are you, may Allah have
mercy on you?” He replied, “I am so-and-so, the son of so-and-so,
the ruler of such-and-such a kingdom. I thought about my situation
and I realized that my kingdom would (one day) be cut off from
me, and it had diverted me from the worship of my Lord, so I
abandoned it and came here, that I might worship my Lord, the
Almighty, the All-Powerful.” The king said, “You were not in
greater need of that which you did than I.” Then he dismounted
from his horse and set it free. Then he followed him and both of
them together worshipped Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful
and they asked Him to cause them to die together. So they both
died.” ‘Abdullah (May Allah be pleased with him) said, “If we were
in Rumailah, Egypt, I would show You their graves in the location
described to me by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him).”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri (May Allah be pleased with him) from the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), that he said,
“Amongst the people who lived before you, there was a man whom
Allah had given a lot of money. When he was on his deathbed, he
called his sons and said, “What type of father have I been to you?”
They replied, “You have been a good father.” He said, “I have
never done a single good deed; so when I die, burn me, crush my
body, and scatter the resulting ashes on a windy day.” His sons did
accordingly, but Allah gathered the particles and asked (him),
“What made you do so?” He replied, “Fear of you.” So Allah
bestowed His Mercy upon him (i.e. forgave him).”
Another hadeeth: It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “A man used to give
loans to the people and used to say to his servant, “If the debtor is
poor, forgive him, so that Allah may forgive us.” So when he met
Allah (after his death), Allah forgave him.”
Sunniconnect.com
339

Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘Amir ibn
Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas from his father that he heard him asking
Usamah Ibn Zaid (May Allah be pleased with him), “What did you
hear from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) regarding plague?” Usamah replied, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Plague is
a calamity which was sent to the Children of Isra’eel or upon those
who were before you. So when you hear that it has broken out in a
land, do not go to it, and when it has broken out in the land where
you are, do not run away from it.” It was also narrated by Muslim.
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah
(may Allah be Pleased with her) that the people of Quraish became
very worried about the Makhzoomiyyah lady who had committed
theft. They said, “Nobody can speak (in favor of the lady) to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and nobody dares do that except Usamah, who
is the favorite of Allah’s Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).” When Usamah spoke
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) about that matter, he said, “Do you intercede (with me) to
violate one of the legal punishments of Allah?” Then he got up and
addressed the people, saying, “O, people! The nations before you
went astray because if a noble person committed theft, they used to
leave him, but if a weak person among them committed theft, they
used to inflict the legal punishment on him. By Allah, if Fatimah,
the daughter of Muhammad, committed theft, I would cut off her
hand!”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
said, “I heard a man reciting a Verse from the Qur’an and I had
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) reciting it in a different way and so I took him to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and informed him (of what I had heard). I recognized in his face
Sunniconnect.com
340

signs of dislike and he said, “Both of you are right. Do not differ,
for the nations before you differed and perished (because of their
differences).”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “The Jews and Christians do not dye (their grey hair), so do
the opposite of what they do (i.e. dye your grey hair and beards).”
Al-Bukhari was alone in narrating this; Muslim did not narrate it.
In Abu Dawood’s Sunan it is reported : “Pray in your shoes (and
by so doing,) be different from the Jews.”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that once
‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) was informed that a certain
man sold alcohol and he heard him say, “May Allah curse so-andso! Does he not know that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “May Allah curse the Jews,
for Allah had forbidden them to eat the fat of animals but they
melted it and sold it.”
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn
Malik (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said: “The people
mentioned the fire and the bell (i.e. they suggested those as signals
to indicate the starting of prayers), and by that they mentioned the
Jews and the Christians. Then Bilal was ordered to pronounce the
Adhan for the prayers by repeating its wordings twice; and for the
iqamah (the call for the actual standing for the prayers in rows) by
pronouncing its wordings once. (The iqamah is pronounced when
the people are ready for the prayer).”
What is meant by this is that we should be different to the People
of the Scripture in all manners and characteristics, because when
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
arrived in Al-Madinah, the Muslims used to come to prayer without
Sunniconnect.com
341

any call to it. Then he ordered someone to call them to prayer (by
saying, “The prayer is convened.”). Then they wished to be called
to prayer with something that the people would recognize, so some
of them said, “Let us ring a bell.” Others said, “Let us light a fire.”
But they disliked this, because it was similar to the practices of the
People of the Scripture. Then ‘Abdullah Ibn Zaid Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih
Al-Ansari was shown the Adhan in a dream. He related this to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
who ordered Bilal (May Allah be pleased with him) to pronounce
the Adhan, as described in the Chapter on the Adhan, in the Book
of Judgments (in Saheeh Al-Bukhari).
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah
(may Allah be Pleased with her) and
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that they
said that on his deathbed, the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) would put a sheet over his face and when he
felt hot, he would remove it from his face. While in that state (of
putting and removing the sheet) he said, “May Allah’s Curse be on
the Jews and the Christians for they build places of worship at the
graves of their prophets.” (By that) he intended to warn (Muslims)
against what they (i.e. the Jews and Christians) had done.
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, “You will follow the ways of those nations who
were before you, span by span and cubit by cubit (i.e. inch by inch)
so much so that even if they entered a hole of a mastigure, you
would follow them.” We said, “O, Messenger of Allah! (Are you
referring to) the Jews and the Christians?” He said, “Whom else?”
What is meant by this is to acquaint us with the sayings and deeds
that resemble those of the People of the Scripture who lived before
us, which are prohibited according to Islamic Law, and to inform
us that Allah and His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) have prohibited us from copying them in their words and
Sunniconnect.com
342

deeds. Even if the intention of the Believer was a good one, if his
deed is clearly an imitation of their deeds (it is forbidden). And just
as praying at sunrise and sunset is prohibited, in order not to imitate
the pagans, who used to prostrate before the sun in those times –
even if no such intention occurred to the Believer. Likewise, this is
why Allah, Most High, says, {O, you who believe! Say not (to the
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ), “Ra‘ina,”
but say “Unzurna,” (Do make us understand) and hear. And for the
disbelievers there is a painful punishment. (See Verse 4:46)}
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:104). The disbelievers used to say to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), when they
spoke with him, “Ra‘ina,” i.e. direct your gaze toward us and listen
to our words. What they actually meant by this was ‘joke with us.’
So the Believers were prohibited from saying that, even if none of
them intended this (evil meaning) by it.
And Imam Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) from the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said,
“I was sent with the sword just before the Last Hour, so that Allah
is worshipped alone without partners. My sustenance was provided
for me from under the shadow of my spear. Those who oppose my
command were humiliated and made inferior, and whoever imitates
a people, he is one of them.” So it is not permissible for Muslims
to imitate them, whether it be in their religious festivals and
holidays, or in their worship, because Allah, Most High, has
honored this (Islamic) nation with the Seal of the Prophets, for
whom the great, eternal, comprehensive and complete Religion was
legislated – the Prophet who, if Moosa (Peace be upon him), son of
‘Imran – to whom the Tawrah was sent down – and ‘Eesa (Peace
be upon him), the son of Maryam – to whom the Injeel was revealed
– were present, indeed if all of the Prophets were present, they
would have no alternative but to follow this pure, noble, exalted
and mighty
Law. And since Allah, Most High, has blessed us by making us the
followers of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
Sunniconnect.com
343

him), so how can it befit us to imitate a people who have gone
astray aforetime, and who have misguided many from the Straight
Path? They have altered their religion, distorted it and deliberately
misinterpreted it, until it appeared that it was a different religion
entirely to that which was originally legislated for them. In addition
to this, it is based on adherence to that which has been abrogated;
and holding fast to what has been abrogated is unlawful. Allah will
accept neither little nor much of it. And there is no difference
between it and something that was not legislated (by Allah) at all.
And Allah guides whom He wills to the Straight Path.
Another hadeeth: Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that he said, “Your period (i.e. the Muslims’ period) in comparison
to the periods of the previous nations is like the period between the
‘Asr prayer and sunset. And your example in comparison to the
Jews and the Christians is like the example of a person who
employed some laborers and asked them, “Who will work for me
till midday for one qeerat each?” The Jews worked for half a day
for one qeerat each. The person asked, “Who will do the work for
me from midday to the time of the ‘Asr (prayer) for one qeerat
each?” The Christians worked from midday till the ‘Asr prayer for
one qeerat. Then the person asked, “Who will do the work for me
from the ‘Asr prayer till sunset for two qeerats each?” The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “It is you (i.e. the
Muslims) who are doing the work from the ‘Asr prayer till sunset,
so you will have a double reward. The Jews and the Christians got
angry and said, “We have done more work but got less wages.”
Allah said, “Have I been unjust to you as regards your rights?”
They said, “No.” So Allah said, “Then it is My Blessing which I
bestow on whomsoever I will.” In this hadeeth there is evidence
that the period of this nation is short, compared to the periods of
the nations who came before us. This is inferred from the saying of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him): “Your
period (i.e. the Muslims’ period) in comparison to the periods of
Sunniconnect.com
344

the previous nations is like the period between the ‘Asr prayer and
sunset.” And none knows the past except Allah, just as none but He
knows the future. But it is short in comparison to what has passed;
and none knows precisely how much time remains except Allah,
the Almighty, the All-Powerful, as He, Most High, says, {None can
reveal its time but He} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:187) and He, Most High,
says, {They ask you (o, Muhammad) about the Hour – when will
be its appointed time? You have no knowledge to say anything
about it. To your Lord belongs (the knowledge of) the term thereof}
(Soorah An-Nazi‘at 79:42-44). As for the hadeeth that some of the
people mention, which is well-known to the common folk, and
which states: “He has no knowledge of the unseen,” it is baseless
and is not to be found in the books of ahadeeth. A hadeeth has been
related which states that the life of this world is one Friday of the
Fridays of the Hereafter. But there is doubt about its authenticity.
What is meant by this comparison between the workers is to point
out the dissimilarity in their rewards and that this is not dependent
on abundance of deeds or paucity of deeds. Rather, it is dependent
on other matters which Allah, Most High, deems important. And
how often are few deeds more useful or advantageous than
abundant deeds? Deeds performed on Lailatul-Qadr, for example,
are better than a thousand nights of worship performed at any other
time. The Companions of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) spent (in Allah’s Cause) and if someone in our
time were to spend the same amount in gold as they spent in dates,
it would not be equivalent to it. And Allah sent the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he was
forty years old and took him when he was sixty-three, according to
what is widely accepted. During these twentythree years, he
excelled in beneficial knowledge and righteous deeds over all of
the Prophets who came before him, including even Nooh (Peace be
upon him), who remained among his people for nine hundred and
fifty years, calling them to the worship of Allah, Alone, without
partners and working day and night in obedience to Allah. May the
Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon all of the Prophets. This
nation was only honored and had its reward multiplied because of
Sunniconnect.com
345

the blessed leadership of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), his nobility and his greatness, as Allah, Most High,
says, {O, you who believe (in Moosa i.e. the Jews and ‘Eesa i.e. the
Christians)! Fear Allah and believe too in His Messenger
(Muhammad). He will give you a double portion of His Mercy, and
He will give you a light by which you shall walk (straight), and He
will forgive you. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. So
that the people of the Scripture (the Jews and Christians) may know
that they have no power whatsoever over the Grace of Allah and
that (His) Grace is (entirely) in His Hand to bestow on whomsoever
He wills. And Allah is the Owner of Great Bounty.} (Soorah AlHadeed 57:28,29)

Section:
The stories of the Children of Isra’eel are extremely numerous in
the Qur’an and the Prophetic Sunnah, and were we to make an
exhaustive study of them, the book would be very long. But we
have mentioned what Imam Abu ‘Abdullah Al-Bukhari has
mentioned in this book and in that there is sufficiency, and they are
a reminder and examples for this chapter. And Allah (SWT) knows
better.
As for the Isra’eelites’ stories, according to what has been
mentioned by the scholars of tafseer and the scholars of history,
they are extremely numerous. Some of them are authentic and
agree with what has been related in the Qur’an and Sunnah. But a
lot of the stories they mention – indeed, most of them – are lies and
inventions fabricated by their disbelievers and those who had gone
astray. These narrations fall into three categories: (i) Those that are
authentic, because they agree with what Allah has related in His
Book or with what the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) has reported; (ii) those whose falseness is
known, because they contradict the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him); and
(iii) those which may be true, or they may be false. Concerning this
Sunniconnect.com
346

latter category, we are commanded to remain non-committal. We
neither believe them nor belie them, as confirmed in the authentic
hadeeth: “If the People of the Scripture relate something to you,
neither believe them, nor disbelieve them; instead, say, “We
believe in what has been revealed to us and in what has been
revealed to you.” And it is permissible to report it, according to the
aforementioned hadeeth, which states: “Relate from the Children
of Isra’eel, and there is no objection.”

Sunniconnect.com
347

Mention of the Alterations and
Substitutions Made by the People of the
Scripture in their Religion
As for the Jews, Allah had sent down to them the Tawrah, by the
hand of Moosa, son of ‘Imran, and it was as Allah says: {Then, We
gave Moosa the Book (the Tawrah), to complete (Our Favor) upon
those who would do right, and explaining all things in detail}
(Soorah Al-An‘am 6:154) and He, Most High, says, {Verily, We
did send down the Tawrah (to Moosa), therein was guidance and
light, by which the Prophets, who submitted themselves to Allah’s
Will, judged the Jews. And the rabbis and the priests (too judged
the Jews by the Tawrah after those Prophets) for to them was
entrusted the protection of Allah’s Book, and they were witnesses
thereto. Therefore fear not men but fear Me (O, Jews) and sell not
My Verses for a miserable price. And whosoever does not judge by
what Allah has revealed, such are the kafiroon (i.e. disbelievers of
a lesser degree, as they do not act on Allah’s Laws)} (Soorah AlMa’idah 5:44). They used to judge by them and they held fast to
them for a while, but then they began to distort them, alter them,
misconstrue them and declare things that were not from them, as
Allah, Most High, says, {And verily, among them is a party who
distort the Book with their tongues (as they read), so that you may
think it is from the Book, but it is not from the Book, and they say,
“This is from Allah,” but it is not from Allah; and they speak a lie
against Allah while they know it} (Soorah Ali ‘Imran 3:78). So
Allah, Most High, informs us that they explained it, misconstrued
it and quoted things out of context – and there is no disagreement
in this matter among the scholars, i.e. that they interpreted its
meanings freely (according to their whims) and attributed false
implications to it, such as when they changed the ruling of stoning
to flogging and blackening of the face with charcoal, without
altering the word for stoning in it. In addition, when an eminent
person among them committed theft, they would overlook his
offense, but when a weak or unimportant person among them
Sunniconnect.com
348

committed theft, they would inflict the prescribed punishment on
him, in spite of the fact that they were commanded to inflict all
prescribed punishments on the eminent and the lowly, without
distinction.
As for their alteration of its wordings, some said that it means that
all of the words were altered. Others said that the whole of the
Tawrah was not altered and they cited as evidence the Words of
Allah: {But how do they come to you for decision while they have
the Tawrah, in which is the (plain) Decision of Allah} (Soorah AlMa’idah 5:43) and: {Whom they find written with them in the
Tawrah (Deuteronomy, xviii, 15) and the Injeel (Gospel) (John xiv,
16) – he commands them to implement al-ma‘roof (i.e. Islamic
Monotheism and all that Islam has ordained); and forbids them
from al-munkar (i.e. disbelief, polytheism of all kinds, and all that
Islam has forbidden); he allows them as lawful at-tayyibat ([i.e.
everything good and lawful] as regards things, deeds, beliefs,
persons, foods, etc.)} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:157) and also: {Say (O,
Muhammad), “Bring here the Tawrah and recite it, if you are
truthful.”} (Soorah Ali ‘Imran 3:93).
And there is the story of the stoning, as confirmed in the Saheehain,
on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him), in Saheeh Muslim, on the
authority of Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib (May Allah be pleased with him),
of Jabir ibn ‘Abdillah (May Allah be pleased with him) and in the
Sunan, on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased
with him) and others, when they sought judgment from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
with regard to the case of the Jew and the Jewess who committed
adultery, A Jew and a Jewess were brought to the Messenger of
Allah on a charge of committing an illegal sexual intercourse. The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked them.
“What is the legal punishment (for this sin) in the Tawrah.” They
replied, “We blacken their faces with charcoal and flog them.” So
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
Sunniconnect.com
349

ordered them to bring the Tawrah. The Tawrah was brought, and
‘Abdullah ibn Sooria (one of the Jews) put his hand over the Verse
of ar-rajm (stoning to death) and started reading what preceded and
what followed it. On that, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to the Jew, “Lift up your
hand.” So he lifted his hand and in it (the Tawrah) was the Verse
of ar-rajm. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) then ordered that the two (sinners) be stoned to death
and he said, “O, Allah! I am the first one to revive Your
Commandment after they (the Jews) had suppressed it.” And in
Abu Dawood’s Sunan, it was stated that they placed a cushion for
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
who sat on it and said, “Bring the Tawrah.” They brought it. Then
he withdrew the cushion from beneath him and placed the Tawrah
on it saying, “I believe in you and in Him Who revealed you.” Some
of them said that he stood for it, but I have not read its sanad. And
Allah knows better.
Many of the religious scholars and others have said that the tawatur
of the Tawrah was cut off during the era of Bukhtunassar, and that
none remained who had memorised it except Uzair (Ezra (Peace be
upon him)). But Uzair (Peace be upon him) was a Prophet and was
thus protected from error (by Allah) and tawatur up to a person who
is protected from error is sufficient. Although it was said that it was
not mutawatir up to him. But after him came Zakariyya, Yahya and
‘Eesa (peace be upon them all) – and all of them held fast to the
Tawrah; now if it had not been authentic and valid, they would not
have depended on it, since they were Prophets, protected from
error. In addition, Allah, Most High, has stated in the Revelation
sent down to His Messenger, Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets
– may the Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him and upon all
of the Prophets – which rebukes the Jews for their evil intentions,
because they turned away from that which they knew to be true (i.e.
the Tawrah) and which they were commanded to follow, in favor
of seeking judgment from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), even though they rejected what
Sunniconnect.com
350

he had brought. But in reality, they were seeking a judgment that
concurred with their heresy, i.e. flogging and blackening of the
face, which was contrary to what Allah had Commanded them to
do. And they said, “If he rules that you should flog them and
blacken their faces, then accept it, and on the Day of Resurrection,
when you stand before Allah, you will be able to plead in your
defence that you were given a ruling by a Prophet. But if he does
not make this ruling for you, then beware of accepting it from him.”
So Allah, Most High, rebuked them for their evil intention, which
was prompted by the desire to attain a corrupt objective, and
accorded with their own inclinations and desires, not the true
Religion, which is why Allah, Most High, says, {But how do they
come to you for decision while they have the Tawrah, in which is
the (plain) Decision of Allah; yet even after that, they turn away.
For they are not (really) Believers. Verily, We did send down the
Tawrah (to Moosa), therein was guidance and light, by which the
Prophets, who submitted themselves to Allah’s Will, judged the
Jews. And the rabbis and the priests (too judged the Jews by the
Tawrah after those Prophets) for to them was entrusted the
protection of Allah’s Book, and they were witnesses thereto.
Therefore fear not men but fear Me (O, Jews) and sell not My
Verses for a miserable price. And whosoever does not judge by
what Allah has revealed, such are the kafiroon (i.e. disbelievers –
of a lesser degree, as they do not act on Allah’s Laws} (Soorah AlMa’idah 5:43,44). This is why, when the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) ruled that they be stoned, he said,
“O, Allah! I am the first one to revive Your Commandment after
they (the Jews) had suppressed it.” He asked them what caused
them to do this and why they had abandoned Allah’s Command
which was in their hands. They replied: “Unlawful sexual
intercourse had become widespread among our nobles and we were
unable to enforce the legal punishment against them, so we used to
stone the weak among us. So we said, “Let us resort to a just
solution between the noble and the humble,” so we agreed that we
would flog them and blacken their faces.” This was a part of their
distortion, substitution, alteration and false interpretation. They
Sunniconnect.com
351

only altered the meaning, not the wording of ar-rajm, which they
left in their Scripture, as proven by the hadeeth whose authenticity
is agreed upon by Al-Bukhari and Muslim. This is why some
claimed that the substitution only occurred in the meanings and that
the wordings remained, and that is a proof against them, for if they
had implemented what was in their Scripture in full, it would have
led them to follow the truth and to obey the Messenger, Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), as He, Most High,
says, {Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet, who can
neither read nor write (i.e.
Muhammad) whom they find written with them in the Tawrah
(Deuteronomy xviii, 15) and the Injeel (John xiv, 16) – he
commands them for al-ma‘roof; and forbids them from al-munkar
he allows them as lawful at-tayyibat , and prohibits them as
unlawful al-khaba’ith (i.e. all evil and unlawful as regards things,
deeds, beliefs, persons, foods, etc.), he releases them from their
heavy burdens (of Allah’s Covenant), and from the fetters that were
upon them} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:157). And He, Most High, says,
{And if only they had acted according to the Tawrah, the Injeel,
and what has (now) been sent down to them from their Lord (the
Qur’an), they would surely have gotten provision from above them
and from underneath their feet. There are from among them people
who are on the right course (i.e. they act on the revelation and
believe in Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) like ‘Abdullah Ibn Salam).} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:66).
And He, Most High, says, {Say (O, Muhammad), “O, people of the
Scripture (Jews and Christians)! You have nothing (as regards
guidance) till you act according to the Tawrah, the Injeel, and what
has (now) been sent down to you from your Lord (the Qur’an).”
Verily, that which has been sent down to you (O, Muhammad) from
your Lord increases in many of them their obstinate rebellion and
disbelief} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:68). And this is the opinion, i.e.
the one which states that the substitution only occurred in the
meanings and not in the wordings, was expressed by AlBukhari, on
the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him) at the end of his Saheeh and he acknowledged it and did not
Sunniconnect.com
352

reject it. Al-Fakhr Ar-Razi also related it in his Tafseer, on the
authority of most of the religious scholars.

I say: As for what is in their hands of the Arabic translation of the
Tawrah, no rational person doubts that substitution has occurred in
it, that many of its wordings have been distorted and that stories
have been changed, along with wordings and that obvious and clear
additions and omissions have occurred. In addition, it contains
manifest lies and many monstrous errors. As for what they recite
with their mouths and write down with their pens, we are not privy
to it, but it is presumed that they are lying, treacherous and make
many fabrications against their Messengers and their Scriptures.
As for the Christians, their four Gospels, narrated by way of Mark,
Luke, Matthew and John, contain more contradictions, additions
and omissions and more monstrous disparities than the Tawrah and
contradict the rulings of the Tawrah and the Injeel in many matters.
They have legislated many things in it according to their own will,
including praying to the East, for there is no evidence for it and no
command to do it in any place in the four Gospels. Likewise, their
embellishment of their churches with pictures and images is
without foundation, as is their abandonment of circumcision and
their transfer of their fast from the spring season and their
lengthening of it to fifty days. In addition, they eat pork and have
instituted something totally without foundation, which is
monasticism, involving the abandonment of marriage for those
who wish to devote themselves to worship and they have declared
it unlawful for them. And their priests have laid down three
hundred and eighteen laws for them. All of these things were
innovated and fabricated by them during the era of Constantine, son
of Constantius, builder of Constantinople. He reigned three
hundred years after the time of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him).

Sunniconnect.com
353

Comprehensive Book of the Stories of
Previous Prophets
Allah, Most High, says, {Those Messengers! We preferred some to
others; to some of them Allah spoke (directly); others He raised to
degrees (of honor); and to ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, We gave clear
proofs and evidences, and supported him with Rooh Al-Quds
Jibra’eel} (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:253)
And He, Most High, says, {Verily, We have inspired you (O,
Muhammad) as We inspired Nooh and the Prophets after him; We
(also) inspired Ibraheem (Abraham), Isma’eel (Ishmael), Ishaq
(Isaac), Ya‘qoob, and Al--Asbat (the twelve sons of Ya‘qoob
[Jacob]), ‘Eesa, Ayyoob (Job), Yoonus (Jonah), Haroon (Aaron),
and Sulaiman (Solomon), and to Dawood (David) We gave the
Zaboor (Psalms). And
Messengers We have mentioned to you before, and Messengers We
have not mentioned to you – and to Moosa Allah spoke directly.
Messengers as bearers of good news as well as of warning in order
that the mankind should have no plea against Allah after the
Messengers. And Allah is Ever All-Powerful, Most Wise} (Soorah
An-Nisa’ 4:163-165)
And it has been narrated on the authority of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I am the
Seal of a thousand Prophets or more and there was no Prophet
among them who did not warn his people against the Dajjal. And
that which has not been made clear to any of those before me
regarding him has been made clear to me: He is one-eyed, and your
Lord is not one-eyed.” The isnad of this hadeeth is hasan and the
hadeeth is understood to refer to the number of Prophets who
warned their people against the Dajjal. However, another hadeeth
states: “There is no Prophet who did not warn his nation against the
Dajjal.” So Allah knows better.
Sunniconnect.com
354

And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hazim that he
said, “I sat with Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) for
five years and I heard him narrate from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that: “The Prophets used to rule
the Children of Isra’eel. Whenever a Prophet died another Prophet
succeeded him, but there will be no Prophets after me; instead there
will be Khulafa’ (Caliphs) and they will number many.” They
asked, “What then do you order us to do?” He said, “Fulfill your
allegiance to them, one after the other. Give them their dues. Verily
Allah will ask them about that with which he entrusted them.”
And ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood (May Allah be pleased with him) said,
“It is as if I am looking at the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) relating the story of one of the
Prophets whose people have beaten and wounded him, and he was
wiping the blood off his face and saying, “O, Lord! Forgive my
people, for they do not know’.”
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed AlKhudri (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “A man put
his right hand on the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and said, “By Allah! I am unable to put my hand on you due
to the severity of your fever.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “For us, the community of the Prophets,
the severity of the affliction is increased many times over, just as
the reward for us is multiplied. If a Prophet from among the
Prophets is afflicted with qummal, they afflict him so severely that
it kills him. If one of the Prophets is afflicted with poverty, he may
take his cloak and cut it (in order to fashion a kind of pocket for it).
But they rejoice in their afflictions as they rejoice in ease and
comfort.”
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Mus‘ab Ibn
Sa‘d, who reported on the authority of his father, that he said, “I
said, “O, Messenger of Allah! Which of the people are most
severely afflicted by trials?” He said, “The Prophets, then the
Sunniconnect.com
355

righteous people, then those who are nearest to them in perfection,
then those among the people who are nearest to them in perfection.
A man is tried in accordance with his religiousness; if his faith is
strong, his test is increased and if he is weak in religion, his test is
reduced. A Believer will be tested until he walks on the earth sinless
(i.e. until his sins have been erased by the series of afflictions that
he has endured).”
And we have already mentioned the hadeeth which states: “We, the
community of the Prophets, are paternal brothers and their Religion
is one; but their mothers are different.” This means that the Law
given to them is one Law, even though there might be differences
in the applied Jurisprudence given to each Prophet, and some of
them abrogated others, until all of them ended in the Law that Allah
gave to Muhammad (peace be upon him and upon all of them). But
the Religion of every Prophet whom Allah sent was Islam, and that
is to affirm Allah’s Oneness (Tawheed) and to worship Him,
Alone, without ascribing partners to Him, as He, Most High, says,
{And We did not send any Messenger before you (O, Muhammad)
but We inspired him (saying), La ilaha illa Ana (there is none who
has the right to be worshipped but I [Allah]), so worship Me (Alone
and no one else).”} (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:25). And He, Most
High, says, {And ask (O, Muhammad) those of Our Messengers
whom We sent before you,
“Did We ever appoint alihah (gods) to be worshipped besides the
Most Beneficent (Allah)?”} (Soorah
Az-Zukhruf 43:45). And He, Most High, says, {And verily, We
have sent among every Ummah (community, nation) a Messenger
(proclaiming), “Worship Allah (Alone), and avoid (or keep away
from) the taghoot (all false deities, etc. (i.e. do not worship the
taghoot besides Allah).” Then of them were some whom Allah
guided and of them were some upon whom the straying was
justified. So travel through the land and see what was the end of
those who denied (the truth)} (Soorah An-Nahl 16:36). Paternal
brothers means that they share the same father, but their mothers
are different. So the father represents the Religion, and that is to
Sunniconnect.com
356

affirm the Oneness of Allah (Tawheed). The mothers represent the
Divine Laws, which differ in matters of jurisprudence, as He, Most
High, says, {To each among you, We have prescribed a Law and a
Clear Way} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:48). And He, Most High, says,
{For every nation We have ordained religious ceremonies (e.g.
slaughtering of the sacrificial beasts during the three days of stay
at Mina (in Makkah) during the Hajj [pilgrimage]) which they must
follow} (Soorah
Al-Hajj 21:67). And He says, {For every nation there is a direction
to which they face} (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:148) – according to one
of the two sayings regarding its explanation. And what is meant is
that the Laws, though they differed in the times at which they were
revealed, all of them commanded that Allah be worshipped Alone,
without partners – and that is the Religion of Islam, which Allah
ordained for all of the Prophets; and it is the Religion besides which
Allah will accept none on the Day of Resurrection, as He, Most
High, says, {And whoever seeks a religion other than Islam, it will
never be accepted of him, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the
losers} (Soorah Ali ‘Imran 3:85). And He, Most High, says, {And
who turns away from the religion of Ibraheem (i.e. Islamic
Monotheism) except he who befools himself? Truly, We chose him
in this world and verily, in the Hereafter he will be among the
righteous. When his Lord said to him, “Submit (i.e. be a Muslim),”
he said, “I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the
‘Alameen.”} (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:130,131). And He, Most High,
says,
{Verily, We did send down the Tawrah (to Moosa), therein was
guidance and light, by which the
Prophets, who submitted themselves to Allah’s Will, judged the
Jews} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:44). So the
Religion of Islam is the worship of Allah, Alone, without partners;
and that is sincere devotion to Him, Alone, without any other
besides Him, and ihsan means to do so in the manner legislated (by
Allah) at that time. This is why Allah, Most High, does not accept
a deed from anyone which is contrary to what Allah ordained for
Sunniconnect.com
357

Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) after He
has sent him, as He,
Most High, says, {Say (O, Muhammad), “O, mankind! Verily, I am
sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah.”} (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:158). And He, Most High, says, {“And this Qur’an has been
revealed to me that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it
may reach.”} (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:19). And He, Most High, says,
{and before it came the Book of Moosa, a guidance and a mercy,
they believe therein, but those of the sects (Jews, Christians and all
the other non-Muslim nations) that reject it (the Qur’an), the Fire
will be their promised meeting place.} (Soorah Hood 11:17) And
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “I have been sent to the red and the black.” It was said that the
red and the black refers to the Arabs and the non-Arabs. It was also
said that it refers to mankind and the jinn. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) also said, “By Him in Whose Hand
is my soul, if Moosa (Peace be upon him) appeared among you,
then you followed him and abandoned me, you would surely have
gone astray.” The ahadeeth bearing this meaning are very
numerous. And what is meant is that the brotherhood of al-‘allat
means that they are from one father, but their mothers are different.
The word is derived from the expression: “…drinking from al-‘alal
(the tributaries) after (drinking from) the source. As for the
brotherhood of al-akhyaf, it is the opposite of that, i.e. that their
mothers are one, but their fathers are different. The brotherhood of
al-a‘yan means they are brothers from the same father and mother.
And Allah, Most High, knows better.
In another hadeeth, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “We, the community of the Prophets, do not
bequeath what we leave, for it is (given in) charity.” This is one of
the special characteristics of the Prophets, that they do not bequeath
anything. The reason for this is that the material things of this world
are held in too much contempt by the Prophets for them to bequeath
their worldly goods. In addition, their trust in Allah, the Almighty,
the All-Powerful regarding their offspring is too great and too
Sunniconnect.com
358

positive for them to need to leave their property to their heirs, to
the exclusion of the rest of the mankind. Rather, all of what they
leave is a charity for the poor people, to alleviate their poverty and
fulfill their needs. We shall mention all of the characteristics
peculiar to the Prophets, including the characteristics of our
Prophet (peace be upon all of them) at the beginning of the Book
of Marriage, in the Great Book of Rulings, where the Imams
usually write them, in emulation of Imam Abu ‘Abdullah
AshShafi‘i (may Allah have mercy on all of them).

Sunniconnect.com
359

Information Regarding the Arabs
It has been said that all of the Arabs can trace their lineage to
Isma‘eel, son of Ibraheem (peace be upon them both). What is
correct and well-known is that there were pure Arabs before
Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him). And we have mentioned previously
that pure Arabs included ‘Ad, Thamood, Tasm, Jadees, Umaim,
Jurhum, the Amalekites and others known to none except Allah.
They were before Al-Khaleel (Ibraheem (Peace be upon him)) and
during his time also. As for those who were assimilated into the
Arabs, they are the Arabs of Al-Hijaz and they are the descendants
of Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him). As for the Arabs of Yemen, they
are Himyar and it is well-known that they are from Qahtan, whose
name was Muharrim, according to Ibn Makoola. It was said that
they were four brothers: Qahtan, Qahit, Miqhat and Faligh. Qahtan
was the son of Hood. It was also said that he was Hood (Peace be
upon him) and it was said that Hood (Peace be upon him) was his
brother, and also that he was from his progeny and that Qahtan was
from among the progeny of Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him). This last
was related by Ibn Ishaq and others. Some said that he was Qahtan
Ibn Al-Hamaisa‘, son of Taiman, son of Qaizar, son of Nabt, son
of Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him). Other claims were also made
regarding his lineage to Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him). And Allah
knows better.
Al-Bukhari has written regarding his biography in his Saheeh,
under the “Chapter: The Relationship of Yemen to Isma‘eel (Peace
be upon him), on the authority of Salamah (May Allah be pleased
with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed by some people from the
tribe of Aslam practicing archery. He said, “O, children of
Isma‘eel! Fire (your arrows), for your father was an archer. I am on
the side of Banu so-and-so,” meaning one of the two teams. The
other team stopped firing, whereupon the Prophet said, “What has
happened to them?” They replied, “How shall we throw while you
are with Banu so-and-so?” He said, “Fire, for I am with all of you.”
Sunniconnect.com
360

And Al-Bukhari said, “And Aslam Ibn Afsa Ibn Harithah Ibn ‘Amr
ibn ‘Amir from Khuza‘ah refers to Khuza‘ah, a group from among
those who split from the tribes of Saba’, when Allah sent upon them
the great flood, as we shall explain later. Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj
were also from them. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said to them, “O, children of Isma‘eel! Fire (your
arrows), which proves that they were from his progeny. Others
interpreted it as meaning the Arab race, but it is a farfetched
interpretation, since it contradicts the apparent meaning without
any proof. However, the majority hold that the Qahtani Arabs are
from the Arabs of Yemen and the others are not from the progeny
of Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him). They also contend that all of the
Arabs may be divided into two categories: Qahtani and ‘Adnani.
The Qahtanis are two tribes: Saba’ and Hadramawt. The ‘Adnanis
are also two tribes: Rabee‘ah and Mudar; they were the sons of
Nizar Ibn Ma‘add Ibn ‘Adnan. There is a difference of opinion
regarding the fifth tribe, Quda‘ah. It was said that they were
‘Adnanis; Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr said, “And that is the opinion of the
majority.” Muhammad Ibn Salam Al-Basri An-Nassabah said,
“The Arabs have (descended from) three roots: ‘Adnanis, Qahtanis
and Quda‘ah.” It was said to him, “Then which of them are the
majority, the ‘Adnanis or the Qahtanis?” It depends on what
Quda‘ah says; if they say that they are from Yemen, then the
Qahtanis will be the majority. But if they say that they are from the
tribe of Ma‘add, then they will be ‘Adnanis.” This proves that they
are undecided regarding their origins. And if the aforementioned
hadeeth of Ibn Lahee‘ah is authentic, then it is a proof that they are
from the Qahtanis. And Allah knows better. Allah, Most High,
says, {O, mankind! We have created you from a male and a female,
and made you into nations and tribes, that you may know one
another. Verily, the most honorable of you with Allah is that
(Believer) who has at-taqwa (i.e. one of the muttaqoon (pious – see
V. 2:2)} (Soorah Al-Hujurat 49:13). The scholars of genealogy said
that it is said: nations and then tribes, then ‘ama’ir, then butoon,
then afkhadh, then families, then kin. And kin are the closest of
people to a man and there is nothing after it.
Sunniconnect.com
361

Let us begin first with a mention of the Qahtanis, then after them,
we shall mention the Arabs of the Hijaz, who are the ‘Adnanis, and
matters pertaining to the Jahiliyyah, in order that that may be
connected to the Seerah of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), if Allah wills – and it is Him in
Whom we place our trust.
Al-Bukhari said under the “Chapter: Mention of Qahtan, it is
reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased
with him) from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) that he said, “The Hour will not be established until a man
emerges from Qahtan and he drives the people with his stick.”

The Story of Saba’
Allah, Most High, says, {Indeed there was for Saba` (Sheba) a sign
in their dwelling place – two gardens on the right hand and on the
left (and it was said to them,) “Eat of the provision of your Lord,
and be grateful to Him, a fair land and an Oft--Forgiving Lord. But
they turned away (from the obedience of Allah), so We sent against
them Sail Al--‘Arim (the flood released from the dam), and We
converted their two gardens into gardens producing bitter, bad fruit
and tamarisks, and a few lote- trees. In this way We requited them
because they were ungrateful disbelievers. And never do We
requite in such a way except those who are ungrateful
(disbelievers). And We placed between them and the towns which
We had blessed, towns easy to be seen, and We made the stages (of
journey) between them easy (saying,) “Travel in them safely both
by night and day.” But they said, “Our Lord! Make the stages
between our journey longer.” And they wronged themselves, so We
made them as tales (in the land), and We dispersed them all, totally.
Verily, in this are indeed signs for every steadfast grateful
(person).} (Soorah Saba’ 34:15-19)
The scholars of genealogy, including Ibn Ishaq, said that the name
of Saba’ was ‘Abd Shams Ibn Yashjub
Sunniconnect.com
362

Ibn Ya‘rub Ibn Qahtan. They said that he was the first of the Arabs
from Saba’ and so he was called
Saba’. He was known as Ar-Ra’ish because he used to give the
people from his property. As-Suhaili said, “It was said that he was
the first to be crowned king. Some said that he was a Muslim and
that he had poetry in which he gave tidings of the coming of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him);
this included the following words:
A Prophet will rule after us a great kingdom,
And he will not permit the unlawful,
And after him, from among them will be kings,
Who will treat the slaves without disparagement,
And after them, kings from among us will rule,
And the kingdom will be divided up among us,
And after Qahtan a Prophet will rule,
Who is pure of brow, the best of mankind,
He will be called Ahmad, how I wish that I,
Could live after he is sent for but a year,
I would support him and give him my help,
Will all my arms and all of my spearmen,
When he appears, be his supporters,
And whoever meets him, convey my salutations to him.
Sunniconnect.com
363

This was related by Ibn Dihyah in his book At-Tanweer Fee
Mawlid Al-Basheer An-Nadheer.
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of As-Saba’i ‘AbdurRahman Ibn Wa‘lah (that he said,) “I heard ‘Abdullah ibn Al‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) say, “A man asked the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) about Saba’,
was it a man, or a woman or a land? He said, “Nay, it was a man.
He fathered ten sons and six of them took up residence in Yemen
and the other four took up residence in Ash-Sham. As for the
Yemenis, (they were) Madhhij, Kindah, Al-Azd, Al-Ash‘ariyyoon,
Anmar and Himyar. As for the Shamites, (they were) Lakhm,
Judham, ‘Amilah and Ghassan.”
What is meant is that Saba’ includes all of these tribes. Among
them were At-Tababi‘ah in Yemen (the singular is Tubba‘) and
their kings had crowns that they wore at the time of delivering
judgments, just as the Kisras of Persia used to do. The Arabs used
to call every king who ruled Yemen, including Ash-Shihr and
Hadramawt, “Tubba‘”, just as they referred to every ruler of AshSham and Al-Jazeerah as “Qaisar” (Ceasar), while every ruler of
Persia was known as Kisra (Kisra). Every ruler of Egypt was
known as “Fir‘awn” (Pharaoh) and every ruler of Abyssinia was
known as “An-Najashi” (the Negus) and every ruler of India was
known as “Batlaimoos” (Ptolemy). Among the rulers of Himyar, in
the land of Yemen was Bilqees, whose story with that of Sulaiman
(Peace be upon him) we have already told. They enjoyed great good
fortune and abundant provisions and plentiful fruits and crops. In
addition to this, they were rightly guided and followed the path of
righteousness. But when they repaid Allah’s Blessing with
disbelief, their land became uncultivable.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq narrated on the authority of Wahb Ibn
Munabbih that Allah sent thirteen Prophets to them. As-Suddi
claimed that he sent twelve thousand Prophets to them. And Allah
knows better. What is meant is that they turned away from guidance
Sunniconnect.com
364

in favor of error and prostrated before the sun, instead of Allah –
and that was during the reign of Bilqees and before it also – and
this continued until Allah sent
Sail Al-‘Arim against them, as He, Most High, says, {But they
turned away (from the obedience of Allah), so We sent against
them Sail Al--‘Arim (the flood released from the dam), and We
converted their two gardens into gardens producing bitter, bad fruit
and tamarisks and a few lote- trees. In this way We requited them
because they were ungrateful disbelievers. And never do We
requite in such a way except those who are ungrateful
(disbelievers)} (Soorah Saba’ 34:16,17)
More than one of the earlier and the later scholars from among the
scholars of tafseer and others said that the reason for the building
of the dam of Ma‘rib was because the waters used to run between
two mountains and so in the far distant past, they built a very strong
dam between the two mountains, so that the water rose and the dam
held it back to the tops of the mountains. Then they planted
orchards and trees and got the best fruits that could ever be
harvested, plentiful and beautiful and they grew bountiful crops. It
was said that the first person to build the dam was Saba’ Ibn Ya‘rub
and that seventy rivers ran into it, while it had thirty openings from
which the water emerged (to irrigate the land). He died when the
construction of the dam was not yet finished and so it was
completed after him by Himyar. It was many farsakhs wide and
they enjoyed great wealth and lived lives of enviable luxury, to
such a degree that, according to Qatadah and others, a woman
would walk with a large basket on her head and it would be filled
with fruits that fell into it, due to their ripeness and their profusion.
They also said that there were no fleas or harmful creatures in their
lands, due to the healthy climate and the good health they enjoyed,
as He, Most High, says, {Indeed there was for Saba’ a sign in their
dwelling place – two gardens on the right hand and on the left (and
it was said to them,) “Eat of the provision of your Lord, and be
grateful to Him, a fair land and an Oft--Forgiving Lord} (Soorah
Saba’ 34:15) and as He, Most High, says, {And (remember) when
Sunniconnect.com
365

your Lord proclaimed, “If you give thanks (by accepting faith and
worshipping none but Allah), I will give you more (of My
Blessings), but if you are thankless (i.e. disbelievers), verily! My
Punishment is indeed severe.”} (Soorah Ibraheem 14:7). So they
worshipped (false) deities besides Allah and disregarded His
Blessings and asked Allah to make the stages between their journey
longer and to make their journeys longer and more difficult and
tiresome. And they asked that He replace goodness with evil, just
as the Children of Isra’eel asked for manna and quails to be
replaced with herbs, cucumbers, foom (wheat or garlic), lentils and
onions. So they were deprived of this great Blessing and the
widespread Benevolence by the destruction of the land and the
scattering of the slaves throughout the lands, as He, Most High,
says, {But they turned away (from the obedience of Allah), so We
sent against them Sail Al--‘Arim.} (Soorah Saba’ 34:16)
More than one of the scholars said that Allah sent rats to the
foundations of the dam, i.e. desert rats. It was also said that they
were moles. When they realized this, they brought cats to counter
the rats, but this did not benefit them at all once the Divine Decree
had come to pass. Their vigilance was to no avail. No! There is no
refuge! When the rats took hold of the foundations, the dam
collapsed and the water gushed forth and rushed through the bottom
of the valley and destroyed everything in their path – buildings,
trees, etc. As the water drained from the trees that were on the
mountains, to the right and the left, those trees dried up and were
destroyed. Those beautiful, fruit-bearing trees were replaced with
something altogether different, as Allah says, {and We converted
their two gardens into gardens producing bitter, bad fruit, and
tamarisks.} (Soorah Saba’ 34:16)
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid
and others said that it was the arak tree, whose fruit is known as
bareer and tamarisk, which is at-tarfa’. It was also said that it
resembles it and that it is dry wood has no fruit. {and some few
lote- trees} (Soorah Saba’ 34:16). This was because it bore lotus
Sunniconnect.com
366

fruit and so there were only a few of them, although it has many
thorns and its fruit is, as it is said in the parable, “The meat of a lean
camel is on the top of a high mountain and there is no easy path to
it and (if you could reach it,) there is little meat to be had from it.”
This is why Allah, Most High, says, {Like this We requited them
because they were ungrateful disbelievers. And never do We
requite in such a way except those who are ungrateful
(disbelievers).} (Soorah Saba’ 34:17). That is, We only inflict this
severe punishment on those who disbelieve in Us, belie Our
Messengers, disobey Our Commandments and violate Our
Prohibitions. And He, Most High, says, {So We made them as tales
(in the land), and We dispersed them all, totally} (Soorah Saba’
34:19). That is, when their wealth was destroyed and their land was
ruined, they had to depart from it and so they were widely dispersed
throughout the lands.

The Story of Rabee‘ah Ibn Nasr Ibn Abi
Harithah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Amir
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “Rabee‘ah Ibn Nasr was the king of
Yemen, one among many of the
Tabab’ah. He saw a vision which terrified and shocked him and he
gathered every soothsayer, magician, ‘a’if and astrologer from
among his people and said to them, “I have seen a vision that
terrified me and shocked me, so inform me about it and explain it
to me.” They said, “Relate it to us and we will inform you of its
explanation.” He said, “If I inform you of it, I am not sure that you
will be able to explain it to me, because none can know its meaning
except who knows it (the vision) before I inform him of it.” One of
them said, “If the king desires this, then let him send word to Shiqq
and Sateeh, because no one is more knowledgeable than they; they
will inform about that which he asks.” So he sent word to them and
Sateeh came to him before Shiqq and he said to him, “I have seen
a vision that terrified me and shocked me; inform me about it and
if you get it right, you will be able to correctly explain it.” He said,
Sunniconnect.com
367

“I will do so. You saw something that had been burned in the fire
emerging from blackness and it arrived in Tahamah and there it ate
every living creature.” The king said to him, “You have not erred
in any detail of it, O, Sateeh! Now what is your explanation of it?”
He said, “I swear by that which is between the two lava fields of
Hanash, your land will be brought down by the Abyssinians and
they will certainly rule that which lies between Abyan and Jurash.”
The king said to him, “O, Sateeh! Verily, this is distressing and
painful to us. When will it happen? Will it be in my time, or after
it?” He said, “Nay! It will be a long time after it – more than sixty
or seventy years.” He asked, “Will their rule continue, or will it be
terminated?” He said, “Nay! It will be terminated after seventy-odd
years, and then they will be killed and expelled from it and put to
flight.” The king said, “And who will come after their killing and
expulsion?” He replied, “They will be followed by Iram Dhee
Yazan. He will attack them from Adan and he will not leave a
single one of them in Yemen.” The king asked, “Will his rule
continue, or will it be terminated?” He said, “Nay! It will be
terminated.” The king said, “And who will terminate it?” Sateeh
said, “A pure Prophet, who will receive Revelation from the
Supreme (Allah).” The king asked, “And from whom is this
Prophet?” He replied, “A man from the sons of Ghalib ibn Fihr ibn
Malik ibn An-Nadr. The kingdom will remain in the hands of his
people until the end of time.” The king asked, “Does time have an
end, then?” Sateeh said, “Yes, a Day on which the first and the last
generations will be gathered; on that Day, those who used to do
good deeds will be happy, while those who did evil will be
wretched.” The king asked, “Is it true, what you have told me?” He
said, “Yes, by the afterglow of sunset, by the twilight, by the
daybreak in its fullness, verily, that which I impart to you is the
truth.”

The Story of Tubba‘
Abu Karib Tubban As‘ad, king of Yemen and the People of AlMadinah, and How He Intended to Attack the Sacred House, Then
Sunniconnect.com
368

He Honoured and Glorified it and He Draped it With a Covering
and He Was the First Person to Do So
Ibn Ishaq said, “It was Tubban As‘ad Abu Karib, king of Yemen,
who came to Al-Madinah and took two of the Jewish rabbis to
Yemen. He also rebuilt the Sacred House and draped it with a
covering. His reign was before that of Rabee‘ah Ibn Nasr. He had
selected his route through Al-Madinah when he returned from
fighting in the lands of the east. He had passed by it on the outward
journey and he did not burn its inhabitants. He appointed one of his
sons to govern them, but he was assassinated. So when he arrived
in the city, he resolved to destroy it, annihilate its inhabitants and
burn down its date-palms. So he gathered to himself the tribe of the
Ansar, whose chief was ‘Amr Ibn Talhah, the confederate of Banu
An-Najjar, then one of Banu ‘Amr Ibn Mabdhool. The name of
Mabdhool was ‘Amir ibn Malik Ibn An-Najjar. And the name of
An-Najjar was Taimullah Ibn Tha‘labah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al-Khazraj
Ibn Harithah Ibn Tha‘labah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Amir.”
Ibn Ishaq added, “A man from Banu ‘Adiyy Ibn An-Najjar, whose
name was Ahmar, attacked a man from among the companions of
Tubba‘ whom he found taking a bunch of his dates, striking him
with his scythe and killing him. He said, “The dates are only for the
one who pollinated them.” This served to increase the anger of
Tubba‘ against them and so they fought. The Ansar said that they
used to fight him during the daylight and at night they would offer
him their hospitality. This impressed him and he said, “By Allah,
they are a generous people!”
Ibn Ishaq said, “While Tubba‘ was engaged in fighting them, two
Jewish rabbis from Banu Quraizah, who were firmly grounded in
knowledge came to him, when they heard that he intended to
destroy AlMadinah and annihilate its inhabitants. They said to him,
‘O, king! Do not do this, for if you insist on carrying out your
intention, you will be prevented from doing so, and we fear that a
swift punishment may descend upon you.’ He said, ‘And why
Sunniconnect.com
369

should that be?’ They said, ‘It is the place of refuge for a Prophet
who will depart from the Sacred Precincts (Makkah), fleeing from
Quraish at the end of time. This will be his abode and his
settlement.’ And so he desisted from attacking it. He realized that
they were knowledgeable men and he was impressed by what he
heard and so he left Al-Madinah and adopted their religion.”
We have already mentioned in the Tafseer the hadeeth that was
reported from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in which he said, “Do not curse Tubba‘ for he embraced
Islam.” And AsSuhaili narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him) that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Do not curse
As‘ad Al-Himyari, for he was the first to drape the Ka‘bah.” AsSuhaili said, “When the two rabbis informed Tubba‘ about the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
he recited the following poetic verses:
I bear witness that Ahmad is a Messenger from Allah, pure of soul,
And if my life was prolonged till his time, I would be his vizier and
his nephew,
And I would perform jihad with my sword against his enemies,
And I would endeavor to free his heart from all cares.
And this poem continued to be passed down through generations of
the Ansar and memorized by them; it was known to Abu Ayyoob
Al-Ansari (May Allah be pleased with him).

Sunniconnect.com
370

The Cause of Abrahah’s Determination
to Destroy the Ka'bah With an Elephant
Allah, Most High, says, {Have you (O, Muhammad) not seen how
your Lord dealt with the Owners of the Elephant (The elephant
army which came from Yemen under the command of Abrahah AlAshram intending to destroy the Ka‘bah at Makkah)? Did He not
make their plot go astray, and send against them birds in flocks,
striking them with stones of sijjeel? And He made them like an
empty field of stalks (of which the corn has been eaten up by
cattle)} (Soorah Al-Feel 105:1-5). He was the first person to put
saddles on horses. As for the first person to tame horses and ride
them, it was Tahmoorith, who was the third king in this world. It
was also said that the first person to ride them was Isma‘eel (Peace
be upon him), and it is possible that he was the first person from
among the Arabs to ride them. And Allah knows better.
It is said that the elephant, in spite of its great size and strength,
flees from cats. Some generals employed cats in war against the
Indians (who used elephants), releasing them during the turmoil of
the battles and the elephants fled.
Ibn Ishaq said, “Then Abrahah built Al-Qullais in San‘a’; it was a
church the like of which had never been seen on earth at that time.
He wrote to the Negus of Abyssinia saying, “I have built for you a
church the like of which no king before you has ever built, but I
will not be content until I have diverted the Arab pilgrims to it.”
As-Suhaili mentioned that Abrahah humiliated the people of
Yemen during the building of this infamous church and forced
them to labor on its construction. Those who arrived after sunrise
to work on its construction would have one of their hands cut off.
He transferred marble, stones and wonderful furnishings to it from
the palace of Bilqees and he erected in it crosses of gold and silver.
He also placed in it pulpits made from ivory and ebony and made
it extremely high and very vast in width. After Abrahah had been
Sunniconnect.com
371

killed and the Abyssinians had fled, anyone who tried to take
anything from its furnishings would be afflicted with evil by the
jinn. This was because the church was built over two idols: Ku‘aib
and his wife. The height of each of them was sixty cubits and so
the people of Yemen left the church as it was and it remained so
until the era of As-Saffah, the first Caliph of the Abbasid dynasty.
He sent a group of resolute men of learning to it and they
demolished it stone by stone, and all traces of it have remained
hidden to this day.
Ibn Ishaq said, “When the Arabs heard about the letter that Abrahah
had sent to the Negus, a man from An-Nasa’ah, who belonged to
the tribe of Kinanah, became angry. They were known as AnNasa’ah because they used to defer the sanctity of the month of
Muharram until Safar (nasa’a is the Arabic verb to defer or
postpone), announcing its deferment in Makkah, upon the
completion of the Hajj rites, as we established in the explanation of
the Words of Allah, Most High: {The postponing (of a Sacred
Month) is indeed an addition to disbelief.} (Soorah At-Tawbah
9:37) Ibn Ishaq said, “So the Kinani man set out and traveled to AlQullais and he sat in it, i.e. relieved himself in it, in a place where
no one could see him, after which he left the church and returned
to his own land. On discovering this, Abrahah was furious and he
swore to march on the House (of Allah) and destroy it, then he
ordered the Abyssinians to prepare for the march to Makkah and
they did so.”
Ibn Ishaq added, “When Abrahah camped at Al-Mughammis, he
sent a man from Abyssinia whose name was Al-Aswad Ibn
Maqsood on horseback to Makkah. There he captured the property
of the Makkan people from Quraish and other tribes, including two
hundred camels belonging to ‘Abdul-Muttalib Ibn Hashim, who
was at that time the leader of Quraish and its chief. Quraish,
Kinanah, Hudhail and those from other tribes and peoples who
were in the Sacred Precincts desired to fight Abrahah, but then they
realized that they did not have the ability to do so and they
Sunniconnect.com
372

abandoned the idea. Abrahah sent Hunatah AlHimyari to Makkah
and he said to him, “Ask for the leader of this city.” Then say to
him, “The king says to you, “I have not come to fight you, I have
only come to destroy this House, and as long as you do not try to
prevent us from doing so by fighting us, I have no desire to shed
your blood. If he does not desire to fight, then bring him to me.”
When Hunatah entered Makkah, he asked for the leader of Quraish
and he was told, “He is ‘Abdul-Muttalib Ibn Hashim.” So he went
to him and conveyed the message that Abrahah had ordered him to
give. ‘Abdul-Muttalib said to him, “By Allah, we do not wish to
fight him and we do not have the ability to do so. This is Allah’s
Sacred House and the House of His Khaleel, Ibraheem (Peace be
upon him). So if He prevents him, then it is His Sacred Place and
His House, and if
He lets him approach it, by Allah, We have no means to defend it
from him.” So Hunatah told him, “Come with me to him
(Abrahah).” And so ‘Abdul-Muttalib went with him, accompanied
by some of his sons. When Abrahah saw him, he was impressed by
him, because ‘Abdul-Muttalib was a large and handsome man. So
Abrahah descended from his seat and sat with him on a carpet on
the ground. Then he asked his translator to say to him, “What do
you need?” ‘Abdul-Muttalib replied to the translator, “I want the
king to return my camels that he has taken from me, which are two
hundred in number.” Abrahah then told his translator to tell him, “I
was impressed by you when I first saw you, but now I withdraw
from you after you have spoken to me. You are asking me about
two hundred camels which I have taken from you and you leave the
matter of a House which is (the foundation of) your religion and
the religion of your fathers, and which I have come to destroy and
you do not speak to me about it!” ‘Abdul-Muttalib said to him,
“Verily, I am the lord of the camels. As for the House, it has its
Lord Who will defend it.” Abrahah said, “I cannot be prevented
(from destroying it).” ‘Abdul-Muttalib answered, “Then do so.” It
is said that a number of the chiefs of the Arabs accompanied
‘Abdul-Muttalib and offered Abrahah a third of the wealth of the
tribe of Tihamah if he would withdraw from the House, but he
Sunniconnect.com
373

refused and returned ‘AbdulMuttalib’s camels to him. ‘AbdulMuttalib then returned to his people and ordered them to leave
Makkah and seek shelter at the top of the mountains, fearful of the
excesses which might be committed by the army against them.
Then he took hold of the metal ring of the door of the Ka‘bah, and
along with a number of Quraish, he called upon Allah to give them
victory over Abrahah and his army. ‘AbdulMuttalib said, while
hanging onto the ring of the door of the Ka‘bah:
There is no matter more important to any man right now,
Than the defence of his livestock and property,
So defend Your Property,
Their cross and their cunning will not be victorious,
Over Your Astuteness by the time morning comes.
Ibn Hisham said, “This is what has been authentically reported
from him.” According to Ibn Ishaq, then ‘Abdul-Muttalib let go of
the metal ring of the door of the Ka‘bah, and they left Makkah and
ascended to the mountain tops. Muqatil Ibn Sulaiman mentioned
that they left one hundred animals (camels) tied near the Ka‘bah
hoping that some of the army would take some of them without a
right to do so, and thus bring about the vengeance of Allah upon
themselves. When morning came, Abrahah prepared to enter the
sacred city of Makkah. He prepared the elephant named Mahmood.
He mobilized his army, and they turned the elephant toward the
Ka‘bah. At that moment Nufail Ibn Habeeb approached it and stood
next to it, and taking it by its ear, he said, “Kneel, Mahmood! Then
turn around and return directly to whence you came, for verily, you
are in the Sacred City of Allah.” Then he released the elephant’s
ear and it knelt, after which Nufail Ibn Habeeb left and hastened to
the mountains. Abrahah’s men beat the elephant in an attempt to
make it rise, but it refused. They beat it on its head with axes and
Sunniconnect.com
374

used hooked staffs to pull it out of its resistance and make it stand,
but it refused. So they turned him toward Yemen, and he rose and
walked quickly. Then they turned him toward Ash-Sham and he
did likewise. Then they turned him toward the East and he did the
same thing. Then they turned him toward Makkah and he knelt
down again. Then Allah (SWT) sent against them the birds from
the sea, like swallows and herons. Each bird carried three stones
the size of chickpeas and lentils, one in each claw and one in its
beak. Everyone who was hit by them was destroyed, though not all
of them were hit. They fled in panic along the road asking about
the whereabouts of Nufail that he might point out to them the way
home. Nufail, however, was at the top of the mountain with Quraish
and the Arabs of the Hijaz observing the wrath which Allah had
caused to descend on the People of the Elephant. Nufail then began
to say:
Where will they flee when the One True God is the Pursuer, For
Al-Ashram is defeated and not the victor?
Ibn Ishaq reported that Nufail said these lines of poetry at that time:
O, Rudaina! Did you not live with continued support?
We favored you all with a revolving eye in the morning (i.e., a
guide along the way),
If you saw, but you did not see it at the side of the rock covered
mountain that which we saw,
Then you will excuse me and praise my affair,
And do not grieve over what is lost between us,

Sunniconnect.com
375

I praised Allah when I saw the birds, and I feared that the
stones might be thrown down upon us, So all the people are
asking about the whereabouts of Nufail,
As if I have some debt that I owe the Abyssinians.
Ibn Ishaq said that they left (Makkah) being struck down and
destroyed along every path and at every water spring. Abrahah’s
body was afflicted by the pestilence of the stones and his army
carried him away with them as he was falling apart piece by piece,
until they arrived back in San‘a’. When they arrived there he was
but like the baby chick of a bird. And he did not die until his heart
fell out of his chest, or so they claim.
Ibn Ishaq said that when Allah sent Muhammad with the
Prophethood, among the things that he used to recount to Quraish
as blessings that Allah had favored them with of His bounties, was
His defending them from the attack of the Abyssinians. Due to this
they (Quraish) were allowed to remain (safely in Makkah) for a
period of time. Thus, Allah says, {Have you (O, Muhammad) not
seen how your Lord dealt with the
Owners of the Elephant (The elephant army which came from
Yemen under the command of Abrahah AlAshram intending to
destroy the Ka‘bah at Makkah)? Did He not make their plot go
astray, and send against them birds in flocks, striking them with
stones of sijjeel? And He made them like an empty field of stalks
(of which the corn has been eaten up by cattle).} (Soorah Al-Feel
105:1-5)
Ibn Hisham said that “ababeel” is the word used for hosts, and the
Arabs do not speak of just one (bird). He also said, “As for sijjeel,
Yoonus An-Nahwi and Abu ‘Ubaidah have informed me that
according to the Arabs, it means something hard and solid.” He
then said, “Some of the commentators have mentioned that it is
Sunniconnect.com
376

actually two Persian words that the Arabs have made into one word.
The two words are ‘sang’ and ‘gill’, ‘sang’ meaning stones, and
‘geel’ meaning clay. The rocks are of these two types: stone and
clay.” He continued, saying, “‘‘asf’ are the leaves of the crops that
are not gathered. One of them is called ‘‘asfah’.” Al-Kisa’i said, “I
have heard some of the scholars of Arabic grammar (nahw) say that
the singular of ‘ababeel’ is ‘Ibbeel’.” Many of the Salaf said that
“ababeel” means different groups, some of them following others,
from hither and thither. And it is reported on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that they
had beaks like those of birds and feet like those of dogs.” On the
authority of ‘Ikrimah that he said, “They had heads like the heads
of predatory animals and they emerged from the sea and were green
in color.” ‘Ubaid Ibn ‘Umair said, “They were black birds of the
sea that had stones in their beaks and claws.” And it is reported on
the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him) that he said, “They were shap like strange griffons.” It was
also said by ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
them) that the smallest stone held by them was the size of a man’s
head, while some of them were as large as camels. Yoonus ibn
Bukair also mentioned this on the authority of Ibn Ishaq. It was also
said that they were (all) small. And Allah knows better.
Ibn Abi Hatim narrated on the authority of ‘Ubaid Ibn ‘Umair that
he said, “When Allah willed to destroy the People of the Elephant,
He sent birds against them that came from the sea, like terns. Each
of the birds was carrying three small stones – two stones in its claws
and one stone in its beak. They came until they gathered in rows
over their heads. Then they gave a loud cry and threw what was in
their claws and beaks. Thus, no stone fell upon the head of any man
except that it came out of his behind (i.e. it went through him), and
it did not fall on any part of his body except that it came out from
the opposite side. Then Allah sent a severe wind that struck the
stones and increased them in force. Thus, they were all destroyed.”

Sunniconnect.com
377

I say: In that year the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was born, according to what is widely accepted.
It was also said that it happened some years before his birth, as we
shall mention, if Allah, Most High, wills, and in Him we place our
trust.
Then Ibn Ishaq mentioned the poetry that the Arabs recited
regarding this great incident, in which Allah saved His Sacred
House, which it was His Will to ennoble, purify and revere by
sending Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
with the true Religion that He had ordained for him, one of whose
pillars is prayer; indeed it is a foundation of His Religion. And he
would make the purified Ka‘bah its Qiblah. So what He did to the
People of the Elephant was not to help Quraish, for they were the
Abyssinian Christians, whose religion at that time was closer to the
true Religion than that of the pagan Quraish. Nay, His Help was for
the Sacred House and in preparation for the advent of Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Ibn Hisham said, “It was narrated by Umayyah Ibn Abi As-Salt in
Al-Bahr Al-Khafeef’:
“Verily, the Signs of our Lord are everlasting,
No one disputes regarding them except the disbelievers,
He created the night and the day,
And the measure of each of them is plainly ordained,
Then a Merciful Lord reveals the day,
With a sun whose rays are widely diffused,
He halted the elephant at Al-Mughammis,
Until it began to creep, as if it was wounded,
Sunniconnect.com
378

Like a camel held back by reins,
As if it were an overturned, fallen rock,
Around it were the brave rulers of Kindah,
Stained with the dust of war, falcons,
They allowed it to lead, then they all raced ahead,
As if its leg bone was broken,
Every religion on the Day of Resurrection,
Will be held as falsehood in Allah’s Sight,
Except the Haneef Religion.”
This incident occurred in the month of Muharram, in the Year 886,
according to the calendar of DhulQarnain.

The Story of the Persian Involvement in Yemen
Ibn Hisham said, “Then Wahriz died and Kisra appointed Wahriz’s
son, Al-Marzuban as governor of
Yemen. Then Al-Marzuban died and so Kisra appointed
Marzuban's son, At-Tainujan as governor. After
At-Tainujan died, he (kisra) appointed Tainujan's son. Then he
deposed him from the governorate of
Yemen and appointed Badhan as its governor. During his era, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was sent.” Ibn Hisham said, “It
was conveyed to me on the authority of
Az-Zuhri that he said, Khosrau wrote to Badhan informing him that
a man from Quraish had appeared in Makkah, claiming that he was
a Prophet and he ordered him to proceed there and tell him to
Sunniconnect.com
379

repent. If he refused, he told Badhan to send his head to him.
Badhan sent a messenger to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) with Kisra’s letter. The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) wrote to him,
saying, “Verily, Allah has promised me that Kisra will be killed on
such-and-such a day, in such-and-such a month.’ When the letter
reached Badhan, he paused to think and then he said, “If he is a
Prophet, then what he says will come to pass.” Then Allah killed
Kisra on the day specified by the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him).” ibn Hisham said, “(He was killed) by the hand
of his son, Sheerawaih.” I say: Some said that his sons all took part
in his murder. This Kisra’s name was Abraweez, son of Hurmuz,
son of Anushirwan, son of Qubaz; and he is the defeater of Rome
mentioned in Allah’s Words: {Alif-Lam-Meem. The Romans have
been defeated in the nearer land (Syria, Iraq, Jordan, and
Palestine).} (Soorah Ar-Room 30:1-3)
As-Suhaili said, “His murder occurred on the night of Tuesday, the
tenth of Jumad Al-Oola, in the Year 9 A.H. It is said that when the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
wrote to him, he invited him to embrace Islam, but Kisra was
enraged and tore up the letter. He then wrote to his representative
in Yemen with the aforementioned orders. And Allah knows better.
In some narrations, it was stated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to Badhan’s messenger,
“Verily, my Lord has killed your lord this night.” And it transpired
that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had spoken truthfully; he had been killed on that very night
by his sons because of his injustice and wrongdoings, having
previously been a just ruler. After they had deposed him, they
replaced him with his son, Sheerawaih; but he only remained alive
for six months or less, after the death of his father. Regarding this
incident, Khalid Ibn Hiqq Ash-Shaibani said:
And remember when Kisra was cut up,
Sunniconnect.com
380

By his sons with their swords,
As a piece of meat is dismembered,
For every person there is an appointed time.
Az-Zuhri said, “When Badhan was informed of this, he sent word
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he and those with him had
embraced Islam. The messengers said,
“To whom do we belong, O, Messenger of Allah?” He said, “You
are from us and you belong to us, Ahl Al-Bait. Az-Zuhri said, “And
for that reason the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “Salman is from us, Ahl Al-Bait.”
I say: It is apparent that this was after the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) migrated to AlMadinah, which is why he sent governors to Yemen to teach the
people goodness and call them to Allah, the Almighty, the AllPowerful. First, he sent Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed (May Allah be
pleased with him) and ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (May Allah be pleased
with him), then he sent after them Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari (May
Allah be pleased with him) and Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal (May Allah be
pleased with him), and Yemen and its people embraced the
Religion of Islam. Then Badhan died and after him, Shahr, son of
Badhan, took his place. It was he who was murdered by Al-Aswad
Al-‘Ansi, when he claimed to be a prophet and he took his wife, as
we shall explain, if Allah wills. He also ousted all of the vicegerents
appointed by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him). But after he had been killed, Islamic rule returned to
Yemen. Ibn Hisham said, “And it was he who was referred to by
Sateeh when he said, “A pure Prophet, who will receive Revelation
from the Supreme (Allah).” And it was he who was referred to by
Shiqq in his words: “Nay, it will be cut off by a Messenger sent (by
Allah); he will bring truth and dispense with justice to the people
Sunniconnect.com
381

of religion and virtue and the rule shall remain among his people
until the Day of Decision.”

The Story of As-Satiroon, Owner of Al-Hadhr
‘Abdul-Malik Ibn Hisham mentioned his story here because of
what some of the scholars of lineage have said, which was that it
was An-Nu‘man Ibn Al-Mundhir who, as mentioned previously,
was from the offspring of As-Satiroon, ruler of Al-Hadr. And we
have related previously from Ibn Ishaq that AnNu‘man Ibn AlMundhir descended from Rabee‘ah Ibn Nasr and he narrated on the
authority of Jubair Ibn Mut‘im that he was one of the descendents
of Qunus Ibn Ma‘add ibn ‘Adnan. These are three opinions
regarding his lineage. Ibn Hisham proceeded to describe the ruler
of Al-Hadr. Al-Hadr was a massive fortress built by king, i.e. AsSatiroon, on the banks of the Euphrates. It was a towering, elevated
structure, vast in breadth, with a huge courtyard; and its perimeter
was like that of a great city. It was of the utmost perfection,
magnificence, beauty and splendor. And all of the surrounding
towns and villages owed fealty to it. As-Satiroon’s name was AdDaizan Ibn Mu‘awiyah Ibn ‘Ubaid Ibn Ajram, from the tribe of
Banu Sulaih Ibn Halwan ibn Al-Haf Ibn Quda‘ah, according to the
lineage attributed to him by ibn Al-Kalbi. Others said that he was
from Al-Jaramiqah and that he was one of the kings of At-Tawa’if
and that he used to lead them whenever they gathered for war
against their enemies. His fortress lay between the Tigris and the
Euphrates.
Ibn Hisham said, “Kisra Saboor, Zul Aktaf made war on AsSatiroon, king of Al-Hadr.” Others said that the person who made
war on him was none other than Saboor, son of Ardasheer, son of
Babak, the first of the Sassanid kings. He subdued the kings of AtTawa`if and returned sovereignty of their lands to the Kisras. As
for Saboor Zul Aktaf, son of Hurmuz, he lived many years after
that. And Allah knows better. This was mentioned by As-Suhaili.
Sunniconnect.com
382

The Story of the Kings of At-Tawa’if
As for the ruler of Al-Hadr, he was As-Satiroon, and as we have
said, he used to lead the other kings of At-Tawa’if. He lived in the
time of Alexander, son of Philip II of Macedon, in Greece. The
reason for this was because after Alexander had conquered the
Persian King, Dara, son of Dara, subdued his kingdom, destroyed
his lands, taken his people’s property as booty, plundered his
granaries and divided Persia, scattering the people in all directions.
He resolved that no force should ever assemble against them again
and that no one should unite against them and so he appointed kings
over small groups of people (tawa’if), ruling over small parcels of
land occupied by Arabs and non-Arabs. Each king would protect
his territory and profit from his position, and when he died, his son
or one of his people would succeed him. The situation continued
thus for about five hundred years, until Azdasheer, son of Babak
from the tribe of Sasan, son of Bahman, son of Isfandyar, son of
Yashtasib, son of Lahrasib. He returned their kingdom to its former
state and restored the empire. He abolished the petty kingdoms of
At-Tawa’if and nothing of them remained. The siege of the ruler of
Al-Hadr delayed him, for he was the greatest of them, the most
powerful of them and the mightiest of them, being their leader. But
when Azdasheer died, he was succeeded by his son, Saboor, who
besieged the fortress until he captured the king, as we mentioned
previously. And Allah, Most Glorified, Most High, knows better.

The Story of Khuza‘ah and ‘Amr Ibn Luhayy
and His Worship of the Idols in the Land of the
Arabs
Ibn Ishaq said, “Ghubshan was from Khuza‘ah, who took over
responsibility for the House from Banu Bakr Ibn ‘Abd Manat. The
person who took over from them was ‘Amr ibn Al-Harith AlGhubshani.
Sunniconnect.com
383

Quraish at that time were scattered, separated and lived in abodes
dispersed between the people of Kinanah. It was said that they were
known as Khuza‘ah because they left the sons of ‘Amr Ibn ‘Amir
and when they arrived from Yemen, they were en route to AshSham, but they stopped at Marr Az-Zahran and took up residence
there. ‘Awn Ibn Ayyoob Al-Ansari, then Al-Khazraji, said
regarding this:
When we settled at Batn Marr,
Khuza‘ah left us on fast horses,
Every wadi in Tihamah fought,
With pointed spears and sharpened swords.
So Khuza‘ah took on responsibility for the House and it was passed
down from father to son, until the last of them, Hulail Ibn
Hubshiyyah Ibn Salool Ibn Ka‘b Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Rabee‘ah AlKhuza‘i. His daughter, Hubba, married Qusayy ibn Kilab. She bore
him four sons: ‘Abdud-Dar, ‘Abd Manaf, ‘Abdul-‘Uzza and ‘Abd.
Then the responsibility of the House passed to him, as we shall
explain in detail in the relevant place, if Allah, Most High, wills –
and in Him we place our trust.
Khuza‘ah continued to be responsible for the House for around
three hundred years, or it was said, five hundred years. And Allah
knows better. Ibn Hisham said, “I was informed by one of the
scholars that ‘Amr Ibn Luhayy set out from Makkah for Ash-Sham
on business and when he arrived at Ma’ab in the land of Al-Balqa’,
which was at that time in the hands of the Amalekites, who were
the descendants of ‘Imlaq, or it was said, ‘Imleeq Ibn Lawadh Ibn
Sam, Ibn Nooh. He saw them worshipping idols and he said to
them, “What are these idols that I see you worshipping?” They said
to him, “We worship these idols and ask them for rain and they
grant us rain, and we seek help from them and they help us.” He
Sunniconnect.com
384

said to them, “Will you not give me an idol from among them and
I will take it to the land of the Arabs, that they may worship it?” So
they gave him an idol named Hubal and he brought it to Makkah
and erected it there and ordered the people to worship and glorify
it.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “They claim that the beginning of idol worship
among the descendants of Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him) was that
whenever they departed from Makkah and they were traveling in
the wide open spaces and were feeling uneasy, they would take
with them a stone from the stones of the Sacred Precincts in
glorification of them and wherever they camped, they would place
it on the ground and circumambulate it, as they circumambulated
the Ka‘bah until this led them to worship the stones and their
descendants forgot the religion that they had formerly followed.
It is reported in Saheeh Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu Raja’
Al-‘Utaridi (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “During
the Jahiliyyah (days of ignorance), if we could not find a stone, we
would collect a handful of dust, then we would bring a sheep and
milk it over it, then we would circumambulate
it.”
Based on this, we may infer that there were some remnants of the
rites practiced during the time of Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) to
which they adhered, i.e. glorification of the House and
circumambulation of it, Hajj and ‘Umrah, standing on ‘Arafat,
visiting Muzdalifah, slaughtering a sacrificial animal, making the
ihlal for Hajj and ‘Umrah, though they added to them things to them
which were not a part of them. When Kinanah and Quraish made
ihlal, they would say, “Labbaik Allahumma Labbaik, Labbaika La
Shareeka Laka Labbaik, Illa Shareekan Huwa Lak, Tamlikuhi Wa
Ma Malak (O,
Allah! I respond to Your Call, I respond to Your Call and You have
no partner except a partner whom You have and You own all that
he owns).” So they would declare His Oneness in the talbiyyah,
Sunniconnect.com
385

then they would insert into it their idols and they would place their
ownership in His Hand. Allah, Most High, said to Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him): {And most of them
believe not in Allah except that they attribute partners unto Him
(i.e. they are mushrikoon [polytheists].} See also Soorah AlAn‘am
6:121) (Soorah Yoosuf 12:106). That is, they do not affirm My
Oneness except that they ascribe partners to Me from among My
creation.
And it has been confirmed in the Saheeh that when the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) heard them
saying, “Labbaika La Shareeka Laka Labbaik (I respond to Your
Call and You have no partner,” he said, “Qad, Qad (Enough,
enough).”
And ‘Abdullah Ibn Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah
ibn Mas‘ood (May Allah be pleased with him), who reported from
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he
said, “The first person to let animals roam free for the idols was the
father of Khuza‘ah, ‘Amr Ibn ‘Amir and I saw him dragging his
entrails in the Fire.”
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah (may Allah
be Pleased with her) that she said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I saw the Hellfire and
its different portions were consuming each other and saw ‘Amr
dragging his intestines (in it), and he was the first person to
establish the tradition of letting animals loose (for the idols).”
What is meant is that ‘Amr Ibn Luhayy – may Allah Curse him –
introduced heresies to them in their religion by which he changed
the Religion of Al-Khaleel (Peace be upon him) and the Arabs
followed him in that, which caused them to stray far from the truth.
And Allah, Most High, rebuked them in His Noble Book in more
than one Verse, such as His Words: {And say not concerning that
which your tongues put forth falsely: “This is lawful and this is
Sunniconnect.com
386

forbidden,” so as to invent lies against Allah.} (Soorah An-Nahl
16:116) and His Words: {Allah has not instituted things like
baheerah (a she--camel whose milk was spared for the idols and
nobody was allowed to milk it) or a sa’ibah (a she--camel let loose
for free pasture for their false gods, idols, etc. and nothing was
allowed to be carried on it), or a waseelah (a she--camel set free for
idols because it has given birth to a she--camel at its first delivery
and then again gives birth to a she--camel at its second delivery) or
a ham (a male -camel freed from work for their idols, after it had
finished a number of matings assigned for it. All these animals were
liberated in honor of idols as practiced by pagan Arabs in the pre-Islamic period). But those who disbelieve invent lies against Allah
and most of them have no understanding} (Soorah Al-Ma’idah
5:103). We have discussed this in detail and we made clear the
difference of opinion among the Salaf regarding its tafseer. So
whoever wishes to read it may find it there, all praise and thanks be
to Allah. And He, Most High, says, {And they assign a portion of
that which We have provided them unto what they know not (i.e.
false deities). By Allah, you shall certainly be questioned about (all
of) that which you used to fabricate.} (Soorah An-Nahl 16:56)
And He, Most High, says, {And they assign to Allah a share of the
tilth and cattle which He has created, and they say, “This is for
Allah according to their pretending, and this is for our (Allah’s so-called) partners.” But the share of their (Allah’s so--called)
“partners” reaches not Allah, while the share of Allah reaches their
(Allah’s so-called) “partners”! Evil is the way they judge! And so
to many of the mushrikoon (polytheists - see v. 2:105) their
(Allah’s so--called) “partners” have made fair-seeming the killing
of their children, in order to lead them to their own destruction and
cause confusion in their religion. And if Allah had willed they
would not have done so. So leave them alone with their
fabrications. And according to their pretending, they say, “suchand-such cattle and crops are forbidden, and none should eat of
them except those whom we allow.” And (they say) there are cattle
forbidden to be used for burden or any other work, and cattle on
Sunniconnect.com
387

which (at slaughtering) the Name of Allah is not pronounced, lying
against Him (Allah). He will recompense them for what they used
to fabricate. And they say: “What is in the bellies of such-and-such
cattle (milk or fetus) is for our males alone, and forbidden to our
females (girls and women), but if it is born dead, then all have
shares therein.” He will punish them for their attribution (of such
false orders to Allah). Verily, He is Most Wise, All--Knowing.
(Tafseer At--Tabari, Vol. 8, page 49). Indeed lost are those who
have killed their children from folly, without knowledge, and have
forbidden that which Allah has provided for them, inventing a lie
against Allah. They have indeed gone astray and were not guided.}
(Soorah Al-An‘am 6:136-140)
And Al-Bukhari narrated in his Saheeh on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
said, “If you wish to know about the ignorance of the Arabs, refer
to Soorah Al-An‘am after Verse No. 130: {Indeed lost are those
who have killed their children from folly, without knowledge and
have forbidden that which Allah has provided for them, inventing
a lie against Allah. They have indeed gone astray and were not
guided} (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:140). We have already given the
explanation of this Verse and the heresies they introduced into the
Religion, which were false and wicked, and which their leader,
‘Amr ibn Luhayy – may Allah Curse him – thought were beneficial
and a mercy to the cattle and camels, but he was a liar and fabricator
in this. And in spite of his ignorance and misguidance the foolish,
common people followed him. Indeed, they followed him in
something far worse than that, i.e. the worship of idols besides
Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful. And they altered the True
Religion and the Straight path with which Allah sent Ibraheem, His
Khaleel (Peace be upon him), and perverted the religious
knowledge, when they themselves had no knowledge and no
evidence – be it authentic or weak. And in doing so, they followed
those pagan nations who came before them, imitating the people of
Nooh (Peace be upon him), who were the first people to associate
partners with Allah and to worship idols, which is why Allah sent
Sunniconnect.com
388

Nooh (Peace be upon him) to them. He was the first Messenger
who prohibited the worship of idols, as we made clear earlier, in
the story of Nooh (Peace be upon him), {And they said, “You shall
not leave your gods, nor shall you leave Wadd, nor Suwa‘, nor
Yaghooth, nor Ya‘ooq, nor Nasr (names of the idols). And indeed
they have led many astray.”} (Soorah Nooh 71:23,24). ‘Abdullah
ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said, “They (the idols)
were righteous persons from among the people of Nooh (Peace be
upon him) and when they died, they used to sit around their graves,
then after a long period of time had passed, they began to worship
them.” And we have explained how they used to worship them
previously in such detail, that there is no necessity to repeat it here.

The Story of ‘Adnan, the Father of the Arabs of
Al-Hijaz
There is no difference regarding the fact that ‘Adnan was one of the
descendants of Isma‘eel, son of Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel (peace be
upon them both), but there are several opinions regarding the
number of forefathers there were between him and Isma‘eel (Peace
be upon him). The greatest number of forefathers mentioned is
forty, which is the number stated by the People of the Scripture.
They took it from the Books of Rakhya, as we shall make clear. It
was also said that there were thirty forefathers and also that there
were twenty and that there were fifteen, and also ten and nine. The
smallest number claimed was four, according to the narration of
Moosa Ibn Ya‘qoob, who reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah
Ibn Wahb Ibn Zam‘ah Az-Zam‘i, who reported on the authority of
his paternal aunt that she reported on the authority of Umm
Salamah (may Allah be Pleased with her), that she reported from
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he
said, “Ma‘add was the son of ‘Adnan Ibn Udad Ibn Zand ibn Yara
Ibn A‘raq Ath-Thara.” Umm Salamah (may Allah be Pleased with
her) said, “Zand is Al-Hamaisa‘,
Sunniconnect.com
389

Al-Yara is Nabt and A‘raquth – Thara is Isma‘eel (Peace be upon
him), because he is the son of Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) – and
Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) was not consumed by the fire, just
as fire does not consume ‘ath-thara’.” Ad-Daraqutni said, “We do
not know Zand except in this hadeeth and Zand ibn Al-Jawn is Abu
Dulamah, the poet.”
Abu ‘Umar said, “There were a number of people from among the
Salaf, including ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘ood, Amr Ibn Maimoon Al-Azdi and Muhammad Ibn Ka‘b
Al-Qurazi, who, when they recited the Words of Allah: {And those
after them? None knows them but Allah} (Soorah Ibraheem 14:9),
would add, “The scholars of lineage have lied.”
Abu ‘Umar – may Allah have Mercy on him – said, “The meaning,
as we understand it, is different from what they have understood; it
is that whoever claimed to know the number of Adam’s
descendants, (they should know that) none knows it except Allah,
Who created them. As for the lineages of the Arabs, the scholars
know them, including times and ancestries and they have
memorized their groups and the origins of their tribes, though have
differed regarding some of the branches of those tribes.”
Abu ‘Umar also said, “The opinion of the scholars of this discipline
regarding the lineage of ‘Adnan is that he is ‘Adnan Ibn Udad Ibn
Muqawwam Ibn Nahoor Ibn Tairah Ibn Ya‘rub ibn Yashjub ibn
Nabit ibn Isma‘eel ibn Ibraheem Al-Khaleel (peace be upon them
both). This is how it was related by Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Yasar
in his Seerah.”

Sunniconnect.com
390

What Has Been Said Regarding the Lineage of
Quraish, Its Origins and Its Virtues – and They
Are Banu An-Nadr ibn Kinanah
Ibn Hisham said, “An-Nadr is Quraish and the one who is
descended from him is a Quraishite; those who are not descended
from him are not Quraishites. Abu ‘Ubaid and Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr
said, “The opinion of the majority is that he is An-Nadr Ibn
Kinanah, based on the hadeeth of Al-Ash‘ath Ibn Qais.” I say: This
is what was cited by Hisham Ibn Muhammad ibn As-Sa’ib AlKalbi and Abu ‘Ubaidah Ma‘mar Ibn AlMuthanna and it is the
opinion of Ash-Shafi‘i (may Allah be pleased with him). Abu
‘Umar’s preferred opinion was that he was Fihr Ibn Malik and he
cited as evidence that there is no one today who claims descent
from Quraish except that he traces his lineage from Fihr Ibn
Malik.”
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Kulaib Ibn Wa’il that
he said, “I said to the stepdaughter of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) (i.e. Zainab Bint Abi Salamah),
“Tell me about the Prophet, did he belong to the tribe of Mudar?”
She replied, “Yes, he belonged to the tribe of Mudar and was from
the offspring of An-Nadr Ibn Kinanah.”
And At-Tabarani said, “on the authority of Al-Jufsheesh Al-Kindi
that he said, ‘A people from Kindah came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and they said,
You are from us,’ and they claimed him (as one of them). But he
said, ‘No, we are Banu An-Nadr Ibn Kinanah; we do not follow our
mother and we do not deny our father’.”
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Muslim from AlHaisam Ibn Al-Ash‘ath Ibn Qais (May Allah be pleased with him)
that he said, “I went to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) with a delegation from Kindah and I said,
“O, Messenger of Allah! We claim that you are from us.’ But the
Sunniconnect.com
391

Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, ‘We are Banu AnNadr ibn Kinanah; we do not follow our
mother and we do not deny our father.” Al-Ash‘ath ibn Qais said,
“By Allah, I do not hear anyone denying that Quraish are from AnNadr except that I inflict on him a flogging.’ And this is the decisive
proof in this matter, so no regard should be paid to those who
contradict it. And Allah knows better. A person from Quraish is
known as a Qurashi or a Quraishi. AlJawhari said, This is a
comparison; the poet said:
Every Quraishi is honorable,
He hastens to answer the call of the caller and he is generous.
He said, “If one intends by Quraish the clan, then it will be
inflected (i.e. Quraishun), but if one intends by it the tribe, then it
will be uninflected (i.e. Quraishu). The poet said regarding its
being uninflected:
And Quraish’s support sufficed them against their problems.
And Muslim narrated in his Saheeh, on the authority of Wathilah
Ibn Al-Asqa‘ that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Verily, Allah chose Kinanah
from the sons of Isma‘eel, He chose Quraishan from Kinanah, He
chose Hashim from Quraishin and He chose me from Banu
Hashim.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “A person whose integrity I do not doubt informed
me that ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said to some men, among whom
were men from Banu Murrah, “If you wish to refer to your lineages,
then do so.” Ibn Ishaq said, “They were eminent people among
Ghatafan and they were masters and leaders of them, a people
possessing fame amongst all of Ghatafan and Qais. They held fast
to their lineage and they said, “Whenever their lineage was
mentioned, they would say, “We do not disavow or reject them and
Sunniconnect.com
392

it is the dearest lineage to us.” Then he mentioned their poems
regarding their claim of descent from Lu’ayy. He added, “They
followed a practice known as al-basl, which was the designation of
eight months in each year as sacred months; and the other Arabs
accepted this from them and they would guarantee their safety in
them.” I say: Rabee‘ah and Mudar accepted the sanctity of only
four months in the year: Dhul-Qa‘dah, Dhul-Hijjah, Muharram –
and Rabee‘ah and Mudar disagreed as to the fourth, but it is Rajab.
Mudar said that it is the month that is between Jumada and Sha‘ban,
while Rabee‘ah said that it is the month between Sha‘ban and
Shawwal. And it has been confirmed in the Saheehain on the
authority of Abu Bakrah (May Allah be pleased with him) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said in the sermon that he delivered in his Farewell Pilgrimage:
“The division of time has turned to its original form which was
current when Allah created the heavens and the earths. The year is
of twelve months, out of which four months are sacred: Three are
in succession DhulQa‘dah, Dhul-Hijjah and Muharram, and (the
fourth is) Rajab of (the tribe of) Mudar which comes between
Jumada Ath-Thaniyah and Sha‘ban.” This lends more weight to the
saying of Mudar, as opposed to that of Rabee‘ah; and Allah, Most
High, says {Verily, the number of months with Allah is twelve
months (in a year), so was it ordained by Allah on the Day when
He created the heavens and the Earth; of them four are sacred, (i.e.
the 1st, the 7th, the 11th and the 12th months of the Islamic
calendar).} (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:36). This is a reply to Banu ‘Awf
Ibn Lu’ayy and their designation of eight sacred months, for they
increased thereby what Allah had ordained and included in it that
which is not from it. As for the saying of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the hadeeth: “Three are in
succession,” it is a reply to the people of An-Nasi’, who used to
defer the sanctity of Muharram until Safar. As for his saying: “and
(the fourth is) Rajab of (the tribe of) Mudar,” it is a reply to
Rabee‘ah.

Sunniconnect.com
393

The Story of Qusayy Ibn Kilab
Qusayy was a master and leader among his people, a man whose
commands were obeyed and who was venerated (by them). What
is meant is that he gathered Quraish from their dispersed locations
throughout the Arabian Gulf. He sought support from those Arab
clans who obeyed him in his war against Khuza‘ah, their expulsion
from the Sacred House and the handing over of it to Qusayy. There
was much fighting and bloodshed between them, then they called
for a ruling and they sought that ruling from Ya‘mur Ibn ‘Awf Ibn
Ka‘b Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Laith Ibn Bakr Ibn ‘Abd Manat ibn Kinanah.
Ya‘mur subsequently ruled that Qusayy had more right than
Khuza‘ah to take responsibility for the House. He also ruled that
Qusayy was not responsible for the bloodshed inflicted by him on
Khuza‘ah and Banu Bakr, while Khuza‘ah and Banu Bakr were
obligated to pay bloodwit for the bloodshed that they had inflicted
on Quraish, Kinanah and Qudha’ah. Finally, the area of Makkah,
including the Ka‘bah was to be vacated for Qusayy and his people.
Thenceforth, Ya‘mur became known as Ash-Shaddakh (the
Crusher).
Ibn Ishaq said, “So Qusayy took over the custodianship of the
Ka‘bah and the affairs of Makkah and he gathered his people from
their homes and made them take up residence in Makkah. He also
became ruler of his people and of Makkah. But he confirmed the
Arabs in what they were following, for he considered that it was
the true religion and that it did not require any alteration. He
confirmed the family of Safwan, ‘Adwan, An-Nasa`ah and Murrah
Ibn ‘Awf in what they were doing and the matter remained thus
until the advent of Islam, by which Allah destroyed all of that.” ibn
Ishaq said, “Qusayy was the first of Banu
Ka‘b to become the ruler of Makkah, obeyed by all of his people.
He was responsible for Al-Hijabah, AsSiqayah, Ar-Rifadah, AnNadwah and Al-Liwa`. He divided Makkah into four regions which
he then allocated to Quraish as their homes.”
Sunniconnect.com
394

I say: Custodianship of the House became established as the right
of Quraish, while Khuza‘ah were dispossessed of it because of the
heresies they introduced there, such as their worship of idols, their
erection of them around the Ka‘bah, the animals they sacrificed to
them, the humility they displayed toward them, the help they
sought from them and the sustenance they requested from them.
Qusayy apportioned the valleys of Makkah to the tribes of Quraish
and he settled a group of them in its outskirts. All matters pertaining
to leadership were in the hands of Qusayy Ibn Kilab, such as the
maintenance and custodianship of the House and leadership in all
military matters. He built a house for the resolution of disputes,
which he called Dar An-Nadwah. When a problem arose, the
leaders of all the tribes would meet therein and they would resolve
it. But no military covenants or marriage contracts were enacted
except in Dar An-Nadwah. The door of this meeting place was
opposite the Sacred Mosque. Then this meeting place became the
responsibility of Hakeem Ibn Hizam, after Banu ‘Abdud-Dar and
he sold it during the era of Mu‘awiyah (May Allah be pleased with
him) for a hundred thousand dirhams. Mu‘awiyah (May Allah be
pleased with him) rebuked him for selling it, saying, “You have
sold the honor of your people for a hundred thousand?” He replied,
“By Allah, honor this day is only in piety. I purchased it in the
Jahiliyyah for a skin of wine and look now, I have sold it for a
hundred thousand dirhams and I call upon you to bear witness that
its price is given in charity in Allah’s Cause. So which of us is
deceived?” This was mentioned by Ad-Daraqutni in his discussion
of the narrators in Al-Muwatta’.
The responsibility for providing water to the pilgrims was in the
hands of Qusayy and they would not drink except from his water
basins. Zamzam was at that time lost and had been like that since
the time of Jurhum and knowledge of it had been forgotten and they
were unable to find its location.
Ibn Ishaq said, “This was because Qusayy obliged them to do so;
he said to them, “O, people of Quraish! You are Allah’s neighbors,
Sunniconnect.com
395

the people of Makkah and the people of the Sacred Precincts and
the pilgrims are Allah’s guests and the visitors to His House and
they are most worthy of hospitality. So prepare for them food and
drink during the days of Hajj until they leave you.” So they did this,
and every year they would pay a tax from their wealth to him and
he would use it to prepare food for the people during the days of
Mina. Matters continued thus during the Jahiliyyah until the advent
of Islam. Then matters continued in Islam and they have remained
like this until this day, and that is the food which is prepared by the
Sultan every year for the people until the Hajj is completed.”
I say: Then this ended after Ibn Ishaq’s time. Later, a group from
Bait Al-Mal (the Treasury) were ordered to carry food and drink to
people traveling to Makkah to perform Hajj. This is a good deed
for reasons too numerous to be mentioned, but it should really be
the sole responsibility of Bait Al-Mal, because they have the
resources to do it. And it would be better if it were taken from the
Jews and Christians, because they do not perform pilgrimage to the
Ancient House; and it has been stated in the hadeeth, “Whoever is
able to perform Hajj and does not do so, then let him die if he
wishes as a Jew or a Christian.”

Section
Then, when Qusayy became old, he passed the matter of these
responsibilities which had been in his hands, such as the leadership
of Quraish, Ar-rifadah, As-siqayah, Al-hijabah, Al-liwa’ and annadwah, to his son, ‘Abdud-Dar, who was his eldest son. He
selected him to bear all of these responsibilities because his other
brothers, ‘Abd Manaf, ‘Abdul-'Uzza and ‘Abd had been honored
during their father’s lifetime and had achieved their greatest
potential and so Qusayy wanted ‘Abdud-Dar to attain the same
level of leadership as they had. His brothers did not dispute this,
but after they had passed away, their sons fell into dispute regarding
it. They said, “Qusayy only chose ‘Abdud-Dar for this
responsibility because he wanted to bring him up to the same level
Sunniconnect.com
396

as his brothers, but we deserve what our fathers deserved.” The
sons of ‘Abdud-Dar said, “This is a matter that was decided for us
by Qusayy, so we have more right to it.” So they disagreed
profoundly and the clans of Quraish divided into two groups, one
of them pledged their loyalty to ‘Abdud-Dar and entered into an
alliance with him, while the other group pledged their loyalty to
Banu ‘Abd Manaf and made an alliance with them. To signify this,
they placed their hands in a bowl of perfume, then when they stood
up, they wiped their hands on the corners of the Ka‘bah, for which
reason the alliance became known as the Alliance of the Perfumers.
Among the tribes of Quraish who did so were Banu Asad Ibn
‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy, Banu Zuhrah, Banu Taim and BanulHarith ibn Fihr. With Banu ‘Abdud-Dar were Banu Makhzoom,
Banu Sahm, Banu Jumah and Banu ‘Adiyy. Banu ‘Amir ibn Lu’ayy
and Muharib ibn Fihr abstained and did not side with either group.
Then they held peace talks and agreed that Ar-Rifadah and AsSiqayah should be the responsibility of Banu ‘Abd Manaf and that
Al-Hijabah, Al-Liwa’ and An-Nadwah should remain in the hands
of Banu ‘Abdud-Dar, and the matter was settled in this way and
continued thus.

Chapter: Mention of a Group Who Were
Renowned in the Jahiliyyah
The Story of Khalid Ibn Sinan Al-‘Absi Who
Lived During the Era of AlFatrah
Some claimed that he was a Prophet, and Allah knows better.
Al-Hafiz Abul-Qasim At-Tabarani said, “on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
said, “The daughter of Khalid Ibn Sinan came to the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he spread out his garment
Sunniconnect.com
397

for her and said, “The daughter of a Prophet whose people
neglected him.”
And it was narrated by Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar (May Allah
be pleased with him) on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “Khalid ibn Sinan
was mentioned in the presence of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he said, “That was a
Prophet whose people neglected him.” Then he said, “We do not
know of any marfoo‘ version of it except from this source; and Qais
Ibn Ar-Rabee‘ was a trustworthy person, except that he had a poor
memory; and he had a son who used to insert things into his
ahadeeth that did not belong in them. And Allah knows better. It
would appear most likely that he was a righteous man who was
virtuous and noble, for if he lived during al-fatrah, it has been
confirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I am the nearest
of all the people to the son of
Maryam, and all the Prophets are paternal brothers, and there has
been no Prophet between me and him
(i.e. ‘Eesa).” If he lived before it, then it is impossible that he could
have been a Prophet, because Allah,
Most High, says, {to give warning to a people to whom no warner
had come before you.} (Soorah AlQasas 28:46). And more than
scholar has said that Allah, Most High, did not send any Prophet to
the Arabs after Isma‘eel (Peace be upon him) except Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), the Seal of the
Prophets, to whom Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel, builder of the venerable
Ka‘bah (which was ordained by Allah as the Qiblah for the people
of the world) called, and whose advent the Prophets foretold to their
peoples, until the last Prophet to foretell of his advent came, i.e.
‘Eesa, the son of
Maryam (Peace be upon her). And by this very means one may
refute the argument propounded by AsSuhaili and others – which
holds that a Prophet from the Arabs, whose name was Shu‘aib ibn
Dhee
Sunniconnect.com
398

Mahzam ibn Shu‘aib ibn Safwan of Madyan was sent and that
Hanzalah ibn Safwan was also sent to the Arabs, but that they
belied them and so Allah made Bukhtunassar victorious over them,
and that he killed some of them and took others captive, which was
similar to the punishment inflicted on the Children of Isra’eel. They
also claim that this occurred during the era of Ma‘add ibn ‘Adnan.
But it would appear that these people were righteous men who
called to goodness. And Allah knows better. We have already told
the story of ‘Amr Ibn Luhayy Ibn Qama‘ah ibn Khindif in the
stories of Khuza‘ah, after Jurhum.

Mention of the Story of Hatim At-Ta’i, One of
the Generous Folk in the Jahiliyyah
Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar said in his Musnad, “on the authority
of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
said, “Hatim was mentioned in the presence of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he said, “That (man)
intended something and he attained it.” This hadeeth is ghareeb;
Ad-Daraqutni said, “
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Adiyy Ibn Hatim
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “I said to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
“My father used to maintain the ties of kinship and do such-andsuch; will he have the reward of that?” He replied, “Your father
sought something and he attained it.”
And in another hadeeth in the Saheeh, that they asked the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
about ‘Abdullah Ibn Jud‘an Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Sa‘d Ibn Taim
Ibn Murrah and they said to him, “He used to be hospitable toward
his guests and he would free slaves and give charity; will that
benefit him?” He said, “It would be of no avail to him as he did not
ever say: “O, my Lord, pardon my sins on the Day of Resurrection.”
This was in spite of the fact that he was renowned as one of most
Sunniconnect.com
399

generous people in the Jahiliyyah and also one of those who fed the
poor during the years of drought and in times of sandstorms.
And Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Baihaqi reported on the authority of
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said,
“Glorified be Allah! I wonder at a Muslim who does not do benefit
to his brother Muslim who stands in need of it. If he hopes for
rewards and fears punishment, he should hasten toward good
conduct as it shows the path of salvation.” On hearing this, a man
stood up and said to him, “May my father and mother be ransomed
for you, O, Commander of the Faithful! Did you hear it from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?”
‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) replied, “Yes, and (I heard)
that which is better than it, when the captives of Tai’ were brought
to him, a girl with a rosy complexion, red lips, a fine nose, with a
good stature and head, trim ankles, straight legs, good thighs, wide
hips and a trim waist arrived and when I saw her, I admired her, so
I said, “I will ask the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) to make her a part of my share of the spoils,
but when she spoke, her eloquence caused me to forget her beauty;
she said, “O, Muhammad! If you wish, release me, but don’t
dishonor me before the Arab clans. I am the daughter of the leader
of my people and my father was the caretaker of my people. He
used to set free the captives, feed the hungry, spread peace and
never refused any beggar in his time of need. I am the daughter of
Hatim Ta’i.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “O girl! What you have mentioned about his qualities
are the attributes of a true Believer. If your father had been a
Believer, we would have treated him with compassion. Set her free,
for her father used to love good character and conduct and Allah,
Most High, loves good character and conduct.” Then Abu Burdah
Ibn Niyar stood up and said, “O, Messenger of Allah! Does Allah
love good character and conduct?” The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, “By Him in Whose
Hand is my soul, No one will enter Paradise unless he has a good
character.”
Sunniconnect.com
400

Among the poems composed by Hatim is the following:
If I continued to drink more than my thirst demanded,
Because of an intoxicant in the drink, then I would not quench my
thirst,
If I continued to cheat
Should I dishonor my neighbor’s wife and deceive my neighbor?
By Allah, I will not do so as long as I live.
Also from his poetry is the following (Al-Bahr Al-Kamil):
No neighbor of mine has been harmed,
By not having a screen for his doorway,
I should close my eyes if my neighbor’s wife appeared,
Until she was concealed by the curtain.
Also from the poetry of Hatim (Al-Bahr ul-Wafir) is:
It is not in my nature to malign my cousin,
Nor do I disappoint one who puts his hope in me,
And the word of an envier without cause,
I heard and said (to it), “Pass by and go through me,”
And they found fault with me for it, but it did not hurt me,
And it did not cause sweat on my brow at all,
And a hypocrite met me face-to-face,
Sunniconnect.com
401

And when he was absent, it did not worry me,
And I triumphed over his accusation and was forbearing toward
him,
In order to protect my dignity and my religion.”
Also from his poetry (Al-Bahr ut-Taweel) is:
O, Umm Malik! Ask the cold and wretched person,
When he came to me, between my fire and my meat,
Did I not smile at him, as if he was the first guest,
And extend my benevolence to him, without rebuke?
And he also said (Al-Bahrut-Taweel):
And verily, if you gave your stomach its desire,
And also your loins, they would both receive the utmost censure.
And Al-Qadi Abul-Faraj Al-Mu‘afa Ibn Zakariyya Al-Jareeri said,
“Al-Husain Ibn Al-Qasim Al-Kawkabi told me, “Abul- ‘Abbas
Al-Mubarrid told me, “Ath-Thawri informed me on the authority
of ‘Ubaidah that he said, When the following words of AlMutalammis reached Hatim At-Ta’i:
If you have but little money and you use it well, it will last,
And much money will not last if you waste it,
And saving money is better than finishing it,
And reckless expenditure, leaving one without provision.

Sunniconnect.com
402

He said, “What is wrong with him? May Allah cut off his tongue!
He encourages the people to be miserly; why did he not say (AlBahrut-Taweel):
Generosity does not exhaust wealth before its time,
Nor does the miser’s niggardliness increase it,
So do not seek wealth by living a frugal life,
For every tomorrow there is a provision that will return anew,
Do you not see that wealth departs and disappears,
And that the One Who give it to you is not far away?
And Al-Qadi Abul-Faraj said, “He spoke well when he said,
“And that the One Who gives it to you is not far away?”
If he had been a Muslim, it might have been hoped that he might
have a good end in the Hereafter; and
Allah, Most High, says in His Book, {…and ask Allah of His
Bounty} (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:32), and He, Most High, says, {And
when My slaves ask you (O, Muhammad) concerning Me, then
(answer them), I am indeed near (to them by My Knowledge). I
respond to the invocations of the supplicant when he calls on Me
(without any mediator or intercessor)} (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:186).

Mention of Something of the Story of ‘Abdullah
ibn Jud‘an
He was ‘Abdullah Ibn Jud‘an Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Sa‘d Ibn Taim
Ibn Murrah, the chief of Banu Taim and he was the son of Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeq’s great-uncle. He was one of the generous and
kind folk in the Jahiliyyah, who used to feed the poor and needy.
Sunniconnect.com
403

Ibn Qutaibah and others mentioned that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I used to get
shelter under the water trough of ‘Abdullah Ibn Jud‘an at
noontime.”
In the hadeeth of the killing of Abu Jahl it was mentioned that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said to his Companions (May Allah be pleased with them), “Search
for him among the dead; you will recognize him by a wound on his
knee, for he and I argued regarding a banquet for Ibn Jud‘an and I
pushed him and he fell on his knee and it fractured, and the scar of
it remains on his knee.” So they found him like that.
It was also said that he used to feed people with dates and saweeq
and he would give them milk until he heard the words of Umayyah
Ibn Abis-Salt:
I have seen the doers and their deeds,
And I have seen that the most generous of them are
Banu Ad-Dayyan,
Their food is wheat mixed with honey,
Not like what Banu Jud‘an give to us.
So Ibn Jud‘an sent two thousand camels bearing wheat, honey and
clarified butter to Ash-Sham and he ordered a caller to invite the
people every night from the roof of the Ka‘bah to drink from the
water trough of Ibn Jud‘an. Umayyah said regarding this:
He has a swift caller in Makkah,
And another atop the Ka‘bah calling,
To bowls full of wheat mixed with honey.
Sunniconnect.com
404

But in spite of all this, it has been confirmed in Saheeh Muslim
that ‘A’ishah (may Allah be Pleased with her) said, “O,
Messenger of Allah! Verily, Ibn Jud‘an used to give food and
offer hospitality to the guests; will that benefit him on the Day of
the Resurrection?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) replied, “No, for he never even once said, “My Lord!
Forgive me my sins on the Day of Judgment.”

Mention of Imru’ul-Qais Ibn Hujr Al-Kindi, the
Author of One of AlMu‘allaqat
It is one of the most excellent and most famous of them and it
begins thus:
Stop and let us weep at the memory of a beloved person and his
status.
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Imra’ul-Qais is
the bearer of the flag of the poets to the Fire.”
Al-Kalbi mentioned that Imra’ul-Qais came forward with a banner,
intending to fight Banu Asad after they had killed his father and he
passed by Tabalah, where an idol called Dhul-Khalasah was
located. The Arabs used to use divining arrows before it and so he
cast the divining arrows and the arrow of prohibition came out.
Then he cast them a second time and then a third time, with the
same result, so he broke the arrows and struck the face of DhulKhalasah with them and said, “I bite your father’s penis! Had it
been your father who was murdered, you would not have forbidden
me from avenging him. Then he attacked Banu Asad and
annihilated them.” Ibn Al-Kalbi said, “And he did not use divining
arrows before Dhul-Khalasah after that until the advent of Islam.”

Sunniconnect.com
405

Some said that he celebrated Qaisar, the emperor of Rome, in his
poetry and that he supported him in some of the wars that he fought,
but that when he requested support from him, he did not receive
what he had hoped for from him and so he disparaged him after
that. It was said that Caesar had him poisoned as a result of this and
that death approached him when he was beside the grave of a
woman near to a mountain known as ‘Aseeb and there he wrote:
O, my neighbor, verily, the sanctuary is near,
And I will reside where ‘Aseeb resided,
O, my neighbor, verily, we are both strangers here,
And every stranger is to a fellow stranger a kinsman.
It was said that the seven Mu‘allaqat were attached to the Ka‘bah
and this was because when one of the Arabs composed a qaseedah,
he would present it to Quraish and if they approved of it, they
would affix it to the Ka‘bah in order to honor and venerate it and
so the seven Mu‘allaqat, the first of which was by Imru’ul-Qais Ibn
Hujr Al-Kindi, were collected from these.

Mention of Something of the Story of Umayyah
Ibn Abis-Salt Ath-Thaqafi, Who Was One of the
Poets of the Jahiliyyah and Who Lived During
the Era of Islam
Al-Hafiz ibn ‘Asakir said, “He was Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt
‘Abdullah Ibn Abi Rabee‘ah ibn ‘Awf Ibn ‘Uqdah Ibn ‘Ghiyarah
Ibn ‘Awf Ibn Thaqeef Ibn Munabbih Ibn Bakr Ibn Hawazin Abu
‘Uthman.” It was said that he was a righteous man and that at first,
he had faith, but later, he deviated from it and that it was he who
was referred to in the Words of Allah, Most High: {And recite (O,
Muhammad) to them the story of him to whom We gave Our Ayat,
Sunniconnect.com
406

but he threw them away, so Shaitan (Satan) followed him up, and
he became of those who went astray} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:175)
And ‘Abdur-Razzaq said that Ath-Thawri said, “Habeeb Ibn Abi
Thabit informed me that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr said regarding the
Words of Allah, Most High: {And recite (O, Muhammad) to them
the story of him to whom We gave Our Ayat, but he threw them
away, so Shaitan followed him up, and he became of those who
went astray} (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:175), “He was Umayyah Ibn Abu
As-Salt. on the authority of Nafi‘ Ibn ‘Asim Ibn Mas‘ood that he
said, “I was in a gathering which included ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr and
a man from among the people recited the verse which is in Soorah
Al-A‘raf: {And recite (O, Muhammad) to them the story of him to
whom We gave Our Ayat, but he threw them away} (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:175) and he said, “Do you know who he is?” One of them
said, “He is Saifi Ibn Ar-Rahib.” Another said, “Nay, he is Bal‘am,
a man from Banu Isra’eel.” He said, No.” They asked, “Then who?”
He replied, “Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt.” This was also said by Abu
Salih and Al-Kalbi and Qatadah transmitted it from some of them.
And Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir narrated on the authority of Az-Zuhri that
he said, “Umayyah ibn Abis-Salt said:
Will not a Messenger come to us from among us, informing
us,About what is after our destination, and (who is) from our tribe.”
He said, “Then Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt set out for Bahrain and the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) announced his Prophethood, and
Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt remained in
Bahrain for eight years. After that, he traveled to At-Ta’if and he
said to them, what does Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah say?” They
said, “He said, “He claims that he is a Prophet and that he is the one
you were hoping for.” So he set out for Makkah and met with him
and he said to him, “O, son of ‘Abdul-Muttalib! What is it that you
are saying?” He said, “I say that I am the Messenger of Allah and
Sunniconnect.com
407

that none has the right to be worshipped but He.” He said, “I wish
to speak to you, so meet me tomorrow.” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Your appointment is on the
morrow.” Umayyah said, “Do you desire that I come to you alone,
or with a group of my Companions? Or will you come to me alone,
or with a group of your companions?” The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, “Whatever you
wish.” He said, “Then I will come to you in a group.” Ibn ‘Asakir
said, “So the next morning, Umayyah came with a group from
Quraish and a number of the Companions of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also came to him
and they sat in the shade of the Ka‘bah. Umayyah began to speak
and then he began to compose some poetry and to recite it aloud.
After he finished reciting it, he said, “Answer me, O, son of ‘AbdulMuttalib!” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) recited: “ {In the Name of Allah, the Most
Beneficent, the Most Merciful, Ya Seen. (These letters are one of
the miracles of the Qur’an, and none but Allah [Alone] knows their
meanings). By the Qur’an, full of wisdom (i.e. full of laws,
evidences, and proofs)} (Soorah Ya Seen 36:1,2) – until the end of
the Soorah. Then Umayyah leapt up and Quraish followed him,
saying, “What do you say, O, Umayyah?” He said, “I bear witness
that he is following the truth.” They asked, “Will you follow him?”
He said, “Until I have considered his case.” Ibn ‘Asakir said,
“Umayyah departed for Ash-Sham and the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went to Al-Madinah.
When the participants in the Battle of Badr were killed, Umayyah
came from Ash-Sham and camped at Badr. Then he set out in
search of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and someone asked him, “What do you want, O, AbusSalt?” He said, “I want Muhammad.” The questioner asked him,
“And what will you do?” He said, “I will declare my belief in him
and place my fate in his hands.” The questioner asked him, “Do
you know who is in the well?” Umayyah said, “No.” He said, “In
it are ‘Utbah Ibn Rabee‘ah and Shaibah Ibn Rabee‘ah, who are your
maternal uncle’s sons and his (your uncle’s) mother is Rabee‘ah
Sunniconnect.com
408

Bint ‘Abd Shams.” On hearing this, he cut off the ears and tail of
his she-camel, then he stood beside the well and recited a long
poem, lamenting the loss of life:
What was in Badr? It was as a valley full of people,
Who are ready and willing to rush to one’s aid,
Badr was a battle where swords were flashing,
As the warriors moved across the sands,
The warriors were of all ages and sizes and very strong,
Can you not see what I see? The battle was very clear,
Can you not see that Makkah has become strong and ferocious?
Warriors were like friends who loved one another,
They were like kings during the battle,
They were tall, muscular and very strong,
And they did whatever they wanted during the battle,
Everything they said and did was good,
They were generous and used to feed people,
From the best food available to them,
There were giant pans full of food,
And they had food for whoever wanted it,
Their homes were always open and welcoming to guests,
Sunniconnect.com
409

They gave them anything that they needed,
And they gave them camels from the valley of Baladih,
Their generosity is more than any in the world,
They gave to people without counting the cost,
They are betrayed by people and they are the defenders,
When they fight with their swords,
They compete to be first on the battlefield,
I was sad when I heard them screaming on the battlefield,
May Allah bless the married and the single ones among them,
When they approached, the enemy would retreat in fear,
They advanced on their horses and ate up the distance,
And galloped for a long time, their heads held High,
These horses are like lions, strong and aggressive,
When the armies met with each other face to face,
They were as close as people shaking hands,
They were magnificent, thousand upon thousand,
Including those wearing armor and those bearing spears.
Then he returned to Makkah and At-Ta’if and abandoned Islam.
Some said that he used to study the languages of animals and that
while on a journey, he passed by a bird and he said to his
Sunniconnect.com
410

companions, “This bird says such-and-such.” And they said, “We
do not know the truth of what he is saying,” until they passed by a
flock of sheep and they saw that an ewe and its lamb had become
detached from the rest of the flock. He looked toward it and it
bleated, as if it was prompting it to hasten and he said, “Do you
know what it is saying to its lamb?” They said, “No.” He said, “It
is saying, “Let us hasten, so that the wolf does not come and eat
you, just as it ate your brother last year.” So they hurried on until
they met the shepherd and they asked him if a wolf had eaten one
of his sheep last year in that place, and he said, “Yes.” It was also
said that one day he passed by a camel being ridden by a woman
and it was raising its head toward her and foaming at the mouth. He
said, “It is saying to her, “You are riding me and under the saddle
there is a needle.” So they made the woman dismount and they
removed the saddle and found underneath it a needle, as he had
said.
And it has been confirmed in an authentic hadeeth on the authority
of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said,
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “The truest word spoken by a poet was the saying of
Labeed:
Verily, everything except Allah is perishable.
– and Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt almost embraced Islam.”
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Ash-Shareed (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “I was riding mounted
behind the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and he said to me, “Do you know any of Umayyah Ibn
Abis-Salt’s poetry?” I replied, “Yes.” He said, “Then recite it to
me.” So I recited a verse to him and after each verse I recited to
him, he would say, “Yes,” until I had recited a hundred verses to
him. Then the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
remained silent, so I became silent.”
Sunniconnect.com
411

It was also narrated thus by Imam Muslim, and in some narrations,
it was stated, “Then the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, Be it that
he almost embraced Islam.”
And it was narrated on the authority of Al-Asma‘i that he used to
recite from the poetry of Umayyah:
Praise Allah, for He is Worthy of praise,
Our Lord is in the highest place,
(He is praised) highly in the evening,
In the highest edifice, which preceded,
The creation of mankind and He fashioned,
Above the heaven a Throne which is carried,
No eye has seen it, even the angels who bear it,
Avert their gaze from it.
Also from the admirable poetry of Umayyah is:
They do not violate the earth when they ask,
As if they are searching for excuses with sticks,
Rather, their faces shine and you see them,
When they ask, in the best color,
And when the poor man rises in the midst of their steeds,
They refer him to the Lord of the horses and the slaves,
Sunniconnect.com
412

And if you called them to every misfortune,
They would block the rays of the sun with their horses.

This is the end of the biography of Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt.
Mention of Quss Ibn Sa‘idah Al-Iyadi
It is reported on the authority of ‘Ubadah Ibn As-Samit that he said,
“A delegation visted the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) from Iyad and he said to them, “O, members of the
delegation of Iyad! What has happened to Quss Ibn Sa‘idah AlIyadi?” They replied, “He has died, O, Messenger of Allah.” He
said, “I witnessed him one day on the market of ‘Ukaz, on a red
camel, speaking admirable and elegant words, which I find myself
unable to remember.” Then a Bedouin from among the most remote
people stood up and said, “I remember them, O, Messenger of
Allah!” On hearing this, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) looked pleased. The Bedouin said,
“He was in the market of ‘Ukaz, on a red camel and he said:
O, assembly of people! Gather round,
for all those who pass away have gone, And everything that is to
come will come,
A dark night, a starry evening and a roaring sea,
Stars that shine, firmly fixed mountains and flowing rivers,
Verily, in the heaven there is a message,
And in the earth there is a warning, Why do I see the people going
and not returning?
Are they happy to stand in prayer and so they pray?
Sunniconnect.com
413

Or do they abandon it and sleep?
Quss swears an oath to Allah,
Of which there is no doubt,
Verily, Allah’s Religion is more pleasing,
Than this religion if yours.
Then he recited these verses:
In those of the earlier generations who have gone,
There are insights for us,
When I saw the destinations of the dead,
Without origins,
And I saw my people like them,
The great and small depart,
None of those who have departed come to you,
And none of those who remain have departed,
I am certain that it is inevitable, That I shall go where they have
gone.
Its isnad is ghareeb from this source.
Al-Jarood Ibn Al-Mu‘alla Ibn Hanash Ibn Mu‘alla Al-‘Abdi was a
Christian who was renowned for his explanation and exegesis of
the Scriptures and he was knowledgeable regarding the history and
parables of Persia. He was also a learned philosopher and
Sunniconnect.com
414

physician, shrewd, well mannered and handsome in appearance. He
possessed great wealth and property and he was one of a delegation
from ‘Abdul-Qais, all of whom were intelligent and eloquent men,
who visited the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and when he met the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), he stood in front of him and began to declaim:
O, Prophet of guidance! Men have come to you,
Having crossed vast tracts of desert,
And traversed barren lands to reach you,
And they did not consider tiredness,
In their eagerness to see you,
All of Bahma’ avert their eyes from them,
As they spurred on their steeds,
They raced to traverse it,
In armor, like twinkling stars,
Seeking to avert the harm of a great Day,
Terrible, paining the hearts and frightening,
When all of creation will be gathered,
Estranged and separated,
For those who persisted in error,
They rode toward Light from the Deity,
Sunniconnect.com
415

And in order to find proof and piety,
Allah has chosen you, o, son of Aminah,
For goodness, since clouds filled with rain have come,
So let great good come from you, o, Proof of Allah,
For there is no good for one who stays behind.
After he finished, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) approached him and sat close to him, then he said to
him, “O, Jarood! The promise for you and your people has been
delayed.” AlJarood replied, “May my father and mother be
ransomed for you! Has not whoever delayed in coming to you lost
his opportunity? And that would be the greatest sin and the worst
punishment. I am not among those who have seen you or heard of
you and then opposed you and followed someone other than you. I
am presently a follower of the faith that you know (i.e.
Christianity). I have come to you and here and now, I abandon it in
favor of your Religion. Does that purify the sins, misdeeds and
offenses that I have committed, and does such an action from the
slave please the Lord?” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to him, “I guarantee that for
you; now devote yourself to belief in Allah’s Oneness and leave
behind you the religion of Christianity.” Al-Jarood replied, “May
my father and mother be ransomed for you! Extend your hand, for
I bear witness that none is worthy of worship except Allah, Alone,
without partners and I bear witness that you, Muhammad, are His
slave and His Messenger.” So he embraced Islam and those with
him from his people also embraced Islam. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was happy with their Islam and
showed them such hospitality as pleased them and delighted them.
Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) came to them and said, “Is there anyone among you who
is acquainted with Quss Ibn Sa‘idah AlIyadi?” Al-Jarood replied,
Sunniconnect.com
416

“May my father and mother be ransomed for you! All of us know
him and I am the best acquainted of all of them with him and his
circumstances. Quss, O, Messenger of Allah, was one of the sons
of the Arabs; he lived for six hundred years, of which five were
spent in the deserts and wastelands, raising his voice in
glorification (of Allah), in imitation of the Messiah, during which
time he remained unsettled, had no home to shelter him and heard
not the sound of any neighbor. He used to wear hair shirts and travel
alone for the purpose of worship and he never tired of his
monasticism. He used to drink from ostrich eggs and keep the
company of reptiles and vermin. He enjoyed the darkness. He
would look and reflect and he would think and seek information.
As a result of all this, his name became a byword for wisdom and
terrors were removed through him. He was a contemporary of the
head of the Disciples, Sam‘an (Simon) and he was the first person
from among the Arabs to believe in Allah’s
Oneness and devote himself to His service and to declare his certain
belief in the Resurrection and the Reckoning. He warned the people
against an evil return (i.e. the Hellfire) and he ordered them to do
good deeds before it was too late and warned them against death.
He submitted to Allah’s Divine Decree – whether in times of ease
or in times of hardship – and he composed laments in poetic verse
and he used to visit graves. He reminded them of the Resurrection
and contemplated Allah’s Divine Ordainments. He demonstrated
his knowledge and wisdom in numerous ways, pointing out to the
people the many proofs of Allah’s existence in creation: in the
heavens and the Earth, in the rotation of night and day, in the sun
and the moon, in the wind and the rain, the land and the seas, in the
existence of male and female throughout nature and many more
signs too numerous to mention. He declared that Allah is One God,
that He was not born and that He has no father, that He gives life
and causes death. He called upon them to dwell on the fate of ‘Ad
and Thamood and the fate of their fathers and their forefathers. He
told them that all of them would have their just deserts in the
Hereafter, good for good and evil for evil.” And it is he who said:
Sunniconnect.com
417

Remembrance of Allah fills the heart with love,
As night is followed by day,
And dark clouds filled with rain,
Pour down water, and inside them is fire,
Its light blinds the eyes and,
Violent thunder causes hearts to flutter,
And lofty palaces are filled with goodness,
While others are empty and devoid of it,
And high mountains are firmly anchored,
And seas whose waters are abundant,
And stars that shine in the darkness of night,
We see them every day revolving,
Then a sun that is urged on by the evening moon,
And each follows the other in succession,
And young, grey-haired and old,
All of them will be equal on a Day that is coming,
And their minds will be unable to imagine,
And all of these things that I have mentioned,
Show the hearts the way to Allah,
Sunniconnect.com
418

Those that are rightly-guided and reflect.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “No matter what I forget, I will never forget him in the
market of ‘Ukaz, sitting on his red camel and addressing the people
thus: “Gather and listen, and if you hear, remember it and if you
remember it, then benefit from it. And speak, and if you speak,
speak the truth. Whoever lives will die and whoever dies will pass
away. And everything that comes comes, rain and plants and the
living and the dead.”

Mention of Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufail (May
Allah be pleased with him)
It is reported on the authority of Asma’ Bint Abu Bakr (may Allah
be Pleased with them both) that she said, “I saw Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn
Nufail leaning his back against the Ka‘bah and he was saying, “O,
assembly of Quraish! By Him in Whose Hand is Zaid’s soul, none
of you is following the Religion of Ibraheem but I.” Then he said,
“O, Allah! If I but knew the most beloved way to You, I would
worship
You thereby, but I do not know.” Then he prostrated on his camel.”
This is how it was narrated also by Abu Usamah, on the authority
of Hisham. He added, “He used to pray toward the Ka‘bah and he
would say, “My God is the God of Ibraheem and my Religion is
the Religion of Ibraheem.” And he used to save girls from being
buried alive, saying to the man who intended to kill his daughter,
“Do not kill her. Give her to me and I will be her guardian. Then,
when she had grown up, he would say, “If you wish, take her and
if you wish, leave her.” This was narrated by An-Nasa’i by way of
Usamah and Al-Bukhari included it in a mu‘allaq form.
And Abu Dawood At-Tayalisi said, “I was informed by AlMas‘oodi on the authority of Nufail Ibn Hisham Ibn Sa‘eed Ibn
Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufail Al-‘Adawi, on the authority of his father,
who in turn reported on the authority of his grandfather, that Zaid
Sunniconnect.com
419

Ibn ‘Amr and Waraqah Ibn Nawfal set out in search of the (true)
Religion and they traveled until they reached a monk in Al-Mawsil.
The monk said to Zaid Ibn ‘Amr, “From where have you come, O,
owner of the camel?” He replied, “From the sons of
Ibraheem.” He asked, “And for what are you searching?” He said,
“I am searching for the (true) Religion.” He said, “Return, for it is
about to appear in your land.” He said, “As for Waraqah, he became
a Christian, and as for myself, I decided to follow Christianity, but
it did not suit me.” So he returned, reciting:
Here I am, at Your service in truth,
Worshipping and as a slave,
It is piety that I desire and I seek not to beguile,
So should I migrate, like the one who said,
“I have believed in that in which Ibraheem believed,”
O, Allah I shall remain obedient to You,
No matter what hardships I may undergo,
I shall certainly bear them.
Then he fell down and prostrated. The narrator said, “Then his son,
i.e. Sa‘eed Ibn Zaid (May Allah be pleased with him), one of the
ten who were promised Paradise came and said, “O, Messenger of
Allah! If my father was as I have seen and as you have been
informed, then ask forgiveness for him.” He said, “Yes, for he will
be sent forth on the Day of Resurrection as a nation of one.”
Zaid Ibn ‘Amr came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), and with him was Zaid Ibn
Harithah (May Allah be pleased with him) and they were eating
from a table belonging to them. They invited him to eat their food,
Sunniconnect.com
420

but Zaid Ibn ‘Amr said, “O, my nephew! I do not eat of that which
has been slaughtered on stone altars.”
And Al-Bukhari narrated in his Saheeh on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) that the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) met Zaid Ibn
‘Amr Ibn Nufail at the bottom of (the valley of) Baldah before any
Divine Inspiration came to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). A meal was presented to the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) but he refused to eat from it.
(Then it was presented to Zaid (May Allah be pleased with him))
who said, “I do not eat anything which you slaughter in the name
of your stone idols. I eat none but those things on which Allah’s
Name has been mentioned at the time of slaughtering.” Zaid Ibn
‘Amr used to criticize the way Quraish slaughtered their animals,
and he used to say, “Allah has created the sheep and He has sent
the water for it from the sky, and He has grown the grass for it from
the earth, yet you slaughter it in other than the Name of Allah.” He
used to say this because he rejected that practice and considered it
as something abominable.”
And Ibn ‘Asakir cited here a number of ahadeeth which are very
strange and in some of them there are extremely objectionable
things. Then he related from numerous sources from the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said,
“He will be sent forth on the Day of Resurrection as a nation of
one.” Among them was the narration of Muhammad Ibn ‘Uthman
Ibn Abi Shaibah: on the authority of Jabir that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
was asked if Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufail used to face the Qiblah in
the Jahiliyyah and he said, “That man will be brought forth as a
nation of one, between me and ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam.” Its isnad
is jayyid, (good) hasan (sound).
And Al-Baghandi narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah (may Allah
be Pleased with her) that she said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
Sunniconnect.com
421

and Blessings of Allah be upon him) I entered Paradise and I saw
two tall trees with many branches for Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufail.”
Its isnad is jayyid and it is not in any of the books.
And from the poetry of Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufail is the following:
To Allah my praise and extolment are directed,
And pleasing words which time does naught to diminish,
To the Highest King, above Whom there is no god,
Nor any lord that approximates Him.
Also from his poetry affirming Allah’s Oneness are the following
verses related by Muhammad Ibn Ishaq, Az-Zubair Ibn Bakkar and
others:
I have submitted my countenance to the One to Whom,
The earth, which bears heavy rocks, has submitted,
He spread it and when it was leveled,
He made it firm and anchored the mountains,
And I have submitted my countenance to the One to Whom,
The clouds, which bear sweet, cold water, have submitted,
If they are sent to a land, they obey and pour abundant rain on it,
And I have submitted my countenance to the One to Whom,
The wind has submitted, when it is directed hither and thither.

Sunniconnect.com
422

The Story of the Re-Excavation of Zamzam
‘Abdul-Muttalib said, “While I was sleeping in my room, someone
came to me, saying, “Dig Teebah.” I said, “What is Teebah?” Then
he went away. The next day, I retired to my bed and while I was
sleeping, he came to me saying, “Dig Barrah.” I said, “What is
Barrah?” Then he left me and on the next day, I retired to my bed
and while I was sleeping, he came to me and said, “Dig AlMadnoonah.” I asked, “What is Al-Madnoonah?” Then he left me
and on the following day, I retired to my bed and while I was
sleeping, he came to me and said, “Dig Zamzam.” I asked, “What
is Zamzam?” He replied, “It will never be depleted, nor will its
water decrease. It is to provide water for the Hajj pilgrims. It is
between the blood and the entrails, where the white-footed raven
raps, near the ants’ nest.” He said, “When he had made its situation
clear to me and directed me to its location I knew that he had
spoken the truth.” He then took his adze and accompanied by his
son, Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib – who was his only son at that
time – and he dug until he found what had been concealed, upon
which he called out, “Allahu Akbar!” Immediately, Quraish
realized that he had found what he was looking for.” Ibn Ishaq said,
“This is what was conveyed to me on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (May Allah be pleased with him) regarding Zamzam.” He
added, “And I have heard one who spoke regarding ‘AbdulMuttalib saying that it was said to him when he ordered the digging
of Zamzam,
Then call for sweet water, not muddy,
To provide water for Allah’s Hajj pilgrims in every place,
That no person need fear, as long as it lasts.
He said, “When this was said to ‘Abdul-Muttalib, he came out to
Quraish and said, “Do you know that I was ordered to excavate
Zamzam?” They said, “Was it made clear to you where it was?” He
Sunniconnect.com
423

said, “No.” They said, “Then return to your bed where you saw
what you saw and if it is the truth from Allah, he will make it clear
to you, but if it is from Shaitan, he will not return to you.” So he
returned home and slept and someone came to him and it was said
to him, “Excavate Zamzam; if you excavate it, you will not regret
it. It is an inheritance from your illustrious forefather. It will never
be depleted, nor will its water decrease and it will provide water for
the mass of pilgrims. It is like a shying ostrich and it is not shared.
Let a person vow (to water them with it) and it will flow
generously. It will be an inheritance and firm covenant. It does not
belong to some, as you know; and it is between the blood and the
entrails.
And Ibn Ishaq and others mentioned that during the time of ‘AbdulMuttalib, there were many wells in Makkah prior to the appearance
of Zamzam. Ibn Ishaq enumerated them, named them and
mentioned their locations in Makkah, along with the names of those
who dug them. Then he said, “Then Zamzam eliminated all of the
wells and all of the people turned to it because of its location in the
Sacred Mosque and its superiority over waters, for it was the well
of Isma‘eel, son of Ibraheem (peace be upon them both). Banu
‘Abd Manaf vaunted their superiority over all of Quraish and all of
the other Arabs because of it. And it has been confirmed in Saheeh
Muslim in a hadeeth relating the story of how Abu Dharr (May
Allah be pleased with him) embraced Islam, that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said of Zamzam,
“It serves as a food and it is a cure for the sick.” And in another
narration, “The water of Zamzam is for whatever purpose it was
drunk for.”

The Story of ‘Abdul-Muttalib’s Vow to Sacrifice
One of His Sons
Ibn Ishaq said, “According to what is claimed, due to the attitude
of Quraish toward his digging of Zamzam, ‘Abdul-Muttalib vowed
Sunniconnect.com
424

that if ten sons were born to him and they all survived to reach
manhood, he would sacrifice one of them to Allah beside the
Ka‘bah. When his sons numbered ten, he knew that Quraish would
try to prevent him – and they were Al-Harith, Az-Zubair, Hajl,
Dirar, AlMuqawam, Abu Lahab, Al-‘Abbas, Hamzah, Abu Talib,
and ‘Abdullah – he gathered them and informed them of his vow
and he called upon them to fulfill it for Allah, the Almighty, the
All-Powerful and they obeyed him, asking him, “What will you
do?” He replied, “Each of you will take a divining arrow and then
he will write his name on it, then all of you come to me.” They did
as he asked and then they came to him and he went with them to
the idol, Hubal, which was inside the Ka‘bah. Hubal was near a
well inside the Ka‘bah. It was at this well that donations to the
Ka‘bah were stored. Beside Hubal there were seven divining
arrows, which they used to use to seek judgments when any matter
was difficult for them, such as bloodwit, paternity or any other
problem. They would go there and cast their arrows and whatever
the arrows ordered or forbade, they would fulfill it.
What is meant is that when ‘Abdul-Muttalib came and cast the
divining arrows beside Hubal, the arrow on which ‘Abdullah’s
name was written came up. He was his youngest son and the most
beloved of them to him. But he took ‘Abdullah by the hand and
took his knife and approached Isaf and Na’ilah, with the intention
of sacrificing his son before them. But Quraish left their assemblies
and tried to prevent him, saying, “What do you intend, O, ‘AbdulMuttalib?” He said, “(I intend to) sacrifice him.” Quraish and his
sons – the brothers of ‘Abdullah – said to him, “By Allah, you shall
never sacrifice him unless there is some valid reason for it! If you
do so, men will continue to come and sacrifice their sons and the
people cannot remain upon such a custom.”

Sunniconnect.com
425

The Story of ‘Abdullah’s Giving of His Son,
‘Abdullah in Marriage to Aminah Bint Wahb
Az-Zuhriyyah
Ibn Ishaq said, “Then ‘Abdul-Muttalib left, taking his son,
‘Abdullah by the hand and according to what is claimed, he passed
by a woman from Banu Asad Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy, whose
name was Umm Qannal; she was the sister of Waraqah Ibn Nawfal
Ibn Asad Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy and she was beside the
Ka‘bah. She looked at his face and she asked, “Where are you
going, o, ‘Abdullah?” He said, “With my father.” She said, “You
can have the like of the camels that were slaughtered in your stead
if you will have intimate relations with me.” But he said, “I am with
my father and I cannot disobey him or leave him.” So ‘AbdulMuttalib departed with him and went to Wahb Ibn ‘Abd Manaf Ibn
Zuhrah Ibn Kilab Ibn Murrah Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Lu’ayy Ibn Ghalib Ibn
Fihr, who was at that time the leader of Banu
Zuhrah, being the oldest of them and the noblest, and he gave
‘Abdullah to his daughter, Aminah Bint Wahb in marriage, who at
that time was the head of the women of her tribe. It is claimed that
he consummated his marriage to her as soon as he had transferred
her to his home and that she became pregnant with the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Then he left
her and went to the woman who had offered herself to him and he
said to her, “Why do you not offer to me today what you offered
me yesterday?” She said to him, “The light that was with you
yesterday has left you and so I have no need of you.” She used to
hear from her brother, Waraqah Ibn Nawfal, who had embraced
Christianity and read the Scriptures, that there would be a Prophet
from this nation and so she desired that he should be born to her.
But Allah made him to be from the finest and noblest stock, as
Allah, Most High, says, {Allah (SWT) knows best with whom to
place His Message.} (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:124)

Sunniconnect.com
426

--- End Of The Book --Sunniconnect.com

Sunniconnect.com
427

1

Ibn Katheer

The Valley Came Alive
Life of the Last Messenger
Taken from

Al-Bidayah wa'l-Nihayah

Translation &
Compiled By:
Darussalam
Research Center
Published By:
Darussalam
Publishers &
Distributers
Copyright:
2

Darussalam
Publishers

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form
or by any means, electronic of mechanical, including
photocopying and recording or by any information storage
and retrieval system, without the written permission of the
publisher.

Contents

Preface to the Revision ..................................................................... 8
Publisher’s Preface ......................................................................... 13
The Biography of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) ......................................................................... 16
Chapter on Mention of His Illustrious Lineage and the Nobility of His
Excellent Origins ............................................................................ 16
3

Chapter on The Birth of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) ..................................................................... 20
A Description of His Noble Birth (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) ........................................................................................ 23
His Nursemaids and Wet Nurses .................................................... 30
Wet-Nursing of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) by Haleemah Bint Abi Dhu’aib As-Sa‘diyyah ....................... 31
Regarding His Journey With His Uncle, Abu Talib to Ash-Sham and
What Happened With Baheera, the Monk ...................................... 37
Regarding His Upbringing and Allah’s Sufficiency for Him, His
Protection of Him ........................................................................... 39
The Part Played By the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) in the Sacrilegious War ................................................. 41
The Part Played By the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) in the Treaty of Al-Fudool (Virtuous) ........................... 42
Marriage of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)to
Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid Ibn Asad Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy
........................................................................................................ 44
Quraish’s Rebuilding of the Ka‘bah Five Years Before the Start of
His Prophetic Mission..................................................................... 46
The Book of the Sending of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Mention of the Signs of That54
The Story of ‘Amr Ibn Murrah Al-Juhani ....................................... 64
Regarding the Communications of the Jinns: Being the Words They
Placed On the Lips of the Soothsayers and Which They Caused to Be
Heard From Within the Idols .......................................................... 71
Chapter on How the Revelation Began to Come to the Messenger of
Allah And Mention of the First Thing Revealed to Him From the
Qur’an ............................................................................................. 76
Mention of His Age at the Time When He Was Sent and the History
of It.................................................................................................. 78
4

Section Regarding the Prevention of the Jinn and the Repelling of the
Shayatin (devils) from Eavesdropping When the Qur’an Was
Revealed ......................................................................................... 92
Section Regarding How the Revelation Came to the Messenger of
Allah ............................................................................................... 95
Section Regarding the First People to Embrace Islam, Then Mention
of the Earliest Companions to Embrace Islam .............................. 101
The Story of How Hamzah Ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib, the Paternal Uncle
of the Prophet, Embraced Islam .................................................... 111
The Story of How Abu Dharr Embraced Islam ............................ 113
The Story of How Dimad Embraced Islam................................... 115
The Story of Al-Irashi and the Quraish’s Attempt at Harming the
Prophet .......................................................................................... 126
Heightened Persecution of Weak Muslims ................................... 130
The polytheists’ disputation of the Messenger of Allah and his
establishing an irrefutable proof on them and their acknowledgement
of the Truth ................................................................................... 140
Hijrah of those who migrated among the Companions of Allah’s
Messenger from Makkah to Abyssinia ......................................... 145
A Mention of (Abu Bakr) As-Siddiq’s Resolve to Migrate to
Abyssinia ...................................................................................... 170
The Mentioning of the Annulment of the Pact of Boycott............ 172
The Story of ‘A’sha Banu Qais Ibn Tha‘labah ............................. 178
The Story of the Wrestling of Rukanah and How He Sees the Tree
Which the Prophet Called and It Returned ................................... 179
The Journey by Night of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, from Makkah to Jerusalem and then his ascension
there from to the heavens .............................................................. 185
The Splitting of the Moon in the Time of the Prophet, Peace and
Blessings of Allah be Upon Him .................................................. 197
5

The Death of Abu Talib, the uncle of Allah’s Messenger and soon
after, Khadeejah Bint Khuwaiylid, the wife of Allah’s Messenger
...................................................................................................... 198
Concerning the death of Khadeejah and a mention of some of her
excellence and virtues ................................................................... 200
The Prophet’s Marriage to ‘A’ishah Bint Abu Bakr As-Siddiq and
Sawdah Bint Zam‘ah .................................................................... 202
Allah’s Messenger Goes to the People of At-Ta’if to Invite Them to
Allah and to the Aid of His Religion and They Reject Him ......... 204
Arrival of the Delegates of the Ansar Year After Year Till They
Pledge Allegiance One After the Other ........................................ 212
Iyas Ibn Mu‘adh’s Acceptance of Islam ....................................... 213
The Dawn of Islam Among the Ansar .......................................... 216
The Story of the Second Pledge of ‘Aqabah ................................. 222
Commencement of the Migration to Madinah .............................. 229
Circumstances Leading to the Migration of Allah’s Messenger ... 235
Migration of Allah’s Messenger from Makkah to Madinah along with
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq ..................................................................... 239
The Story of Umm Ma’bad Al-Khuzaa’iyyah .............................. 254
Prophet Muhammad’s Entry into Madinah, where He Established His
Residence, and Related Issues ...................................................... 257
Notable events and occurrences of the first year of the hijrah of the
Prophet .......................................................................................... 266
Abdullah Ibn Salam Accepts Islam ............................................... 270
Khutbah of the Messenger of Allah on that Day .......................... 272
The Building of his Noble Mosque During His Stay at the Residence
of Abu Ayyoob Al-Ansari ............................................................ 274
Story of the Construction of the Prophet’s Mosque upon his plan 276
A Reminder on the Excellence of this Noble and Exalted Mosque
...................................................................................................... 277
6

The Fever of Madinah Afflicts the Muhajiroon, but the Messenger
was Spared by the Wisdom and Power of Allah (SWT). He
Supplicated Allah and He Removed the Fever from Madinah ..... 279
Establishment of a Pact of Brotherhood Between the Muhajiroon and
the Ansar ....................................................................................... 281
The Prophet’s Formation of Brotherhood Between the Muhajiroon
and the Ansar ................................................................................ 283
The death of Abu Umamah As’ad Ibn Zurarah, One of the Twelve
Delegates on the Night of the Pledge of 'Aqabah ......................... 286
The Birth of Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair in Shawwal, the year of Hijrah
...................................................................................................... 287
Allah’s Messenger Consummated His Marriage with 'A’ishah in
Shawwal ........................................................................................ 288
The Legislation of Adhan (the call to prayer) Upon the Arrival of the
Prophet in Madinah....................................................................... 288
Expedition of Hamzah Ibn Abdul-Muttalib .................................. 290
The Expedition of Ubaidah Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Abdul-Muttalib .... 290
Expedition of Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas ............................................. 291
Events of the Second Year of Hijrah ............................................ 291
The Book of Military Expedition .................................................. 292
Those Who Accepted Islam Among the Jews Out of Dissimulation
...................................................................................................... 296
The first military expedition was the expedition of Al-Abwa’ Also
Referred to as the Battle of Waddan ............................................. 297
The Ghazwah of Buwat Toward Radwa ....................................... 300
Detachment of Abdullah Ibn Jahsh Which Was Incidental to the Great
Battle of Badr ................................................................................ 302
The Changing of the Qiblah in the Second Year of Hijrah Prior to the
Battle of Badr ................................................................................ 305

7

The Obligation of Fast of Ramadan in the Second Year Prior to the
Battle of Badr ................................................................................ 309

Preface to the Revision
In the Name of Allah (SWT), the Most Beneficent, the Most
Merciful
All praise and thanks be to Allah (SWT), Who revived
knowledge of His religion and caused it to blossom forth after
it had all but disappeared, and Who demolished the false
conjectures of the apostates. I praise Him and I seek refuge
with Him from the sins which weigh upon the backs of
mankind. I worship Him and seek His aid in removing
hindrances and difficulties in the practice of my religion. I
bear witness that none has the right to be worshipped except
Allah (SWT), Alone, without partners and I bear witness that
Muhammad – who, by Allah’s leave, brought about the dawn
of faith to the darkness and misguidance which existed in the
hearts of mankind – is the slave and Messenger of Allah. May
the Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon him in perpetuity.
O, Allah! We seek Your favor and through You we seek to
ward off affliction. We ask You to protect us and to grant us
mercy. Our Lord! Make not our hearts deviate after You have
already guided us. Make it easy for us to perform our deeds
in the way that You have taught us. Make us grateful for what
You have given us and make plain a path for us which leads
to You. Open up the doors between us and You by which we
may arrive before You. To You belong the keys to the heavens
and the Earth and You are Most Able to do all things. To
proceed:
8

Among the blessings which Allah (SWT) has bestowed upon
us, the community of Muslims is that He has made it easy for
us to follow the path of guidance, and He has opened the doors
of knowledge by making available to us these new
publications, which present to us the writings of the early
scholars and reveal to us what they said regarding legal
verdicts, history, events, information and lessons. These
scholars opened a clear beacon of light for all those Muslims
seeking guidance and they set up for us a signpost in which
there is neither deviation nor crookedness. Whoever follows
it will arrive safely at his desired destination and whoever
diverts from it will be lost forever. They have written these
books and treatises and made clear to us therein events,
information and virtues. Among such books is this unique
work, Al-Bidayah Wan-Nihayah, by the Imam, the Hafiz, the
master scholar of hadeeth, ‘Imaduddeen Isma‘eel Ibn Katheer
Al-Qurashi – may Allah have mercy on him. This book was
greeted with approval by the vast majority of Muslims. No
Islamic library would be complete without it. In it, the author
has recorded what Allah, Most High has made easy for him
about the history of mankind, from the beginning of creation,
starting with the creation of the Throne and the Kursi
(Footstool), the heavens and the Earth and all that they contain
and all that lies between them, such as the angels, the jinn and
the devils. He also described how Adam (Peace be upon him)
was created, and told the stories of the prophets up to the days
of the Children of Isra’eel and the Days of Ignorance
(Jahiliyyah), until the advent of Prophet Muhammad (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), which heralded the end
of Prophethood. He then recorded his Seerah. Then he
recorded the events which took place up to his own time. He
also spoke of the trials and battles, the signs of the approach
of the Hour, then the sending forth of mankind and the terrors
of the Resurrection, which he described in detail. He then
described the Hell-fire, with all its horrors, and Paradise and
all the good things contained therein. He called this particular
volume of his book: AnNihayah Fil-Fitan Wal-Malahim (The
9

Ending in Trials and Battles). As for the book which is in our
hands today, it is Al-Bidayah.
By Allah’s Grace, I came to know brother Abdul Malik
Mujahid, the general manager of Darussalam Publishing in
Riyadh. He visited me in my humble office in Damascus and
suggested to me the idea of creating a summarized version of
this wonderful book. I prayed for Allah’s Guidance in the
matter and sought help from Him in completing the project.
Allah (SWT) enabled me to make the acquaintance of a
number of people of knowledge and experience in this field
and a plan of action for the work was written. It consisted of
ten principal points and we then started the task, seeking help
from the Lord of the heavens and the Earth. All of us exerted
our utmost efforts in this task, making repeated revisions and
corrections, until we reached the point where, by Allah’s
Permission, we completed it and it was published in the form
which is in your hands today.
The Plan of Action for This Book:
1. Summarization of the text. This was achieved by
concentrating on the most important events narrated in the
book. In doing so, we took care not to leave out any
important details which would cause loss of meaning or
import.
2. We relied on a number of printed and handwritten copies
of the book and in cases where any contradiction or
omission was found, we succeeded in establishing the
most accurate and authentic text.
3. We left out the ahadeeth which proved to be baseless or
weak and confined ourselves to the ahadeeth which are
authentic or hasan and those which are acceptable due to
the existence of other supporting narrations. On rare
occasions, when it was found that there were no other
10

ahadeeth in the chapter, we included some weak ahadeeth
whose weakness was not of an extreme nature.
4. We performed takhreej of the ahadeeth with ascription of
the number of the section and the page, the number of the
hadeeth and in many cases, the precise location of the
hadeeth in the original source, then the ruling on its
authenticity, if it was not from the Saheehain, because the
ahadeeth therein do not require any ruling on their
authenticity and they have been widely accepted by the
Muslim Ummah. As for the ahadeeth in this book, we
have relied on the opinions of the Imams and scholars of
hadeeth – including the earlier scholars, the later scholars
and those of the present day. On some occasions, we have
recorded the weak ahadeeth, while making it plain that
they are not authentic. We have not omitted them because
the author has included them in order to warn the people
against them due to their widespread popularity amongst
the Muslims in general. In such cases, we desired not to
oppose the author in this effort and so we left them, at the
same time making the scholars’ ruling on them clear, so
as to warn the people against them.
5. We summarized the asaneed present in the book, in most
cases mentioning only the Companion who narrated the
hadeeth, or the person who reported it from him.
6. We omitted many of the Isra’eeliyyat found in this book
which the author referred to in the preface, where he said:
“We do not record the Isra’eeliyyat except those which the
Lawgiver has permitted, i.e., those which do not
contradict the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
These are stories which are neither believed nor belied and
they have been recorded because they provide details of
unclarified narratives that we have, or they provide names
for people and places that have only been mentioned in
11

passing in our Revelation, due to there being no benefit in
specifying them for us. Thus we have reported them in
order to provide extra detail and not with the intention of
citing them as evidence or placing any reliance on them.
Only the Book of Allah and the authentic Sunnah of His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
may be relied and depended upon. It is from Allah that we
seek help and it is He in Whom we place our trust; there
is no help and no power except in Allah, the All-Powerful,
the Most Wise, the Most High, the Almighty.
7. In some instances, we have referred back to the original
manuscript in order to verify the wording of a hadeeth
from its source. In some cases, the author has combined
two narrations of the same hadeeth together and so where
this has occurred, we have noted it and separated the two
narrations, placing our own words between brackets, i.e.,
(and in another narration…) and we have also identified
the source of the addition in the footnotes.
8. We have written the Qur’anic Verses in the Uthmani
script, in conformity with the copy of the Qur’an
published by Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah Printing
Complex.
9. We vowelised the words of many of the ahadeeth in the
book and, in addition, the poetic verses, wherever
possible.
10. We mentioned the meters of the poetic verses between
parentheses.
11. We explained the meanings of some difficult or obscure
words, relying on dictionaries, books containing ghareeb
ahadeeth and narrations and other sources.

12

12. We furnished a brief biography of the author, Hafiz Ibn
Katheer though in reality, he requires no introduction and
no description.
Finally, I ask Allah, Most High, to accept this humble work
from us and to acknowledge it as having been done purely and
sincerely with the aim of pleasing Him and to grant us and our
brothers, who assisted us in the production of this book,
pardon and forgiveness in religious and secular matters. In
addition, we ask Him that He include this work in the weight
of our good deeds on the Day of Resurrection – a Day on
which neither wealth nor sons will benefit anyone – except
for those whom Allah has blessed with pure hearts.
And our final declaration is that all praise and thanks are due
to Allah, and we invoke blessings and peace upon Prophet
Muhammad and upon all his righteous family and
Companions until the Day of Reckoning.
Yoosuf Al-Hajj Ahmad,
The humble slave of Allah (SWT).
Damascus, Ash-Sham (Syria).
2nd of Dhul-Hijjah, 1428 A.H.

Publisher’s Preface
Verily, all praise and thanks are due to Allah (SWT). We seek
His aid and we ask forgiveness of Him. We seek refuge with
Allah (SWT) from the wickedness in ourselves. Whomsoever
Allah (SWT) guides, there is none who can misguide him and
whomsoever He sends astray, there is none who can guide
him. I bear witness that none is worthy of worship except
Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger.
He sent him with guidance and the true Religion and with the
13

light (of truth), the admonition and wisdom, at a time when
no Messengers were sent for a long period, when there was
little religious knowledge and the people had gone astray,
when the Hour was drawing nearer. Whoever obeys Allah
(SWT) and His Messenger has followed the right course,
while whoever disobeys Allah (SWT) and His Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) erred from it and
gone far astray. To proceed:
The book Al-Bidayah (The Beginning) by the Hafiz, the
Imam, the scholarly critic, Ibn Katheer is an incomparable
work regarding the study of the events and their chronological
order, the knowledge of which he strove hard to acquire. He
began by describing the start of creation – from the creation
of the Throne and the Kursi and the heavens and the Earth and
all that is in them and all that lies between them, such as the
angels, the jinn and the devils and he described the manner of
Adam’s creation (Peace be upon him). He recounted the
stories of the Prophets and the events that took place therein,
up to the times of the Children of Isra’eel and the Days of
Ignorance, which ended with the advent of the final Prophet,
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Then he gave a detailed description of his life and what
happened after that, up to the time in which he, lived. He then
wrote a separate volume called An-Nihayah Fil – Fitan WalMalahim (The Ending With Trials and Great Battles).
Furthermore, Allah (SWT) inspired us to undertake the noble
task of making this book easily accessible to both the students
and the scholars and then to translate it into several languages,
by Allah’s Permission.
I suggested to my brother, Yoosuf Al-Hajj, the necessity of
summarizing this book in a suitable manner, through the
omission of unbeneficial repetition, weak ahadeeth, lengthy
poems, etc. I am thankful to brother Yoosuf for assembling a
team that consisted of Abdul Malik Wadih, Abu Muslim Al14

Jaza’iri, Muwaffeq Khaleel Hammad, and himself.
Darussalam funded the entire project, paying each team
member for his contribution and work. After they completed
their portion of the project, the work then went through
numerous people in the Research Division of Darussalam,
who meticulously went through the work, adding and
subtracting materials. After this, the project went through
another round of editing of the Arabic material before it was
sent to the translation department. The translation was then
checked for accuracy and then sent for editing, resulting in the
final project that you see before you. All praise and thanks be
to Allah (SWT) for allowing us to produce such a classical
work for the first time in the English language.
O Allah! We ask that You bless us with sincerity and success
and that You spread goodness through our hands.
A‘bdul Malik Mujahid Jumadal-Oola 1431 A.H.

15

The Biography of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him)
And a Report of His Times, His Battles, His Military
Campaigns, the Delegations That Came to Him, His Qualities,
His Virtues and His Signs

Chapter on Mention of His Illustrious
Lineage and the Nobility of His Excellent
Origins
Allah, Most High, says, “Allah knows best with whom to
place His Message" (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:124) and when
Hiraql (Heraclius), the emperor of Rome, asked Abu Sufyan
about his characteristics, “What is his family status amongst
you?” Abu Sufyan replied, “He belongs to a good (noble)
family amongst us.” After asking several more questions, he
said, “In fact, all the Messengers come from such families
amongst their respective peoples.” That is, from among the
noblest of them and the largest of their tribes – may Allah’s
Blessings be upon them all.
He is the master of the sons of Adam (Peace be upon him) and
the most honorable of them in the life of this world and in the
Hereafter: Abul-Qasim and Abu Ibrahim, Muhammad and
Ahmad, the Eradicator, through whom disbelief was
eradicated, the final Prophet, after whom there will be no
prophet, the Gatherer, who gathered the people (to follow) in
his footsteps, the Follower (of all other Prophets), the
Prophet of Repentance, the Prophet of War, the Seal of the
Prophets, the Conqueror, Ta Ha, Ya Seen and ‘Abdullah.
Al-Baihaqi said, “Some of the scholars added that Allah
called him a Messenger, a Prophet, Unlettered, a Witness and
Bearer of Glad Tidings, a Warner, a Caller to Allah, by His
16

Permission, a Lamp Spreading Light, Compassionate and
Merciful, a Blessing and a Guide in the Qur’an.”
He is the son of ‘Abdullah, who was the youngest of his
father, ‘Abdul-Muttalib’s children and he was the second
sacrifice, who was ransomed for a hundred camels.
Imam Abu Ja‘afar Ibn Jareer – may Allah have mercy on him
– spoke at the opening of his Tareekh about this in great detail
and in a clear and beneficial manner. A Hadith has been
related in which he claimed while on the pulpit that he was
descended from ‘Adnan. But Allah knows better with regard
to its authenticity. Likewise, Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Baihaqi
narrated on the authority of Abu Bakr Ibn ‘AbdurRahman Ibn
Al-Harith Ibn Hisham, “The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was informed that some men from Kindah
were claiming that they were from him and he was from them.
He said, 'Al-‘Abbas and Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb only used to
say that when they came to Al-Madinah, in order to be given
safety there and they were given safety, but we will not deny
our forefathers; we are Banu AnNadr Ibn Al-Kindah.' He said
that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
delivered a sermon in which he said, 'I am Muhammad, son
of ‘Abdullah, son of ‘Abdul-Muttalib, son of Hashim, son of
‘Abd Manaf, son of Qusayy, son of Kilab, son of Murrah, son
of Ka‘b, son of Lu'ayy, son of Ghalib, son of Fihr, son of
Malik, son of An-Nadr, son of Kinanah, son of Khuzaimah,
son of Mudrikah, son of Ilyas, son of Mudar, son of Nizar.
And people do not split into two groups except that Allah has
made me in the best of them. I have been produced from
between my two parents and I am not affected by anything
from the iniquity of the Jahiliyyah. I came forth from marriage
and I did not come forth from fornication – from the time of
Adam until I was born of my parents – and I am the best of
you in soul and the best of you in lineage'.” This Hadith is
very ghareeb, from the Hadith of Malik. Al-Qudami was
alone in narrating it and he is weak. But we shall cite
17

supporting narrations and other sources for it. Among them is
the saying of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) that "I came forth from marriage, not from
fornication.”
And ‘Abdur-Razzaq narrated on the authority of Abu Ja‘afar
Al-Baqir regarding the Words of Allah, Most High: "Verily,
there has come unto you a Messenger (Muhammad) from
amongst yourselves (i.e. whom you know well)." (Soorah AtTawbah 9:128) that it means that he was not affected by
anything of the birth of the Jahiliyyah. He said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “I came forth from marriage and I did not come
forth from fornication.” And this is mursal, jayyid. Al-Baihaqi
also narrated it, on the authority of Ja‘afar Ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of his father. He said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
“Verily, Allah produced me from marriage and He did not
produce me from fornication.”
And it has been confirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari on the
authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him)
that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, 'I was sent from the best of
generations of the sons of Adam, generation after generation,
until the generation in which I was sent'.”
And in Saheeh Muslim on the authority of Wathilah Ibn AlAsqa‘ that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “Verily, Allah chose from Isma‘eel
from among the children of Ibrahim and He chose from
among the children of Isma‘eel Banu Kinanah and from
among Banu Kinanah He chose Quraish and from Quraish He
chose Banu Hashim and He chose me from Banu Hashim.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Al-‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Prophet (Peace
18

and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was informed about
some of the things that the people were saying and so he
ascended the pulpit and said, 'Who am I?' They said, 'You are
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).' He said, “I am Muhammad, son of ‘Abdullah, son of
‘Abdul-Muttalib. Verily, Allah created mankind and made me
among the best of His creation. And He made them into two
groups and He made me in the best group. He created the
tribes and He made me in the best tribe. He made them
families and He made me in the best family. So I am the best
of you in family and I am the best individual among you.' May
the blessings and peace of Allah be upon him forever, until
the Day of Judgment.”
And it has been confirmed in an authentic Hadith that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “I will be the leader of the sons of Adam on the
Day of Resurrection and (I say this) without boasting.”
And Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi said, “These Ahadeeth – although
there may be among their narrators those who are not reliable
– they confirm each other and the meaning of all of them
derives from the Hadith of Wathilah Ibn Al-Asqa‘. And Allah
knows best.”
I say: Abu Talib recited these poetic verses, in which he
praised the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him),
If Quraish gathered one day in order to boast,
Then ‘Abd Manaf would be their heart and their core,
And if the noblest of ‘Abd Manaf were sought,
It would be found that Hashim were the noblest and oldest,
And if they boasted one day, then Muhammad,
19

He is the Chosen One from their heart and their nobility,
The lean and the stout among Quraish rallied against us,
But they did not succeed and their dreams came to nought,
Of old, we would not accept injustice,
If they did not turn away from it in contempt,
we would put it right,
And we would guard it (justice) every day against aversion,
And we would turn away from its (injustice’s)
holes those that covet it,
Through us the wilted tree is strengthened,
And only by our protection will it become supple and its
roots grow.

Chapter on The Birth of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)
He – may Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him – was born
on a Monday, according to the narration of Muslim in his
Saheeh, on the authority of Abu Qatadah (May Allah be
pleased with him), who reported that a Bedouin said, “O,
Messenger of Allah! What do you say regarding fasting on
Mondays?” He said, “On that day I was born and on it the
Revelation (first) came to me.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
20

him) was born on Monday, Prophethood was conferred on
him on Monday, he set out as an emigrant from Makkah to
Al-Madinah on Monday, he arrived in Al-Madinah on
Monday, he died on Monday and the Black Stone was raised
on Monday.” Imam Ahmad was alone in narrating this
version. Ibn Bukair narrated it on the authority of Lahee‘ah,
with the addition: “Soorah Al-Ma’idah was revealed on
Monday: 'This day I have perfected your Religion for
you.'(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:3) This is how some of them
narrated it on the authority of Moosa Ibn Dawood and they
also added: “…and the Battle of Badr took place on Monday.”
Among those that said this was Yazeed Ibn Habeeb, but it is
extremely munkar.
Ibn ‘Asakir said, “It is recorded that the Battle of Badr and the
revelation of 'This day I have perfected your Religion for you'
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:3) took place on Friday.” Ibn ‘Asakir
is correct in this assertion.
This is how it was narrated from sources other than this, on
the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with him), that he was born on Monday; and there is no
disagreement regarding the fact that he was born on Monday.
In addition, the majority of scholars are of the opinion that it
took place in the month of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal. It was said that
it was on the second day of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal; this was stated
by Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr in Al-Istee‘ab. It was also narrated by AlWaqidi, on the authority of Abu Ma‘ashar Najeeh Ibn ‘AbdurRahman. It was also said that he was born on the eighth day
of Rabee‘ ulAwwal. This was related by Al-Humaidi, on the
authority of Ibn Hazm. It was narrated by Malik, Aqeel,
Yoonus Ibn Yazeed and others, on the authority of Az-Zuhri,
who reported on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Jubair Ibn
Mut‘im. Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr transmitted on the authority of the
historians that they declared it to be correct. Al-Hafiz AlKabeer Muhammad Ibn Moosa Al-Khuwarizmi stated it as an
unequivocal fact. It was given preponderance by Al-Hafiz
21

Abul-Khattab Ibn Dihyah in his book AtTanweer Fee Mawlid
Al-Basheer An-Nadheer. It was also said that he was born on
the tenth day of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal. This was transmitted by
Ibn Dihyah in his book and it was narrated by Ibn ‘Asakir on
the authority of Abu Ja‘afar Al-Baqir and it was narrated by
Mujalid on the authority of Ash-Sha‘abi, as we have already
mentioned. It was already said that he was born on the twelfth
day of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal. This was stated by Ibn Ishaq and it
was narrated by Ibn Abi Shaibah in his book Al-Moosannaf,
on the authority of Jabir and Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with them), who reported that they said that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was born in the Year of the Elephant, on Monday, on the
twelfth day of the month of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal; on that date he
was sent (as a Prophet), on that date he was made to ascend to
the heaven, on that date he emigrated and on that date he
died.” This is what is widely accepted by the majority of
scholars. And Allah knows better.
Ibn Ishaq said, “In the year of Al-‘Ukaz, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was twenty
years old.
Ibn Ishaq also said, “Al-Fijar occurred twenty years after the
Year of the Elephant. The rebuilding of the Ka‘bah was
fifteen years After Al-Fijar and the start of his Prophethood
was five years after the rebuilding of the Ka‘bah.”
Muhammad Ibn Jubair Ibn Mut‘im said, “ ‘Ukaz was fifteen
years after the Year of the Elephant; the rebuilding of the
Ka‘bah was ten years after ‘Ukaz and the beginning of his
Prophethood was fifteen years after the rebuilding of the
Ka‘bah.” Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi narrated on the authority of
‘Abdul-‘Azeez Ibn Abi Thabit Al-Madeeni that he said, “I
was informed by Az-Zubair Ibn Moosa, who reported on the
authority of Abul-Huwairith that he said, 'I heard ‘AbdulMalik Ibn Marwan say to Qubath Ibn Ushaim Al-Kinani, then
Al-Laithi, 'O, Qubath! Are you older (in years), or is the
22

Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) older (in years)?' He said, 'The Messenger of Allah is
older than I, but I am older in years than him'.”

A Description of His Noble Birth (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)
‘Abdullah, son of ‘Abdul-Muttalib set out for Ghazzah in
Ash-Sham (Syria) with a trade caravan from Quraish and
when they finished their trade, they departed for home,
passing by Al-Madinah. On that day, ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘AbdulMuttalib was ill and he said, “I will remain behind with my
maternal uncles in Banu ‘Adiyy Ibn An-Najjar.” So he stayed
with them for a month in a state of ill health. His companions
returned to Makkah, where ‘Abdul-Muttalib asked them
about his son. They said, “We left him with his maternal
uncles in Banu ‘Adiyy Ibn An-Najjar, for he was sick.” So
‘Abdul-Muttalib sent his eldest son, Al-Harith to him, but
when he arrived in Al-Madinah, he found that he had died and
buried in the house of An-Nabighah. So he returned to his
father and informed him of what had happened. When he
arrived, he found ‘Abdul-Muttalib in the company of his
brothers and sisters and a grandfather. At that time, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was in his mother’s womb. When ‘Abdullah died, he
was twenty five years old.
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d said, “Hisham Ibn Muhammad Ibn AsSa’ib Al-Kalbi informed me on the authority of his father,
who reported on the authority of ‘Awanah Ibn Al-Hakam that
they said that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib died when the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was twenty-eight months old and it was also said that he
died when he was seven months old. But the first narration,
which stated that his wife was still pregnant when he died, is
more reliable."
23

Az-Zubair Ibn Bakkar narrated on the authority of Ibn
Kharraboodh that he said, “ ‘Abdullah died in AlMadinah,
when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was two months old and his mother died when
he was four years old. His grandfather died when he was eight
years old and he entrusted him to the care of his uncle, Abu
Talib.” Al-Waqidi and his scribe, Al-Hafiz Muhammad Ibn
Sa‘d gave preponderance to the view that the father of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) died when he was but a fetus in the womb of his mother
– and this is the ultimate in orphanhood and the highest level
of it. We have mentioned previously in the Hadith: “And the
vision of my mother, in which she said that it was as if a light
was emitted from her private parts when I was born and this
light illuminated the palaces of Ash-Sham.”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “Aminah Bint Wahb, the mother
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), said that someone came to her when she gave birth
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and said, “You have given birth to the master of
this nation, so when he is born into the earth, say, 'I place him
under the protection of the One, from the evil of the envier,
from every slave, whether good or evil; a Protector protects
me and He is the Praiseworthy, the Exalted, until I see that he
has attained his objective. And the sign of that will be that his
birth will be accompanied by a light which will fill the palaces
of Busra, in the land of Ash-Sham. So when he is born, name
him Muhammad, for his name is in the Tawrah: Ahmad – he
is praised by the occupants of the heaven and the occupants
of the Earth and his name is in the Injeel: Ahmad – he is
praised by the occupants of the heaven and the occupants of
the Earth; and his name is in the Qur’an: Muhammad.' This
and that necessitate that when she was pregnant with him and
she saw, as if when he came out of her, the palaces of AshSham were illuminated for him. Then, when she actually gave
24

birth to him, she saw it with her own eyes, just as she had seen
it in her vision." And Allah knows better.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “When she gave birth to him, she
sent word to ‘Abdul-Muttalib via her slave girl – and his
father had already died while she was pregnant. It was also
said that ‘Abdullah died when the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was twenty-eight months old
and Allah knows better which of them is correct. She said, “A
boy has been born for you this night, so come and see him.”
So when he came to her, she informed him about what she
had seen when she was carrying him and what had been said
to her about him and she told him that she had been ordered
to name him Muhammad. So ‘Abdul-Muttalib took him to
Hubal, which was inside the Ka‘bah, and he stood and
supplicated and thanked Allah, the Almighty, the AllPowerful, saying,
All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who has given me,
This fine, well-proportioned boy,
While still in the cradle, he has become the leader of boys,
I seek refuge for him by the house possessing corners,
Until he has attained manhood,
And until I see him of mature stature,
I seek refuge for him from the one who hates,
From the envier, of deranged mind,
Until I see him raising his voice,
It is you who have been named in the Qur’an,
25

In confirmed, oft-recited Scriptures,
Ahmad is written on the tongue.
And Al-Baihaqi narrated on the authority of Al-‘Abbas Ibn
‘Abdul Muttalib (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said,
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was born circumcised and happy.” He added, “His
grandfather, ‘Abdul-Muttalib was amazed by this and saw it
as a good omen." He said, “This child of mine shall certainly
have an important position.” And this proved to be the case.”
But there is doubt about the authenticity of this Hadith. AlHafiz Ibn ‘Asakir narrated it on the authority of Anas (May
Allah be pleased with him) and he asaid, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
'Among the virtues bestowed on me by Allah was that I was
born circumcised and no one saw my private parts'.”
And Al-Baihaqi narrated on the authority of Mu‘awiyah Ibn
Saleh, who reported on the authority of Abul-Hakam AtTanookhi that he said, “Whenever a child was born among
Quraish at night, they would send it to the women of Quraish
until the morning and they would invert an earthenware pot
over it, so when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was born, ‘Abdul-Muttalib sent him to
the women of Quraish and they upturned an earthenware pot
over him; then in the morning, they came and found that the
pot had cracked into two and they found that his eyes were
open and he was staring toward the heaven. Then ‘Abdul
Mittalib came to them and they confided to him, 'We have
never seen a newborn like him; we found the earthenware pot
had cracked into two over him and we found his eyes open
and he was staring at the heaven.' He said, 'Take care of him,
for I hope that he will have an important position or that he
will attain goodness.' Then on the seventh day, an animal was
sacrificed for him and he invited Quraish to eat. When they
had eaten, they said, 'O, ‘Abdullah! Have you named this son
26

of yours in honor of whom you have invited us?' He replied,
'I have named him Muhammad.' They asked, 'What caused
you to favor that name over the names of his family
members?' He said, 'I wanted Allah to praise him in the
heaven and His creation to praise him on the Earth'.” The
scholars of language said that everything in which all good
qualities are combined is called Muhammad, as one of them
said,
Toward you – who reject malediction – I directed my shecamel,
The illustrious, the noble master, the Muhammad (i.e. the
praised).
One of the scholars said, “Allah, the Almighty, the AllPowerful inspired them to call him Muhammad, because of
the praiseworthy characteristics he possessed, so that the
name and the deed should agree with each other and so that
the name and the person named should correspond in form
and in meaning, as his uncle, Abu Talib said,
His name was thus derived in order to honor him,
For the Owner of the Throne is
Mahmood and he is Muhammad.

Chapter Pertaining to
the Signs on the Night of His Birth
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “on the authority of Hassan Ibn
Thabit that he said, 'I was a young boy of seven or eight years
and I understood what I saw and heard. Early one morning, I
heard a Jewish man in Yathrib calling out, O, assembly of
Jews! So they gathered to him and I was listening. They said
to him, 'Woe to you! What is wrong with you?' He said, 'The
27

star of Ahmad, who has been born this night, has risen.' And
Al-Hafiz Abu Nu‘aim narrated in his book, Dala`il AnNubuwwah, on the authority of Abu Bakr ‘Abdullah Al‘Amiri, who reported on the authority of Sulaiman Ibn
Saheem and Rubaih Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman, both of whom
reported on the authority of ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abi Sa‘eed,
who in turn reported on the authority of his father that he said,
'I heard Abu Malik Ibn Sinan saying, 'I went to Banu ‘AbdulAshhal one day to speak with them – and at that time we were
at peace with them – and I heard Yoosha’ (Joshuah), the Jew,
say, 'A Prophet, whose name is Ahmad, is about to depart; he
will depart from the Sacred Precincts (i.e. Makkah).'
Khaleefah Ibn Tha‘labah Al-Ashhali said to him in tones of
mockery, 'What is his description?' He said, 'He is a man who
is neither short nor tall. In his eyes there is redness and he
wears a turban and rides a donkey. His sword is on his
shoulder and he will migrate to this city.' Abu Malik said, 'So
I returned to my people, Banu Khudrah and I was full of
admiration for what Yoosha‘ had said at that time and I heard
a man from among us asking, 'Is Yoosha‘ alone in saying
this?' But they replied, 'No, all of the Jews of Yathrib are
saying it.' Abu Malik Ibn Sinan said, 'So I set out and went to
Banu Quraizah and I found an assembly who were discussing
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). AzZubair Ibn Bata said, 'The red star has risen, a star which does
not rise except for the departure or the appearance of a
Prophet – and none remains except Ahmad, and this is the
place to which he will emigrate.' Abu Sa‘eed said, 'So when
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
arrived, my father imparted this news to him and the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, 'If Az-Zubair embraced Islam, his kinsman from
the chiefs of the Jews would follow him'.”
Abu Nu‘aim narrated on the authority of Zaid Ibn Thabit that
he said, “The Jewish rabbis of Banu Quraizah and An-Nadeer
used to speak about the description of the Prophet (Peace and
28

Blessings of Allah be upon him) and when the red star rose,
they said that he was a Prophet and that no prophet would
come after him, that his name was Ahmad and that he would
emigrate to Yathrib. Then, when the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) arrived in AlMadinah, they rejected him, were envious of him and
disbelieved in him." This story was transmitted by Al-Hafiz
Abu Nu‘aim in his book, from other sources, all praise and
thanks be to Allah (SWT).

29

His Nursemaids and Wet Nurses
Umm Aiman, whose name was Barakah was his nursemaid
and the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
had inherited her from his father. When he grew up, he
manumitted her and married her to his freed slave, Zaid Ibn
Harithah and she bore him Usamah Ibn Zaid (may Allah be
pleased with them all). The freed slave of his uncle, Abu
Lahab, whose name was Thuwaibah, breastfed him, with his
mother before Haleemah As-Sa‘diyyah.
Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated in their Saheehain, on the
authority of Umm Habeebah Bint Abi Sufyan (may Allah be
pleased with her) that she said, “O, Messenger of Allah!
Marry my sister, the daughter of Abu Sufyan.” The Prophet
said, “would you like that?” She replied, “yes, for even now I
am not your only wife and I would like that my sister should
share the good with me.” The Prophet said, “but that is not
lawful for me.” She said, “we have heard that you want to
marry the daughter of Abu Salamah (or in another narration:
Durrah, the daughter of Abu Salamah).” He said, “(do you
mean) the daughter of Umm Salamah?” She said, “yes.” He
said, “even if she were not my stepdaughter, she would be
unlawful for me to marry as she is my foster niece. I and Abu
Salamah were suckled by Thuwaibah. So you should not
present your daughters or your sisters (in marriage) to me.”
Urwah added, “Thuwaibah was the freed slave girl of Abu
Lahab whom he had manumitted, and then she suckled the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). When
Abu Lahab died, one of his relatives saw him in a dream in a
very bad state and asked him, “What have you encountered?”
Abu Lahab said, “I have not found any good since I left you,
except that I have been given water to drink in this (the space
between his thumb and other fingers) and that is because of
my manumitting Thuwaibah.”

30

Wet-Nursing of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) by
Haleemah Bint Abi Dhu’aib As-Sa‘diyyah
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah
Ibn Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib that he said, “It was related
regarding Haleemah Bint Al-Harith that she said, 'I came to
Makkah with a group of women'..." and Al-Waqidi cited with
his isnad that they were ten in number and that they were from
Banu Sa‘d Ibn Bakr who had come looking for children to
wet-nurse during a year of drought. She added, “I arrived on
a white donkey belonging to me. I had our baby with me and
an old she-camel, which I swear by Allah (SWT) did not give
us even a drop of milk. We did not get even a moment of sleep
that night because my hungry baby was crying and there was
no milk to be had from my breast or from the shecamel with
which to feed him. When we reached Makkah, we looked for
children to suckle and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was offered to every woman
among us, but they all refused him saying that he was an
orphan. That was because we hoped for a good reward from
the child’s father. We said, 'An orphan! And what can his
mother do?' We disliked to take him because of that. Every
woman who came with me found a child to suckle but I.
Before we departed, I said to my husband, 'By Allah, I hate to
return among my friends without a baby to suckle. I will go
and take that orphan.' He said, 'There is no harm for you if
you do. Perhaps Allah will bless us through this orphan.' So I
went and took him because there was no other alternative. On
my way back, as soon as I put him in my lap, my breasts
overflowed with milk, which he drank until he was satisfied
and so did his foster brother. Then both of them slept, while
before this, we had not been able to sleep because of my son’s
crying. My husband went to the old she-camel to milk it and
to his surprise, its udders were full. He milked it and we both
drank the milk until we were completely satisfied; and
31

thereafter, we spent a good night. In the morning, my husband
said, 'By Allah, Haleemah, you have taken a blessed child.
Have you not observed the goodness and blessings that we
have enjoyed since you took him last night?' And Allah, the
Almighty, the All-Powerful continued to bestow blessings on
us. I carried him with me, as we rode back on my jenny
(female donkey) and it went at such a speed that the other
donkeys could not keep up with it, so that my fellow travelers
said to me, 'Woe to you, O, daughter of Abu Dhu’aib! Is this
the same jenny that you rode when you set out with us?' I said,
'Yes, by Allah, it is the very same.' They said, 'By Allah, there
is certainly something unusual about it!' At last we reached
the land of Banu Sa‘d and I do not know of any land more
parched and drought-stricken than that land. But in spite of
this, my sheep would graze and return with udders filled with
milk and we would take as much as we wanted, while the
sheep of all those around us did not give a single drop of milk.
Their sheep became so hungry that their owners would say to
their shepherds, 'Woe to you! See where the sheep of the
daughter of Abu Dhu’aib are grazing and let your sheep graze
with them.' So they would put them to graze where my sheep
were grazing, but their sheep would return hungry and
without a drop of milk in their udders. My sheep, on the other
hand, would return with udders full of milk and we would take
what we wished. Allah continued to bestow this blessing on
us, which we gratefully acknowledged, until Muhammad
reached two years of age, at which time, he was growing at a
rate that exceeded that of the other children. By Allah, by the
time he had attained the age of two years, he was a sturdy
child. So we took him to his mother, though we were keen to
keep him with us because of the blessings we had enjoyed as
a result of having him. When his mother saw him, I said to
her, 'Let us return with our boy next year, for we fear that he
may be affected by the infectious disease that is present in
Makkah.' By Allah, we continued to press her until she said,
'Yes, ‘ and she let him go with us. He remained with us for
two or three months after that. Then one day, while he was
32

outside, behind our dwellings with a foster brother of his,
playing with our lambs, that foster brother came running to us
and said, 'Two men wearing white garments came to my
Quraishi brother and they laid him down and cut open his
belly!' My husband and I went out and raced over to him and
we found him standing, his face pale. My husband embraced
him and said, 'O, my son! What happened to you?' He said,
'Two men wearing white garments came to me and they laid
me down and opened up my belly. Then one of them took
something out of it and they cast it aside. Then they returned
it (my belly) to its former state.' So we took him back to the
house with us. My husband said, 'O, Haleemah! I fear that
something might have befallen our son, so let us take him
back to his family before something that we fear appears in
him.' Haleemah said, 'So we carried him to his mother and
when we arrived, she said, what has caused you to return him,
when you were earlier insisting that he remain with you? We
said, 'No, by Allah; it is only because Allah has allowed him
to reach this age and we have fulfilled our duty. We were
afraid that some harm may befall him and so we have brought
him back to you as you requested.' She felt that this was not
the case and so she insisted to know the truth until I told her
what had happened. Then she said, 'Do you fear that he has
been possessed by Satan? Nay! By Allah, Satan has no way
to control him, for he has a great future in store for him. Shall
I not inform you about him?' We said, 'Certainly! I bore him
and by Allah, I have not born a lighter load than him. I saw in
a dream when I was carrying him that it was as if when I
delivered him, a light was emitted from me which illuminated
the palaces of Ash-Sham. Then it happened thus when I gave
birth to him and he supported himself on his hands and raised
his head to the heaven. So leave him'.” This Hadith has been
narrated from other sources and it is well-known and widely
circulated among the scholars of military campaigns and
battles.

33

Ibn Ishaq said, “I was informed by Thawr Ibn Yazeed, who
reported on the authority of Khalid Ibn Ma‘dan, who in turn
reported on the authority of the Companions of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that they
said to him, 'Inform us about yourself.' He said, 'Yes: I am the
supplication of my father, Ibrahim (Peace be upon him) and
the glad tidings of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him); and my mother
saw in a vision when she was carrying me that a light was
emitted from her which illuminated the palaces of Ash-Sham.
I was breastfed among Banu Sa‘d Ibn Bakr and while I was
playing with their lambs, two men wearing white garments
came to me and they had a golden bowl with them which was
filled with ice. They laid me down and they opened up my
belly, then they removed my heart and they cut it open and
removed a black clot from it and threw it away. Then they
washed my heart and my belly with that ice and when they
purified it, they put it back in its place as it had been before.
Then one of them said to the other, 'Weigh him against ten of
his nation, ‘ so he did and I outweighed them. Then he said,
'Weigh him against a hundred of his nation, ‘ so he did and I
outweighed them. Then he said, 'Weigh him against a
thousand of his nation, ‘ so he did and I outweighed them.
Then he said, 'Leave him, for if you were to weigh him against
the whole of his nation, he would outweigh them'.” The isnad
of this Hadith is good, strong.
And it has been confirmed in Saheeh Muslim on the authority
of Anas Ibn Malik (May Allah be pleased with him) that
Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) came to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while he was
playing with the other boys and he took him and lay him down
on the ground, cut open his breast and took the heart out from
it. Then he extracted a clot from it and said: “That was the part
of Satan in you.” Then he washed it with the water of Zamzam
in a golden basin and then it was joined together and restored
to its place. The boys came running to his mother, (i.e. his
nurse) and said, “Verily, Muhammad has been murdered.
34

They all rushed toward him (and found him all right) though
his color was changed.” Anas said, “I, myself saw the marks
of the needle on his chest.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “‘Abdullah Ibn Abi Bakr Ibn Muhammad Ibn
‘Amr Ibn Hazm informed me that the mother of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), Aminah, died when he was six years old at Al-Abwa’,
which lies between Makkah and Al-Madinah. She had taken
him to AlMadinah to visit his uncles from Banu ‘Adiyy Ibn
An-Najjar, but she died on the way back to Makkah.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Buraidah that he
said, “We set out with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and journeyed until we
reached Waddan. At this point, the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 'Remain in your places
until I come to you.' Then he came to us with a troubled
expression and said, 'I went to the grave of Umm Muhammad
(i.e. his mother) and I asked my Lord to let me intercede for
her. But He refused me. Previously, I had forbidden you to
visit the graves, now you may visit them. I had also forbidden
you to eat the meat of sacrificial animals after three days, now
you may eat it and keep it with you as long as you see fit. And
I forbade you to drink from these vessels, now drink as you
see fit'.”
Muslim narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah
be pleased with him) that he said, “The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) visited the grave of his
mother and he wept, causing those around him to weep. Then
he said, 'I sought permission from my Lord to visit the grave
of my mother and He permitted me. Then I sought permission
from Him to ask forgiveness for her, but He did not permit
me. So visit the graves, for it will remind you of death'.”

35

What is meant is that ‘Abdul-Muttalib died while still an
adherent to the religion of the Jahiliyyah; this view is in
contrast to the claim of the Shiites regarding him and his son,
Abu Talib, as we shall see when we discuss the death of Abu
Talib. Al-Baihaqi said, after narrating these Ahadeeth in his
book: Dala’il An-Nubuwwah, “And how could the parents of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
his grandfather not be as described in these Ahadeeth in the
Hereafter, when they used to worship idols until they died and
they did not follow the religion of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him)?
But their disbelief does not diminish his lineage, because the
marriages of the disbelievers are valid: Do you not see that
when they embrace Islam, they are not required to renew their
marriage contract or to split up?”
I say: The information that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) has conveyed to us regarding his
parents and his grandfather, ‘Abdul-Muttalib, i.e. that they are
among the inhabitants of the Fire, does not contradict the
Hadith which is related from him via numerous sources,
which states that the People of the Fatrah, children, the insane
and the deaf will not be put to trial on the Day of Resurrection,
as we have explained in detail in our explanation of the Words
of Allah, Most High: "And We never punish…" (Soorah AlIsra 17:15). Among them are those who respond positively
and among them are those who do not; and these people are
among those who do not respond, so there is no contradiction.
All praise and thanks be to Allah (SWT), from Whom
proceeds all grace. As for the Hadith cited by AsSuhaili –
which he said contains in its chain of narrators two unknown
persons up to Ibn Abi Az-Zinad, who reported on the
authority of ‘Urwah, who in turn reported on the authority of
‘A’ishah (may Allah be Pleased with her) – in which it was
stated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) asked his Lord to return his parents to life
and that He did so, after which they both believed in him, it is
totally munkar, even though it is possible for Allah, the
36

Omnipotent to do so, it contradicts what has been reported in
the Saheeh. And Allah knows better.
Ibn Ishaq said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was with his grandfather, ‘AbdulMuttalib Ibn Hashim, i.e. after the death of his mother,
Aminah Bint Wahb. A mattress used to be placed for ‘AbdulMuttalib in the shade of the Ka‘bah and his sons would sit
around that mattress until he came out to it and out of respect
for him, none of them would venture to sit on it.” He said,
“Yet the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) would come – though he was but a young boy
– and his uncles would hold him in order to restrain him from
going on it, but if ‘Abdul-Muttalib saw them doing that, he
would say, 'Leave my son, for by Allah, he has a great future
before him.' Then he would make him sit beside him on his
mattress and he would stroke his back with his hand and it
used to please him to see what the young boy did. He said to
Umm Aiman, who was the child’s nurse, 'O, Barakah! Do not
neglect my son, for I have found him with other boys near to
AsSidrah and the People of the Scripture claim that my son is
the Prophet of this nation.' And whenever ‘Abdul-Muttalib
ate, he would say, 'I must have my son!' Then he would be
brought to him."

Regarding His Journey With His Uncle, Abu
Talib to Ash-Sham and What Happened
With Baheera, the Monk
Ibn Ishaq said, “Then Abu Talib set out with a trading caravan
to Ash-Sham and when he was preparing to depart, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) attached himself closely to him, according to what has
been claimed, and this touched Abu Talib’s heart and he said,
'By Allah, I will certainly take him with me and I will never
be parted from him, nor will he ever be parted from me!' Or
37

he said words similar to these. Then, when the caravan
camped at Busra, in the land of Ash-Sham, they found there a
monk, whose name was Baheera, who was staying in his
hermitage. He was well-versed in Christianity. It was claimed
that this monk had always lived in that hermitage, where he
gained his knowledge from a book which had been handed
down from generation to generation. That year, when they
stayed near Baheera, he prepared for them a great feast, unlike
most years, when they passed by him and he would not speak
to them or pay any attention to them. Then he sent a message
to them, saying, 'I have prepared food for you, O, assembly of
Quraish and I would like all of you to attend, including the
old and the young, the slaves and the freemen.' Due to his
tender years, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) stayed behind under a tree, to take care of
his people’s baggage. When Baheera saw them, he did not see
the sign that he knew about and he said, 'O, assembly of
Quraish! Let none of you fail to partake of my food.' They
said, 'O, Baheera! No one who should come to you has stayed
behind, except a boy, who is the youngest of us, and who has
remained behind to take care of our baggage.' He said, 'Do not
do that. Invite him and let him partake of the food with you.'
Then, when the people finished eating their food and
dispersed, Baheera came over to him and said to him, 'O, Boy!
I ask you by Al-Lat and Al-‘Uzza to answer what I am going
to ask you.' Baheera only said this to him because he had
heard Quraish swearing by them. It is claimed that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said to him, 'Do not ask me anything by Al-Lat and Al‘Uzza, for by Allah, I have never despised anything as much
as I despise these two.' Baheera said to him, 'Then by Allah,
will you answer me anything that I ask you?' He said, 'Ask me
whatever you like.' So he began to ask him about things
pertaining to his situation, including his sleep, his appearance
and affairs in general. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) answered him and his
answers agreed with the information that Baheera had
38

regarding his description. Then he looked at his back and he
saw the seal of Prophethood between his shoulders, in the
place which was in accordance with the description found in
his book. When he finished, he went over to his uncle, Abu
Talib and he said, 'what is this boy to you?' Abu Talib replied,
'he is my son.' Baheera replied, 'he is not your son.' Abu Talib
said, 'then he is my brother’s son.' Baheera asked, 'and what
happened to his father?' He replied, 'his father died while his
mother was pregnant with him.' Baheera said, 'you have
spoken the truth. Return with this nephew of yours to his land
and protect him against the Jews, for by Allah, if they see him
and recognize in him what I have recognized, they will
contrive evil against him, for this nephew of yours has a great
future in store for him. So hasten with him to his land.' So as
soon as he finished his trading business, he departed with him
in haste and returned him to Makkah.”

Regarding His Upbringing and Allah’s
Sufficiency for Him, His Protection of Him
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) grew up into a young
man and Allah provided food for him and protected him from
the evils of the Jahiliyyah in order to preserve his honor and
his status as a Messenger. This continued until he became a
man and he was the best of his people in manly virtues and
good conduct, the noblest of them in lineage, the best of them
in neighborliness, the greatest of them in forbearance and
gentleness, the most truthful of them in speech, the most
trustworthy of them, the remotest of them from indecency and
such behavior as defiles men and causes them to lose their
decency and honor. Such was his reputation among his people
that even they referred to him as Al-Ameen, because of the
righteous attributes that Allah had combined in him.
According to what I have been told, the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) spoke of how
Allah used to preserve him during his childhood and the
39

period of his ignorance and he said, 'You might have seen me
among boys from Quraish moving stones in order to make a
play area. All of us had exposed our private parts by taking
our lower garments and placing them on our shoulders, so that
we could carry the stones on them. I was going back and forth
with them when I felt a painful slap on my face from someone
I could not see. Then the unknown person said, 'pull your
lower garment around you.' So I took it and pulled it around
me, then I began to carry the stones on my shoulder with my
companions while wearing my lower garment'.” This story
resembles that which is found in the Saheeh regarding the
rebuilding of the Ka‘bah. If this is not the same story, then it
precedes it, like a preparation for it. And Allah knows better.
Al-Baihaqi narrated on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say, 'I only took an interest in the affairs which
preoccupied the people of the Jahiliyyah twice and on both
occasions Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful protected
me: One night, while a young Makkan man and I were
guarding some sheep belong to the people of Makkah, I said
to him, look after my sheep for me so that I may go down to
Makkah and socialize there as the young men do. He said,
Certainly. So I went down to Makkah and approached the first
house I came to; from inside I heard the sound of musical
instruments playing and I asked, What is this? They said, soand-so and so-and-so have got married. So I sat and watched,
but Allah struck me on my ear and by Allah, nothing
awakened me until I felt the sun on my face. Then I returned
to my companion and he asked, What did you do? I said, I did
not do anything. Then I informed him of what I had seen.
Then on another night, I said to him, Look after my sheep for
me so that I may go and socialize. He agreed and I went down
to Makkah. When I arrived there, I heard music such as I had
heard on the previous occasion and I asked what was
happening and was told, It is the marriage of so-andso and so40

and-so. So I sat and watched, but Allah struck me on my ear
and by Allah, and by Allah, nothing awakened me until I felt
the sun on my face. Then I returned to my companion and he
asked me, What did you do? I replied, Nothing. Then I
informed him of what had occurred and by Allah, I took no
interest and did not repeat anything of that until Allah, the
Almighty, the All-Powerful honored me with Prophethood.”
This Hadith is extremely ghareeb. It could be from ‘Ali (May
Allah be pleased with him) himself and the words: “…until
Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful honored me with
Prophethood…” could be an interpolation. And Allah (SWT)
knows better.

The Part Played By the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in the Sacrilegious War
Ibn Hisham said, “When the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) reached fourteen or fifteen
years of age, according to what I was told by Abu ‘Ubaidah
An-Nahwi, who reported on the authority of Abu ‘Amr Ibn
Al-‘Ala`, the Sacrilegious War sprang up between Quraish
and their supporters from Kinanah, and Qais ‘Ailan. The
cause of it was that ‘Urwah Ar-Rahhal Ibn ‘Utbah Ibn Ja‘afar
Ibn Kilab Ibn Rabee‘ah Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Sa‘sa‘ah Ibn
Mu‘awiyah Ibn Bakr Ibn Hawazin granted protection to some
trade goods belonging to An-Nu‘man Ibn Al-Mundhir. AlBarrad Ibn Qais, who belonged to Banu Damrah Ibn Bakr Ibn
‘Abd Manat Ibn Kinanah, said, 'Do you protect them against
Kinanah?' ‘Urwah replied, 'Yes, and against all mankind.' So
‘Urwah set out with the caravan and AlBarrad also set out,
hoping to catch him unawares. He followed the caravan until
it reached Taiman Dhee Zillal, at Al-‘Aliyah and catching
‘Urwah unawares, he attacked him and killed him in a sacred
month. For this reason, the war became known as the
41

Sacrilegious War. Al-Barrad said regarding it (AlBahrulWafir),
I raised my hand to him at Dhee Zilal, And he fell down and
lay stunned, Like a felled tree.

The Part Played By the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the
Treaty of Al-Fudool (Virtuous)
Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi narrated on the authority of Jubair Ibn
Mut‘im (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, 'I took part with my paternal uncles in the treaty of
the Scented Ones, so I do not like to violate it (or he used a
similar word), even if I was given the best of red camels'.”
I say: There is no doubt of this; this refers to the treaty signed
by Quraish after the death of Qusayy. They disagreed with
regard to Qusayy’s appointment of his son, ‘Abdud-Dar as the
person responsible for AsSiqayah, Ar-Rifadah, Al-Liwa', AnNadwah and Al-Hijabah. They were opposed in it by Banu
‘Abd Manaf and each side was supported by tribes from
Quraish. They agreed on the conditions of the treaty and the
members of Banu ‘Abd Manaf brought a bowl of perfume and
they placed their hands in it and swore to abide by the treaty.
Then, when they stood up, they wiped their hands on the
corners of the House of Allah. For this reason, they were
known as Al-Mutayyaboon (the Perfumed Ones), as we
mentioned previously. This took place in earlier times, but
what is meant by this treaty is the Treaty of Al-Fudool which
was signed in the house of ‘Abdullah Ibn Jud‘an, according
to what was narrated by AlHumaidi, who reported on the
authority of Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyainah, who in return reported on
the authority of Muhammad and ‘Abdur-Rahman, the sons of
Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) that they said
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
42

upon him) said, 'I witnessed a treaty in the house of ‘Abdullah
Ibn Jud‘an, and if I was invited to take part in it in Islam, I
would accept it.' They agreed to respect the principles of
justice and to collectively intervene in cases of injustice. They
said that the Treaty of Al-Fudool was twenty years before the
beginning of his Prophethood, in the month of DhulQa‘dah,
approximately four months after the Sacrilegious War."
Az-Zubair Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib said regarding this (Al-Bahr
ul-Wafir),
I swore to uphold a treaty on them,
And if we were all the people of a house,
We called it Al-Fudool when we resolved,
To respect strangers who had protection,
And those around the House know that,
We oppose injustice and reject dishonor.
And Az-Zubair also said (Al-Bahr ul-Kamil),
Verily, the virtuous made an agreement and swore an oath,
That no wrongdoer should find an abode inside Makkah,
A matter upon which they agreed and resolved,
So that the protégé and the wretched might be safe.

43

Marriage of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)to
Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid Ibn Asad
Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy
Ibn Ishaq said, “Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid was an honorable
and wealthy businesswoman, who used to conduct her
business through men contracted to act on her behalf. When
she was informed about the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his truthfulness, honesty
and nobility of character, she sent a message to him offering
him a position as her agent on a business trip to AshSham and
she offered to pay him a better remuneration than she paid to
any other trader. He was to be accompanied by a slave
belonging to her, whose name was Maisarah. The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) accepted
this from her and he set out with her goods. Her slave,
Maisarah, accompanied him and they traveled until they
reached Ash-Sham. There the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) stopped beneath the shade of
a tree, near to the hermitage of a monk. The monk came out
to Maisarah and said, 'Who is this man who has stopped
beneath the tree?' Maisarah replied, 'This is a man from
Quraish, from among the people of the Sacred Precincts.' The
monk said to him, 'No one has stopped beneath this tree
except a Prophet.' Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) sold his goods (i.e. the things
that he had brought to trade) and he bought what he wanted to
buy. Then he set out on the return journey to Makkah,
accompanied by Maisarah. It is claimed that when it was
midday and the heat of the sun was fierce, Maisarah saw two
angels shading him from the sun while he was proceeding on
his camel. When he arrived in Makkah, he went to Khadeejah
with the goods he had purchased, she sold them and found
that her profits were almost double what they normally were.
Maisarah informed her of what the monk had said and of how
44

he had seen two angels shading him. Khadeejah was a
resolute, noble and intelligent woman, in addition to the
generosity with which Allah had favored her. So when
Maisarah conveyed this information to her, she sent a
message to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), in which it is claimed she said, 'O, my
cousin! I have conceived a liking for you because of your
kinship, the high reputation you hold among your people,
your honesty, your good character and your truthfulness.'
Then she offered herself as a wife to him. She was the best of
the Quraishi women in lineage, the greatest of them in nobility
and the wealthiest of them. All of her people were keen to
seek a marriage with her if it were possible. So when she said
this to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), he informed his uncles about it and then
Hamzah, one of his uncles, went with him to Khuwailid Ibn
Asad and proposed marriage to her, after which the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) married her."
Ibn Ishaq said, “Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid mentioned to
Waraqah Ibn Nawfal Ibn Asad Ibn ‘Abdul‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy
– who was her paternal cousin – what the monk had said to
Maisarah and how he had seen the angels shading him. He
was a Christian who studied the Scriptures and possessed
much of the knowledge of mankind. On hearing this, he said,
'O, Khadeejah! if this is true, then Muhammad is certainly the
Prophet of this nation. I knew that a Prophet was expected to
come to this nation and this is his time.' Waraqah felt
impatient after that and he used to say, 'Until when'?”
Regarding this, he said (AlBahrul-Wafir),
I persisted in remembrance of Allah,
Waiting for Him to send the Prophet,
Based upon Khadeejah’s description,
45

O, Khadeejah! Long have I waited,
In the center of the two Makkahs in hope,
Based on your words, that I might see him emerge,
According to what you have related from a cleric,
Among the monks; I hate to think he might have erred,
When he said that Muhammad will lead his people,
And will defeat those who oppose him,
And the light of truth will shine through the lands,
Causing the people to rise up like a wave,
And those who fight him will meet with loss,
While those who make peace with him,
Will find irrigated date groves,
So I hope that when this comes to pass,
I may witness it and I will be the first to enter.

Quraish’s Rebuilding of the Ka‘bah Five
Years Before the Start of His Prophetic
Mission
Allah, Most High, says, "Verily, the first House (of worship)
appointed for mankind was that at Bakkah (Makkah), full of
blessing, and a guidance for Al-‘Alameen (mankind and the
jinn). In it are manifest signs (for example), the Maqam
(place) of Ibrahim; whosoever enters it, he attains security.
And Hajj (pilgrimage to Makkah) to the House (Ka‘bah) is a
46

duty that mankind owes to Allah, those who can afford the
expenses (for one’s conveyance, provision and residence);
and whoever disbelieves (i.e. denies Hajj, then he is a
disbeliever in Allah), then Allah stands not in need of any of
the Al-‘Alameen." (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:96,97). And it has
been confirmed in the Saheehain on the authority of Abu
Dharr (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “I said,
O, Messenger of Allah! Which mosque was built first?” He
replied, “The Sacred Mosque (in Makkah).” I asked, “Then
which one?” He replied, “Al-Aqsa Mosque.” I then asked
him, “How many years passed between the construction of the
former and the latter?” He said, “Forty years.” We have
discussed this previously and we said that Al-Aqsa Mosque
was established by Isra’eel, i.e. Ya‘qoob (Peace be upon him).
It is also narrated in the Saheehain: “Verily, this city was
made a sanctuary by Allah on the day He created the heavens
and the Earth, and it is a sanctuary by His Decree until the
Day of Resurrection.”
And Al-Baihaqi narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As (May Allah be pleased with him) that he
said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, 'Allah sent Jibraeel to Adam and Eve to
say to them, Build a House for Allah. Jibraeel laid the designs
for them. Then Adam began to dig, while Eve removed the
soil, until he struck water. At this point, he was called from
beneath, Adam! That is enough! After completing the
construction, Adam was directed by Allah, Most High, to
circumambulate the House (the Ka‘bah). It was said to him,
'You are the first man (to be created), and this is the first
House to be built.' Several centuries passed until Nooh made
pilgrimage to it, then more centuries passed until Ibrahim laid
the foundations.” Al-Baihaqi said, “Ibn Lahee‘ah was alone
in narrating it in this way, in a marfoo‘ form.”

47

I say: It is weak; and it is more correct and safer to say that it
is mawqoof at ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr (May Allah be pleased
with him). And Allah knows better.
A man asked ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) regarding
the Saying of Allah: "Verily, the first House (of worship)
appointed for mankind was that at Bakkah (Makkah), in
which blessing and guidance for Al-‘Alameen were placed"
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:96), “Was it the first House built on the
Earth?” ‘Ali replied, “No, but it was the first House in which
blessing and guidance were placed for mankind, along with
Maqam-e-Ibrahim and whoever enters it is safe. And if you
wish, I will inform you how it was built: Verily, Allah, Most
High, revealed to Ibrahim (Peace be upon him): “Build Me a
House on the Earth.” But he was unable to accomplish it and
so Allah sent As-Sakeenah – which is a twisting wind with a
head – and each of them followed the other until it finished.
Then it encircled the location of the House, as a serpent does
and Ibrahim (Peace be upon him) built until he reached the
place of the stone and he said to his son, “Find me a stone.”
So he searched for a stone and he found one and returned with
it. But when he returned, he found that the Black Stone had
already been put into place and so he said to his father, “From
where did you get this?” He replied, “The one who does not
rely on your building brought it: It was brought by Jibraeel
from the heaven and he completed it.” Then time passed and
it fell into disrepair and it was repaired by the Amalekites.
Then it fell into disrepair again and it was rebuilt by Jurhum.
Then it fell into disrepair a third time and it was rebuilt by
Quraish and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), who at that time was a young man. When
they wanted to raise the Black Stone, they disagreed regarding
who should have the honor of doing it, so they said, “We will
appoint as an arbiter the first man to emerge from this gate.”
It happened that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was the first person to emerge from the
gate and so he arbitrated between them, saying that they
48

should place the Stone on a mantle, then all of the tribes might
raise it up.”
Sa‘eed Ibn Yahya Al-Umawi said, “Al-Mu‘ammar Ibn
Sulaiman Ar-Raqqi told us, on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
Bishr from Az-Zuhri (who attributed the Hadith to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)), that he said,
“Three stone tablets were found in the Maqam (of Ibrahim).
On the first tablet it was written: “Verily, I am Allah, the
Owner of Bakkah (Makkah). I made it on the day I made the
sun and the moon and I surrounded it with seven pure estates;
and I blessed its inhabitants in their meat and their milk.” On
the second tablet it said, “Verily, I am Allah, the Owner of
Bakkah (Makkah). I created ar-rahim and I derived it from
My Name (i.e. Ar-Rahman). So whoever maintains ties of
kinship, I will maintain ties with him and whoever cuts them,
I will send him away.” On the third tablet, it said, “Verily, I
am Allah, the Owner of Bakkah (Makkah). I created goodness
and evil and I ordained them. So blessed is the one in whose
hands I place goodness and woe to the one in whose hands I
place evil.”
And it has been confirmed in the Saheehain on the authority
of ‘A’ishah (may Allah be Pleased with her) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said to her, “Do you know that when your people
(Quraish) rebuilt the Ka‘bah, they decreased it from its
original foundation laid by Ibrahim?” I said, “O, Messenger
of Allah! Why do you not rebuild it on its original foundation
laid by Ibrahim?” He replied, “Were it not for the fact that
your people are close to the Jahiliyyah (i.e. they have recently
become Muslims) I would have done so.” The sub-narrator,
‘Abdullah (Ibn ‘Umar) (May Allah be pleased with him)
stated: ‘A’ishah must have heard this from the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), for in my
opinion, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) had not placed his hand over the two
49

corners of the Ka‘bah opposite Al-Hijr only because the
Ka‘bah was not rebuilt on its original foundations laid by
Ibrahim (Peace be upon him).” For this reason, when AzZubair was able to rebuild it, he did so in accordance with the
description mentioned by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and it appeared in best, most
beautiful and perfect form, on the foundations of Al-Khaleel,
with two doors at floor level, at the eastern and the western
ends; the people would enter from one end and exit from the
other. After AlHajjaj had killed Ibn Az-Zubair, he wrote a
letter to ‘Abdul-Malik Ibn Marwan – who was the Caliph at
that time – informing him of what Ibn Az-Zubair had done,
they thought that he had done it of his own accord and so he
ordered that it be returned to its former appearance, so they
turned their attention to Shami wall and they broke it down
and removed the Stone from it, then they compressed its
stones on the floor of the Ka‘bah, which caused the level of
its door to be raised, then they blocked off the western door,
while the eastern door continued as it was. Then during the
era of Al-Mahdi, or that of his son, he consulted Malik
regarding the possibility of returning the Ka‘bah to the way
Az-Zubair had made it. Malik – may Allah have mercy on him
– said, “I fear that kings will make it into a game.” So he left
it as it was and it remains thus to this day.
As for the Sacred Mosque, the first person to move back the
houses from the vicinity of the Ka‘bah was ‘Umar Ibn AlKhattab (May Allah be pleased with him). He purchased them
from their owners and demolished them. Then, when
‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan (May Allah be pleased with him) became
Caliph, he extended the area of the Mosque by purchasing
more houses. When Ibn Az-Zubair was Governor, he
improved its construction and increased the number of its
doors, but he did not increase it in any other way. When
‘Abdul-Malik Ibn Marwan sought advice in the matter, he
increased the height of its walls and he ordered that the
Ka‘bah be covered with silk brocade. The person who was
50

entrusted with this task was Al-Hajjaj Ibn Yoosuf and we
have mentioned already the story of the building of the House
and the Ahadeeth pertaining to that in the explanation of
Allah’s Saying in Soorah Al-Baqarah: [ And (remember)
when Ibrahim and (his son) Isma‘eel were raising the
foundations of the House (the Ka‘bah at Makkah) ] (Soorah
Al-Baqarah 2:127)
Ibn Ishaq said, “When they had finished rebuilding the
Ka‘bah and built it as they wished, Az-Zubair Ibn ‘AbdulMuttalib said, regarding the matter of the snake which caused
Quraish to fear rebuilding the Ka‘bah,
I was amazed to see the eagle swoop down,
On the snake, and it was confused,
And it had used to recoil and sometimes pounce,
When we tried to repair the foundations, it attacked,
And made us afraid to rebuild and we were in dread,
And when we feared that we would be prevented,
The eagle came rushing and it attacked,
And seized it, allowing us to build without hindrance,
So we began to concentrate on our building,
Like digging the foundations and shifting the dirt,
In the morning, we raised the foundations of it,
And we were without garments on our flesh,
The Owner thereby honored Banu Lu’ayy,
51

And none of them left its foundations,
And Banu ‘Adiyy had gathered there,
Along with Murrah, but Kilab preceded them,
And the Owner had thereby honored us,
And with Allah reward is sought.
Ibn Ishaq described how Quraish had innovated in calling
themselves Al-Hums, which means to be harsh and hard in
religious matters. They did this because of their excessive
veneration of the Sacred Precincts, due to which they would
not leave the Sacred Precincts on the night of ‘Arafah. They
used to say, “We are the sons of the Sacred Mosque and the
inhabitants of the House of Allah (SWT).” And so they would
not stand upon ‘Arafah, even though they knew that this was
one of the rites practiced by Ibrahim (Peace be upon him). So
determined were they in the practice of these wicked
innovations that they would not abandon them at any cost.
They would not store dried yoghurt or ghee and they would
not use animal fat while they were in a state of ihram. Nor
would they enter a tent made of camel hair, or seek shade
except in a house of adobe bricks, as long as they were in a
state of ihram. Also, out of a deeply-rooted misconception,
they would not allow the Hajj and ‘Umrah pilgrims to eat any
food except the food of Quraish and they would not allow
them to perform circumambulation of the Ka‘bah except in
garments provided by Quraish and if they were unable to find
anyone from Quraish or their associated tribes, such as
Kinanah and Khuza‘ah to provide them with a garment, they
had to circumambulate naked, even the women. For this
reason, when a woman was forced to circumambulate naked,
she would place her hand over her private parts and say,
Today part or all of it appears,
52

And what appears of it I do not declare it lawful.
If one of those who found one of these so-called Ahmasi
garments performed the circumambulation in his own clothes,
he would be obliged to discard them after completing the rite
and he would not be allowed to use them after that. In addition
neither he nor anyone else was allowed to touch them. The
Arabs used to call these garments ‘Al-Laqy’ (that which is
discarded). One of the poets said regarding this (AlBahrAtTaweel),
It is sad enough that he is,
Like a discarded garment,
Before those circumambulating the Ka‘bah.
Ibn Ishaq said, “They continued in this manner until Allah
sent Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and revealed the Qur’an to him, rejecting their innovations.
He, Most High, says, 'Then depart from the place whence all
the people depart.' (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:199). It means the
majority of the Arabs depart from ‘Arafat. '…and ask Allah
for His Forgiveness. Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful'." (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:199). We have mentioned
previously that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) used to stand at ‘Arafat even before
Revelation came to him and this conformity with Allah’s
Divine Will was granted to him by Allah. And Allah revealed
to him a rejection of the prohibitions regarding clothing and
food that they used to practice: "O, Children of Adam! Take
your adornment (by wearing your clean clothes), while
praying and going round (performing tawaf of) the Ka‘bah,
and eat and drink but waste not by extravagance, certainly He
(Allah) likes not AlMusrifoon (those who waste by
extravagance). Say (O, Muhammad), 'Who has forbidden the
adoration with clothes given by Allah, which He has produced
53

for his slaves, and At-Tayyibat (all kinds of halal [lawful]
things) of food?' Say, 'They are, in the life of this world, for
those who believe (and) exclusively for them (the Believers)
on the Day of Resurrection (and the disbelievers will not share
them).' Thus We explain the Ayat (Islamic laws) in detail for
people who have knowledge." (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:31,32).
And Ziyad Al-Bakka’i said, on the authority of Ibn Ishaq, “I
do not know if these innovations of theirs began before the
Year of the Elephant or after that.”

The Book of the Sending of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and Mention of the Signs of That
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq – may Allah have mercy on him – said,
“The Jewish rabbis and the Christian and Arab soothsayers
had spoken of the matter of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) before his advent, when
it drew near. As for what the Jewish rabbis and the Christian
monks found regarding the description of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and of his time, and what
had been foretold of his coming by their Prophets, Allah,
Most High, says, 'Those who follow the Messenger, the
Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad)
whom they find written with them in the Tawrah (Deut. xviii,
15) and the Injeel (Gospel) (John xiv, 16).' (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:157). And He, Most High, says, 'And (remember) when
‘Eesa, son of Maryam (Mary), said, O, Children of Isra’eel! I
am the Messenger of Allah unto you confirming the Tawrah
(which came) before me, and giving glad tidings of a
Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad.'
(Soorah AsSaff 61:6). And He, Most High, says, 'Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah, and those who are with him are
tough against disbelievers, and merciful among themselves.
You see them bowing and falling down in prostration (in
prayer), seeking bounties from Allah and (His) Good
54

Pleasure. The mark of them (i.e. of their Faith) is on their
faces (foreheads) from the traces of (their) prostration (during
prayers). This is their description in the Tawrah.' (Soorah AlFat'h 48:29). And He, Most High, says, 'And (remember)
when Allah took the Covenant of the Prophets, saying, Take
whatever I gave you from the Book and Hikmah
(understanding of the Laws of Allah, etc.), and afterward
there will come to you a Messenger (Muhammad) confirming
what is with you; you must then believe in him and help him.
Allah said, 'Do you agree (to it) and will you take up My
Covenant (which I conclude with you)?' They said, 'We
agree.' He said, 'Then bear witness; and I am with you among
the witnesses (for this)'." (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:81). And in
Saheeh Al-Bukhari it is reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said,
“Allah did not send a Prophet except that He took a covenant
from him that if Muhammad was sent while they were alive,
they would believe in him, support him and follow him.” It is
known from this that all of the Prophets gave tidings of his
coming and ordered their followers to obey him.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Umamah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “O, Messenger of
Allah! Tell us how your Prophethood started.” He replied, “I
am the supplication of my father, Ibrahim and the glad tidings
of ‘Eesa; and my mother saw that a light was emitted from
her, which illuminated the palaces of Ash-Sham.”
The meaning of this is that he wanted to know how his
Prophethood began to be known to the people and how his
fame spread, so he mentioned the supplication of Ibrahim
(Peace be upon him), from whom the Arabs claim descent,
then the glad tidings of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), who was
the Seal of the Prophets sent to the Children of Isra’eel, as we
mentioned earlier. This proves that those Prophets between
them (i.e. Ibrahim and ‘Eesa also gave the glad tidings of his
coming.
55

As for the heavenly host, his affair was spoken of and wellknown to them since before the creation of Adam (Peace be
upon him), as narrated by Imam Ahmad on the authority of
Al-‘Irbad Ibn Sariyah (May Allah be pleased with him) who
said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, 'I was written as the slave of Allah and the
Seal of the Prophets when Adam was still only clay. And I
shall inform you of the start of that: the supplication of
Ibrahim, the glad tidings which ‘Eesa gave of me and the
vision which my mother saw. Likewise, all of the mothers of
the Prophets saw something similar'.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “ ‘Asim Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Qatadah informed me
on the authority of some men from his people that they said,
'Among the things that called us to Islam – in addition to
Allah’s Mercy and His Guidance to us – was the fact that
when we were pagan idol worshippers, we used to hear from
the Jews, who were People of the Scripture, having
knowledge that we did not have – at a time when there was
still enmity between us – whenever we inflicted some harm
on them, they would say to us, 'The time is near when a
Prophet will be sent and we will kill you with him, as the
people of ‘Ad and Iram were killed.' And we used to hear this
frequently from them. Then, when Allah sent the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), we
responded positively when he called us to Allah, for we
realized what they had been threatening us with, so we rushed
to follow him before they did, and we believed in him, while
they rejected him and disbelieved in him. So this Verse was
revealed concerning us and them: 'And when there came to
them (the Jews), a Book (this Qur’an) from Allah confirming
what is with them (the Tawrah and the Injeel), although
aforetime they had invoked Allah (for the coming of
Muhammad — peace be upon him) in order to gain victory
over those who disbelieved, then, when there came to them
that which they had recognized, they disbelieved in it. So let
56

the Curse of Allah be on the disbelievers'." (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:89)
And Ibn Ishaq said, “It is reported on the authority of Salamah
Ibn Salamah Ibn Waqsh (May Allah be pleased with him),
who was one of the participants in the Battle of Badr, that he
said, 'We had a neighbor from among the Jews in Banu
‘Abdul-Ashhal and he came out to us one day from his house
and stood before Banu ‘Abdul-Ashhal.' Salamah added, 'At
that time, I was the youngest of them in years and I was lying
on a fur belonging to me in the yard of my family, and he
spoke of the Resurrection, the Sending Forth, the Reckoning,
the Scale, Paradise and the Fire. He said these things to a
pagans, idol worshipping people, who did not believe that
they would be resurrected after death.' So they said to him,
'Woe to you, O, so-and-so! Do you believe that this happen?
That the people will be sent forth after their death, to an abode
in which there is a Garden and a Fire, where they will be
recompensed in accordance with their deeds?' He said, 'Yes.
And the greatest wish of those who enter it is that they may
leave it on the morrow.' They said to him, 'woe to you, O, soand-so! And what will be the Sign of that?' He said, 'a Prophet
will be sent from the direction of these lands, ‘ and he pointed
with his hand toward Makkah and Yemen. They said, 'and
when will we see him?' Salamah (May Allah be pleased with
him) said, 'then he looked at me – and I was the youngest of
them – and said, when this boy has exhausted his life, he will
see him.' Salamah said, 'and by Allah, no more than a day and
a night had passed, when Allah sent His Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he was living
amongst us; so we believed in him, while he (the Jew)
disbelieved in him out of transgression and envy. So we said
to him, 'woe to you, O, so-andso! Was it not you who told us
about him?' He said, 'Yes; but it is not he'.” Narrated by Imam
Ahmad.

57

Then Ibn Ishaq – may Allah have mercy on him – related the
story of how Salman Al-Farisi embraced Islam, saying, “It
was reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, 'Salman Al-Farisi told
me from his own lips, saying, I was a Persian man from a
village in Asfahan, which was known as Hayy. My father was
the headman of the village and I was the dearest of Allah’s
creation to him. He loved me so much that he kept me in his
house near the fire, as slave girls are kept in. I strove hard in
the Magian religion until I became the keeper of the fire,
which I tended and did not let go out for a moment. My father
had a huge garden, and he was busy one day with some
construction work, so he said, O, my son! I am too busy with
this building today, go and check my garden, and he told me
some of the things he wanted done. I went out, heading toward
his garden, and I passed by one of the Christian churches,
where I could hear their voices as they were praying. I did not
know anything about the people because my father had kept
me in his house. When I passed by and heard their voices, I
entered upon them to see what they were doing. When I saw
them, I was impressed with their prayer and I was attracted to
their way. I said: By Allah, this is better than the religion that
we follow. By Allah, I did not leave them until the sun set,
and I forgot about my father’s garden and did not go there. I
said to them: Where did this religion originate? They said: In
Ash-Sham. Then I went back to my father, who had sent
people out to look for me, and I had distracted him from all
his work. When I came to him, he said, O, my son! Where
were you? Did I not ask you to do what I asked? I said, O, my
father! I passed by some people who were praying in a church
of theirs, and I was impressed with what I saw of their
religion. By Allah, I stayed with them until the sun set. He
said, O, my son, there is nothing good in that religion. Your
religion and that of your forefathers is better than that. I said,
No, by Allah, it is better than our religion. He was afraid for
me, and he put fetters on my legs and kept me in his house. I
sent word to the Christians saying, If any Christian merchants
58

come to you from Ash-Sham, tell me about them. He said,
Some Christian merchants came to them from Ash-Sham and
they told me about them. I said to them, When they have
completed their business and want to go back to their own
country, tell me about that. So when they wanted to go back
to their own country, they told me about that, and I threw off
the shackles from my legs and went out with them, until I
came to Ash-Sham. When I reached Ash-Sham, I said, Who
is the best person in this religion? They said, The bishop in
the church. So I went to him and said, I like this religion, and
I would like to stay with you and serve you in your church
and learn from you and pray with you. He said, Come in. So
I went in with him, but he was a bad man. He would command
them and exhort them to give charity, but he kept a great deal
of it for himself and did not give it to the poor; he had amassed
seven chests of gold and silver. I hated him deeply when I saw
what he was doing, then he died and the Christians gathered
to bury him. I said to them, This was a bad man; he
commanded you and exhorted you to give charity, but when
you brought it to him he kept it for himself and did not give
any of it to the poor. They said, How do you know that? Show
us where his treasure is. So I showed them where it was and
they brought out seven chests filled with gold and silver.
When they saw that they said, By Allah, we will never bury
him. Then they crucified him and pelted him with stones.
Then they brought another man and appointed him in his
place. Salman said, I have never seen a man who does not
offer the five daily prayers who was better than he; he
shunned this world and sought the Hereafter and no one strove
harder than him night and day. I loved him as I had never
loved anyone before, and I stayed with him for a while. Then
when he was about to die, I said, O, so-and-so! I was with you
and I loved you as I have never loved anyone before, and now
the decree of Allah has come to you as you see; to whom do
you advise me to go? What do you command me to do? He
said, O, my son! By Allah, I do not know of anyone today
who follows what I followed. The people are doomed; they
59

have changed and abandoned most of what they used to
follow, except for a man in Mawsil. He is so-and-so and he
follows what I used to follow, so go and join him. When he
died and was buried, I went to the man in Mawsil. I said to
him, O, so-and-so! so-and-so advised me when he died to
come to you, and he told me that you follow the same as he
followed. He said to me, stay with me. So I stayed with him,
and I found him to be a good man who followed the same as
his companion had followed. But soon he died. When he was
dying I said to him, O, so-and-so! so-and-so advised me to
come to you and told me to join you, but now there has come
to you from Allah what you see. To whom do you advise me
to go? What do you command me to do? He said, O, my son!
By Allah I do not know of anyone who follows what we used
to follow except a man in Naseebeen. He is so-and-so; go to
him. When he died and was buried, I went to the man in
Naseebeen. I came to him and told him my story and what my
companion had told me to do. He said, Stay with me. So I
stayed with him and I found him to be a follower of the same
way as his two companions, and I stayed with a good man. By
Allah, soon death came upon him, and when he was dying I
said to him, O, so-and-so! so-and-so advised me to go to soand-so; then so-and-so advised me to come to you. To whom
do you advise me to go and what do you command me to do?
He said, O, my son! By Allah we do not know of anyone left
who follows our way and to whom I can tell you to go, except
a man in ‘Ammooriyyah. He follows something like what we
follow. If you wish, go to him, for he follows our way. When
he died and was buried, I went to the man in ‘Ammooriyyah
and told him my story. He said, Stay with me. So I stayed with
a man who was following the same way as his companions. I
earned wealth until I had cows and sheep, then the decree of
Allah came to him. When he was dying I said to him, O, soand-so! I was with so-and-so, and so-and-so told me to go to
so-and-so; then so-and-so told me to go to so-and-so; then soand-so told me to come to you. To whom do you advise me to
go and what do you command me to do? He said, O, my son!
60

By Allah, I do not know of anyone who follows our way to
whom I can advise you to go. But there has come the time of
a Prophet, who will be sent with the Religion of Ibrahim. He
will appear in the land of the Arabs and will migrate to a land
between two harrahs (lave fields), between which there are
palm trees. He will have characteristics that will not be
hidden. He will eat of what is given as a gift but he will not
eat of what is given as charity. Between his shoulder blades is
the Seal of Prophethood. If you can go to that land then do so.
Then he died and was buried, and I stayed in ‘Ammooriyyah
as long as Allah willed I should stay. Then some merchants
of Kalb passed by me and I said to them, will you take me to
the land of the Arabs and I will give you these cows and sheep
of mine? They said, yes. So I gave them the cows and sheep,
and they took me there, but when they brought me to Wadi
Al-Qura, they wronged me and sold me as a slave to a Jewish
man. When I was with him I saw the palm trees, and I hoped
that this was the land that my companion had described to me,
but I was not sure. While I was with him, a cousin of his from
Banu Quraizah came to him from Al-Madinah, and he sold
me to him and he took me to Al-Madinah. By Allah, as soon
as I saw it, I recognized it from the description given to me by
my companion. I stayed there, and Allah sent His Messenger,
who stayed in Makkah as long as Allah willed, and I did not
hear anything about him because I was so busy with the work
of a slave. Then he migrated to Al-Madinah, and by Allah, I
was at the top of a palm tree belonging to my master, doing
some work on it, and my master was sitting there. Then a
cousin of his came and stood beside him, and said, May Allah
kill Banu Qailah! By Allah, right now they are gathering in
Quba’ to welcome a man who has come from Makkah today;
and they say that he is a Prophet. When I heard that, I began
to shiver so much that I thought I would fall on top of my
master. I came down from the tree and started saying to that
cousin of his, what are you saying, what are you saying? My
master got angry and he struck me with his fist and said, what
has it got to do with you? Go back to your work! I said,
61

“nothing; I just wanted to make sure of what he was saying. I
had something that I had collected, and when evening came,
I went to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) when he was in Quba’ and I entered upon
him and said to him, I have heard that you are a righteous man
and that you have companions who are strangers and are in
need. This is something that I have to give in charity, and I
see that you are more in need of it than anyone else. I brought
it near to him and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to his Companions,
“Eat,” but he refrained from eating. I said to myself, This is