said to me: 'Brother Suda’ you are indeed (someone who is)
obeyed among your people. I said: 'Rather, it is Allah who has
guided them to Islam.'” The Messenger of Allah said: 'Should I
appoint you as their leader?' I said: 'Yes, O Messenger of Allah.'
Then he wrote a document appointing me as the leader. I said: 'O
Messenger of Allah, order for me something from their alms.'
The Prophet agreed and he wrote yet another document for me
(concerning that)."
As-Suda‘i added: This occurred during one of his journeys and
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
alighted at a place and its inhabitants came to complain
211

abouttheir representative. They said: “He is punishing us for a
quarrel between us and his people during the period of
ignorance.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, asked: “He did that?” and they replied in the affirmative.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, turned toward his Companions while I was among them and
said: “There is no good in the position of authority for a believing
Muslim.” As- Suda‘i said: “That (statement) settled in my heart.”
Someone else came to him and asked: “O Messenger of Allah,
give me something.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “Whoever begs from the people while
he is rich, it will be a headache and a stomachache (for him).”
The man then said: “Then give me from the Zakah.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“Allah does not permit Zakah (for anyone) by the ruling a
Prophet or other than him until He Himself gives His ruling on
it. He has apportioned Zakah into eight categories, if you fall into
any of the categories then I shall give you.” As-Suda‘i added:
“That also sank into my heart given that I am rich and yet I had
asked him from the Zakah.”
Thereafter, the Messenger felt thirsty in the first part of the night,
I remained with him nearby, but all his Companions had left him
with no one remaining other than myself. When it was time for
Salat As-Subh he ordered me to call the prayer and I complied. I
kept asking him: “O Messenger of Allah, may I announce the
Iqamah?” and he would say: "No," until the dawn appeared and
he alighted and lined up. Then he came to me, passing through
his Companions and said to me: “Brother of Suda‘a, do you have
any water (left) ?” I said: “No, except a very small quantity which
will not be sufficient for you.” He said: “Pour it into a bowl and
212

bring it to me.” I did as he ordered and he dipped his hand into
the water and I saw water gushing out from between his fingers.
He said: “Were it not that I am shy of my Lord, the Exalted, I
would have quenched our thirst and give us drink. Call those who
have a need for water among my Companions.” I made the call
to them and those who wanted took some of the water and the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
stood up to pray. Bilal wanted to announce the Iqamah but
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said to him: “It was the man of Suda‘a who made the call (Adhan)
and he who gave the Adhan should announce the Iqamah.” AsSuda‘i said: “So I announced the Iqamah.”
When the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, concluded the Salat, I went to him with the two
documents (he had written for me) and I said: “Relieve me of
these two (documents).” He asked: “What is the matter with
you?” I said: “Messenger of Allah, I heard you say: ‘There is no
good in the position of authority for a believing Muslim,’ and I
believe in Allah and in His Messenger. I also heard you say:
‘Whoever begs from people while he is rich, it will be a headache
and stomachache (for him),’ and I am rich.” The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “That is the case but if
you wish you can take it or otherwise you can return it.” I said:
“I return (them).” Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said to me: “Then direct me to someone I
may appoint as your leader.” So I directed him to a man among
the delegation that came to him and he appointed him as the
leader.

213

"Then we said to him: 'O Messenger of Allah, we have a well in
our town. During the winter, its water is ample for us and we all
mill around it. But during the summer, its water recedes and we
disperse in different directions to various wells around us. Now
we have accepted Islam and all those around us are enemies.
Please supplicate for our well so that its water becomes ample
for us, and we will not have to disperse (anymore).' He called for
seven pebbles and scrubbed them with his own hands. He
supplicated on them and then said: 'Go with these pebbles. When
you get to the well, throw the pebbles one after the other while
mentioning Allah’s Name at each throw'.” As-Suda‘i added: “We
did as we were told and thereafter, we were unable to see the
bottom of the well again.” This Hadith has various
corroborations in Sunan Abi Dawood, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn
Majah.

The Arrival of Al-Harith Ibn Hassan Al- Bakri
Imam Ahmad related from Al-Harith Ibn Hassan, who is also
known as Ibn Yazeed Al-Bakri, that he said: "I set out to
complain to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, against Al-Ala’ Ibn Al-Hadrami. On my way, at
Rabadhah, I met a stranded old woman from Banu Tameem. She
said: 'O servant of Allah, I have a need to go to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,, would
you kindly take me to him?'
"So I took her with me. When I came to Madinah, the Mosque
was packed with people and a black flag was flying. Bilal, with
his sword strapped, stood in front of the Messenger of Allah. I
asked: 'What is happening to the people?' They replied: 'He wants
to send ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As to a (war) front.' So I sat down. Soon
214

afterward, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, entered his house (or he said, his tent). I sought and
was given permission to enter. I greeted him and he asked:h 'Has
something happened between you and Banu Tameem?' I said:
'Yes, but we overpowered them. I came across an old woman
from Banu Tameem and she asked me to take her to you. She is
right now at the door.' He permitted her to come in and she said:
'O Messenger of Allah, if you intend to forge a demarcation
between us and Banu Tameem, make Ad-Dahna’ the
demarcation'.”
The old woman then sat as if she intended to immediately stand
up, and asked: 'O Allah’s Messenger, to where are you
compelling your Mudar?' I said: 'My similitude is like that of
Mi‘za who gave a ride to her death. I brought this (woman) but I
did not know that she was an enemy to me. I seek refuge from
being like the delegate of Ad.' The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said: 'What is the delegate of Ad?' even
though he knew the matter better than him but merely asked him.
I said: 'Ad were afflicted with famine and they sent their delegate,
who was known as Qail. He came across Mu‘awiyah Ibn Bakr
and stayed with him for a month giving him intoxicants, and two
girls known as Al-Jaradatan were singing for him. After a month,
he went out to the mountain of Tihamah and said: 'O Allah, You
know that I did not come to a sick person so as to heal him nor
have I come to a captive so that I may free him. O Allah, provide
water for Ad as You used to.' Then a black cloud passed by and
he was called from it (saying): ‘Choose!’ He pointed to a dark
cloud from it and he was called from it: Take from it incenerating
ashes which will leave behind no one from among Ad.’ I said:
'Nothing more than the wind as small as this ring of mine was
sent to them and they were destroyed'.” Abu Wa’il said: “He has
215

spoken the truth,” and added: “Women and men whenever they
sent their delegate, they would say to him: ‘Do not be like the
delegate of Ad'.” This is how At-Tirmidhi related it on the
authority of Abd Ibn Humaid from Zaid Ibn Al-Hubab.

The Arrival of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Abu
‘Aqeel With His People
On the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Abu ‘Aqeel who
narrated: "I set out among a delegation to Allah’s Messenger.
When we came to him, we made our camel kneel by the door.
There was no one more detestable to us than this person whom
we were going in to see. We went in and by the time we came
out, there was no one more beloved to us than the man we had
just met. One of us said to him: 'O Messenger of Allah, why don’t
you ask your Lord for a kingdom like that of Sulaiman?' The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
smiled and said: 'Perhaps there is with Allah for your companion
something better than the kingdom of Sulaiman. Allah does not
send a prophet except that He gives him (the gift of) a
supplication. Some of them used it to gain the world which they
were given. Some of them used it against their own people when
they disobeyed them, and they were destroyed. Allah has also
given me a supplication but I have reserved it with my Lord as
an intercession for my Ummah on the Day of Resurrection'.”

The Arrival of Tariq Ibn ‘Abdullah and His
Companions
Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Tariq Ibn
‘Abdullah who narrated: "I was standing in the market of DhulMajaz when a man approached wearing a jubbah saying: 'Say,
216

none deserves to be worshipped (in truth) except Allah so that
you may be successful.' Another man was following him,
hurlingstones at him and saying: 'People, he is liar, don’t believe
him.' So I asked: 'Who is that man?' someone said: 'That is the
youth from Banu Hashim who claims to be the Messenger of
Allah.' I asked about the identity of the one trailing him and he
said: 'That is his uncle Abdul Uzza'.
"When the people became Muslim and had migrated we set out
from Rabadhah heading for Madinah to seek some of its dates.
When we approached its walls and its palmgroves, I said: 'It will
be nice to alight (here) and change our clothes.' Just then a man
wearing two sets of old clothes met us, greeted us and asked:
'From where did you come from?' We said: 'We are from
Rabadhah.' He asked: 'Where is your destination?' We replied:
'We are heading to Madinah.' He asked: 'What business do you
have there?' We said: 'To seek from its dates. We have our
women with us and a red camel that is bridled.' He said: 'Is your
camel for sale?' We responded: 'Yes, for such-andsuch measures
(sa‘) of dates and we will not discount anything from what we
have said.' He took the bridle of the camel and went away. When
he had been shielded by the walls of Madinah and it palm trees,
we said: 'What have we done, we never even sold our camel to
someone we know without taking its price (and now we have
done that to a stranger).' One of the women with us said: 'I saw a
man whose face is like the radiance of the full moon. I am a
guarantor for your camel.'
"Soon after, the man approached and said: 'I am the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to you. These
are your dates, eat to your satisfaction and weigh a full measure.'
We ate to our fill and we weighed a full measure. Afterward, we
217

entered Madinah and went into the Mosque and there was the
same man standing on the pulpit addressing the people.
Wecaught him saying in his address: 'Give alms for giving alms
is better for you. The upper hand is better than the lower one.
Your mother, your father, your sister, your brother and other
relatives in descending order.'
"Then a man came in the midst of a group from Banu Yarboo’
(or he said, a man from the Ansar) and said: 'O Messenger of
Allah, we have a murder case againt these (people) in the period
of ignorance.' He said: 'The father is not punished over his son.'
He said this three times.

The Arrival of the Delegation of Farwah Ibn
‘Amr AlJudhami, the Sovereign of the Land of
Mu‘an, to Declare His Islam
Ibn Ishaq said: Farwah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn An-Nafirah Al-Judhami and
An-Nufathi sent envoyrs to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, conveying his acceptance of
Islam and he sent as a gift a white mule. He was a representative
of Rome in charge of the adjacent Arab territories. His residence
was at Mu‘an and the surrounding areas in the territory of Syria.
When Rome became aware of his acceptance of Islam they
sought him out until they apprehended him and detained him.
When the Romans gathered to crucify him by one of their
watering place known as ‘Ifra at Palestine he said:
Alas, has it reached Salma that her spouse
Is by the oasis of ‘Ifra on top a gallows
218

On a camel whose mother has not been mated by a male
Whose edges have been pruned by a sickle
Az-Zuhri claims that when he was brought for execution, he said:
Convey to the leaders of the Muslims that
I have surrendered to my Lord, my bones and my position
Then they beheaded him and crucified him by that water. May
Allah have Mercy and be pleased with him, and make him
pleased and make Paradise his final abode.

The Arrival of Tameem Ad-Dari, His
Encounter With AlJassasah and What He
Heard from Ad-Dajjal Concerning the Advent
of the Prophet
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Fatimah Bint Qais:
Tameem Ad-Dari came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and informed him that he
traveled on the high sea and their ship was tossed by the waves.
They were taken to an island and they came out of the ship
seeking fresh water. They met a creature with long dragging hair.
They asked him: “Who are you?” He said: “I am Jassasah.” They
said: “Give us information,” and Jassasah said: “I will not inform
you (of anything) but go into this island.” We went in and found
a man fettered. He asked: “Who are you?” We replied: “We are
men from the Arabs.” He asked further: “What is the news of this
Prophet that has emerged from your midst?” We said:

219

“Peoplehave believed in him, followed him and acknowledged
the truth of his message.” The man said: “That is better for them.”
He then asked: “Inform me about the spring of Zughar, what has
happened to it?” We informed him and he leaped up so high that
we almost exited behind the wall. Then he asked: “Inform me
about the date-palm trees of Baisan. Are they bearing fruits or
not?” We informed him that it is bearing fruits. Again he leapt
up in a similar manner as the first time. Then he said: “I will soon
be permitted to go out and I will travel throughout the land
excluding Taibah.” Afterward, (when Tameem had narrated the
encounter to him) the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, brought him (i.e. Tameem) out and he
addressed the people and said: “This is Taibah (Madinah) and
that was Dajjal.”

The Delegation of Banu Asad
Al-Waqidi related that in the beginning of the 9th year, the
delegation of Banu Asad came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. They were ten delegates among
whom were Dirar Ibn Al-Azwar, Wabisah Ibn Ma‘bad, Tulaihah
Ibn Khuwailid who would later claim prophethood but would
eventually return back to Islam and became a good Muslim, and
Nuqadah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Khalaf. Their leader, Hadramee Ibn
‘Amir said: “O Messenger of Allah, we have come to you under
the pitch-dark night in a cold season but you did not send envoys
to us. Concerning them, the following Verse was revealed: Count
not your Islam as a favor upon me. Nay, but Allah has conferred
a favor upon you, that He has guided you to the Faith, if you
indeed are true. (Soorah Al-Hujurat 49:17)

220

Among them was a tribe known as Banu Zinyah and
theMessenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, changed their name saying: “You are Banu Rishdah”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
had asked Nuqadah Ibn Abdullah Ibn Khalaf to direct him to a
camel that is good for riding and milking without any offspring
with her. He sought and found (such a camel) with one of his
cousins and brought it to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, who ordered that it be milked. He drank
out of it gave the remainder to him and then said: “Allah, bless it
and the one who has bestowed it.”

The Delegation of Banu Abs
Al-Waqidi related that they were nine individuals (and AlWaqidi recounted their names) and the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said to them: “I am your tenth.”
He ordered Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaidullah to fix a flag for them. Thus
their slogan became, “The ten.” He also mentioned that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked
them concerning Khalid Ibn Sinan Al-Absi and they mentioned
that he left no successor and (the narrator) also mentioned that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
sent them to lay ambush for the caravan of the Quraish caravan
coming from Syria. This indicates that their coming preceded the
Conquest of Makkah. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

The Delegation of Bani Fazarah
Al-Waqidi related that on the authority of Abu Wajzah As-Sa’di
who narrated that when Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, returned from the expedition of Tabook,
which was in the 9th year, the delegation of Banu Fazarah came
221

to him. The delegation consisted of about ten delegates, among
whom were Kharijah Ibn Hisn, Al-Harith Ibn Qais Ibn Hisn who
was the youngest of them and was riding a lean animal. They
came to confess their acceptance of Islam. Allah’s Messeneger
asked them about their land and one of them said: “O Messenger
of Allah, our land has stagnated, our livestock have been
destroyed and our farmlands have become arid and our family
famished. Please supplicate to Allah for us.” The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, climbed the
minbar and supplicated: “O Allah, provide water for Your land
and Your animals and spread Your Mercy and revive Your dead
land. O Allah! Send down to us Your rain relieving, profuse,
fertile, consistent, ample, instant and not delayed, beneficial and
not destructive. O Allah! Grant us a rain that is merciful and not
punitive, devastating, drowning and annihilating. O Allah! Send
down rain on us and help us against the enemy.” Then it rained
and it did not cease for a week. Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, once again ascended the minbar
and supplicated: “O Allah! Around us and not upon us; on the
hillock, rocks, the middle of the valley and the roots of tree.”

The Delegation of Banu Murrah
Al-Waqidi related that they arrived in the 9th year during the
Prophet’s return from Tabook. They were three individuals
among whom was Al-Harith Ibn ‘Awf. Allah’s Messenger
granted them ten ounce of silver and he gave AlHarith Ibn ‘Awf
twelve Ooqiyyahs. They informed him that their land was barren
and requested him to supplicate (to Allah) for them. He said:
“Allah! Send down rain for them.” When they returned to their
land, they found that rain had fallen the same day that the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, supplicated for them.
222

The Delegation of Banu Tha‘labah
Al-Waqidi related that "when Allah’s Messenger returned from
Ji‘ranah in the 8th year, four of us came to him and said: 'We are
emissaries of our people and they are (conveying) their
profession of Islam.' He arranged an accommodation for us and
we stayed for some days and then we came to bid him farewell.
He said to Bilal: 'Make provision for them as you normally do
for a delegation.' He then came with a cow laden with silver and
he gave each one of us five ounce (of silver).” He said: 'We do
not have Dirhams.' Then we returned to our country.

The Arrival of Banu Muharib
Al-Waqidi related that "Muhammad Ibn Saleh narrated to me on
the authority of Abi Wajzah As-Sa’di who said that the
delegation of Maharib arrived in the 10th year during the
Farewell Pilgrimage. They were ten delegates among whom
were Sawa’ Ibn Al-Harith and his son Khuzaimah Ibn Sawa‘.
They stayed at the house ofRamlah Bint Al-Harith. Bilal used to
come to them morning and evening. They accepted Islam and
they said: 'We are representing those whom we left behind.' That
season, there was no one who had been more rough and crude to
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
than them. Among the delegation was a man whom Allah’s
Messenger recognized. He said: 'Praise be to Allah who has
preserved me until I believed in you.' Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
, said: 'This heart is in the Hand of Allah, the Exalted.' Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), wiped
the face of Khuzaimah Ibn Sawa’ and there appeared a white spot
223

and he provided for them as he would do for a delegation and
they left for their country."

The Delegation of Banu Kilab
Al-Waqidi related that they arrived in the 9th year. They were
three individuals: the poets Labeed Ibn Rabee‘ah, Jabbar Ibn
Sulma who shared some friendship with Ka‘b Ibn Malik. He
welcomed him, honored him and gave him gifts. He
accompanied him to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), and greeted him with the greeting of Islam.
They also mentioned to him that Ad-Dahhak Ibn Sufyan AlKilabi had gone around among them with the Book of Allah and
the Sunnah of His Messenger with which Allah had commanded
him and he invited them to Allah. They had responded to him
and he had taken their Zakah from the wealthy and gave it to their
poor.

The Delegation of Banu Ru’as Ibn Kilab
Al-Waqidi related that "a man named ‘Amr Ibn Malik Ibn Qais
Ibn Bujaid Ibn Ru’as Ibn Kilab Ibn Rabee‘ah Ibn Amir Ibn
Sa‘sa‘ah came to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), accepted Islam, returned to his people and
invited them to Allah; however they said:'Not until we do to
Banu ‘Uqail exactly what they did to us.' He mentioned the wars
that took place between them and that this same Amr Ibn Malik
had killed someone from Banu ‘Uqail, and his hands became
tied. I came to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), and the news had reached him and he had said: 'If
he comes to me I will cut loose the fetter of his hands.' When I
came to him, I greeted him but he did not return my greeting and
224

he turned away from me. I approached him from his right and he
turned away. I came to him from his left and still he turned away.
I approached directly from his front and I said: 'O Messenger of
Allah, the pleasure of the Lord is sought and He grants it, be
pleased with me, may Allah be pleased with you (as well).' Then
the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said: 'I
am pleased with you'.”

The Delegation of Banu ‘Uqail Ibn Ka‘b
Al-Waqidi related that they came to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and he apportioned to them
Al-‘Aqeeq, ‘Aqeeq Banu ‘Uqail, which was a piece of land
where there were date-palms and water springs. He wrote for
them a document to that effect:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, this is what
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, has given to Rabee‘ah,
Mutarrif, and Anas. I have given them Al-‘Aqeeq as long as they
establish the Salat, offer the Zakah, listen and obey, and they do
not infringe on the rights of a Muslim.”
The document remained in the hands of Mutarrif. The narrator
added: Laqeet Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Al-Muntafiq Ibn ‘Amir Ibn ‘Uqail
known as Abu Razeen also came to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and he gave him an oasis
known as An-Nazeem which he sold tohis people. We have
mentioned earlier his arrival, his story and statement extensively
and to Allah belongs Praise and Grace.

225

The Delegation of Banu Qushair Ibn Ka‘b
Their coming was prior to the Farewell Pilgrimage and the Battle
of Hunain. It is mentioned that Qurrah Ibn Hubairah Ibn ‘Amir
Ibn Salamah Al-Khair Ibn Qushair was among them. He
accepted Islam and Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), gave him a burdah (covering cloth) to wear
and appointed him in charge of his people’s Sadaqah (alms).

The Delegation of Banu Al-Bakka’
Al-Waqidi related that they came in the 9th year and that they
were thirty men in number. Among them was Mu‘awiyah Ibn
Thawr Ibn Ibadah Ibn AlBakka’. His age on that day was 100
years. With him was his son known as Bishr. He said: “O Allah’s
Messenger, I seek blessing by your touch. I have grown old and
this son of mine has been dutiful to me, please wipe his face.”
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), did as requested and gave him an additional sandy-colored
female goat, and he supplicated for their blessing. Afterward,
they were never afflicted with drought or famine.

The Delegation of Kinanah
Al-Waqidi related with his own chain of narrations that Wathilah
Ibn AlAsqa’ Al-Laithi came to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), on his way to Tabook. He
offered the early morning prayer with him and then returned to
his people and invited them and spoke to them about Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Exasperated by his impudence, his father said: “I shall never
speak to you again.” Nevertheless, hissister listened to his words
226

and accepted Islam. She supplied him with provision and he was
able to accompany the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), to Tabook riding on Ka‘b Ibn Uujrah’s
camel. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), dispatched him along with Khalid to Ukaidir
Doomah. On their return, Wathilah presented to Ka‘b Ibn Uujrah
part of the booty which fell to his lot in compensation for
granting him a ride on his camel but Ka‘b said to him: “I gave
you a ride solely for the sake of Allah.”

The Delegation of Ashja‘
Al-Waqidi mentioned that they arrived in the year of Khandaq.
They were 100 men in total. Their leader was Mas‘ood Ibn
Rukhailah. They dismounted by the mountain pass of Sala’ and
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
went to meet them and ordered for them loads of dates. It is also
said that they arrived after the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), had finished dealing with Banu
Quraizah. They were 700 men. He concluded a peace treaty with
them and they returned, and afterward they accepted Islam.

The Delegation of Bahilah
Their leader, Mutarrif Ibn Al-Kahin arrived after the Conquest
(of Makkah) and accepted Islam. He obtained guarantee on
behalf of his people and a document was written for him
containing the obligatory duties and laws of Islam. It was
‘Uthman who wrote the document.

227

The Delegation of Banu Sulaim
A man from Banu Sulaim known as Qais Ibn Nushbah came to
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
He listened to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), andasked him questions on a number of things to
which he responded. Allah’s Messenger invited him to Islam and
he accepted. He returned to his people, Banu Sulaim, and
addressed them saying: “I have listened to the Roman memoirs,
the subtleties of the Persians, the poetry of the Arabs, the
divination of the soothsayers, and the words of the chieftains of
Yemen; none of them resembles the words of Muhammad. So
follow me so that you may take your own portion from him.” In
the year of the Conquest, Banu Sulaim, numbering 700, set out
and met the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), at Qudaid. It is also said they were 1,000 in number
among whom was Al-‘Abbas Ibn Mirdas and a number of their
dignitaries, and they accepted Islam.

The Delegation of Banu Hilal Ibn ‘Amir
Among their delegation were ‘Abd ‘Awf Ibn Asram who
accepted Islam, and Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), changed his name to ‘Abdullah, and
Qabeesah Ibn Mukhariq, about whom there is a story concerning
the Sadaqah. Also in the delegation was Ziyad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
Malik Ibn Bujair Ibn Al-Huzam Ibn Ruaibah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
Hilal Ibn ‘Amir. When he entered Madinah, he headed for the
residence of his maternal aunt, Maimoonah Bint Al-Harith and
went in to see her. When Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), entered his residence and when
he saw him he becam angry and left. She said: “O Messenger of
228

Allah, he is my nephew.” He returned and soon went out to the
Mosque along with Ziyad. They offered the Dhuhr prayer and
then he drew close to Ziyad and he prayed for him, placed his
hand on his head and then glided it down to the tip of his nose.
The Banu Hilal used to say: “Since then we never ceased to
discern blessing from the face of Ziyad.”

The Delegation of Banu Bakr Ibn Wa’il
Al-Waqidi related that when they arrived, they asked Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), about
Quss Ibn Sa‘idah and he said: “He is not from you. He was a
man who would walk barefoot from Iyad to ‘Ukaz, during the
period of ignorance while the people were gathered and he
would address them.” He recited to them some of his words
which he had memorized.

The Delegation of Banu Taglib
Al-Waqidi related that they were 16 men comprising Muslims
and Christians, (the latter) wore golden crosses. They stayed in
the house of Ramlah Bint AlHarith and the Messenger of Allah,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), had a peace pact
with the Christians upon the condition that they would not
baptize their children into Christianity and gave grants to the
Muslims among them.

The Arrival of the Delegation of Tujeeb
Al-Waqidi related that they arrived from Yemen in the 9th year.
They were thirteen individuals and the Messenger of Allah,

229

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), gave them a grant
more than he gave to others.

The Delegation of Khawlan
Al-Waqidi related that they were ten and that they arrived in
Sha‘ban in the 10th year. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), asked them about their idol
which they called ‘Amm Anas and they said: “Allah has replaced
it with that which is better. When we return, we shall demolish
it.” They learned the Qur’an and Sunan. When theyreturned to
their country, they demolished the idol; they permitted what
Allah has permitted and forbade what Allah has forbidden.

The Ju’fi Delegation
Al-Waqidi related that they used to forbid eating the heart (of
animals). When their delegation became Muslims, Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ordered
them to eat the heart. He ordered that an (animal heart) be
barbecued and gave it to their leader and said: “Your Iman (faith)
will not be complete until you eat it.” He took it with a trembling
hand and ate it. Then he said: “Eating the heart was detested (by
me), in such a way that my fingers trembled when it touched it.”

The Delegation of As-Sadif
About ten riders arrived and they found Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), on his Minbar
addressing the people. They sat down without greeting. The
Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said to them: “Are you Muslims?” They answered in the
230

affirmative and he said: “Shouldn’t you have said the Salam?”
They got up swiftly and said: “Peace, Mercy and Blessing (of
Allah) be upon you, O Prophet.” He responded: “And upon you
be peace. Sit down.”They sat down and they later asked him
about the times of Salawat (prayers).”

The Delegation of Khushain
Abu Tha‘labah Al-Khushani came to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), while he was preparing for
Khaibar. He participated in the expedition of Khaibar along with
him. Afterward, he came with about ten men from his people and
they accepted Islam.

The Delegation of Banu Sa’d
Then he mentioned the delegation of Banu Sa’d, Hudhaim,
Baliyy, Bahra’, Bani Udhrah, Salaman, Juhainah, Bani Kalb, AlJarmiyyeen. We have mentioned earlier the Hadith of ‘Amr Ibn
Salmah Al-Jarmi in Saheeh AlBukhari.
He also mentioned the delegation of Al-Azd; the delegation of
Ghassan, AlHarith Ibn Ka‘b, Hamdan, Sa’d, Al-‘Asheerah and
‘Ans. The delegations also included, the Dariyyeen,
Rahawiyyeen, Banu Ghamid, Nakha‘, Bajeelah, Khath‘am,
Hadramawt. He mentioned that among them were Wa’il Ibn Hujr
and the four kings: Jamd, Mikhwas, Mishrah and Abda‘ah. It is
recorded in the Musnad of Imam Ahmad that they were cursed
along with their sister AlAmarradah. Al-Waqidi spoke at length
on this.

231

He also mentioned the delegations of Azd Oman, Ghafiq, Bariq,
Daws, Thumalah, Al-Huddan, Aslam, Judham, Mahrah, Himyar,
Najran and
Ja’ishahn and he discussed these different tribes very
extensively. We have presented earlier some of their concerns in
our previous narration which is sufficient. And Allah (SWT)
knows best.

The Delegation of the As-Siba’ (Beasts of Prey)
On the authority of ‘Abdul-Muttalib Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Hantab
who narrated that while Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), was sitting in the midst of his
Companions in Madinah, a wolf came and stood in front of him
and howled. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), said: “This is the delegation of the beasts of prey
that has come to you. If you wish you may apportion something
for them which will not go to any other than them, otherwise you
let it be and you will protected from it, but whatever it takes is
its provision.” They said: “OAllah’s Messenger, we are not
pleased to give it anything.” Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), signaled to it with three fingers
and it went back with two honeycombs. This narration is mursal
from this angle and it appears that this is the same wolf
mentioned in the Hadith related by Ahmad.

The Arrival of Al-Azd
Suwaid Ibn Al-Harith said: "I was the seventh of the delegates of
my people to Allah Messenger. When we came to him, we spoke
with him and our speech and appearance impressed him. He
asked, 'Who are you?' We said: 'We are believers.' Allah’s
232

Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), smiled
and said: 'Every statement has its truth. What is the truth of your
statement and Iman?' Suwaid added: We said, 'They are fifteen
practices. Five of them, your envoy commanded us to believe in
them, five of them, you commanded us to carry out, and the
remaining five have been part of our character since the period
of ignorance unless you detest anything from it.' The Messenger
asked: 'What are the five things that my envoy commanded you
to believe in?' We answered: 'He commanded us to believe in
Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers, and Resurrection
after death.'
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), then asked: 'What are the five things I have commanded
you to do?' We said: 'You commanded us to say that there is none
worthy of worship (in truth) except Allah, that we should
establish the prayer, pay the Zakah, that we should fast the month
of Ramadan, and that we should go on pilgrimage if we are able
and find the means.' He asked: 'What are the five things which
were part of your character since the time of Ignorance?' We said:
'Gratitude in times of comfort, patience in times of adversity,
truthfulness at the point of meeting (the enemy), and glee over
the misfortune of the enemies.' Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: 'Wise men and scholars,
their men of knowledge almost were Prophets.' And he added: 'I
shall add five more things for them making it twenty if you are
as you have said. Do not amass what you cannot eat, do not build
a house in which you will not live, do not vie (with one another)
over what you know will be ephemeral tomorrow, fear Allah to
Whom is your returning and to Whom you shall be presented (for
judgment), and be desirous of what you are heading to (Paradise)
in which you shall live forever.' The people went away from the
233

presence of Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), and they memorized his advice and implemented it."
It has been mentioned earlier that a delegation of the Jinncame in
Makkah before the Hijrah. We have examined the discussion on
that in the explanation of Allah’s statement: “And (remember)
when We sent toward you (O Muhammad) Nafran (three to ten
persons) of the Jinn, (quietly) listening to the Qur’an.” (Soorah
Al-Ahqaf 46:29)
This and other similar narrations indicate the repeated coming of
the delegation of the Jinn to Makkah. We have also stated that
repeatedly in a manner that suffices.

The 10th Year: Allah’s Messenger Dispatches
Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to Banu Al-Harith
Ibn Ishaq related that afterward, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), dispatched Khalid Ibn AlWaleed in the month of Rabee’ Ul- Akhir or Jumad Al-Ooala, in
10th A.H. to Banu Al-Harith Ibn Ka‘b in Najran. He ordered him
to invite them to Islam for three days prior to any fighting. In the
event of their accepting Islam, he should accept it from them,
otherwise he should fight them ifthey refused.
Khalid marched out, dispersing convoys in different directions to
invite people to Islam saying: “O People embrace Islam and you
will be safe.” So people accepted Islam. In deference to the
command of Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), in the event of their accepting Islam, he refrained
from fighting them. He stayed with them to teach them Islamic
teachings, the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet.
234

Then Khalid wrote to the Messenger of Allah:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, (this isletter
to Muhammad, the Prophet and Messenger of Allah, from Khalid
Ibn Waleed. Peace, Mercy and Blessing of Allah be on you.
Praise be to Allah beside Whom there is no god. O Messenger of
Allah, you sent me to Banu Al-Harith Ibn Ka‘b commanding me
not to fight them for three days, to call them to Islam and to
remain with them if they embrace it, and to accept it from them
and teach them the religion, the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
His Prophet; and in case they do not submit, I should fight them.
I went to them, invited them to Islam for three days as ordained
by Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), and I sent convoys among them saying: ‘OBanu Al-Harith,
embrace Islam and you will be safe.’ They accepted it without a
fight and I remained among them enjoining on them what Allah
has commanded and forbidding them from what Allah has
forbidden, and educating them about Islamic teachings and the
Sunnah of the Prophet. And Peace, Mercy and Blessing of Allah
be on you.”
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
wrote back to him thus:
“In the Name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful, (this is a)
letter from Muhammad, the Prophet and Messenger of Allah, to
Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed. Peace, Mercy and Blessing of Allah be
on you. Praise be to Allah beside Whom there is no god. I
received your letter from your envoy informing me that Banu AlHarith Ibn Ka‘b has embraced Islam without a fight, that they
responded to (the teaching of) Islam which you had invited them
to, that they have testified that none deserves to be worshipped
235

(in truth) except Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and
Messenger, and that Allah has guided them with His guidance (to
the Right Path). So promise them (the good consequence of their
work) and warn them (against the evil of disobedience), and
come with a delegation from them. Peace, Mercy and Blessing
of Allah be on you.”
So, Khalid came to the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), with a delegation from Banu Al-Harith
Ibn Ka‘b.
Ibn Ishaq added: Afterward, they returned to their people during
the remaining days of Shawwal or in the beginning of DhulQa‘dah. He also said: After the delegation had left, he (Allah’s
Messenger) also sent to them ‘Amr Ibn Hazm to teach them
Islam, the Sunnah, the Islamic rulings, and to take from them
their Zakah. He wrote a document for him stating that his
agreement (with them) is his own agreement the command (of
‘Amr) is his command.

Allah’s Messenger Sent Ameers to the People
of Yemen Prior to the Farewell Pilgrimage
Al-Bukhari says in the chapter of the dispatch of Abu Moosa and
Mu’adh Ibn Jabal to Yemen that on the authority of Abu Burdah,
who narrated that the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), sent Mu’adh and AbuMoosa to Yemen. He sent each
of them to administer a province as Yemen consisted of two
provinces. He said to them: “Treat the people with ease and do
not be hard on them; give them glad tidings and do not fill them
with aversion.” In another narration, he added: “And love each
other, and do not differ.” Thus, each of them went to carry out
236

his job. So when any one of them toured his province and
happened to come near (the border of the province of) his
companion, he would visit him and greet him. Once Mu’adh
toured that part of his state which was near (the border of the
province of) his companion Abu Moosa.
Mu’adh came riding his mule until he reached Abu Moosa and
saw him sitting, and the people had gathered around him. There
was a man tied with his hands behind his neck. Mu’adh said to
Abu Moosa: “‘Abdullah Ibn Qais, what is this?” Abu Moosa
replied: “This man has reverted to polytheism after embracing
Islam.” Mu’adh said: “I will not dismount until he is killed.” Abu
Moosa replied: “He has been brought for this purpose, so
dismount.” Mu’adh said: “I will not dismount until he is killed.”
So Abu Moosa ordered that he be killed, and he was killed. Then
Mu’adh dismounted and said: “O ‘Abdullah (Ibn Qais) ! How do
you recite the Qur’an?” Abu Moosa said: “I recite the Qur’an
regularly at intervals and piecemeal.” He asked: “How do you
recite it, O Mu’adh?” Mu’adh said: “I sleep in the first part of the
night and then get up after having slept for the time devoted for
my sleep and then recite as much as Allah has written for me. So
I seek Allah’s reward for both my sleep as well as my prayer (at
night).”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said to
Mu’adh when he sent him to Yemen: “You are going to the
People of the Scripture, so when you reach them, invite them to
testify that none has the right to be worshipped except
Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger. If they obey you in
that, then tell them that Allah has enjoined on them five prayers
to be performed every day and night. If they obey you in that,
237

then tell them that Allah has enjoined on them Sadaqah (i.e.
Zakah) to be taken from the rich among them and given to the
poor among them. If they obey you in that, then be cautious!
Don’t take their best properties (as Zakah) and be afraid of the
curse of an oppressed person as there is no screen between his
invocation and Allah.”
It is narrated that Mu’adh used to say: “Allah’s Messenger sent
me to Yemen and said: ‘Perhaps you will (come back and) pass
by my grave and my Mosque. I have sent you to a people whose
hearts are soft and they fight upon the truth (saying that twice).
So fight along with those who follow you from among them
against those who disobey you until they return to Islam, and the
woman hastens to her spouse, son to his father, brother to his
brother and until tranquility prevails between two lovers.”
This Hadith contains a clear indication and prophecy that Mu’adh
would not meet Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), and this is exactly what happened. He
remained in Yemen until the time of the Farewell Pilgrimage and
then the Messenger of Allah’s death occurred 81 days after the
Farewell Hajj.
Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Malik narrated that Mu’adh Ibn Jabal was a
handsome and big-hearted young man from the best of theyouth
of his people. He was never asked anything except that he gave
it until his debt overwhelmed his wealth. He asked Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), to
intervene with his creditors on his behalf and he did. If someone
were to be let off based on the statement of another, it should
have been Mu’adh. He would have been left because of the
statement of Allah’s Messenger. So Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
238

and Blessings of Allah be upon him), supplicated for him and
continued to distribute his wealth and portions among his
creditors. Eventually, Mu’adh became penniless. When Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
performed the last pilgrimage, he sent Mu’adh to Yemen to
improve his condition. The first person to be restored with this
wealth was Mu’adh.
The sub-narrator added: He came to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may
Allah be pleased with him, from Yemen when Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), had
died. ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, came to Mu’adh
and said to him: “Do you have any desire to follow me so that
you may return this wealth to Abu Bakr? If he leaves it for you
then you may take it.” Mu’adh replied: “Why should I return it
to him when Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), sent me in order to improve my condition?” When
Mu’adh objected, ‘Umar went to Abu Bakr and said: “Send for
this man and take from him (his wealth) and let him go.” Abu
Bakr said: “I shall not do such (a thing). Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), sent him to Yemen
to improve his condition and I shall not take away anything from
him.” In the morning, Mu’adh went to ‘Umar and said: “I have
no other choice but to follow your advice. I saw myself in a
dream being dragged into the Hellfire while you were pulling me
away from it.” Thus, he went to Abu Bakr with all that he came
back with from Yemen until he even brought a whip. He swore
to him that he did not hide anything. Abu Bakr, mayAllah be
pleased with him, said: “It is for you, I shall not take anything
from you.”

239

Then Al-Baihaqi mentioned a corroboration for the Hadith of
Mu’adh’s sleep on the authority of ‘Abdullah and that all that he
brought (from Yemen) were slaves and he brought them to Abu
Bakr. When all of them were returned to him, he went back with
them. One day, he stood up to pray and they all stood up and
prayed with him. When he concluded the prayer, he asked them:
“To whom were you praying?” They responded: “To Allah.” So
he said: “Then you are free for His sake,” and so he set them free.

Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), Sent ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
and Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to Yemen
Al-Bara’ narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), sent Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to the people
of Yemen to invite them to Islam. Al- Bara’ added: I was among
those who set out with Khalid Ibn AlWaleed. We stayed for six
months inviting them to Islam but they did not respond to him.
Then Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), sent ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and also ordered that Khalid should
return (with his entourage) excluding one man who had been
with Khalid. I wished I would be left behind with ‘Ali. Al-Bara’
continued: I was among those left behind with ‘Ali. When we
came close to the people, they came out to meet us. ‘Ali stepped
forward and led us in prayer and then he arranged us into a single
row. Then he went forward in front of us and read the letter of
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
to them and the people of Hamdan accepted Islam in their
entirety. ‘Ali sent a letter to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), informing him of their
acceptance of Islam. When Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) read the letter, he prostrated and
240

when he raised his head, he said: “Peace be unto Hamdan, peace
be unto Hamdan.”
It is related that Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri said: Allah’s Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), sent ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib to Yemen. Abu Sa’eed continued: I was among those who
set out along with him. When he took Zakah of camels, we asked
him to allow us to ride on them so that we may relieve our camels
for we noticed some weakness in our camels but he refused and
said: “Your share in it is similar to that of other Muslims.”
When‘Ali was through (with his assignment) and was set on a
return journey, he appointed someone to lead us and he hastened
back and he caught the Hajj. When he had concluded his Hajj,
the Prophet said to him: “Go back to your companions and lead
them.”
Abu Sa’eed continued: "We had asked the person ‘Ali had
appointed in his stead to allow us to ride the camels of Zakah
since ‘Ali did not prohibit us directly himself. So he did. On his
return, when ‘Ali discovered that the camels of Zakah had been
ridden and he saw signs to that effect, he censured and
reproached the person he had appointed in his place. I said: I
swear by Allah that I shall take it upon myself to report to Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) the
harshness and straitening that we were subjected to. When we
got back to Madinah, early in the morning, I went to Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with the
intention of fulfilling my vow. I met Abu Bakr coming out from
the presence of Allah’s Messenger. When he saw me, he stayed
with me, welcomed me and asked about my affairs and I asked
him about his. He asked: 'When did you arrive?' I said: 'I came
back last night.' He went back with me to see the Messenger of
241

Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He entered
and said: 'Here is Sa’d Ibn Malik Ibn Ash-Shaheed.' Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
'Let him enter.' When I entered, I greeted him and he returned my
greeting. He turned to me and asked me about myself and my
family. I quickly broached the matter: 'O Messenger of Allah,
(you should have seen) what we experienced of harshness and
bad companionship.' The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), withdrew while I enumerated
all our experience with him (i.e. ‘Ali) until when I was still in the
middle of my speech, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), patted my thigh for I was close to him and
said: 'O Sa’d Ibn Malik Ibn Shaheed, refrain from your talk about
your brother, ‘Ali, for you know that he was merely harsh for
them in the path of Allah.' I said to myself: 'O Sa’d Ibn Malik,
may your mother be bereft of you! Shouldn’t you have told me
that I have engaged you in what is detestable all day? By Allah I
shall never mention him with evil (again) whether secretly or
openly'.”
The import of this episode is that many rumors were spread
concerning his command of that army solely because of his
objection to the use of the camels of Zakah and his retrieval of
the garments which his deputy had given out to them. ‘Ali was
excused from all that he did but the comments became rife
among the pilgrims. This is why, And Allah (SWT) knows best,
when Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) returned from his pilgrimage and he concluded his rites and
on his return journey to Madinah, at Ghadeer Khumm, he rose to
address the people. He absolved Ali publicly, boosted his esteem

242

and described him with virtues in order to dissipate what the
hearts of many people were entertaining concerning him.

The Farewell Pilgrimage in the 10th Year
This is because Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) bade farewell to the people during it and
never performed any other Hajj after it. It is calledHajjat ul-Islam
because Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), never undertook any Hajj from Madinah other than
this even though he performed Hajj before the Hijrah several
times prior to Prophethood and after it. It is said that the
obligation of Hajj was promulgated that year. It is also said that
it was obligated in the 9th year while some said it was in the 6th
year. Others opine that the obligation was revealed just before
the Hijrah but this is very strange. It is called Hajjat ul-Balagh
because Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), conveyed to the people the Islamic law of Hajj both
in statement and action. Thus, there was nothing left of the
cornerstones and pillars of Islam except that he (Allah’s
Messenger) had explained them. He explained to them the laws
of Hajj, Allah revealed while he was standing on ‘Arafah: “This
day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed My Favor
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion.”
(SoorahAl-Ma’idah 5:3) An explanation of all this will be
presented later.
The import of this explanation is to relate the description of the
Hajj of the Prophet as there are considerable variances among the
narrations concerning it, according to the knowledge that reached
each one of the narrators, which caused them to differ especially

243

after the generation of the Companions, Allah be pleased with
them all.
Here we cite what the Imams have related in their books from
these narrations and we reconcile all of them in a manner that
will delight anyone who contemplates and examines them
carefully, reconciling between the two routes of the Hadith and
understanding their meanings, insha’Allah. In Allah we place our
reliance and to Him (all affairs) are entrusted. People have paid
considerable attention to the Hajj of the Messenger of Allah,
from the earlier scholars to the later ones. ‘Allamah Abu
Muhammad Ibn Hazm Al-Andalusi, may Allah have Mercy on
him, has compiled an entire volume on the Farewell Pilgrimage
demonstrating his mastery in much of it, albeit he had some
falseimpressions which we shall point out in their proper places.

Explanation of the Fact About the Hajj of
Allah’s Messenger From Madinah
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Anas who said: “Allah’s
Messenger performed four ‘Umrahs all of them in the month of
Dhul-Qa’dah, except the one which he performed during his
Hajj.”
The first: out of these ‘Umrahs (of the Prophet) was the ‘Umrah
of AlHudaibiyah from which he was prevented. Then after that was
the ‘Umrah AlQada’ (redemption). It is also known as the
‘Umrah Al-Qisas (of reprisal). It is equally known as the ‘Umrah
of Al-Qadiyyah. Subsequently came the ‘Umrah Al-Ji‘ranah on
his return from Ta’if where he distributed the booty of (the battle

244

of) Hunain. Discussions on all of these have preceded at their
proper places.
The fourth ‘Umrah performed by the Prophet was the one he
performed along with his Hajj. We shall explain the differences
among the people concerning this ‘Umrah, which he performed
with the Hajj. Was it (the Hajj) Mutamatti’ such that the ‘Umrah
occurred before the Hajj and then he became free (of Ihram) or
he was prevented from being free (from Ihram) by his coming
with Hady. Or was it Qarin (simultaneous) with his Hajj as we
mentioned from the Ahadeeth pointing to that. Or was it Mufrid
(i.e.singled out) from the Hajj such that the ‘Umrah occurred
after he had completed the Hajj rites. This is the argument of
those who subscribe to the fact that it was Ifrad, as is wellknown
from Ash-Shafi‘i. An explanation of these shall be
presentedduring our discussion on his assumption of Ihram to
determine whether he undertook Ifrad, Mutamatti’ or Qarin.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Zaid Ibn Arqam that the
Prophet fought 19 Ghazwahs (battles) and performed Hajj once
after he migrated (to Madinah).Abu Ishaq said: “Another one
was in Makkah.”
What Abu Ishaq states here is that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), performed Hajj in Makkah
“another Hajj” implying that he did not perform more than one
Hajj in Makkah as is apparent in his wordings, which of course
is quite remote. This is because after Prophethood, Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to
attend the season of Hajj and he would invite the people to Allah
saying: “Who would give me protection so that I can deliver the
message of my Lord, for the Quraish have prevented me from
245

conveying the message of my Lord?” This remained the case
until Allah ordained for him a group of Ansar who met him on
the night of ‘Aqabah, i.e. on the eve of the day of Nahr by the
Jamrah Al‘Aqabah, for three years consecutively until the third
year when they pledged to him on the night of the second
‘Aqabah which was their third meeting with him. Soon after, the
Hijrah to Madinah took place just as we have related earlier in its
proper context. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

His Exit From Madinah for the Farewell
Pilgrimage
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with his
Companions proceeded from Madinah after combing and oiling
his hair and putting on two sheets ofIhram). He did not forbid
anyone to wear any kind of sheets except the ones colored and
dipped in with saffron, because they may leave a scar of scent on
the skin. In the early morning, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) mounted his ride while in Dhul-Hulaifah
and set out until they reached Baida’. That happened four nights
toward the end of DhulQa‘dah and he reached Makkah on the 5th
of Dhul- Hijjah.” Al-Bukhari related it exclusively.
Regarding his statement: “That occurred five days toward the end
of DhulQa‘dah,” he meant by it that he got to Dhul-Hulaifah on
the morning of that day. Ibn Hazm argued that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) left
Madinah on Thursday and spent the night of Jumu‘ah at DhulHulaifah until the day of Jumu‘ah corresponding to the 25th day
of Dhul-Qa‘dah. Thus, the statement of Ibn ‘Abbas that: “This
occurred five days toward the end of Dhul-Qa‘dah,” means from
the day of his departure from Madinah after he had oiled, combed
246

his hair and donned his Izar and Rida’; ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) and Jabir narrated that they departed from
Madinah five days toward the end of Dhul-Qa‘dah and this
makes the argument of Ibn Hazm remote and improbable
suggesting the more correct opinion is to the contrary. That day
does not correspond to Friday if the month of Dhul-Qa‘dah was
complete.
It is not possible that the Messenger of Allah’s departure was on
a Friday, because of what is related by Al-Bukhari from Anas Ibn
Malik, who said: “While we were in Madinah, Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) offered
the Dhuhr prayers four Raka‘ahs and offered two Raka‘ahs of the
‘Asr prayers at Dhul-Hulaifah. Then he spent the night there until
the following morning. He then mounted his riding animal and
set out until they reached Baida’ where he uttered the praise of
Allah (Alhamdulillah), glorified Him (Subhan-Allah) and
extolled the greatness of Allah (AllahuAkbar), and then he made
the Talbiyah for Hajj and ‘Umrah.
This nullifies the possibility of the departure of Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ever
occurring on Friday and based on this as well, it is not possible
that his departure was on Thursday as opined by Ibn Hazm
because that corresponds with the 24th day of Dhul- Qa‘dah.
There are no differences on the fact that the first day of DhulHijjah was Thursday as established by concurrent narrations and
the consensus that Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) stood on ‘Arafah on Jumu‘ah, 9th of DhulHijjah, indubitably. If his departure were to occur on Thursday,
24th of Dhul-Qa‘dah, it would leave six nights to the end of the

247

month – the nights of Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday and Wednesday.
Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), and Jabir
have said that he departed five days toward the end of DhulQa‘dah and it is impracticable that it was on Friday based on the
Hadith of Anas. Thus, the day of his departure ought to be
Saturday. The narrator thought that the month was complete but
it is unanimous that the month (of Dhul- Qa‘dah) of that year was
short. At the close of Wednesday, the month of Dhul-Hijjah
began on the night of Thursday. This is corroborated by what
occurs in the narration of Jabir that (his departure was) five or
four days (toward the end of DhulQa‘dah). This is a confirmation
that this is the (more apt) estimation; there is no deviation from
it, by no means. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

The Description of His Departure From
Madinah to Makkah for Pilgrimage
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar that Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to go (for Hajj) via AshShajarah pathway and return viaMu‘arras pathway; and no
doubt, whenever Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) went to Makkah, he used to offer the prayer
in the Mosque of Ash-Shajarah; on his return, he used to offer
the prayer at Dhul- Hulaifah in the middle of the valley, and pass
the night there until the morning.”
On the authority of Anas that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) performed pilgrimage on a shabby mount
and underneath was a velvet sheet and he said: “A Hajj devoid
of show-off and dissimulation.”
248

Al-Bukhari has related in his Saheeh on the authority of
Thumamah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Anas who said: “Allah’s
Messenger performed Hajj on a packsaddle and he was not a
miser.” (Anas added): “Allah’s Messenger performed Hajj on a
pack-saddle and the same mount was carrying his baggage too.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Ishaq Ibn Sa’eed from
his father who narrated: “I set out along with Ibn ‘Umar and we
met a company of Yemenis with leather luggage and the rein of
their camels was rope. So ‘Abdullah said: ‘Whoever wishes to
see the similitude of fellowship common with Allah’s Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his Companions
when they arrived for the Farewell Pilgrimage, then let him look
at this company'.”
On the authority of Asma’ Bint Abu Bakr who narrated: "We set
out with the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
on pilgrimage until we got to Al-Arj where the Messenger of
Allah dismounted and ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her)
sat by his side while I sat by my father. Allah’s Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and AbuBakr shared the
same camel and it was entrusted to a slave-boy of Abu Bakr. Abu
Bakr sat waiting for him to turn up and when he did, his camel
was not with him. Abu Bakr asked: “Where is your camel?” The
boy said: “It got lost yesterday.” Abu Bakr said: “The only camel
and you lost it?” Then he began to hit him while Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was
smiling and saying: “Look at this pilgrim and his action.”
It has been stated earlier that Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) offered four Raka‘ahs of Dhuhr
prayers and then proceeded to Dhul- Hulaifah, which is also
249

known as Wadi Al-‘Aqeeq and he offered the ‘Asr prayers in two
Raka‘ahs which points to the fact that he came to DhulHulaifah
during the day at the time of ‘Asr and thus he shortened the ‘Asr
prayers. Between Madinah and Dhul-Hulaifah was a distance of
three miles and thereafter, he offered the Maghreb and ‘Isha’. He
spent the night there until the morning and led his Companions
in Salat. He then informed them that a revelation had been sent
to them during the night concerning the Ihram.
On the authority of Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar who narrated that the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came while
he was at Al-Mu‘arras in Dhul-Hulaifah. It was said to him: “You
are in a blessed valley.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Umar who narrated: I
heard Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) say while he was in Wadi Al- ‘Aqeeq: “Tonight a
messenger came to me from my Lord and asked me to pray in
this blessed valley and to assume Ihram for Hajj and ‘Umrah
together.” Al-Bukhari related it exclusive of Muslim. Obviously
the command to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) to pray at the valley of ‘Aqeeq was a command to stay
there until he offered the Dhuhr prayers. This is because the order
came tohim in the night and he informed them after the
conclusion of the Subh prayers and there was no Salat coming
just after that except Dhuhr. Thus, he ordered them to offer it
there even if the Ihram would come afterward. This is why he
said: “Tonight a messenger came to me from my Lord and asked
me to pray in this blessed valley and to assume Ihram for Hajj
and ‘Umrah together.” This has been used as evidence for the
obligation of Qiran and incidentally, it is the strongest evidence
on that as shall be explained in due course.
250

The significance of this is that Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was ordered to remain in the
valley of ‘Aqeeq until the time of the Dhuhr prayers, and he
complied. He remained there and visited his wives in turn that
morning; there were nine of them with him at the time, all of
whom had set out with him. He did not leave until he offered the
Dhuhr prayers as shall be explained in due course in the Hadith
of Abi Hassan AlA‘raj from Ibn ‘Abbas that: “Allah’s Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) offered the Dhuhr
prayers at Dhul- Hulaifah and then he branded his Badanah
(sacrificial camels) and he rode his mount and began the
Talbiyah.”
On the authority of Anas Ibn Malik who narrated that: “Allah’s
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) offered
the Dhuhr prayers and then mounted his camel. When he
ascended Al-Baida’, he said the Talbiyah.”
On the authority of Anas also (that): “Allah’s Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) spent the night at DhulHulaifah until the following morning when he offered the Subh
prayers and then rode his camel until it took him to Al-Baidaa
when he pronounced the Talbiyah for both ‘Umrah and Hajj.”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: “I used to
apply perfume onAllah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and then he would visit his wives, and then
he would assumeIhram in the morning while still emitting
perfume.”
On the authority of Kharijah Ibn Zaid Ibn Thabit from his father
who narrated: “He saw Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings

251

of Allah be upon him) remove his cloth for his Talbiyah and take
a bath.”
On the authority of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her)
that: “I applied perfume on Allah’s Messenger with my own
hands with Dhareerah during the Farewell Pilgrimage for exiting
the state of Ihram and entering into it.”
This Hadith points to the fact that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) applied perfume after the bath,
for if the perfume were applied before the bath, it would have
been washed away and none of its traces would remain –
especially three days after assuming Ihram. Some of the
predecessors, including Ibn ‘Umar, have opined that it is
detestable to apply perfume at the time of Ihram.
Ibn ‘Umar narrated that Hafsah, the wife of the Prophet, asked:
“O Messenger of Allah, why have the people finished their Ihram
after performing ‘Umrah but you have not finished your Ihram
after performing ‘Umrah?” He replied: “I have matted my hair
and garlanded my Hady. So I will not finish my Ihram until I
have slaughtered (my Hady).”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that: “When Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) reached
Dhul-Hulaifah, he called for his camel, marked it on the right
side of its hump, removed the blood from it, and tied two sandals
round its neck. He then mounted his camel.” The authors of the
four Sunan have related it through different chains on the
authority of Qatadah.This is a pointer that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) carried out the
marking and garlanding of his Budn (sacrificial camel) with his
own hands and he entrusted the marking and garlanding of the
252

remainder to someone else for his Hady were many either
numbering 100 or slightly less. It is also possible that he
slaughtered 63 with his own hands and told ‘Ali to slaughter the
remainder. The Hadith of Jabir indicates that ‘Ali came from
Yemen with the Prophet’s Budn and the wordings of Ibn Ishaq
mentions that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) shared his Budn with ‘Ali. And Allah (SWT)
knows best. Others mentioned that he (the Messenger of Allah)
and ‘Ali slaughtered 100 camels on the day of Nahr. Based on
this, it is possible that he had herded them all the way from DhulHulaifah and it is equally possible that he bought some of them
afterward while he was a Muhrim.

The Explanation of the Place From Where
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), Began His Talbiyah
On the authority of ‘Umar who narrated (that the Messenger
ofAllah said): “Tonight a messenger came to me from my Lord
and asked me to pray in this blessed valley and to assume Ihram
for Hajj and ‘Umrah together.”
Salim Ibn ‘Abdullah said: I heard my father say, “Never did
Allah’s Messenger assume Ihram except at the mosque, that is,
at the Mosque of DhulHulaifah.”
However, Ibn ‘Umar has narrated something contrary to that as
related on another angle which is related in the Saheehain from
Ibn ‘Umar and he mentioned a Hadith concerning that, which is
that ‘Abdullah said: “As for uttering the Talbiyah, I did not see
Allah’s Messenger utter it until his camel proceeded with him.”

253

Al-Bukhari has said this in the chapter of facing the Qiblah to
utter the Talbiyah.
On the authority of Nafi’ who narrated that whenever Ibn ‘Umar
offered the morning prayers at Dhul-Hulaifah, he would call for
his camel and mount it. When it stood upright, he would face the
Qiblah and then pronounce the Talbiyah until he reached the
sacred precinct. Then he would discontinue until he got to Dhi
Tuwa. He would spend the night until the following morning.
After offering the morning Salat, he would take a bath and he
claimed that Allah’s Messenger did the same thing.
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated: The Prophet,
(Peace and lessings of Allah be upon him) with his Companions
started from Madinah after combing and oiling his hair and
putting on two sheets of Ihram. He did notforbid anyone to wear
any kind of sheets except the ones colored with saffron because
they may leave the scent on the skin. In the early morning, the
Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) mounted
his riding animal while in Dhul-Hulaifah and set out until they
reached Baida’, where he and his Companions recited Talbiyah,
and then they did the ceremony of Taqleed (which means to put
the colored garlands around the necks of the sacrificial animals).
And all that happened on the 25th of Dhul-Qa‘dah.
When he reached Makkah on the 4th of Dhul-Hijjah he
performed the Tawaf round the Ka‘bah and Sa‘i between Safa
and Marwah. Since he had a sacrificial animal with him and had
garlanded it, he did exit from his Ihram. He proceeded toward
the highest places of Makkah near Al-Hajoon and as he had
assumed the Ihram for Hajj, he did not go near the Ka‘bah after
he performed Tawaf until he returned from ‘Arafah. Then he
254

ordered his companions to perform Tawaf and then the Tawaf of
Safa and Marwah, and to cut short the hair of their heads and to
exit from their Ihram. This was only for those people who had
not garlanded a Budn. Those who had their wives with them were
permitted to have sexual relation with them, and similarly use
perfume and (ordinary) clothes were permissible for them. These
narrations from Ibn ‘Abbas in which Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) began his Talbiyah after his
camel had stood upright, are more authentic and well- established
than the Hadith of Khusaif Al-Jazari from Sa’eed Ibn Jubair. And
Allah (SWT) knows best.
The narrations that are well-established and clarify that he began
the Talbiyah when his mount stood upright with him have
precedence over others because of the probability that he
assumed his Ihram at the mosque when his camel had stood
upright with him. Thus the narration containing his riding his
camel wouldthen be an additional information above the others.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.

An Extensive Discussion on the Type of
Ihramthat Allah’s
Messenger Assumed in The Hajj
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
performed Hajj Ifrad. And on the authority of ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her), who said: “We set out along with
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
while some of us had made intention for Hajj, others for ‘Umrah,
and yet some others had made the intention for both Hajj and
255

‘Umrah. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), made the intention for Hajj. Those who made the
intention for ‘Umrah became free after they had
circumambulated the Ka‘bah and went around the Safa and
Marwah. Those who made the intention for Hajj or both Hajj and
‘Umrah did not become free until the day of Nahr.”
On the authority of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her),
who said: “Allah’s Messenger made intention for Hajj and
‘Umrah during the Farewell Pilgrimage and he came along with
his Hady. Some of the people with him made intention for
‘Umrah and drove along with them their Hady. There were others
who, however, made the intention for ‘Umrah but did not drive
along with them the Hady.” ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with
her) added: “I was among those who made intention for ‘Umrah
and did not drive along with them their Hady. When Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), arrived,
he said: ‘Whoever among you has driven the Hady, should not
finish his Ihram until he completes his Hajj; and whoever among
you has not (driven) the Hady with him, should perform Tawaf
of the Ka‘bah and the Sa‘i between Safa andMarwah, then cut
short his hair and exit his Ihram, and then later assume the Ihram
for Hajj; but he must offer a Hady (sacrifice) ; and if anyone
cannot afford a Hady, he should fast for three days during the
Hajj and seven days when he returns home.” ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) added: “Then Allah’s Messenger
brought forward the Hajj in which his death was feared and
delayed the ‘Umrah.”This one of the Ahadeeth related
exclusively by Ahmad though some of the wordings are
objectionable but others have corroborations in the Saheeh. Saleh
Ibn Abi Al-Khdar was not among the prominent companions of

256

Az-Dhuhri especially when he is contradicted by others as is the
case here in some of his wordings in this narration.
His statement: “Allah’s Messenger brought forward the Hajj, in
which his death was feared, and delayed the ‘Umrah” obviously
does not flow with the first section of the Hadith that he made
intention for Hajj and ‘Umrah. If his intention in the clause is that
he made his intention for both at the same and then he brought
forward the rites of Hajj and upon concluding it, he made
intention for ‘Umrah as opined by those argue that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), did
Ifrad and this is what we are discussing currently. However, if he
intended that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), delayed the ‘Umrah in entirety after he had
assumed Ihram for it, then I do not know any scholar who
subscribes to that opinion. If he meant that he carried out the rites
of Hajj separate from those of ‘Umrah and he entered ‘Umrah
into Hajj, then this is the opinion of those who say that he
(Allah’s Messenger) performed Qiran. They have interpreted the
statement of the one who narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) performed Ifrad, i.e. he
performed the rites of Hajj Ifrad even though he had intended to
perform ‘Umrah along with it. They said: “Everyone who
narrated Ifrad had also narrated Al-Qiran.”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), made
the intention for Hajj arriving (at Makkah) four days into the
month of Dhul-Hijjah. He led us in the Subh prayers at Batha’.
Then he said: “Whoever wishes to make an intention for ‘Umrah
may do so.”

257

Arguments that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), Performed
Tamattu‘
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated: “During the last
Hajj (Hajjat ulWadaa‘) of Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)
, he performed Tamattu‘, i.e. combined ‘Umrah with Hajj. He
herded a Hady along with him from Dhul-Hulaifah. Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), started
by assuming the Ihram for ‘Umrah and Hajj. The people also
performed the ‘Umrah and Hajj along with the Prophet. Some of
them brought a Hady with them, while others did not do so.
When the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
arrived in Makkah, he said to the people, “Whoever among you
has brought a Hady, should exit from his Ihram until he
completes his Hajj; whoever has not brought the Hady with him,
should perform Tawaf of the Ka‘bah and the Sa‘i between Safa
and Marwah, then cut his hair and exit from his Ihram, and then
later assume the Ihram for Hajj; however, he must offer a Hady
(sacrifice) and if he is unable to afford a Hady, then he should
fast for three days during the Hajj and seven days upon his return
to his home.
The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
performed Tawaf of the Ka‘bah; he wouldfirst touch the corner
(where the Black Stone is located) and then perform Ramal (brisk
walk moving the shoulders) during the first three rounds around
the Ka‘bah; during the last four rounds he would walk at a normal
pace. After finishing Tawaf of the Ka‘bah, he offered a two
Raka‘ahs prayer at the Maqam of Ibrahim; he then went to Safa
258

and Marwah and performed seven rounds of Sa‘i between them
and did not perform any ritual or any action which was forbidden
for the one in Ihram. He continued until he completed all the
rituals of his Hajj and sacrificed his Hady on the day of Nahr
(10th day of Dhul-Hijjah). He then hastened toward Makkah and
performed Tawaf of Ka‘bah, after which everything that was
forbidden because of Ihram became permissible. Those who
brought with them a Hady did the same as Allah’s Messenger
did.”
This Hadith is the more problematic of the three opinions. As for
the opinion of Ifrad, there is affirmation of ‘Umrah either before
the Hajj or along with it. However, based on this narration, the
opinion that he only performed Tamattu’ (is problematic)
because the narration mentions that he did not come out of his
Ihram after he had performed the rounds between Safa and
Marwah. This is not the nature of Tamattu‘. Those who claim
that he was prevented from exiting his Ihram say this because he
brought with him a Hady. This is understood from the Hadith of
Ibn ‘Umar from Hafsah that she said as she asked the Prophet:
“O Messenger of Allah, why have the people exited from their
Ihram after performing ‘Umrah, but you have not done so?” He
replied: “I have matted my hair and garlanded my Hady. So I will
not take out my Ihram until I have slaughtered (my Hady).”
However, their statement is remote because the Hadith narrated
for theaffirmation of Qiran contradicts this statement as well as
the fact that Allah’s Messenger made the intention for ‘Umrah
first and then, after his Sa‘i between Safa and Marwah, he made
another intention for Hajj. No one narrates this sequence (or
description) through any authentic chain, not even a hasan or
dha‘eef one.

259

As for his statement contained in this Hadith: “During the last
Hajj (HajjatalWadaa‘) of Allah’s Messenger, he performed
Tamattu‘,”i.e. combined ‘Umrah with Hajj. If it is intended by
that At-Tamattu‘solely, where a pilgrim becomes free after Sa‘i,
then that is not the case here for the wordings of the Hadith
contradict this and the affirmation of ‘Umrah alongside the Hajj
of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
also contains a denial of it. If the general Tamattu’ is intended by
this, in which Al-Qiran is inclusive, then that may be possible.
Concerning his statement that “Allah’s Messenger started by
assuming Ihram for ‘Umrah and Hajj”, if it is intended to mean
that he pronounced the wording (of the intention for) ‘Umrah
before that of Hajj perhaps by saying: “Labbaika Allahumma
‘Umratan wa Hajjan” (Here I am, O Allah, intending ‘Umrah and
Hajj) it is easier and does not contradict Al-Qiran. If it is intended
by this that he intended ‘Umrah first and then he added Hajj to it
after a delay but before the Tawaf, then that would turn to AlQiran also. If he intended by it that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), made the intention for
‘Umrah and upon concluding its rites, he came out of Ihram or
hedid not come out of it due to his driving the Hady — as claimed
by its proponents — but he if he had made the intention for Hajj
after he had fulfilled the rites of ‘Umrah and before setting out
for Mina, then this has not been narrated from any of the
Companions as we have said earlier. The argument of whoever
claims this among the people stands refuted due tolack a of
(supporting) narration and its contradiction to Ahadeeth narrated
concerning the affirmation of Qiran as shall be gleaned shortly,
as well as the Ahadeeth reported concerning Ifrad as pointed out
earlier. Allah knows best.

260

What is apparent, is that this Hadith of Al-Laith from ‘Uqail,
from Az-Dhuhri from Salim from Ibn ‘Umar is related through
another chain from Ibn ‘Umar when he intended (to perform)
Hajj at the time of Al-Hajjaj’s siege against Ibn Zubair and it was
said to him: “It appears that there is something between the
people, shouldn’t you delay performing the Hajj this year?” He
said: “Then I would be doing as the Prophet did, i.e. at the time
of the siege of Hudaibiyah.” So he assumed Ihram for ‘Umrah
from Dhul-Hulaifah. When he reached Baida’ he said: “I do not
see their affairs except that it is one.” So he made intention for
Hajj along with it. The sub-narrator believed that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), behaved
in a similar manner, he started with the intention of ‘Umrah and
then made the intention for Hajj and they reported it as such.
However, there is an observation concerning that based on what
we shall explain.
The explanation of this is contained in the Hadith reported that
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar set out on ‘Umrah during the fitnah and he
said: "If I am prevented from accessing the House, we shall
behave in a similar manner as Allah’s Messenger behaved.” So
he made intention for ‘Umrah and traveled till he reached Baida’.
He turned toward his Companions and said: “I see that their
differences have been reconciled. I call you to witness that I have
combined Hajj with ‘Umrah.” He set out until he reached the
House (Ka‘bah), circumambulated it, and walked between Safa
and Marwah seven times without increasing it and he considers
that permissible and he took with him a Hady.
It is also contained in the narration of Al-Bukhari that Ibn
‘Umarintended Hajj the year Al-Hajjaj advanced against Ibn AzZubair. It was said to him: “It appears that there is fighting
261

between the people and we fear that they might be turned back.”
He recited an Ayah: Indeed in the Messenger of Allah
(Muhammad) you have a good example to follow. (Soorah AlAhzab 33:21)
And then said, “In that case, I shall do the same as the Messenger
of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), had done.
I call you to witness that I have merged Hajj with my ‘Umrah,”
and then he set out till he reached Baida’. There he said: “I do
not view the matter of Hajj and ‘Umrah except that they are the
same. I call you to witness that I have merged Hajj with my
‘Umrah” and then he took a Hady which he had bought at Qudaid
and he did not increase upon that and he did not slaughter, he did
not commit any act forbidden because of Ihram and he did not
shave his head for the first time. Ibn ‘Umar said: “This is the
same as Allah’s Messenger had done.”
Al-Bukhari related from Nafi’ who related that ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar and his riding animal entered the house of
Ibn ‘Umar. The son of Ibn ‘Umar said: “I fear that this year a
battle might take place between the people and you might be
prevented from going to the Ka‘bah. I suggest that you stay
here.” Ibn ‘Umar said: “Once Allah’s Messenger set out for
pilgrimage, and the polytheists of Quraish intervened between
him and the Ka‘bah. So, if the people intervene between me and
the Ka‘bah, I would do the same as Allah’s Messenger had
done... Indeed in the Messenger of Allah (Muhammad) you have
a good example to follow. (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:21) Then he
added: “I make you a witness that I have intended to perform
Hajj along with ‘Umrah.” After arriving at Makkah, Ibn ‘Umar
performed one Sa‘i only (between Safa and Marwah).

262

Ibn ‘Umar had emulated the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), in exiting from Ihram at the
blockade of the enemy and contentment with one Tawaf for both
Hajj and ‘Umrah, because he had originally assumed Ihram for
‘Umrah so that he might perform Tamattu‘, and then feared that
there would be a blockade so he merged them together; he
merged Hajj into ‘Umrah prior to the Sa‘i so he became a Hajj
Qiran pilgrim and he said: “I do not see any difference between
the two, i.e. being prevented from Hajj or ‘Umrah or both.” Thus
when he arrived in Makkah, he sufficed both of them with his
first Sa‘i as distinct from the wordings of the first narration we
cited, which is his view that he had fulfilled the requirements of
Sa‘i of Hajj and ‘Umrah with his first Sa‘i. Ibn ‘Umar said: “This
is the same as Allah’s Messenger has done.” Meaning, Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), was
content with one Sa‘i for both Hajj and ‘Umrah. In this is an
indication that Ibn ‘Umar reported Hajj Qiran (from the Prophet)
and this why An-Nasa’i related on the authority of Nafi’ that Ibn
‘Umar did a Qiran Hajj and ‘Umrah and he did one Tawaf.
An-Nasa’i also related on the authority of Nafi’ that Ibn ‘Umar
came to DhulHulaifah and made the intention for ‘Umrah and
feared that he may be prevented from reaching the House.
The import of this narration is that when some narrators heard
Ibn ‘Umar say: “In that case, I shall do the same as the Messenger
of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), had done,”
and his other statement: “This is the same as Allah’s Messenger
had done,” they believed that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), had also started with the
intention of ‘Umrah and then he intended Hajj and added it to the
‘Umrah before the Tawaf and thus they reported the meaning of
263

what they understood.Meanwhile, Ibn ‘Umar did not intend that;
rather what he intended was what we have already mentioned.
Allah knows best what the most correct view is.Even based on
the understanding that he initially made the intention for ‘Umrah
and then added to it that of Hajj before the Tawaf; however, this
still makes him a Hajj Qiran pilgrim and not pure Tamattu‘.
Thus, there is no evidence that may be inferred from it by
proponents of preference for Tamattu‘. And Allah (SWT) knows
best. As for the Hadith reported by AlBukhari in his Saheeh from
‘Imran, who said: “We performed Tamattu’ during the time of
the Prophet and then the Qur’an was revealed (regarding Hajj AtTamattu‘) and somebody said what he wished (regarding Hajj
At- Tamattu‘) according his own opinion.”Muslim also related
it.
The intended meaning here is the Tamattu’ which is more general
than Qiran. What points to that is what Muslim related on the
authority of ‘Imran Ibn Husain that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), combined Hajj and
‘Umrah.He mentioned the remainder of the Hadith. The majority
of the preceding scholars used to apply Mut‘ah to Al-Qiran as
related by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Sa’eed Ibn AlMusayyib who said: ‘Ali and ‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased
with them, disagreed concerning Mut‘ah (i.e. Tamattu‘), May
Allah be pleased with both of them, while they were both at
‘Usfan. ‘Ali said: “You merely want to prohibit something that
Allah’s Messenger had done.” When ‘Ali saw that, he made
intention for both of them together.

264

The Evidence of Those Who Opine That
Allah’s Messenger Performed Hajj Qiran
The narration of Ameerul-Mu’mineen ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab,
may Allah be pleased with him, which Al-Bukhari reported that
he said: I heard Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), say at the valley of ‘Aqeeq: “Tonight a
messenger came to me from my Lord saying: pray in this blessed
valley and say: ‘Umrah is entered into Hajj.”
The narration of Anas Ibn Malik, may Allah be pleased with him
is reported by a host of Tabi‘een (successors) from him. We list
them in alphabetical order:
Bakr Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Muzani: I heard Anas Ibn Malik narrate:
“I heard Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), utter the Talbiyah of Hajj and ‘Umrah together.” I
(Bakr, one of the narrators) narrated it to Ibn ‘Umar, whereupon
he said: “He (the Prophet) pronounced the Talbiyah for Hajj
alone.” I met Anas and narrated to him the words of Ibn ‘Umar,
whereupon he said: “You treat us only as children. I heard
Allah’s
Messenger pronounce Talbiyah both for ‘Umrah and Hajj.”
Thabit Al-Bunani from Anas
Humaid Ibn Teerawaih in a lengthy narration from him
Humaid Ibn Hilal Al-Adawi Al-Basri from him
Zaid Ibn Aslam from him
Salim Ibn Abu Al-Ja‘d Al-Ghatafani Al-Kufi
265

Sulaiman Ibn Tarkhan At-Taimi
Suwaid Ibn Hujair
‘Abdullah Ibn Zaid Abu Qilabah Al-Jarmi
‘Abdul Azeez Ibn Suhaib
‘Ali Ibn Zaid Ibn Jud‘an
Qatadah Ibn Di‘amah As-Sadoosi
Mus‘ab Ibn Sulaim Az-Zubairi, their mawla
Yahya Ibn Ishaq Al-Hadrami
Abu Asma’ As-Saiqail
Abu Qudamah Al-Hanafi and it is said that his actual namewas
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ubaid.
The narration of Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib concerning Al-Qiran, states
that: “Allah’s Messenger performed three ‘Umrahs, all of them
in Dhul-Qa‘dah.” ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) said:
“They know that he performed four ‘Umrahs with the ‘Umrah he
performed along with the Hajj.” Al-Baihaqi said: “This is not
preserved.”
I say: A similar narration with a chain of narrators linking
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) shall be cited later.
The narration of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with
him and his father, states: “The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), performed three Hajj. Two prior to his
266

Migration and the third, he performed along with ‘Umrah
(Qiran).”

The Narration of Abu Talhah That Allah’s
Messenger Combined Hajj and ‘Umrah
Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘shum narrated: "I heard Nazzal Ibn
Sabrah, the companion of ‘Ali, say: I heard Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), say: “‘Umrah has
been entered into Hajj till the Day of Resurrection.” He said:
Allah’s Messenger performed Qiran in the Farewell Pilgrimage.
According to the narration of Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas from the
Prophet that he made Tamattu’ (merger) of Hajj into ‘Umrah
which is Al-Qiran that he heard Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas, AdDahhak Ibn Qais the same year Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan
performed Hajj mentioning the combination of ‘Umrah into Hajj
and Ad- Dahhak commented: “No one does that except he who
is ignorant of the rulings of Allah.” Sa’d said: “How wrong is
that which you have just said, O son of my brother!” Ad-Dahhak
said: “This is because ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab used to forbid it.”
Sa’d responded: “Allah’s Messenger had done it and we did it
along with him.”According to the narration of ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi
‘Awfa: “Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), combined Hajj and ‘Umrah because he knew that he
would not be able to perform another Hajj after that year.”
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas narrated concerning that on the authority
of Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “The Messenger of Allah performed
four ‘Umrahs: the ‘Umrah of Hudaybiyah, the ‘Umrah AlQa‘ada’, the third was the ‘Umrah from Ji‘ranah, and the last was
the one he performed along with his Hajj.”
267

‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him and his
father, narrated: “Allah’s Messenger made Tamattu’ during the
Farewell Pilgrimage; he obtained a Hady and it from DhulHulaifah. Allah’s Messenger began by making the intention for
‘Umrah and then for Hajj.”
‘Imran Ibn Husain, may Allah be pleased with him, narrated: "I
will narrate to you a Hadith, through which Allah might reward
you is that Allah’s Messenger merged both his ‘Umrah and Hajj;
neither did he forbid it until he died nor was the Qur’an revealed
prohibiting it. He used to greet me, but when I cauterized myself
he stopped and when I refrained (from cauterization) he resumed
greeting me.”
The narration of Al-Hirmas Ibn Ziyad Al-Bahili on the authority
of AlHirmas, who said: "I was riding behind my father when I
saw the Prophet on his camel saying: Labbaik bi Hajjatin wa
Umratin Ma‘an (Here I am performing Hajj and ‘Umrah
combined).
According to Hafsah Bint ‘Umar, the Mother of the Believers,
she said to the Prophet: “O Messenger of Allah, why have you
not exited from your Ihram as you have been commanded?” He
replied: “I have matted my hair and garlanded my Hady, so I will
not finish my Ihram until I have slaughtered (my Hady).”
According to the narration of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased
with her), she said: "We went out with Allah’s Messenger during
the Hajjat Al-Wadaa’ and we assumed the Ihram for ‘Umrah.
Then Allah’s Messenger said to us: 'Whoever has brought a Hady
should assume Ihram for Hajj and ‘Umrah and should not exit
from his Ihram until he has performed both (‘Umrah and Hajj).'
I arrived at Makkah with him (i.e. the Prophet) while I was
268

menstruating, so I did not perform the Tawaf around the Ka‘bah
or between Safa andMarwah. I informed Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), about that and he
said: 'Undo your braids and comb your hair, and then assume
Ihram for Hajj and leave the ‘Umrah.' I did so, and when we
performed and finished the Hajj, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), sent me to At-Taneem along
with (my brother) ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, to
perform the ‘Umrah. The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), said: 'This ‘Umrah is in lieu of your missed
‘Umrah.'” Those who had assumed Ihram for ‘Umrah, performed
the Tawaf around the Ka‘bah and between Safa and Marwah, and
then exited from their Ihram, and on their return from Mina, they
performed another Tawaf (around the Ka‘bah and between Safa
and Marwah), but those who combined their Hajj and ‘Umrah,
performed only one run (between Safa and Marwah) (for both).”
If it is said that you have related from a group of Companions
that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), singled out Hajj and then you also related that from them
in their individual capacities and other than them that he (Allah’s
Messenger) combined Hajj and ‘Umrah, so what is the
reconciliation of this?
The answer to this is that the narration that he singled out Hajj
may be understood that he singled out the rites of Hajj and the
‘Umrah was merged to it in intention, action and timing. This
points to the fact that he sufficed both (the Hajj and ‘Umrah) with
the Tawaf and Sa‘i of Hajj as is the opinion of the majority of the
pilgrims performing Hajj Qiran; this differs from Imam Abu
Hanifah, may Allah have Mercy on him, who opined that the
Qiran pilgrim performs two Tawafs and Sa‘i relying on a
269

narration from ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. However, its chain that links
up to him contains some doubts.
As for those who relate At-Tamattu’ and then also relateAlQiran, we have answered earlier that At-Tamattu’ in theparlance
of the Salaf (righteous predecessors) is more general than the
specific Tamattu’ and Al-Qiran. Rather, they apply it to
performing ‘Umrah during the months of Hajj even if he did not
perform Hajj. This is as stated by Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas: “We did
Tamattu’ with Allah’s Messenger…” and this – i.e. Mu‘awiyah–
at that time was an disbeliever at Makkah; rather, he intended by
that one of the two ‘Umrahs, either Hudaibiyah or Al-Qada’. As
for ‘Umrah of Al-Ji‘ranah, Mu‘awiyah had accepted Islam at the
time because it occurred after the Conquest of Makkah and the
Farewell Pilgrimage came after that in the tenth year. This is
clear and evident. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
If it is said that then what is your response to the Hadith related
by Abu Dawood At-Tayalisi in his Musnad that Mu‘awiyah said
to a group of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah: “Do
you know that Allah’s Messenger forbade Sufafin-Numoor
(saddle linen).” They said: “Yes.” He added: “I am also witness
to that.” Again he asked: “Are you aware that Allah’s Messenger
prohibited wearing gold except a (small) portion?” They said:
“Yes.” He asked further: “Do you know that Allah’s Messenger
prohibited connecting Hajj with ‘Umrah?” They said: “No, he
said it is connected to them.”
He found the narration of Mu‘awiyah forbidding combining Hajj
and ‘Umrah to be odd. Perhaps what was prohibited was Mut‘ah
and the narrator believed it was the Mut‘ah of Hajj, while it was
the Mut‘ah with women, and so there was no narration in the
270

knowledge of those Companions prohibiting it. Or perhaps the
prohibition was about peering (Iqran) in dates as related in the
Hadith of Ibn ‘Umar, thus the narrator believed that what was
meant is AlQiran in Hajj and this is not the case. The person who
used to ban the Mut‘ah of Hajj was ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab,
mayAllah be pleased with him, but his ban was not that of
outright prohibition and imposition of obligation as we
mentioned earlier. He used to ban it so as to single out Hajj with
another journey so that the Ka‘bah may be frequently visited.
The Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, used to fear
him and most times they dared not contradict him. Nevertheless,
his son used to oppose him and he would be asked: “Your father
used to prohibit it,” and he would respond: “I fear that stones
might rain down on you from the sky. Allah’s Messenger had
done it. Is it the Sunnah of Allah’s Messenger we should follow
or that of ‘Umar Ibn AlKhattab?‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased
with him, also used to ban it and ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with
him, differed from him as mentioned earlier. He would say: “I
shall not abandon the Sunnah of Allah’s Messenger for the
statement of anyone.” Thus, ‘Imran Ibn Husain said: “We did
Tamattu’ along with Allah’s Messenger and the Qur’an was not
revealed prohibiting it, and he did not forbid it even up to his
death.” It is related in the Saheehain.
i.e. they did it with Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), at Makkah at the time (when the polytheists
controlled it).
I say: It has been mentioned earlier that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), did Hajj Qiran based
on the Ahadeeth that relate it; between his Farewell Pilgrimage
and his death were no more than 81 days and the Companions
271

who witnessed it (the Hajj) both in statement and action
numbered more than 40,000. Thus, if he had prohibitedQiran in
Hajj during the Hajj which the people witnessed with him, not a
single Companion would have reported it exclusively; (if he were
to do so) a group from among them would refute him from those
who heard from him and those who did not. All of these are part
of the signs that indicate this is not well-preserved from
Mu‘awiyah, may Allah be pleased with him.

The Bases of Those Who Opined That Allah’s
Messenger Generalized His Ihram
It has been related from Ash-Shafi‘i to be his preferred opinion,
albeit it is a weak opinion. Ash-Shafi‘i, may Allah have Mercy
on him, said: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), set out from Madinah without specifying Hajj or
‘Umrah; rather he waited for a ruling (from Allah). The ruling
was revealed to him while he was between Safa and Marwah.
Thus he commanded those from his Companions who had
intended Hajj but did not bring along a Hady to make it an
‘Umrah. He said: “Had I been privy to what I now possess of
knowledge, I would not have driven the Hady but I have matted
my hair and have driven the Hady so I will not finish my Ihram
until I have slaughtered them.” Then Suraqah Ibn Malik rose and
said to him: “O Messenger of Allah, give us the ruling of the
common people who have just been born today. Is this ‘Umrah
of ours only for this year or forever?” Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said: “It is forever. ‘Umrah
has been entered into Hajj until the Day of Resurrection.”
Thereafter, ‘Ali came from Yemen and the Prophet, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), asked him: “What intention
272

have you made?” He responded: “Here I am with an intention
similar to that of the Prophet.” Or (he said): “Here I am, intending
the Hajj of the Prophet.”
This Hadith is mursal from Tawoos and there is some strangeness
in it. AshShafi‘i’s own principle is that he does not accept mursal
absolutely except if it is strengthened by another narration with
the exception that it (the mursal) is from senior Followers
(Tabi‘een) as his statement in Ar-Risalah indicates.
This is because in most cases, they (the Tabi‘een) do not drop a
narrator except that he is a Companion. And Allah (SWT) knows
best.
This mursal, however, is not from this set; rather, it contradicts
all the Ahadeeth cited earlier – the Ahadeeth of Ifrad, Tamattu’
and Qiran — all of which are authentically related as pointed out
earlier. All those Ahadeeth take precedence for they are
evidences of affirmation while this mursal is that of negation and
an evidence of affirmation takes precedence over that of negation
if they are equal (in status and strength). How much more is it if
a Musnad Saheeh contradicts a mursal which does not even rise
up to the level of evidence due to the break in its chain. And
Allah, the Exalted, knows best.
It is related that ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) said:
"We set out with Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), without specifying Hajj or ‘Umrah. When
we arrived, he ordered us to exit from Ihram. When it was the
night of departure, Safiyyah Bint Huyayy saw her menses and
the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said:
“A ruptured vein, there is nothing more than that; she is going to
detain you.” He asked her: “Did you circumambulate (the
273

Ka‘bah) on the day of Nahr?” She replied in the affirmative.
“Then you may depart,” the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), said. ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with
her) narrated further: I said: “O Allah’s Messenger, I have not
made my intention.” The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), said: “Assume ‘Umrah from Tan‘eem.” The subnarrator added: Her brother accompanied her. ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) added: “We met at the tail end of the
night.” He said: “Your meeting point is at such-and-such place.”
This is understood that this isnot to be mentioned along with the
Talbiyah even though it was mentioned at the point of Ihram as
contained in the Hadith of Anas: I heard Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), say: “Labbaik
Allahumma Hajjan wa ‘Umratan.” (Here I am intending Hajj and
‘Umrah). I heard them raising their voices together with both
statements. As for the Hadith related by Muslim from Jabir and
Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri, who both narrated: “We arrived along
with Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), while we were raising our voices high with Hajj
(Talbiyah).” Based on this, the Hadith is problematic. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.

The Talbiyah of Allah’s Messenger
On the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar who narrated:
Whenever his mount stood upright at the mosque of DhulHulaifah, the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), would assume his intention. He said: “Labbaik
Allahumma labbaik, labbaika la shareeka Laka labbaik.
Innalhamda wan-ni‘mata Laka wal-mulk la shareeka Lak (Here
I am responding to Your call, O Allah, Here I am. Here I am,
You have no partner. All the praises and blessings are for You;
274

all the sovereignty is for You; and You have no partners with
You).” They said: ‘Abdullah used to say: “This is the Talbiyah
of Allah’s Messenger.” Nafi’ added: ‘Abdullah used to add to
this: “(Here I am responding to Your call (three times) and I am
obedient to Your orders. All good is in Your Hands. Here I am,
to You all requests and deeds are directed).”
On the authority of Zaid Ibn Khalid Al-Juhani who narrated:
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said: “Jibraeel came to me and said: 'Order your Companions to
raise their voice with the Talbiyah for it is the symbol of Hajj'.”

The Hadith of Jabir Concerning the Hajj of
Allah’s Messenger
It is unique and distinctive in relating the rites of Hajj and we
thought it correct to quote it at this juncture because it subsumes
the Talbiyah and other rites of Hajj mentioned earlier and those
that will be mentioned later. We relate its paths and wordings and
we follow it with corroborations from Ahadeeth having similar
meanings and help is sought from Allah.
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad
who narrated that "my father related to me: 'We came to Jabir Ibn
‘Abdullah while he was with Banu Salimah, and we asked him
concerning the Hajj of the Prophet and he narrated to us that:
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
stayed in Madinah for nine years without performing Hajj. Then
afterward (in the tenth year) he made a public announcement that
Allah’s Messenger shall perform Hajj this year, a large number
of people came to Madinah, all of them eager to emulate the
Prophet and follow his actions'."
275

Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
set out ten days to the end of the month of Dhul-Qa‘dah and we
accompanied him until we came to Dhul- Hulaifah when Asma’
Bint ‘Umais gave birth to Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr. She sent a
message to the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), asking him: “What should I do?” He (the
Prophet) said: “Take a bath, place a bandage around your private
parts, and place on Ihram.”
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), set out until his camel stood uprightwith him on its back at
Baida’. He pronounced the Oneness of Allah (saying): “Labbaik
Allahumma labbaik, labbaika la shareeka Laka labbaik.
Innalhamda wan-ni‘mata Laka wal-mulk la shareeka Lak (Here
I am responding to Your call, O Allah, Here I am. Here I am,
You have no partner. All the praises and blessings are for You;
all the sovereignty is for You; and You have no partners with
You).” And the people also followed suit while they also added:
“Dhal-Ma‘arij” (The Lord of the ways of ascent) and similar
words while the Prophet was listening and yet he did not say
anything (of objection) to them. I looked as far as I could see in
front of Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), riders and pedestrians, and similar throngs were
behind him, on his right and his left.
Jabir continued: "The Messenger of Allah, may peace be upon
him, was prominent among us and the revelation of the Holy
Qur’an was descending upon him. It is he who knows its true
significance. Whatever he did, we also did that. We continued,
having no intention other than to perform Hajj, until we came to
the Ka‘bah where he touched the pillar and made seven circuits
jogging three of them and walking four. When he finished, he
276

went to the Maqam-e-Ibrahim (Station of Ibrahim) to offer two
Rak‘ahs of prayer and then recited: 'And take you (people) the
Maqam (place) of Ibrahim (or the stone on which Ibrahim stood
while he was building the Ka‘bah) as a place of prayer (for some
of your prayers, e.g. two Raka‘ahs after the Tawaf of the Ka‘bah
at Makkah) '.”
Abu ‘Abdullah (Ja‘afar – the sub-narrator) added: “He recited in
both units (of prayer) At-Tawheed (Soorah Al-Ikhlas) and Qul
ya ayyuhal-Kafiroon (Soorah Al-Kafiroon). Then he went to kiss
the Black Stone (Hajar Al-Aswad). Then he went to Safa and (as
he reached near it) he recited: “Verily! As-Safa and Al-Marwah
(two mountains in Makkah) are of the Symbols of Allah.”
(AlBaqarah 2:158) and then added: “We begin with what Allah
has began.” Hefirst mounted Safa till he saw the House, and
facing the Qiblah he extolled the greatness of Allah and then
said: “La ilaha ill-Allah wahdahu la shareeka lahu lahul-mulk wa
lahul-hamd wa Huwa a‘laa kulli shai‘in Qadeer. La ilaha illAllah anjaza wa‘dahu wa sadaqa a‘bdahu wa galabal-Ahzaba
wahdahu (There is no deity worthy of worship (in truth) but
Allah, the One, there is no partner with Him. His is the
Sovereignty; to Him praise is due and He is Powerful over
everything. There is no deity worthy of worship (in truth) but
Allah, Who fulfilled His promise, helped His servant and
overcame the confederates alone).” Then he supplicated and
resumed these words and then descended until his feet came
down in the bottom of the valley, where he began to jog,and
when he began to ascend, he again started to walked until he
reached Marwah. He ascended it, faced the House and he
repeated what he said on Safa. When it was his seventh running
at Marwah he said: “If I had known beforehand what I have come
to know afterward, I would not have brought a sacrificial animals
277

and would have performed an ‘Umrah. So, he who among you
has not a sacrificial animal with him should exit the Ihram and
treat it as an ‘Umrah.” And all of the people exited from their
Ihram.
Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘ashum, who was at the foot of Marwah,
got up and asked: “O Messenger of Allah, does it apply to the
present year, or does it apply forever?” Thereupon the Messenger
of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
intertwined the fingers (of one hand) into another and said three
times: “Forever.” And then he said: “The ‘Umrah has been
incorporated into Hajj till the Day of Resurrection.”
‘Ali came from the Yemen with the Hady, while the Prophet had
also come with Hady, and found that Fatimah had exited from
the Ihram and had put on dyed clothes and had applied antimony.
‘Ali showed disapproval to it, whereupon she said: “Allah’s
Messenger has commanded me to do this.” The narrator said that
‘Ali used to say these words in Kufah (Ja‘afar narrated: my
fathersaid, words not mentioned by Jabir): “I went to the
Messenger of Allah showing annoyance at Fatimah for what she
had done, seeking the verdict of the Prophet regarding what she
had narrated from him, and told him that I was angry with her,
whereupon he said: ‘She has told the truth, she has told the truth,
she has told the truth. I ordered her to do so'.”
Jabir continued: Then Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), said to ‘Ali: “What did you say when you
intended to go for Hajj?” ‘Ali said: “O Allah, I am putting on the
Ihram for the same purpose for which Your Messenger has put it
on.” He said: “I have with me sacrificial animals, so do not exit
from the Ihram.”
278

The total number of those sacrificial animals brought by ‘Ali
from Yemen and of those brought by the Prophet were one
hundred. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), slaughtered sixty-three with his own hands and then
told ‘Ali to slaughter the remainder and make him partake in his
Hady. He then commanded that a piece of flesh from each animal
sacrificed should be put in a pot, and when it was cooked, both
of them (the Prophet and ‘Ali) took some meat out of it and drank
from its broth.
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), said: “I have slaughtered here and all of Mina is a place of
slaughtering.” Then he stood on ‘Arafah and said: “I have stood
here but all of ‘Arafah is a place for standing.” Then he stood at
Muzdalifah and said: “I have stood here but all of Muzdalifah is
a place for standing.” This is how Imam Ahmad has related this
Hadith though he had summarized its concluding part. It is also
related by Imam Muslim.
We had apprized that there are different additions in the wordings
of Ahmad from that of Muslim up to the statementof Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), to ‘Ali:
“She has told the truth, she has told the truth, she has told the
truth. I ordered her to do so. What did you say when you made
intention for Hajj?” ‘Ali said: “O Allah, I am putting on Ihram
for the same purpose for which Your Messenger has put it on.”
He said: “I have with me sacrificial animals, so do not exit from
Ihram.”
Then all the people except the Prophet and those who had with
them sacrificial animals, exited from their Ihram, and had their
hair clipped. When it was the day of Tarwiyah (8th of Dhul279

Hijjah) they went to Mina and put on Ihram for Hajj and the
Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
rode and led the noon, afternoon, sunset, ‘Isha’ and dawn
prayers. He then waited a little until the sun rose, and
commanded that a tent be pitched at Namirah.
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), then set out and the Quraish believed that he would stop at
Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram (the sacred site) as the Quraish would do
in the pre-Islamic period. The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), however, continued until he
came to ‘Arafah and found that the tent had been pitched for him
at Namirah. There he alighted and stayed until the sun had passed
the meridian; then he commanded that Al-Qaswa’ should be
brought and saddled for him. He came to the bottom of the valley,
and addressed the people saying: “Verily your blood, your
property are as sacred and inviolable as the sacredness of this day
of yours, in this month of yours, in this town of yours. Behold!
Everything pertaining to the Days of Ignorance is under my feet
completely abolished.
Abolished are also the blood-revenges of the Days of Ignorance.
“The first claim of ours on blood-revenge which I abolish is that
of the son of Rabee‘ah Ibn Al-Harith, who was nursed among the
tribe of Sa’d and killed by Hudhail. The usury of the pre-Islamic
period is abolished, and the first of our usury I abolish is that of
‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib, for it is all abolished. Fear
Allahconcerning women! Verily you have taken them on the
security of Allah, and intercourse with them has been made
lawful to you by the words of Allah. You have rights over them:
they should not allow anyone to sit on your bed whom you do
not like. But if they do that, you can chastise them but not
280

severely. Their rights upon you are that you should provide them
with food and clothing in a fitting manner.
“I have left among you the Book of Allah, and if you hold fast to
it, you would never go astray. You will be asked about me (on
the Day of Resurrection), what would you say?”
The audience said: “We will bear witness that you have conveyed
(the message), discharged (the responsibility of Prophethood)
and given wise counsel.” The narrator said: The Prophet then
raised his forefinger toward the sky and pointing it at the people
(said): “O Allah, bear witness. O Allah, bear witness,” saying it
three times.
Then Bilal pronounced the Adhan and then Iqamah and the
Prophet led the noon prayer. Bilal again uttered the Iqamah and
the Prophet led the afternoon prayer and he observed no other
prayer between the two.
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), then mounted his camel and came to the place of stay,
making his she-camel, AlQaswa’, turn toward the side where
there were rocks, having the path taken by those who went on
foot in front of him, and faced the Qiblah. He stood there until
the sun set, and the yellow light had somewhat faded, and the
disc of the sun had disappeared. He made Usamah sit behind him,
and he pulled the nosestring of Al-Qaswa’ (in order to keep her
under perfect control) so forcefully that its head touched the
saddle, and he pointed out to the people with his right hand to be
moderate in speed, and whenever he happened to pass over an
elevated tract of sand, he slightly loosened the nose-stringof his
camel until she climbed up and this is how he reached AlMuzdalifah.
281

He led the evening and ‘Isha’ prayers with one Adhan and two
Iqamas and did not glorify (Allah) between them (i.e. he did not
observe supererogatory Raka‘ahs between Maghreb and ‘Isha’
prayers). The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), then lay down until dawn and offered the dawn
prayers, with an Adhan and Iqamah. When the morning light was
clear, he again mounted Al-Qaswa’, and when he came to AlMash‘ar AlHaram, he faced toward the Qiblah, supplicated
Allah, Glorified Him, and pronounced His Uniqueness (La ilaha
ill-Allah) and Oneness, and stood until the daylight was very
clear.
He then went quickly before the sun rose, and seated behind him
was Al-Fadl Ibn ‘Abbas and he was a man having beautiful hair,
a fair complexion, and a handsome face. As the Messenger of
Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), traveled on,
a group of women also traveled on his side. Al-Fadl began to
look at them. The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), placed his hand on the face of Fadl who then
turned his face to the other side; he again began to look and the
Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
turned his hand to the other side and placed it on the face of AlFadl who again turned his face to the other side until he came to
the bottom of Muhassir. He urged Al-Qaswa’ a little, and,
following the middle road, which comes out at the Greatest
Jamrah (Al-Kubra), he came to the Jamrah which is near the tree.
At this he threw seven small pebbles, saying Allahu Akbar while
throwing each one of them in a manner in which the small
pebbles are thrown (with the help of fingers) and this he did at
the bottom of the valley. He then went to the place of sacrifice,
and sacrificed sixty-three (camels) with his own hand. Then he
gave the remaining number to ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with
282

him, who sacrificed them, and he made him partake in his
sacrifice. He then commanded that a piece of flesh from each
animal sacrificedbe put in a pot, and when it was cooked, both of
them (the Prophet and ‘Ali) took some meat out of it and drank
its broth. The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), again rode and came to Ka'bah, and offered the
Dhuhr prayers at Masjid Al-Haram. He came to the tribe of
‘Abdul-Muttalib, who were supplying water at Zamzam, and
said: “Draw water, O Bani ‘Abdul-Muttalib; were it not that
people would usurp this right of supplying water from you, I
would have drawn it along with you.” So they handed him a
bucket and he drank from it.

Places Where Allah’s Messenger Had Prayed
During His Journey From Madinah to
Makkah
Al-Bukhari related that Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah said: “I saw Salim Ibn
‘Abdullah looking for some places on the way and prayed there.
He narrated that his father used to pray there, and had seen the
Prophet praying at those very places.” Nafi’ on the authority of
Ibn ‘Umar narrated: “I used to pray at those places.” (Moosa, the
narrator added): “I asked Salim on which he agreed with Nafi’
concerning those places, except the mosque situated at a place
called Sharaf Ar-Rawha.”
Nafi’ narrated that ‘Abdullah informed that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), used to stop at DhulHulaifah under Samurah at the spot where the Mosque of DhulHulaifah is located whenever he went for ‘Umrah and when he
went for his Hajj. Whenever he returned from a Ghazwah, Hajj
or ‘Umrah, he would return through thesame route. Whenever he
283

descended into the middle of the valley, he would make his camel
kneel down at a basin by the eastern edge of the valley to take
rest until the following morning; neither in the mosque close to
the Hijarah (stone) nor the hillock upon which the mosque lies.
It is at that bay, the middle of which is a sand hill, ‘Abdullah used
to pray. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), used to pray there. Torrential rainfall into the basin
eventually buried the spot in which ‘Abdullah used to pray.
Nafi’ also said that ‘Abdullah related to him that the Prophet,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), prayed at the spot
occupied by the small mosque which is before the mosque at the
honored Rawha’. ‘Abdullah used to know the spot where the
Prophet had prayed. He would say: There on your right is where
you should stand to pray. That is the mosque on the edge of the
road on the right as you are going toward Makkah. Between it
and the big mosque is the distance of a stone’s throw or
thereabouts.
Ibn ‘Umar used to pray toward a hill by the exit of Ar-Rawha’.
The edge of that hill terminates into the edge of the road before
the mosque, which is between it and the exit on your way toward
Makkah. A mosque was constructed at the spot but ‘Abdullah
would not to pray in that mosque but would rather abandon it
toward his left behind him and he would pray in its front toward
the hill itself. ‘Abdullah used to relax at Ar-Rawha’ and he would
not offer the Dhuhr prayers until he got to that spot where he
would then offer the Dhuhr prayers. On his way back from
Makkah, if he passed it an hour before the Subh prayers or at the
end of the Sahar (early morning before dawn), he would tarry so
that he could offer the Subh prayers there.

284

‘Abdullah narrated that the Prophet used to alight under amassive
tree just before Ar-Ruwaithah by the right side of the road at an
expansive area. He would descend until there were two miles
between him and Bareed ArRuwaithah. Its top portion had been
chipped; it is curved in the middle and it is straight at its lower
trunk, where there is plenty of sand.
He also reported that Ibn ‘Umar narrated to him that the Prophet
prayed at the edge of the hill located behind Al-‘Araj on your
way to Hadbah. There are two or three graves by that mosque.
On the graves were heaps of stones by the right side of the road
by its edge. Between those edges, ‘Abdullah used to relax by Al‘Araj after the sun had deflected by the midday and then he
would offer the Dhuhr prayers in that mosque.
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar narrated to him that Allah’s Messenger
alighted at the location of some big trees on the left side of the
road in the ravine at the lower end of Harsha. That ravine is
connected to Kura’ Harsha. Between it and the road is the
distance of an arrow shot. ‘Abdullah used to pray toward the tree
which is the closest of the trees to the road and the tallest of them.
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar narrated to him that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), used to alight at the
ravine located at the lowest part of Marraz- Zahran toward
Madinah upon descending from AsSafrawat. He would descend
into the middle of that ravine on the right side of the road on your
way to Makkah. Between the place where the Messenger of
Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), had alighted
and the road is a distance of a stone throw. Nafi’ also said that
Ibn ‘Umar informed him that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), used to alight at Dhi Tuwa and
285

he would spend the night until the following morning when he
would move ahead to Makkah. The place where Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), prayed
was a rough hillock; not in the mosque built there but on the
hillock at a lower spot.
He also mentioned that ‘Abdullah narrated to him that Allah’s
Messenger,
(Peace and
Blessings
of
Allah be
upon
him), approached the crevices of the
mountain which is located between him and the sprawling
mountain toward the Ka‘bah. The mosque was on the left of the
edge of the hillock. The place of prayer of the Prophet was at a
lower section on the black hillock. He would inch away from
the hillock the distance of ten arms length or thereabouts and
then he would pray toward the crevices of the mountain which
is located between you and Ka‘bah. Al-Bukhari related this
Hadith in its length and wordings exclusively.
Much or most of these places are no longer known today because
much of their names have been changed by the Bedouins living
there. Ignorance has overtaken most of them. Al-Bukhari has
related in his book that perhaps someone might be guided to them
through investigation, scrutiny and research. r perhaps many or
most of them were known during the time of Al-Bukhari. And
Allah (SWT) knows best.

The Prophet’s Entrance Into Makkah
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to
spend the night at Dhi Tuwa, and he would offer the Subh prayers
286

on his way to Makkah. The place of prayer of the Messenger of
Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), was by a
rough hillock and Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), would face the crevices of the mountain
located between him and the sprawling mountain in the direction
of the Ka‘bah. The mosque which had been built was on the left
of the edge of the hillock. The place of prayer of the Prophet was
at a lower section of a black hillock at a distance ten cubits or
thereabout from the hillock. He would pray toward the crevices
of the mountain which intervenes between you and the Ka‘bah.
This is related in the Saheehain.Whenever Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), reached Dhi Tuwa,
close to Makkah and near the Haram, he would stop uttering the
Talbiyah because that was his destination. He would spend the
night at that place and would offer the Subh prayers there at the
described spot between the two crevices of the sprawling
mountain were located. Whoever looks closely at these indicated
places with insight will recognize them and the place where
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
prayed will be identified. Then Allah’s Messenger would take a
bath for the entrance of Makkah, and he would ride and enter it
during the day time publicly through Thaniyyat Al-Ulya located
at the basin- shaped valley also known as Kada’ so that people
may see him and to supervise them. This is how he entered it on
the Day of the Conquest as mentioned earlier.
Ibn ‘Umar related that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), entered Makkah through the upper
Thaniyyah and exited through the lower Thaniyyah. Related in
the Saheehain from his Hadith. Then Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), entered the Mosque
through the door of Banu Shaibah.
287

Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi said: Ibn Juraij informed us from ‘Ata’ Ibn
Abi Rabah who said: “The Muhrim enters from anywhere he
wants.” He added: “And the Prophet entered through the gate of
Banu Shaibah and exited to Safa through
Banu Makhzoom.” Al- Baihaqi further commented: “This is a
good mursal.”

Description of His Tawaf
Al-Bukhari related that ‘Urwah said: ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) informed me that: “The first thing the Prophet
did on reaching Makkah, was the ablution and then he performed
Tawaf of the Ka‘bah and that wasnot ‘Umrah (alone), (but Hajj
Qiran).” ‘Urwah added: “Later, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar did the
same in their Hajj.” And I performed the Hajj with my father AzZubair, and the first thing he did was Tawaf of the Ka‘bah. Later,
I saw the Muhajiroon (Emigrants) and the Ansar doing the same.
My mother (Asma’) told me that she, her sister (‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her)), AzZubair and so-and-so persons put
on Ihram for ‘Umrah, and after they passed their hands over the
Black Stone Corner they took out their Ihram (i.e. after doing
Tawaf of the Ka‘bah and Sa‘i between Safa and Marwah).
Al-Bukhari related that ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,
came to the Black Stone, kissed it and then said: “I am kissing
you, whereas I know that you are a stone, were it not that I saw
Allah’s Messenger kissing you, I would not have kissed you.”
Muslim also reported it.
Al-Bukhari related that ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab addressed the
Black Stone saying: “By Allah! I know that you are a stone and
can neither benefit nor harm. Had I not seen the Prophet touching
288

and kissing you, I would never have touched and kissed you.”
Then he kissed it and said: “There is no reason for us to do Ramal
(brisk walking in Tawaf) except that we wanted to show off
before the pagans, and now Allah has destroyed them.” ‘Umar
added: “ (Nevertheless), the Prophet did that and we do not want
to leave it (i.e. Ramal).”
Abu Dawood At-Tayalisi related from Ja‘afar Ibn ‘Uthman AlQurashi who reported from an inhabitant of Makkah saying: Isaw
Muhammad Ibn ‘Abbad Ibn Ja‘afar kissing the Stone and
prostrating to it. Thereafter he said: I saw your maternal uncle
kissing it and prostrating to it and Ibn Abbas said: I saw ‘Umar
Ibn Al-Khattab kissing and prostrating to it and ‘Umar said: “Had
I not seen the Prophet kissing it, I would never have kissed it.”
This chain is good.
In sum, this Hadith related from different chains from AmeerulMu’mineen, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with
him, is decisive in the opinion of many scholars on this matter.
There is nothing in these narrations showing that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
prostrated before the Black Stone except what is mentioned in
the narration of Abu Dawood At-Tayalisi from Ja‘afar Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Uthman and it is not clearly connected to the
Prophet.
Al-Bukhari related from Az-Zubair Ibn ‘Arabi who said: “A man
asked Ibn ‘Umar concerning the touching of the Black Stone and
he said: I saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), touching and kissing it.” The man said: “What if
there is a crowd and I am overcrowded?” He replied: “I saw

289

Allah’s Messenger touching and kissing it.” Muslim related it
exclusively.
Abu Dawood, An-Nasa’i related on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar
that Allah’s Messenger never abandoned touching the Yemeni
corner and the Hajar (Black Stone) in all his Tawaf.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Salim Ibn ‘Abdullah from
his father that he said: “I did not see the Prophet touch anypart of
the House (Ka‘bah) except the two Yemeni corners.” It is also
related by Muslim.
Al-Bukhari related from Abi Ash Sha‘tha’ who said: “Who
would avoid any part of House?” Mu‘awiyah used to touch all
the corners and Ibn ‘Abbas said to him: “These two corners are
not to be touched.” Mu‘awiyah said in response: “There is
nothing of the House that should be abandoned.” Ibn AzZubair
also used to touch all of the corners. Al-Bukhari related this
narration exclusively, may Allah have Mercy on him.
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “I did not see Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
touching other than the two Yemeni corners.”Muslim related it
exclusively.
The report of Ibn ‘Umar agrees with that of Ibn ‘Abbas that the
two Shami corners are not to be touched because they were not
built on the foundation of Ibrahim. The Quraish were short of
funds so they expunged the Hijr from the House when they were
rebuilding it as stated earlier. The Prophet desired to complete it
upon the foundation of Ibrahim but feared that since the people
had abandoned Jahiliyyah recently, their hearts would be
repelled by such an action. During the reign of ‘Abdullah Ibn Az290

Zubair, the Ka‘bah was destroyed and he built it on the
foundation indicated as he was informed by his maternal aunt,
the Mother of Believers, ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with
her) Bint Abu Bakr As-Siddiq. If Ibn Az-Zubair had touched all
of the corners after rebuilding it on the foundation of Ibrahim,
then that will be considered very good and this is more likely of
him.
An-Nasa’i related on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn As-Sa’ib
who said: I heard Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), say between the Yemeni corner and the
Black Stone: “Our Lord! Give us in this world that which is good
and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save us from the
torment of the Fire.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:201)
Abu Dawood also related on the authority of Jabir that when the
Prophet arrived in Makkah, he entered the Mosque and touched
the Black Stone and then proceeded toward his right jogging
three times (round the Ka‘bah) and walking the remaining four
circuits. Then he came to the Maqam (Ibrahim) and said: “And
take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim (or the stone on
which Ibrahim stood while he was building the Ka‘bah) as a
place of prayer (for some of your prayers, e.g. two Raka’ahs after
the Tawaf).” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:125) He offered two units of prayer while the Maqam
was intervening between him and the House. Afterward, he went
to the Black Stone after the two Raka‘ahs and touched it and then
exited to Safa and I think he said: “Verily! As-Safa and AlMarwah are of the Symbols of Allah.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah
2:158) This Hadith is hasan saheeh and so is working according
to it the people of knowledge.

291

The Description of the Prophet’s Ramaland
Idtiba’ During His Tawaf
When Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), performed Tawaf of the Ka‘bah for Hajj or ‘Umrah, the
first thing he did was to do Ramal during the first three rounds,
and in the last four rounds he would walk; then after the Tawaf
he used to offer two Raka‘ahs and then performed Tawaf
between Safa and Marwah.Imam Muslim also related it from the
Hadith of Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah.
Al-Bukhari also related from Ibn ‘Umar that: “Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), used to
circumambulate the Ka‘bah the first time jogging through three
circuits and walking through four. He also used to run when he
got to the middle of the valley whenever he did Sa'i between Safa
and Marwah.” It is related by Muslim.
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, said
concerning why Ramal was done and the shoulders were
exposed: “Allah established Islam and banished disbelief and its
adherents. Nevertheless, we will never abandon whatever we
used to do with Allah’s Messenger.” It is related by Ahmad, Abu
Dawood, Ibn Majah and Al-Baihaqi.
All of these are refutations of Ibn ‘Abbas and those who follow
him from the opinion that Ramal is not Sunnah, as Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), only did
it when he and his Companions arrived on the morning of the
fourth day on the ‘Umrat Al-Qada’ and the Mushrikoon
(polytheists) said: “A delegation that has been debilitated by the
fever of Yathrib has come to you,” thus, Allah’s Messenger,
292

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), ordered to jog
(Ramal) through the first three circuits and to walk the distance
between the two corners and nothing prevented (him from
commanding) them from jogging through all the circuits except
out of pity for them. This is established in the Saheehain.Ibn
‘Abbas used to disprove the occurrence of Ramal during the
Farewell Pilgrimage. However, it is authentically related and
confirmed as stated earlier and in it is a more complete addition
confirming Ramal. He did not walk between the two Yemeni
corners owing to the abatement of that reason, which is
weakness.
It is recorded in an authentic Hadith from Ibn ‘Abbas that they
did Ramal in the ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah and they also did Idtiba‘.
This is a refutation against him as during the ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah,
they were not under any type of fear because it occurred after the
Conquest as stated earlier.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), and his Companions assumed
‘Umrah from Ji‘ranah and they did Ramal and Idtiba‘, placing a
part of their Rida’ (upper garment) under their armpits and the
other end of it over their shoulders.It is related by Abu Dawood.
Concerning Idtiba’ during the Farewell Pilgrimage, Ya‘la Ibn
Umayyah from Umayyah who said: I saw Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), circumambulating
the House with Idtiba‘. Related by AtTirmidhi from the Hadith
of Thawree and he said it is hasan saheeh.
Jabir said in his Hadith related earlier: "Until we came to Ka‘bah
where he touched the pillar and (made seven circuits) jogging
three of them and walking four. When he finished, he went to the
293

Maqam Ibrahim to offer two units of prayer and then he recited:
'And take you (people) the Maqam Ibrahim as a lace of prayer
(for some of your prayers, e.g. two Raka‘ahs after the Tawaf of
the Ka‘bah at Makkah) '.” Abu ‘Abdullah (Ja‘afar – the subnarrator) added: “He recited in both units (of prayer) AtTawheed (Soorah Al-Ikhlas) and Qul ya ayyuhal Kafiroon
(Soorah Al-Kafiroon).”
If it is said: Was Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), riding or walking during this Tawaf? The
answer is that two narrations have been reported which are
thought to be contradictory and we relate them and indicate
reconciliation between them and clear the mind of thosewho
have a false impression that there is contradiction between them;
Allah is the source of fortune and from Him is assistance sought,
He is sufficient for us and the best trustee.
Al-Bukhari related from Ibn ‘Abbas that: Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), circumambulated
(the Ka‘bah) on his camel during the Farewell Pilgrimage and he
would touch the corner with a staff.
Muslim related on the authority of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her), that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), circumambulated round the Ka‘bah on
his camel during the Farewell Pilgrimage and he touched the
corner and he did not like that the people should be pushed away
from him. This is an affirmation that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), circumambulated riding a
camel during the Farewell Pilgrimage and there were three
Tawafs in the Farewell Pilgrimage: the first is Tawaf AlQudoom, the second is Tawaf Al-Ifadah which the obligatory
294

Tawaf on the day of sacrifice and the third is Tawaf Al-Wadaa‘.
Perhaps his riding (to perform Tawaf) occurred either in one or
both of the last two Tawafs. As for the first, which is Tawaf
AlQudoom, he was walking during it. Ash-Shafi‘i has related all
of these. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Abu Dawood related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), arrived
in Makkah with a an ailment and so he circumambulated on his
mount. When he came to the corner he touched it with a stick.
When he completed his Tawaf, he made his camel kneel and then
offered two units of prayer. Yazeed Ibn Abi Ziyad related it
exclusively but he is judged to be weak.
Also, he did not mention that it was during the Farewell
Pilgrimage and he did not mention whether it occurred in the first
Tawaf during the Farewell Pilgrimage and he did not mention
Ibn ‘Abbas in the authentic Hadith in Muslim. So also Jabir
narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), rode in his Tawaf due to weakness and it is also
mentioned that the weakness was due to the large number of
people and their frequent visits (to him) and he did not like that
people be beaten in his presence as shall be confirmed shortly
insha’Allah.
Also, the second kissing after the Tawaf after the two Raka‘ahs
which is mentioned by Ibn Ishaq in his narration is equally
confirmed in Saheeh Muslim from the Hadith of Jabir. He said
after mentioning the two Raka‘ahs after Tawaf: “Then he
returned to the corner and touched it.”
Imam Muslim related in his Saheeh on the authority of Nafi’ who
said: “I saw Ibn ‘Umar touching the Black Stone with his hand
295

and then he kissed his hand and then said: I have never
abandoned it since I saw Allah’s Messenger doing it.” This
implies that he saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), in some of his Tawafs or it was in his last
Tawaf that he did that as we have mentioned, or perhaps Ibn
‘Umar did not get to the Black Stone due to his weakness or
perhaps so that he may not push others and they may not be
harmed by him.

His Sa‘i Between As-Safa and Al-Marwah
Imam Muslim related in his Saheeh on the authority of Jabir in
his lengthy Hadith quoted earlier after mentioning his seven
circuits around the House, his two Raka‘ahs of Salat at the
Maqam, hesaid: Thereafter, he went out to Safa and (as he
reached near it) he recited: “Verily! As-Safa and Al-Marwah are
of the Symbols of Allah.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:158) and then
added: “We begin with what Allah has begun.” He first mounted
Safa till he saw the House, and facing the Qiblah he extolled the
greatness of Allah and then said: “La ilaha ill-Allah wahdahu la
shareeka lahu lahul- mulk wa lahul-hamd wa Huwa a‘la kulli
shai’in Qadeer. La ilaha ill-Allah anjaza wahdahu wa sadaqa
a‘bdahu wa ghalabal-ahzab wahdahu (There is no deity worthy
of worship (in truth) but Allah, the One, there is no partner with
Him. His is the Sovereignty; to Him is due praise and He is
Powerful over everything. There is no deity worthy of worship
(in truth) but Allah, Who fulfilled His promise, helped His
servant and overcame the confederates alone).” Then he
supplicated and then resumed these words and then he descended
until his feet came down to the bottom of the valley, then he ran,
and when he began to ascend, he walked again till he reached Al-

296

Marwah. He ascended it, faced the House and he repeated what
he said on As-Safa’.
On the authority of Umm Walad Shaibah Ibn ‘Uthman who said
that she saw the Prophet going between As-Safa and Al-Marwah
(for Sa‘i). An-Nasa’i related it. The meaning of Sa‘i here is the
movement from As-Safa to AlMarwah and vice versa and the
meaning here is not the jogging and hastening. This is because
Allah has not made it compulsory on us; rather, if a man were to
walk normally throughout the seven circuits and he did not
perform Ramal (jogging) in the ravine, that will still suffice him
according to a group of scholars and no difference of opinion is
known concerning that.
At-Tirmidhi, may Allah have Mercy on him, reported from some
people of knowledge from Katheer Ibn Jumhan who said: “I
sawIbn ‘Umar walk in the Masa‘a (place of Sa‘i) and I said to
him: ‘Do you walk between As-Safa and Al-Marwah?’ He said:
‘If I hasten, I have seen Allah’s Messenger doing that and if I
walk, I have seen Allah’s Messenger doing that as well and
coupled with that, I am an old man'.” Then the narrator said: This
Hadith is hasan saheeh.
The statement of ‘Umar that he witnessed the two situations from
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
implies two things:
That he saw him walk during the Sa‘i and not jogging at all.
Or that he saw him hasten a part and walk a part of the way.
This (the second implication) is perhaps stronger because it has
been related by both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
297

Ibn ‘Umar that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), used to hasten in the middle of the valley whenever
he went between Safa and Marwah. It is has been stated earlier
in the Hadith of Jabir that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), “Descended until his feet came
down in the bottom of the valley, then he ran, and when he began
to ascend, he again walked until he reached Marwah.”This is the
more preferred opinion of the scholars that it is recommended to
jog in the middle of the valley at each circuit during the Sa‘i.
They designate it to be between the green mileposts; one toward
Safa close to the Mosque and two together in the direction of
Marwah, also close to the Mosque. Some of the scholars said:
The distance between these mileposts today is wider than the
middle of the valley in which Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), jogged. And Allah (SWT)
knows best.
As for the statement of Muhammad Ibn Hazm in the book he
compiled on the Farewell Pilgrimage: “Then he (the Messenger
of Allah) exited to Safa and he recited: “Verily! As-Safa and AlMarwah are of the Symbols of Allah.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah
2:158) I start with what Allah has started,” then he went between
Safa and Marwah seven times riding, or jogging through the first
three circuits and walking the remaining four. No one has
concurred with him on this opinion and nobody has uttered it
before him that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), ran three circuits between Safa and Marwah
and he walked four circuits. Coupled with this serious error, he
did not adduce for it any evidence at all. Rather, when he got to
the point of adducing evidence for it, he said: “We do not find
any text for the number of jogging between Safa and Marwah
even though that is agreed upon. If he intends that the Ramal in
298

the first three circuits is agreed upon, then this is not correct; in
fact, no one has said it. If he intends that the Ramal in the first
three circuits is generally agreed upon, then that also does not
avail him nor does it actualize his intention.
Just as they are agreed upon Ramal in the first three circuits, they
have also agreed on its being recommended in the other four
circuits. Hence, Ibn Hazm’s restriction of Ramal to the first three
circuits is contrary to what the scholars have mentioned.
As for Ibn Hazm’s statement that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), was riding between Safa and
Marwah, then it has been presented earlier on the authority of Ibn
‘Umar that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), used to hasten in the middle of the valley.
In the narration of At-Tirmidhi on his authority, it reads: “If I
hasten, (this is because) I have seen Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), doing so; and if I walk,
(this is because) I have seen Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) doing so.” Jabir also said:
“When he descended until his feet came touched the bottom of
the valley, then he ran,and when he began to ascend, he again
walked.” It is related by Muslim. Habeebah Bint Abi Tijrat
narrated: “He hastened and his Izar gathered round him due to
the intensity of the jogging.” It is related by Ahmad. It is recorded
in Saheeh Muslim on the authority of Jabir as stated earlier that
he climbed Safa until he could see the House and similarly on
Marwah.
It is stated earlier on the authority of Jabir that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), made
his camel kneel down at the gate of the Mosque until he
299

circumambulated and it is not mentioned that he mounted it at
the time when he went out to Safa. All of these indicate the
possibility that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), performed Sa‘i on foot.
However, Muslim related on the authority of Abu Az-Zubair that
he heard Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah say: During the Farewell
Pilgrimage, the Prophet performed the Tawaf of the House on
the back of his mount and the Sa‘i on his camel so that the people
could see him, to direct them and that they may ask him
questions; neither the Prophet nor his Companions performed
Sa‘i except once.
Abu Dawood has related on the authority of Abu Az-Zubair that
he heard Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah say: “During the Farewell
Pilgrimage, the Prophet circumambulated the House and then
between Safa and Marwah."
This is well-preserved in the Hadith of Ibn Juraij which is very
problematic because the remainder of the narrations of Jabir
andothers indicated that the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), performed Sa‘i on foot. It is
possible that this addition is a version of Abu Az-Zubair and his
statement: “Between Safa and Marwah” is an interpolation from
someone after the Companions. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Or perhapsAllah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), carried out some of his Tawafs on foot and they
witnessed what has been mentioned but when the number of the
people became multiplied and there was overcrowding, he rode
as indicated by the Hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas coming shortly. Ibn
Hazm conceded that his first Tawaf around the House was on
foot and understood his riding during Tawaf to be in the ones
300

after. He also claimed that he was riding during the Sa‘i, he said:
Because he did not circumambulate but once and he interpreted
the statement of Jabir: “till his feet touched the bottom of the
valley, then he ran,” as to be correct. If he was riding, then, when
his camel descended into the valley, he has descended entirely,
his foot along with the rest of his body. This interpretation is very
remote indeed. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Abu Dawood related on the authority of Abu Tufail who said: I
said to Ibn ‘Abbas: “Your people claim that Allah’s Messenger
did Ramal round the House and that is part of his Sunnah.” He
replied: “They told the truth and they lied.” I said: “Where did
they speak the truth and where did they tell a lie?” He said: “They
spoke the truth for the Messenger of Allah did Ramal but they
lied because it is not Sunnah. During the period of Hudaibiyah,
the Quraish said: Leave him and his Companions to die like
maggots. Afterward, they reached an armistice to allow the
Muslims to perform Hajj the following year and to reside in
Makkah for three days for that purpose. Allah’s Messenger
arrived (in Makkah) while the polytheists were in the direction
of Qu‘aiqi‘an. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), said to his Companions: ‘Do Ramal of the House
three times.’ Thus, it is not Sunnah.”
She said: “Your people claim that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) wentbetween Safa and Marwah
on the back of his camel and that is Sunnah.” He said: “They told
the truth and they lied. They spoke the truth for the Messenger of
Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), did Sa‘i but
they lied because it is not Sunnah. It was difficult repelling and
staving off the people from the Prophet so he rode his camel so

301

that they may hear and see him (well) and to observe his
movements without their hands reaching him.”
Muslim has related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas in which he
mentioned the virtue of circumambulating the House in the
manner described above and then he said: She said to Ibn ‘Abbas:
“Relate to me about the Tawaf between Safa and Marwah while
riding, for your people claim that it is Sunnah?" He replied:
“They told the truth and they lied.” I said: “What do you mean
by your statement: they told the truth and they lied.” He said:
“The people swarmed Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), shouting: ‘This is Muhammad! This is
Muhammad!’ Until the virgin girls came out of the houses.
Meanwhile, the Prophet did not tolerate that people be beaten in
his presence. However, when he was overcrowded, he rode.” Ibn
‘Abbas added: “But walking and hastening is preferred.” This is
the wording of Muslim and it implies that his riding was
circumstantial and this is a reconciliation of all the Ahadeeth.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
As for what is related by Muslim in his Saheeh on the authority
of Abu Tufail who said: “I said to Ibn ‘Abbas: ‘I think that I saw
Allah’s Messenger.’ He
(Ibn ‘Abbas) said: ‘Describe him to me.’ I said: ‘I saw him near
Marwah on the back of a she-camel, and people thronged around
him.’ Thereupon Ibn Abbas said: ‘It was Allah’s Messenger for
they (the crowd of people) were neitherpushed aside from him,
nor were they turned away'.”Muslim has related it exclusively
and there is nothing in it indicating that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), performed the Sa‘i
between Safa and Marwah riding since that was neither restricted
to the Farewell Pilgrimage nor other than it. Supposing that it
302

occurred during the Farewell Pilgrimage, from what is possible
is that after Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), had concluded his Sa‘i, his sitting on Marwah, his
addressing the people, his commanding those who did not drive
their Hady among them to turn their Hajj into ‘Umrah and they
had exited from their Ihram (as commanded) except those who
came with their Hady, as stated earlier in the Hadith of Jabir;
after all these, he came to his camel, mounted it and proceeded
to his residence at Al-Abtah as we shall relate shortly. It is at this
time Abu At-Tufail ‘Amir Ibn Wathilah Al-Bakri saw him. He
was also counted among the junior Companions.
However, Abu Dawood related on the authority of Abu At-Tufail
who said: “I saw the Prophet circumambulating the House on the
back of his camel, touching the corner with a staff and then
would kiss it (the stick).” Muhammad Ibn Rafi’ added:
“Afterward, he went out to Safa and Marwah and he walked
between them seven times (riding) on his camel.” Muslim has
also related it in his Saheeh from the Hadith of Abu Dawood AtTayalisi.
On the authority of Qudamah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Ammar AlKilabi who narrated that he saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), pelting the Jamrah on the day
of Nahr at the middle of valley while riding a reddish camel,
neither beating nor shoving (people) and he was not saying: "
(stay) away from me, (stay) away from me.”
I say: A number of scholars from Iraq like Abu Hanifah and his
companions and Ath-Thawri have posited that a Qarin (a pilgrim
performing Hajj Qiran) should do two Tawafs and two Sa‘is.
This opinion is also related of ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘ood, Mujahid and
303

Ash-Sha‘bi. They can adduce the lengthy Hadith of Jabir as a
proof that the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), did Sa‘i between Safa and Marwah on foot and this Hadith
of his that the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), performed Sa‘i between both of them on foot throughout
the number of circuits on one occasion and on another riding.
Sa’eed Ibn Mansoor has related in his Sunan on the authority of
‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, that he made intention for
Hajj and ‘Umrah. When he arrived in Makkah, he
circumambulated the House and between Safa and Marwah for
his ‘Umrah. Thereafter, he circumambulated the House and
walked between Safa and Marwah for his Hajj. He remained in
Ihram until the day of sacrifice. This wording is his.
Abu Dharr Al-Harawi in Al-Manasik said on the authority of ‘Ali
that he combined both Hajj and ‘Umrah and he performed two
Tawafs and Sa‘i (i.e., one each) for both of them and said: “This
is how I have seen Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), behave.” This is how Al-Baihaqi, AdDaraqutni and An-Nasa’i also related in Khasa’is ‘Ali.
Al-Baihaqi related in his Sunan on the authority of Abu Nasr who
said: I met ‘Ali while I had made intention for Hajj and he had
made intention for both Hajj and ‘Umrah so I asked: “Is it
possible for to me to act in a similar manner (as you have acted)?”
He replied: “That is on the condition that you started with the
‘Umrah.” I said: “What do I do if I intend to do that?” He said:
“You will take a container of water and you will take a bath with
it. Then you will make intention for both of them together
andthen you will perform two Tawafs and Sa‘is (i.e., one each)
for both of them and it is not permissible for you to do anything
that will vitiate your Ihram before the day of sacrifice.”
304

Al-Mansoor said: "I mentioned that to Mujahid and he said: 'We
used to give a religious verdict of one Tawaf but now, we shall
desist'.”
I say: However, what is related in authentic Ahadeeth run
contrary to that. We have presented earlier a narration on the
authority of Ibn ‘Umar in Saheeh AlBukhari that he made
intention for ‘Umrah and he joined the Hajj to it so he became a
Qarin and he performed one Tawaf for the Hajj and ‘Umrah and
he commented: This is the same way Allah’s Messenger had
acted.
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated: Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said: “Whoever
combines both Hajj and ‘Umrah together should perform one
Tawaf and one Sa‘i for both of them.” At-Tirmidhi said: This
Hadith is hasan ghareeb.
I say: Its chain is upon the standard of Muslim. This is how
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), the Mother of the
Believers, acted for she was among those who made intention for
‘Umrah due to the fact that she did not drive along with her the
Hady. Thus, when she menstruated, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), commanded her to take a
bath and to make intention for Hajj along with her ‘Umrah so she
became a Qarinah (a female pilgrim on Hajj-Qiran). When they
returned from Mina, she requested to be allowed to perform
‘Umrah after her Hajj and she was granted in order to please her
as clearlyrelated in the Hadith.

305

Imam Ash-Shafi‘i related on the authority of ‘Ata’ that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said to
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her): “Your
circumambulation of the House and between Safa and Marwah
suffices for your Hajj and ‘Umrah.”This narration is clearly
mursal though it is connected in meaning.
Muslim related from the Hadith of Ibn Juraij who said: “Abu AzZubair informed me that he heard Jabir say that the Messenger
of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), came to
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), may Allah be pleased
with her, and found her weeping, and said: ‘What is the matter
with you?’ She said: ‘The matter is that I have commenced my
menstruation and the people have exited from Ihram, but I have
not circumambulated the House, and the people are going for
Hajj now (but I can’t go).’ Whereupon he said: ‘It is a matter
which Allah has ordained for the daughters of Adam, so now take
a bath and put on the Ihram for Hajj.’ She (‘A’ishah (May Allah
be pleased with her)) did accordingly, and stayed at the places of
staying until her monthly period was over. She then
circumambulated the House, and (ran between) Safa and
Marwah. He (the Prophet) then said: ‘Now both your Hajj and
‘Umrah are complete,’ whereupon she said: ‘I feel in my mind
that I did not circumambulate the House until I performed Hajj
(I missed the circumambulation of ‘Umrah).’ Thereupon Allah’s
Messenger said: ‘Abdur Rahman, take her to Tan‘eem (so as to
enable her) to perform ‘Umrah (separately), and it was the night
at Hasbah'.” Another Hadith from Juraij reads: Abu Az- Zubair
informed me that he heard Jabir say, “The Prophet and
Companions did not perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwah
except once.” According to the companions of Abu Hanifah, may
Allah have Mercy on him, the Prophet and his Companions
306

whodrove their Hady along with them had done combined Hajj
with ‘Umrah as indicated by aforementioned Ahadeeth. And
Allah (SWT) knows best.
Ash-Shafi‘i related on the authority of ‘Ali who said concerning
a pilgrim performing Hajj-Qiran: "He will perform two Tawafs
and one Sa‘i." AshShafi‘i added: some people said: Two Tawafs
and Sa‘is and they adduced as evidence a weak narration on the
authority of ‘Ali.
Jabir narrated in his Hadith: Until the end of his Tawaf (i.e. Sa‘i)
at AlMarwah when he said: “If I had known beforehand what I
have come to know afterward, I would not have brought
sacrificial animals.” Related by Muslim. In it is a proof against
those who state that Sa‘i is fourteen circuits. Each to and from is
considered one circuit. This is the opinion of a group of senior
followers of the Shafi‘i madhhab and this Hadith is a refutation
for them. This is because, based on their opinion, the last circuit
of Sa‘i ends at Safa and not Marwah. Thus, Ahmad said in his
own version of the Hadith of Jabir: “When it was his seventh
running at Marwah he said: ‘If I had known beforehand what I
have come to know afterward, I would not have brought
sacrificial animals and would have performed an ‘Umrah.’ So,
he who among you has not brought the sacrificial animals with
him should exit from Ihram and treat it as an ‘Umrah.” All the
people exited from their Ihram. Muslim added: All the people
exited from their Ihram and cut their hairs except the Prophet as
well as those brought with them a Hady.
A host of Companions have narrated his command to those who
did not bring along a Hady to treat their Hajj as ‘Umrah. We
discuss them at length here and we have enumerated them in
307

thebook Al-Ahkam Al-Kabeer, insha’Allah. Scholars have
disagreed concerning that. Malik, Abu Hanifah and As-Shafi‘i
argue that it is part of the Khasa’is (peculiarities) of the
Companions and then its permissibility for people other than
them was abrogated. They rely on to the opinion of Abu Dharr
that a repeal of Hajj for ‘Umrah was meant only for the
Companions of Muhammad. It is related by Muslim.
However, Imam Ahmad refuted that saying: “It has been narrated
by eleven Companions, so where did this occur in their
narrations?” Thus, he opined that a repealing of Hajj for ‘Umrah
is permissible for other than the Companions. Ibn ‘Abbas argues
in favour of the obligation of repealing upon whoever does not
bring with them a Hady. To him, it is permissible in the Shari‘ah
if he had circumambulated the House and did not bring a Hady,
then he becomes free of Ihram by the simple occurrence of that.
According to him, there is no Nusuk (sacrifice) except for (Hajj)
Qiran for whoever came with the Hady or Tamattu’ for those
who did not come with the Hady. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated:
The Prophet along with his Companions arrived in Makkah in
the morning of the fourth of Dhul-Hijjah in Ihram for Hajj only.
So when we arrived, the Prophet ordered us to change our
intentions of the Ihram for ‘Umrah and that we could remove our
Ihram after performing the ‘Umrah and could go to our wives
(for intercourse). The people began talking about that. Jabir said
in surprise: “Shall we go to Mina while semen is dribbling from
our male organs?” Jabir moved his hand while saying so. When
this news reached the Prophet he delivered a sermon and said: “I
have been informed that some people were saying suchand-such;

308

by Allah, I fear Allah more than you do, and am more obedient
to Him than you. If I had known what I know now, I would not
have brought the Hady (sacrifice) with me and had the Hady not
been with me, I would have removed Ihram.” At that Suraqah
Ibn Malik stood up and asked: “O Allah’s Messenger! Is this
permission for us only or is it forever?” The Prophet, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), replied: “It is forever.”
On the authority of Jabir who narrated: “We, in the state of Ihram,
came with the Messenger of Allah for Hajj-Mufrad (with the aim
of Hajj only), and ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) set
out for ‘Umrah, and when we reached Sarif, she entered in the
state of her monthly period. We proceeded on until we reached
Makkah and circumambulated the Ka‘bah and ran between Safa
and Marwah; and the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), commanded that anyone among us who
had no sacrificial animal with him should exit from the Ihram.
We said: “What does this exiting imply?” He said: “Exiting
completely from the state of Ihram, and we returned to our wives
and applied perfume and put on our clothes and we were just four
nights away from ‘Arafah.”
It is explicit in these two Ahadeeth that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), arrived in Makkah
in the year of Hajjat AlWadaa’ on the morning of the 4th day of
Dhul-Hijjah. That was on Sunday when the day had risen and at
the time of Dhuha because the first day of Dhul- Hijjah that year
fell on Thursday without any dispute. Thus, the day of ‘Arafah
that year fell on the day of Jumu‘ah based on the Hadith of ‘Umar
Ibn AlKhattab recorded in the Saheehain as shall be presented
later.

309

When Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), arrived on Sunday, the fourth day of the month, and as
mentioned earlier, he started with the Tawaf of Ka'bah and then
Sa‘i. Upon concluding his running between them at Marwah, he
ordered the one who had no Hady with him to exit from his Ihram
compulsorily and that became obligatory upon them without an
option. They complied but some of them were grieved because
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
did not exit from his Ihram due to his coming with the Hady and
they wished to act exactly as he had done. When he saw their
unhappy demeanor, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), said to them: “If I had known beforehand
what I have come to know afterward, I would not have brought
sacrificial animals and would have performed an
‘Umrah.”Meaning, if I had known that it would unnerve you, I
would not have brought Hady with me so that I could put off the
Ihram as you have.
Thus, the evidence of the preference for Tamattu’ becomes clear
as mentioned by Imam Ahmad, deducing from this Hadith. He
said: “I do not have a doubt that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), performed Hajj-Qiran, but
Tamattu’ is better because of his feeling of regret. His response
is that the Prophet did not feel regretful for Tamattu’ being better
than Qiran in respect of the one who had brought along the Hady.
Rather, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), felt regretful so that he may not discomfit his
Companions by remaining in Ihram himself and his command
that they should exit from their own Ihram.” Consequently, And
Allah (SWT) knows best, when Imam Ahmad contemplated on
this secret, he adduced in yet another narration from him that
Tamattu’ is better in respect of the one who did not bring Hady
310

based on Allah’s Messenger’s command that whoever, among
his Companions, did not bring along the Hady to perform
Tamattu’ and that Qiran is better for the one whobrought the
Hady as Allah has preferred for His Prophet during his Farewell
Pilgrimage and His commanding him accordingly as stated
above. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Afterward, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), proceeded along with the people upon the completion
of his Sa‘i between Safa and Marwah and his command to those
who did not come with Hady to exit from Ihram until he alighted
at Al-Abtah in the eastern part of Makkah. He remained there for
the remainder of Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
until he offered the Subh prayers of Thursday. All the while he
led his Companions in prayers and he did not return to the Ka‘bah
throughout those days.
Al-Bukhari said in the chapter on the one who does not come
near the Ka‘bah and does not perform Tawaf till the day of
‘Arafah and returns after the first Tawaf that on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated: the Prophet arrived in
Makkah and he circumambulated (the House) and did Sa‘i
between Safa and Marwah and did not come close to the Ka‘bah
after his Tawaf until he returned from ‘Arafah. Al-Bukhari
related it exclusively.
While Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), was still at Al-Batha’, on the outskirts of Makkah, ‘Ali
arrived from Yemen. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), had sent him to Yemen as a commander
after Khalid Ibn Al- Waleed, as stated earlier. When he returned,
he found that his wife, Fatimah, the daughter of Allah’s
311

Messenger, had exited from her Ihram as had the wives of
Allah’s Messenger as (they were among) those who did not come
along with the Hady and she had applied antimony and had put
on dyed clothes. Showing disapproval ‘Ali asked: “Who asked
you to do this?” She said: “My father.” ‘Ali went to the
Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
showingannoyance at Fatimah for what she had done, and
narrated to him: “O Messenger of Allah, Fatimah has exited from
her Ihram, put on dyed clothes and applied antimony and she
claims that you commanded her to do so.” Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said: “She has told
the truth, she has told the truth, she has told the truth.” Then the
Prophet asked him: “What did you say when you make the
intention to go for Hajj?” ‘Ali said: “I assume the same Ihram as
that of the Prophet.” He said: “I have with me sacrificial animals,
so do not exit from the Ihram.” The total number of those
sacrificial animals brought by ‘Ali from Yemen and of those
brought by the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), from Madinah and those he bought on the
way was one hundred camels. Both of them shared in all of the
Hady. All of these have been related earlier in Saheeh Muslim.
This silent approval refutes the narration mentioned by Al-Hafiz
Abul-Qasim At-Tabarani, may Allah have Mercy on him, from
the Hadith of ‘Ikrimah from Ibn ‘Abbas that ‘Ali met the Prophet
on his way to Al-Juhfah.And Allah (SWT) knows best. Abu
Moosa was among the people who came with ‘Ali but he did not
come with a Hady so Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), ordered him to exit from his Ihram after
he had performed the Tawaf and Sa‘i for ‘Umrah. Thus, he
turned his intention for Hajj into ‘Umrah and he became a
Mutamattu’ pilgrim and, thereafter, he used to give religious
312

verdicts accordingly during the reign of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab,
may Allah be pleased with him. When he saw that ‘Umar used
to do Hajj-Ifrad and ‘Umrah, he abandoned his previous verdict
in deference and love for the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Umar.
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of ‘Awn Ibn Abi Juhaifah
who narrated that his father said: “I saw Bilal calling the
Adhanand turning his mouth here and there with two of his
fingersinserted into his ears.” He added: “Meanwhile, Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), was in
a reddish tent which I supposed was made of leather. Afterward,
Bilal came out into his front with an iron-tipped walking stick
and drove it into the ground and Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), offered the Salat.” ‘Abdur
Razzaq said: "I heard him say that it was in Makkah at Al-Batha’;
while a dog, a woman and a donkey passed across the front
(behind the iron-tipped walking stick) and he was wearing a
reddish garment as if I could still see his shining shanks.” Sufyan
said: “We think it (the garment) was a Hibarah."
On the authority of Abu Juhaifah who narrated: Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went out
at midday to Al-Batha’. He performed ablution, offered two units
of the Dhuhr prayers while an iron- tipped walking stick was in
front of him. ‘Awn added from a report from his father, Abu
Juhaifah: “Meanwhile, donkeys and women were passing behind
us.” Hajjaj said concerning the Hadith: Afterward, the people got
up and were taking his hand and rubbing it on their faces. He
added: “I also took his hand and rubbed it on my face and it felt
colder than snow and its fragrance sweeter than musk.” The two
authors of Saheeh have related it from the Hadith of Shu‘bah in
its entirety.
313

Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
remained at Al-Abtah, as indicated earlier, throughout Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. The people had exited from
their Ihram except those who came along with Hady. It was
during these days that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib arrived from Yemen
together with those who had accompanied him among Muslims;
he also came with wealth. The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him),did not return to the Ka‘bah after he had
circumambulated it. On the morning of Thursday, Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), offered
the Subh prayers of that day at Al-Abtah which coincided with
the day of Tarwiyah and it is equally referred to as the day of
Mina because that is the day pilgrims proceed to it.
It has been related that the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), gave an address prior to this day. It is said that it
was the day before, based on what I saw from some
commentaries on the Day of Embellishment because it is the day
the Budn used to be embellished and similar things. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated:
Whenever Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), addressed the people on the day of Tarwiyah, he
would address them concerning their rites.
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
rode toward Mina before the sun shifted from its zenith though
some said it was after it. Those people who had made the
intention for Hajj at Al-Abtah assumed their Ihram when they
were heading to Mina and dispatched their camel in its direction.

314

On the authority of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah who narrated: We arrived
along with Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), and exited from our Ihram until the day of Tarwiyah
when we left Makkah after making intention for Hajj. Al-Bukhari
mentioned this as a short commentary.
On the authority of Jabir who narrated: "After we had exited from
it, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), ordered us to put on our Ihram when we were heading to
Mina." He added: "We put on our Ihram from Al-Abtah."
‘Ubaid Ibn Juraij said to Ibn ‘Umar: "I saw that whenever you
are in Makkah and people put on Ihram on sighting the crescent
moon you would not put on it until the day of Tarwiyah." He
responded: "I have never seen the Prophet putting on Ihram until
his camel set out with him (to Mina)."
Al-Bukhari related: ‘Ata’ was asked concerning the person who
passed Mina while reciting the Talbiyah of Hajj and he said: Ibn
‘Umar used to utter the Labbaik on the day of Tarwiyah after he
had offered the Dhuhr prayers and his camel had risen with him.
I say: This is how Ibn ‘Umar used to act whenever he performed
Hajj with ‘Umrah. He would put off his Ihram for ‘Umrah and
when it was the day of Tarwiyah, he would not utter the Labbaik
until his camel had set out toward Mina just as Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), had put
on Ihram from Dhul-Hulaifah after he had offered the Dhuhr
prayers and his camel had set out. However, on the day of
Tarwiyah, the Prophet did not offer the Dhuhr prayers at AlAbtah; rather, he offered it that day at Mina and there is no
dispute concerning this.

315

On the authority of ‘Abdul-Aziz Ibn Rufai’ who narrated: "I
asked Anas Ibn Malik: 'Tell me something you have observed
about the Prophet concerning where he offered the Dhuhr prayers
on the Day of Tarwiyah (8th DhulHijjah).' Anas replied: 'He
offered it at Mina.' I said: 'Where did he offer the ‘Asr prayers on
the Day of Nahr (day of departure from Mina) ?' He replied:
'AtAl-Abtah,' and added, 'You should do as your leaders do'.”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated: Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), led us in the Dhuhr,
‘Asr, Maghreb, ‘Isha’ and Fajr prayers at Mina and then
proceeded to ‘Arafah the following morning.
Ash-Shafi‘i has narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), rode from Al-Abtah to Mina
after Zawal but he offered the Dhuhr prayers in Mina and this
Hadith is adduced as evidence for that. And Allah (SWT) knows
best.
It has been stated earlier in the Hadith of Ja‘afar Ibn Muhammad
from his father on the authority of Jabir who narrated: “Then all
the people except the Prophet and those who had with them
sacrificial animals, removed their Ihram, and got their hair
clipped. When it was the day of Tarwiyah they went to Mina and
put on the Ihram for Hajj and the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), rode and led the noon,
afternoon, sunset, ‘Isha’ and dawn prayers. He then waited a little
until the sun rose, and commanded that a tent should be pitched
at Namirah.
The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), then set out and the Quraish did not doubt that he would
halt at Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram (the sacred site) as the Quraish used
316

to do in the pre-Islamic period. The Messenger of Allah, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), however, continued until
he came to ‘Arafah and found that the tent had been pitched for
him at Namirah. There he alighted and stayed until the sun had
passed the meridian; then he commanded that Al-Qaswa’ be
brought and saddled for him. He came to the bottom of the valley,
and addressed the people saying:
“Verily, your blood, your property are as sacred and inviolableas
the sacredness of this day of yours, in this month of yours, in this
town of yours. Behold! Everything pertaining to the days of
Ignorance is under my feet completely abolished. Abolished are
also the blood-revenges of the days of Ignorance.
“The first claim of ours on blood-revenge which I abolish is that
of the son of Rabee‘ah Ibn Al-Harith, who was nursed among the
tribe of Sa’d and killed by Hudhail. The usury of the pre-Islamic
period is abolished, and the first of our usury I abolish is that of
‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib, for it is all abolished. Fear Allah
concerning women! Verily, you have taken them on the security
of Allah, and intercourse with them has been made lawful unto
you by the words of Allah. You have right over them: they should
not allow anyone to sit on your bed whom you do not like. But if
they do that, you can chastise them but not severely. Their rights
upon you are that you should provide them with food and
clothing in a fitting manner.
I have left among you the Book of Allah, and if you hold fast to
it, you would never go astray. And you would be asked about me
(on the Day of Resurrection), (now tell me) what would you
say?”

317

The audience said: “We will bear witness that you have conveyed
(the message), discharged (the responsibility of Prophethood)
and given wise (sincere) counsel.”
The narrator said: “The Prophet then raised his forefinger toward
the sky and pointing it at the people (said): ‘O Allah, bear
witness. O Allah, bear witness,’ saying it thrice.”
It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas
who narrated: "I heard Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), deliver the Khutbah on‘Arafat to the
pilgrims: 'Whoever does not have shoes may wearKhuffs and
whoever does not find an Izar may wear trousers'.”
On the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Kharijah who said: "Attab Ibn
Aseed sent me to Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), while he was standing on ‘Arafat during
Hajj. I delivered the message to him and then I stood under his
camel while its saliva dribbled down my head and I heard him
say: 'O people, Allah has restored rights to their respective
owners and that it is not permissible to make a will for a rightful
inheritor. A child is attributed to the (owner of the) bed and
stoning is for the adulterer. Whoever attributes himself to other
than his rightful father, upon him shall be the curse of Allah, the
angels and all mankind and Allah shall accept neither his
obligatory deeds nor his supererogatory ones'.”
We will shortly present the content of the Khutbah which Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
delivered after this on the day of Nahr and what it contains of
wisdom, exhortation, encompassing benefits and prophetic
morals insha’Allah.

318

Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr
Ath-Thaqafi who once asked Anas Ibn Malik, while the two of
them were going from Mina to ‘Arafat: “What did you do on this
day when you were with the Messenger of Allah?” He said:
“Those of us who were saying the Talbiyah would continue
doing so, and no one disapproved of it, and those of us who were
saying: ‘Allahu Akbar’ would continue doing so, and no one
disapproved of that either.” It is also related by Muslim.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Salim Ibn ‘Abdullah that
‘Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan wrote to Al-Hajjaj that he should
follow ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar in all the rites of Hajj. So when it
was the Day of ‘Arafah (9th of Dhul-Hijjah), and after the sun
had deviated or declined from the middle of the sky, Ibn ‘Umar
and I came and he shouted near the cotton (cloth) tent of AlHajjaj: “Where is he?” Al-Hajjaj came out. Ibn ‘Umar said: “Let
us proceed (to ‘Arafah).” Al-Hajjaj asked: “Just now?” Ibn
‘Umar replied: “Yes.” Al-Hajjaj said: “Wait for me until I pour
water on myself (i.e. take a bath).” So, Ibn ‘Umar dismounted
(and waited) until Al-Hajjaj came out. He was walking between
me and my father. I informed Al-Hajjaj: “If you want to follow
the Sunnah today, then you should shorten the sermon and then
hurry up for the stay (at ‘Arafah).” Ibn ‘Umar said: “He (Salim)
has spoken the truth.”
Al-Bukhari related after his narration of this that Al-Laith said:
‘Uqail narrated to me from Ibn Shihab on the authority of Salim
who said: In the year that he advanced against Ibn Zubair, Hajjaj
asked Ibn ‘Umar what was done at this place of stay. He said: “If
you intend to follow the Sunnah, then offer the Salat at noon time
on the day of ‘Arafah." Ibn ‘Umar Added: “He has spoken the
truth. They used to combine the Dhuhr and ‘Asr prayers
319

according to Sunnah.” I said to Salim: “Did Allah’s Messenger
do that?” He said: “Are they following anything other than the
Sunnah with that?”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
proceeded from Mina on the morning of the day of ‘Arafah. He
disembarked at Namirah which is the place atwhich the Imams
usually camp on ‘Arafah. When it was time for the Dhuhr Salat,
the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), came out and combined both the Dhuhr and ‘Asr prayers.
This is how Jabir has mentioned it in his Hadith after he had
related the Khutbah above, he said: “Then Bilal pronounced the
Adhan and then the Iqamah and the Dhuhr Salat was performed.
Again, he gave another Iqamah and the ‘Asr prayers was
performed and he did not offer any (supererogatory) prayers in
between them. This implies that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), delivered the Khutbah first and
then offered the prayers. This does not contradict the second
Khutbah.
Muslim related on the authority of Jabir who narrated: “The
Messenger of Allah then mounted his camel and came to the
place of stay, making his camel turn toward the side where there
were rocks, having the path taken by those who went on foot in
front of him, and faced the Qiblah.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Umm Fadhl Bint AlHarith that "some men were arguing in her presence on the day
of ‘Arafah about whether the Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), was fasting or not. Some of
them said: ‘He was fasting.’ Others countered: ‘He was not
320

fasting.’ So I sent a bowl of milk to him while his camel was
standing and he drank it.” It is also related by Muslim.
‘Ata’ said: ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas invited Fadhl Ibn ‘Abbas to a
meal on the Day of ‘Arafah and he declined and said: “I am
fasting.” ‘Abdullah said: “Don’t fast for Allah’s Messenger
wassent a bowl of milk on the Day of ‘Arafah and he drank from
it. So don’t fast for you are being emulated. Ibn Bakr and Rawh
(version) reads: “People will emulate you.”
While a man was standing at ‘Arafat (for Hajj) with Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), he fell
down from his mount and broke his neck (and died). So Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said:
“Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of
cloth and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will
resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection and he will be saying
‘Labbaik'.” Muslim also related it.
On the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Ya‘mar Ad-Deeli who
narrated: "I witnessed Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), at ‘Arafat and a group of people from
Najd came to him and asked concerning the Hajj and he said:
“Arafah is Hajj. Whoever catches the night of ‘Arafah before the
dawn of the night of Jami’ (the day pilgrims return to Mina) has
completed his Hajj.”
On the authority of Yazeed Ibn Shaiban who narrated: "We were
standing on ‘Arafah at a place far away from the place of
standing. Then Ibn Mirba’ AlAnsari came to us and said: 'I am a
messenger of Allah’s Messenger to you and he has sent me to tell
you: Stay within your Masha‘ir (sacred sites) for you are upon a
heritage from the heritage of your father, Ibraheem'.”
321

It has been stated earlier that Allah’s Messenger, peace
andblessings of Allah be upon him, was not fasting on the day of
‘Arafah. Thus, this points to the fact that not fasting there is better
than fasting so as to be able to cope with supplication for it is the
most important objective at that place. It is for this same purpose
(Du‘a) that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), stood riding on the back of his camel from the time
of the decline of the sun (from the zenith) till sunset.
Abu Hatim Muhammad Ibn Hibban Al-Busti related in his
Saheeh on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar that he was
asked concerning fasting on the Day of ‘Arafah and he said: “I
performed Hajj with Allah’s Messenger, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
and they did not fast on that day and I also will not fast that day
but I neither recommend it nor forbid it.”
Imam Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi have related from the Hadith of
‘Amr Ibn Shu‘aib through his father from his grandfather that
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said: “The best Du‘a is Du‘a on the Day of ‘Arafah, and the best
thing that I or the Prophets before me have said is: ‘There is no
deity worthy of worship (in truth) except Allah. He is the Only
One and has no partners. For Him is the Kingdom and all the
praises are due for Him and He has dominion over all things (i.e.
Omnipotent).’ (La ilaha ill-Allah wahdahu la shareeka lahu
lahul-mulk, wa lahul-hamd wa Huwa ‘ala kulli shai’in Qadeer).”
Usamah Ibn Zaid said: "I was riding behind the Prophet while he
lifted up his hand supplicating. His camel tilted and its bridle fell
off his hand and he reached for it with one hand while he
continued raising the other in supplication."

322

MentioningoftheRevelationtothe Messenger of
Allah
Sublime revelations that were sent down to Allah’s Messenger at
this revered place: Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Tariq
Ibn Shihab who narrated: A Jew came to ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
and said: O Ameerul-Mu’mineen, you recite a Verse in your
Book which, if it had been revealed in relation to us, the Jews,
we would have taken that day as a day of celebration. ‘Umar
asked: “What Verse is that?” The Jew said: “The statement of
Allah: ‘This day, I have perfected your religion for you,
completed My Favor upon you, and have chosen for you Islam
as your religion'." Thereupon ‘Umar said: “By Allah, I know the
day it was revealed on Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), and the hour in which it was revealed. It
was revealed on the eve of the Day of ‘Arafah (ninth of DhulHijjah) on Friday.”

Departure of Allah’s Messenger From ‘Arafat
to Mash‘ar Al-Haram
Jabir narrated in his lengthy Hadith: “He kept standing there until
the sun set and the yellow light had gradually gone, and the disc
of the sun had disappeared. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), made Usamah sit behind him,
and he pulled the nose-string of Al-Qaswa’ (in order to keep her
under perfect control) so forcefully that its head touched the
saddle, and he pointed out to the people with his right hand: “O
people, gently! Gently! (i.e., to be moderate in speed), and
whenever he happened to pass over an elevated tract of sand, he
slightly loosened the nose-string of his cameluntil she climbed
up and this is how he reached Al-Muzdalifah. There he led the
323

evening and ‘Isha’ prayers with one Adhan and two Iqamahs and
did not glorify (Allah) in between them (by not observe
supererogatory Raka‘ahs between them).” It is related by
Muslim.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Urwah from his father
who said: Usamah was asked in my presence: “How was the
speed of (the camel of) Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), while departing from ‘Arafat during the
Hajjat al-Wadaa‘?” Usamah replied: “The Prophet proceeded on
with a modest pace, and when there was enough space he would
(make his camel) go very fast.”
On the authority of Usamah Ibn Zaid who narrated: I was riding
behind Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), on the Day of ‘Arafah. When the sun went down,
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
returned. When he heard the rumblings of their haste, he said:
“Gently, O people. Go easily and in a measured manner for
righteousness is not in hastening.” Whenever the people crowded
him, he would go slowly but whenever he found enough space,
he went faster until he came to Muzdalifah and combined both
Maghreb and ‘Isha’ prayers at the latter's time.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Usamah Ibn Zaid that he
(a subnarrator) heard him say: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), proceeded from Arafah, and as
he approached the mountain pass, he alighted from his camel and
relieved himself, and then performed a light ablution. I said to
him: “Prayers”, whereupon he said: “The prayer is ahead of you
(at Muzdalifah).” So he rode again, and as he came to
Muzdalifah, he got down and performed complete ablution.Then
324

Iqamah was pronounced for prayers, and he observed the
Maghreb prayers. Then every person made his camel kneel down
there, and then Iqamah was pronounced for ‘Isha’ prayers and he
observed it, and he (the Prophet) did not observe any prayer
(either Sunan or Nawafil) in between them.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Usamah Ibn Zaid that
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
made him ride behind him from ‘Arafat. He added: The people
said: “Our companion will inform us what he did.” Usamah said
further: On his return from ‘Arafat he pulled the nose-string of
his camel so forcefully (in order to keep her under perfect
control) that its head touched or almost touched the saddle, and
he pointed out to the people with his right hand to be moderate
(in speed) until he came to Muzdalifah. Then he made Fadhl Ibn
‘Abbas sit behind him. He added that the people began to say:
“Whatever Allah’s Messenger does will be relayed to us by our
companion.” Al-Fadl said: "The procession kept on moving
gently until it came to a valley exhausted and they spread into the
valley until they lay down."
On the authority of Anas Ibn Seereen who said: "I was with Ibn
‘Umar in ‘Arafat. When it was time to depart, I departed with
him until the Imam came and prayed Dhuhr and ‘Asr and then he
stood (on ‘Arafah) and a companion of mine until the Imam
departed and he departed with him till we reached a strait. He
made his camel kneel down and we did the same thing. We
thought he wanted to pray but his slave boy who was holding his
camel informed us that he did not intend to pray, rather he
mentioned that when the Prophet once reached this place, he
stopped to ease himself and (since then) he also loved to ease
himself at the same place."
325

On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated: The Prophet
combined the Maghreb and ‘Isha’ prayers at Muzdalifah, with
one Iqamah each and he did not offer any supererogatory (prayer)
between them or immediately after each one of them.
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar narrated: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), combined both Maghreb and
‘Isha’ at Muzdalifah without offering any other prayer between
them. He prayed Maghreb three units and ‘Isha’ two. Afterward,
‘Abdullah used to offer the prayer in a similar way until he died.
On the authority of Sa’eed Ibn Jubair who narrated that he
combined Maghreb and ‘Isha’ with one Iqamah at Muzdalifah
and he related that Ibn ‘Umar acted in a similar manner. Ibn
‘Umar in turn related that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), did that as well.
Sa’eed Ibn Jubair narrated: "We departed along with Ibn ‘Umar
until we arrived at Muzdalifah where he led us in the Maghreb
and ‘Isha’ prayers with one Iqamah and then he left." He added:
"This is how Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), had prayed at this spot."
Al-Bukhari related in the chapter: “He who made one Adhan and
Iqamah for each one of them” on the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman
Ibn Yazeed who narrated: ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood performed the
Hajj and we reached AlMuzdalifah at or about the time of the
‘Isha’ prayer. He ordered someone to pronounce theAdhan and
Iqamah and then he offered the Maghreb prayer and offered two
Raka‘ahs after it. Then he asked for his supper and took it, and
then, I think, he ordered someone to pronounce the Adhan and
Iqamah (for the ‘Isha’ prayers). (‘Amr, a sub-narrator said: The
intervening statement ‘I think’, was said by the sub- narrator
326

Zuhair). Then ‘Abdullah offered two Raka‘ahs of ‘Isha’ prayers.
When the day dawned, ‘Abdullah said: “The Prophet never
offered any prayer at this hour except this prayer at this time and
at this place and on this day.” ‘Abdullah added: “These two
prayers are shifted from their actual times – the Maghreb prayer
(is offered) when the people reached AlMuzdalifah and the Fajr
(morning) prayer at the early dawn.” ‘Abdullah added: “I saw the
Prophet doing that.”
Jabir narrated in his Hadith that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), laid down until the dawn of the
following morning and then he offered the Fajr prayer when the
dawn had clearly come out with an Adhan and Iqamah.
On the authority of ‘Urwah Ibn Mudarris who said: I came to
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
while he was at Muazdalifah and asked: “O Messenger of Allah,
I have come to you from the mountain of Tayyi’. I exhausted
myself and my camel became tired and I did not leave a mountain
except that I stood on it, do I have Hajj?” The Prophet, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), answered: “Whoever
participated with us in this Salat i.e. the Salat Al-Fajr and stood
with us until we departed and had attended the ‘Arafah whether
in the night or day time, then his Hajj is complete and (he has)
fulfilled his rites.”
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
had sent forward some of his family members during the night
before the surge of crowds fromMuzdalifah to Mina.
Al-Bukhari related in the chapter on the one who sent the weak
members of his family ahead of him and they stayed in

327

Muzdalifah supplicating and they went ahead when the moon has
become hidden.
On the authority of Ibn Shihab who narrated: ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar used to send the weak among his family early to Mina. So
they used to depart from Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram (that is AlMuzdalifah) at night (when the moon had set) and invoked Allah
as much as they could, and then they would return (to Mina)
before the Imam had started from Al-Muzdalifah to Mina. Some
of them would reach Mina at the time of the Fajr prayer and some
of them would come later. When they reached Mina they would
throw pebbles on the Jamrah (Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah) Ibn ‘Umar
used to say: “Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), gave the permission to them (the weak people) to
do so.”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “Allah’s Messenger
sent me from Muzdalifah (to Mina) by night.”
Ibn ‘Abbas also said: “I was among the weak members of the
Prophet’s family who went ahead of him from Muzdalifah in the
night.”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: "We, the young boys of Banu ‘AbdulMuttalib, went ahead of the Prophet on our donkeys. He stroked
our thighs saying: “O my sons, don’t pelt the Jamrah till the sun
comes out.”
On the authority of ‘Abdullah (the slave of Asma’) who narrated:
During the night of Jam‘, Asma’ got down at Al-Muzdalifah and
stood up to (offer) the prayer and offered the prayer for some
time and then asked: “O my son! Has the moon set?” I replied in
the negative and she again prayed for another period and then
328

asked: “Has the moon set?” I replied, “Yes.” So she said that we
should set out (for Mina), and we departed and went on until she
threw pebbles at the Jamrah (Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah) and then she
returned to her dwelling place and offered the morning prayer. I
asked her: “O you! I think we have come (to Mina) early in the
night.” She replied: “O my son! Allah’s Messenger gave
permission to the women to do so.”
If Asma’ Bint Abi Bakr pelted the Jamrah before the sunrise as
mentioned here from Tawqeef, then her narration has precedence
over that of Ibn ‘Abbas because the chain of narrations of her
Hadith is more authentic than that of Ibn ‘Abbas especially if we
say that: young boys are more energetic than women and that is
why Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), commanded the boys not to throw the Jamrah before the
sunrise while those who were given permission to depart were
permitted to stone the Jamrah before the sunrise because their
own condition were more precarious and more deserving of
being guarded. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
If Asma’ did not do it by permission, then the Hadith of
Ibn‘Abbas has precedence over her action but it strengthens the
first statement of Abu Dawood: that Asma’ stoned the Jamrah at
night. She said: “We stoned the Jamrah at night.” She added:
“We used to do that during the time of the Prophet.”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: "We alighted
at AlMuzdalifah and Sawdah asked the permission of the Prophet
to leave (early) before the rush of the people. She was a slow
woman and he gave her permission, so she departed (from AlMuzdalifah) before the rush of the people. We kept on staying at
Al-Muzdalifah until dawn, and set out with the Prophet but (I
329

suffered so much that) I wished I had taken the permission of
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
as Sawdah had done, and that would have been dearer to me than
any other happiness."

The Prophet’s Talbiyah at Muzdalifah
Muslim related on the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Yazeed
who said: While we were at Jam’ (Muzdalifah), ‘Abdullah said:
I heard the one on whom Soorah Al-Baqarah was sent down
saying at this station: “Labbaik Allahumma labbaik.”

The Messenger of Allah’s Stay at Mash‘ar AlHaramand His Departure From Muzdalifah
Allah says: “Then, when you leave ‘Arafat, remember Allah
(byglorifying His
Praises, i.e. prayers and invocations, etc.) at theMash‘ar AlHaram.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:198)
Jabir narrated in his Hadith the he then offered the Fajr prayer,
when dawn had become clear, with one Adhan and Iqamah. Then
he mounted Al-Qaswa’ till he came to Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram. He
faced the Qiblah and supplicated to Allah, saying "Allahu Akbar,
la ilaha ill-Allah" and extolling His unity. He remained standing
until the sky turned yellow and he departed before sunrise and he
made Fadhl Ibn ‘Abbas sit behind him.
On the authority of Abu Ishaq who said: "I heard ‘Amr Ibn
Maimoon say: I witnessed ‘Umar praying at Jam’ (Muzdalifah)
and he stood and said: 'The polytheists would not to depart until
sunrise and they would say: Hurry to sacrifice. But Allah’s
330

Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), would
depart before sunrise'.”
‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Yazeed narrated: "I went out with ‘Abdullah
to Makkah and when we proceeded to Jam’ he offered the two
prayers (the Maghreb and the ‘Isha’) together, making the Adhan
and Iqamah separately for each prayer. He took his supper in
between the two prayers. He offered the Fajr prayers as soon as
the day dawned. Some people said: 'The day had dawned (at the
time of the prayer),' and others said, 'The day had not dawned.'
‘Abdullah then said: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), said: ‘These two prayers have been shifted
from their stated times at this place only (at AlMuzdalifah) ; first:
The Maghreb and the ‘Isha’. So the people should not arrive at
Al-Muzdalifah until the ‘Isha’ prayer becomes due. The second
prayer is the morning prayer which is offered at this hour.’” Then
‘Abdullah stayed there until it became a bit brighter. He then
said: “If the AmeerulMu’mineen hastened onward to Mina just
now, then he had indeed followed theSunnah.” I do not know
which preceded the other, ‘Abdullah’s statement or the departure
of ‘Uthman. ‘Abdullah was reciting Talbiyah until he stoned the
Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering) (i.e. the
10th of DhulHijjah).
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
departed from Muzdalifah before sunrise.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that Usamah was riding behind the Prophet
from ‘Arafat to Muzdalifah and then Fadhl rode behind him from
Muzdalifah to Mina and each one of them reported that the

331

Prophet did not cease uttering the Talbiyah until he stoned the
Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah.
Fadhl Ibn ‘Abbas who was riding behind Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), narrated that on the
eve of ‘Arafah and on the morning of Jam‘ (Muzdalifah) the
Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said to the people when they were returning: “Go gently!”
Meanwhile, he held his camel until he entered Muhassir in Mina,
and then said: “Be careful to pick only small pebbles with which
you will stone the Jamrah.” The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) did not cease uttering the Talbiyah until
he stoned the Jamrah.
Jabir said concerning the pilgrimage of the Prophet: Till he came
to Muhassir then he quickened his pace slightly.
On the authority of ‘Ali who narrated: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), stood at ‘Arafat and said:
“This is a place of standing and all of it is a place of standing.”
Then he departed when the sun had set and he made Usamah ride
behind him. He kept stretching his neck on his camel while the
people thronged on by his right and left. Turning to them he
would say: “Gently, O people.” Then he came to Jam’ and he
offered the two prayers: Maghreb and ‘Isha’ and spent the night
until the following morning when he came to Quzah (a mountain
at the end of Muzdalifah) and stood on it and said: “This is a
place of standing and all of Jam’ is a place of standing.” Then he
proceeded until he came to Muhassir, he stood on it and struck
his camel and it moved faster until he went past the valley and
then he restrained it. He made Fadhl sit behind him and
proceeded until he came to the Jamrah. He stoned it and then
332

went to the slaughtering place and said: “This is a place of
slaughtering and all of Mina is a place of slaughtering.” A young
lady from Khath‘am came to ask him question. She said: “My
father is a decrepit old man and the obligation of Hajj had
become due from him, will it suffice for him if I undertake it on
his behalf?” The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), answered: “Yes, so undertake it on behalf of your father.”
Meanwhile, he had turned the neck of Fadhl and ‘Abbas said to
him: “O Messenger of Allah, why have you turned the neck of
the son of your uncle?” The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)
, replied: “I saw a young man and a young lady and I do not have
security from Shaitan (for them).”
A man came to him and said: “O Allah’s Messenger! I shaved
before I slaughtered.” He replied: “ (Go ahead and) slaughter,
there is no problem.” Another person came to him and asked: “I
did Ifadah before I shaved.” He replied: “ (Go ahead and) shave
your hair, there is no problem.” Then he came to the House and
circumambulated it and then he went to Zamzam and said: “O
children of ‘Abdul-Muttalib, were it not that people
mightcontend with you over your provision of water (for
pilgrims), I would have taken it over.”
That has been authentically related by a number of Companions
and it is authentic that the two chiefs used to do that.

333

The Prophet’s Stoning of the Jamrat Al‘Aqabah Alone on the Day of Nahr
It has been stated earlier in the Hadith of Usamah and Fadhl and
others from among the Companions, may Allah be pleased with
them, that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), continued uttering the Talbiyah until he stoned the
Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah.
Abu Al-‘Aliyah narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said: Fadhl narrated to
me that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), said to him on the morning of the Day of Nahr:
“Come and pick pebbles for me.” I fetched him pebbles. He
started sorting them out in his fingers saying: “Throw ones like
these! Throw ones like these!” He then said: “Keep away from
extremism in religion, for that which destroyed those who came
before you was extremism in the religion.” It is related by AlBaihaqi.
Al-Bukhari related that Jabir narrated that the Prophet, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), stoned on the Day of Nahr
at the time of Dhuha and afterward, after Zawal.
It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of ‘Abdur
Rahman Ibn Yazeed, who narrated that ‘Abdullah stoned from
the middle of the valley so I said: “O Abu ‘Abdur Rahman,the
people are stoning from its top.” He said: “I swear by Him
besides Whom none deserves to be worshipped, it is at this spot
where Soorah Al-Baqarah was revealed to him.” The wording is
that of Al-Bukhari.

334

It is reported that ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood came to the Jamrah,
and stood such that the House was toward his left and Mina on
his right and he stoned seven times and said: “This is the exact
manner the one upon whom Soorah AlBaqarah was sent had
acted.”
It is also related that ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood also stoned the
Jamrah from the middle of the valley with seven pebbles saying
Allahu Akbar at each (throw of the) stone and he said: “By Him
besides Whom none deserves to be worshipped, it is from here
that the one upon whom Soorah Al-Baqarah was revealed stood
(to throw the pebbles).”
On the authority of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah who said: “I saw Allah’s
Messenger stoning the Jamrah with seven small pebbles.”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that the Prophet stoned the Jamrat Al‘Aqabah on the day of Nahr mounted.
Umm Jundub Al-Azdiyyah narrated: I saw Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), stoning the Jamrahs
from the middle of the valley mounted and saying Allahu Akbar
at each throw of the pebble while a man was behind shielding
him. Upon asking about the identity of the man, I was told it was
Al-Fadhl Ibn ‘Abbas and when the peoplecrowded (one another)
he said: “O people, do not kill one another and whenever you are
going to stone, do it with small pebbles.”
Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah narrated: I saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), stoning the Jamrah
mounted on his camel on the Day of Nahr and saying: “Learn
your rites of Hajj from me perhaps I may not perform another
Hajj after this.”
335

Qudamah Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Kilabi reported that he saw Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), stoning
the Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah from the middle of the valley on the Day
of Nahr mounted on a reddish camel neither beating nor shoving
nor was he telling people away from him.
Nafi’ narrated: Ibn ‘Umar used to stone the Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah
mounted on a riding animal on the Day of Nahr but he did not
come to the remaining ones except on foot and he claimed that
the Prophet also used not to come (to the remaining Jamrahs)
except on foot both to and fro.
Jabir narrated: “Then the Prophet went to the slaughter place and
he slaughtered sixty-three animals with his own hands and then
gave ‘Ali (the slaughter instrument) to slaughter the remainder
and made him partake in his Hady. He then commanded that a
piece of flesh from each sacrificial animal should be put in a pot,
and when it was cooked, both of them (the Prophet and ‘Ali) took
some meat out of it and drank from its broth.” We shall discuss
this Hadith.
‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Mu’adh At-Taimi who said:
“Allah’sMessenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
addressed us while we were at Mina and our ears were open in
such a way that we could hear what he was saying.”
Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), made ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib share
in the Hady and the total number of those sacrificial animals
brought by ‘Ali from Yemen and of those brought by the Prophet
was one hundred camels. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), slaughtered sixty-three with his
own noble hands.
336

Ibn Hibban and others said: That coincides with his lifespan:
sixty-three years.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), slaughtered 100 animals during the Hajj,
sixty of them with his own hands and he ordered that the
remainder be slaughtered as well. He took a piece of flesh from
each animal sacrificed and put them in a pot, and when it was
cooked, he took some meat out of it and drank from its broth. He
added: He slaughtered seventy camels on the day of Hudaibiyah
among which was the camel of Abu Jahl and when it was turned
back from the House, it pined as it would over her child.
It is established in the Saheehain that ‘Ali said: Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
commanded me to take charge of his Budn and to give away their
meat, hide and other material as charity and that I should not give
the butcher anything out of it. He added: “We shall pay him from
our resources.”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), stoned the Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah, then he
slaughtered and then he shaved his head.
Ibn Hazm has claimed that he slaughtered a cow on behalf of his
wife and he slaughtered on that day, two rams with black stripes.

Description of His Shaving
Imam Ahmad related that Ibn ‘Umar narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), shaved
his head during his Hajj.
337

Nafi’ narrated that Ibn ‘Umar narrated: Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and a group of his
Companions shaved their heads while some others shortened
their hairs.
Imam Muslim related from the Hadith of Al-Laithi from Nafi’
with an addition. ‘Abdullah said: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “May Allah have Mercy
on those who shaved,” once or twice. They said: “And those who
shortened, O Messenger of Allah?” He said: “And those who
shortened.”
Anas Ibn Malik narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), got to Mina and went to the
Jamrah and he stoned it. Thereafter he returned to his residence
at Mina and he slaughtered and then he said the barber: “Take
from here,” pointing to the right side of his head and then to the
left. Afterward, people began to approach him. In another
narration, he shaved the right side and he distributed
it among the people a strand or two strands each and he gave the
left side to Talhah. In yet another report, he gave the right side to
Abu Talhah and he gave him the left side and asked him to
distribute it among the people.
Anas narrated: I saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), while the barber was shaving his head and
his Companions encircled him. They did not want any strand of
hair to fall except in the hand of one of them. Ahmad related it
exclusively.
Afterward, Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), donned his cloth and applied perfume after he had
338

stoned the Jamrat Al‘Aqabah and slaughtered but before
circumambulating the House. ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased
with her), the Mother of the Believers, was the one who applied
the perfume on him.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn AlQasim Ibn Muhammad, the best of the people of his time, who
said that he heard his father who was also the best of the people
of his generation say that he heard ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) say: “I applied perfume on Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), with these hands of
mine when he wanted to put on Ihram.” Perhaps it was at the time
of removing the Ihram before he circumambulated the House and
she spread her hands to demonstrate that.
It is narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “When you have stoned the
Jamrah, all that has been prohibited to you before becomes
permissible, except intercourse till you circumambulate
theHouse.” A man said: “And perfume, O Abu ‘Abbas?” He
replied: “I saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), perfuming himself with musk. Is this perfume or
not?”
Umm Salamah narrated: The night in which Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), went around his
wives was on the night of Nahr. When he was with me, Wahb
Ibn Zam‘ah and a man from the family of Abi Umayyah entered
after they had changed their clothes. Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), asked them: “Have you
done your Tawaf Al- Ifadah?” Both of them replied in the
negative and the Prophet,

339

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said to them:
“Remove your dress.” They complied but Wahb asked him: “But
why, O Messenger of Allah?” He said: “This is a day in which
facility has been given to you once you have stoned the Jamrah,
slaughtered the Hady, if you have one, to be free from all
prohibitions except intercourse with women until you have
circumambulated the House. Thus, if you have stoned and you
have not done the Tawaf Al-Ifadah, you remain in Ihram as you
had been previously until you circumambulate the House.”

His Tawaf Al-Ifadah
Jabir related: The Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), again rode and came to the House, and
offered the Dhuhr prayers at Makkah. He came to the tribe of
‘Abdul-Muttalib, who were supplying water at Zamzam, and
said: “Draw water. O Bani ‘Abdul-Muttalib, were it not that
people would usurp this right of supplying water from you, I
would have drawn it along with you. So they handed him a basket
and he drank from it.” This is related by Muslim. Thesewordings
contain an indication that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), rode to Makkah before the
Zawal. He circumambulated the House and when he completed
that, he offered Dhuhr prayers there.
Ibn ‘Umar narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), performed Tawaf Al-Ifadah on the Day
of Nahr and then returned to perform the Dhuhr prayers at Mina
This is a contradiction to the Hadith of Jabir both of them related
by Muslim. The flaw in both is that it is possible to say that
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
offered the Dhuhr prayers in Makkah and then returned to Mina
340

and he found that the people were already waiting for him, so he
led them again. And Allah (SWT) knows best. His return to Mina
at the time of Dhuhr is possible because it was summer time
when the day is usually longer especially since a lot of actions
have reached us from him on the same day. He returned from
Muzdalifah after the day had brightened but before sunrise. He
came to Mina and started with the stoning of the Jamrat Al‘Aqabah with seven pebbles. Then he came to sacrifice with his
own hands sixty-three camels and ‘Ali sacrificed the remainder
of the 100 camels. Then he took a piece of flesh from each animal
sacrificed put them in a pot, and when it was cooked, he took
some meat out of it and drank from its broth. In the meantime,
he shaved his head and applied perfume. After he had finished
all that, he rode to the House. On this same day, Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
delivered a compelling address. I do not know whether it took
place before going to the House or upon his return to Mina. And
Allah (SWT) knows best.
The import of this is that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), rode to the House and
circumambulated it seven times riding, but he did not run
between Safa and Marwah as confirmed in Saheeh Muslim on
the authority of Jabir and ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with
her), may Allah be pleased with both of them. Then he drank
from the Zamzamwater and from an infusion of dates in Zamzam
water. All of this strengthen the position of the one who argues
that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), offered the Dhuhr prayers in Makkah as related by Jabir. It
is equally possible that he returned to Mina at the tail end of the
time of Dhuhr and he led his Companions again in the Dhuhr
prayers at Mina. This is what is perplexing for Ibn Hazm and he
341

did not know what to say concerning it. He is excused because
of the contradiction between two authentic texts on it. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), did
Tawaf Al-Ifadah at the end of that day when he had offered the
Dhuhr prayers and then he returned to Mina and remained there
for the nights of the days of Tashreeq, stoning the Jamrah after
the decline of the sun (from the zenith) pelting each Jamrah with
seven pebbles and saying Allahu Akbar with each pebble.
Ibn Hazm said: Here, ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her)
and Jabir agree on the fact that the Messenger of Allah, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), offered the Dhuhr prayers
at Makkah on the Day of Nahr and they are more precise, And
Allah (SWT) knows best, than Ibn ‘Umar. This is what he said
but there is no proof in this. This narration of ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) does not textually prove that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), offered
the Dhuhr prayers in Makkah. Thus, this is proof that he offered
the Dhuhr prayers at Mina before he went to the House. This is
more probable. And Allah (SWT) knows best. Based on this, it
remains only the contradiction of the Hadith of Jabir for this
implies that he prayed the Dhuhr at Mina before he rode to the
House. The Hadith of Jabir implies that he rode to the House
before he prayed the Dhuhr prayers and offered it in Makkah.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) and Ibn ‘Umar narrated
that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him),visited (the House) at night. If this is understood to mean
after Zawal toward the evening, that may be correct. But if it is
342

understood to mean after sunset, then this is quite remote and
contradicts what is established in well-known authentic
Ahadeeth which state that he circumambulated the House on the
Day of Nahr during the day time and he drank from the Zamzam
water. The Tawaf for which he went to the House at night was
that of Wadaa’ (farewell). There are narrators which refer to
Tawaf as a visit as we shall shortly explain insha’Allah. Or it
may even be ordinary Tawaf Ziyarah before Tawaf Al-Wadaa’
after the obligatory Tawaf.
A Hadith has been related, which we shall cite in its proper place,
that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), used to visit the House every night during the nights of
Mina. This is also very improbable.
The more authentic of those narrations and the opinions upon
which the majority of scholars are upon is that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
circumambulated on the Day of Nahr during the day time and
much more likely before the Zawal but with a possibility that it
may have occurred after the Zawal.
The import of this is that when Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), arrived at Makkah, he
circumambulated the House while mounted and then he came to
the Zamzam where he found Banu ‘AbdulMuttalib drawing
water from it and providing it to the people. He took a bucket of
water and drank from it and poured some on himself.
On the authority of Bakr Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Muzani who narrated
that he heard Ibn ‘Abbas say while sitting near the Ka‘bah:
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
came here riding his she-camel, and Usamah was sitting behind
343

him. He asked for water, and we gave him a cup full of Nabeedh
(infusion of dates) and he drank it, and gave the remaining (part)
to Usamah; and he (the Prophet) said: “Good!You have done
well! So continue doing like it.” So we do not like to change what
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
had commanded us to do. In another version of the Hadith from
Bakr, a Bedouin came to Ibn ‘Abbas and said: “What is the
matter that I see that the progeny of your uncle supplies honey
and milk (as drink to the travelers), whereas you supply Nabeedh
(water sweetened with dates)? Is it due to your poverty or due to
your close-fisted attitude?” Thereupon Ibn ‘Abbas narrated this
Hadith.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), came to the drinking place and
asked for water. ‘Abbas said, “O Fadhl! Go to your mother and
bring water from her for Allah’s Messenger.” Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said,
“Give me water to drink.” ‘Abbas said, “O Allah’s Messenger!
The people put their hands in it.” Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), again said, ‘Give me water to
drink. So, he drank from that water and then went to the Zamzam
(well) and there the people were offering water to others and
working at it (drawing water from the well). The Prophet, (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), then said to them, “Carry
on! You are doing a good deed.” Then he said, “Were I not afraid
that other people would compete with you (in drawing water
from Zamzam), I would certainly take the rope and put it over
this (i.e. his shoulder) to draw water,” on saying that the Prophet,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), pointed to his
shoulder.Afterward, Allah’s Messenger did not repeat running
between Safa and Marwah for the second time; rather, he was
344

contented with the first one. This is as related by Muslim on the
authority of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah who said:
The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and
his Companions did not perform Sa‘i except once.
Those referred to here as “his Companions”, are the ones who
brought their Hady along with them and were performing HajjQiran. It is recorded in Saheeh Muslim that Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said to ‘A’ishah
(May Allah be pleased with her) who had combined Hajj with
‘Umrah and thus was also a Qiran pilgrim: “Your Sa’i suffices
for your Hajj and your ‘Umrah.”
According to Imam Ahmad and his companions, the position of
Jabir and his companions is generally applicable to both those
performing Hajj-Qiran as well those performing Hajj-Tamattu‘.
Thus, Imam Ahmad posits that one round between Safa and
Marwah suffices for both ‘Umrah and Hajj of a Tamattu’ pilgrim
even though he removes his Ihram between them. This is a
strange position relying on the apparent general (meaning) of the
Hadith.
The companions of Abu Hanifah hold the same opinion as their
counterparts in the Maliki and Shafi‘i schools that two Tawafs
and two Sa‘is are due upon a Tamattu’ pilgrim until the Hanafi
even applied that to a Qarin and it is one of the odd positions of
their madhhab. That is, a Qarin must also perform two Tawafs
and two Sa’is. They related that opinion from ‘Ali in a mawqoof
form. It is also reported from him in a form raised (to the Prophet)
but we have earlier discussed all of these under the Tawaf and
we explained that the chains of that (Hadith) are weak and
contradict more authentic Ahadeeth.
345

‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
performed (Tawaf) Al-Ifadah at the end of that day when he had
offered the Dhuhr prayers and then he returned to Mina and
remained there for the nights of the days of Tashreeq, stoning the
Jamrah after the descent of the sun (from the Zenith) pelting each
Jamrah withseven pebbles and saying Allahu Akbar with each
pebble. This is related by Abu Dawood exclusively. This is a
pointer to the fact that his going to Makkah on the Day of Nahr
was after Zawal. This is an outright negation of the Hadith of Ibn
‘Umar. Concerning its contradiction to the Hadith of Jabir, then
that is doubtful.
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
delivered a compelling Khutbah on this honored day which has
been reported in many Ahadeeth and here we cite from them
what Allah has made easy:
Al-Bukhari said in the chapter which address in the days of Mina
that on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
delivered a sermon on the Day of Nahr, and said: “O people!
(Tell me) what is the day today?” The people replied: “It is the
Sacred day.” He asked again: “What town is this?” They replied:
“It is the Sacred town.” He asked: “Which month is this?” They
replied: “It is the Sacred month.” He said: “No doubt! Your
blood, your properties, and your honor are sacred to one another
like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this town of yours, and
in this month of yours.” The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), repeated his statement again and again. After
that he raised his head and said: “O Allah! Have I not conveyed
Your Message to them? O Allah! Have I not conveyed Your
346

Message to them?” Ibn Abbas added: “By Him in Whose Hands
is my soul, the following was the Prophet’s will to his followers:
It is incumbent upon those who are present to convey this
information to those who are absent; beware and do not renegade
(as) disbelievers (turn into infidels) after me, striking the necks
(cutting the throats) of one another.”
On the authority of Abi Bakrah who narrated: The Prophet,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), delivered a sermon
to us on the Day of Nahr. He said: “Do you know what today is?”
We said: “Allah and His Messenger know best.” He remained
silent until we thought that he might give that day another name.
He said: “Isn’t it the Day of Nahr?” We said: “It is.” He further
asked: “Which month is this?” We said: “Allah and His
Messenger know best.” He remained silent until we thought that
he might give it another name. He then said: “Isn’t it the month
of Dhul-Hijjah?” We replied: “Yes! It is.” He further asked:
“What town is this?” We replied: “Allah and His Messenger
know it best.” He remained silent until we thought that he might
give it another name. He then said: “Isn’t it the Sacred town of
Makkah?” We said: “Yes. It is.” He said: “No doubt, your blood
and your properties are sacred to one another like the sanctity of
this day of yours, in this month of yours, in this town of yours,
until the day you meet your Lord. No doubt! Haven’t I conveyed
Allah’s message to you?” They said: “Yes.” He said: “O Allah!
Be witness. So it is incumbent upon those who are present to
convey it to those who are absent because the informed one
might comprehend it better than the present audience, who will
convey it to him. Beware! Do not renegade as disbelievers after
me by striking the necks of one another.”

347

The deliverance of this address at the Jamrahs makes it possible
to claim that it was after he had stoned the Jamrah on the Day of
Nahr and before his Tawaf.
It is equally possible that it occurred after his Tawaf and return
to Mina and stoning the Jamrahs. However, the former is
strengthened by what is related by An-Nasa’i.
Muslim has related that Umm Al-Husain narrated: I performed
Hajj along with Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), on the occasion of the Farewell Pilgrimage
and I saw him when he threw pebbles atJamrat Al-Aqabah and
returned while he was riding the camel, and Bilal and Usamah
were with him. One of them was leading his camel, while the
other was raising his cloth over the head of Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), to shield him from
the heat (of the sun). She (further) said: Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), said so many things,
and I heard him say: “If a slave having some limb of his missing
and having a dark complexion is appointed to govern you
according to the Book of Allah, then listen to him and obey him.”
On the authority of Salamah Ibn Qais Al-Ashja‘i who said:
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said during the Farewell Pilgrimage: “They are four: Do not
associate any partner with Allah. Do not take a life which Allah
has forbidden to be taken except by right, do not commit adultery
and do not steal.” Since I heard it from Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), no one has been
more careful not to fall into them than me.”
Ibn Hazm said in Hajjat Al-Wadaa’ on the authority of Usamah
Ibn Shareek who said: I witnessed Allah’s Messenger, (Peace
348

and Blessings of Allah be upon him), giving an address during
the Farewell Pilgrimage and he was saying: “Your mother, your
father, your sister, your brother and then other relatives in
descending order.” Then some people came and said: O
Messenger of Allah, Banu Yurboo’ had fought us whereupon
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said: “No one should falsely accuse another.” Then a man who
had forgotten to stone came and asked him for a (religious)
verdict and he said: “Go ahead and stone, there is no harm.”
Another person came and said: “O Messenger of Allah, I forgot
to circumambulate.” The Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), answered: “Go ahead and circumambulate, there
is no harm.” And yet another man who had shaved before he
slaughteredcame to seek his verdict and he said to him: “Go
ahead and slaughter, there is no harm.” He was not asked about
anything that day except that he said, there is no harm.
Thereafter, he said: “Allah has removed all harms except for
someone who falsely tarnish the honor of another Muslim. Such
is a person for whom there is harm and destruction.” He added:
“Allah does not sent down a disease except that He also sends
down its cure, except for old age.”
On the authority of Jareer who narrated: The Prophet, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), said to me during the Farewell
Pilgrimage: “O Jareer, let the people keep quiet and listen.” Then
he said to the people: “Do not revert to disbelief after me by
striking the necks of one another.”
On the authority of ‘Amr who reported from his father who said:
During the Farewell Pilgrimage, I witnessed Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), saying: “O people,
(saying that three times) what day is this?” The people
349

responded: “The day of the great pilgrimage.” The Prophet,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), then said:
“Certainly, your blood, your wealth and your honor are sacred to
one another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month
of yours, in this town of yours. The sin of a sinner shall not be
blamed on his children nor that of a child blamed on his father.
Verily, Shaitan has lost hope of being worshipped in this land of
yours forever, however, he will be obeyed in some of the little
things of your action and he would be pleased. Verily, all usury
of the time of ignorance shall henceforth be waived, yours is the
principal of your money. Do not oppress and do not (accept to)
be oppressed.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Abu Umamah who said:
I heard Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), say while he was sitting on Al-Jad‘a’ (one of his
camels) and his legs were on the stirrup stretching so that the
people may hear him. He said at the height of his voice: “Won’t
you listen!” A man among the groups of people present said: “O
Messenger of Allah, what do you recommend to us?” He said:
“Worship your Lord, offer your five daily prayers, fast your
month (of Ramadan) and obey when you are commanded and
you will enter the Paradise of your Lord.” I (the sub-narrator)
said: “Abu Umamah, how old were you at the time?” He said:
“At the time, I was thirty years old.”
On the authority of Abu Umamah Al-Bahili who narrated: I
heard Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), say in his Khutbah during the Farewell Pilgrimage: “Allah
has given rights to their respective owners and that it is not
permissible to make a will for a rightful inheritor. A child is
attributed to the (owner of the) bed and the stone is for the
350

adulterer. Whoever attributes himself to other than his rightful
father or affiliates himself to other than his rightful mawla, upon
him shall be the curse of Allah that will follow him until the Day
of Resurrection. A woman should not give out anything from her
(husband) house except with her husband’s permission.” It was
said: “O Messenger of Allah, not even food?” He said: “That is
the best of our wealth.” Then Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), said: “Loan is to be repaid, a
gift is reciprocated, a debt is offset and a guarantor is liable.”
On the authority of Rafi’ Ibn ‘Amr Al-Muzani who narrated: I
saw Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), giving an address at Mina during the late morning on a
reddish mule while Ali was articulating for himand the people
were either standing or sitting.”
On the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Mu‘aadh At-Taimi who
said: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), addressed us while we were at Mina. Our hearings were
wide open in such a way that we could hear what he was saying
even while we were inside our lodgings. Then he began to teach
them their rites till he got to the Jamrahs then he put together his
two forefingers and said: “With small pebbles.” Then he ordered
the Emigrants to camp in front of the mosque and the Ansar to
camp at the back and other people encamped after that.
It is recorded in the Saheehain that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al‘As narrated: "I witnessed the Prophet, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), while he was delivering a sermon on the Day
of Nahr (i.e., 10th Dhul-Hijjah, day of slaughtering the sacrifice),
a man got up saying: 'I thought, Allah’s Messenger, such-andsuch a thing was to be done before such-and-such a thing.'
351

Another man got up, saying, 'I thought, Allah’s Messenger, suchand-such a thing was to be done before such-and-such a thing.'
Then Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), said: 'Do, and there is no harm'.” It is related from the
Hadith of Malik, Muslim and Yoonus from Az-Dhuhri. It has
numerous wordings and this is not the right place to examine that.
Its proper place is the Book of Ahkam (rulings). In the wording
of the Saheehain he said: Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), was not asked about anything
brought forward or delayed that day except that he said: “Do, and
there is no harm.”
Then Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), alighted at Mina where the mosque is currently located
according to a report. The Emigrants encamped on the right, the
Ansar encamped on the left and the (other) people encamped
around behind them.
Ibn ‘Umar narrated: Al-‘Abbas sought permission of Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), to stay
in Makkah during the nights of Mina for the provision of water
and he permitted him.”
Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
used to lead his Companions in Mina in two Raka‘ahs as
established in narrations from him in the Saheehain from the
Hadith of Ibn Mas‘ood and Harithah Ibn Wahb, may Allah be
pleased with them both. Thus, a section of scholars posits that
the reason for this shortening was Nusuk (sacrifice) as opined by
some Malikis and others. They said: Whoever says that the
Messenger of Allah, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
said in Mina to the people of Makkah: “Complete your prayers
352

for we are travelers” is mistaken for he said that during the year
of the Conquest when he disembarked at Al-Abtah as stated
earlier. He used to pelt the three Jamrahs every day during the
days of Mina after the Zawal on foot as stated by Jabir earlier and
as stated by Ibn ‘Umar among the Salaf, each Jamrah was pelted
with seven pebbles and he uttered Allahu Akbar at each throw of
the pebble. He stopped at the first and second to supplicate Allah
but he did not stop at the third.
It is narrated that Ibn ‘Umar used to stone the nearest Jamrah with
seven pebbles saying Allahu Akbar at the end of each pebble
throw then he would move ahead slightly to a more level
groundand he would supplicate raising his hands. Then he would
stone the middle Jamrah and he would move slightly left to a
more convenient place and he would face the Qiblah and
supplicate raising his hands and he would stand for a long time.
He would then stone the last Jamrah from the middle of the valley
but he would not stop to supplicate. He would depart saying:
“This is the way I saw Allah’s Messenger acting.”
‘Asim Ibn ‘Adiyy reported from his father that Allah’s
Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), gave
concession to stone the Jamrah on the Day of Nahr and to skip a
day and night and then stone the Jamrah again the subsequent
day.

353

Chapter Concerning the Ahadeeth that
Illustrate that Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) Addressed the
People in Minaon the Second Day From the
Days of Tashreeq
Abu Dawood said in the chapter concerning which day the
Sermon given in Mina. Narrated by Ibn Abi Najeeh, from his
father, from two men from Banu Bakr who said: We saw the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
address (the people) between the middle days of the days of
Tashreeq, while we were by his riding animal, and it was the
Sermon of the Messenger of Allah that he addressed in Mina.
From Sarra’Bint Nabhan – and she was a housewife in
Jahiliyyah– who said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) addressed us on the day of heads
(the day when the heads of the sacrifices are eaten i.e. the first
day of Tashreeq), saying: “What day is this?” We said: “Allah
and his Messenger know best.” He said: “Isn’t this the middle of
the days of Tashreeq (three days of Mina i.e. 11th,12th and 13th
of Dhul-Hijjah).”
Ibn Hazm mentioned: It has occurred that the Prophet addressed
the people on the day of heads and it is the second day from the
day of sacrifice without any difference from the people of
Makkah, and it has been mentioned that it is the middle of the
days of Tashreeq, so middle can mean most noble, just as Allah
said: And thus we have made you a median community. (Soorah
Al-Baqarah 2: 143). And this course that Ibn Hazm followed is
far from what is correct.
354

A Mention of a Hadith that the Messenger of
Allah Used to Visit Ka‘bah Every Night From
the Nights of Mina
Al-Bukhari stated mentioning from Abu Hassan, from Ibn
‘Abbas: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) used to visit Ka‘bah on the days of Mina,” this is
how Al-Bukhari mentioned it in Mu‘allaq (without mentioning
the chain of narrators) form with the context of criticising the
narration’s authenticity.

The Sixth Day of Dhul-Hijjah
Some of them said: It is called “the Day of Beauty” because the
body is beautified with Jilal (a type of adornment) and other than
it, and the seventh day is called “the Day of Irrigation” becauseit
is the day when they quench their thirst with water, and they take
from it that which they need for the time of standing on the plains
of ‘Arafat supplicating and that which comes after that, and the
eight day is known as “the Day of Mina,” because they travel
from Al-Abtah to Mina, and the ninth day is called “the Day of
‘Arafah,” due to their standing there on the plains of ‘Arafat, and
the tenth day is called “the Day of Sacrifice” and “the Day of AlAdha” and “the Day of the Hajj AlAkbar” and the day that
follows it is called “the Day of Tranquility” because they settle
on that day. It is also called “the Day of Heads” because they eat
the first of their sacrifices, and it is the first day of the days of
Tashreeq, and the second of the days of Tashreeq is called “the
Day of the First Leaving Group” because it is permissible to
leave on that day, and it is said that it is the day that is known as
“the Day of the Heads.” And the third of the days of Tashreeq is
called “the Day of the Last (Leaving) Group.” Allah, the Most
355

High, says: Then whoever hastens in two days – there is no sin
upon him; and whoever delays – there is no sin upon him.
(Soorah Al- Baqarah: 203). Then, when it was the last day for
leaving, and it is the third of the days of Tashreeq and it was a
Tuesday, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) rode and the Muslims also left with him. He left
Mina with them and descended Al-Al-Muhassab and it is a valley
between Makkah and Mina. Then he prayed Salat Al-‘Asr there.
And it has been narrated by ‘Abdul-Aziz Ibn Rufai‘: I asked Anas
Ibn Malik: “Inform me about something you witnessed from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
; where did he pray Dhuhr on the Day of Irrigation?” He said:
“At Al-Abtah, do as your man did.” And it has truly been
narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) prayed Dhuhr on the Day of Leaving at AlAbtah while remaining at Al- Muhassab.
Ibn ‘Umar narrated: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with them, would stop at Al-Abtah.
Ibn ‘Umar also narrated: Indeed he would stop at Al-Muhassab.
And he would pray Dhuhr on the Day of Leaving at Al-Hasbah.
Nafi’ mentioned: Indeed the Messenger of Allah and his Caliphs
after him threw pebbles at the Jamarahs in Mina.
Abu Hurairah narrated: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said about the day after the Day
of Sacrifice at Mina: “We are going to descend tomorrow at
Khaif Bani Kinanah where they share with each other disbelief.”
He meant by that Al-Muhassab.

356

Usamah Ibn Zaid narrated: I said: O Messenger of Allah, where
are you going to stay tomorrow in Hajj? He replied: “And did
‘Aqeel leave for us a household?” Then he said: “We are going
to stop tomorrow insha’Allah at Khaif Bani Kinanah – i.e. AlMuhassab – where they have gathered with the Quraish upon
disbelief,” and that is because the tribe of Kinanah confederated
with Quraish against the tribe of Hashim not to marry, trade and
not to give them refuge – i.e. until they gave up the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – then he
said at that point: “The Muslim does not inherit from the Kafir
and the Kafir does not inherit from the Muslim.” Az-Dhuhri said:
And Al-Khaif means the valley
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: “It was the
only place that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) would stop at in order for it to be easier for him to
leave – i.e. Al-Abtah.”And what is intended is that all of them
(the narrators) agreed that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) stopped at Al-Muhassab when he left Mina,
but they differed afterward. Some said he didn’t plan his descent,
but it was by coincidence for it to be easier for his exit; others
indicated with his words that he intended to stop there, and this
is the most likely opinion, because he commanded the people that
their last covenant was with Ka'bah, and they would before that
disperse from every angle. Ibn ‘Abbas said: “So he commanded
the people that their last affair was with Ka'bah, i.e., the Farewell
Tawaf. So the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) intended that he made Tawaf and those who were with him,
and he indeed left Mina close to the time of midday, so it wasn’t
possible for him to come to Ka‘bah for the rest of the day and
make Tawaf, and then traveled to the outskirts of Makkah from
the direction of Madinah. Since that may nothave been possible
357

with a big crowd, he needed a place to stay before going to
Makkah and there was no place more suitable than Al-Muhassab
for his stay, where the Quraish had confederated with the tribe of
Kinanah against the tribe of Hisham and Muttalib. So Allah did
not assist the Quraish in their affair; rather He suppressed them
and rejected them as losers. Allah made His religion victorious
and helped His Prophet and raised His Word (tawheed), and
completed His straight religion and made clear His straight path.
So the Prophet made Hajj with the people and made clear to them
Allah’s rules and signs and he left after completing the rights of
Hajj. He then stopped at the place where the Quraish had unified
on oppression, wrongdoing and causing discord. He prayed by it
Dhuhr, ‘Asr, Maghreb and ‘Isha’ and then slept a little. And he
sent ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), the Mother of the
Believers, with her brother ‘Abdur-Rahman so they could
perform the ‘Umrahfrom At-Tan‘eem and when she finished she
returned.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: "I left with
him - the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) in the last group, then he stayed at Al-Muhassab." Abu
Dawood said: Ibn Bashshar mentioned the story of his dispatch
to Tan‘eem. She said: "Then I came to him in the morning, and
he announced to his Companions it was time to go, so he reached
Ka’bah before the morning prayer and made Tawaf of it when he
was going to leave. Later, he left and headed for Madinah.
I say: That which is apparent is that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed the morning prayer on
that day at Ka‘bah with his Companions and read in that prayer
the complete Soorah Toor till the end: By the Mount. And a Book
inscribed. In parchment spread open. And the frequented House.
358

And the ceiling raised high. And the sea filled (with fire).
(Soorah At-Toor: 1-6)
And that is due to what Al-Bukhari narrated: From Umm
Salamah, the wife of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him): "I complained to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that I was sick. He said:
“Make Tawaf behind the people while riding.” So I made Tawaf
and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was praying at the side of Ka'bah, while reading: By
the Mount. And a Book inscribed. (Soorah At-Toor: 1, 2)
Umm Salamah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said when he was in Makkah
and wanted to leave and Umm Salamah had not yet made Tawaf
and also wanted to leave, so he said to her: “When the morning
prayer commences then make Tawaf on your camel while the
people are praying.”
And the point is that he upon completing the morning prayers
made Tawaf and stood in the area (Multazem) between the corner
which has the Black Stone in it and the door of the Ka‘bah and
thereafter invoked Allah and pressed his cheek against the wall
of the Ka‘bah.
‘Amr Ibn Shu‘aib narrated from his father, from his grandfather:
"I saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) pressing his face and his chest with the Multazem.”
Then the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) left
Makkah as ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) mentioned:
“Indeed the Messenger of Allah entered Makkah from the top
and exited from the bottom,” narrated in the Saheehain.
359

Ibn ‘Umar said: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) entered from the high end which is at AlBatha’ and left from the lower end,” narrated by Al-Bukhari and
Muslim. According to another narration: He entered from Kuda’
and left from Kada.
Jabir narrated: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) left Makkah at sunset, and did not pray until
he arrived at Sarif which is nine miles away from Makkah. This
is very strange, and Ajlah (narrator in the chain of narrations) is
doubtful, and maybe this was in other than the last pilgrimage.
For verily the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) made Tawaf of the House after the morning prayer,
so what delayedhim to the time of sunset? This is very strange,
unless that which Ibn Hazm claimed was true that he returned to
Al-Muhassab from Makkah after his Tawaf, and did not mention
an evidence for that except for the statement of ‘A’isha when she
returned from her ‘Umrah from Tan‘eem then she met him while
she was ascending and he was descending to the people of
Makkah. Or, she was descending and he was ascending. Ibn
Hazm said: That which there is no doubt in, is that she was
ascending to Makkah and he was descending; because she
proceeded to perform ‘Umrah, and he waited for her until she
returned, then he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
proceeded to make the farewell Tawaf. Then he met her whilst
she was going to Al- Muhassab from Makkah.
Al-Bukhari stated in the chapter of the one who stops at Dhi
Tuwa when he returns from Makkah, and narrated from Ibn
‘Umar that when he would spend the night at Dhi Tuwa until the
morning and then he would enter (Makah) ; when he would leave
he would pass by Dhi Tuwa and spend the night there until he
360

reached the morning, and he would say that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to do that.
This is how he mentioned it Mu‘allaqan (without mentioning the
narrator) with the phrase of certainty about the authenticity of the
narration, and he mentioned it with the chain of narrations at
another place in his book and Muslim also from the narration of
Hammad Ibn Zaid. However, it does not have the mentioning of
staying at Dhi Tuwa upon his return.
A’ishah narrated: She used to carry Zamzam and she used
toinform that the
Messenger of Allah
(Peace
and
Blessings
of
Allah be
upon him) would also carry it.
Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar also narrated that whenever the Messenger
of Allah
(Peace and
Blessings
of
Allah be
upon
him) would return from a battle or Hajj or ‘Umrah, he
would say Allahu Akbar thrice, then he would say:“There is no
diety worthy of worship except Allah alone without a partner,
for Him is the kingdom, for Him is All Praise, and He is able to
do all things, returning repenters, worshippers, those who
prostrate to our Lord praising, Allah affirmed his promise, and
He helped his slave and He defeated the armies Himself.”

Concerning a Hadith that Proves that the
Prophet Addressed at a Place Between
Makkah and Madina
It is narrated that he explained over there the virtues of ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib and his innocence from what some people spoke about
in Yemen, because of that which they experienced from his
361

rulings which they considered as oppression, suppression, and
stinginess, while the truth was with him in that matter. That is
why when the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) finished explaining the rights of Hajj and returned to
Madinah he explained that on the journey. Then he made a
forcefull speech on the 18th of Dhul-Hijjah of that year and it
was a Sunday at Ghadeer Khumm under a tree in which he
explained certain matters. He mentioned the virtues of ‘Ali and
his honesty, justice, and his relationship with him, which
removed from the people whatever they held in their hearts and
minds against him. We will mention many Ahadeeth related to
that affair and make clear the authentic narrations from the
weakones insha'Allah. Abu Ja‘afar Muhammad Ibn Jareer AtTabari, the author of Tafseer and history, paid special attention
to this and compiled a two volume work which mentions the
chains and versions of this speech. He mentioned the weak and
the strong, the authentic and the unauthentic narrations, upon the
way of many Muhaditheen who mentioned that which came to
them in that chapter without making a difference between the
authentic and unauthentic narrations. Similarly Al-Hafiz AbulQasim Ibn Al‘Asakir mentioned many Ahadeeth of this sermon
and we will mention narrations which have been narrated while
mentioning that the Shi‘as have no share in it and there is nothing
for them to hold onto or any proof as we will make clear what
we say.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said in the context of the Farewell
Pilgrimage: narrating from Yazeed Ibn Rukanah: When ‘Ali
arrived from Yemen to meet the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) in Makkah, he hurried to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and left in charge of the army he had with him a man from his
362

companions. That man clothed every person with a gown that
was with ‘Ali. When ‘Ali came back to his army he found them
all having gowns on them, so he said: “Woe be upon you, what
is this?” He said: “I clothed the people for them to beautify
themselves when they met the people.” He replied: “Woe be
upon you! Remove them before you meet the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with it.” He removed
the gowns from the people and returned it. The army then made
apparent their grievance for what he had done to them.
Abu Sa’eed narrated: The people complained about ‘Ali, so the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
stood as an addresser amongst us, then I heard him say: “People
do not complain about ‘Ali for, by Allah, there is no harshness
for Allah – or the path of Allah – that should be complained
about.”
And Buraidah said: "I fought with ‘Ali in Yemen and I saw
harshness from him. Then, when I came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) I mentioned
‘Ali and I belittled him. I saw the face of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) change, and he said:
'O Buraidah, am I not more deserving of the Believers than
themselves?' I said: 'Indeed, O Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) ' He replied: 'Whoever I am a
protector of, then ‘Ali is his protector'.”
Zaid Ibn Arqam related that when the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) returned from the Farewell
Pilgrimage and stopped at Ghadeer Khumm and ordered that the
Dawhat (trees) be brushed and their thorns were removed from
underneath them so the ground would be clear then he said: “It
363

is as though I was called so I answered. I have left behind the two
heavy (matters) ; one of them is heavier than the other: The Book
of Allah and my ‘Itrah (close cousins) the people of my family
(Ahl ulbait), so see how you succeed me to them, for, verily, they
will not split until they meet me at the Hawdh.” Then he said:
“Allah is my protector and I am the ally of every Believer,” then
he took the hand of ‘Ali and said: “Whoever I am the protector
of, then he is their ally. Allah take as a friend the one who takes
him as a friend and be an enemy to the one who is hostile to him.”
So I said to Zaid: “Did you hear it from the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ?” He replied:
“Nobody was in the great trees except that he saw him with his
two eyes and heard him with his two ears.”
Sa’eed Ibn Wahb related from Zaid Ibn Yuthai’ who said that
‘Ali said to the people in the open who heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say on the day
of Ghadeer Khumm what he said except that he should stand? He
said: Six people stood before Sa’eed, and six stood before Zaid,
then they attested that they indeed saw the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say to ‘Ali on the
day of Ghadeer Khumm: “Is not Allah more deserving of the
Believers than themselves?” They replied: “Certainly.” He
replied: “O Allah whoever I am the protector of, then ‘Ali is their
protector; O Allah take as a friend the one who takes him as a
friend and be an enemy to the one who is hostile to him.”
Sa’eed ibn Wahb said: ‘Ali said in the open: "I read to you by
Allah a man who heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say on the day of Ghadeer
Khumm: 'Verily Allah is the ally of the Believers, and the one
who I am their ally, then he (‘Ali) is their ally. Allah take as an
364

ally the one who takes him as an ally and be hostile to the one
who is hostile to him, and help the one who helps him'.”

Year 11 From Hijrah
The year began and the noble Prophet and the travelers returned
to Madinah from the Farewell Pilgrimage and in this year great
matters occurred; from the greatest matters was the catastrophe
that was the death of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). However, Allah, Almighty,
moved him from this temporary world to the eternal pleasure in
a lofty high place, and a level in Paradise that has no level higher
than it. Allah said: And the hereafter is better for you than the
first (life). And your Lord is going to give you, and you will be
satisfied. (Soorah Duha: 4,5). And that is after he finished
conveying the message that Allah commanded him to propagate,
and he advised his nation, and showed to them that which he
knew from good, and he warned them and prohibited them
fromthat which was harmful for them in this world and the
hereafter.
We already mentioned what the authors of the two authentic
books (Imam AlBukhari and Muslim) mentioned from the
Hadith of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab that he said: The statement of
Allah was revealed: Today I have completed for you your
religion (Soorah Al-Ma’idah: on the day of Jumu‘ah and the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
was standing in ‘Arafat.
We narrated from a good route that ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab cried
when this Verse was revealed, so it was asked: “What causes you
to cry?” He replied: “There is nothing after perfection except
365

deficiency,” and it was though he felt the death of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). And indeed he, may
the prayers of Allah and peace be upon him, indicated this in the
narration of Muslim which he narrated from Jabir: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
stood at Jamrat Al-‘Aqabah and said to us: “Take from me your
rights (of Hajj), for perhaps I may not perform Hajj after this year
of mine.”
Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar and Al-Baihaqi narrated from Ibn ‘Umar
that when Soorah An-Nasr was revealed in the middle of the days
of Tashreeq, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) knew it was a farewell so he ordered for his
riding animal Al-Qaswa’ and then left. He then mentioned the
sermon that as preceded. Similarly Ibn ‘Abbas said to ‘Umar
when he asked him about the explanation of this Soorah in the
presence of many of the Companions to show them the virtue of
Ibn ‘Abbas and his advancement and knowledge, as some of
them blamed him for bringing forth and seating himamongst the
veterans of Badr. He said, “Indeed he is from where you know
(i.e. the family of the Prophet),” then he asked them in the
presence of Ibn ‘Abbas about the explanation of this Soorah:
When the victory of Allah has come and conquest. And you see
the people entering into the religion of Allah in multitudes. Then
exalt (Him) with Praise of your Lord and ask for forgiveness
from Him. Indeed He is ever Accepting of repentance. (Soorah
An- Nasr: 1-3) They said: “We have been commanded when we
are victorious (in conquest) that we remember Allah and we
praise Him and ask for forgiveness.” Then he asked: “What do
you say, O Ibn ‘Abbas?” He replied: “The time of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) is being
announced to him.” Then ‘Umar said: “I don’t know from it
366

except that which you know.” We indeed mentioned it in the
explanation of this Soorah that which illustrates the statement of
Ibn ‘Abbas from different perspectives even though it does not
negate alos that which the Companions said in explanation of it.
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said when He performed Hajj
with his wives: “It is only this pilgrimage, then stick to the
surfaces of the rugs.” This was the point that the soul felt his
passing was imminent in that year, and we will mention that and
relay that which has been narrated with regards to it from
Ahadeeth and narrations and with Allah is help sought. Let us
mention before that what the Imams Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn
Yasar, Abu Ja‘afar Ibn Jareer, and Abu Bakr Al-Baihaqi said at
this point before the death of the Prophet from the number of his
pilgrimages, battles, brigades, letters and messengers to the
kings. So let us mention that abridged and summarized then we
will follow that up with the death of the Prophet.
In the Saheehain Zaid ibn Arqam narrated: Verily the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) fought 19
battles, and made pilgrimage after He migrated, the Farewell
Pilgrimage, and never made pilgrimage after that. Abu Ishaq
said: And one in Makkah. And we mentioned earlier from more
than one of the Companions, from them Anas Ibn Malik in the
Saheehain: Indeed he performed four ‘Umrahs: ‘Umrah of
Hudaybiyyah, ‘Umrah of Al-Qada’, ‘Umrah of Al-Ji‘ranah and
the ‘Umrah of the Farewell Pilgrimage.
As for the battles, Al-Bukhari narrated from Salamah Ibn AlAkwa‘: I fought with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) seven battles, and with Zaid Ibn
367

Harithah nine battles in which the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) placed him in command over
us.
In the Saheehain from Salamah: "I fought with the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) seven battles,
and from that which he would send from expeditions (brigades)
nine battles, at one time with Abu Bakr in charge and at one time
Usamah Ibn Zaid."
And in Saheeh Al-Bukhari Al-Bara’ who said: The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) fought 15
battles.
Zaid Ibn Arqam said, as recorded in the Saheehain: Verily the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
fought 19 battles and I was present in 17of them.
Ibn Buraidah related from his father: He truly fought battles with
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). In a narration from Muslim from the route of Al-Husain
Ibn Waqid from Abdullah Ibn Buraidah from his father: He
fought with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) battles and fought in eight from them. In a
narration from him with this chain (of narrators): He sent 24
brigades, he fought on the day of Badr, Uhud, Al-Ahzab, AlMuraisee‘, Qudaid, Khaibar, Makkah and Hunain.
In Saheeh Muslim from the Hadith of Abu Zubair from Jabir:
Verily the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) fought 21 battles, I fought with him in 19 battles, and
I did not attend Badr or Uhud, as my father prevented me. When

368

my father was killed in Uhud I did not miss any battle that he
fought in.
Sa’eed Ibn Al-Musayyab narrated: the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) fought in 18 battles.
He said: I heard him another time say: 24 battles, and so I don’t
know if that was a misconception or something that I heard
afterwards.
Abu Qatadah said: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) fought in 19 battles, he
participated in eight of them, and sent from the brigades 24,” so
all of his battles and brigades were 43 (in total).
‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair mentioned and Az-Dhuhri, Moosa Ibn
‘Uqbah, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Yasar and more than one of
the Imams concerning this matter: Verily he fought on the Dayof
Badr in Ramadan in the second year (since Hijrah), then in Uhud
in Shawwal of the third year, then Al-Khandaq, and Banu
Quraizah in Shawwal also of the fourth year, and its mentioned
the fifth year. Then in Bani Al-Mustaliq at Al-Muraisee’ in
Sha‘ban in year 5, then in Khaibar in Safar in year 7, and from
them are those who say year 6 and the truth is that it was at the
start of year 7 and the end of year 6. Then he fought the people
of Makkah in Ramadan year 8 and fought against Hawazin and
laid siege to the people of Tai’f in Shawwal and some of DhulHijjah year 8 as is mentioned in detail before. And Muhammad
Ibn Ishaq said: And the total number of battles that he fought
were 27:
The Battle of Waddan and that is the Battle of Al-Abwa’
The Battle of Buwat from the direction of Radwa
369

The Battle of Al-Ishirah from the middle of Yanbu‘
The first Battle of Badr (the request of Kurz ibn Jabir),
The great Battle of Badr in which he fought against the bravest
of the Quraish
The Battle of Bani Sulaim until he reached Al-Kudr
The Battle of As-Saweeq in search of Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb
The Battle of Ghatfan and it was the Battle of Dhi Amr
The Battle of Najran
The Battle of Uhud
The Battle Hamra’al-Asad
The Battle of Banu Nadheer
The Battle of Dhaat ar-Riqa‘
The Battle of Badr Al-Akhirah (last)
The Battle Doomatal Jandal The Battle of Al-Khandaq then
Bani Al-Quraidhah then Bani Lihyan from Hudhail then Dhu
Qarad then Bani Al-Mustaliq from Khuza‘ah then AlHudaibiyyah, not wanting battle when the polytheists blocked
his path then Khaibar then ‘Umrah al-Qada’ then Al-Fath
370

(Conquest of Makkah) then Hunain then At-Tai’f and then
Tabook.
Ibn Ishaq said: He fought in nine of them: Badr, Uhud, AlKhandaq, Quraidhah, Al-Mustaliq, Khaibar, Al-Fath, Hunain
and At-Ta’if. I say that all of that has been mentioned in much
detail in their places with their evidences and proofs.

Concerning the Verses and Ahadeeth Warning
of the Death of the Messenger of Allah
Jabir said: I saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and
Blessings
of
Allah be
upon him)
throw at the Jimar then he stood and said: “Take from me your
rites of Hajj for I may not perform Hajj after this year of mine.”
Allah, Most High, says:
“Indeed you are to die and indeed, they are to die. Then indeed
you, on the
Day of Resurrection, before your Lord, will dispute.” (Soorah
Az-Zumar: 30, 31)
“And we did not grant to any man before you eternity (on
earth), so if you die
– would they be eternal?” (Soorah Al- Anbiya’: 34)
“Every soul will taste death. And we test you with evil and
with good as a trial; and to Us you will be returned.”
(Soorah Al-Anbiya’: 35)

371

“Everyone shall taste death. And only on the Day of Resurrection shall you be paid your wages in full. And whoever is
removed away from the Fire and admitted to Paradise, he indeed
is successful. The life of this world is only the enjoyment of
deception (a deceiving thing).” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran: 185).
“Muhammad is not but a messenger. (Other) messengers have
passed on before him. So if he was to die or be killed, would you
turn back on your heels (to unbelief) ? And he who turns back on
his heels will never harm Allah at all; but Allah will reward the
grateful.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran: 144)
The above-mentioned Verse is the one As-Siddeeq (Abu Bakr)
recited on the day of the passing of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). When the people
heard it, it was as though they had never heard it before.
Allah said: “When the victory of Allah has come and conquest.
And you see the people entering into the religion of Allah in
multitudes. Then exalt (Him) with Praise of your Lord and ask
for forgiveness from Him. Indeed He is ever Accepting of
repentance.” (Soorah An-Nasr: 1-3). ‘Umar and Ibn ‘Abbas
mentioned: “It was the time (death) of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that was made
known to him.”
Ibn ‘Umar mentioned: It was revealed in the middle of the days
of Tashreeq in the Farewell Pilgrimage, so the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) knew it was a
farewell. Thereafter he addressed the people with a sermon he
commanded them with good and forbade them from evil, the
famous sermon as mentioned earlier.

372

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to
his daughter, Fatimah: “Verily, Jibraeel used to revise the Qur’an
with me once every year, and this year he revised the Qur’an
twice, and I do not see except that my time has come near.”
In Saheeh Al-Bukhari Abu Hurairah said: “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to make
I‘tikaf (staying in the mosque as an act of worship) every month
of Ramadan for 10 days, then, when it was the year in which he
passed away he performed I’tikaf for 20 days.”
Abu Muwaihibah narrated: "The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was ordered to pray upon the
people of Al-Baqi (graveyard in Madinah). He prayed upon them
three times, then, when it was the third night, he said: 'Abu
Muwaihibah, place the saddle on my riding animal.' Then he rode
and I walked until he reached them, then he descended from his
riding animal, then I held theriding animal and he stood, or he
said, he stood by them and said: 'Let it be easy for you the state
you are in, in contrast to what the people are in. The trials are
like pieces of the dark night, each piece follows the other, the last
is worse than the first, so let the state you are in be easy for, in
contrast to what the people are in'.”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
returned from Al-Baqi and found me while I had a headache and
I was saying: “My head!” He said: “Rather me, ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) and my head.” She continued: Then
he said: “What would harm you were you to die before me and
then I stood by you, wrapped you, prayed over you, and buried
you?” I replied: “By Allah, it is as though I was with you, were
373

you to indeed do that. It was as if I indeed returned to my house
and had a feast with some of your wives.” Then the illness of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
peaked while visiting his wives, until his illness intensified in
Maimoonah’s house. He called his wives, and sought permission
from them to be nursed in my house so they gave him permission.
Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) exited being helped by two men from his family, one
of them was Al-Fadhl Ibn ‘Abbas and another man, while having
his head tied and dragging his feet, until he entered my house.
‘Ubaidullah mentioned: So I informed Ibn ‘Abbas then he asked:
'Do you know who the other man was? He was ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib'.”
A’ishah also said: When the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) fell ill and his pain intensified,
he asked permission from his wives to be nursed in my house so
they allowed him. Then he exited while being helped by two men
while his feet were dragging on thefloor between ‘Abbas Ibn
‘Ubaid and another man. ‘Ubaidullah said: So I informed
‘Abdullah – i.e. Ibn ‘Abbas – what ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) mentioned. Then ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas said:
“Do you know who the other man was who ‘A’ishah (May Allah
be pleased with her) didn’t mention?” I replied: “No.” Ibn
‘Abbas said: “He was ‘Ali.” Then ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) used to say that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) entered my house when his
illness intensified, and said: “Pour on me water from seven water
skins, and not complete the contents, i.e., not all of the water
from them in order that I take a covenant from the people.” So
we sat him in a tub belonging to Hafsah, the wife of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and we began to
374

pour on him from those containers, until he began to indicate to
us with his hand that you have done what he had wanted. A’ishah
said: Then he exited to the people and led the prayer and
addressed them.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
used to ask in during illness from which he died: “Where am I
tomorrow, where am I tomorrow?” He intended the day with
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), so his wives allowed
him to be where he wanted to be. So he stayed in ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her)’s house until he died. ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) said: He died on the day that he was
going to see me in my house, and Allah took him while his head
was between my chest and my neck and his saliva mixed with
mine.
She said: ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr entered brushing with a
Siwak (twig like toothbrush), and the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) looked at him. I said to him:
“Give me that Siwak, ‘Abdur Rahman." So he gave it to me and
I cut it and softened it, and then gave it to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He brushed with it
while leaning on my chest.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her): “Verily
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would read upon himself when ill the Mu‘awwidhat (the
last three Soorahs of the Qur’an) and blow on himself, then wipe
his hands on himself. When he fell ill from the illness that led to
his death, I began to blow on him with the Mu‘awwidhat like he

375

would, and wipe with the hand of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) upon him.
It is affirmed in the Saheehain that ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) narrated: "The wives of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) gathered around
him. Then Fatimah came walking her gait (which) was not
different to her father's. He said: 'Welcome my daughter,' and she
sat to his right or left. Then he whispered something to her in
secret and she cried, then he whispered another thing to her in
secret and she smiled. I asked her: 'The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) favored you in
particular with a secret and you were crying.' When she stood, I
said: 'Inform me of what he shared with you?' She replied: 'I am
not to spread the secret of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) "When he passed away I asked
her: 'I ask you for the right that I have upon you, that you inform
me.' She replied: 'As for now, then yes. He whispered to me on
the first occasion: Verily I used to recite the Qur’an to Jibraeel
once every year, and I recited it to him this year twice, and I do
not see except that my time has come near, so fear Allah and
remain patient for I am a good predecessor for you, so I cried.
Then he whispered to me: Are you not pleased that you are the
leader of the women believers, or the leader of the women from
this nation? so I smiled'."And this Hadith has other paths narrated
by ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her).
Narrated by ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her):“We gave
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) medicine during his illness, so he began to indicate to us not
to give him that medicine. Then we said (we thought or said to
ourselves), (that it was) the hatred of the sick for medicine. When
376

he recovered he said: “Did I not forbid you from administering
medicine to me?” We said (we thought or said to ourselves) (that
it was) the hatred of the sick for medicine. Then he said:
“Nobody should be left in the house except that he is given this
medicine – while I watch – except for Al-‘Abbas because he did
not see you (give the medicine).”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to say in his
illness from which he died: “‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased
with her), I still feel the pain from the food that I ate in Khaibar
(after he was poisoned by the Jews of Khaibar), so this is a time
I find myself gasping from that poison.”
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that ‘Ali left the company of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
during the illness from which he died. The people said: “AbulHasan, how did the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) reach the morning?” He replied: “He is better
with Allah’s praise.” Then ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Mutalib took his
hand and said to him: “You, by Allah, after three (nights he will
die) are the worshipper of the stick (an example for someone who
begins to follow someone else), and I truly see that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
shall pass away by this illness of his. Verily, I know the faces of
Bani ‘Abdul-Muttalib at the time of death. Take us to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and then let us ask him for whom is the command? If it is us then
we know, but if it is in other than us thenwe will be informed and
give Wasiyyah (i.e. appointment of the Caliph after him).”
Thereafter ‘Ali said: “If we, by Allah, were to ask the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) for
377

Wasiyyah then he denies us from it then the people won’t give it
to us after him, for surely by Allah I will not ask the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) for it.”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: “Thursday, and what happened on
Thursday? The illness of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) intensified.” Then he said:
“Come to me I will write a message for you, after it you will
never go astray.” Thereafter they began to argue and it is not
appropriate to argue in the presence of a Prophet. So they said:
“What is the matter with him that he is in such pain?” They
questioned that, so they began to defend him by make excuses
for him. Thereafter he said: “Leave me, for that condition in
which I am is better than what you are calling me to.” Then he
advised them with three matters. He said: “Expel the idolaters
from the Arabian Peninsula, and treat the delegations in the way
that I would.” And he remained silent about the third, or he said:
“I forgot it.”
A’ishah said that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said: “Indeed I intended to send for Abu
Bakr and his son and take a covenant lest those who speak were
to speak, or those who wish were to wish.” Then he said Allah
refuses, or the believers repel, or Allah repels and the believers
refuse (to accept anyone other than Abu Bakr as the Caliph).
In Saheeh Al-Bukhari and Muslim it is narrated from
Muhammad Ibn Jubair Ibn Mut‘im from his father that he said:
A woman came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and he ordered her to return to himafter
some time. So she aked: “If I were to come and not find you?”
As though she intended his death. He said: “If you do not find
378

me then go to Abu Bakr.”And that which is apparent And Allah
(SWT) knows best that she only said that to him in the illness
from which he died.
He conveyed on Thursday before he was taken by five days a
great sermon, in which he made clear the virtues of As-Siddeeq
(Abu Bakr) in the presence of all of the Companions, as well as
what he specifically mentioned about him leading the
Companions in prayer – as will be explained – in the their
presence. It might be that this sermon was reparation for what he
wanted to write. And he indeed had a bath before this noble
sermon, they poured on him seven water skins and not their
complete contents and this is from seeking a cure with seven
from water, as has been mentioned in other Hadiths in other
places. That which is intended is that he had a bath then exited
and led the people in prayer. Afterward, he addressed them as
was mentioned in the Hadith of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased
with her).

Mention of His Command to Abu Bakr AsSiddiq to Lead in Prayer, and His Exiting,
then He Prayed Behind Him
Imam Ahmed narrated from ‘Abdullah Ibn Zam’ah Ibn AlAswad Ibn AlMuttalib Ibn Asad who said that when the illness
became severe for the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) while I was with him in a group from
among the Muslims, Bilal called for the prayer. He said:
“Command somebody to lead the prayer.” He said: So I exited
then suddenly ‘Umar was with the people and Abu Bakr was
absent so I said: “Stand, ‘Umar and lead the people in prayer.”
So he stood, and when ‘Umar pronounced: Allahu Akbar,
379

theMessenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) heard his voice, for ‘Umar was a man with a loud voice.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) asked: “Where is Abu Bakr? Allah refuses that and so do
the Muslims; Allah refuses that and so do the Muslims.”
Thereafter Abu Bakr was sent for and he arrived after ‘Umar had
prayed that prayer, and led the people in prayer. Then ‘Abdullah
Ibn Zam’ah said: ‘Umar said to me: “Woe be unto you! What did
you do, Ibn Zam’ah? By Allah, I did not think when you
commanded me except that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) commanded me with it, if it was
not for that I would not have prayed.” I replied: “By Allah, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
did not command me, however, when I did not see Abu Bakr, I
saw you more deserving of the people in leading them in prayer.”
Al-Aswad said: We were with A’ishah, and we spoke of being
steadfast on the prayer and veneration of it so she said: When the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) became ill,
during the illness from which he died, the time of prayer entered,
and Bilal made the Adhan. He said: “Order Abu Bakr to lead the
people in prayer.” It was said to him: “Verily, Abu Bakr is a weak
man, i.e., he had a soft heart and would cry much from the fear
of Allah as other narrations have mentioned, and when he stands
in your place he will not be able to lead the people in prayer.” He
repeated himself and they repeated themselves to him. Then he
replied on the third occasion and said: “You are like the women
who tried to tempt Yoosuf, may peace be upon him, order Abu
Bakr to lead the people in prayer.” Thereafter Abu Bakr exited
(as an Imam). Thereafter the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) felt better and came out between two people,
it is as though I see his legs dragging from the pain. Abu Bakr
380

wanted to move back, but the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) indicated to him to stay in his place.
Thereafter he was led until he sat next to him. It was said to AlA’mash: So the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) prayed and Abu Bakr followed himin prayer whilst the
people were following Abu Bakr in prayer? So he nodded with
his head: “Yes.”
‘Ubaidullah Ibn ‘Abdullah said: “I entered upon ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) and said: Will you inform me about
the illness of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) ?” She said: “Indeed, the Messenger of
Allah’s (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) illness
became heavy upon him and so he asked: ‘Have the people
prayed?’ We replied: ‘No, they are waiting for you, O Messenger
of Allah.’ He said: ‘Put some water for me in the container.’ So
we did. Then he had a bath and when he went to stand up, he
became unconscious. When he regained conscious said: ‘Have
the people prayed?’ We replied: ‘No, they are waiting for you, O
Messenger of Allah.’ He said: ‘Put some water for me in the
container.’ So we did. Then he had a bath when he went to stand
up, he became unconscious. When he regained conscious he said:
‘Have the people prayed?’ We replied: ‘No, they are waiting for
you, O Messenger of Allah.’ Then he said: ‘Put some water for
me in the container.’ So we did. Then he had a bath then he went
to stand up, he became unconscious. When he recovered he said:
‘Have the people prayed?’ We replied: ‘No, they are waiting for
you, O Messenger of Allah,’ and the people were sitting in the
mosque waiting for the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) for the Isha’ prayers. The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent for Abu
Bakr so that he can lead the people in prayers. Abu Bakr was a
381

weak man (who cried from the fear of Allah). He (Abu Bakr)
said: ‘Umar, lead the people in prayers,’ to whichh he replied:
‘You are more deserving of that.’ So Abu Bakr led them in
prayers in those days. When the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) felt a little better, so he came
out between two men, one of whom was Al-‘Abbas for the Dhuhr
prayers. When Abu Bakr saw him he started to move back, but
the Prophet indicated to him not to move back. He commanded
him and thensat him next to him. Thereafter Abu Bakr prayed
standing and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) prayed while seated.” ‘Ubaidullah
mentioned: So I entered upon Ibn ‘Abbas and I said: 'Shall I not
inform you of what A’ishah told me about the illness of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
' He replied: 'Tell me.' So I informed him and he didn’t deny
anything about it except that he said: 'Did she mention to you the
name of the person who was with Al‘Abbas?' I replied: 'No.' He
said: 'He was ‘Ali'.”
In anotherr narration: Abu Bakr began to pray standing while
following the prayer of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). The people were following the
prayer of Abu Bakr while the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was seated.Al-Baihaqi
mentioned: So in this (narration) the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) went forward in this prayer, and
Abu Bakr joined his prayer with his.
Anas said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) prayed behind Abu Bakr in one single
garment wrapped around him. When he wished to stand he said:
“Call Usamah Ibn Zaid for me.” So he came and then leaned his
382

back to his neck, and that was the last prayer he prayed. AlBaihaqi mentioned: In this is proof that this prayer was the
morning prayer of Monday the day of his passing away. It was
the last prayer that he prayed due to what has been affirmed that
he passed away during midmorning (Dhuha) of Monday. That
which Al-Baihaqi has mentioned, Muslim took it from the Book
of Maghazi by Moosa Ibn Uqbah, for he mentioned it just like
that. Similarly, Abul-Aswad narrated from Urwah, but it is weak.
Rather this was the last prayer that he prayed with the people
aswas mentioned specifically in the other narration, and a general
incident is overruled by a specific one. Therefore, it is not
possible for this to be the morning prayer of Monday the day of
his passing away, because that prayer was in congregation, rather
than in his house because of the weakness. The evidence for that
is what Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Saheeh from Anas Ibn
Malik, who followed, served, and accompanied the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him): Verily, Abu Bakr
used to lead the prayer during the illness from which the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed away, until it
was Monday while they were in rows for prayer. The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) uncovered the
curtain of the house looking at us while standing, his face was
like the page of a Mus- haf, he smiled and was laughing. So we
thought we were going to be tempted from the joy of seeing the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and Abu
Bakr had gone back on his heels to reach the row of worshippers
behind him, and he thought that the Prophet was coming out for
the prayer. He indicated to us to complete the prayer, and then he
let the curtain down, and passed away on that day."
Anas ibn Malik said that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) did not came out for three days, then the
383

(Iqamah) prayer was established, Abu Bakr moved forward. The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Lift
the curtain,”and they lifted it. When the Prophet’s (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) face became apparent to us, we
had not seen a sight more beloved to us than his face. Thereafter,
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) indicated
with his hand to Abu Bakr to move forward and the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) let go of the veil,
and he was not seen until he died.
This is the most clear evidence that he (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) did not pray the Monday morning prayer
with the people, and he had no contact with them, because he did
not come out for three days. We say: So upon thisbasis, the last
prayer that he prayed with them was Dhuhr, as it has come
explicitly in the Hadith of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with
her) which was mentioned before, and that was on Thursday not
Saturday or Sunday, as Al- Baihaqi mentioned from Maghazi
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah, who is weak, and because of we mentioned
from his sermon after it. Also due to the fact he lost contact with
them on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, and these were full days.
What is strange is that Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi cited this Hadith
from these two paths, then he said: So maybe he (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) secluded himself from them in
the first Raka‘ahs, then he exited in the second Raka‘ah, then
prayed behind Abu Bakr, just as ‘Urwah and Moosa Ibn Uqbah
mentioned, and that had been unknown to Anas Ibn Malik, or he
mentioned some of the incident and didn’t mention the end of
it.This, which he mentioned, is very far fetched because Anas
said: Then he was not seen until he died, and in another narration
he said: Then that was the last time with him. The statement of a

384

Companion takes precedence over the statement of a Tabi‘ee
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
What is important is that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) chose Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq as
an Imam for all of the Companions in the prayer, which is the
greatest pillar of Islam in terms of acts of worship. Shaikh AbulHasan Al-Ash‘ari said: “His preference of him is a matter known
by necessity from the religion of Islam. His preference of him is
a proof that he was the most knowledgable of the Companions
and the best of them in memorization due to what has been
affirmed in the report whose authenticity is agreed upon by the
scholars. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said: ‘The one who leads the people in prayer is the
one who has the best recitation/ memorization of the Qur’an; if
they are the same in recitation, then the one who has the most
knowledge of the Sunnah; if they are the same with regards to
the Sunnah, then the one who is older; if they are the same age,
then the one who accepted Islam first'.” Isay: these words of AlAsh‘ari deserves to be written in gold. All these qualities were
indeed present in As-Siddeeq. The prayer of the Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) behind him in some
of the prayers as we mentioned previously from the authentic
narrations do not contradict that which has been narrated in the
Saheeh that Abu Bakr followed him, because that was in another
prayer as Ash- Shafi‘i and others from the Imams mentioned.
Point of Benefit: Malik, Ash-Shafi‘i and a number of the
scholars, including Al-Bukhari, used the Prophet’s prayer while
being seated and Abu Bakr following him standing and the
people following Abu Bakr as an evidence for the abrogation of
his statement in the Hadith that is agreed upon,when he prayed
385

with some of his companions seated. He fell from his horse and
his right side was injured, so they prayed behind him while
standing. So he indicated to them to sit down, then when he
finished he said: “By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, you
similar to what the Persians and the Romans would do, standing
for their great ones while they are seated. The Imam is only there
to be followed, so when he pronounces Allahu Akbar then
pronounce Allahu Akbar. When he performs the Rukoo’ also
perform the Rukoo‘, and when he stands straight then stand
straight; when he prostrates then prostrate, and when he prays
sitting then everyone should pray sitting.” They said: Then he led
them while seated, and they were standing in the illness of death,
so that illustrates that it is an abrogation of what was mentioned
before, And Allah (SWT) knows best.
And the ways in which people replied to this conclusion have
differed into many opinions, and the place of their mentioning
isin the book Al-Ahkam AlKabeer. The summary of it is that
some people claimed that the Companions sat because of his
previous command and Abu Bakr only continued standing in
order to convey his voice. Some of the people said that Abu Bakr
was the Imam at the same time as some of the narrators explicitly
mentioned as was mentioned before, and Abu Bakr, due to his
great conduct with the Messenger of Allah, would not lead him
rather he would follow him. So it is as though the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) became the Imam of the
Imam, because of this they did not sit as they were following Abu
Bakr while he was standing. As-Siddeeq did not sit because he
was the Imam and also in order to convey to them the Prophet’s
movements, still moments, and transmissions. And Allah (SWT)
knows best. From the people are those who said: There is a
difference between starting the prayer behind the Imam in a state
386

of standing, then continuing standing in it, even if the sitting of
the Imam occursduring it, as is in this situation, and beginning a
prayer behind an Imam who is already seated, in the latter case it
is obligatory to sit as in the Hadith mentioned earlier And Allah
(SWT) knows best. From the people are those who said: This
action and the Hadith mentioned earlier are an evidence allowing
standing and sitting, and both of them are allowed and
permissible; sitting because of what has been mentioned, and
standing because of the later action. And Allah (SWT) knows
best.

387

Chapter Concerning How the Prophet
Approached Death
Imam Ahmad narrated from ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood: "I entered
upon the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
while he was ill and I touched him. I said: 'O Messenger of Allah,
indeed you are very ill.' He said: 'I feel the illness of two people
from you.' I replied: 'You have two rewards.' He said: 'Yes by the
One in Whose Hands is my soul, there is noMuslim on this Earth
who is afflicted with a hardship from illness and other than it
except that Allah removes from him his sins just as a tree sheds
its leaves'.”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) said: “I haven’t seen
an illness of anyone more severe than the one of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
She also said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) died between my neck and chin, so I don’t
hate the severity of death for anyone after I saw the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
In another Hadith it is said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The most severely tested
of the people are the Prophets, then the righteous, then those
similar to them, then those similar to them. The man is tested
according to his religion, so if there is firmness in his religion
then he will have a severe test upon him.”
Usamah Ibn Zaid narrated: "When the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) became ill the people and I
went to Madinah. I entered upon the Messenger of Allah (Peace
388

and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he became silent so he
didn’t speak, then he began to raise his hands to the sky then put
them on his face, I knew he was praying for me."
Imam Malik mentioned in his Muwatta from Isma‘eel IbnAbu
Hakeem that he heard ‘Umar Ibn Abdul-Aziz say that the last
words which the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said were: “May Allah curse the Jews and
Christians, they took the graves of their Prophets as mosques.
Two religions will not remain in the land of the Arabs.” This is
how he narrated it as a murasl Hadith (a Hadith which a break in
its chain between the Tabi‘ee and the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) ).
Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated from A’ishah and Ibn ‘Abbas
that they said:
When death descended upon the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) he began to cast his sheet on his
face. When he became grieved he removed it from his face then
he said in that state: “May the curse of Allah be upon the Jews
and the Christians, they took the graves of their Prophets as
places of worship,” warning them from what they did (this is
from the words of the narrator ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased
with her)).
Anas Ibn Malik narrated: The advice of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when death
approached him was: “The prayer and that which your right
hands own slaves,” to the extent that the Messenger of Allah’s
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) chest began to heave
with it, and his tongue could hardly pronounce it.

389

Umm Salamah narrated: The advice of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) at the time of his
death was: “The prayer, the prayer and that which your right
hands owns slaves,”until he would mumble itin his chest and his
tongue could not pronounce it.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) related from the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said:
“What truly makes it the suffering easy upon me, is that I saw the
whiteness of the palm of ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with
her) in Paradise.” Only Ahmad narrated it and the chain is sound.
This is an evidence for his strong love for ‘A’ishah (May Allah
be pleased with her), may Allah be pleased with her. The people
have mentioned many concepts for having strong love, and
nobody reached this level. That is only because they over
exaggerate with words that have no reality and these are certainly
true words and there is no doubt about it.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) also narrated that she
used to say: Verily, from the blessings of Allah upon me is that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) passed away on my day, in my house and between my chest
and neck, and Allah indeed mixed my saliva with his at the time
of death. She said: My brother entered upon me with a Siwak
with him and I leaned the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to my chest, then I saw him look
at him. I knew that he liked Siwak, so I said: “Will I give it to
you?” He nodded with his head, i.e. yes, so he placed it in his
mouth. She said: And in front of him was a pot or container with
water in it, then he began to place his hand into the water and
wipe it on his face, then say: “There is no God deserving of
worship except Allah, verily death has pains.” Then he raised his
390

left index finger and began to say: “In the highest company,”until
he was taken and his hand moved in the water.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) said: We used to say
that the Prophet would never dieuntil he was given a choice
between this world and the hereafter. She said: When it was the
time of the Messenger of Allah’s (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) illness that he died from, I heard him say: “And
whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger – those will be with the
ones upon whom Allah bestowed favor of the Prophets, the
steadfast affirmers of truth, the martyrs and the righteous. And
excellent are those as companions.” (Soorah An-Nisa: 69) She
said: So we thought he was given a choice between life and
death.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
used to say when he was well, “Verily, no prophet has been taken
until he sees his place in Paradise then he is given a choice.”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) said: “When the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
became ill and his head was on my thigh he fell unconscious for
a while. Thereafter, he recovered, then raised his eyes to the
ceiling of the house and said: ‘O Allah, the high company,’ so I
knew that it was the Hadith that he used to inform us of when he
was well, ‘Verily, no prophet has been taken until he sees his
place in Paradise then he is given a choice'.” ‘A’ishah (May Allah
be pleased with her) said: “So I said: In that case do not choose
us.” And ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) said: “Those
were the last words that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) pronounced: ‘O Allah, the
highest companion (paradise) ’.”
391

‘Abbad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair narrated that ‘A’ishah
(May Allah be pleased with her) informed him that she heard the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
say, which she took heed of before he died while leaning on her
chest: “Allah, forgive me, have mercy on me and add me with
the presence of the Rafeeq (i.e. he yearned to meet Allah).”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) related: "The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
was taken while his head was between my chest and neck. She
said: When his soul exited, I never ever found a smell more
pleasant than it.”
Umm Salamah narrated: “I placed my hand on the chest of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
the day he died, then weeks passed by and I would eat and
perform Wudu’ yet the smell of musk would not leave my hand.”
Abu Burdah said: "I entered upon ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her), and she showed us a thick Izar (lower garment)
which is made in Yemen and a Kisa’ (upper garment) which they
call Al-Mulabbadah, then she said: “Verily the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was taken in
these two garments.”
Yazeed Ibn Babanoos said: "My friend and I went to see ‘A’ishah
(May Allah be pleased with her) and we asked permission to
enter, so she threw a cushion to us and wore her Hijab.
Thereafter, my friend said: 'O Mother of the Believers, what do
you say regarding Al-Irak?' She replied: 'What is Al-Irak?' I hit
my friend on the shoulder. She said: 'What is this, you hurt your
brother?' and said: 'Al-Irak is menstruation.' Then, she said: 'The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
392

used to cover me and touch my head and between us was a
garment while I was menstruating.' Then she said: 'The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
used to pass my door and say a word that Allah would make
beneficial. One day, he passed by and didn’t say anything, then
he passed by again without saying anything – twice or three times
– I said: ‘O maid, put a cushion for me at the door,’ and I tied my
head. Then he passed by and said: ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her), what is wrong with you?’So I replied I have a
headache. He said: ‘My head,’ then he left and it was not long
before he was brought carried in a cloth. Thereafter he entered
upon me and sent to the women a message so he said: ‘Verily I
am ill, and I am not able to visit you, so allow me to be with
either ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) or Safiyyah.’
"I had not nursed anyone before, so one day while his head was
on my shoulder suddenly his head moved toward mine, I thought
he wanted something from my head. His cold saliva dripped
fromhis mouth and landed on my neck and my skin shivered
from it. I thought he was unconscious so I wrapped a garment
around him, then ‘Umar and Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah came
and asked permission so I allowed them to enter and put on my
veil. ‘Umar looked at him and said: ‘His unconsciousness, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
passing out is so severe!’ Then they stood, and when they came
close to the door, Al-Mugheerah said: ‘Umar, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) has passed
away.’ He replied: ‘You are mistaken; rather you are a man
mixed with tribulation! Verily, the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) will not die until Allah
eradicates the hypocrites.’ Then Abu Bakr came so I lifted the
veil, thereafter he looked at him and said: ‘Indeed we belong to
393

Allah and unto him we will return, the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) has died.’ He came to his
head, dropped his mouth and kissed his forehead and then he
said: ‘My true friend!’ He lifted his head, lowered his mouth and
kissed his forehead and said: ‘My close friend, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) !’ He then
went to the mosque while ‘Umar was addressing the people and
saying: ‘Verily, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) will not die until Allah eradicates the
hypocrites.’ Abu Bakr then spoke by praising Allah and extolling
Him, then he said: “Verily, Allah says: Indeed, you are to die,
and indeed, they are to die (Soorah Az-Zumar: 30) until he
completed the verse. Muhammad is not but a messenger. (Other)
messengers have passed on before him. So if he was to die or be
killed, would you turn back on your heels (to disbelief)? And he
who turns back on his heels... (Soorah Aal Imran: 144) until he
completed the Verse. So whoever used to worship let them know
that Allah is truly Ever-Living, and whosoever worshipped
Muhammad, then verily, Muhammad has indeed died.’ ‘Umar
said: ‘Is it really in the Book of Allah? I did not notice that it was
in the Book of Allah.’ ‘Umar then said: ‘O People, this is Abu
Bakr, and he is the owner of the young Muslims, so pledge
allegiance to him, so they pledged allegiance to him’.”

394

www.sunniconnect.com l 1

Miracles & Merits Of Allah's
Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
Taken from

Al-Bidayah Wan-Nihayah

-----------------------------------------------------------------By: Ibn Katheer
Translation & Researched By: Darussalam Publishers &
Distributers
Copyright: Darussalam Publishers
-----------------------------------------------------------------

www.sunniconnect.com l 2

Downloaded from sunniconnect.com
This book is uploaded and shared online fi sabi lilaah for the
muslims who can’t access Authentic Islamic knowledge due to
various reasons. At Present, on one side, the muslim world is
shattered and filled with wars, poverty, unemployment, shirki
deviant methodologies and misguided scholars and rulers and
on other side all types of immorality is prevalent and easy to
access. So, we sunniconnect.com do our best to make this
heavenly knowledge accessible to all those who want to taste
islam and want to find the solutions to the problems we have
today. If you have money and access, please do buy ‘Original’
copy of this book and support the author, editor, publisher,
distributor, reseller and retailer.

www.sunniconnect.com l 3

Table of Contents
Preface .................................................................................. 14
Publisher’s Preface.............................................................. 20
A Mention of Important Matters that Occurred After the
Death and Before the Burial of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) ......................................... 22
The Story of Saqeefah Banu Sa‘idah .................................... 23
A mention of Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah’s recognition of the correctness
of what AsSiddiq mentioned on the Day of Saqeefah .......... 28
Section Concerning the time that the Messenger of Allah
passed away, his age at the time of death, how he was washed
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and covered, and
the prayer upon him, his burial and the place of his grave ... 34
The description of his ‘Ghusl’............................................... 37
The Description of His Shroud ............................................. 38
The (Funeral) Prayer ............................................................. 39
The Description of His Burial, (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) Where He Was Buried .................................... 41
A mention of the last person who was with him (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). .......................................... 42
When was his Burial ............................................................. 43

www.sunniconnect.com l 4

The description of his Grave ................................................. 43
Mention of What Afflicted the Muslims from the Great
Calamity by His Death .......................................................... 45
A Mention of What Has Been Narrated Regarding
Condolences With Him ......................................................... 47
Section Regarding What Has Been Narrated From the
Knowledge of the People of the Book of the Day of His Death
.............................................................................................. 48
Declaration that the Prophet Did Not Leave a Dinar, nor
Dirham, or Slave Boy, or Slave Girl, or Sheep, or Camel and
Nothing Else Which is Inherited. .......................................... 50
Declaration that the Prophet said, ‘We are not to be inherited’
.............................................................................................. 52
Refutation of the Rafidah with Regard to the Inheritance and
that Which They Used as Proof ............................................ 56
A Mention of His Wives (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and their children - may Allah be pleased with them ... 60
Those Whom the Messenger of Allah Proposed but Did Not
Marry .................................................................................... 69
A Mention of His Slave Girls................................................ 72
A Mention of His Children (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) .............................................................................. 74
A Mention of His Slave Boys and Slave Girls. And a Mention
of His Workers and Entrusted Scribes (of Qur’anic Verses) 78

www.sunniconnect.com l 5

Those Who Served Him from the Companions Other Than His
Mawali (Freed Slaves) .......................................................... 93
Writers of the Revelation ...................................................... 99
The Traits of the Prophet that Were Particular for him in his
Lifetime ............................................................................... 115
A Mention of His Sword ..................................................... 117
A Mention of the Sandals He Used ..................................... 119
The Description of the Wooden Cup of the Prophet ........... 119
Chapter .............................................................................. 120
A mention of what has been narrated concerning the bottle of
antimony [kuhl] that he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would use.................................................................... 120
The Cloak ............................................................................ 120
A mention of his (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
horses and means of transport ............................................. 122
Chapter: The book of Ash-Shama’il ............................... 125
The characteristics of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and a mention of his apparent
and non-apparent traits ........................................................ 125
Narrations concerning his dazzling handsome appearance, after
that which was mentioned previously from his handsome looks
............................................................................................ 126

www.sunniconnect.com l 6

The description of the complexion of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ...................... 127
The description of the face of the Messenger of Allah and a
mention of his features: his parting, forehead, eyebrows, eyes,
nose, mouth, teeth and other features of his looks and
appearance........................................................................... 128
The description of his (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) Hair ............................................................................. 132
That which has been narrated concerning his shoulders,
forearms, armpits, feet and ankles ...................................... 135
Description of his height (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and his fragrant scent .................................................. 136
Description of the Seal of Prophethood which was between his
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) shoulders ...... 139
Compilation of the hadeeths concerning the description of the
Messenger of Allah ............................................................. 142
The hadeeth of Umm Ma‘bad concerning him (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) ......................................... 143
Hadeeth of Hind bin Abu Halah.......................................... 145
His Generosity..................................................................... 165
His Humility ........................................................................ 169
His Humor ........................................................................... 171
His abstinence (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
his disregard of this world, his focus, effort and action for the
world of eternity.................................................................. 174
Concerning his worship (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and his effort in that.................................................... 186
His Courage......................................................................... 189

www.sunniconnect.com l 7

What has been mentioned about his attributes (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the books narrated from the
previous Prophets ................................................................ 192
Miracles/Signs of Prophethood ........................................... 197
Section................................................................................. 213
Miracles on the land ............................................................ 220
His increasing of Samn (butter/ghee) for Umm Sulaim ...... 234
The story of Siddeeq’s bowl ............................................... 237
The story of Jabir (May Allah be pleased with him) and his
father’s debt and his increasing of dates ............................. 241
The story of Salman in the Prophet’s increasing of that piece of
gold to clear his debt ........................................................... 241
Chapter on following of the trees with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ...................... 244
The tree trunk yearning for the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and sadness due to his
departure from it ................................................................. 246
The stone’s glorification (of Allah) in the Prophet’s hand .. 247
Chapter about animals from the miracles of Prophethood; the
story of the chanting camel and its prostration to him and its
complaint to him ................................................................. 249
Hadith of the sheep’s prostration before the Prophet .......... 251
The story of the wolf and its testimony of the Prophethood 252
The story of the beast that was in the house of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and would respect
him and venerate him .......................................................... 253
The story of the lion ............................................................ 253
The Hadith of the gazelle .................................................... 254

www.sunniconnect.com l 8

The Hadith of the lizard despite its Nakarah and Gharabah 255
Hadith of the donkey ........................................................... 258
The Hadith of Al-Hummarah (robin) a well-known bird .... 259
Another Hadith .................................................................... 259
Another Hadith .................................................................... 260
Another Hadith .................................................................... 260
Another Hadith in which is a sign for a Wali from this Ummah
............................................................................................ 261
Another story with the incident of Al-‘Ala’ Ibn Al-Hadrami
............................................................................................ 261
Another story....................................................................... 263
The story of Zaid Ibn Kharijah and his words after his death
............................................................................................ 264
The dead speaking and their wonders ................................. 265
The story of the child that was suffering from seizures ...... 265
Another Hadith .................................................................... 266
Another Hadith in that regard ............................................. 266
Another Hadith .................................................................... 267
Another Hadith .................................................................... 268
Another Hadith .................................................................... 269
Another Hadith .................................................................... 269
Another Hadith .................................................................... 269
Another Hadith .................................................................... 270
Another Hadith .................................................................... 271
Another Hadith .................................................................... 272
Another Hadith .................................................................... 275
www.sunniconnect.com l 9

Another Hadith .................................................................... 277
The issues that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was asked about and then answered in
accordance with the truth in agreement with what the previous
inherited books from the Prophets before him stated.......... 278
Another Hadith with the same meaning .............................. 280
Another Hadith .................................................................... 281
Another Hadith which includes the admittance of the Jews that
he is the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) ............................................................................ 284
Another Hadith .................................................................... 287
A Hadith about the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) answering the question before hearing the questioner
ask ....................................................................................... 297
What the Prophet foretold from the future events in his lifetime
and after it and then occurred just as he mentioned exactly 298
Past hidden and future foreseen matters.............................. 316
Section about the order of the unseen future events after the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ......... 317
And from the book, Signs of Prophethood, in the chapter about
his informing of future unseen matters ............................... 336
Another Hadith .................................................................... 344
A mention of his briefing concerning the tribulations toward
the end of Uthman’s era and the Caliphate of Ali Ibn Abi Talib
............................................................................................ 345
Chapter concerning his briefing about the two arbitrators which
were sent in the era of Ali ................................................... 354
The Prophet’s mention of the exit of the Khawarij ............. 354

www.sunniconnect.com l 10

The Prophet’s mention of Ali Ibn Abi Talib’s murder, and then
it occurred exactly as he mentioned .................................... 357
The Prophet’s mention of the event between Mu‘awiyah and
Al-Hasan and the nobility of his grandson Al-Hasan by
resigning.............................................................................. 358
The Prophet’s mention of the expedition of the sea to Cyprus
which was in the era of Mu‘awiyah .................................... 360
Information of the war against India ................................... 362
Section concerning this Prophet’s mention of the war against
the Turks as it happened ..................................................... 363
Another narration from Abdullah Ibn Salam ...................... 363
The mention of the death of Maimoonah Bint Al-Harith in Sarif
............................................................................................ 364
Narrations regarding the Prophet’s mention of the murder of
Hujr Ibn Adiyy and his companions ................................... 365
Narration of Rafi‘ Ibn Khadeej ........................................... 366
The Prophet’s informing of trials that will occur after his death
at the hands of youngsters from Banu Hashim ................... 366
Murder of Husain Ibn Ali .................................................... 369
The event of Harrah that also occurred during the time of
Yazeed ................................................................................ 375
Another Miracle .................................................................. 380
The Prophetic allusion to the reign of Umar Ibn Abdul-Azeez,
crown of the Umayyads ...................................................... 384
Another narration of questionable authenticity in which Wahb
Ibn Munabbih is praised and Ghailan is disparaged ........... 387
Allusion to Muhammad Ibn Ka‘b Al-Qurazi and his
memorization of the Qur’an and knowledge of Tafseer ..... 387

www.sunniconnect.com l 11

Prophesy about a disturbance that would occur after a hundred
years fulfillment of that prophesy ....................................... 388
Another Hadith .................................................................... 388
His informing about Al-Waleed and the strong threat against
him ...................................................................................... 389
Another Hadith .................................................................... 389
His informing about rulers of Banu Umayyah in general and
alluding to the length of their rule ....................................... 391
Information about twelve leaders that are all from Quraish 394
Information about things that occurred in the Abbasid
Caliphate till today .............................................................. 396
A Hadith purported to be in reference to Imam Malik Ibn Anas
............................................................................................ 397
Another Hadith purported to be in reference to Muhammad Ibn
Idrees AshShafi‘i ................................................................ 397
Another Hadith .................................................................... 399
Another Hadith .................................................................... 399
Another Hadith .................................................................... 400
Another Hadith .................................................................... 401
Another Hadith .................................................................... 401
Another Hadith .................................................................... 402
Miracles of the Messenger of Allah(Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) that are similar to or greater than miracles
of Prophets .......................................................................... 403
About that which is given to Nooh (Peace be upon him).... 405
A story similar to that of Al-Ala’ ........................................ 407
Another similar story........................................................... 408

www.sunniconnect.com l 12

Hadiths on seeking rain ....................................................... 410
About miracle granted to Prophet Saleh (Peace be upon him)
............................................................................................ 415
About the miracle granted to Prophet Ibraheem (Peace be upon
him) ..................................................................................... 416
About miracles of Prophet Moosa (Peace be upon him) ..... 427
Holding of sun for Prophet Yoosha‘ (Joshua) Ibn Noon Ibn
Afrayeem Ibn Yoosuf Ibn Ya‘qoob Ibn Ishaq Ibn Ibraheem
(peace be upon them) .......................................................... 439
Concerning merits granted to Prophet Idrees (Peace be upon
him) such as his being Elevated .......................................... 442
Concerning the virtue of Prophet Dawood (Peace be upon him)
............................................................................................ 445
About Prophet Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) (Solomon) and
that which he was honored with.......................................... 449
About miracles granted to ‘Eesa (Jesus) (Peace be upon him)
............................................................................................ 453
Another story....................................................................... 455
Story of the blind man who Allah restored his vision through
supplication of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) ............................................................................ 457
Another story....................................................................... 457

www.sunniconnect.com l 13

Preface
In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
All praise and thanks be to Allah (SWT), Who revived
knowledge of His religion and caused it to blossom forth after
it had all but disappeared, and Who demolished the false
conjectures of the apostates. I praise Him and I seek refuge with
Him from the sins which weigh upon the backs of mankind. I
worship Him and seek His help and guidance in removing
hindrances and difficulties in the practice of my religion. I bear
witness that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah,
Alone, without partners and I bear witness that Muhammad –
who, by Allah’s leave, brought about the dawn of faith to the
darkness and misguidance which existed in the hearts of
mankind – is the slave and Messenger of Allah. May the
Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon him in perpetuity.
O Allah! We seek Your favor and through You we seek to ward
off affliction. We ask You to protect us and to grant us mercy.
Our Lord! Make not our hearts deviate after You have already
guided us. Make it easy for us to perform our deeds in the way
that You have taught us. Make us grateful for what You have
given us and make plain a path for us which leads to You. Open
up the doors between us and You by which we may arrive
before You. To You belong the keys to the heavens and the
Earth and You are Most Able to do all things.
Among the blessings which Allah (SWT) has bestowed upon
us, the community of Muslims, is that He has made it easy for
us to follow the path of guidance and He has opened the doors
of knowledge by making available to us these new publications,
which present to us the writings of the early scholars and reveal
to us what they said regarding legal verdicts, history, events,

www.sunniconnect.com l 14

information and lessons. These scholars opened a clear beacon
of light for all those Muslims seeking guidance, and they set up
for us a signpost in which there is neither deviation nor
crookedness. Whoever follows it will arrive safely at his
desired destination and whoever diverts from it will be lost
forever. They have written these books and treatises and made
clear to us therein events, information and virtues. Among such
books is this unique work, Al-Bidayah Wan-Nihayah, by the
Imam, the Hafiz, the master scholar of ahadeeth, ‘Imaduddeen
Isma‘eel Ibn Katheer Al-Qurashi – (May Allah be pleased with
him) This book was greeted with approval by the vast majority
of Muslims. No Islamic library would be complete without it.
In it, the author has recorded what Allah, Most High, has made
easy for him about the history of mankind, from the beginning
of creation, starting with the creation of the Throne and the
Kursi (chair), the heavens and the Earth and all that they
contain and all that lies between them, such as the angels, the
jinn and the devils. He also described how Adam was created,
and told the stories of the prophets up to the days of the
Children of Isra’eel and the Days of Ignorance (Jahiliyyah),
until the advent of Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), which heralded the end of Prophethood.
He then recorded his Seerah. Then he recorded the events
which took place up to his own time. He also spoke of the trials
and battles, the signs of the approach of the Hour, then the
sending forth of mankind and the terrors of the Resurrection,
which he described in detail. He then described the Hellfire,
with all its horrors, and Paradise and all the good things
contained therein. He called this particular volume of his book:
AnNihayah Fil-Fitan Wal-Malahim (The Ending in Trials and
Battles). As for the book which is in our hands today, it is AlBidayah.

www.sunniconnect.com l 15

By Allah’s Grace, I came to know Brother Abdul Malik
Mujahid, the general manager of Darussalam Publishing in
Riyadh. He visited me in my humble office in Damascus and
suggested to me the idea of creating a summarized version of
this wonderful book. I prayed for Allah’s Guidance in the
matter and sought help from Him in completing the project.
Allah enabled me to make the acquaintance of a number of
people of knowledge and experience in this field and a plan of
action for the work was written. It consisted of ten principal
points and we then started the task, seeking help from the Lord
of the heavens and the Earth. All of us exerted our utmost
efforts in this task, making repeated revisions and corrections,
until we reached the point where, by Allah’s Permission, we
completed it and it was published in the form which is in your
hands today.
The Plan of Action for This Book:
1. Summarization of the text. This was achieved by concentrating
on the most important events narrated in the book. In doing so,
we took care not to leave out any important details which would
cause loss of meaning or import.
2. We relied on a number of printed and handwritten copies of the
book and in cases where any contradiction or omission was
found, we succeeded in establishing the most accurate and
authentic text.
3. We left out the ahadeeth which proved to be baseless or weak
and confined ourselves to the ahadeeth which are authentic or
hasan and those which are acceptable due to the existence of
other supporting narrations. On rare occasions, when it was
found that there were no other ahadeeth in the chapter, we

www.sunniconnect.com l 16

included some weak ahadeeth whose weakness was not of an
extreme nature.
4. We performed takhreej of the ahadeeth with ascription of the
number of the section and the page, the number of the ahadeeth
and in many cases, the precise location of the hadeeth in the
original source, then the ruling on its authenticity, if it was not
from the Saheehain, because the ahadeeth therein do not require
any ruling on their authenticity and they have been widely
accepted by the Muslim Ummah. As for the ahadeeth in this
book, we have relied on the opinions of the Imams and scholars
of Hadith – including the earlier scholars, the later scholars and
those of the present day. On some occasions, we have recorded
the weak ahadeeth, while making it plain that they are not
authentic. We have not omitted them because the author has
included them in order to warn the people against them due to
their widespread popularity amongst the Muslims in general. In
such cases, we desired not to oppose the author in this effort
and so we left them, at the same time making the scholars’
ruling on them clear, so as to warn the people against them.
5. We summarized the asaneed present in the book, in most cases
mentioning only the Companion who narrated the Hadith, or
the person who reported it from him.
6. We omitted many of the Isra’eeliyyat found in this book which
the author referred to in the preface, where he said: “We do not
record the Isra’eeliyyat except those which the Lawgiver has
permitted, i.e., those which do not contradict the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). These are stories which are neither
believed nor belied and they have been recorded because they
provide details of unclarified narratives that we have, or they
provide names for people and places that have only been

www.sunniconnect.com l 17

mentioned in passing in our Revelation, due to there being no
benefit in specifying them for us. Thus we have reported them
in order to provide extra detail and not with the intention of
citing them as evidence or placing any reliance on them. Only
the Book of Allah and the authentic Sunnah of His Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) may be relied and
depended upon. It is from Allah that we seek help and it is He
in Whom we place our trust; there is no help and no power
except in Allah (SWT) , the Almighty, the All-Powerful, Most
Wise and Most High.
7. In some instances, we have referred back to the original
manuscript in order to verify the wording of a Hadith from its
source. In some cases, the author has combined two narrations
of the same Hadith together and so where this has occurred, we
have noted it and separated the two narrations, placing our own
words between brackets, i.e., (and in another narration…) and
we have also identified the source of the addition in the
footnotes.
8. We have written the Qur’anic Verses in the Uthmani script, in
conformity with the copy of the Qur’an published by AlMadinah Al-Munawwarah Printing Complex.
9. We vowelized the words of many of the ahadeeth in the book
and, in addition, the poetic verses, wherever possible.
10. We mentioned the meters of the poetic verses between
parentheses.
11. We explained the meanings of some difficult or obscure words,
relying on dictionaries, books containing ghareeb ahadeeth and
narrations and other sources.

www.sunniconnect.com l 18

12. We furnished a brief biography of the author, Hafiz Ibn
Katheer, though in reality, he requires no introduction and no
description.
Finally, I ask Allah, Most High, to accept this humble work
from us and to acknowledge it as having been done purely and
sincerely with the aim of pleasing Him and to grant us and our
brothers, who assisted us in the production of this book, pardon
and forgiveness in religious and secular matters. In addition,
we ask Him that He include this work in the weight of our good
deeds on the Day of Resurrection – a Day on which neither
wealth nor sons will benefit anyone – except for those whom
Allah has blessed with pure hearts.
And our final declaration is that all praise and thanks are due to
Allah, and we invoke blessings and peace upon Prophet
Muhammad and upon all his righteous family and Companions
until the Day of Reckoning.
Yoosuf Al-Hajj Ahmad,
The humble slave of Allah.
Damascus, Ash-Sham (Syria).
2nd of Dhul-Hijjah, 1428 A.H.

www.sunniconnect.com l 19

Publisher’s Preface
Verily, all praise and thanks are due to Allah (SWT). We seek
His help and we ask forgiveness from Him. We seek refuge
with Allah from the wickedness in ourselves. Whomsoever
Allah guides, there is none who can misguide him and
whomsoever He sends astray, there is none who can guide him.
I bear witness that none is worthy of worship except Allah and
that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger. He sent him
with guidance and the true Religion and with the light (of truth),
the admonition and wisdom, at a time when no Messengers
were sent for a long period, when there was little religious
knowledge and the people had gone astray, when the Hour was
drawing nearer. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger has
followed the right course, while whoever disobeys Allah
(SWT) and His Messenger erred from it and gone far astray.
The book Al-Bidayah (The Beginning) by the Hafiz, the Imam,
the scholarly critic, Ibn Katheer is an incomparable work
regarding the study of the events and their chronological order,
the knowledge of which he strove hard to acquire. He began by
describing the start of creation – from the creation of the
Throne and the Kursi and the heavens and the Earth and all that
is in them and all that lies between them, such as the angels, the
jinn and the devils and he described the manner of Adam’s
creation. He recounted the stories of the Prophets and the
events that took place therein, up to the times of the Children
of Isra’eel and the Days of Ignorance, which ended with the
advent of the final Prophet, Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). Then he gave a detailed description of
his life and what happened after that, up to the time in which
he lived. He then wrote a separate volume called An-Nihayah
Fil- Fitan Wal-Malahim (The Ending With Trials and Great
Battles).

www.sunniconnect.com l 20

Furthermore, Allah inspired us to undertake the noble task of
making this book easily accessible to both the students and the
scholars and then to translate it into several languages, by
Allah’s Permission.
I suggested to my brother, Yoosuf Al-Hajj, the necessity of
summarizing this book in a suitable manner, through the
omission of unbeneficial repetition, weak ahadeeth, lengthy
poems, etc. I am thankful to Brother Yoosuf for assembling a
team that consisted of Abdul Malik Wadih, Abu Muslim AlJaza’iri, Muwaffeq Khaleel Hammad, and himself. Darussalam
funded the entire project, paying each team member for his
contribution and work. After they completed their portion of
the project, the work then went through numerous people in the
Research Division of Darussalam, who meticulously went
through the work, adding and subtracting materials. After this,
the project went through another round of editing of the Arabic
material before it was sent to the translation department. The
translation was then checked for accuracy and then sent for
editing, resulting in the final project that you see before you.
All praise and thanks be to Allah for allowing us to produce
such a classical work for the first time in the English language.
O Allah! We ask that You bless us with sincerity and success
and that You spread goodness through our hands.
Abdul Malik Mujahid
Jumadal-Oola 1431 A.H.

www.sunniconnect.com l 21

A Mention of Important Matters that
Occurred After the Death and Before
the Burial of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)
From the greatest, most majestic and most blessed acts in the
history of Islam and its people was the pledge of allegiance to
Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) This is because
when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) died, Abu Bakr As-Siddiq led the people in the
morning prayer, and that was the time when the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) recovered
from the hardship of the illness he was experiencing. It was
then that he removed the curtain of the house and looked at the
Muslims while they were in rows in prayer behind Abu Bakr.
The sight pleased him and made him smile (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and even the Muslims
contemplated leaving the prayer they were engaged in due to
their happiness on seeing him. Abu Bakr wanted to move
backward to reach the rows of praying Muslims. However, the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) motioned
to them to stay as they were, and (then) he let the curtain drop
which was their last time with him (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). When Abu Bakr completed the prayer he
entered upon him and said to ‘A’ishah: “I do not see the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) except that part of his illness has been removed from him.
And this is the day of Bint Kharijah, [i.e., one of his two wives
who lived in As-Sunh, east of Madinah].” So he rode a horse
of his and went to his house and the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed away in
midmorning of that day, and it has (also) been said: midday.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
www.sunniconnect.com l 22

When he died, the Companions differed amongst themselves;
there were those who said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) has died. And from them were
those who said: He has not died. So Salim Ibn Ubaid followed
As-Siddiq to As-Sunh, and he announced to him the death of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). Thereupon, As-Siddeeq came back from his house when
the news reached him and then entered the house of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), removed the cover from his face, kissed him and made
sure he was indeed dead. Then he exited to the people and
addressed them from the side of the pulpit, and clarified to them
the passing of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) as we mentioned, and thus ended the
commotion and erased the mystery, and all the people returned
to him.
Thereafter, a group of the Companions gave allegiance to him
in the mosque and a doubt arose in the minds of some of the
Ansar and became embedded into the minds of some of them,
concerning the permissibility of having a Caliph from the
Ansar. Some of them mediated to have a leader from the
Muhajiroon and one from the Ansar until Abu Bakr made clear
to them that the Caliphate is only from the Quraish, so they
returned to him and gathered upon that as we are going to
explain and draw attention to in the following pages.

The Story of Saqeefah Banu Sa‘idah
Imam Ahmad narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas who said: I was
teaching ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, then he found me while I
was waiting for him and that was in Mina in the last Hajj that
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab performed. ‘Abdur- Rahman said:
Verily a man came to ‘Umar and said: Verily, so and so says:

www.sunniconnect.com l 23

Indeed, if ‘Umar were to have died I would have made a pledge
of allegiance to so-and-so. At this, ‘Umar replied: Verily I am
going to stand tonight insha’Allah in front of the people, and I
am going to warn them of this group that wants to steal from
them their affair.
‘Abdur-Rahman said, then I said: O Leader of the Believers, do
not (do that), for this season gathers the rabble of the people
and their mobs, and indeed they are the ones who mostly sit in
your gatherings when you address the people. I fear that you
may give a speech that makes them agitated and they may not
understand it, and they will not put it in its place (i.e., receive
the words in the spirit they are intended to). So, please wait
until you reach Madinah because it is the land of the Hijrah and
Sunnah and it is filled with the scholars of the people and their
noble ones. Then you can say what you will safely say, they
will understand your speech and put it in its place. ‘Umar said:
If I reach Madinah safely I will certainly mention it to the
people, the first time I stand.
We reached Madinah in the end of Dhul-Hijjah and it was a
Friday, I hurried my movements like Sakkatul-A‘ma. Then I
said to Malik: What is Sakkatul- A‘ma (blind way)? He replied:
When one doesn’t care what time he exits, doesn’t know heat
and cold or something like that. I found Sa‘eed Ibn Zaid at the
right corner of the pulpit had already preceded me, so I sat next
to him with his knee touching mine, then ‘Umar suddenly
appeared. When I saw him I said: Tonight, he is going to give
a speech on this that nobody has given upon it prior to him. He
said: Sa‘eed Ibn Zaid denied that and said: What do you think
he will say that nobody else has said?
Then ‘Umar sat on the pulpit, and when the Mu’aththin was
quiet he stood and extolled Allah with what he is deserving of,

www.sunniconnect.com l 24

then said: To proceed: O people, for verily I am going to give
a speech and it has been already decreed for me to give it. I
don’t know for maybe it is near my time, so whoever
comprehends it and understands it then he should convey it to
where his riding animal reaches. And whoever doesn’t
understand it then I don’t allow him to lie against me. Verily,
Allah sent Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, with the Truth and revealed upon him His Book, and in
what Allah revealed to him is the “Verse of stoning.” Thus, we
read it and we comprehended and understood it. The Messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him, stoned and we stoned after him,
so I fear that there may come a time before long upon the people
wherein someone will say: We can’t find “the Verse of stoning”
in the Book of Allah. So they will go astray for leaving an
obligation that Allah, the Most Honored and High, indeed
revealed. Stoning in the Book of Allah is incumbent for the one
who fornicates while being chaste from the men and women,
when the evidence is proved, or pregnancy, or confession.
Indeed we used to read: Don’t abuse your parents because,
erily, it is disbelief for you that you abuse your parents. Indeed
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “Don’t praise me like the Christians praised ‘Eesa
the son of Maryam, for I am only a slave; simply say: the Slave
of Allah and his Messenger.”And it has indeed reached me that
a person amongst you says: If ‘Umar was dead I would give the
pledge of allegiance (Bai‘ah) to so-and-so. No man should be
deluded in what he says, verily, the pledge of allegiance to Abu
Bakr was a sudden occurrence and was accomplished. Indeed
it was like that, however, Allah saved me from its evil. And
there is no one amongst you today that is like Abu Bakr, and he
indeed was from the best of us when the Messenger of Allah
passed away.

www.sunniconnect.com l 25

Verily, ‘Ali and Az-Zubair stayed behind in the house of
Fatimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, and all the Ansar stayed behind from giving the Bai‘ah
and the Muhajiroon supported Abu Bakr. I said to him: O Abu
Bakr, come with us to our brothers from the Ansar. We went
leading them until two righteous men met us, they mentioned
to us what the people had done then they said: Where do you
want to go, O Muhajiroon? I said: We want our brothers from
the Ansar. They replied: It is not incumbent upon you to go near
them, complete your affair, O Muhajiroon. Then I said: By
Allah, we are certainly going to approach them.
We continued until we met them at Saqeefah Banu Sa‘idah;
they were gathered there and suddenly a man wrapped in a
garment appeared. I said: Who is this? They replied: Sa‘d Ibn
‘Ubadah. I said: What is the matter with him? They replied: He
is ill.
When we sat down, their spokesperson stood and praised Allah
with what He deserves and said: To proceed: We are the helpers
of Allah and the army of Islam, and you, O Muhajiroon, are the
party of our Prophet. A group from you has come wanting to
cut us out from our roots and single us out from this affair.
Then, when he became silent I wished to speak and I had
already perfected a speech which I liked and I wanted to say it
in front of Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, and I
flattered him to some extent, and he was wiser and calmer than
me. Abu Bakr said: Hold on. I hated to anger him for he was
more knowledgeable and I venerated him.
By Allah (SWT), he did not leave a word which pleased me
from my speech except that he said it with its essence but better
until he finished. He said: To proceed: As for that which you
mentioned from goodness then you are deserving of it and the

www.sunniconnect.com l 26

Arabs only know this matter (leadership) for this tribe from the
Quraish. They are the most noble people of the Arabs in lineage
and home (Makkah). I have chosen for you one of these two
men, whichever you choose. Then he took my hand and the
hand of Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah, and I did not hate
anything he said apart from this. It was, by Allah, more beloved
to me to advance and have my neck chopped off so sin would
not come near me than to lead a people with Abu Bakr amongst
them except if I was to change my mind at the time of death.
Then a person from the Ansar said: I am her (camel with an itch
or scabies) stick that scratches (her) and the supporting datepalm stick, a leader from us and a leader from you, O people of
the Quraish. I said to Malik: What does this” I am her (camel
with an itch or scabies) stick that scratches (her) and the
supporting date-palm stick, mean”? He replied: It is as though
he said I am its mastermind.
He said, then the commotion grew and the voices were raised
to the extent that we feared bickering. I said: Stretch out your
hand, O Abu Bakr. As he stretched out his hand, and I gave him
the Bai‘ah and the Muhajiroon gave him the Bai‘ah. Thereafter,
the Ansar gave him the Bai‘ah and we fell upon (i.e. urged)
Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah in such a way that a person from them said:
You have killed Sa‘d. I said: Rather, Allah killed Sa‘d. ‘Umar
said: Indeed, by Allah, we find in what we attended a matter
easier than giving Bai‘ah to Abu Bakr. We feared that if we
were to leave the people without a Bai‘ah, they would initiate
a Bai‘ah after us, so either we would give Bai‘ah to them upon
what we did not like, or we differ with them which would result
in evil.
So, whoever gives Bai‘ah without the consultation of the
Muslims then he has no Bai‘ah, and there is no Bai‘ah for the

www.sunniconnect.com l 27

one who fears that he might be killed. Malik said: Ibn Shihab
informed me from ‘Urwah that indeed the two men who met
them were Uwaim Ibn Sa‘idah and Ma‘n Ibn Adiyy. Ibn Shihab
related: Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab said the one who said “I am
her (camel with an itch or scabies) stick that scratches (her) and
the supporting date-palm stick” was Al-Hubab Ibn AlMundhir.

A mention of Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah’s recognition
of the correctness of what AsSiddiq
mentioned on the Day of Saqeefah
Rafi‘ At-Ta’i, the companion of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq in the
Battle of Chains, narrated: I asked him (Abu Bakr) as to what
was said in their Bai‘ah. Abu Bakr said, while he was informing
him about what the Ansar said and what he said to them, and
what ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said to the Ansar, and what he
reminded them, from my leading them (in prayer) with the
command of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, during his illness, then they gave me
(allegiance) due to it and I accepted it from them and I feared
that there would be a trial and then after it apostasy.
This chain of narrations is good and strong and the meaning of
it is that Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, only
accepted leadership because he feared a trial may occur if he
did not accept it. I say: This was at the end of Monday. Then,
when it was the morning of next day (Tuesday), the people
gathered in the mosque and the Bai‘ah was accomplished from
the Muhajiroon and the Ansar together. This was before the
preparation for the burial of the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah upon him.

www.sunniconnect.com l 28

Imam Al-Bukhari narrated from Anas Ibn Malik that he heard
‘Umar’s last sermon when he sat on the pulpit, and that was the
day after the Messenger of Allah had passed away and Abu
Bakr was silent and would not speak. He said: I wish the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, were
alive so he could organize us – what he meant by that was that
he would be the last of them (to die) – so if the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, has indeed died, then Allah has made
amongst you a light which you are guided with. Allah guided
Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and
indeed Abu Bakr is the Companion of the Messenger of Allah
and the second of the two, and he is the most deserving of the
Muslims to be in control of your affairs. So stand and give him
Bai‘ah. A group had already given the Bai‘ah in Saqeefah Bani
Sa‘idah, and the Bai‘ah of the general populace was on the
pulpit.
Az-Zuhri narrated from Anas Ibn Malik: I heard ‘Umar say on
that day to Abu Bakr: Ascend the pulpit, and he continued (to
reason) with him until he ascended. Then everyone gave him
the Bai‘ah.
Abu Sa‘eed narrated that the Messenger of Allah died and the
people gathered in the house of Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah, and among
them were Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. The spokesperson for the
Ansar stood and said: Do you know that the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was from the
Muhajiroon and his Caliph is from the Muhajiroon, and we
were the Ansar (helpers) of the Messenger of Allah and we are
the helpers of his Caliph just as we used to be his helpers. He
said: Then ‘Umar stood up and said: Your spokesperson has
spoken the truth. If you were to say other than that we would
not have given you Bai‘ah, and he took the hand of Abu Bakr
and said: This is your companion so give him Bai‘ah.

www.sunniconnect.com l 29

Thereafter ‘Umar gave him Bai‘ah, and the Muhajiroon and
Ansar gave followed him.
He said: Then Abu Bakr ascended the pulpit and looked at the
faces of the people and when he did not see Az-Zubair, he
summoned him and he came. He said: I said: “The son of the
maternal uncle of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
and his Companion, I apprehended that the group of the
Muslims would split (i.e. differ).” At this, he said: “(There is)
no blame upon you, O Caliph of the Messenger of Allah. Then
he stood and gave him Bai‘ah.
Then Abu Bakr looked at the faces of the people and did not
see ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, so he summoned him. When he came,
he said: “The son of the paternal uncle of the Messenger of
Allah and the one he married to his daughter, I apprehended
that the group of the Muslims would be split.” ‘Ali, may Allah
be pleased with him, said, ‘No blame (shall be upon you), O
Caliph of the Messenger of Allah.” Then he stood up and gave
him Bai‘ah.
In this narration is a point of benefit, and that is the Bai‘ah of
‘Ali bin Abi Talib, whether on the first day or the second day
after the death (of the Prophet). And this is true that ‘Ali did
not leave Abu Bakr at any time, and he did not leave a prayer
from the prayers behind him as we are going to mention. He
accompanied him to Dhul-Qassah when As-Siddeeq went with
his sword unsheathed to kill the apostates.
Whoever contemplates about what we have mentioned, it
becomes apparent to him that there was a consensus of the
Companions – from the Muhajiroon and Ansar – on appointing
Abu Bakr as a leader, and the proof of his (the Messenger of
Allah’s) statement: “Allah and the Believers will insist on Abu

www.sunniconnect.com l 30

Bakr.” It is made plain to him that the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, did not explicitly
mention any individual for the Caliphate, neither for Abu Bakr
– as a group mentioned from Ahlus-Sunnah – nor for ‘Ali – as
a group claimed from the Rafidah. However he gave a strong
indication that is understood by everyone who has a brain and
intellect in favor of Abu Bakr as we mentioned and we will also
mention later. Similarly, it has been affirmed in the Saheehain
in the Hadith of Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah, from his father, from Ibn
‘Umar: Verily, when ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab was stabbed it was
said to him, “Would you not appoint for us a successor, O
leader of the Believers?” He replied, “If I were to appoint for
you a successor then somebody who is better than me did - i.e.
Abu Bakr. And if I did not then somebody who is better than
me did not” - i.e. the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him. Ibn ‘Umar said, “I knew when he said
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, that he would not
appoint a successor.”
It was narrated by Ibn ‘Abbas: Indeed, when Al- ‘Abbas and
‘Ali came out after being with the Messenger of Allah, and a
man said: How did the Messenger of Allah woke up this
morning? ‘Ali replied: He woke up better (or cured) with the
praise of Allah. Then Al-‘Abbas said: Indeed you are the slave
of a staff (a type of rebuke) after three nights, indeed I know
death in the faces of Bani Hashim, and I see death in the face
of the Messenger of Allah. So let us take ourselves to him and
let us ask him, with whom is the leadership? If it is with us then
we know, and if it is with other than us, then he will give him
commands in our regard. ‘Ali said: I am not going to ask him,
by Allah, if he does not give it to us then the people will never
ever give it to us. I say: And this would be on Monday, the day
of his death, so this proves that he – may salutations be upon
him – passed away without giving instructions (Wasiyyah)

www.sunniconnect.com l 31

about leadership. And in the Saheehain, Ibn ‘Abbas narrated
that, verily, the calamity in every sense of the word is what
prevented the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, from writing the will (Wasiyyah). We have
already mentioned that he requested to write for them a book
(or message) they would not go astray after it. When they
increasingly began raising their voices and differing near him,
he said: “Go away from me, for that which I am in is better than
that which you are calling me to.” And we already mentioned
that he said after that: “Allah and the Believers will insist on
Abu Bakr (as a leader).”
In the Saheehain Ibrahim At-Taimi narrated from his father:
‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (May Allah be pleased with him) addressed
us saying: “Whoever claims that we have something which we
read which is not in the Book of Allah, and this Scripture
(which is attached to his sword), in it are the ages of the camels
(eligible for Zakat) and matters from Jirahat (rules regarding
injuries) - then he has indeed lied. And what is written on this
paper, (wherein) the Prophet said, “Madinah is a sanctuary
from (the mountain of) ‘Air to Thawr, therefore, whoever
innovates (in it) an heresy or commits a sin, or gives shelter to
such an innovator, will incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and
all the people; and none of his compulsory or optional good
deeds of worship will be accepted and the asylum granted by
any Muslim is to be secured by all the Muslims even if it is
granted by one of the lowest social status among them. And
whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect will incur the Curse
of Allah, the angels and all the people, and his compulsory and
optional good deeds of worship will not be accepted. And any
freed slave who takes as masters (befriends) people other than
his own real masters who freed him without taking the
permission of the latter, will incur the Curse of Allah, the

www.sunniconnect.com l 32

angels and all the people, and his compulsory and optional
good deeds of worship will not be accepted.”
This Hadith, which is affirmed in the Saheehain and other than
them, ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him)refutes a group
from the Rafidah in their claim that the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, made a testament of
leadership for him. If it was as they claimed, then none from
among the Companions would have repelled that. They were
more obedient to Allah and his Messenger in his life and after
his death than to oppose him and choose other than whom he
had selected, and leave behind whom he had selected with his
words; nay never and why (would they)? Whoever assumes this
about the Companions y then he has ascribed them all to
disobedience and gathering upon opposition to the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and
opposing him in his ruling and his text. And whoever from the
people reaches this level (of disobedience) then he has left the
fold of Islam and has disbelieved by consensus of the Imams of
Islam and the spilling of his blood is more permissible than the
spilling of alcohol. Thereafter, if ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (May
Allah be pleased with him)had a text, then why did he not use
it as an evidence against the Companions proving the
affirmation of his principality over them and his leadership of
them? If he couldn’t convey the evidence he had with him, then
he would be weak and the weak are not suitable for leadership.
And if he was able but did not do so, then he would be a
betrayer and the disobedient betrayer is retired from leadership.
And if he did not know of the existence of the proof, then he
would be ignorant; thereafter he knew and learned of it
afterward. This is impossible, a lie and misguidance.
This is only (seen as) good in the eyes of the ignorant, common
people and the deluded creatures. Shaitan beautifies it for them

www.sunniconnect.com l 33

without a proof or evidence, rather with purely
(unsubstantiated) claims, guessing, lying and slander. I seek
refuge in Allah from the confusion, disgrace, blunder and
disbelief they are upon. And I seek a place of refuge with Allah
by holding on to the Sunnah and Qur’an, and death upon Islam
and Eemaan (faith), dying upon firmness and certainty, and
filling the scales (with good deeds) and salvation from the fire,
and success with paradise. Verily, He is Noble, the Bestower
of bounties, Merciful, the Most Gracious.
In this sound Hadith in the Saheehain narrated by ‘Ali, which
we mentioned earlier, is a refutation of the liars from the people
of Turuq (Soofiyyah) and ignorant story-tellers against their
claim that the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, made a Wasiyyah (testament) to ‘Ali with many things.
They narrate (in a) lengthened (form), such as: “O ‘Ali, do this.
O ‘Ali, don’t do that. O ‘Ali, whoever did this was a such-andsuch” with weak wordings and foolish meanings, and most of
them are weak that don’t deserve to be written. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.

Section Concerning the time that the
Messenger of Allah passed away, his age at
the time of death, how he was washed (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
covered, and the prayer upon him, his burial
and the place of his grave
There is no difference of opinion that he passed away on
Monday. Ibn ‘Abbas said: The Prophet was born on Monday
and he became a Prophet on Monday. He left Makkah as a
migrant on Monday, he entered Madinah on Monday and he
died on Monday. (Narrated by Imam Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi ).
www.sunniconnect.com l 34

Anas said: The last time I saw the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him, was on Monday. He opened the curtains while the
people were praying behind Abu Bakr, then I looked at his face
and it was though it was like the page of a book. The people
wanted to turn around, but he indicated to them to stay put.
Then he closed the gap that was between the two curtains and
passed away by the end of the day.
Abu Nu‘aim Al-Fadl Ibn Dukain said the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him, passed away on Monday in the beginning
of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal of the 11th year since his arrival in
Madinah. And Ibn ‘Asakir also mentioned it.
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said: The Messenger
of Allah passed away on Monday after 11 nights had passed
from Rabee‘ ul-Awwal.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that when the Messenger of Allah
completed the Farewell Pilgrimage he came to Madinah and
stayed there for the rest of Dhul-Hijjah and Muharram and
Safar. And he died on Monday after 10 nights had passed from
Rabee‘ ul- Awwal.
Point of benefit: Abul Qasim As-Suhaili says in Ar-Rawd, the
summary of which is that the occurrence of his death on
Monday, the 12th of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal in Year 11, cannot be
possible. This is because he stood on the Day of ‘Arafah in the
Farewell Pilgrimage in Year 10 A. H., on Friday, which means
that the start of Dhul- Hijjah was on Thursday. Therefore upon
the assumption that the months are calculated completely or
incomplete or some of them complete and others incomplete, it
cannot be imagined that Monday was the 12th of Rabee‘ ulAwwal.

www.sunniconnect.com l 35

The argument against this opinion has become well-known. A
group has tried to answer it and it is not possible to answer it
except in one way, and that is the difference in time zones (or
moon sightings). The people of Makkah saw the crescent on
Thursday and as for the people of Madinah, they didn’t see it
except on Friday night.
The statement of ‘A’ishah and others supports this: The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, exited five days before
the end of Dhul-Qa‘adah – i.e. from Madinah – for the Farewell
Pilgrimage. And upon what we mentioned that has to be on
Saturday and not what Ibn Hazm claimed that he exited on
Thursday because there were more than five days left without
a doubt. And it is not possible that he left on Friday because
Anas said: The Messenger of Allah prayed Dhuhr (4 units) and
‘Asr in Dhul-Hulaifah (2 units). So it has to be that he left on
Saturday with five days left.
Thus based on this, the people of Madinah only saw the
crescent of Dhul-Hijjah on Friday night. And if the first of
Dhul-Hijjah according to the people of Madinah was on Friday
and the months are calculated as complete months (30 days
because the lunar month is either 29 or 30 days) after it, the first
of Rabee‘ ul- Awwal on Thursday, which is Monday the 12th.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from the Hadith of Malik
from Rabee‘ah Ibn Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman from Anas Ibn Malik
that the Messenger of Allah was not very tall and not short. And
he was not very white nor brown, and he was not curly haired
nor was he straight-haired. Allah sent him at the start of 40
years (of age), then he stayed in Makkah for 10 years and in
Madinah for 10 years. And Allah took his soul at the beginning

www.sunniconnect.com l 36

of 60 years and he did not have on his head or in his beard 20
white hairs.
Anas narrated: The Prophet died when he was 63 years old, and
Abu Bakr died when he was 63 years old and ‘Umar died when
he was 63 years old.
Ibn ‘Abbas: The Messenger of Allah was sent when he was 40
years old. He stayed in Makkah for 13 years as commanded by
Allah. Then he was ordered with migration so he migrated for
10 years and died when he was 63 years old.

The description of his ‘Ghusl’
We have already mentioned that the Companions y were
engaged with the Bai‘ah of Abu Bakr for the whole of Monday
and some of Tuesday. Then, when it was established, and
firmly accomplished, they began thereafter to prepare washing
and covering the body of the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him following Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with
him)in everything that was problematic for them.
‘A’ishah, the Mother of the Believers, said that when they
wanted to wash body of the Prophet they said: We don’t know
(whether we) should strip the Messenger of Allah from his
clothing as we strip our dead or wash him with his clothes on.
When they differed, Allah put them to sleep to the extent that
all of them had their chins on their chests. Then a voice
addressed them from the direction of the house but they didn’t
know who he was: “Wash the Messenger of Allah with his
clothes on.” Then they stood by the Messenger of Allah and
washed him with his clothes on. They poured water on his shirt
and they rubbed him with the shirt without using their hands.
And ‘A’ishah used to say: If I was to take my affair that I left,

www.sunniconnect.com l 37

nobody would have washed the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him, except his wives.
Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab narrated that ‘Ali said: I washed the
Messenger of Allah, then I went to check what was left of him
but I didn’t see anything. He was clean while alive and dead.
Ibn ‘Abbas said: When the grave was dug and the people had
prayed Dhuhr, Al-‘Abbas began to wash the body of the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him. He erected a curtain
from thick Yemeni clothing in the middle of the house. Then
he entered and called ‘Ali and Al-Fadhl. And if he went to pass
the water to them he would call Abu Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith.
Then he would bring it while the men from Bani Hashim were
behind the curtain. And whoever was allowed to enter from the
Ansar were the ones who asked my father, from them was:
‘Aws Ibn Khawli (May Allah be pleased with him)

The Description of His Shroud
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said: The Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was placed
in a veil, then it was taken from him. Al-Qasim said: Verily,
the remains of that cloth are with me.
As narrated by ‘A’ishah, the Messenger of Allah was wrapped
in three white Sahooli (the name of a village in Yemen)
garments, without a shirt and turban.
‘A’ishah said: The Messenger of Allah was wrapped in three
white Sahooli garments of cotton, without a shirt and turban.
As for the cloak, it was only assumed by the people. I only
bought a cloak for him to be wrapped in, however it was
abandoned. ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Bakr took it said, “I am going

www.sunniconnect.com l 38

to take it so that I am wrapped in it.” Thereafter he said, “If
Allah was pleased with it for his Prophet he would have
wrapped him in it.” So he sold it and gave the proceeds to
charity.

The (Funeral) Prayer
Ibn Mas‘ood said that regarding the will of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that the men of his
household should wash him, and that he said: “Wrap me in
these clothes of mine, or in Yemeni, or the white of Egypt.”
“When they wrapped him they put him at the edge of his grave
and then left him, in order to let the angels pray on him.
Thereafter, male members of his household entered and prayed
on him. Then the people after them individually.” This Hadith
is in its complete form and its authenticity is doubtful.
‘Ikrimah narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas: When the Messenger of
Allah died the men were allowed to enter, who prayed on him.
Then the women were allowed to enter and prayed upon him.
Thereafter the children were allowed to enter and they prayed
upon him. Then the slaves were allowed to enter and prayed
upon him; nobody led them in prayer on the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him.
This action - which is their prayer upon him individually
without anybody leading them - is a matter upon which there is
a consensus, with no one differing on it. The reason for this has
been differed over, so if the Hadith that we mentioned from Ibn
Mas‘ood is authentic, it would have been a clear text in the
matter, and it would be purely (a matter of) worship for which
the reason is hard to understand. It is not for anyone to say:
They prayed upon him in this manner because they didn’t have
an Imam, because we have already mentioned that they began

www.sunniconnect.com l 39

to prepare him (for burial) – (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) – after the completion of the Bai‘ah of Abu Bakr
(May Allah be pleased with him)
Some of the scholars mentioned that nobody led them in the
funeral prayer on the Messenger of Allah. The reason was that
everyone could experience the prayer from himself upon him,
and the repetition of the Muslims’ prayer on him time after
time, from every individual from the groups of the
Companions: their men, women, children and even the male
and female slaves.
The brief outline of what As-Suhaili said was: Verily, Allah
already mentioned that He and His angels send prayers upon
him, and He commanded everyone from the Believers to send
prayers upon him.
Therefore it was obligatory upon everyone to initiate the prayer
on him by himself, and the prayer upon him after his death is
from this type. He said: And also the angels are leaders for us
in that. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
The followers of Ash-Shafi‘i differed over the legality of prayer
on his grave for other than the Companions. So it has been said:
Yes (it is permissible), because his body - (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) - is fresh in his grave, because Allah has
made it impermissible for the earth to consume the bodies of
the Prophets As has been mentioned in the Hadith in the Sunan
and others, so he is like the one who died today. And others
said: He should not, because the Salaf from those after the
Companions didn’t do it, and if it was permissible they would
have proceeded and persevered upon it. And Allah (SWT)
knows best.

www.sunniconnect.com l 40

The Description of His Burial, (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) Where He
Was Buried
‘A’ishah narrated: “When the Messenger of Allah died they
differed with regards to his burial, so Abu Bakr said: I heard
from the Messenger of Allah a matter which I have not
forgotten. He said: “Allah does not take a Prophet except in the
place that he likes to be buried.” Bury him in the place of his
bed Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab said: ‘A’ishah mentioned to her
father a dream and he was from the best in interpretation. She
said: “I saw three moons fall in my house.” Then he said to her:
“If you have told the truth about your dream, three people from
the best of the people on this Earth will be buried in your
house.” When the Messenger of Allah passed away and was
buried there, he said: “O ‘A’ishah, this is the best of your
moons.”
In the Saheehain, she was quoted as saying: “The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah upon him, passed away in my
house and between my neck and chest. And Allah mixed my
saliva with his in the last hour of this world and the first hour
of the Hereafter.”
In Saheeh Al-Bukhari it was narrated by ‘A’ishah: I heard the
Messenger of Allah in the illness that he died from say: “May
Allah curse the Jews and the Christians, they took the graves of
their Prophets as places of worship.” ‘A’ishah said: “If it wasn’t
for that, his grave would have been prominent, except that he
feared that his grave would be taken as a place of worship.”
Anas Ibn Malik narrated: “When the Messenger of Allah
passed away there was a man in Madinah who would make the
Lahd (niche toward the direction of the Qiblah in the grave, in

www.sunniconnect.com l 41

which the deceased is placed on his right then bricks are placed
behind him) and another would dig a Dareeh (a regular trench
type grave). They said: “Let us make Istikharah (a prayer of 2
units, after which one supplicates a particular prayer seeking
guidance toward the correct decision by the decree of Allah)
and send for them, and the one who is slower will be left.” Then
they were sent for and the one who would make the Lahd came
first, so they made a Lahd for the Prophet.
Ibn ‘Abbas said: “A red velvet sheet was placed in the grave of
the Prophet, peace be upon him.”
Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab narrated: ‘Ali said: I washed the
Prophet, peace be upon him, then I went to look to see what
was left from the signs of the deceased and I didn’t see
anything, and he was clean while living and while dead. He
said: Four from amongst the people were in charge of his burial
– (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – ‘Ali, Al‘Abbas, Al-Fadhl and Saleh, the servant of the Prophet. And a
Lahd was made for the Prophet and bricks were erected on it.
Al-Baihaqi mentioned from some of the scholars: That nine
bricks were erected in his Lahd.

A mention of the last person who was with
him (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).
Bahz narrated that he witnessed the prayer on the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and the Companions
said: How do we pray upon him? He replied: Enter one after
the other. So they entered from one door, prayed on him, then
left from the other door. He said: When he was placed in his
Lahd, Al-Mugheerah said: Part of his feet are showing which
they didn’t attend to. They said: Enter and cover them. He

www.sunniconnect.com l 42

entered the Lahd and entered his hand and touched his feet.
Then he said: Pile the soil on top of me, so they did until it
reached the middle of his chin, then he left. And he would say:
I am the last of you with the Messenger of Allah.

When was his Burial
‘A’ishah, the Mother of the Believers, narrated: Verily, the
Messenger of Allah passed away on Monday and he was buried
on the night before Wednesday. It has already been mentioned
in a similar way in more than one Hadith. And this is what is
known from more than one Imam from the Salaf and the Khalaf
(those after the first three generations of Muslims); from them
are Sulaiman Ibn Tarkhan At-Taimi, and Ja‘far Ibn Muhamad
As-Sadiq, Ibn Ishaq, Moosa Ibn Uqbah and other than them.

The description of his Grave
It is known through tawatur, that he – (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was buried in ‘A’ishah’s personal house,
east of his mosque in the west corner in the direction of the
Qiblah from the house. Then Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased
with him) was buried after him in it, then ‘Umar (May Allah be
pleased with him).
Sufyan At-Tammar narrated that he informed him that he saw
the Prophet’s grave raised. Al-Bukhari was the only one who
mentioned it. Abu Dawood narrated from Al-Qasim: I entered
upon ‘A’ishah, and said to her: O mother, show me the grave
of the Messenger of Allah and his two Companions. She
showed me the three graves not elevated or level with the
ground leveled with a red coating (in that order): The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. Then Abu Bakr

www.sunniconnect.com l 43

(May Allah be pleased with him) and then ‘Umar (May Allah
be pleased with him)
Abu Dawood was the only one who mentioned it.
Al-Hakim narrated it and Al-Baihaqi related it from Al-Qasim:
Then I saw the Prophet at the forefront and Abu Bakr’s head
between the shoulders of the Prophet and ‘Umar’s head near
the leg of the Prophet, peace be upon him.
Al-Baihaqi said: This narration proves that their graves were
flat, because pebbles are only stable on a flat surface. This is
strange from Al-Baihaqi,, for, verily, there is no mention in the
narration of pebbles in totality, upon that assumption it is
possible to be raised while pebbles were on it by using clay and
similar materials.
Al-Bukahri narrated from Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah from his father,
who said: When the wall collapsed upon them in the time of
Al-Waleed Ibn Abdul- Malik, they began to rebuild it. Then a
foot became apparent to them, so they became startled. Then
they thought that it was the foot of the Prophet and none from
amongst them knew what it was until ‘Urwah said to them: No,
by Allah, it is not the foot of the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, it is only the foot of ‘Umar.
Hisham narrated from his father, from ‘A’ishah that she made
a will to ‘Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair, “do not bury me with them.
Bury me with my companions in Al-Baqee‘.
He said: Al-Waleed Ibn Abdul-Malik began to build a mosque
in Damascus when he came to power in the Year 86 A.H. And
he wrote to his representative in Madinah, the son of his
paternal uncle ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-Azeez to expand the mosque

www.sunniconnect.com l 44

of Madinah, so he expanded it even from the side of the market.
Then the house of the Prophet became part of it.
Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir narrated with his chain of narrations from
Zadhan Mawla Al-Furafisah and he is the one who built the
Prophet’s Mosque in the days of ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-Azeez’s
rule of Madinah. Then he mentioned from Salim Ibn ‘Abdullah
similar to what Al-Bukhari mentioned, and he spoke about the
description of the graves just as Abu Dawood narrated.

Mention of What Afflicted the Muslims from
the Great Calamity by His Death
Al-Bukhari narrated from Anas, who said: When the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, became ill the pain
began to overwhelm him. Fatimah said: “Oh the pain, my
father!” He replied: “There is no pain for your father after
today.” When he died, she said: “O my father, he answered the
call of a Lord that called him. O father, the one whose abode is
the highest level in Paradise. O father, to Jibraeel we announce
the death.” When he was buried, Fatimah said: “O Anas, does
it please you that you throw soil on the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him?” Thabit would cry
if he mentioned this Hadith and it would seem that his ribs
would cross one another. This is not deemed to be wailing,
rather it is by the way of mentioning his true virtues and we
only mentioned this because the Messenger of Allah forbade
wailing.
Anas narrated: “When the Messenger of Allah arrived in
Madinah, everything was lit up on the day of his arrival; when
on the day he died everything was darkened on his death.” He
said, “We had not removed our hands from the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, (while removing the soil away from

www.sunniconnect.com l 45

his body) before our hearts felt different.” Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b
narrated: “We were with the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him, and our faces were the same, but when he was taken
we looked here and there.” Anas said: “Once the Messenger of
Allah went to visit Umm Aiman and I went with him, andI
offered him some drink there. Either he was fasting or he did
not want it, so he refused to take it. Umm Aiman used to make
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, laugh. After the
death of the Prophet, peace be upon him, Abu Bakr, may Allah
be pleased with him, asked ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with
him: “Come with us to visit Umm Aiman”; when we reached
there she started crying. They asked her: “What makes you cry?
That which is with Allah is better for the Messenger of Allah.”
She said: “By Allah, I don’t cry because I didn’t know that what
is with Allah is better for his Messenger; I cry because the
revelation has ceased from the sky.” Thus she drove them to
cry, and they began to cry. And only Imam Muslim narrated it.
Abu Moosa narrated from the Prophet, peace be upon him, who
he said: “Verily, if Allah wishes to have mercy upon a nation
from His slaves He takes its Prophet before them, then He
makes him a role model and a Salaf (predecessor) for it, which
he will bear witness for. And if He wishes to destroy a nation
He will punish it while its Prophet is alive and then cause it to
perish, while he is looking at them with a sympathetic eye with
its destruction when they rejected him and disobeyed his
command.” Aws Ibn Aws narrated: The Messenger of Allah
said: “From the best of your days is Friday, on this day Adam
was created, on this day he was taken, on this day is the blowing
(in the trumpet) and on this day is the collapsing (of the
creation). So send abundant prayers upon me on this day,
because your prayers will be conveyed to me.” They said: “O
Messenger of Allah, how can our prayers reach you when you
have perished? (.i.e. become decomposed bones).” He replied:

www.sunniconnect.com l 46

“Verily, Allah has made it impermissible for the earth to
consume the bodies of the Prophets.”

A Mention of What Has Been Narrated
Regarding Condolences With Him
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, narrated: The
Messenger of Allah opened a door between him and the people
or opened a curtain suddenly and the people were praying
behind Abu Bakr. Then he praised Allah upon the good state
he saw them in; hoping that Allah will succeed him with what
he saw. Then he said, “O people; if anybody from the people
or from the Believers is afflicted by a misfortune then let him
remember his calamity by me (i.e. my death) instead of the
calamity caused by other than me (i.e. other than my death).
For none of my Ummah will be afflicted by a calamity greater
than my calamity (i.e. the calamity caused by my death is a
greater misfortune upon everyone due to the discontinuation of
revelation and the differing and other evils).
Abu Hazim Al-Madani narrated: Verily, when Allah took the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, the Muhajiroon
entered in groups praying upon him and then leaving. The
Ansar also entered in the same way. Thereafter the people of
Madinah entered. When the men finished, the women entered.
And there were voices of despair from them, as usually occurs
from them. After that there was deep silence in the house. Then
suddenly a person said: Verily in Allah is comfort from every
deceased, and a recompensation from every disaster, and a
replacement for everything lost. And the repaid is the one who
is repaid with reward, and the unfortunate is the one who is not
repaid with reward.

www.sunniconnect.com l 47

Section Regarding What Has Been Narrated
From the Knowledge of the People of the
Book of the Day of His Death
Jareer Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Bajali narrated: I was in Yemen and I
met two men from the people of Yemen, Dhu Kala‘ and Dhu
Amr. I began to inform them from the Messenger of Allah.
Then they said to me: If what you say is true then your
companion has been gone since three years. He said: So I
advanced and they advanced; while we were on the journey we
saw some travelers before Madinah so we asked them, and then
they replied: The Messenger of Allah has died and he left Abu
Bakr as a successor and the people are righteous. He said: Then
they said to me: Inform your friend that we came and that we
may return if Allah, the Most Honored and High, wills. He said:
And we returned to Yemen. When I arrived I informed Abu
Bakr of their talk. He said: If only you could bring them!
Then after sometime, Dhu Amr said to me: O Jareer, you have
a high repute over me, and verily I am going to tell you
something. Verily, you, O people of the Arabs, you will always
be in a state of goodness if and when your leader dies you come
under the command of another. And if it is by the sword, then
you will become kings and have the anger of kings and you will
be pleased like the pleasure of kings.
Ka‘b Ibn Adiyy narrated: I came to the Prophet, peace be upon
him, in a delegation from the people of Al-Heerah. He
explained the basics of Islam to us and we accepted Islam.
Thereafter we went back to AlHeerah, and it wasn’t long that
(news) of the death of the Prophet came to us. My companions
began to doubt and they said: If he was a Prophet he wouldn’t
have died. I said that have Prophets died before. I stayed firm
upon my Islam.

www.sunniconnect.com l 48

Then I left and headed for Madinah, and I came across a monk
and we would not be certain of a matter without him (i.e.
without affirming from him). I said to him: Tell me about a
matter that I intended, part of which has occurred in my chest.
He said: Tell me any name from the names. I told him the name
of Ka‘b. He said: Throw it in this big book, which he had
brought. So I threw Ka‘b in it, then he looked in it and suddenly
the description of the Prophet as I saw him, and suddenly he
died at the time he died in.
He said: After this, I became stronger in my faith and went to
Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) and informed him
and stayed with him. Thereafter he sent me to Al-Muqawqis (a
leader in Egypt) and then I returned. Later, ‘Umar also sent me.
I came to him with his message and I came to him during the
Battle of Al-Yarmook and I didn’t know of it. He said to me:
Do you know that the Romans have killed the Arabs and
humiliated them? I replied: No, I don’t know. He asked: Why?
I replied: Verily, Allah promised his Prophet that He will make
him victorious over every religion, and He doesn’t break His
promise. He said: Verily, your Prophet has told you the truth,
the Romans are going to die as Allah killed ‘Ad. He said: Then
he asked me about the faces of the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
When I told him about them, he sent a gift to ‘Umar, may Allah
be pleased with him, and to them. And from those whom he
sent gifts were ‘Ali, ‘Abdur- Rahman and AzZubair and I think
he mentioned Al-‘Abbas. Ka‘b said: I was a partner with ‘Umar
in clothing in Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic era of ignorance). And
when the register was invented, he made me from the people of
‘Adiyy Ibn Ka‘b. This is a rare narration (ghareeb), in it is a
great story and it is authentic.

www.sunniconnect.com l 49

Declaration that the Prophet Did Not Leave a
Dinar, nor Dirham, or Slave Boy, or Slave
Girl, or Sheep, or Camel and Nothing Else
Which is Inherited.
Rather, he left a piece of land all of which he gave in charity
for the sake of Allah. For, verily, the world in its totality is not
worthy in his sight – as it is with Allah – to strive for or leave
after him as a charity, may the prayers of Allah and peace be
upon him and his brothers from the Prophets and Messengers,
and many salutations forever till the Day of Judgment.
Al-Bukhari narrated: From Amr Ibn Al-Harith, who said: The
Messenger of Allah did not leave a Dinar, nor Dirham, nor
slave boy, nor slave except for his white mule which he used to
ride, and his weapons and land that he gave to the wayfarers in
charity.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), narrated: The
Messenger of Allah did not leave a Dinar, nor Dirham, nor
slave girl, nor slave boy, nor sheep or camel.
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her), said: The Messenger
of Allah passed away while his shield was held ransom with a
Jew for 30 (Sa‘ of wheat).
Anas narrated: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
was invited to wheat bread and some soup. Anas said: I indeed
heard the Messenger of Allah say: “By the One in Whose
Hands is my soul, the family of the Prophet have never had a
Sa’ (ancient measure of approx. 2.5 kg) of wheat, nor a Sa’ of
dates.” And he had on that day nine wives and his shield was
held in ransom with a Jew in Madinah and he took food from
him. Then he couldn’t find anything to free it until he died.
www.sunniconnect.com l 50

Ibn ‘Abbas: That the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, looked at Uhud then said: “By the One in Whose
Hands is my soul, it would not please me that the family of the
Prophet had the amount of Uhud in gold; I would spend it in
the way of Allah....” He said: Then he died and he did not leave
a Dinar, or Dirham, or slave boy, or slave girl and he left his
shield with a Jew for 30 Sa’ of wheat.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: ‘Umar entered upon the Prophet, peace be
upon him, while he was on a rug that had left a mark on his
body. He said: “O Prophet of Allah, were you to use a rug softer
than this!” He replied: “What need do I have for this world?
My example and that of this world is nothing but the example
of a traveler who traversed on a hot day. Then he took shade
under a tree for a part of the day and then continued and left it.”
Ahmad was the only one who mentioned this and its chain is
good. And it has a supporting evidence in the Hadith of Ibn
‘Abbas from ‘Umar, about the two women that allied against
the Messenger of Allah and the story of Al-’Eela’. And the
Hadith will be mentioned as well as others similar to it
concerning his abstinence and his leaving of this world and his
turning away from it and his rejection of it. This is what proves
what we have said that he did not have this world in his mind,
i.e., he was not preoccupied with it.
Narrated by Malik Ibn Mighwal from Talhah, who said: I asked
‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Awfa: Did the Prophet make a Wasiyyah?
He said: No. I said: How has the will been made obligatory on
the people, or commanded with it? He replied: He made a
Wasiyyah: the Book of Allah, the Most Honored, Most High.

www.sunniconnect.com l 51

Declaration that the Prophet said, ‘We are not
to be inherited’
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him, said: “My inheritance is not to be divided; neither
Dinar nor Dirham. That which I leave behind after spending on
my wives and wages for my workers is for charity.” The
wording is that of Al-Bukhari.
‘A’ishah, the Mother of the Believers, narrated: Verily, when
the Messenger of Allah passed away, the wives of the Prophet
wanted to send ‘Uthman (May Allah be pleased with him) to
Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) to ask him for their
inheritance. ‘A’ishah said: Did not the Messenger of Allah say:
“We are not to be inherited, that which we leave is for charity?”
She also narrated that Fatimah and Al-‘Abbas came to Abu
Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him)asking for their
inheritance from the Messenger of Allah and they at the time
were seeking his land from Fadak and his share from Khaibar.
Abu Bakr told them: I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, say: “We are not to be
inherited, that which we leave is for charity, only the family of
Muhammad eats from this wealth.” Abu Bakr said: By Allah, I
will not leave a matter that I saw the Messenger of Allah do
with it, except that I would do it. The narrator said: Then
Fatimah boycotted him and did not speak to him till she died.
‘A’ishah also narrated similar to what has preceded, with the
addition that when she passed away ‘Ali buried her at night
without informing Abu Bakr and prayed upon her. ‘Ali had a
status with the people during the life of Fatimah. When she died
the people condoned him, so he sought to make amends with
Abu Bakr and to make Bai‘ah with him, as he had not made

www.sunniconnect.com l 52

Bai‘ah with him earlier. He sent a word to Abu Bakr saying,
“Come to us and no one else should come to us with you,” and
he hated that ‘Umar would come to him for what he knew of
his harshness.
‘Umar said: “By Allah, do not enter upon them alone.” Abu
Bakr replied: “And what may they do to me? By Allah, I will
certainly go to them.” Then Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased
with him) left to meet him and ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with
him) testified and said: “We indeed know of your virtues that
Allah has given you. And we did not compete with you in the
good that Allah has given you, however you had taken control
of the matter. And we saw due to our kinship with the
Messenger of Allah that we have a share in this affair.” ‘Ali
continued to talk until Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with
him) cried.
He replied: “By the One in Whose Hands is my soul, indeed I
prefer to hold ties with the kinship of the Messenger of Allah
more than keeping my own ties of kinship. And as for that
which has occurred between you and I in (the matter of) this
wealth then I did not stray from goodness in this regard. And I
did not leave a matter that the Messenger of Allah performed
except that I did it.” ‘Ali said: “Your time for the Bai‘ah is
tonight.”
When Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) prayed
Dhuhr he ascended the pulpit and testified and mentioned the
affair of ‘Ali not attending the Bai‘ah as well as the excuse that
he mentioned. ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) testified
and then venerated the right of Abu Bakr and mentioned his
virtues and his precedence (in accepting Islam). He mentioned
that competing with Abu Bakr was not what made him do what
he did. Then he got up, came to Abu Bakr (May Allah be

www.sunniconnect.com l 53

pleased with him) and made Bai‘ah with him. Thereafter the
people turned to ‘Ali and said: “You have done well.” And the
people became closer to ‘Ali when he recanted the matter with
goodness.
So this is the Bai‘ah of ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him)
with Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) after the death
of Fatimah (May Allah be pleased with her) as an affirmation
for the amendment that occurred between them. And it was the
second, due to the Bai‘ah which we mentioned initially on the
Day of Saqeefah as Ibn Khuzaimah narrated and Muslim Ibn
Al-Hajjaj deemed authentic. ‘Ali did not boycott Abu Bakr in
these six months, rather he used to pray behind him and attend
his gatherings, and he rode with him to Dhul-Qassah as is going
to be mentioned.
And it is mentioned in Saheeh Al Bukhari that Abu Bakr (May
Allah be pleased with him) prayed ‘Asr after the death of the
Messenger of Allah, then he exited the mosque and found AlHasan Ibn ‘Ali playing with children outside, and he carried
him on his shoulders saying, “May my father be sacrificed for
you! He looks like the Prophet, not similar to ‘Ali,” while Ali
laughed. However, when the second Bai‘ah took place, some
of the narrators believed that ‘Ali had not made the Bai‘ah
before it, so he negated it. And the one who affirms takes
precedence over the one that negates (a principle in the science
of Fiqh) as preceded and has been established. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
As for Fatimah’s anger with Abu Bakr t, I don’t know the
reason. If it was due to his prevention of her from what she
asked of her inheritance, then he had already apologized with
an excuse that has to be accepted, and that is what he narrated
from her father the Messenger of Allah that he said, “We are

www.sunniconnect.com l 54

not to be inherited, that which we leave is charity.” She was
from those who follow the text of the legislator (Qur’an and
Sunnah) which was not known to her before she asked for her
inheritance, just as it was not known to the wives of the Prophet
until ‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, informed them
of it and they agreed with her upon that.
It should not be believed that Fatimah accused As-Siddeeq
(May Allah be pleased with him) of what he informed her; she
is above all that and he is far from that. How (could this be),
when ‘Umar Ibn AlKhattab had agreed with him in narrating
this Hadith and ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan, ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, Al‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Mutalib, ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, Talhah
Ibn ‘Ubaidullah, Az-Zubair Ibn Al‘Awwam, Sa‘d Ibn Abu
Waqqas, Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with them all,
and ‘A’ishah ! as we are going to clarify later. And (even) if
As-Siddiq (May Allah be pleased with him) was the only one
who narrated it, it would become incumbent upon everyone on
Earth to accept it and to follow him in that. If her anger was due
to her request from As-Siddiq due to these lands (which) were
for charity and not inheritance, then her husband would look
into it. Moreover, Abu Bakr had already apologized by saying
(the summary of which was), that as he was the Caliph of the
Messenger of Allah, it was obligatory for him to act as the
Messenger of Allah used to and to take charge of what the
Messenger of Allah took charge of. It was for this reason he
said: “And verily, I will not leave a matter that the Messenger
of Allah used to perform with it (wealth) except that I do so.”
He said: Then Fatimah boycotted him and did not speak to him
till she died. This boycotting and condition opened manifest
evil for the sect of the Rafidah (the Shia sect), and (led to acts
of) sheer ignorance. Due to this uncalled for incident, they
entered into what didn’t concern them. If they were to

www.sunniconnect.com l 55

understand the matters as they were then, they would have
known the virtue of As-Siddiq and accepted from him his
reasoning which is obligatory upon everyone to accept.
However, they are a humiliated party and a lowly sect. They
hold onto the ambiguities, and they leave the matters which are
clear and affirmed with the Imams of Islam, from the
Companions, Tabi‘oon and those after them from the
recognized scholars in all times and countries. Besides, the
scholars from the people of the house (family of the Prophet)
have admitted the authenticity of what Abu Bakr judged with
in this regard. Zaid Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abu
Talib said: “As for me, if I were in the place of Abu Bakr, I
would have ruled with what Abu Bakr ruled in Fadak.”

Refutation of the Rafidah with Regard to the
Inheritance and that Which They Used as
Proof
The Rafidah spoke with ignorance in this regard and overexerted themselves into that which they have no knowledge of,
and denied that which they had no comprehension of and the
interpretation of it that came to them. They entered into that
which didn’t concern them and some of them tried to reject the
narration of Abu Bakr(May Allah be pleased with him)in that
which we mentioned – (saying) that it is against the Qur’an, as
in the Verse where Allah, the Most High, says: “And Sulaiman
inherited Dawood” (Soorah An-Naml: 16). And as Allah, the
Most High, says about Zakariyya that he said: “And indeed, I
fear the successors after me, and my wife has been barren, so
give me from Yourself a heir. Who will inherit me and inherit
from the family of Ya‘qoob. And make him, my Lord pleasing
(to You).” (Soorah Maryam: 5-6)

www.sunniconnect.com l 56

This argumentation is futile from many angles: one of them is
that by His statement: “And Sulaiman inherited Dawood”
(Soorah An-Naml: 16)
By this, He only meant in kingship and prophethood i.e. We
made him in charge after him over what he oversaw – in terms
of kingship and controlling the masses and judging between
Bani Isra’eel. And We made him a noble Prophet like his father
and just as kingship and prophethood was combined for his
father then similarly He made his son after him.
Material inheritance is not intended by this because Dawood,
as many of the Mufassiroon (exegetes of the Qur’an)
mentioned, had many sons; it has been estimated around a
hundred. Why did he single out Sulaiman from amongst them
if he intended material inheritance? Thus, the intended meaning
is only the inheritance of standing after him in prophethood and
kingship and that is why He says: “And Sulaiman inherited
Dawood.” He also says, “O people, we have been given from
all things. Indeed, this is evident bounty.” (Soorah An-Naml:
16) and the Verses that come after it. And we have mentioned
this a number of times in our book, Tafseer, which is sufficient.
As for the story of Zakariyyah, indeed he was from the noble
Prophets, and this world was considered lowly by him, how
could he ask Allah for a child to inherit him in his wealth? He
was only a carpenter, he ate from the earning of his hands as
Al-Bukhari narrated, and he didn’t save from it more than his
daily provision of food, for him to ask Allah for a child to
inherit his wealth from him (would be plausible) if he had
wealth. He only asked for a righteous child to inherit him in
prophethood and to see the interests of Bani Isra’eel and drive
them to uprightness.

www.sunniconnect.com l 57

And for this reason Allah, the Most High, says:
Kaf- Ha-Ya-‘Ain-Sad. (These letters are one of the miracles
of the Qur’an, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their
meanings). (This is) a mention of the Mercy of your Lord to
His slave Zakariyyah. When he
called out to his Lord (Allah) a call in secret, saying: “My
Lord! Indeed my bones have grown feeble, and gray hairs
have spread on my head, and I have never been unblest in
my invocation to You, O my Lord! And, verily, I fear my
relatives after me, since my wife is barren. So give me from
Yourself an heir, who shall inherit me, and inherit (also) the
posterity of Ya’qoob (inheritance of the religious knowledge
and prophethood, not the wealth, etc.). And make him, my
Lord, one with whom You are well-pleased!
(Soorah Maryam: 1-6)
The rest of the story follows (after these Verses). He said: An
heir who shall inherit from me, and inherit (also) the posterity
of Ya‘qoob, i.e. prophethood as we established in the Tafseer
(Tafseer Ibn Katheer). It has been mentioned in the narration of
Abu Salamah from Abu Hurairah from Abu Bakr that indeed
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “The Prophet is not inherited”. This is a generic noun
that encompasses all of the Prophets and At-Tirmidhi declared
the Hadith to be good. And in another Hadith it is said, “We,
the family of the Prophets, are not inherited.”
And the second angle: Indeed the Messenger of Allah was
particularized with ordainments that the other Prophets did not
share with him, as we are going to single out a chapter for it at
the end of the Seerah, insha’Allah. So if it is hypothesized, that
Prophets other than him were to be inherited – which is not the
case – then what we mentioned from the Companions, from

www.sunniconnect.com l 58

them the four Imams; Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Ali,
may Allah be pleased with them, a clarification of this rule
being specific for him.
And the third: Indeed acting on this Hadith is obligatory and
ruling by it requisite as the Caliphs (first four) ruled by it. The
scholars affirmed its authenticity whether it was from his
particular characteristics or not. For he said, “We are not
inherited from; that which we leave is for charity.” It can be
understood from the point of wording that his statement, “That
which we leave is for charity,” is the news (khabar) from his
ordainment or the ordainment of all the Prophets before him
also, which preceded and is the apparent meaning. If it could
be understood initiating his will, it is as though he said: we are
not inherited from because all of what we leave is for charity
and so he is particularized from the point of rendering all of his
wealth for charity.
The first understanding is more apparent and is the path that the
majority of the scholars followed.
The second meaning could be strengthened by what has
preceded from the Hadith of Malik and others narrated by Abu
Hurairah, indeed the Messenger of Allah said: “My inheritors
are not to have a single Dinar. That which I leave after the
spending on my wives and the wages of my workers is for
charity.” And this wording has been collected in the Saheehain
and it refutes the distortion of the ignorant ones of the Shias in
the narration of this Hadith, who say, ”We did not leave
charity,” making the particle “Ma” (Arabic particle of the
Hadith) for the purpose of negation. Then how does one deal
with the first part of the Hadith and it is his statement: “We are
not inherited. And with this narration: “That which I leave after
the spending on my wives and the wages of my workers is for

www.sunniconnect.com l 59

charity.”.The affair of this person is similar to what is narrated
from some of the Mu‘tazilah that he read to a Shaikh from
Ahlus-Sunnah: “And Allah spoke to Moosa directly” (Soorah
An-Nisa’: 164) by making the word “Allah” the object of the
verb (meaning that Moosa spoke to Allah). So his Shaikh said
to him: “Woe be unto you! How do you deal with his statement
the Most High: ‘And when Moosa arrived at our appointed time
and his Lord spoke to him’.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf: 143)
The point is that it is obligatory to act upon his statement, “We
are not inherited, what we leave is for charity,” on every
possibility that the wording holds and the (apparent) meaning,
because it is a limitation of the generality of the Verse of
inheritance and his exclusion from it either by himself or with
his brothers from the Prophets u.

A Mention of His Wives (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and their children may Allah be pleased with them
Allah (SWT) says:
“O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women. If
you keep your duty (to Allah), then be not soft in speech, lest
he in whose heart is a disease (of hypocrisy, or evil desire for
adultery, etc.) should be moved with desire, but speak in an
honorable manner. And stay in your houses, and do not display
yourselves like that of the times of ignorance, and perform AsSalat (Iqamat as-Salat), and give Zakat and obey Allah and His
Messenger. Allah wishes only to remove Ar-Rijs (evil deeds
and sins, etc.) from you, O members of the family (of the
Prophet), and to purify you with a thorough purification. And
remember (O you, the members of the Prophet’s family, the
graces of your Lord), that which is recited in your houses of the
www.sunniconnect.com l 60

Verses of Allah and Al-Hikmah (i.e. Prophet’s Sunnah legal
ways, etc. so give your thanks to Allah and glorify His Praises
for this Qur’an and the Sunnah). Verily, Allah is Ever Most
Courteous, Well-Acquainted with all things.” (Soorah AlAhzab: 32-34)
There is no difference of opinion that the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, passed away having nine
(wives) and they are: ‘A’ishah Bint Abu Bakr As-Siddiq AtTaimiyyah, Hafsah Bint ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab Al-Adawiyyah,
Umm Habeebah Ramlah Bint Abu Sufyan Sakhr Ibn Harb Ibn
Umayyah
Al-Umawiyyah, Zainab Bint Jahsh Al-Asadiyyah, Umm
Salamah Hind Bint Abu Umayyah AlMakhzoomiyyah,
Maimoonah Bint Al-Harith Al-Hilaliyyah, Sawdah Bint
Zam‘ah Al- Amiriyyah, Juwairiyah Bint Al-Harith Ibn Abu
Dirar Al-Mustaliqiyah, Safiyyah Bint Huyayy Ibn Akhtab
AnNadariyyah Al-Isra’eeliyyah Al-Harooniyyah - may Allah
be pleased with them and please them.
He had two slave girls, and they were Mariyah Bint Sham‘oon
Al-Qibtiyyah Al-Misriyyah from Koorah Ansina and she was
the mother of his son Ibraheem and Raihanah Bint Sham‘oon
Al-Quraziyyah who accepted Islam, then he freed her and she
returned to her family. And there are some people who said that
she went into hiding with them. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
As for the mention in detail and order with regards to who was
first and so on, from the words of the Imams, Qatadah narrated:
The Messenger of Allah had fifteen women. He entered upon
thirteen from them and he had eleven at one time and left nine
when he died. Thereafter he mentioned the nine which we
mentioned.

www.sunniconnect.com l 61

‘A’ishah narrated similarly as she said: The two women that he
did not allow to enter were: Amrah Bint Yazeed AlGhifariyyah and Ash-Shanba’. As for Amrah, when he was
alone with her and removed her clothes and saw that she had
leprosy and he left her and gave her the dowry. And she became
impermissible for others (to marry). As for Ash-Shanba’, when
she was made to enter upon him she wasn’t at ease so he left
her until she would feel comfortable. Then, when Ibraheem
died suddenly she said: “If he was a Prophet his child would
not have died.” So he divorced her and gave her the dowry and
she became impermissible for others. She said: The ones who
cohabited with him were: ‘A’ishah, Sawdah, Hafsah, Umm
Salamah, Umm Habeebah, Zainab Bint Jahsh, Zainab Bint
Khuzaimah, Juwairiyah, Safiyyah, Maimoonah and Umm
Shareek.
I say: And in Saheeh Al-Bukhari Anas narrated: Verily, the
Messenger of Allah would visit his wives and they were eleven
women. It is commonly mentioned that he did not enter upon
Umm Shareek as its clarification is forthcoming, however, the
meaning of the eleven that he would visit are the nine
previously mentioned and the two maids Mariyah and
Raihanah.
The first woman that the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, married was Khadeejah Bint
Khuwailid Ibn Asad Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Qusayy. Her father
married her to him before his Prophethood.
In a narration Az- Zuhri said: The age of the Messenger of
Allah the day he married Khadeejah was 21 years, and it has
also been mentioned as 25 years, the time the Ka‘bah was
rebuilt. And Al-Waqidi also mentioned it and added that she
was 45 years old. Others from the people of knowledge said the

www.sunniconnect.com l 62

Messenger of Allah was 30 years of age. And narrated by
Hakeem Ibn Hizam that: The age of the Messenger of Allah the
day he married Khadeejah was 25 and she was 40 years old.
And narrated by Ibn Abbas: She gave birth to Al-Qasim, and
by him he was nicknamed (Abul-Qasim), and At-Tayyib, AtTahir, Zainab, Ruqayyah, Umm Kulthoom and Fatimah.
I say she was the mother of all his sons with the exception of
Ibraheem; he was from Mariyah as we are going to mention.
Then he spoke about every daughter from the daughters of the
Messenger of Allah and who married her, the brief outline of it
is: Zainab was married to Abul’Aas Ibn Ar-Rabee‘ Ibn
‘Abdul‘Uzza Ibn ‘Abd Shams Ibn ‘Abd Manaf, and he was
Khadeejah’s nephew. His mother was Halah Bint Khuwailid.
She gave birth to his son ‘Ali and a daughter called Umamah
Bint Zainab. ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib married her after the death of
Fatimah and died while she was with him, then she married AlMugheerah Ibn Nawfal Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib
after him.
As for Ruqayyah, ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan married her; she gave
birth to his son ‘Abdullah and was nicknamed after him
initially, then he nicknamed himself with the name of his son
‘Amr. Ruqayyah died when the Messenger of Allah was in
Badr. And when Zaid Ibn Harithah came with the glad tidings
(of victory) he found that they had just leveled the soil on her
body. And ‘Uthman stood by her nursing her so the Messenger
of Allah gave him his share and reward. Thereafter he married
him to her sister Umm Kulthoom and for that reason he was
nicknamed: Dhun-Noorain (possessor of two lights). She also
passed away in the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him.

www.sunniconnect.com l 63

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, married her
daughter, Fatimah, to his nephew ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib Ibn
‘Abdul-Muttalib. ‘Ali entered upon her after the Battle of Badr
as we have mentioned. She gave birth to Hasan and he (‘Ali)
was nicknamed with his name, and Husain, and Husain was
martyred in the land of Iraq.
I say it is also said Muhsin (his son).
His daughter Zainab was married to the son of her uncle,
‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far, and she gave birth from him to ‘Ali and
‘Awn and died while married to him. As for Umm Kulthoom,
the Leader of the Believers, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab married her,
and she gave birth to Zaid from him and he died while married
to her. Later, after him she married with the sons of her uncle,
one after the other. She married ‘Awn Ibn Ja‘far, then after his
death his brother, Muhammad, married her. Then after the
death of Muhammad, their brother, ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far,
married her; she died while married to him.
Az-Zuhri said: Khadeejah married two men before the
Messenger of Allah; the first of them was ‘Ateeq Ibn ‘Abid Ibn
Makhzoom. The second was Abu Halah At-Tamimi. She gave
birth to Hind and Zainab from him. Ibn Ishaq related that after
the death of ‘Abid Abu Halah, she was married to An-Nabbash
Ibn Zurarah, from the sons of ‘Amr Ibn Tameem, the ally of the
Banu Abdud-Dar. She gave birth to a boy and a girl. Later, AnNabbash also died. Then she married the Messenger of Allah
and gave birth to his four daughters and sons Al-Qasim, AtTayyib, At-Tahir. The sons passed away in infancy. The
Messenger of Allah didn’t marry anyone else while she was
alive.

www.sunniconnect.com l 64

Az-Zuhri said: After Khadeejah, the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him, married ‘A’ishah Bint Abu Bakr Ibn ‘Abdullah
Ibn Abu Quhafah, ‘Uthman Ibn Amir Ibn Amr Ibn Ka‘b Ibn
Sa‘d Ibn Taim Ibn Murrah Ibn Ka‘b Ibin Lu’ayy Ibn Ghalib Ibn
Fihr Ibin Malik Ibn An-Nadr Ibn Kinanah. After Khadeejah,
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, did not marry any virgin except ‘A’ishah but she did not
bear him any child.
I say: She did not give birth to any child for him and it is said
that she had a miscarriage of a son, the Messenger of Allah
named him Abdullah. That is why she is nicknamed Umm
(mother of) ‘Abdullah.
The child of her sister, Asma’, from Az- Zubair Ibn Al‘Awwam was nicknamed ‘Abdullah.
I say: Indeed the Messenger of Allah married Sawdah before
‘A’ishah as Ibn Ishaq mentioned. And Allah (SWT) knows
best. And we already mentioned the description of his marriage
with them before the Migration (Hijrah) and not entering upon
‘A’ishah until after the Hijrah.
He married Hafsah Bint ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab; She was earlier
married to Khunais Ibn Hudhafah Ibn Qais Ibn ‘Adiyy Ibn
Hudhafah Ibn Sahm Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Husais Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Lu’ayy.
Khunais had died as a Believer.
He said: The Messenger of Allah married Umm Salamah Hind
Bint Abu Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar Ibn Makhzoom. Before him, she was married to the son
of her uncle, Abu Salamah ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abdul-Asad Ibn
Hilal Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Makhzoom.

www.sunniconnect.com l 65

He said: And he married Sawdah Bint Zam‘ah Ibn Qais Ibn
‘Abd Shams Ibn ‘Abd Udd Ibn Nasr Ibn Malik Ibn Hisl Ibn
Amir Ibn Lu’ayy. Before getting married to the Messenger of
Allah, she was married to As-Sakran Ibn ‘Amr, the brother of
Suhail Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Abd Shams. He died as a Muslim after
their return from Al-Habashah (Ethiopia or Abyssinia and
surrounding areas) to Makkah, may Allah be pleased with
them.
He said: He married Umm Habeebah Ramlah Bint Abu Sufyan
Ibn Harb Ibn Umayyah Ibn ‘Abd Shams Ibn ‘Abd Manaf Ibn
Qusayy. Before the Messenger of Allah, she was married to
‘Ubaidullah Ibn Jahsh Ibn Ri’ab from the tribe of Asad Ibn
Khuzaimah. He died as a Christian in Abyssinia. The
Messenger of Allah sent ‘Amr Ibn Umayyah Ad-Damri to her
there, then he proposed to her through him and then ‘Uthman
Ibn ‘Affan married her to him. This is what he said. However,
Khalid Ibn Sa‘eed Ibn Al-‘As and Najashi, the ruler of
Abyssinia, paid her the dowry of 400 Dinars and sent
Shurahbeel Ibn Hasanah with her. And we already have
mentioned all of that in detail.
He said: He married Zainab Bint Jahsh Ibn Ri’ab Ibn Asad Ibn
Khuzaimah, and her mother was Umaimah Bint ‘AbdulMuttalib, the paternal aunt of the Messenger of Allah. Earlier,
she was married to Zaid Ibn Harithah, the slave of the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him. She was the first of his
wives to follow him in death and the first who had a bier made
over her; Asma’ Bint ‘Umais made it for her as she saw in
Abyssinia.
He said: And he married Zainab Bint Khuzaimah and she was
from the tribe of Banu ‘Abd Manaf Ibn Hilal Ibn Amir Ibn
Sa‘sa‘ah and she was called Ummul-Masakeen. She was

www.sunniconnect.com l 66

previously married to ‘Abdullah Ibn Jahsh Ibn Ri’ab, who was
killed on the Day [Battle] of Uhud. She could not stay with the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, except for a short time
as she passed away.
Yoonus said narrating from Muhammad Ibn Ishaq that she was
married to Al-Husain Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul- Muttalib Ibn
‘Abd Manaf, or his brother, At-Tufail Ibn Al-Harith.
Az-Zuhri said: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
married Maimoonah Bint Al-Harith Ibn Hazn Ibn Bujair Ibn
Al-Huzam Ibn Ruwaibah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Hilal Ibn Amir Ibn
Sa‘sa‘ah. She is the one who offered herself (for marriage
without dowry and guardian).
I say: The truth is that indeed the Messenger of Allah proposed
to her and the mediator between them was Abu Rafi‘, his slave,
as we explained in detail in Umratul-Qada’. Az-Zuhri said: She
had married two men before the Messenger of Allah, first of
them was Ibn Abd Yaleel. Saif Ibn ‘Umar said in his narration:
She was married to ‘Umair Ibn ‘Amr from the tribe of Uqdah
from Thaqeef Ibn ‘Amr AthThaqafi. He died and then she
married Abu Ruhm Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Abu Qais Ibn Abd
Wudd Ibn Nasr Ibn Hisl Ibn Amir Ibn Lu’ayy.
He said: And he captured Safiyyah Bint Huyayy Ibn Akhtab
from the tribe of An-Nadeer on the Day of Khaibar when she
was the bride of Kinanah Ibn Abul-Huqaiq. Saif Ibn ‘Umar
claimed in his narration that she was married to Sallam Ibn
Mishkam before Kinanah. And Allah (SWT) knows best. He
said: So these are the eleven women upon whom he entered.
Az-Zuhri said: The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, married Al- ‘Aliyah Bint Zabyan Ibn ‘Amr
from the tribe of Abu Bakr Ibn Kilab and entered upon her, and

www.sunniconnect.com l 67

(then) divorced her. Al-Baihaqi said: This is how it is
mentioned in my book and in a narration other than his: He did
not enter upon her, then he divorced her. He said: The Prophet
peace be upon him, married the sister of the tribe of Al-Jawn
Al-Kindi, and they are the allies of the tribe of Fazarah, then
she sought refuge in Allah from him so he said: “You have
sought refuge in a Great One (Allah), go back to your family.”
So he divorced her and did not enter upon her. He said: The
Messenger of Allah had a slave girl called Mariyah; she gave
birth to Ibraheem from him. Then he passed away in infancy.
He had a slave girl called Raihanah Bint Sham‘oon from the
People of the Book from Khunafah tribe - and they were a
subdivision of the tribe of Quraizah. The Messenger of Allah
freed her but they claim that she went into hiding.
And Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir narrated with his chain of narrations
from ‘Ali Ibn Mujahid: Verily, the Messenger of Allah married
Khawlah Bint Al- Hudhail Ibn Hubairah At-Taghlibi, and her
mother was Khirniq Bint Khaleefah, the sister of Dihyah Ibn
Khaleefah. And she was brought to him from Ash-Sham, and
she died during the journey. Then he married her maternal aunt,
Sharaf Bint Fadalah Ibn Khaleefah. She was brought to him
from Ash-Sham but she also died during the journey. Yoonus
Ibn Bukair mentioned from Muhammad Ibn Ishaq: And the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, married Asma’ Bint
Ka‘b Al-Jawniyyah and did not enter upon her, and he divorced
her. Then he married ‘Amrah Bint Yazeed from the women of
Kilab tribe (Al-Waheed subdivision tribe). Earlier, she was
married to AlFadhl Ibn ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib before
him. After marrying her, the Messenger of Allah, divorced her
and didn’t enter upon her. Al-Baihaqi said: So these two are the
ones that Az-Zuhri mentioned and did not name them.

www.sunniconnect.com l 68

Al-Baihaqi narrated from Ash-Sha‘bi, who said: The women
offered themselves to the Messenger of Allah. After marrying
them, he entered upon some of them and left others and then
didn’t go near them till the day he died. And they didn’t marry
after him, from them was Umm Shareek. That is the statement
of Allah, the Most High:
“You (O Muhammad) can postpone (the turn of) whom you
will of them (your wives), and you may receive whom you will.
And whomsoever you desire of those whom you have set aside
(her turn temporarily), it is no sin on you (to receive her again),
that is better; that they may be comforted and not grieved, and
may all be pleased with what you give them. Allah knows what
is in your hearts. And Allah is Ever All-Knowing, Most
Forbearing. (Soorah Al-Ahzab: 51)
Al-Baihaqi said we have narrated from Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah
from his father, who said: Khawlah Bint Hakeem is from those
who offered themselves (for marriage) to the Messenger of
Allah.

Those Whom the Messenger of Allah
Proposed but Did Not Marry
Umm Hani’ Fakhitah Bint Abu Talib narrated that the
Messenger of Allah asked for her hand, but she mentioned that
she had small children so he left her and said: “The best women
among the camel riders are the righteous women of Quraish,
the most kind to their young ones and the most caring of their
husbands’ property.”
Abu Hurairah narrated that the Messenger of Allah proposed to
Umm Hani’ Bint Abu Talib then she said:

www.sunniconnect.com l 69

“O Messenger of Allah, verily, I have become old and I have
children.”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: Laila Bint Al-Khateem went to the
Messenger of Allah while he had his back to the sun so it shone
on his shoulder, then he said: “Who is this whose food is the
black (dates)?” And he used to say this often. Then she replied:
“I am the daughter of the one who feeds the birds and the one
who is like the wind [i.e. generous], I am Laila Bint AlKhateem, I came to offer myself to you, will you marry me?”
He replied: “I have done (so).” Then she returned to her people
and said: “I have indeed married the Prophet”. They said:
“What a bad thing you have done, you are a selfless woman and
the Messenger of Allah has women who protect him jealously
so he will curse you, so ask for demission.” Thereafter she
returned and said: “Demit me, O Messenger of Allah“. He
demitted her.
Then she married Mas‘ood Ibn Aws Ibn Sawad Ibn Zafar and
she gave birth to a child from him, then one day when she was
having a bath in one of the gardens in Madinah when suddenly
a black wolf pounced on her and injured her, thereafter she
died.
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: Duba‘ah Bint Amir Ibn Qurt was married
to ‘Abdullah Ibn Jud‘an, then he divorced her. Hisham Ibn AlMugheerah married her after him, and she gave birth to
Salamah from him and she was a big beautiful woman with
plentiful hair that enveloped her body. Then the Messenger of
Allah proposed to her through her son Salamah so he said:
“May I ask her permission?” It was said to the Prophet: “She
has become old.” Thereafter her son came to her and sought her
permission. She replied: “O my son, do you ask permission
with regards to the Messenger of Allah?” Her son returned and

www.sunniconnect.com l 70

remained quiet and didn’t return an answer to the Messenger of
Allah, it was as though he saw that she had become old, the
Prophet too did not speak about her.
Ibn Abbas narrated: “The Messenger of Allah proposed to
Safiyyah Bint Bashamah Ibn Nadlah Al‘Anbari. She had been
taken prisoner, so the Messenger of Allah gave her a choice and
said: “If you wish me or if you wish your husband.” So she said
“Rather my husband”, then he set her free whereupon the tribe
of Banu Tameem cursed her.
And from those who he proposed to and did not marry is Jamrah
Bint Al-Harith Ibn ‘Awf Ibn Abu Harithah Al-Muzani. Her
father said: “She has a defect”, when she didn’t have one. Then
he returned to her and she was afflicted with leprosy.
He said: And he proposed to Umm Habeebah Bint Al-‘Abbas
Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib. Then he found that her father was her
brother from breast-feeding, Thuwaibah, the maid of Abu
Lahab.
These are his wives and they are categorized into three groups:
First those he entered upon and died leaving them behind, and
they are nine which was the initial mention of them and they
were inviolable after his death (in marital terms) by actual
consensus known from the religion by necessity and their
waiting period ended with the end of their lives.
Allah, Most High, said:
“And it is not (right) for you that you should annoy Allah’s
Messenger, nor that you should ever marry his wives after
him (his death). Verily! With Allah that shall be an enormity.
(Soorah Al-Ahzab: 53)

www.sunniconnect.com l 71

In the second category are those whom he entered upon and
divorced in his lifetime, so is it (considered) permissible to
marry them after the end of their waiting period ? There are two
opinions of the scholars in its regard; one of them is no, due to
the generality of the Verse which we mentioned. And the
second (opinion) is yes; because of the Verse of At-Takhyeer
and it is his statement: “O Prophet (Muhammad)! Say to your
wives: If you desire the life of this world and its glitte, then
come, I will make a provision for you and set you free in a
handsome manner (divorce). But if you desire Allah and His
Messenger, and the home of the Hereafter, then verily, Allah
has prepared for Al-Muhsinat (gooddoers) among you an
enormous reward.” (Soorah Al-Ahzab: 28,29)
The scholars said: If she was not permissible for anyone else to
marry after his divorce of her there wouldn’t be any benefit in
giving her the choice between this world and the Hereafter.
This is because if his divorce of her didn’t allow anyone else to
marry her there wouldn’t be any benefit for her, and this is a
strong (argument). And Allah (SWT) knows best.
As for the third category, they are the ones whom he married,
then divorced before entering upon them., Then it is not
allowed for anyone else to marry them and I do not know of a
debate in this category. As for the ones whom he proposed and
didn’t marry, it is within her rights to marry. And a chapter is
to come in “The Book of Particular Characteristics” (of the
Prophet) in relation to this. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

A Mention of His Slave Girls
The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, had two slave
girls. One of them was Mariyah Bint Sham‘oon Al-Qibtiyyah.
The leader of Alaxandria, Juraij Ibn Meena (Viceroy of Egypt),

www.sunniconnect.com l 72

had given her to him. He also gave her sister Seereen. Abu
Nu‘aim mentioned that he gave her among four maids - And
Allah (SWT) knows best – an emasculated slave boy called
Ma’boor and a mule called Ad- Duldul, so he accepted his gifts
and chose Mariyah for himself. She was from a village in Egypt
known as Hafn from Koorah ’Ansina and Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abu
Sufyan removed the land tax levied on the people of the land
during the days of his leadership as a means of distinguishing
it because it bore a son from the Messenger of Allah and he was
Ibraheem. They said Mariyah was white and beautiful, the
Messenger of Allah was pleased with her and loved her. She
was precious to him especially after she gave birth to Ibraheem,
his son. And as for her sister Seereen, the Messenger of Allah
gave her to Hassan Ibn Thabit. She gave birth to his son
‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Hassan.
As for the emasculated slave boy, Ma’boor, he used to enter
upon Mariyah and Seereen without permission as was the
tradition in Egypt. Thereafter some of the people spoke about
her due to that and didn’t realize that he was emasculated until
it was made known on the basis that we are going to clarify
shortly insha’Allah.
And as for the mule, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, used to ride it and from what is apparent – And Allah
(SWT) knows best – it is the one that he rode in battle on the
Day of Hunain. The mule grew old and lived long; it was even
with ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib in the days of his reign and when he
died it was with ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far Ibn Abu Talib and grew
old and wheat was ground for it to eat.
And from the wives is Raihanah Bint Zaid from the tribe of AnNadeer and it is also said that she was from the tribe of
Quraizah. Az-Zuhri narrated: The Messenger of Allah captured

www.sunniconnect.com l 73

Raihanah from the tribe of Quraizah, then he freed her so she
returned to her family.
Qatadah said: The Messenger of Allah had two slave girls,
Mariyah Qibtiyyah and Rubaihah – or Raihanah – Bint
Sham‘oon Ibn Zaid Ibn Khunafah from the tribe of ‘Amr Ibn
Quraizah. She was with the son of her uncle called ‘AbdulHakam, according to what reached me and died before the
Prophet.

A Mention of His Children (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)
There is no difference of opinion that all of his children were
from Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid with the exception of
Ibraheem; he was from Mariyah Bint Sham‘oon Qibtiyyah.
Ibn Abbas he said: The oldest of the Messenger of Allah’s
offspring was Al-Qasim, then Zainab, then ‘Abdullah, then
Umm Kulthoom, then Fatimah and then Ruqayyah. Al-Qasim
died and he was the first of his children to die in Makkah,
thereafter ‘Abdullah died.
Mariyah gave birth to Ibraheem in Madinah in Dhul-Hijjah in
the 8th year after the Hijrah, and he died when he was 18
months old.
Abul-‘As Ibn Ar-Rabee‘ married Zainab and she gave birth to
‘Ali and Umamah from him. She is the one that the Messenger
of Allah used to carry her in the prayer, when he would
prostrate he would put her down and when he would stand up,
he would carry her. And maybe that was after the death of her
mother in the Year 8 after the Hijrah, based on what Al-Waqidi,
Qatadah, ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Bakr Ibn Hazm and others have

www.sunniconnect.com l 74

mentioned. And it is as though she was a young child. And
Allah (SWT) knows best.
‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib(May Allah be pleased with him)married her
after the death of Fatimah based on what is to come
insha’Allah. And the death of Zainab was in Year 8 A. H..
Qatadah mentioned it from ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Bakr Ibn Hazm,
Khaleefah Ibn Khayyat, Abu Bakr Ibn Abu Khaithamah and
others. Qatadah said from Ibn Hazm: in the beginning of the
8th year A.H. Hammad Ibn Salamah mentioned from Hisham
Ibn ‘Urwah from his father that when she was migrating a man
pushed her so she fell on a rock and had a miscarriage. She
remained ill till she died, thereafter they believed that she died
as a martyr.
As for Ruqayyah, the son of her paternal uncle ‘Utbah Ibn Abu
Lahab, married her first just as his brother ‘Utaibah Ibn Abu
Lahab married Umm Kulthoom. Thereafter they divorced
before entering upon them out of hatred of the Messenger of
Allah when Allah (SWT) revealed:
“Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab, and perish he! His
wealth and his children will not benefit him! He will be
burned in a Fire of blazing flames! And his wife too, who
carries wood (thorns of Sa‘dan which she used to put on the
way of the Prophet), or use to slander him). In her neck is a
twisted rope of Masad
(palm fiber) (Soorah Masad: 1-5)
Then ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan (May Allah be pleased with him)
married Ruqayyah and migrated with her to Abyssinia and it is
said that he was the first to migrate there. Thereafter, they
returned to Makkah as we mentioned earlier and then migrated
to Madinah. She gave birth to his son ‘Abdullah who reached

www.sunniconnect.com l 75

6 years of age, then a rooster pecked him in his eyes and he
died. He was nicknamed by him initially (Abu ‘Abdullah),
thereafter he was nicknamed with his son (son’s name) ‘Amr
and he died when the Messenger of Allah was victorious in
Badr, the Day of Criterion, the day the two parties met. And
when the bringer of good news - who was Zaid Ibn Harithah –
came to Madinah he found that they had just leveled the soil on
her grave.
‘Uthman had stayed behind to nurse her by the command of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
and the Prophet gave him his share and reward (from the war
booty). Thereafter he married her sister Umm Kulthoom also
to him upon his return and for this reason he was known as the
“possessor of two lights”. She died in Sha‘ban in Year 9 A.H.
and didn’t have any children from him. The Messenger of Allah
said: “If I had a third (daughter) I would have indeed married
her to ‘Uthman.”And in another narration the Messenger of
Allah said: “If they were 10 (daughters) I would have indeed
married them to ‘Uthman.” As for Fatimah, she was married to
the son of her paternal uncle - ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib - in Safar
Year 2 A.H. She gave birth to Al-Hasan and Al-Husain - and it
is said Muhsin (also) - and she gave birth to Umm Kulthoom
and Zainab from him. ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab indeed married
Umm Kulthoom Bint ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib in the era of his reign,
from Fatimah and was extremely generous to her. He gave her
40,000 Dirhams (in dowry) due to her lineage from the
Messenger of Allah. Then she gave birth to Zaid Ibn ‘Umar Ibn
Al-Khattab from him. When ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab was killed
the son of her paternal uncle ‘Awn Ibn Ja‘far married her after
him and died while (married) to her. Then his brother
‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far succeeded him then she died while
(married) to him.

www.sunniconnect.com l 76

Then ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far married her sister Zainab Bint ‘Ali
from Fatimah and she also died while married to him. Fatimah
passed away six months after the Messenger of Allah based on
the most authentic opinions and this is affirmed from ‘A’ishah,
the Mother of the Believers, in the Saheeh.
As for Ibraheem, he was from Mariyah Qibtiyyah as we have
mentioned, and his date of birth was in Dhul-Hijjah, Year 8
A.H. Anas Ibn Malik narrated: “If Ibraheem, the son of the
Prophet, was to live he would have been a truthful prophet.”
Abu Ya‘la narrated from Anas: “I didn’t see anyone more
merciful to the children than the Messenger of Allah. Ibraheem
was fed in ‘Awali of Madinah. And he would go while we were
with him, then enter the house and it would indeed be smoky
and the husband of the feeder was a blacksmith. So he would
take him and kiss him, and then return.” ‘Amr said: “When
Ibraheem passed away the Messenger of Allah said: “Verily
Ibraheem is my son and he died on my chest. And he indeed
has breast feeders who will complete his feeding in paradise.”
And Al-Waqidi said: “Ibraheem, the son of the Messenger of
Allah, passed away on Tuesday after 10 days had passed from
Rabee‘ ul-Awwal in Year 10 A.H. when he was 18 months old
in the tribe of Banu Mazin Ibn An-Najjar in the house of Umm
Burdah Bint Al-Mundhir, and was buried in Al-Baqee‘.”
I say: We previously mentioned that the sun eclipsed the day
he died. The people said: It has eclipsed for the death of
Ibraheem. On hearing this the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him, said in his sermon: “Verily, the sun and the moon
are two signs from the Signs of Allah, the Greatest and
Almighty. They do not eclipse for the death of anyone nor his
death.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 77

A Mention of His Slave Boys and Slave Girls.
And a Mention of His Workers and Entrusted
Scribes (of Qur’anic Verses)
They are presented here in alphabetical order of their names
and a mention of some of their stories. Let us mention what he
mentioned with some additions and deductions.
From them:
Usamah Ibn Zaid Ibn Harithah from the adopted children of the
Messenger of Allah Abu Zaid Al-Kalbi and it is said: Abu
Yazeed, and it is said: Abu Muhammad the adopted child of the
Messenger of Allah and son of his adopted child, his beloved
and son of his beloved.
His mother was Umm Aiman, her name was Barakah and she
was the nursemaid of the Messenger of Allah in his youth and
from the first of those who believed in him after his
Prophethood. The Messenger of Allah made Zaid in command
in the last days of his life when he was 18 or 19 years old. And
he passed away when he was the leader of a big army.
When the Messenger of Allah entrusted Zaid Ibn Harith with
the flag of leadership some of the people objected to his choice.
So the Messenger of Allah addressed and said in his speech: “If
you defame his leadership then you have indeed defamed the
leadership of his father before. And by Allah he indeed has the
characteristics for leadership and he was indeed from the most
beloved of the creation to me and indeed this (person) is from
the most beloved of creation to me after him.” And it is in the
Saheeh from the Hadith of Moosa Ibn Uqbah from Salim, from
his father.

www.sunniconnect.com l 78

It has been affirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari that Usamah (May
Allah be pleased with him) narrated: The Messenger of Allah
would take me and Al-Hasan and would say: “O Allah, I indeed
love them so love them.”
This is the reason that when ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab distributed
some money to people he also allocated to Usamah some
money and allocated to his son ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar some
amount. When he was asked about it, he replied: “Indeed he
was more beloved to the Messenger of Allah than you and his
father was more beloved to the Messenger of Allah than your
father.”Narrated by Usamah: “Verily, the Messenger of Allah
placed him behind him on a donkey laden with velvet when he
went to visit Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah before the Battle of Badr.”
From them was Aslam and it is said, Ibraheem and it has been
mentioned, Thabit.
And it is mentioned Hurmuz Abu Rafi‘ Al-Qibti.
He accepted Islam before Badr and did not take part in it
because he was with his masters in Makkah - the family of Al‘Abbas. Thereafter, he migrated and took part in Uhud and (the
battles) after it. He was a writer (of Qur’anic Verses and letters)
and wrote for ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib in Al-Kufah as Al-Mufaddal
Ibn Ghassan Al-Ghallabi mentioned. And he participated in the