In this year also, the Muslim women were forbidden in marriage to the
disbelievers as a specification of (and an exemption from) the general
provision of the Treaty of Hudaibiyah stipulating that “…you should
return to us whoever comes to you from us, even if he embraces your
religion.” Then Allah revealed:
O you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants,
examine them, Allah knows best as to their Faith, then if you ascertain
that they are true Believers, send them not back to the disbelievers, they
are not lawful (wives) for the disbelievers nor are the disbelievers lawful
(husbands) for them. (Soorah Al-Mumtahinah 60:10)
The Ghazwah of Al-Muraisi‘ as well as the ‘Umrah of Al-Hudaibiyyah
also occurred in this year.

The Seventh Year of the Prophetic Hijrah
The Ghazwah of Khaibar occurring at the onset of the year. ‘Urwah
related on the authority of Marwan and Al-Miswar both of whom said, the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, returned
in the year of Al-Hudaibiyyah and Soorah Al-Fat‘h was revealed to him
210

In The Defence Of the True Faith
at a distance between Makkah and Madinah. He arrived in Madinah in the
month of Dhul-Hijjah where he remained till he marched forth to Khaibar.
He encamped at Al-Rajee’ which is a valley situated between Khaibar and
Ghatafan. In order not to stir Ghatafan into reinforcing the enemies, he
spent the night at the valley and invaded Khaibar the following morning.
Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy upon him, has also related from Ibn
Irak who narrated from his father that Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him, arrived at Madinah in the midst a contingent of his people while
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was still engaged
in Khaibar. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had
deputized Siba‘ Ibn ‘Urfutah Al-Ghatafani to oversee the affairs of
Madinah in his absence. Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him,
narrated, “We got to him while he was reciting: Kaf- Ha-Ya-’Ain-Sad
(Soorah Maryam 19:1) in the first Rak‘ah and in the second: Woe to AlMutaffifeen [those who give less in measure and weight (decrease the
rights of others)] (Soorah Al-Mutaffifeen 83:1) Then I said to myself:
‘Woe be to such and such person who, when he has to receive by measure
(from others) he demands full measure but when he has to give by measure
or weight (to others), he gives less than due.’ Upon concluding the Salat,
he equipped us so that we may proceed to Khaibar. We got to Khaibar
after it had been conquered by the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him.” Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, added, “The
Prophet recommended that the Muslims let us partake in their booty.”
Al-Bukhari related that Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa‘ said, “We went out to
Khaibar in the company of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him. While we were proceeding at night, a man from the group said
to ‘Amir, “O ‘Amir! Won’t you let us hear your poetry?” ‘Amir was a
poet, so he got down and started reciting for the people poetry that kept
pace with the camels’ footsteps, saying: “O Allah! Without You we would
not have been guided on the right path
Neither would we have given in charity, nor would we have prayed.

211

In The Defence Of the True Faith
So please forgive us, what we have committed (i.e. our defects); let all
of us be sacrificed for Your cause And send Sakinah (i.e. calmness)
upon us to make our feet firm When we meet our enemy,
and If they will call us towards an unjust thing, we will refuse.
The infidels have made a hue and cry to ask others’ help against us.”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, on that, asked:
“Who is that (camel) driver
(reciting poetry)?” The people said, “He is ‘Amir Ibn Al-Akwa‘.”
Then the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “May
Allah have Mercy on him.” A man amongst the people said, “O Allah’s
Prophet! Has (martyrdom) been granted to him? Would that you let us
enjoy his company longer.” Then we reached and besieged Khaibar till
we were afflicted with severe hunger. Then Allah, the Almighty, helped
the Muslims to conquer it (i.e., Khaibar). In the evening of the day of the
conquest of the city, the Muslims made huge fires. The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: (What are these fires? What are you
cooking over the fire?) The people replied, “(For cooking) meat.” He
asked: “What kind of meat?” They (i.e. people) said, “The meat of
donkeys.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“Throw away the meat and break the pots!” A man said, “O Allah’s
Messenger! Shall we throw away the meat and wash the pots instead?” He
said: “(Yes, you can do) that too.”
So when the army ranks were arranged in rows (for the clash), ‘Amir’s
sword was short and he aimed at the leg of a Jew to strike it, but the sharp
blade of the sword returned to him and injured his own knee, and that
caused him to die. When they returned from the battle, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, saw me (in a sad mood). He
took my hand and said: “What is bothering you?” I replied, “Let my father
and mother be sacrificed for you! The people say that the deeds of ‘Amir
are lost.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“Whoever says so, is mistaken, for ‘Amir has got a double reward.” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, raised two fingers and
212

In The Defence Of the True Faith
added: “He (i.e. ‘Amir) was a persevering struggler in the cause of Allah
and there are few ‘Arabs who achieved the like of (good deeds) ‘Amir had
done.”
Al-Bukhari also related from Anas Ibn Malik, may Allah be pleased with
him, that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
reached Khaibar at night and it was his habit that, whenever he reached
the enemy at night, he would not attack them till it was morning. When it
was morning, the Jews came out with their spades and baskets, and when
they saw him (i.e. the Prophet), they said, “Muhammad! By Allah!
Muhammad and his army!” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: “Khaibar is destroyed, for whenever we approach a
(hostile) nation (to fight), then evil will be the morning for those who have
been warned.”
Al-Bukhari also related that Anas Ibn Malik, may Allah be pleased with
him, said, “The Prophet offered the Fajr Prayer near Khaibar when it was
still dark and then said: “Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is destroyed, for
whenever we approach a belligerent nation to fight, then evil will be the
morning for those who have been warned.” Then the inhabitants of
Khaibar came out running on the roads. The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, had their warriors killed, their offspring and woman
taken as captives. Safiyyah, may Allah be pleased with her, was amongst
the captives. She first fell into the lot of Dihyah Al-Kalbi, may Allah be
pleased with him, but later on she was transferred to the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, made her manumission as her Mahr. Abdul Azeez Ibn Suhaib
said to Thabit, “O Abu Muhammad, are you the one who informed Anas
what her Mahr was?” and he nodded his head in affirmation.
Al-Bukhari related from Abu ‘Imran Al-Jawni who said: Anas, may Allah
be pleased with him, looked at the people on the day of Jumu‘ah and saw
a pallium (i.e. a special kind of head-covering worn by Jews in old days).
and he said: “At this moment they (i.e. those people) look like the Jews of
Khaibar.”
He (Al-Bukhari) also related on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa‘d that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said on the day (of
213

In The Defence Of the True Faith
the Battle) of Khaibar: “Tomorrow I will give the flag to somebody who
will be given victory (by Allah) and who loves Allah and His Messenger
and is loved by Allah and His Messenger.” So, the people wondered all
night as to who would receive the flag and in the morning everyone hoped
that he would be that person. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, asked: “Where is ‘Ali?” He was told that ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, was suffering from eye-trouble, so he applied
saliva to his eyes and supplicated to Allah, the Almighty, to cure him. He
at once got cured as if he had no ailment. The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, gave him the flag. ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with
him, asked, “Should I fight them till they become like us (i.e. Muslims)?”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Go to them
patiently and calmly till you enter the land. Then, invite them to Islam,
and inform them what is enjoined upon them, for, by Allah, if Allah gives
guidance to somebody through you, it is better for you than possessing red
camels.”
Al-Bukhari related that Yazeed Ibn Abu Ubaid said, “I saw the scar from
a wound on Salamah’s leg. I said to him, ‘O Abu Muslim! What is this
wound?’ He said, ‘This was inflicted on me on the Day of Khaibar and
the people said, ‘Salamah has been wounded.” Then I went to the Prophet
and he spat his saliva on it (i.e. the wound) three times and since then I
have not had any pain from it till this hour.’”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abu Hurairah, may Allah be
pleased with him, who said, “We witnessed (the battle of) Khaibar.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said
concerning a man from those who were with him and who claimed to be
a Muslim: (This (man) is from the dwellers of the Hell-Fire.) When the
battle started, that fellow fought so violently and bravely that he received
plenty of wounds. Some of the people were about to doubt (the Prophet’s
statement), but the man, under severe pain from his wounds, put his hand
into his quiver, took out some arrows with which he killed himself (i.e.,
committed suicide). Then some men amongst the Muslims came hurriedly
and said, “O Allah’s Messenger! Allah has made your statement true, soand-so has committed suicide. The Prophet said: “O so-and-so! Get up
and make an announcement that none but a believer will enter Paradise
and that Allah may support the religion with an unchaste (sinful) man”.
214

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Shadad Ibn Al-Had related that a Bedouin Arab came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, believed and
followed him. He said, “I will migrate with you.” The Prophet, peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him, entrusted him to some of his Companions.
When it was the time of the Battle of Khaibar, the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, obtained booty which he
distributed among his Companions and he also reserved a portion for the
Bedouin which he gave to his companions (to be taken to him). He used
to tend their riding animals. When they got to him and handed over to him
his portion, he asked, “What is this?” They responded saying: “A part
apportioned to you by Allah’s Messenger.” He took it and went to the
Prophet. He said, “What is this, O Muhammad?” “A part which I have
apportioned to you,” the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said.
The man then said, “I have not followed you because of this. Rather, I
have followed you so that I may be shot an arrow (here) [for the sake of
Allah] (pointing to his throat) and then I die and thereafter I am admitted
to Paradise.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “If you are true to Allah, Allah will be true to you.”
Then he rose to fight against the enemy. He was brought to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, having been hit by
arrow on the exact spot he had indicated. The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, asked: “Is he the same person?” The people
responded in the affirmative. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said: “He was true to Allah and Allah was true to
him.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, shrouded
him in his Jubbah then he laid him before him and offered the funeral
prayer on him. From what was gleaned from his prayer is: “O Allah, Your
servant went out migrating in Your cause and he was martyred and I am
a witness for him.”
Ibn Ishaq related: The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, kept taking over their wealth gradually and conquering their
forts one after the other. The first of their forts to fall was that of Na‘im
where Mahmood Ibn Maslamah was killed. Then Al-Qamoos, the fort of
Banu Abil-Huqaiq where Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, took a number of them as prisoners among whom was
Safiyyah Bint Huyayy Ibn Akhtab; she was with Kinanah Ibn Ar-Rabee‘
215

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Ibn AbilHuqaiq along with a cousin of hers. The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, chose Safiyyah, may Allah be
pleased with her, for himself Dihyah Ibn Khalifah, may Allah be pleased
with him, had requested Safiyyah from Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. Thus, when Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, chose Safiyyah for himself, he gave
Dihyah, may Allah be pleased with him, her cousin instead.
The remainder of the prisoners of Khaibar was distributed among the
Muslims and the people cooked the meat of donkeys and it is mentioned
that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
prohibited that for them. Al-Bukhari devoted attention to this section thus,
by relating a number of narrations concerning it from good and reliable
chains. The prohibition of it (the meat of donkey) is the preferred opinion
of the majority of the earlier and later generations of scholars. It is equally
the preferred opinion of the four Imams. However, some of the early
scholars held the opinion of its permissibility among whom was Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both. They gave various
responses to the Ahadeeth cited on its prohibition. They said: (The donkey
was prohibited because) it was a riding beast which they relied upon to
carry their load. It is also said that (eating its meat was prohibited) because
it eats filth (i.e., Jalalah). However, the authentic position is that it was
prohibited due to its inherent nature. It is recorded in an authentic
narration that a caller of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, announced: “Allah and His Messenger have
prohibited for you the meat of domestic donkey and eating garlic.”
It is also related in Saheeh Al-Bukhari from Nafi‘ Ibn ‘Umar that on the
day (of the Battle) of Khaibar, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings be
upon him, prohibited the meat of domestic donkey and eating garlic.
People have spoken extensively concerning the Hadith related in the
Saheehain from ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him, that
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
prohibited Al-Mut‘a marriage and the eating of donkey’s meat in the year
of the Battle of Khaibar. This is wordings of the Saheehain as related
through Malik and others from Az-Zuhri requiring the connection of the
216

In The Defence Of the True Faith
prohibition of the Mut‘a marriage to the Battle of Khaibar which is
doubtful from two angles:
1.
On the day of the Battle of Khaibar, there were no women with
whom they could have had Mut‘a relationship since they were sufficed by
captives beyond having the need for Mut‘a marriage.
2.
It is recorded in Saheeh Muslim on the authority of Ar-Rabee‘ Ibn
Sabrah Ibn Ma‘bad from his father that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, permitted them Mut‘a on the day of the
Conquest of Makkah but he did not leave Makkah before he prohibited it
again and he said: “Allah has prohibited it till the Day of Judgment.”
Based on this, it is possible that he had prohibited it then permitted it and
thereafter prohibited once again. This indicates that the abrogation (of the
ruling) occurred twice which is very remote. Nevertheless, it is reported
that Imam Ash-Shafi’i, may Allah have Mercy upon him, said that he does
not know anything that was prohibited then permitted and thereafter,
prohibited once again except Nikah Mut‘a. Nothing compelled him to say
that, may Allah have mercy on him, other than his reliance on these two
Hadith as indicated earlier.
As-Suhaili and others have related on the authority of some of them who
claimed that it was permitted thrice and prohibited thrice. Others said: (it
was prohibited) four times but this is extremely remote, and Allah knows
best. They also disagreed on the first time it was prohibited. Some said,
(it was) at the Battle of Khaibar. It is also said that it occurred at the time
of the Umrah of redemption. Others favored the
Conquest of Makkah and this is the more dominant view. Some others
also argued that it occurred in Awtas which is closer to the latter opinion.
It is also said that it was first prohibited in Tabook while some others
argued that it was first prohibited during the Farewell Pilgrimage. This is
related by Abu Dawood.
Some scholars have tried to give response to the Hadith of ‘Ali, may Allah
be pleased with him, by arguing that there occur in it advancement and
deferment and what is upheld there from is what is related by Imam
Ahmad, may Allah have Mercy upon him: Sufyan narrated to us on the
217

In The Defence Of the True Faith
authority of Az-Zuhri from Al-Hasan and ‘Abdullah, the two sons of
Muhammad narrating from their father that ‘Ali said to Ibn ‘Abbas, may
Allah be pleased with them all: “The Messenger of Allah has prohibited
(us) from Nikah Mut‘a and from the meat of domestic donkey at the time
of Khaibar.” The narrator made us believe that the word Khaibar is an
adverb for the prohibition of both (of them – Nikah Mut‘a and meat of
domestic donkey) However, this is not so. Rather, it is an adverb for the
prohibition of the meat of domestic donkey. As for the Nikah Mut‘a, no
adverb was mentioned concerning it, it was only merged with it because
‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, got information that Ibn Abbas, may
Allah be pleased with them both, permitted Nikah Mut‘a and the meat of
domestic donkey as is well-known from him.
Thus, as Ameerul-Mu’mineen, he said to him, “You are a conceited
fellow! Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, has
prohibited Nikah Mut‘a and the meat of domestic donkey on the day of
the Battle of Khaibar and he merely added that so as to dissuade him from
his belief of permissibility concerning it. It is to this account that our
Shaikh, Al-Hafiz Abul-Hajjaj Al-Mizzi, may Allah cover him in His
Mercy (Aameen) [leaned towards]. Inspite of this, Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah
be pleased with them both, did not retract from his opinion of the
permissibility of domestic donkey and Mut‘a. As for the prohibition, he
interpreted it that it was their load-carrier (a reason which gave rise to its
prohibition). As for Mut‘a, he used to permit it at the time of exigency
during journeys. Thus, he understood the prohibition to be at the time of
wellbeing. Some of Ibn ‘Abbas’ companions and students equally
followed him on this view and this did cease to be well-known to the
scholars of Al-Hijaz till the time of Ibn Juraij and thereafter. A similar
view to Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, has been
purportedly related from Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, may Allah have
Mercy upon him, but this is inauthentic. And Allah knows best.
Ibn Ishaq related: After Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, had conquered a number of their fortresses and gained large
amounts of their wealth in booty, he headed for their fortresses of AlWateeh and As-Sulalim both of which were the last two fortresses to be
conquered. He lay siege on them for ten nights. Ibn Hisham added: Their
slogan on the day of Khaibar was ‘O Mansoor (the aided
218

In The Defence Of the True Faith
ones), kill, kill!’

The Story of Safiyyah Bint Huyayy Ibn Akhtab AnNadariyyah
Anas Ibn Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, related: Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, offered the Fajr
prayer when it was still dark, then he rode and said: “Allahu Akbar!
Khaibar is ruined. When we approach near to a nation, the most
unfortunate is the morning of those who have been warned.” They (the
inhabitants of Khaibar) came out running on the roads. The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, had their warriors killed, their
offspring and woman taken as captives. Safiyyah, may Allah be pleased
with her, was amongst the captives. She first fell into the lot of Dihyah
Al-Kalbi, may Allah be pleased with him, but later on she was transferred
to the Prophet. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
made her manumission her Mahr.
Imam Bukhari related on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik, may Allah be
pleased with him, who said, “The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him, came to Khaibar and when Allah, the Almighty, made him victorious
and he conquered the town by breaking the enemy’s defense, the beauty
of Safiyyah Bint Huyayy Ibn Akhtab, may Allah be pleased with her, was
mentioned to him and her husband had been killed while she was a bride.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, selected
her for himself and he set out in her company till he reached SuddasSahba’ (a place close to Khaibar) where her menses were over and he
married her. Then Hais (a kind of meal) was prepared and served on a
small leather sheet (used for serving meals). Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, then said to me: “Inform those who
are around you (about the wedding banquet).” So that was the marriage
banquet given by Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, for (his marriage with) Safiyyah, may Allah be pleased with
her. After that we proceeded to Madinah and I saw that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was covering her
with a cloak while she was behind him. Then he would sit beside his camel
and let Safiyyah put her feet on his knees to ride (the camel).” Imam AlBukhari related this exclusive Muslim.
219

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Anas, may Allah be pleased with him, also narrated: The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, stayed for three nights between
Khaibar and Al-Madinah and was married to Safiyyah, may Allah be
pleased with her. I invited the Muslims to his marriage banquet and there
was neither meat nor bread in that banquet but the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered Bilal, may Allah be pleased with
him, to spread the leather mats on which dates, dried yogurt and butter
were placed. The Muslims said amongst themselves, “Will she (i.e.,
Safiyyah) be one of the Mothers of the Believers, (i.e., one of the wives
of the Prophet ) or just (a lady captive) of what his right-hand possesses?”
Some of them said, “If the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, makes her observe the veil, then she will be one of the mothers of
the believers (i.e. one of the Prophet’s wives), and if he does not make her
observe the veil, then she will be his lady slave.” So when he departed, he
made a place for her behind him (on his and made her observe the veil).”
Al-Bukhari related it exclusively.
Ibn Ishaq said: The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, laid siege on the people of Khaibar in their two strongholds of
Al-Wateeh and As-Sulalim. When they became convinced of their
destruction they requested him to let them leave and spare their blood,
which he granted. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, had captured all their property, AshShiqq, Natat and AlKateebah and all their fortresses except the two strongholds. When the
people of Fadak got wind that he had done so, they also sent to the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asking
him to treat them in a similar manner in exchange for access to their
wealth and he granted their request as well.
Muhayyisah Ibn Mas‘ood, the brother of Banu Harithah, was among those
who mediated between the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and them. When the people of Khaibar had
surrendered, they requested that the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, let them undertake their property for a half share of the
proceeds saying: “We know it better than you and we are better growers.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
accepted their proposal but stipulated that “If we wish to exile you, we
220

In The Defence Of the True Faith
reserve the right to do that.” He (the Messenger of Allah) made a similar
agreement with the people of Fadak.
Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with them both, narrated: The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, fought
against the people of Khaibar till they retreated into their fort and he
captured their land, crops and palm plantation. They entered into an
armistice upon the permission to cultivate the land and for them will be
what can be carried on their riding animals and for the Messenger of Allah
will be the rest. They were also obliged not to hide anything and if they
did, then there would be neither protection nor armistice for them. This
included a leather bag containing some wealth and jewelry belonging to
Huyayy Ibn Akhtab which he carried along with him to Khaibar when he
was dislodged from An-Nadeer.
Consequently, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said to Huyayy’s uncle: “What happened to Huyayy’s leather
bag which he brought with him from An-Nadeer?” He responded, “It has
been depleted by expenses and wars.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, then said: “The agreement had just been
concluded and the wealth is much more than that.” The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, handed him over to AzZubayr who meted out punishment on him. Meanwhile, Huyayy entered
the ruins (of the fort). Upon receiving punishment, he confessed saying,
“I had seen Huyayy going round the ruins towards this direction.” So they
traced the direction and found the leather bag in the ruins.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
executed the two sons of AbilHuqaiq and one of them was the husband of
Safiyyah bint Huyayy Ibn Akhtab. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, captured their women and children and
divided up their wealth due to their breach of faith. He wanted to evict
them from their land but they pleaded, “O Muhammad, grant us to remain
on this land so that we may till it and reside on it.” Since neither the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, nor the
Companions have any men living on it nor did they intend it to be desolate,
they granted them Khaibar on the condition that half of all the harvest
221

In The Defence Of the True Faith
shall be for them and a little aside from that for Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him,.
Abdullah Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him, used to visit them
every year to estimate their harvest and reserve for them half of it. They
complained to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, of Abdullah’s covetousness and they sought to bribe him. He
(Abdullah) said, “O enemies of Allah, you want to give me evil. By Allah,
I have come to you from the most beloved of men to me while you are the
most hateful to me due to a number of you from among the monkeys and
swines. Nevertheless my aversion for you and my love for him will not
impel me to be unjust to you.” They responded, “It is this that sustains the
heaven and the earth.”
It is said that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, saw a green mark on Safiyyah’s eye and he asked: “What is this green
[mark] on you, Safiyyah?” She responded, “My head was on the lap of
Ibn Abi Al-Huqaiq while I was sleeping. Then I saw that the moon fell on
my lap. So I informed him of my dream and he slapped me and said, “You
desire the king of Yathrib.” She added, “The Messenger of Allah used to
be the most hateful to me for he killed my husband and father and he never
ceased to give me excuses saying, “Your father incited the Arabs against
me and did such and such” until the feeling of aversion dissipated from
my heart.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, used
to give each of his wives every year, 80 wasqs (measure) of dates, 20
wasqs of barley. During the time of ‘Umar, they (the people of Khaibar)
double-crossed the Muslims and threw Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased
with them both, from a rooftop and he had his wrist dislocated.
Consequently ‘Umar announced, “Whoever has a claim (share) in Khaibar
should gather so that we may divide it up.” Their leader pleaded, “Do not
exile us, rather, let us remain on the land as The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, and Abu Bakr had done.” ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with him, responded: “Do you think that I have forgotten
the statement of Allah’s Messenger, i.e., “what will your condition be
when you are expelled and your camel will be carrying you toward AshSham day after day?” Thus, ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,
222

In The Defence Of the True Faith
divided it among those who fought in the Battle of Khaibar among the
companions of Al-Hudaibiyyah.” Abu Dawood has also reported it in a
summarized form.
Imam Bukhari related that Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with them
both, said, “On the day of Khaibar, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, gave two portions to the cavalry and one to the
infantry.” Nafi‘, however, explained the rational saying, “If a man had a
horse, he was given three portions and if he had no horse, he was given a
portion.” This version implied that all of Khaibar was divided up among
the soldiers.
It is related on the authority of Ibn Shihab who said, “Information reached
me that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
conquered Khaibar forcibly and left some of the people to utilize the land
after the battle. Based on this, Aaz-Zuhri said: “Allah’s Messenger took
Khumus (one-fith of booty) and then divided up its remainder among
those who witnessed the battle.”
However, what Az-Zuhri has said is debatable for the authentic view is
that all of Khaibar was not divided but half of it was divided between the
victorious warriors as shall be explained shortly. Malik and others who
shared his opinion have adduced this as an evidence that the Imam has a
choice regarding conquered land: if he wishes, he may divide it or he may
earmark it as he deems for the benefit of the Muslims. If he also wishes,
he may divide a part of it and set aside the other part to cater for recurrent
needs and benefits.
Abu Dawood related on the authority of Sahl Ibn Abi Hathmah who said:
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, divided
Khaibar into two halves, one half for his recurrent needs and other benefits
while he shared the other half among the Muslims. He divided it into
eighteen portions.”
On the authority of Bushair Ibn Yasar, the freed slave of the Ansar, from
some of the Companions of Allah’s Messenger: that when Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was victorious over
Khaibar he divided it into thirty six portions, each portion comprising one
223

In The Defence Of the True Faith
hundred parts. One half of all the portion was for the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and the Muslims while the
other half was set aside for inadvertent occurrences and recurrent needs
of the people.
On the authority of Mujmmi‘ Ibn Jariyah Al-Ansari, may Allah be pleased
with him, one of the reciters of the Qur’an who said, “Khaibar was divided
among the companions of Al-Hudaibiyyah. Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, divided it into eighteen portions and the
army numbered one thousand five hundred among which were thirty
cavalries. He gave the cavalries two portions and the infantry one
portion.” Abu Dawood related it exclusively.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said: Ash-Shiqq and An-Natat were among the two
portions of the Muslims. AshShiqq comprises of thirteen portions while
An-Natat comprises of fifty portions. He divided them all into one
thousand eight hundred shares and distributed among those who
witnessed Al-Hudaibiyyah and who were present at Khaibar as well as
those were absent. Meanwhile, none of those who witnessed
AlHudaibiyyah were absent from Khaibar except Jabir Ibn Abdullah, may
Allah be pleased with him, and he was still given his own share.
He also added: “The companions of Al-Hudaibiyyah numbered one
thousand four hundred along with two hundred mounted men. Two shares
were given for the horse and he gave every hundred persons a portion each
of the eighteen portions. He gave additional shares of four hundred to the
two hundred mounted men which was meant for their horses.” This is how
Al-Baihaqi related it on the authority of Salih Ibn Kaisan, that the army
numbered one thousand four hundred men along with two hundred horses.
I say: The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
apportioned among them their shares and the first of the two portions,
Ash-Shiqq, was with ‘Asim Ibn Adiyy.
As for those who witnessed Khaibar among the slaves and women, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, gave them a part
of the booty but did not give them an allotment.
224

In The Defence Of the True Faith
On the authority of Muhammad Ibn Zaid who said: ‘Umair, the freed slave
of Abi Al-Lahm informed me saying, “I was present at Khaibar along with
my masters who spoke about me to the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him. He issued an order about me, and a sword was
girded on me and I was trailing it. He was then informed that I was a slave.
He, therefore, ordered that I should be given some inferior goods.”

The Arrival of Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib and Those Who
Remained of the Muslims Who Migrated to Abyssinia
On the authority of Abu Moosa, may Allah be pleased with him, who said:
The news of the migration of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him, (from Makkah to Madinah) reached us while we were in Yemen. So
we set out as emigrants towards him. We were (three) I and my two
brothers. I was the youngest of them, and one of the two was Abu Burdah,
and the other, Abu Ruhm, and our total number was either 52 or 53 men
from my people. We got on board a boat and our boat took us to anNajashi in Abyssinia. There we met Ja‘far bin Abi Taalib, may Allah be
pleased with him, and stayed with him. Then we all came (to Madinah)
and met the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, at the time of the
conquest of Khaibar. Some of the people used to say to us, i.e., the people
of the ship, “We have migrated before you.”
Asma’ Bint ‘Umais, may Allah be pleased with her, who was one of those
who had come with us, came as a visitor to Hafsah, may Allah be pleased
with her, the wife the Prophet. She had migrated along with those other
Muslims who migrated to an-Najashi. ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with
him, came to Hafsah while Asma’ bint ‘Umais was with her. ‘Umar, on
seeing Asma’ asked, “Who is this?” She said, “Asma’ Bint ‘Umais”.
‘Umar said, “Is she the Abyssinian? Is she the sea-faring lady?” Asma’
replied, “Yes.” ‘Umar said, “We have migrated before you (people of the
boat), so we have got more right than you over Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, “ On that Asma’ became angry and
said, “No, by Allah, while you were with Allah’s Messenger who was
feeding the hungry ones amongst you, and advising the ignorant ones
amongst you, we were in the far-off hated land of Abyssinia, and all that
was for the sake of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him. By Allah, I will neither eat any food nor drink anything till I
225

In The Defence Of the True Faith
inform Allah’s Messenger of all that you have said. There we were harmed
and frightened. I will mention this to the Prophet and will not tell a lie or
curtail your saying or add something to it.”
So when the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, came, she
said, “O Allah’s Messenger, ‘Umar has said such-and-such.” He said (to
Asma’): “What did you say to him?” Asma said, “I told him such-andsuch.” The Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, said: “He
(i.e. ‘Umar) has not got more right than you people over me, as he and his
companions have (the reward of) only one migration, and you, the people
of the boat, have (the reward of) two migrations.” Asma’ later on said, “I
saw Abu Moosa and the other people of the boat coming to me in
successive groups, asking me about this narration, and to them nothing in
the world was more cheerful and greater than what the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, had said about them.”
Narrated Abu Burdah: Asma’ said, “I saw Abu Moosa requesting me to
repeat this narration again and again.”
Narrated Abu Burdah: Abu Moosa said, “The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: ‘I recognize the voice of the group
of Al-Ash‘ariyoon; when they recite the Qur’an after entering their homes
at night. I can recognize their houses by (listening) to their voices when
they are reciting the Qur’an at night although I have not seen their houses
when they come during the day time. Amongst them is Hakim who, on
meeting the cavalry or the enemy, used to say to them (i.e. the enemy):
My companions order you to wait for them’.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abu Moosa, may Allah be pleased
with him, who said, “We came upon the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, after he had conquered Khaibar. He then gave us a
share (from the booty), meanwhile he never gave to anybody else who did
not attend the Conquest aside from us.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Anbasah Ibn Sa‘eed that Abu
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, came to the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and asked him (for a share from the booty
of Khaibar). On that, one of the sons of Sa‘eed Ibn Al-‘As said to him, “O
226

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Allah’s Messenger! Do not give him.” Abu Hurairah, may Allah be
pleased with him, then said (to the Prophet), “This is the murderer of Ibn
Qawqal.” Sa‘eed’s son said, “How strange! A guinea-pig coming from
Qadoom AdDa’n!”

The Story of the Poisoned Lamb
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abu Hurairah, may Allah be
pleased with him, who said: When Khaibar was conquered, a (cooked)
sheep containing poison, was given as a present to Allah’s Messenger.”
Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, also narrated: When
Khaibar was conquered, a roasted poisoned sheep was presented to the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, as a gift (by the Jews). The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered:
“Let all the Jews who have been here, be assembled before me.” The Jews
were collected and the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said (to them): “I am going to ask you a question. Will you tell the truth?’’
They said, “Yes.’ The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
asked: “Who is your father?” They replied, “So-and-so.” He said: “You
have told a lie; your father is so-and-so.” They said, “You are right.” He
said: “Will you now tell me the truth, if I ask you about something?” They
replied, “Yes, O Abul-Qasim; and if we should tell a lie, you can realize
our lie as you have done regarding our father.” On that he asked: “Who
are the people of the (Hell) Fire?” They said, “We shall remain in the
(Hell) Fire for a short period, and after that you will replace us.” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “May you be
cursed and humiliated in it! By Allah, we shall never replace you in it.’’
Then he asked: “Will you now tell me the truth if I ask you a question?”
They said, “Yes, O Abul-Qasim.” He asked: “Have you poisoned this
sheep?” They said, “Yes.” He asked: “What made you do so?” They said,
“We wanted to know if you were a liar in which case we would get rid of
you, and if you are a prophet then the poison would not harm you.”
Ibn Ishaq said: When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, finished with Khaibar, he departed for Wadi Al-Qura and laid
227

In The Defence Of the True Faith
siege on its inhabitants for several nights. Thereafter, he returned
homeward to Madinah.
Then he mentioned the incident of the stray arrow which killed Mid‘am.
The people said, “Congratulations to him for the martyrdom.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “No, by Him
in Whose Hand my soul is, the sheet (of cloth) which he had taken
(illegally) on the Day of Khaibar from the booty before the distribution of
the booty, has become a flame of Fire burning him.”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq also mentioned in his biography that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, consummated his
marriage with Safiyyah, may Allah be pleased with her, at Khaibar or
while on the way. The person who embellished, combed her hair and
beautified her for Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, was Umm Sulaim Bint Milhan, Anas Ibn Malik’s mother. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, passed the
night with her in his tent and Abu Ayoob, may Allah be pleased with him,
stood guard with his sword patrolling the tent throughout the night. When
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, noticed his
presence he asked: “What is the matter with you O Abu Ayoob?” He
responded: “I was afraid of your safety from this woman. You had killed
her father and husband coupled with the fact that she had newly accepted
Islam so I nursed fear of her concerning your safety.” They claimed that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
supplicated: “O Allah, protect Abu Ayyoob as he protected me through
the night.”
Then he said: Az-Zuhri relate on the authority of Sa‘eed Ibn Musayyab
mentioning their oversleeping beyond the time of Salat us-Subh on their
way back from Khaibar and that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, was the first to wake up and said: “O Bilal, what
did you do to us?” He responded, “O Messenger of Allah, the One who
took your soul (in sleep) also took mine.” And the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “You have spoken the truth.” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, steered his camel a
short while and then alighted, performed ablution and offered his prayer
228

In The Defence Of the True Faith
as he used to offer it before. This is how Malik has related on the authority
of Az-Zuhri from Sa‘eed in mursal form.
Abu Dawood has related on the authority of Abu Hurairah, may Allah be
pleased with him, that while Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, was returning from the Battle of Khaibar, he traveled
through the night till sleep overtook us and he said to Bilal, may Allah be
pleased with him: “Keep the vigil for us, Bilal.” He (the narrator) added:
sleep overtook Bilal, may Allah be pleased with him, while he was leaning
against his riding animal. Neither did the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him, nor Bilal, may Allah be pleased with him, nor anyone else
among his companions wake up till the sun shone on them. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was the first to
awake and, being startled, he called to Bilal, may Allah be pleased with
him, who said: “O Messenger of Allah, may my father and mother be
offered as ransom for you, the same thing that overpowered me which
overpowered you.” He (the Messenger of Allah) then said: “Lead the
beasts on.” So they led their camels to some distance. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, then performed ablution
and gave orders to Bilal, may Allah be pleased with him, who pronounced
the Iqamah and then led them in the morning prayer. When he finished
the prayer he said: “When anyone forgets the prayer, he should observe it
when he remembers it, for Allah has said: “and perform As-Salat (Iqamat
us-Salat) for My Remembrance.’” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:14) Yoonus said: Ibn
Shihab used to recite it in a similar manner.
On the authority of Ibn Mas’ood, may Allah be pleased with him, (who
said): This occurred on their return from Al-Hudaibiyyah and in his own
version: that it was Bilal, may Allah be pleased with him, who was
guarding them. And in yet another narration from him, he was the one
who was guarding them.”
Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi said: It is possible that this occurred twice. In the
Hadith of ‘Imran Ibn Husain and Abu Qatadah, their sleep was beyond
the time of Salat. There is the Hadith of Al-Meeda’ah concerning that and
it is possible that this is one of those two times or the third time. Al-Waqidi
said in the Hadith of Abu Qatadah, may Allah be pleased with him, that
229

In The Defence Of the True Faith
this occurred on their return journey from the Battle of Tabook. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
Then Al-Baihaqi cited a Hadith related by the author of Saheeh from the
story of ‘Awf, the bedouin on the authority of Abu Raja’ from ‘Imran Ibn
Husain concerning the incident of his sleeping beyond the time of Salat
and that of the woman with the two buckets and how he took the two
buckets of water with which he watered the entire army and the water did
not reduce from its original quantity even slightest. Then he also
mentioned the incident related by Muslim from the Hadith of Thabit AlBunani on the authority of Abdullah bin Rabah from Abu Qatadah and it
is a lengthy hadeeth, in which they slept beyond the time of Salat and the
increment in water quantity from the water basin.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari, may Allah
be pleased with him, who said: When Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, fought the Battle of Khaibar, or when he
went toward it, (whenever) the people passed over a high place
overlooking a valley, they raised their voices saying, “Allahu-Akbar!
Allahu-Akbar! None has the right to be worshipped except Allah.” On that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said (to
them): “Lower your voices, for you are not calling a deaf or an absent one,
but you are calling a Hearer Who is near and is with you.” I was behind
the riding animal of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and he heard me saying, “La ilaha ill-Allah wala hawla wala
quwwata illa billah” (There is neither might, nor power but with Allah).
On that he said to me: “O Abdullah Ibn Qais!” I said, “Labbaik, O Allah’s
Messenger!” He said: “Shall I tell you a sentence which is one of the
treasures of Paradise?” I said, “Yes, O Allah’s Messenger! Let my father
and mother be sacrificed for your sake.” He said: “It is: ‘La hawla wa la
quwwata illa billah.’” (There is neither might nor power but with Allah).”

The Prophet’s March Through Wadi Al-Qura and
His Siege of the Jewish Inhabitants
Al-Waqidi related on the authority of Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him, that we went out along with Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, from Khaibar to Wadi Al-Qura.
230

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Meanwhile, Rifa‘ Ibn Zaid Ibn Wahb Al-Judhami had presented to the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, a gift of a
black slave called Mid‘am. He used to unsaddle the mount of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. When we got to
the valley and came close to the Jews they greeted us with a shower of
arrows. As the black slave began to unpack the saddle-bag, he was
suddenly struck by a (stray) arrow which proved fatal. We said, “This is
glad tidings for him, O Messenger of Allah, as he is a martyr.” Upon this
the Messenger of Allah remarked: “Not so. By Him in Whose hand is the
life of Muhammad, the small garment which he stole from the booty on
the Day of Khaibar, which did not (legitimately) fall to his lot is burning
like the Fire (of Hell) on him.” The people were greatly perturbed (on
hearing this). A person came there with a lace or two laces and said, “O
Messenger of Allah, I found (them) on the Day of Khaibar. He (the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him) remarked: “This is a lace of
fire or two laces of fire.” This Hadith is recorded in the Saheehain on the
authority of Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, from the
Prophet.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
prevented his Companions from fighting against them. Rather, he arrayed
them and then invited them to Islam and informed them that if they accept
Islam, they will be protecting their wealth and preserving their blood, and
their accounting rests with Allah, the Almighty.
Nevertheless, one of them stepped forward throwing a challenge for a duel
and Az-Zubair Ibn Al‘Awwam, may Allah be pleased with him, stepped
forward and killed him. Another person also stepped forward for a
challenge and ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, also stepped forward
and finished him. Yet another person stepped forward from them and Abu
Dujanah, may Allah be pleased with him, took up his challenge and killed
him. This continued until eleven men were killed from their camp. Each
time a person was killed, the rest were invited to Islam. On that day, when
the time of Salat approached, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, led his Companions in prayer and then resumed
calling them to Islam, to Allah and His Messenger. In this manner, the
Muslims killed them till nightfall.
231

In The Defence Of the True Faith
By the following morning, the sun had not even risen till the length of a
spear before they surrendered. They were pressured into defeat and Allah,
the Almighty, granted their wealth as booty and the Muslims captured a
large amount of furnishings and personal effects. The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, remained in the valley for four
days during which he divided the booty among his Companions and left
the land and palm plantations in the hands of the Jews to work upon on a
sharecropping agreement. When the Jews of Taima’ got wind of what the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, meted out
to Khaibar, Fadak and Wadi Al-Qura, they settled for conciliation with
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, upon
the promise to pay the Jizyah. Thus, they retained their wealth. When
‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, expelled the Jews of Khaibar and
Fadak he did not expel the inhabitants of Taima’ and Wadi Al-Qura for
both of them were situated within the territory of Sham. He also opined
that whatever is before Wadi Al-Qura up to Madinah is Hijaz and
whatever is beyond that falls within Sham.
The narrator added: Afterwards, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, withdrew on a returning journey back to
Madinah after he had concluded the affairs of Khaibar and Wadi Al-Qura
and Allah obtained for him considerable booty.
It is recorded in the Saheehain that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, conquered Khaibar and employed the
Jewish inhabitants (of Khaibar) to cultivate it on the condition that they
would have half of its yield. It is stated in some versions of this Hadith
that the conditions include that they should work upon it with their own
wealth (seeds, implements). In yet another version, the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said to them: “We will allow you to
continue here, so long as we would desire.”
It is recorded in As-Siyar that he would send to them ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him, to estimate the yield once the
fruits had become fully grown and then, he would collect them together
himself. When ‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him,
was killed at (the Battle of) Mu’tah, the Prophet, peace and blessings of
232

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Allah be upon him, would send Jabbar Ibn Sakhr, may Allah be pleased
with him, instead.
I say: In different eras after three hundred (years), the Jews of Khaibar
claimed they had in their possession a document from Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in which they were absolved
from paying the Jizyah. They had deceived a number of scholars with this
document till some of them opined that they had been truly absolved from
paying the Jizyah among whom (from the Shafi‘iyyah) was Shaikh Abu
‘Ali Ibn Khairoon. However, this document was forged, a lie and a
fabrication without any basis whatsoever.
I have explained its futility from a number of angles in the Kitab Mufrad.
A number of scholars have exposed the forgery of this document in their
books such as Ibn As-Sibagh in his ‘Masa’il’, Ash-Shaikh Abu Hamid in
his Ta‘leeqat and Ibn Al-Maslamah authored a distinct volume dedicated
to the refutation against the document. They (the Jews) stirred up the issue
of the document after seven hundred years and displayed a document in
which contains a transcription of the Ashab mentioned in their books and
I came across it and found out it was all false.
Contained in it is the witnessing of Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh, may Allah be
pleased with him, though he had died before the time of (the battle of)
Khaibar. It also includes Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan, may Allah be
pleased with him, even though he had not even become Muslim at the
time. At the end, it says: ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with
him, wrote it and again this is an error for the Jizyah which the document
claims had been absolved from them was not even legislated until after
(Khaibar). The first time it was legislated and taken was from the people
of Najran and they paid it at the end of the ninth year. And Allah knows
best.

The Military Expedition of Abu Bakr to Banu
Fazarah
Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy upon him, related on the authority
of Salamah, may Allah be pleased with him, who said: “We proceeded on
a military expedition with Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, who
233

In The Defence Of the True Faith
was appointed as the commander over us. He had been appointed by the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. When we
were only at an hour’s distance from the water of the enemy, Abu Bakr,
may Allah be pleased with him, ordered us to attack. We made a halt
during the last part of the night to rest and then we attacked from all sides
and reached their wateringplace where a battle was fought. Some of the
enemy was killed and others were taken prisoner.

The Military Expedition of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab to
Turabah in the Territory of the Hawazin
Al-Baihaqi related through Al-Waqidi with his chains of narration that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent ‘Umar
Ibn Al-Khattaab at the command of thirty mounted soldiers with a guide
from Banu Hilal. The army would travel by night and hide by daytime.
When they returned to the enemy territory, they (the enemies) fled and
‘Umar retreated back to Madinah. They asked him, “Do you have any
interest in attacking Khath‘am?” He responded, “The Messenger of Allah
commanded me only to attack the Hawazin in their territory.”

The Expedition of Abdullah Ibn Rawahah Against
Yusair Ibn Rizam, the Jew
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of ‘Urwah and through Moosa Ibn
‘Uqbah from Az-Zuhri that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, sent ‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased
with him, at the command of thirty horsemen, among them was ‘Abdullah
Ibn Unais, to march against Yusair Ibn Rizam, the Jew at Khaibar. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had been informed
that he had been rousing and mobilizing the Ghatafan to wage war along
with him (against the Muslims). The Muslim contingent came to him and
said: Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, has
sent us to make you the ruler of Khaibar. They did not cease to convince
him till he chose to follow them accompanied by thirty of his men. Each
man had a Muslim riding behind him. When they reached Thibar, six
miles from Khaibar, Yusair Ibn Rizam regretted falling for the Muslims’
trick. He reached out for ‘Abdullah Ibn Unais’ sword but Ibn Unais
234

In The Defence Of the True Faith
outsmarted him. He goaded his camel and rushed into the crowd till he
overpowered Yusair then he struck his leg and amputated it. Yusair rushed
with a splinter of rock in his hand and hit the face of ‘Abdullah Ibn Unais
smashing his forehead. Each Muslim also pounced on their riding partner
among the enemies and killed them all with the exception of one man.
None of the Muslims were killed. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, spat on the fracture of ‘Abdullah Ibn Unais and it
neither festered nor pained him till he died.

Another Expedition With Basheer Ibn Sa‘d
Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy upon him, related on the authority
of Usamah Ibn Zaid, may Allah be pleased with him, who said:
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent us (to
fight) against Al-Huraqah (one of the sub-tribes) of Juhainah. We reached
those people in the morning and defeated them. A man from the Ansar
and I chased one of their men and when we attacked him, he said, “None
has the right to be worshipped but Allah.” The Ansari refrained from
killing him but I stabbed him with my spear till I killed him. When we
reached (Madinah), this news reached the Prophet. He said to me: “O
Usamah! You killed him after he had said, ‘None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah'?" I said, “O Allah’s Messenger! He merely said in
order to save himself.” The Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him, said: “You killed him after he had said, ‘None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah.” The Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him, kept on repeating that statement till I wished I had not become
Muslim prior to that day.”

The Military Expedition of Abu Hadrad to AlGhabah
Yoonus said on the authority of Ibn Ishaq, concerning the story of Abu
Hadrad and his expedition to Ghaabah, that a man came from Jusham Ibn
Mu‘awiyah named Rifa‘ah Ibn Qais or Qais Ibn Rifa‘ah from Ju‘sham till
he arrived among his people along with those who had been with him at
Al-Ghabah with the intent of mobilizing the Qais to wage war against
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. He was a
235

In The Defence Of the True Faith
popular and noble person among the Jusham. Thus, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, invited me and two other
Muslims and said: “Go to this man and bring me information and
intelligence reports.”
So we proceeded with our weapons till we came close to their camp at
dusk; we hid in a section and I gave instructions to my two Companions
to hid in another section of their camp. I said to both of them: “Once you
hear that I have shouted the Takbeer and I have charged against them then
you too should echo my Takbeer and attack along with me.” They had a
shepherd who grazed their animals in the pasture of that territory. He
passed by me and I aimed an arrow at him and drove it right into his heart.
By Allah, he could not even make a single sound. I pounced on him and
decapitated him and then I attacked a section of the army and I shouted
the Takbeer and my two companions also followed suit. We captured a
big herd of camels and a large amount of booty and we returned with them
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. I also
came along with his head.

The Expedition in Which Muhallim Ibn Jaththamah
Killed ‘Amir Ibn AlAdbat
On the authority of Abu Hadrad, who narrated that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent us to ’Idam among a group
of Muslims among whom were Abu Qatadah Al-Harith Ibn Rib‘i and
Muhallim Ibn Jaththamah Ibn Qais. We proceeded till we got to the
middle of ’Idam when we came across ‘Amir Ibn Al-Adbat on his ride
with his personal effects including a bottle of milk. He greeted us with the
greeting of Islam, so we refrained from him but Muhallim Ibn Jaththamah
bared his weapon against him and killed him over a dispute which had
occurred between them. He took his camel and personal belongings.
When we returned to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, we informed him of the incident and Allah revealed (a portion
of) the Qur’an concerning us:
“O you who believe! When you go (to fight) in the Cause of Allah, verify
(the truth), and say not to anyone who greets you (by embracing Islam):
'You are not a believer'; seeking the perishable goods of the worldly life.
236

In The Defence Of the True Faith
There are much more profits and booties with Allah. Even as he is now,
so were you
yourselves before till Allah conferred on you His Favors (i.e. guided
you to Islam), therefore, be cautious in discrimination. Allah is Ever
Well-Aware of what you do.” (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:94)

The Expedition of Abdullah Ibn Hudhafah As-Sahmi
It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, may
Allah be pleased with him, who said: The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, sent an army contingent (for some
expedition) and appointed a man from the Ansar as its commander and
ordered them (the soldiers) to obey him. (During the campaign) he became
angry with them and said, “Didn’t the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him, order you to obey me?” They said, “Yes.” He said, “I order you
to collect wood and make a fire and then throw yourselves into it.” So
they collected wood and made a fire, but when they were about to throw
themselves into it, they started looking at each other, and some of them
said, “We followed the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, to
escape from the fire how should we enter it now?” So while they were in
that state, the fire extinguished and their commander’s anger subsided.
The incident was mentioned to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, and he said: “If they had entered it (i.e. the fire) they would
never have come out of it, for obedience is required only in what is good.”

The ‘Umrah of Redemption
It is also called "Al-Qisas" and As-Suhaili prefers it, it is also referred to
as "‘Umratul-Qadiyyah". As for the first appellation, it is concerning the
access-blockade of the year of Al-Hudaibiyyah. As for the second (AlQisas), it is concerning the statement of Allah, the Almighty: “And for the
prohibited things, there is the Law of Equality (Qisas).” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:194). The third name derives from the decision that was
reached where [the Muslims would] return from them (the people of
Makkah) that year [without performing] and return the following year
with a small army, and not staying beyond three days. This is the ‘Umrah
referred to in the Verse of the Qur’an:
237

In The Defence Of the True Faith
“Indeed, Allah shall fulfill the true vision which He showed to His
Messenger [i.e. the Prophet saw a dream that he has entered Makkah
along with his Companions, having their (head) hair shaved and cut
short] in very truth. Certainly, you shall enter Al-Masjid Al-Haram; if
Allah wills, secure, (some) having your heads shaved, and (some) having
your head hair cut short, having no fear.” (Soorah Al-Fat‘h 48:27)
It was promised in the statement of Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, to ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab when he said to
him, “Did you not tell us that we would go to the Ka‘bah and perform
Tawaf around it?” He said: “Yes, but did I tell you that you would visit
the Ka‘bah this year?” I said, “No.” He said: “So you will visit it, and
perform Tawaf around it?”
Ibn Ishaq related that when Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, returned from the Battle of Khaibar, he stayed in
Madinah through the two months of Rabee‘ (ul-Awwal and ath-Thani),
the two Jumadas (al-Oola and al-Akhir), the months of Rajab, Sha‘ban,
Ramadan and Shawwal sending his various military expeditions in
between those months. Afterwards, he went out in the month of
DhulQa‘dah (the same month in which the Mushrikoon had held him back
[from performing ‘Umrah]) intent upon the ‘Umrah of redemption in
place of the one from which he was prevented (the previous year).
Ibn Hisham added: He (the Prophet) appointed Uwaif Ibn Al-Adbat AdDu’ili [in charge as Madinah]. It was referred to as the ‘Umratul-Qisas for
they prevented the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, in Dhul-Qa‘dah in the sacred month of the sixth year. In the
seventh year, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, entered Makkah in Dhul-Qa‘dah, the same sacred month in
which he was previously prevented. It reached us on the authority of Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, that he said, Allah, the
Almighty, revealed concerning that: “And for the prohibited things, there
is the Law of Equality (Qisas).” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:194).
On the authority of Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them
both, who said: “They lined for him at the Darun-Nadwah to have a
glimpse of him and his Companions. When the Messenger of Allah, peace
238

In The Defence Of the True Faith
and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered the Masjid, he did Idtiba‘
with his upper garment exposing his right shoulder and said: “Allah be
pleased with a man in whom they can see strength.” Then he touched the
corner and started out walking briskly and his Companions followed suit
and he proceeded till the House covered him away from them, he touched
the Yemeni corner and walked till he touched the Black (Stone) corner.
Then he walked briskly for three circuits and then walked normally
through the remaining circuits.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased
with them both, who said: “When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, and his Companions arrived in Makkah, the pagans
circulated the news that a group of people were coming to them and they
had been weakened by the fever of Yathrib (Madinah). So the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered his companions to do
Ramal (brisk walking) in the first three rounds of Tawaf of the Ka‘bah
and to walk between the two corners (the Black Stone and Yemenite
corner). Nothing stopped the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, from ordering them to do Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf
except out of pity for them.”
Abu ‘Abdullah narrated that Abu Salamah added on the authority of Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, who said: “When the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, came in the year
agreed upon, he said: “Do Ramal (walk briskly) so that the pagans may
observe your strength.” Meanwhile, the Mushrikoon were in the direction
of Qu‘aiqi‘an.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased
with them both, that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, passed by Marraz-Zahran during his lesser pilgrimage.
Meanwhile, information reached the Companions of Allah’s Messenger
that the Quraish are saying: “They have become debilitated by
emaciation.” Thus the Companions said, “If we could slaughter some of
our mounts, eat from its meat and drink from its broth, we would then
enter upon the people (Mushrikoon) the following morning with some
relief and being well-fed.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said: “Do not do that, rather, gather for me all your
239

In The Defence Of the True Faith
available provisions.” So they gathered them for him and spread it out and
they ate so much to their fill that there was leftover from which each one
of them also filled his traveling bag. Thereafter, Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, proceeded till he entered the Grand
Mosque and the Quraish sat in the direction of Hijr. The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, did Idtiba’ with his upper Rida’ (i.e.,
covered his upper part such that his right shoulder was exposed) and then
said: “Today, the pagans will not find any blemish in you.” He touched
the corner and then walked briskly till he was shielded away by the
Yemeni corner and then he walked to the Black (Stone) corner. Then the
Quraish said, “They are not even contented with walking, perhaps they
will sprint in a manner similar to the antelope.” And they did just that in
three circuits and it became a practice. Abu Tufail added: Ibn ‘Abbas, may
Allah be pleased with them both, also informed me that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, did that during his
Farewell Hajj.

The Story of the Prophet's Marriage to Maimoonah
Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, married
Maimoonah, may Allah be pleased with her, in the course of that journey
while he was in a sacral state. It was ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib, may
Allah be pleased with him, who married her to him. Ibn Hisham related:
She had entrusted her affairs to her sister, Umm Fadhl, may Allah be
pleased with her, and she in turn entrusted her to her husband ‘Abbas, may
Allah be pleased with him, and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, married her and gave her a dowry of four hundred
dirhams.
As-Suhaili added that when the Prophet’s proposal was conveyed to her
she was riding a camel, she said, “The camel and whatever is on it are for
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. It is
concerning her that the following Verse was revealed: “…and a believing
woman if she offers herself to the Prophet, and the Prophet wishes to
marry her; a privilege for you only, not for the (rest of) the Believers.”
(Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:50)
240

In The Defence Of the True Faith
As-Suhaili added: Ad-Daraqutni related through Abul-Aswad, the orphan
of ‘Urwah, and through Matar Al-Warraq on the authority of ‘Ikrimah
from Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, married
Maimoonah, may Allah be pleased with her, while he was in the state of
Halal. Thus, they re-interpret the first version of Ibn ‘Abbas’ narration
that he was in a state of Ihram i.e., in the sacred month.
I say: This interpretation is, however, questionable because that version
has been frequently related from Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with
them both, especially his statement, “He married her while he was a
Muhrim and consummated it while in the state of Halal.”
It is also recorded in Saheeh Al-Bukhari on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas,
may Allah be pleased with them both, that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, married Maimoonah while he was in the
state of Ihram.”

The Prophet’s Departure From Makkah After
Completing his ‘Umrah
On the authority of Al-Bara’ who narrated: When the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, went out for the ‘Umrah in the month of DhulQa‘dah, the people of Makkah did not allow him to enter their city till he
agreed to conclude a peace treaty with them by virtue of which he would
stay in Makkah for three days only (in the following year). When the
agreement was being written, the Muslims wrote: “This is the peace
treaty, which Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah has concluded.” The
polytheists objected and said (to the Prophet), “We do not agree with you
on this, for if we knew that you are indeed a Messenger of Allah we would
not have prevented you for anything (i.e. entering Makkah), but you are
only Muhammad the son of ‘Abdullah.” Then he said to ‘Ali, may Allah
be pleased with him: “Erase (the title of) ‘Messenger of Allah’.” ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, objected and said, “No, by Allah, I will never
erase you (i.e. your name).” Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, took the writing sheet but since he did not know a
better writing, so he wrote (or got the following written): “This is the
peace treaty which Muhammad, the son of ‘Abdullah, has concluded:
241

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Muhammad should not bring arms into Makkah except sheathed swords,
and should not take with him any person of the people of Makkah, even
if such a person wants to follow him, and if any of his companions wants
to stay in Makkah, he should not forbid him.”
(The following year) when the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him,
entered Makkah and the allowed period of stay elapsed, the infidels came
to ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, and said, “Tell your companion
(Muhammad) to go out, as the allowed period of his stay has finished.”
So the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, departed (from
Makkah) and the daughter of Hamzah, may Allah be pleased with him,
followed him shouting, “O Uncle, O Uncle!” ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased
with him, took her by the hand and said to Fatimah, may Allah be pleased
with her, “Take the daughter of your uncle.” So she made her ride (on her
horse). (When they reached Madinah) ‘Ali, Zaid and Ja‘afar, may Allah
be pleased with them all, quarreled about her. ‘Ali said, “I took her for she
is the daughter of my uncle.” Ja‘afar said, “She is the daughter of my uncle
and her aunt is my wife.” Zaid said, “She is the daughter of my brother.”
On that, the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, gave her
to her aunt [the wife of Zaid] and said: “The aunt is of the same status as
the mother.” He then said to ‘Ali: “You are from me, and I am from you,”
and said to Ja‘far: “You resemble me in appearance and character,” and
said to Zaid: “You are our brother and our freed slave.” ‘Ali said to the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, "Will you marry the
daughter of Hamzah?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said, “She is the daughter of my foster brother.” Al-Bukhari
exclusively related it from this route.

The Acceptance of Islam of ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As, Khalid
Ibn Al-Waleed and ‘Uthman Ibn Talhah Ibn Abi
Talhah
The Hadith concerning the story of ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As’ acceptance of Islam
after the Battle of Khandaq has been earlier cited under the heading: The
story of ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As and Najashi and his acceptance of Islam at his
hand.
242

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Al-Waqidi said: On the authority of his Shaikh, Abdul Hameed, who
narrated that I said to Zaid Ibn Abi Habeeb: “Were you told of the time of
the arrival of ‘Amr and Khalid?” He said, “No, but he merely said it was
before ‘The Conquest’.” So I said: “My father informed me that ‘Amr,
Khalid and ‘Uthman Ibn Talhah arrived in the month of Safar, 8th year of
Hijrah.
Shortly afterward, while recounting the event of his death (as contained in
Saheeh Muslim), we shall relate the context of his acceptance of Islam,
his good companionship to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, throughout his (the Prophet’s) lifetime, and he died
while feeling regret for his actions during his reign as governor shortly
after the Prophet’s death, along with a description of his death.

Khalid Ibn Waleed’s Path to Islam
Al-Waqidi related: Yahya Ibn Al-Mugheerah Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn AlHarith Ibn Hisham informed me saying: I heard my father narrating on the
authority of Khalid Ibn Waleed, may Allah be pleased with him, that (he
said): When Allah, the Almighty, fulfilled for me the good that He
intended for me and Islam made inroads into my heart and my conscience
prickled me, I said (to myself): “I have participated in all these battles
against Muhammad and I did not return from any of them except that my
mind tells me I am on a wrong side and that Muhammad will eventually
prevail.”
My brother, Al-Waleed Ibn Al-Waleed had participated with the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in the ‘Umrah of redemption
and he had sought for me to no avail and then wrote a letter to me the
content of which says:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful
To proceed: I am astonished at your failure to see (the Truth of) and
accept Islam inspite of your intelligence and is it Islam that anybody
would feign to be ignorant of? The Messenger of Allah, peace

243

In The Defence Of the True Faith
and blessings of Allah be upon him, had asked me about you. He said:
‘Where is Khalid?’ I said, ‘Allah will bring him (into Islam).’ The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
‘Someone like Khalid will not remain ignorant of Islam. It would be
better for him to devote his power to inflict defeat and good fortune on
the side of the Muslims against the idolaters and we would promote him
over others.’ Catch up with what you have missed; (for) righteousness
has missed you in many battles.”
“When I received his letter, I was goaded to leave (Makkah) and my desire
for Islam was sharpened. The Prophet’s asking of me pleased me so much
I returned to my house, requested for my horse and set out till I came
across ‘Uthman Ibn Talhah, may Allah be pleased with him (on the way).
I said (to myself): ‘This is a friend of mine, I should inform him of my
intention.’ We proceeded till we reached Al-Hadah where we met ‘Amr
Ibn Al-‘As. He said, ‘Greetings to the people.’ And we replied, ‘And to
you.’ Then he asked, ‘Where are you going?’ We also asked him, ‘What
has brought you?’ He repeated his own query and we answered, ‘We seek
to enter into (the fold of) Islam and to follow Muhammad.’ He said, ‘This
is the same reason which has brought me’.”
“So we all went together in company till we entered Madinah. We tethered
our riding animals behind AlHarrah and the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, was informed of our arrival and he
was pleased. I wore my best clothes and then proceeded toward Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. My brother met me
on the way and said, ‘Hurry, for Allah’s Messenger has been informed of
and is pleased with your arrival. He is waiting for you right now.’ We
walked fast till I appeared to him and he never ceased to smile at me till I
got to him. I greeted him as the Prophet and he returned my greeting with
a cheerful face. I said: ‘I bear witness that none deserves to be worshipped
in truth and that you are the Messenger of Allah.’ ‘Come (close),’ the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, began and
added: 'Praise be to Allah Who has guided you. I had always thought that
you were intelligent and that it would lead you to good.’ I said, ‘You are
aware of all the battles I have fought against you to impede the Truth, so
please seek Allah’s forgiveness for me over them.’ He said: ‘O Allah,
forgive Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed all that he did to impede Your way.’
244

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Khalid, may Allah be pleased with him, continued, “ ‘Uthman Ibn Talhah
and ‘Amr, may Allah be pleased with them, also stepped forward and
pledged their allegiance to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. Our arrival was in Safar, 8th year of Hijrah. By Allah,
on the day I became a Muslim, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, did not make me equal to any of his
Companions in what he repaid.”

The Expedition of Shuja‘ Ibn Wahb Al-Asadi to a
Group of Hawazin Tribe
Al-Waqidi related on the authority of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Hakam who said,
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent Shuja‘
Ibn Wahb with twenty-four men to raid a group of Hawazin. They
proceeded, traveling by night and hiding by day till they got to them and
carried out the raid. Meanwhile, he had counseled his companions not to
go to extremes in pursuit (of the enemies). They captured large number of
herds of cattle and sheep which they herded back to Madinah. The portion
given to each participant in the raid was fifteen camels. It is possible that
this expedition is the same one mentioned in what was related by AshShafi‘i from Malik from Nafi‘ on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah
be pleased with him, that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, sent a raiding party in the direction of Najd. Among the
raiding party was ‘Abdullah Ibin ‘Umar who said, “We gained a huge
number of camels as war booty. The share of each one of us was twelve
or eleven camels, and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, gave us an extra camel each.”

Expedition of Ka‘b Ibn ‘Umair Against Banu
Quda‘ah of Sham
Al-Waqidi related: Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah narrated to us from AzZuhri that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
sent Ka‘b Ibn ‘Umair Al-Ghifari with fifteen men (and they traveled) till
they reached Dhat Atlah in Sham where they found a group among their
numerous groups. They invited them to Islam but they declined and shot
a hail of arrows at the Muslims. When the Companions of the Messenger
245

In The Defence Of the True Faith
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, saw this, they fought a grim
battle against them till they were all martyred except for one, who was
injured and awoke under the calm of the night and managed to return to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,. He was
prepared to send against them a punitive force but was informed that the
enemy had moved on to another location.

The Battle of Mu’tah
On the authority of ‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent him to Mu’tah
in Jumada al-Oola in the 8th year (of Hijrah). He appointed Zaid Ibn AlHarithah, may Allah be pleased with him, as their commander with the
instructions: “If Zaid is killed, then Ja‘afar should assume the mantle of
command over the people, and if Ja‘afar is also killed, then ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah should command the people.”
The people equipped themselves and in no time they were prepared to
march forth. They numbered three thousand fighting men.
Ibn Ishaq related: When the time for their departure came, the people bade
farewell to and greeted the commander of Allah’s Messenger. When
‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him, was bidden
farewell among the others, he wept. When he was asked what made him
weep, he said, “By Allah, I neither have an attachment to the world nor
prefer remaining with you, rather, I heard Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, reciting a portion of the Book of Allah in
which Hellfire was mentioned: “There is not one of you but will pass over
it (Hell); this is with your Lord; a Decree which must be accomplished.”
(Soorah Maryam 19:71) and I do not know what my fate will be when I
come across it.” The Muslims supplicated, “May Allah accompany you,
protect you and bring you back to us in righteousness.”
‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him, said in a poem:
As for me, I ask Ar-Rahman for forgiveness,
And a wide cut spouting out blood,
246

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Or a mortal piercing,
With a spear penetrating the intestines and the liver,
Such that whenever they come across my corpse, they would say:
Allah has guided him as a warrior and he was indeed guided.
Ibn Ishaq also related: They proceeded till they encamped at Ma‘an in
Sham. Information reached the Muslim forces that Heraclius had also
encamped at Balqa’ with 100,000 Roman soldiers and yet another 100,000
men joined them from Lakhm, Judham, Al-Qain, Bahra’ and Baliyy
commanded by a man from Baliyy and another from Irashah named Malik
bin Zafilah. In the narration of Yoonus from Ibn Ishaq (it says):
Information got to them that Heraclius had encamped at Ma’ab with
100,000 Roman army and another 100,000 from the Arab tribes. It is also
claimed that the Roman army was two hundred thousand while their
opponents numbered 15,000 men. The least number that was reported is
100,000 Romans, and the Arabs numbered 50,000 men as narrated by AsSuhaili. When this information reached the Muslims, they remained in
their camp at Ma‘an for two days ruminating over their situation. Some of
them suggested: “We should write to inform the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, of the number of the enemy forces so
that he may either send us reinforcements or give us his orders which we
can execute.”
However, ‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him,
emboldened the people saying, “O men, by Allah what you dislike is
exactly what you have come out seeking – martyrdom. We neither fight
with number nor with our power and multitude. We do not fight them
except with this faith with which Allah The Almighty has ennobled us.
So, proceed either of the two good outcomes shall be yours – victory or
martyrdom.” Then the men responded, “By Allah, Ibn Rawahah has
spoken well.”
Ibn Ishaq added: The Muslim army marched ahead till they reached
Balqa’ where they met a combined force of the Romans and the Arab
tribes at a village called Masharif. The enemies moved closer and the
247

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Muslims positioned themselves at a village called Mu’tah where the two
forces eventually met. The Muslims positioned themselves [in
preparation] for the enemy. The right flank was manned by a member of
Banu Udhrah named Qutbah Ibn Qatadah while the left flank was
commanded by an Ansari called Abayah Ibn Malik.
Ibn Ishaq also related: When the two armies clashed, Zaid, may Allah be
pleased with him, fought gallantly with the banner of Allah’s Messenger
until he was killed by a swarm of spears. Then Ja‘afar, may Allah be
pleased with him, took over the banner and fought as well till the battle
became grim; he was alighted from his horse, so he hamstrung it and
resumed fighting till he was killed. Ja‘afar, may Allah be pleased with
him, was the first Muslim ever to do this act in Islam.
When Ja‘afar, may Allah be pleased with him, was killed, ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him, took over the banner and
stepped forward upbraiding his soul and encouraging himself saying:
O soul, I have sworn that you will fight in the battle willingly,
Or you shall be coerced to fight,
When the people assembled and shouted the war cry,
Why do you not advance with them? Or do you hate to enter Paradise?
No doubt, you have remained at ease for so long,
Were you not a lowly drop of water in the womb?
He also said:
O soul, if you are not killed, still you will die,
And you will meet this bird of death,
What you wished for has been bestowed on you,
If you can do what your martyrs have done,
248

In The Defence Of the True Faith
You will be guided.
Reciting these poems, he advanced and he fought strenuously till he was
martyred. May Allah be pleased with him.
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had announced
the death of Zaid, Ja‘afar and Ibn Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with
them, to the people before the news of their death reached them. He said
with his eyes flowing with tears: “Zaid took the flag and was martyred;
then Ja‘afar took the flag and was martyred, and then Ibn Rawahah took
the flag and was martyred. Finally the flag was taken by one of Allah’s
Swords (i.e. Khalid bin Al-Waleed) and Allah gave them (i.e. the
Muslims) victory.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah
be pleased with them both, that, “Allah’s Messenger appointed Zaid Ibn
Harithah, may Allah be pleased with him, as the commander of the army
during the Ghazwah of Mu’tah and said: “If Zaid is martyred, Ja‘afar
should take over his position, and if Ja‘afar is martyred, ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah should take over his position'.” ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah
be pleased with him, further said, “I was present amongst them in that
battle and we searched for Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib and found his body
amongst the bodies of the martyred ones, and found over ninety wounds
over his body, caused by stabs or shots (of arrows).” Al-Bukhari related it
exclusively.
Al-Bukhari also related from Nafi‘ that Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased
with them both, informed him that he (on the day of Mu’tah) stood beside
Ja‘afar, may Allah be pleased with him, who was dead (i.e. killed in the
battle), and he counted fifty wounds on his body, caused by stabs or
strokes, and none of those wounds was in his back. This Hadith is also
exclusively related by Al-Bukhari. A reconciliation between this narration
and the one before it is that Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with them
both, came upon these number while others counted more than that or that
this number of wounds on his front side were the ones he sustained before
he was killed. However, when he fell dead, they (the enemies) struck him
several times on his back. Thus, Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with
249

In The Defence Of the True Faith
them both, counted the wounds sustained in his front while facing the
enemy prior to his martyrdom, may Allah be pleased with him.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Qais Ibn Abi Hazim who said: I
heard Khalid Ibn Waleed, may Allah be pleased with him, saying, “On
the day (of the battle of) Mu’tah, nine swords were broken in my hand and
nothing was left in my hand except a small Yemeni sword.”
Ibn Ishaq related from Umm Ja‘afar Bint Muhammad Ibn Ja‘afar Ibn Abi
Taalib on the authority of her grandmother, Asma’ Bint ‘Umais who
narrated: “When Ja‘afar was killed, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him, came to me while I had finished tanning,
kneaded my flour, bathed, cleaned and embellished my children. He
requested: “Bring me Ja‘afar’s children, I brought them to him. He leaned
over and hugged them while tears flowed from his eyes. Apprehensive, I
asked him: ‘O Messenger of Allah, may my father and mother be
sacrificed for you, why are you crying? Has any news reached you
concerning Ja‘afar and his Companions?” ‘Yes,’ he replied. “They were
killed today.” She added: “I got up and yelled and other women gathered
round me and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him, left for his house and said: “Don’t forget to prepare food for
the family of Ja‘afar for there came upon them an incident which has
engaged them.” This is how Imam Ahmad related it from the Hadith of
Ibn Ishaq. Ibn Majah also related it through Muhammad Ibn Ishaq and
from Ibn Abi Bakr from Umm ‘Eesa from Umm Awn Bint Muhammad
Ibn Ja‘afar on the authority of Asma’ and he mentioned the matter along
with the provision of food. The correct view is that she is Umm Ja‘afar
and Umm Awn.
On the authority of Amrah who said: I heard ‘A’ishah saying, “When the
news of the martyrdom of Ibn Harithah, Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib and
‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah was delivered, Allah’s Messenger sat with sorrow
explicit on his face.” ‘A'ishah added, “I was then peeping through a chink
in the door. A man came to him and said, ‘O Allah’s Messenger! The
women of Ja‘afar are crying.’ Thereupon the Prophet, peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him, told him to forbid them to do so. So the man went
away and returned saying, ‘I forbade them but they did not listen to me.’
The Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, ordered him again
250

In The Defence Of the True Faith
to go (and forbid them). He went again and came saying, ‘By Allah, they
overpowered me (i.e. did not listen to me).’ ‘A'ishah said that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, said (to him), ‘Go
and throw dust into their mouths.’ ‘A'ishah added, ‘I said, May Allah rub
your nose in the dust! By Allah, neither have you done what you have
been ordered, nor have you relieved Allah’s Messenger of trouble.’”
‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair related that when the returning army was close to
entering Madinah, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him, went to welcome them along with other Muslims. (The narrator
added): The children also swarmed around the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him, while he was accompanying the army
back (into Madinah) on his animal. He said: “Take the children (let them
ride with you) and give me Ja‘afar’s son.” ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘afar was
brought to him. He took him and placed him in his front (on the animal).
(The narrator added): Meanwhile, the people were throwing dust at the
returning army saying: “You deserters, you deserted (fighting in) the
cause of Allah.” The Messenger Allah however said: “They are not
deserters rather they are resumes by Allah’s wish.” This narration is
mursal.
Imam Ahmad has related on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘afar who
said: Whenever Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him, returned from a journey, he would be welcomed by the children of
his household. He once returned from a journey and I was presented to
him and he carried me in his front. Then one of the two sons of Fatimah,
either Hasan or Husain was brought too and he also rode along with us at
his back and three of us entered Madinah on a horse.”

Virtues of These Three Commanders – Zaid, Ja‘afar
and Abdullah
Zaid Ibn Harithah said the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, loved him greatly and he was the first among the freed
slaves to accept Islam. A number of Verses of the Qur’an were revealed
concerning him among which are: “…nor has He made your adopted sons
your real sons.” (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:4); “Call them (adopted sons) by
(the names of) their fathers, that is more just with Allah.” (Soorah Al251

In The Defence Of the True Faith
Ahzab 33:5); “Muhammad is not the father of any man among you.”
(Soorah AlAhzab 33:40); “And (remember) when you said to him (Zaid
Ibn Harithah the freed-slave of the Prophet) on whom Allah has bestowed
Grace (by guiding him to Islam) and you (O Muhammad too) have done
favor (by manumitting him) “Keep your wife to yourself, and fear Allah.”
But you did hide in yourself (i.e. what Allah has already made known to
you that He will give her to you in marriage) that which Allah will make
manifest, you did fear the people (i.e., Muhammad married the divorced
wife of his manumitted slave) whereas Allah had a better right that you
should fear Him. So when Zaid had accomplished his desire from her (i.e.
divorced her), We gave her to you in marriage.” (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:37)
There is a consensus that all these Verses were revealed concerning him.
The grace which Allah bestowed on him is Islam and the grace which the
Prophet bestowed on him is his manumission.
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar, Allah be pleased with him, who said that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, sent an army
unit headed by Usamah Ibn Zaid and the people criticized his leadership.
The Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, said (to the
people), “If you are criticizing his leadership now, then you used to
criticize his father’s leadership before. By Allah, he (Usamah’s father)
deserved the leadership and used to be one of the most beloved persons to
me, and now his son (Usamah) is one of the most beloved persons to me
after him.”
Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib: when he sent him to the Battle of Mu’tah the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, appointed
him as the deputy of Zaid Ibn Harithah. When he was killed, about 90
wound could be counted on his body from stabs, strokes and piercing from
spear. He was also shot by arrows all the while facing the enemy valiantly,
never turning his back to them. His right hand was amputated and then the
left while holding the flag of Islam. When he lost his two hands, he
clasped the flag to his bosom with the stumps of his hands till he was
killed in that condition. It is said that a Roman struck him with a sword
cutting him into two. May Allah be pleased with Ja‘afar, and curse his
killer. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, has
attested to his martyrdom and he is among whom Paradise is categorically
252

In The Defence Of the True Faith
affirmed for. A number of hadeeth have been related nicknaming him as
“the possessor of two wings”.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar that whenever he greeted
his son (i.e. Ja‘afar’s) ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘afar he would say to him: Peace
be unto you the son of “the possessor of two wings.”
On the authority of Abu Hurairah who narrated (that Allah’s Messenger
said): “I saw Ja‘afar flying in Paradise among the angels.”
Abu Hurairah intended his preference in nobility based on the evidence
inherent in the narration of Bukhari on the authority of Abu Hurairah who
said: The people used to say, “Abu Hurairah narrates too many
narrations.” In fact I used to keep close to Allah’s Messenger and was
satisfied with what filled my stomach. I ate no leavened bread and dressed
no decorated striped clothes, and never did a man or a woman serve me,
and I often used to press my belly against gravel because of hunger, and I
used to ask a man to recite a Qur'anic Verse to me although I knew it, so
that he would take me to his home and feed me. And the most generous
of all the people to the poor was Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib. He used to take us
to his home and offer us what was available therein. He would even offer
us an empty folded leather container (of butter) which we would split and
lick whatever was in it.” Al-Bukhari related it exclusively.
Ibn Rawahah: He was one of the commanders that were martyred in the
Battle of Mu’tah as pointed out earlier. He was the one who emboldened
the Muslims to confront the Romans during their deliberation. He also
embolden himself after the death of his two other Companions. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, has affirmed
martyrdom for him and he is from those whom Paradise is affirmed for.
On the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Abi Laila who narrated that
Abdullah Ibn Rawahah came while Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him, was giving sermon and he heard him say:
“Sit down” so he sat down where he was, outside the Mosque till the
Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, concluded his sermon.
When the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, heard of that
253

In The Defence Of the True Faith
he said: “May Allah increase you in obedience to Allah and His
Messenger.”
Al-Bukhari said in his Saheeh: Mu‘adh said: “Sit with us for an hour so
that we may (increase our) belief.”
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Ata’ Ibn Yasar that ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah said to his companion: “Come so that we may believe for an
hour.” He responded: “Are we not believers?’ he said: ‘True, but we can
remember Allah and thus increase our Eeman.”
It is recorded in Saheeh Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu Darda’ who
said: “We were with Allah’s Messenger on a journey during intense heat
and none of us was fasting except Allah’s Messenger and ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him.
He was also one of the popular poets among the Companions. Some of his
poems about the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him, as related by Al-Bukhari include: ‘We have Allah’s Messenger with
us who recites His Book (the Qur’an) in the early morning time. He gave
us guidance and light while we were blind and astray, so our hearts are
sure that whatever he says, will certainly happen. He does not touch his
bed at night, being busy in worshipping Allah while the pagans are sound
asleep in their beds. He came with guidance after our hearts had been
blinded. Convinced that what he says shall come to pass'.”
On the authority of Nu‘man Ibn Basheer who narrated: ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rawahah fell down unconscious and his sister ‘Amrah started crying and
was saying loudly, “O Jabalah! Oh so-and-so! O so-and-so! And went on
calling him by his (noble) qualities one after the other). When he came to
his senses, he said (to his sister), “Whenever you said something, I was
asked, ‘Are you really so (i.e. as she says)'?”

The Martyrs of the Muslims on the Day of Mu’tah
Among the Muhajiroon were Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib, Zaid Ibn Harithah AlKalbi, Mas‘ood Ibn Al-Aswad Ibn Harithah Ibn Nadlah Al-Adawi, Wahb
Ibn Sa‘d Ibn Abi Sarh, all making four martyrs. From the Ansar, the
254

In The Defence Of the True Faith
martyrs include ‘Abdullaah Ibn Rawahah, ‘Abbad Ibn Qais AlKhazrajiyan, Al-Harith Ibn AnNu‘man Ibn Isaf Ibn Nadlah An-Najjari
and Suraqah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Atiyyah Ibn Khansa’ Al-Mazini making four
men. The aggregate of those who were killed from the Muslims on that
day were just these eight men.
Meanwhile, a large number of the polytheists were killed. Here is Khalid
himself saying thus: “On the day (of the Battle of) Mu’tah, nine swords
were broken in my hand and nothing was left in my hand except a small
Yemeni sword.” What (number of enemies) do you suppose he would
have killed with those swords? Not to even talk of other brave heroes
among the carriers of the Qur’an. This is subsumed in the statement of
Allah: “There has already been a sign for you (O Jews) in the two armies
that met (in combat i.e. the Battle of Badr): One was fighting in the Cause
of Allah, and as for the other (they) were disbelievers. They (the
Believers) saw them (the disbelievers) with their own eyes twice their
number (although they were thrice their number). And Allah supports
with His Victory whom He pleases. Verily, in this is a lesson for those
who understand.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:13)

Hadeeth Indicating the Great Excellence of the
Commanders of This Expedition
On the authority of Abu Umamah Al-Bahili who said: I heard Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, saying: “While I
was sleeping, two men came to me (in my dream) and held me below my
armpit and took me to a rough mountain and then asked me to climb. I
said: ‘I can’t climb it.’ They insisted saying: ‘We shall make it easy for
you.’ Then I climbed till I got to the summit of the mountain and then I
began to hear intense sounds and I asked: ‘What are these sounds?’ They
said: ‘These are the yelling of the inmates of Hellfire.’ They proceeded
with me till we saw some people hung with their Achilles tendon pierced
through their cheeks and blood streaming from them (their cheeks). ‘Who
are these?’ I asked and they said: ‘These are people who break their fast
before its due time.’ He said: ‘May the Jews and Christians be frustrated.’”
Sulaim said: I do not know whether he heard it from Allah’s Messenger
or from his own opinion.
255

In The Defence Of the True Faith
“As they took me along I saw some people with exceedingly bloated
bodies and exuding the most disgusting odor like that of a lavatory. I
asked, ‘Who are these?’ They replied, ‘These are the polytheists killed (in
battles)’. Then we proceeded till we saw another group of people with
exceedingly bloated bodies and exuding the most disgusting of odor like
that of a lavatory. I asked, ‘Who are these?’ They replied, ‘These are the
male and female adulterers.’ They went ahead with me then we saw
snakes biting the breasts of some women. I asked, ‘What happened to
these ones?’ They replied, ‘These are women who prevented their
children from their breast milk.’ We went ahead till we saw some young
boys playing between two seas and I asked, ‘Who are these’ They
informed me, ‘These are children of the believers.’ Then I was directed to
a direction and I saw three people drinking their wine and I asked who
they are and they said, ‘these are Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib, Zaid Ibn Harithah
and Abdullah Ibn Rawahah.’ They directed me once again and I saw
another group of three people and I asked, ‘Who are these?’ they
responded, ‘These are Ibrahim, Moosa and Eesa, upon whom be Allah’s
peace, waiting for you’.”

256

In The Defence Of the True Faith

257

1

Winning Hearts & Souls
Expeditions and delegations in lifetime of the prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
Taken from

Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah

By: Ibn Katheer
Translation & Researched By: Darussalam Research
Center Copyright: Darussalam Publishers &
Distributers

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form
or by any means, electronic of mechanical, including
2

photocopying and recording or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without the written permission of the publisher.

Contents

Preface To The Revision ...................................................... 11
Publisher’s Preface ............................................................... 18
The Messenger of Allah’s Letters to Foreign Sovereigns
Inviting Them toAllah and to Accept Islam......................... 21
The Prophet’s Letters to the Christian Arab Kings in the
Region of Syria .................................................................... 26
The Prophet’s Deputation to Kisra (Chosroes), the King of
Persia .................................................................................... 27
Deputation to Muqawqis, Juraij Ibn Meena Al-Qibti, the
Monarch of the City of Alexandria ...................................... 30
The Battle of Dhat us-Salasil ............................................... 31
The Conquest of Makkah ..................................................... 33
The Story of Hatib Ibn Abi Balta‘ah .................................... 38

3

The Acceptance of Islam of the Prophet’s Uncle, ‘Abbas Ibn
‘Abdul Muttalib, Abu Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul
Muttalib, the Prophet’s cousin, and ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi
Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah Al - Makhzoomi .................... 41
The Description of the Prophet’s Entrance into Makkah ..... 45
The Prophet’s Dispatching of Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to Bani
Jadheemah of Kinanah After the Conquest.......................... 59
The Dispatch of Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to Destroy Al‘Uzza 61
The Length of the Prophet’s Stay in Makkah ...................... 62
Judgment Passed by Allah’s Messenger in Makkah ............ 63
The Expedition of Hawazin on the Day of Hunain .............. 70
The Description of the Battle: Initial Fleeing and the Event
Victory of Al- Muttaqoon .................................................... 76
The Expedition of Awtas ..................................................... 91
Martyrs of the Battle of Hunain and the Expedition of Awtas
............................................................................................. 93
Ghazwah At-Ta’if ................................................................ 94
The Return of the Prophet From Ta’if and the Distribution of
the Booty Gained From the Battle of Hunain ...................... 98
The Coming of Malik Ibn ‘Awf An-Nasri to Allah’s
Messenger .......................................................................... 104
The Objection to the Fair Distribution of the Messenger of
Allah by Some Ignoramuses From the People of Schism and
Hypocrisy ........................................................................... 105
The Arrival of Ash-Shaima’, the Foster Sister of Allah’s
Messenger, at Ji‘ranah ....................................................... 107

4

The ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah in Dhul-Qa‘dah ............................ 108
Notable Events and Deaths Which Occurred in the 8th Year
........................................................................................... 115
9th Year of Hijrah and the Ghazwah of Tabook in the Month
of Rajab of That Year ........................................................ 117
Those Who Remained Behind Due to an Excuse Among the
Weepers as Well as Others ................................................ 121
The Mobilization of the Muslim Army Numbering Thirty
Thousand ............................................................................ 125
The Prophet’s Passing by the Ruins of Thamood at AlHijr on
the Way to Tabook ............................................................. 128
The Messenger of Allah’s Arrival at Tabook..................... 131
His Treaty With the King of Ailah and the People of Jarba’ and
Adhruh While Encamped at Tabook .................................. 133
The Prophet’s Dispatch of Khalid Ibn Waleed to Ukaidir
Doomah .............................................................................. 135
The Story of the Masjid Ad-Dirar ...................................... 138
Other Disobedient Individuals Who Also Lagged Behind . 151
Events that Occurred After the Prophet’s Return to Madinah
and the Conclusion of the Battle of Tabook ...................... 153
The Visit of the Deputation of Thaqeef to Allah’s Messenger
in the Month of Ramadan, the 9th Year ............................. 155
The Death of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy, MayAllah Disfigure Him
........................................................................................... 160
9th Year of Hijrah: The Messenger of Allah’s Appointment of
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq as the Leader of the Hajj Delegation and
the Revelation of Soorah Al-Bara’ah ................................. 162
5

Among the Various Events That Took Place in the 9th Year
Was the Ghazwah of Tabook in the Month of Rajab ......... 164
The Book of Various Delegations that Came to Allah’s
Messenger .......................................................................... 166
The Deputation of Muzainah ............................................. 167
Narration Concerning the Merits of Banu Tameem ........... 170
Delegation of Banu ‘Abdul Qais ........................................ 171
The Story of Thumamah and the Delegation from Banu
Haneefah With Musailimah, the Liar, May the Curse of Allah
be on Him........................................................................... 174
The Delegation of the People of Najran ............................. 178
The Deputation of Banu ‘Amir and the Story of ‘Amir Ibn AtTufail and Arbad Ibn Qais, May Allah Curse Them Both . 185
The Arrival of Dimam Ibn Tha‘labah to Allah’s Messenger as
a Delegate of His People, Banu Sa’d Ibn Bakr .................. 188
The Arrival of the Delegation of Tayy’ Along With Zaid AlKhail................................................................................... 189
The Story of Adiyy Ibn Hatim At-Tayy’ ........................... 191
The Story of Daws and At-Tufail Ibn ‘Amr ....................... 195
The Arrival of Al-Ash‘aris and the People of Yemen ....... 196
The Story of Oman and Bahrain ........................................ 197
The Arrival of Farwah Ibn Musaik Al-Muradi .................. 198
The Arrival of ‘Amr Ibn Ma‘deekarib Among a Group From
Zubaid ................................................................................ 199
The Arrival of Ash‘ath Ibn Qais Among the Delegation of
Kindah ................................................................................ 201
6

The Arrival of A‘sha of Banu Mazin ................................. 202
The Arrival of Surad Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Azdi and Then the
Deputation of Ahl Jurash ................................................... 204
The Arrival of the Envoy of the King of Himyar ............... 205
The Arrival of Jareer Ibn ‘Abdullah Al- Bajali and His
Acceptance of Islam ........................................................... 208
The Arrival of Wa’il Ibn Hujr Ibn Rabee‘ah Ibn Wa’il Ibn
Ya‘mar Al-Hadrami, Abu Hunaid and One of the Yemeni
Kings .................................................................................. 209
The Arrival of Laqeet Ibn Amir Ibn Al-Muntafiq, Abu Razeen
Al-Uqaili ............................................................................ 210
The Deputation of Ziyad Ibn Al-Harith As-Suda‘i ............ 211
The Arrival of Al-Harith Ibn Hassan Al- Bakri ................. 214
The Arrival of ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Abu ‘Aqeel With His
People................................................................................. 216
The Arrival of Tariq Ibn ‘Abdullah and His Companions . 216
The Arrival of the Delegation of Farwah Ibn ‘Amr AlJudhami,
the Sovereign of the Land of Mu‘an, to Declare His Islam 218
The Arrival of Tameem Ad-Dari, His Encounter With
AlJassasah and What He Heard from Ad-Dajjal Concerning
the Advent of the Prophet .................................................. 219
The Delegation of Banu Asad ............................................ 220
The Delegation of Banu Abs .............................................. 221
The Delegation of Banu Murrah ........................................ 222
The Delegation of Banu Tha‘labah .................................... 223
The Arrival of Banu Muharib ............................................ 223
7

The Delegation of Banu Kilab ........................................... 224
The Delegation of Banu Ru’as Ibn Kilab ........................... 224
The Delegation of Banu ‘Uqail Ibn Ka‘b ........................... 225
The Delegation of Banu Qushair Ibn Ka‘b ........................ 226
The Delegation of Banu Al-Bakka’ ................................... 226
The Delegation of Kinanah ................................................ 226
The Delegation of Ashja‘ ................................................... 227
The Delegation of Bahilah ................................................. 227
The Delegation of Banu Sulaim ......................................... 228
The Delegation of Banu Hilal Ibn ‘Amir ........................... 228
The Delegation of Banu Bakr Ibn Wa’il ............................ 229
The Delegation of Banu Taglib .......................................... 229
The Arrival of the Delegation of Tujeeb ............................ 229
The Delegation of Khawlan ............................................... 230
The Ju’fi Delegation........................................................... 230
The Delegation of As-Sadif ............................................... 230
The Delegation of Khushain .............................................. 231
The Delegation of Banu Sa’d ............................................. 231
The Delegation of the As-Siba’ (Beasts of Prey) ............... 232
The Arrival of Al-Azd ........................................................ 232
The 10th Year: Allah’s Messenger Dispatches Khalid Ibn AlWaleed to Banu Al-Harith ................................................. 234
Allah’s Messenger Sent Ameers to the People of Yemen Prior
to the Farewell Pilgrimage ................................................. 236
8

Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), Sent ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to
Yemen ................................................................................ 240
The Farewell Pilgrimage in the 10th Year ......................... 243
Explanation of the Fact About the Hajj of Allah’s Messenger
From Madinah.................................................................... 244
His Exit From Madinah for the Farewell Pilgrimage ......... 246
The Description of His Departure From Madinah to Makkah
for Pilgrimage .................................................................... 248
The Explanation of the Place From Where Allah’s Messenger,
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), Began His
Talbiyah ............................................................................. 253
Messenger Assumed in The Hajj ....................................... 255
Arguments that Allah’s Messenger, (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), Performed Tamattu‘ .......................... 258
The Evidence of Those Who Opine That Allah’s Messenger
Performed Hajj Qiran ......................................................... 265
The Narration of Abu Talhah That Allah’s Messenger
Combined Hajj and ‘Umrah ............................................... 267
The Bases of Those Who Opined That Allah’s Messenger
Generalized His Ihram ....................................................... 272
The Talbiyah of Allah’s Messenger ................................... 274
The Hadith of Jabir Concerning the Hajj of Allah’s Messenger
........................................................................................... 275
Places Where Allah’s Messenger Had Prayed During His
Journey From Madinah to Makkah .................................... 283
The Prophet’s Entrance Into Makkah................................. 286
9

Description of His Tawaf ................................................... 288
The Description of the Prophet’s Ramaland Idtiba’ During His
Tawaf ................................................................................. 292
His Sa‘i Between As-Safa and Al-Marwah........................ 296
MentioningoftheRevelationtothe Messenger of Allah ....... 323
Departure of Allah’s Messenger From ‘Arafat to Mash‘ar AlHaram................................................................................. 323
The Prophet’s Talbiyah at Muzdalifah ............................... 330
The Messenger of Allah’s Stay at Mash‘ar Al-Haramand His
Departure From Muzdalifah .............................................. 330
The Prophet’s Stoning of the Jamrat Al- ‘Aqabah Alone on the
Day of Nahr........................................................................ 334
Description of His Shaving ................................................ 337
His Tawaf Al-Ifadah .......................................................... 340
Chapter Concerning the Ahadeeth that Illustrate that
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
Addressed the People in Minaon the Second Day From the
Days of Tashreeq ............................................................... 354
A Mention of a Hadith that the Messenger of Allah Used to
Visit Ka‘bah Every Night From the Nights of Mina.......... 355
The Sixth Day of Dhul-Hijjah ............................................ 355
Concerning a Hadith that Proves that the Prophet Addressed at
a Place Between Makkah and Madina ............................... 361
Year 11 From Hijrah .......................................................... 365
Concerning the Verses and Ahadeeth Warning of the Death of
the Messenger of Allah ...................................................... 371
10

Mention of His Command to Abu Bakr As- Siddiq to Lead in
Prayer, and His Exiting, then He Prayed Behind Him ....... 379
Chapter Concerning How the Prophet Approached Death 388

Preface To The Revision
In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who revived knowledge of His
religion and caused it to blossom forth after it had all but
disappeared, and Who demolished the false conjectures of the
apostates. I praise Him and I seek refuge with Him from the sins
which weigh upon the backs of mankind. I worship Him and seek
His help and guidance in removing hindrances and difficulties in
the practice of my religion. I bear witness that none has the right
to be worshipped except Allah, Alone, without partners and I
bear witness that Muhammad – who, by Allah’s leave, brought
about the dawn of faith to the darkness and misguidance which
existed in the hearts of mankind – is the slave and Messenger of
Allah. May the Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon him in
perpetuity.
O Allah! We seek Your favor and through You we seek to ward
off affliction. We ask You to protect us and to grant us mercy.
Our Lord! Make not our hearts deviate after You have already
guided us. Make it easy for us to perform our deeds in the way
that You have taught us. Make us grateful for what You have
given us and make plain a path for us which leads to You. Open
11

up the doors between us and You by which we may arrive before
You. To You belong the keys to the heavens and the Earth and
You are Most Able to do all things.
Among the blessings which Allah has bestowed upon us, the
community of Muslims, is that He has made it easy for us to
follow the path of guidance and He has opened the doors of
knowledge by making available to us these new publications,
which present to us the writings of the early scholars and reveal
to us what they said regarding legal verdicts, history, events,
information and lessons. These scholars opened a clear beacon
of light for all those Muslims seeking guidance, and they set up
for us a signpost in which there is neither deviation nor
crookedness. Whoever follows it will arrive safely at his desired
destination and whoever diverts from it will be lost forever. They
have written these books and treatises and made clear to us
therein events, information and virtues. Among such books is
this unique work, Al-Bidayah Wan- Nihayah, by the Imam, the
Hafiz, the master scholar of ahadeeth, ‘Imaduddeen Isma‘eel Ibn
Katheer Al-Qurashi – may Allah have Mercy on him. This book
was greeted with approval by the vast majority of Muslims. No
Islamic library would be complete without it. In it, the author has
recorded what Allah, Most High, has made easy for him about
the history of mankind, from the beginning of creation, starting
with the creation of the Throne and the Kursi (chair), the heavens
and the Earth and all that they contain and all that lies between
them, such as the angels, the jinn and the devils. He also
described how Adam was created, and told the stories of the
prophets up to the days of the Children of Isra’eel and the Days
of Ignorance (Jahiliyyah), until the advent of Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), which
heralded the end of Prophethood. He then recorded his Seera)
12

Then he recorded the events which took place up to his own time.
He also spoke of the trials and battles, the signs of the approach
of the Hour, then the sending forth of mankind and the terrors of
the Resurrection, which he described in detail. He then described
the Hellfire, with all its horrors, and Paradise and all the good
things contained therein. He called this particular volume of his
book: An-Nihayah Fil- Fitan Wal-Malahim (The Ending in
Trials and Battles). As for the book which is in our hands today,
it is Al-Bidayah.
By Allah’s Grace, I came to know Brother Abdul Malik Mujahid,
the general manager of Darussalam Publishing in Riyadh. He
visited me in my humble office in Damascus and suggested to
me the idea of creating a summarised version of this wonderful
book. I prayed for Allah’s Guidance in the matter and sought help
from Him in completing the project. Allah enabled me to make
the acquaintance of a number of people of knowledge and
experience in this field and a plan of action for the work was
written. It consisted of ten principal points and we then started
the task, seeking help from the Lord of the heavens and the Earth.
All of us exerted our utmost efforts in this task, making repeated
revisions and corrections, until we reached the point where, by
Allah’s Permission, we completed it and it was published in the
form which is in your hands today.

The Plan of Action for This Book:
1. Summarization of the text. This was achieved by
concentrating on the most important events narrated in the
book. In doing so, we took care not to leave out any important
details which would cause loss of meaning or import.

13

2. We relied on a number of printed and handwritten copies of
the book and in cases where any contradiction or omission
was found, we succeeded in establishing the most accurate
and authentic text.
3. We left out the ahadeeth which proved to be baseless or weak
and confined ourselves to the ahadeeth which are authentic
or Hasan and those which are acceptable due to the existence
of other supporting narrations. On rare occasions, when it
was found that there were no other ahadeeth in the chapter,
we included some weak ahadeeth whose weakness was not
of an extreme nature.
4. We performed takhreej of the ahadeeth with ascription of the
number of the section and the page, the number of the
ahadeeth and in many cases, the precise location of the
hadeeth in the original source, then the ruling on its
authenticity, if it was not from the Saheehain, because the
ahadeeth therein do not require any ruling on their
authenticity and they have been widely accepted by the
Muslim Ummah. As for the ahadeeth in this book, we have
relied on the opinions of the Imams and scholars of Hadith –
including the earlier scholars, the later scholars and those of
the present day. On some occasions, we have recorded the
weak ahadeeth, while making it plain that they are not
authentic. We have not omitted them because the author has
included them in order to warn the people against them due
to their widespread popularity amongst the Muslims in
general. In such cases, we desired not to oppose the author in
this effort and so we left them, at the same time making the
scholars’ ruling on them clear, so as to warn the people
against them.
14

5. We summarised the asaneed present in the book, in most
cases mentioning only the Companion who narrated the
Hadith, or the person who reported it from him.
6. We omitted many of the Isra’eeliyyat found in this book
which the author referred to in the preface, where he said:
“We do not record the Isra’eeliyyat except those which the
Lawgiver has permitted, i.e., those which do not contradict
the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). These are stories which
are neither believed nor belied and they have been recorded
because they provide details of unclarified narratives that we
have, or they provide names for people and places that have
only been mentioned in passing in our Revelation, due to
there being no benefit in specifying them for us. Thus we
have reported them in order to provide extra detail and not
with the intention of citing them as evidence or placing any
reliance on them. Only the Book of Allah and the authentic
Sunnah of His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) may be relied and depended upon. It is from Allah
that we seek help and it is He in Whom we place our trust;
there is no help and no power except in Allah, the Almighty,
the All-Powerful, Most Wise and Most High.
7. In some instances, we have referred back to the original
manuscript in order to verify the wording of a Hadith from
its source. In some cases, the author has combined two
narrations of the same Hadith together and so where this has
occurred, we have noted it and separated the two narrations,
placing our own words between brackets, i.e., (and in another
narration…) and we have also identified the source of the
addition in the footnotes.
15

8. We have written the Qur’anic Verses in the Uthmani script,
in conformity with the copy of the Qur’an published by AlMadinah Al-Munawwarah Printing Complex.
9. We vowelized the words of many of the ahadeeth in the book
and, in addition, the poetic verses, wherever possible.
10. We mentioned the meters of the poetic verses between
parentheses.
11. We explained the meanings of some difficult or obscure
words, relying on dictionaries, books containing ghareeb
ahadeeth and narrations and other sources.
12. We furnished a brief biography of the author, Hafiz Ibn
Katheer, though in reality, he requires no introduction and no
description.
Finally, I ask Allah, Most High, to accept this humble work from
us and to acknowledge it as having been done purely and
sincerely with the aim of pleasing Him and to grant us and our
brothers, who assisted us in the production of this book, pardon
and forgiveness in religious and secular matters. In addition, we
ask Him that He include this work in the weight of our good
deeds on the Day of Resurrection – a Day on which neither
wealth nor sons will benefit anyone – except for those whom
Allah has blessed with pure hearts.
And our final declaration is that all praise and thanks are due to
Allah, and we invoke blessings and peace upon Prophet
Muhammad and upon all his righteous family and Companions
until the Day of Reckoning.

16

Yoosuf Al-Hajj Ahmad,
The humble slave of Allah.
Damascus, Ash-Sham (Syria). 2nd
of Dhul-Hijjah, 1428 A.H.

17

Publisher’s Preface
Verily, all praise and thanks are due to Allah. We seek His help
and we ask forgiveness from Him. We seek refuge with Allah
from the wickedness in ourselves. Whomsoever Allah guides,
there is none who can misguide him and whomsoever He sends
astray, there is none who can guidehim. I bear witness that none
is worthy of worship except Allah and that Muhammad is His
slave and His Messenger. He sent him with guidance and the true
Religion and with the light (of truth), the admonition and
wisdom, at a time when no Messengers were sent for a long
period, when there was little religious knowledge and the people
had gone astray, when the Hour was drawing nearer. Whoever
obeys Allah and His Messenger has followed the right course,
while whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger erred from it
and gone far astray.
The book Al-Bidayah (The Beginning) by the Hafiz, the Imam,
the scholarly critic, Ibn Katheer is an incomparable work
regarding the study of the events and their chronological order,
the knowledge of which he strove hard to acquire. He began by
describing the start of creation – from the creation of the Throne
and the Kursi and the heavens and the Earth and all that is in them
and all that lies between them, such as the angels, the jinn and
the devils and he described the manner of Adam’s creation. He
recounted the stories of the Prophets and the events that took
place therein, up to the times of the Children of Isra’eel and the
Days of Ignorance, which ended with the advent of the final
Prophet, Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). Then he gave a detailed description of his life and what
happened after that, up to the time in which he lived. He then

18

wrote a separate volume called An-Nihayah Fil- Fitan WalMalahim (The Ending With Trials and Great Battles).
Furthermore, Allah inspired us to undertake the noble task of
making this book easily accessible to both the students and the
scholars and then to translate it into several languages, by Allah’s
Permission.
I suggested to my brother, Yoosuf Al-Hajj, the necessity of
summarizing this book in a suitable manner, through the
omission of unbeneficial repetition, weak ahadeeth, lengthy
poems, etc. I am thankful to Brother Yoosuf for assembling a
team that consisted of Abdul Malik Wadih, Abu Muslim
AlJaza’iri, Muwaffeq Khaleel Hammad, and himself.
Darussalam funded the entire project, paying each team member
for his contribution and work. After they completed their portion
of the project, the work then went through numerous people in
the Research Division of Darussalam, who meticulously went
through the work, adding and subtracting materials. After this,
the project went through another round of editing of the Arabic
material before it was sent to the translation department. The
translation was then checked for accuracy and then sent for
editing, resulting in the final project that you see before you. All
praise and thanks be to Allah for allowing us to produce such a
classical work for the first time in the English language.
O Allah! We ask that You bless us with sincerity and success and
that You spread goodness through our hands.
Abdul Malik Mujahid
Jumadal-Oola 1431 A.H.

19

20

The Messenger of Allah’s Letters to Foreign
Sovereigns Inviting Them toAllah and to
Accept Islam
On the authority of Anas Ibn Malik who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, wrote to
Kisra (Chosroes, King of Persia), Qaisar (Caesar, Emperor of
Rome), An-Najashi (King of Abyssinia), and to every (other)
ruler inviting them to Allah, the Exalted. The Najashi (Negus)
mentioned here was not the same one for whom the Messenger
of Allah offered the funeral prayers.
On the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas who said that Abu
Sufyan narrated to me directly saying, "We were merchants and
we had been strained by continual fighting until our wealth
became depleted. After the armistice, i.e. the Treaty of
Hudaibiyah, between us and the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, I went on a trade mission to
Sham (Syria) along with a group (of people) from Quraish. We
arrived in Sham when Qaisar, the king of Rome, had defeated
and expelled the Persians who had occupied his territory. He also
reclaimed the Cross that had previously been lost. When the
news of the victory (and defeat of the Persians) reached him, he
was residing in Hims, Sham, and walked to Bait Al-Maqdis to
offer prayers as a token of his gratitude (for the victory). He was
welcomed by the people with great pomp and pageantry. A
messenger from the king of Busra came to him with an Arab,
whom he had brought, and said, 'O King, this man is an Arab
from the people of sheep and camels; he brings you news of
events that have occurred in his land,' and in the king’s presence
he asked his translator to tell the Arab to deliver the news. The
man said, 'An Arab from the Quraish has appeared claiming to
21

be a Prophet; some of the people have followed him while others
have opposed him. Bloody confrontations have occurred
between them in a number of battles, and I left them in that
condition.'
The king summoned the head guard and ordered, 'Comb through
every part of Sham and bring me someone from this man’s
country to verify his story'.”
Abu Sufyan said, “When we came to him, he said to his
translator: ‘Ask them who amongst them is the closest in relation
to the one who claims to be a Prophet'.” Abu Sufyan added, I
replied, ‘I am the nearest relative to him.’ He asked, ‘What
degree of relationship do you have with him?’ I replied, ‘He is
my cousin, and there was no one from Banu ‘Abd Manaf in the
caravan except myself.' The king said, ‘Let him approach me.’He
then ordered that my companions stand behind me near my
shoulder and said to his translator, ‘Relate to his companions that
I am going to ask him about the man who claims to be a Prophet.
If he lies, they should oppose him immediately'.”
Abu Sufyan added, “By Allah! Had it not been shameful that my
companions would label me a liar, I would not have spoken the
truth about him when asked, so I spoke the truth. He said to his
translator, ‘Ask him what kind of family does he belong to.’ I
replied, ‘He belongs to a noble family from amongst us.’ He
asked, ‘Has anyone else from amongst you ever claimed the
same prior to him?’ ‘I replied, ‘No.’ He asked, ‘Have you ever
censured him for telling lies prior to what he claimed? ‘I replied,
‘No.’ He asked, ‘Was anyone from amongst his ancestors a
king?’ I replied, ‘No.’ He asked, 'Do the noble or the poor follow
him?’ I replied, ‘It is the poor who follow him.’ He asked, ‘Are
22

they increasing or decreasing?’ I replied, 'They are increasing.’
He asked, ‘Has anyone from amongst those who have embraced
his religion become displeased with it and discarded it?’ I
replied, ‘No.’ He asked, ‘Does he break his promises?’ I replied,
‘No, but we are now at truce with him and we are afraid that he
may betray us'.” Abu Sufyan added, “Other than the last
sentence, I could not say anything against him."
Caesar then asked, ‘Have you ever fought a battle with him?’ I
replied, ‘Yes.’ He asked, ‘What was the outcome of your battles
with him?’ I replied, ‘The result was unstable; sometimes he was
victorious and other times we were.’ He asked, ‘What does he
order you to do?’ I said, ‘He tells us to worship Allah, Alone, not
to worship anything along with Him, and to abandon all that our
forefathers worshipped. He orders us to pray, give in charity, be
chaste, maintain our promises, and return whatever is entrusted
to us.’ When I said that, Qaisar said to his translator, ‘Say to him:
I asked you about his lineage and your reply was that he belonged
toa noble family. In truth, all the Messengers came from the
noblest lineage of their nations. Then I asked you whether
anyone else from amongst you had ever claimed such a thing,
and your reply was in the negative. If the answer had been in the
affirmative, I would have thought that this man was following a
claim that had been said before him. When I asked you whether
he was ever censured for telling lies, your reply was in the
negative, so I take it for granted that a person who did not lie
about others could never lie about Allah. Then I asked you
whether any of his ancestors were kings. Your reply was in the
negative, and if it had been in the affirmative, I would have
thought that this man wanted to take back his ancestral kingdom.

23

When I asked you if he is followed by the rich or the poor, you
replied that it was the poor who follow him. In fact, such are the
followers of the Messengers. Then I asked you whether his
followers were increasing or decreasing. You replied that they
were increasing. In fact, this is the result of true faith until it is
complete (in all respects). I asked you whether there was anyone
who, after embracing his religion, became displeased with it and
discarded it, your reply was in the negative. In fact, this is the
sign of true faith, for, when its goodness enters and mixes in the
heart, no one will be displeased with it. I asked you whether he
had ever broken his promise. You replied in the negative. Such
are the Prophets, they never break their promises. When I asked
you whether you fought against one another, you replied in the
affirmative and (you also said) that sometimes he was victorious
and sometimes you were. Indeed, such are the Messengers; they
are put to trials and the final victory is always theirs.
Then I asked you what he orders you with. You replied that he
orders you to worship Allah, Alone, not to worship others along
with Him, to leave all that your forefathers used to worship, to
offer prayers, to speak the truth, to be chaste, to keep
promises,and to return what is entrusted to you. These are truly
the qualities of a Prophet, who I knew (from the previous
Scriptures) would appear, but I did not know that he would be
from among you. If what you say is true, he will, very soon,
occupy the ground beneath my feet; if I knew that I would reach
him, I would go immediately to meet him; were I with him, then
I would certainly wash his feet'.” Abu Sufyan added, “Qaisar
then asked for the letter of Allah’s Messenger, which was read.”
Abu Sufyan added, “When Heraclius finished his speech, a great
hue and cry was caused by the Byzantine courtiers surrounding
24

him; there was so much noise that I did not understand what they
said. Thereafter, we were turned out of the court. When I left with
my companions and we were alone, I said to them, ‘Verily, Ibn
Abi Kabsha’s (i.e. the Prophet’s) affair has gained power. This is
the king of Banu Al-Asfar fearing him.’ Abu Sufyan added, “By
Allah, I remained low and was sure that his religion would be
victorious until Allah converted me to Islam, though I disliked
it.”
Ibn Ishaq said that Az-Zuhri narrated to me saying that a
Christian prelate who had witnessed that event informed me that
it was Dihyah Ibn Khaleefah who came to Heraclius with the
letter from the Messenger of Allah, which contained the
following words: “In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent,
the Most Merciful. (This letter is) from Muhammad, the slave of
Allah and
His Messenger, to Heraclius, the ruler of the Byzantine. Peace be
upon the followers of guidance.
"I invite you to Islam; embrace Islam and you will be safe;
embrace Islam and Allah will bestow on you a double reward.
But if you reject this invitation of Islam, you shall be responsible
for misguiding the peasants (i.e. your nation).”
Upon reading the contents of this letter, he slipped it between his
thighs and shank and then wrote to a man from Turkey, who was
well-versed in Hebrew, asking him to inform him about what he
had just received from Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him. The man wrote back saying, “He is
undoubtedly the Prophet that is being awaited, so follow him.”
He then invited the Roman nobles and assembled them at the
colosseum, which he ordered locked. He told them of the
25

rationale behind his action and then he said, “O company of
Romans, a letter has reached me from Ahmad, and, by Allah, he
is the Prophet that we have been waiting for. He is mentioned in
our Book and his signs and time have become discernable (to us),
so accept Islam and follow him and you will find peace in this
world and in the Hereafter.”
Upon hearing this address, the congregation objected and they all
unanimously made for the exit, but found the gates of the
colosseum locked. The king became apprehensive of their
reaction and ordered, “Bring them back to me.” When they
returned to his presence he said to them, “O company of Romans,
I gave that address in order to test your loyalty to your religion
and I have seen in you what pleases me.” On the king’s volte
face, they all prostrated before him and then the gates of the
colosseum were opened for them and they left.

The Prophet’s Letters to the Christian Arab
Kings in the Region of Syria
Ibn Ishaq related: Afterward, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, sent Shuja’ Ibn Wahb from Banu
Asad Ibn Khuzaimah to AlMundhir Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Abi
Shamir Al-Ghassani, the ruler of Damascus. Al-Waqidi adds
thathe sent a letter with him (saying): “Peace on those who
follow the guidance and believe in it. I invite you to believe in
Allah, Alone, and to not associate any partners with Him. (If you
do so) your authority will remain.” When Shuja‘delivered the
letter and the Ghassanid ruler read it, he asked indignantly: “Who
will dispossess me of my authority? I will be the first to march
against him.”

26

The Prophet’s Deputation to Kisra (Chosroes),
the King of Persia
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent a man
with a letter addressed to Kisra. He ordered him to first give it to
the ruler of Bahrain and tell him to deliver it to Kisra. When Kisra
read it, he tore it into pieces. (Az-Zuhri said): I think Ibn AlMusaiyyab said: “Allah’s Messenger invoked Allah to tear them
(Kisra and his followers) into pieces.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, also sent Hudhafah Ibn Qais Ibn ‘Adiyy Ibn Sa’d Ibn Sahm
with a letter to Kisra saying:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
From Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah
To Kisra, the king of Persia
Peace be upon those who follow the guidance and believe in
Allah and His Messenger; bearing witness that none deservesto
be worshipped except Allah, Alone, with Whom there is no
partner, and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger. I invite
you with Allah’s invitation, for I am truly His Messenger sent to
the entire humanity, to give warning to the living and justifiy the
Word against the disbelievers. If you submit (to Islam), you will
be safe but if you decline, the sin of (all) the Magians will be
upon you.”
(The narrator added): When he read the letter, he tore it and said,
“He writes this type of letter to me, while he is my slave?” Then
27

Kisra wrote to Badham, his viceroy over Yemen, ordering him
to “send two men to arrest this man in Hijaz and bring him to
me.” Badham sent his steward along with two Persians. When
they reached the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, with their clean-shaven beards and bushy
mustaches, Allah's Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, detested looking at them. He asked, “Woe be to you,
who ordered you to do this?” They responded, “Our lord
(Kisra).” The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, said, “Rather, my Lord commands me to keep the
beard and trim the mustache.” He then said, “Go back and return
to me tomorrow.” Meanwhile, Divine revelation was sent to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
informing him that Sheerawaih, Kisra’s son, had overthrown
him, and killed him (his father) in such-and-such month on suchand-such night. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, invited the two emissaries and informed them of
the news. They said: “Are you aware of what you are saying?
The one who has sent us against you is more vulnerable than that.
Should we write this against you and inform King Badham about
what you have said?”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “Yes, inform him on my behalf" and add: "Certainly,
my religion and my authority shall subsume the extent of Kisra’s
authority and it will terminate at the limit of where the hooves
(of riding animals) can cover. Also tell him: If you submit, I shall
leave your territory with you and preserve your authority over
your people.”
Badham had not tarried long before Sheerawaih’s letter reached
him saying: “I have killed Kisra in vengeance for deeming it
28

permissible to assassinate noblemen and slaughtering them. So
once you receive my letter, take allegiance on my behalf from
those in your direction and then proceed to that man about whom
Kisra had written an edict and do not provoke him until you
receive my order concerning him.”
When Sheerawaih’s letter was delivered to Badham, he cried out:
“This man is truly a Messenger (from Allah).” He accepted Islam
and all those Persians who were with him in Yemen also
followed suit. Badhawaih said to Badham: “I have never spoken
to a more awe-inspiring person than him.” Badham asked him:
“Did he have a guard with him?” He said, “No.”
Imam Ash-Shafi‘i related on the authority of Abu Hurairah that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “Kisra will die and there would be no Kisra after him.
Qaisar (king of Rome) will die and there would be no Qaisar after
him; by the One in Whose Hands is my life, you will spend their
treasures in the cause of Allah.” Related by Muslim from the
Hadith of IbnUyainahand they narrated it from the Hadith of AzZuhri.
I say: In this is an implicit tiding that the king of Rome shall never
return to Sham. The Arabs used to give the appellation of Qaisar
to the Roman rulers of Sham and the peninsula. Similarly, they
referred to each person that ruled Persia as Kisra and the ruler of
Abyssinia as Negus. They also gave the title of Muqawqis to
every ruler of Alexandria, Fir‘awn (Pharaoh) to the non-Muslim
ruler of Egypt, and Batlaimoos to the ruler of Hind. They also
had peculiar titles other than these. We have mentioned this at
other places also. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

29

Muslim related on the authority of Jabir Ibn Samurah who said:
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: A small force of Muslims will capture the treasure of Kisra
in the White Palace.”

Deputation to Muqawqis, Juraij Ibn Meena
Al-Qibti, the Monarch of the City of
Alexandria
On the authority of Ibn Ishaq who said that "Az-Zuhri narrated
to me from ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn ‘Abdul-Qari that Allah’s
Messenger,peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent Hatib
Ibn Abi Balta‘ah to Muqawqis, the ruler of Alexandria, with the
Prophet’s letter. When he received the letter, he kissed it,
conferred an honor on Hatib and treated him hospitably. He sent
Hatib back with gifts to the Prophet including clothes, white
mules, and two slave girls. One of the two slave girls would
become the mother of Ibrahim and Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, gave the other to Muhammad
Ibn Qais Al-Abdi.” This narration is related by Al-Baihaqi.
I say: Included in these gifts were a black eunuch slaveboy
named Maabur, two unique black mules, and a white mule named
Ad-Duldul. Maabur’s condition as a eunuch was not well- known
to the people. So, when he started to enter upon Mariyah, as they
used to do in their land, some people began to insinuate
concerning both of them as they were unware of him being an
eunuch. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, commanded ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib to execute him, but
when it was discovered that he was an eunuch, he was realeased.
The Hadith is recorded in Saheeh Muslim.

30

Ibn Ishaq related that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, sent Saleet Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Abd Wudd from
Banu ‘Amir Ibn Lu’ay to Hawdhah Ibn ‘Ali, the ruler of AlYamamah, Al-‘Ala Ibn Al-Hadrami to Al-Mundhir Ibn Sawa of
Banu ‘Abdul Qais, the ruler Bahrain, and ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As to
Jayfar Ibn Al-Julanda and Ammar Ibn Al-Julanda Al-Azdiyyin
the two rulers of Amman.

The Battle of Dhat us-Salasil
Al-Baihaqi cited it here before the Battle of the Conquest (of
Makkah). He related it through Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah and ‘Urwah
Ibn Az-Zubair, both of whom narrated that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As
and ‘Abdullah along with those who followed him from Quda‘ah
to Dhat us-Salasil in the vicintiy of Sham in Baliyy. ‘Urwah
added: Banu Baliyy are the maternal uncles of Al-‘As Ibn Wa’il.
Upon seing the enemies' numbers, ‘Amr sought reinforcement
from the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, sent reinforcements which included some of the
early Emigrants, such as Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with them. He gave the command to Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn
Al-Jarrah over them.
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah related that when they arrived, ‘Amr said: “I
am your commander as I requested your reinforcement from the
Messenger of Allah.” The Emigrants said: “Rather, you are the
commander of your companions while Abu ‘Ubaidah is the
commander of the Emigrants.” ‘Amr insisted: “You were merely
sent as a reinforcement (for me).” Observing his insistence, Abu
‘Ubaidah, who was a good-natured and soft-hearted man, said:
31

“The last pledge that Allah’s Messenger took from me is that we
both acquiesce. So if you disobey me, I will obey you.” Thus,
Abu ‘Ubaidah handed over the reign of the command to ‘Amr
Ibn Al-‘As.
On the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As who narrated: "I had awetdream on a cold night in the Battle of Dhat us-Salasil. I was afraid
that if I took a bath I would die. I, therefore, performed
tayammum (dry ablution) and led my companions in the dawn
prayer. They mentioned that to the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, and he said: ‘Amr, did you
lead your companions in prayer while you were sexually
defiled?’ I informed him of the cause which impeded me from
taking a bath. And I said: ‘I heard Allah say: And do not kill
yourselves (nor kill one another). Surely, Allah is Most Merciful
to you.” (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:29) The Messenger of Allah
laughed and did not say anything.”
Imam Malik related on the authority of Jabir who narrated:
“Allah’s Messenger sent an army consisting of three hundred
men toward the east coast and appointed Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn AlJarrah as their commander.” Jabir continued, “I was part of it.
We marched until our food was about to finish.
Abu ‘Ubaidah ordered us to collect all the remaining provisions
which was done. Our provisions were dates. Abu ‘Ubaidah kept
giving us our daily ration in small amounts from it, until it was
exhausted. The share of each one of us would be one date only.”
I (the sub- narrator) asked, “How could one date suffice you?”
Jabir replied, “We came to know its value when that too
finished.” Jabir added, “When we reached the seashore, we saw
a huge fish which was like a small mountain. The army ate from
32

it for eighteen days. Then Abu ‘Ubaidah ordered that two of its
bones be fixed and they were fixed in the ground. Then he
ordered that a she-camel be ridden and it passed under the two
ribs (which formed an arch) without touching them.”

The Conquest of Makkah
The Conquest of Makkah occurred in the month of Ramadan, 8th
year (of Hijrah), and Allah has referred to it at various places in
the Qur’an. Allah, the Almighty, says:
“Not equal among you are those who spent and fought before
the conquering
(of Makkah) (with those among you who did so later). Such
are higher in degree than those who spent and fought
afterward. But to all, Allah has promised the best (reward).
(Soorah Al-Hadeed 57:10)
Allah (SWT) also says:
“When comes the Help of Allah (to you, O Muhammad against
your enemies) and the Conquest (of Makkah), And you see
that the people enter Allah’s
religion (Islam) in crowds, So glorify the Praises of your Lord,
and ask for His Forgiveness. Verily, He is the One Who accepts
the repentance and forgives.”
(Soorah An-Nasr 110:1-3)
The reason for the Conquest, after the Treaty of Hudaibiyah, is
related in the narration of Muhammad Ibn Ishaq from Az-Zuhri
on the authority of ‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair, who said that AlMiswar Ibn Makhramah and Marwan Ibn AlHakam jointly
33

informed him that the Treaty of Hudaibiyah stipulated that
anyone who wished may enter into a treaty either with
Muhammad or with the Quraish; the terms (of the treaty) shall be
applicable to them as well. Banu Khuza‘ah said: “We are
entering into a treaty with Muhammad,” and Banu Bakr quickly
aligned themselves with Quraish.
This status quo, as stipulated by the treaty, remained for 17 or 18
months.
Afterward, Banu Bakr betrayed the treaty by attacking Banu
Khuza‘ah at night near a watering place called Al-Wateer, which
was close to Makkah. Quraish said: “Muhammad will not come
to know of these events as it occurred at night and no one will
see us.” They supported their allies with men and weapons and
fought against Banu Khuza‘ah, because of their malice toward
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him.
However, after the incident between Banu Khuza‘ah and Banu
Bakr at AlWateer, ‘Amr Ibn Salim rode to inform Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, of the
incident.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “O ‘Amr Ibn Salim, you will be aided.” A cloud
appeared in the sky and he said: “This cloud will pour down with
the victory of Bani Ka‘b.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered the people to make
preparations (to march out) as stealthily as possible and
supplicated to Allah to hide the news (of their preparation) from
Quraish until they are able to reach their land.

34

Abu Sufyan went to see Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, in Madinah, but first he went to see his
daughter, Umm Habeebah, the wife of the Prophet. As he tried
to sit on the bed of the Prophet, she pulled it from underneath
him. He asked: “My daughter, do you consider this bed unfit for
me or me unfit for this?” She said: “It is the bed of Allah’s
Messenger and you are an unclean polytheist, and I do not wish
for you to sit on it.” Abu Sufyan said: “My daughter, you have
been afflicted with evil after (you left) me.” He then went tospeak
with Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, but he did not get any response (from him). So he went to
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, requesting him to
mediate with Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, on his behalf. Abu Bakr’s response was brief and he
said, “I will not do so.” He then went to ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him, with the same request, and he said: “Would I
intercede on your behalf with Allah’s Messenger? By Allah, even
if I found nothing more than motes, I shall still fight against you
with it.” Undaunted, Abu Sufyan went to ‘Ali, may Allah be
pleased with him, with whom he found Fatimah, the daughter of
Allah’s Messenger, and with her was Hasan, who was a toddler
crawling in front of them.
Abu Sufyan said: “‘Ali, you are the closest person to me in
kinship and relation. I have come for a need and I shall not return
frustrated. Would you please intercede for me with Allah’s
Messenger?” ‘Ali said: “Abu Sufyan, Allah’s Messenger has
decided upon a matter concerning which we cannot speak to
him.” Then he (Abu Sufyan) turned to Fatimah and said: “O
daughter of Muhammad, would you ask this son of yours to
intercede between the people so that he becomes a leader of the
Arabs until the end of time?” She said: “My son cannot intercede
35

between the people and no one can grant protection against the
Prophet.”
Then Abu Sufyan said: “Abu Al-Hasan, it appears that matters
have really become difficult for me, so please advise me.” ‘Ali
said: “By Allah, I know nothing that will suffice you, except that
you are the leader of Banu Kinanah; you may hold discussions
among the people and then return to your land.” Abu Sufyan
asked: “Do you foresee any benefit in that for me?” ‘Ali replied:
“No, I do not think so, but I have no other advice to give you
other than that.”
Abu Sufyan rose and went to the Mosque and addressed the
people: “O People, I have been given protection,” and then rode
his camel and left. On his return back to Makkah, the Quraish
asked: “What news did you leave behind?” He said: “I went to
Muhammad, spoke with him but he did not give me any
response. Then I went to Ibn Abi Quhafah but, by Allah, I did
not find any good in him. Then I went to ‘Umar and found him
most hostile. I went to ‘Ali and I found him to be the gentlest of
them. He is the one who directed me to a course of action and I
do not know whether it will be of any benefit or not.” They asked:
“What did he advise you to do?” He replied: “He asked me to
intercede between the people and I complied.” They said: “It will
not add up to anything, for the man merely played on your
intelligence. Your feedback will not be of any benefit to us.”
Resignedly, Abu Sufyan said: “I did not find a better option other
than that.”
After Abu Sufyan left, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, remained for as long as Allah wished and
then he resumed preparation for the invasion of Makkah. He
36

asked ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) to prepare his
personal effects for the journey and told her to be quick about it.
Afterward, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, went to the Mosque or to satisfy a need when Abu
Bakr came and found ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her)
sifting and picking wheat. He asked: “Does Allah’s Messenger
intend a military expedition?” She kept silent. Abu Bakr probed
further, “Perhaps he intends to invade the Romans?” ‘A’ishah
(May Allah be pleased with her) remained quiet. “Perhaps he
intends the inhabitants of Najd?” Abu Bakr inquired further
mentioning some of their misdeeds. ‘A’ishah (May Allah be
pleased with her) gave no information to her father. Undaunted,
Abu Bakr prodded further: “Perhaps he intends the Quraish?”
‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) still did not respond.
Soon after, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
beupon him, came back and he asked the same questions to him:
“Allah’s Messenger, do you intend to go on a military
expedition?” “Yes,” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, replied. “Perhaps it is against the Romans?”
Abu Bakr asked. “No,” the Messenger of Allah said. “Perhaps
you intend the inhabitants of Najd?” he further asked. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, answered in
the negative. “Perhaps it is against the Quraish?” Abu Bakr
asked. Finally, the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “Yes.” Alarmed at the Prophet’s response, Abu Bakr
asked: “But isn’t there a treaty between you and them?” The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “Haven’t you been informed of what they did to Banu
Ka‘b?” Thereafter, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, announced to the people to prepare for an
37

invasion. Then Hatib Ibn Abi Balta‘ah wrote to Quraish
(betraying the Prophet’s secret). Allah exposed the incident of
the letter to His Messenger and the story is related as follows:

The Story of Hatib Ibn Abi Balta‘ah
On the authority of ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, who
narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, sent Az-Zubair, Miqdad, and me on an errand, saying,
“Go until you reach the Rawdat Khakh where there is a pagan
woman carrying a letter from Hatib Ibn Abi Balta‘ah to the
pagans of Makkah.” We jumped on our horses and raced until
we got to the meadow where we found her at the place which
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
had described. We said (to her): “Bring forth the letter.” She said:
“I have no letter.” We said, “Take out the letter, otherwise we
will strip you naked.” When she saw that we were determined,
she took out the letter from her hair braid and we brought it to
Allah’sMessenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
When it was opened, it contained correspondence between Hatib
Ibn Abi Balta‘ah and some of the Makkan polytheists disclosing
to them some of the Messenger of Allah’s plans.
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, invited
Hatib and asked: “Hatib, what made you do this?” Hatib replied,
“O Messenger of Allah, please do not be hasty in passing
judgment on me; there is none of your Companions but has
relatives in Makkah who look after their families and property,
while I have nobody there. I wanted to do them a favor (so that
they might look after my family and property). I did not do so
this as a consequence of apostatizing from my faith or from being
pleased with disbelief after I had believed.” The Messenger of
38

Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “He is
truthful (in what he has said).” ‘Umar said, “O Messenger of
Allah, allow me to chop off the neck of this hypocrite.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “He
participated in the Battle of Badr. Who knows, perhaps Allah has
looked at the warriors of Badr and said (to them), ‘Do whatever
you like, for I have forgiven you’.” Then Allah revealed the
chapter: “O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your
enemies (i.e. disbelievers and polytheists, etc.) as friends,” up to
“then indeed he has gone (far) astray, (away) from the Straight
Path.” (Soorah AlMumtahinah 60:1)
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, who narrated that afterward
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
departed on his journey, and he appointed Abu Ruhm Kulthoom
Ibn Husain Ibn ‘Utbah Ibn Khalaf Al-Ghifari over Madinah. He
departed ten days into the month of Ramadan. The Messenger
ofAllah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, fasted and
the people also did the same along with him until they reached
Al- Kadeed (a place) between ‘Usfan and Amaja, where he broke
his fast. He proceeded until he disembarked at Marraz-Zhahran
along with 10,000 Muslims.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated
that Allah’s Messenger traveled in the month of Ramadan and he
fasted until he reached (a place called) ‘Usfan. He asked for a
tumbler of water and drank from it during the daytime, so that
the people might see him. He broke his fast until he reached
Makkah. Ibn ‘Abbas used to say, “Allah’s Messenger fasted and
sometimes did not fast while traveling, so one may fast or may
not (on journeys).”

39

Az-Zuhri said: The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, went on the expedition of the Conquest, i.e. the
conquest of Makkah. He set out of Madinah in Ramadan along
with ten thousand Muslims, and that was exactly eight and a half
years after his arrival in Madinah. He conquered Makkah thirteen
days into the month of Ramadan.
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri
who narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, announced to us to march out in the Year of
the Conquest, two nights into the month of Ramadan. We set out
while fasting until we reached Al-Kadeed where Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered
us to break our fast. Thus, the people broke into two factions – a
faction fasting and the other, not fasting. This was the situation
until we reached the location where we encountered the
enemyand then we were all ordered to break our fast. Thus we
broke our fast altogether.
I say: based on what Az-Zuhri mentioned that the Conquest
occurred on the 13th of Ramadan coupled with Abu Sa’eed’s
narration that they departed from Madinah on the 2nd of
Ramadan, it indicates that their journey between Makkah and
Madinah took 11 nights.

40

The Acceptance of Islam of the Prophet’s
Uncle, ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib, Abu
Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib,
the Prophet’s cousin, and ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi
Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah Al - Makhzoomi
Ibn Ishaq related that ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib met Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, along the
way. Ibn Hisham said that he met him at Juhfah while he was
migrating on his horse. Meanwhile, he had stayed in Makkah
overseeing his watering place, with the Messenger of Allah’s
consent, as mentioned by Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri.
Ibn Ishaq added: Abu Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib
and ‘Abdullah Ibn Umayyah also met Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, on the way at Neeq-il-‘Uqab,
somewhere between Makkah and Madinah, at whichh point they
sought an audience with him. Umm Salamah spoke to him on
their behalf. She said: “Allah’s Messenger, your cousin and your
brother-in-law (would like to have your audience).” He said: “I
do not have any need for them. As for my paternal cousin, he has
denigrated me and it was my maternal cousin who said whathe
said concerning me in Makkah.” When the comment of the
Messenger of Allah was conveyed to them, Abu Sufyan, who
was with his son, said: “By Allah, he either grants me permission
or I shall hold the hand of this son of mine and wander in the land
until we both die of thirst and hunger.” When the news of his
threat was conveyed to the Prophet, he became compassionate
toward them and gave them permission. They were admitted into
his presence and they both accepted Islam.

41

When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, arrived at Marraz-Zhahran, he camped there as related by
Al-Bukhari on the authority of Jabir, who said: “We were with
Allah’s Messenger collecting Al-Kabathat Marraz-Zhahran. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said, “Collect
the black ones, for they are better.” Somebody said, “O Allah’s
Messenger! Have you ever shepherded sheep?” He said, “Yes,
every Prophet has been a shepherd.”
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Abul-Waleed Sa’eed Ibn
Meena, who said that when the warriors (sent to) Mu’tah were
finished with their engagement, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, turned their attention toward
Makkah. When they arrived at Marraz-Zhahran, he alighted at
Al-‘Aqabah and sent a group of harvesters to harvest Al-Kabath.
“What is that?” I asked Sa’eed and he said: “It is the fruit of AlArak.” (The narrator continued): Ibn Mas‘ood also went with the
harvesters. Whenever anyone of them picked a good seed, he
tossed it in his mouth. The people began to laugh at Ibn
Mas‘ood’s shanks as he climbed a tree. Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Do you marvel at the
thinness of his shanks? By Him in Whose Hands is my soul, they
are heavier than Uhud on the scale. It is recorded in the
Saheehain on the authority of Anas, who said: Once we came
upon a rabbit at Marraz-Zhahran. The people chased it until they
became tired. I caught it and brought it to Abu Talhah, who
slaughtered it and sent both its pelvic pieces (or legs) to the
Prophet, which he accepted.
Al-Bukhari related from Ibn Hisham (who narrated) from his
father that: When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, set out (toward Makkah) during the Year of
42

the Conquest (of Makkah) and this news reached (the polytheists
of Quraish), Abu Sufyan, Hakeem Ibn Hizam and Budail Ibn
Warqa’ came out to gather news about Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him. They proceeded on their way
until they reached Marraz-Zhahran. There they saw many fires
as if they were the fires of ‘Arafah. Abu Sufyan said: “What is
this? It looks like the fires of ‘Arafah.” Budail Ibn Warqa’ said,
“ (Perhaps) it is the fires of Banu ‘Amr.” Abu Sufyan interjected:
“Banu ‘Amr are less in number than that.” Some of the guards of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
saw them, caught up with them, captured them and brought them
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,.
Then Abu Sufyan embraced Islam.
When the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
proceeded, he said to ‘Abbas: “Keep Abu Sufyan standing atthe
top of the mountain so that he may look upon the Muslims.” So
‘Abbas kept him standing (at that place) and the tribes
accompanying the Prophet began to pass in front of him. A group
passed by and Abu Sufyan asked: “‘Abbas, who are these?”
‘Abbas said: “They are (Banu) Ghifar.” Abu Sufyan said: “I have
nothing to do with Ghifar.” Then (a group from) Juhainah passed
by and he said something similar as above. Then (a group from)
Sa’d Ibn Hudhaim passed by and he said something similar. Then
(Banu) Sulaim passed by and he said something similar. Then
came a group, the like of which Abu Sufyan had never seen
before, so he asked: “Who are they?” ‘Abbas said: “They are the
Ansar headed by Sa’d Ibn ‘Ubadah, the one holding the flag.”
Sa’d said: “Abu Sufyan! Today is the day of a great battle, and
today (what is prohibited in) the Ka‘bah will be permissible.”
Abu Sufyan said: “O ‘Abbas! How excellent the day of
destruction is!”
43

Then came another group (of warriors), which was the smallest;
in it was Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and his Companions and the flag of the Prophet was
carried by Zubair Ibn Al‘Awwam. When Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, passed by Abu
Sufyan, the latter said, (to the Prophet): “Do you know what Sa’d
Ibn ‘Ubadah said?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, asked: “What did he say?” Abu Sufyan said: “He said
such-and- such.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: “Sa’d told a lie. Today Allah will give superiority
to the Ka‘bah, and today the Ka‘bah will be covered with a
covering.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, ordered that his flag be hoisted at Al-Hajoon.
‘Urwah narrated Nafi’ Ibn Jubair Ibn Mut‘im said: I heard
‘Abbas asking Zubair Ibn Al-‘Awwam: “O Abu ‘Abdullah! Did
Allah’s Messenger order you to hoist the flag here?” He replied,
“Yes,” and added: “Allah’s Messenger ordered Khalid Ibn AlWaleed to enter Makkah from its upper part, Kada’, while the
Prophet himself entered from Kuday. Two men from the cavalry
of Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed named Hubaish Ibn Al-Ash‘ar and
Kurz Ibn Jabir AlFihri were martyred on that day.
Abu Dawood related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated
that in the Year of the Conquest, that ‘Abbas Ibn ‘AbdulMuttalib came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, with Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb who accepted
Islam at Marraz-Zhahran. ‘Abbas said to him: “O Messenger of
Allah, Abu Sufyan loves pride, would you grant him something
(to boost his ego) ?” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, replied: “Whoever enters Abu Sufyan’s
house is safe and whoever remains indoors is safe (as well).”
44

The Description of the Prophet’s Entrance into
Makkah
It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of Anas that on
the Day of the Conquest, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, entered Makkah, wearing a helmet on his
head. When he took it off, a man came and said: “Ibn Khatal is
clinging to the curtain of Ka‘bah.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Kill him.” Malik (a subnarrator) said: “On that day the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, was not in a state of Ihram, as it appeared to
us. And Allah (SWT) knows best.”
Ahmad related on the authority of Jabir that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered Makkah on
the Day of the Conquest wearing a black turban.
Muslim related on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Huraith, who
narrated: “As if I am seeing Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, on the Day of the Conquest of
Makkah with a pitch-black turban on his head, and its two ends
hanging between his shoulders.”
The compilers of the four Sunan related on the authority of Jabir
that the flag of the Messenger of Allah was white on the day he
entered Makkah.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Mu‘awiyah Ibn Qurrah,
who narrated that I heard ‘Abdullah Ibn Mughaffal said: “I saw
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
on the Day of the Conquest of Makkah riding his she-camel,
reciting Surah Al-Fat‘h in a vibrant quivering tone.” The sub45

narrator added: “Were I not afraid that the people would gather
around me, I would recite in a vibrant quivering tone just as he
did.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah from
his father that ‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her)
informed him that on the Day of the Conquest, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered
through Kada’ in the upper part of Makkah. Abu Usamah and
Wuhaib followed him concerning the wording Kada’.
‘Ubaid Ibn Isma’eel narrated from Abu Usamah from Hisham on
the authority of his father that in the Year of the Conquest,
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
entered from the upper part of Makkah through Kada’. This is
more authentic.
Ibn Ishaq related that Ibn Abi Najeeh stated in his Hadith that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
ordered Khalid Ibn AlWaleed to enter from Al-Leet, in the lower
part of Makkah with a group of people. At that time, Khalid was
on the right flank, which included the tribes of Aslam, Sulaim,
Ghifar, Muzainah, Juhainah and a number of other Arab tribes.
Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah approached with the Muslim
column to lay ambush to Makkah. The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered from
Adhakhir until he disembarked at the upper part of Makkah
where his tent was pitched.”
Al-Bukhari related that Usamah Ibn Zaid asked the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, at the time of
the Conquest: “O Allah’s Messenger! Where will we camp
tomorrow?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
46

him: said, “Has ‘Aqeel left for us any house to lodge in?” He then
added, “ (Anyway) No Believer will inherit an infidel’s property,
and no infidel will inherit the property of a Believer.”
Al-Bukhari also related on the authority of Abu Hurairah that the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “If
Allah makes us victorious, our camping place will be Al-Khaif,
the place where the infidels took an oath of dedication to kufr.”
Ibn Ishaq said that ‘Abdullah Ibn Khatal belonged to Banu Taim
Ibn Ghalib.
I say: His name was probably ‘Abdul ‘Uzza Ibn Khatal and when
he became Muslim, his name was changed to ‘Abdullah. After
he accepted Islam, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, sent him to collect Zakah and sent an
Ansari along with him. Ibn Khatal also had with him his mawla
(freed slave). On the way, he became extremely angry with the
mawla, killed him and then apostatized. He had two female
singers, Fartana and her friend, both of whom used to satirize the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
and the Muslims in their songs. It is for this reason that his blood
and that of the two female singers were permitted to be shed. He
was killed while hanging on the drapes of Ka‘bah. Abu Barzah
Al-Aslami and Sa’eed Ibn Huraith Al-Makhzoomi jointly
executed him. One of the two female singers was also executed
while security was requested (and granted) for the other.
The narrator added: Al-Huwairith Ibn Nuqaidh Ibn Wahb Ibn
Abd Ibn Qusayy was one of those who used to harm the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
in Makkah. When ‘Abbas carried Fatimah and Umm Kulthoom
so that they may join their father, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
47

blessings of Allah be upon him, in Madinah during the first
Hijrah, AlHuwairith poked the camel on which the Prophet’s
daughters were riding and they both fell off the animal. Thus,
when the permission for his killing was given, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
executed him.
He also added that Miqyas Ibn Subabah was also killed because
he killed someone who mistakenly killed his brother after he had
collected the blood money (for his brother) and also apostatized.
A member from his clan named Numailah Ibn ‘Abdullah carried
out his execution. Another person who was permitted to be killed
was Sarah, the female client of Banu ‘Abdul-Muttalib and of
‘Ikrimah Ibn Abi Jahl as she would harm the Prophet while she
was in Makkah.
I say: It has been expressed earlier that she is the same person
who was carrying the letter of Hatib Ibn Abi Balta‘ah. It appears
that she was forgiven or perhaps she fled. Later, the order for her
execution was given. And Allah (SWT) knows best. She fled
again until her protection was sought from the Messengerof
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and it was
granted. She lived until the rule of ‘Umar; someone ran over her
with a horse after which she died. As-Suhaili mentioned that
Fartana also accepted Islam.
On the authority of Mus‘ab Ibn Sa’d from his father that on the
Day of the Conquest of Makkah, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, granted amnesty to the people
with the exception of four men and two women. The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, gave the command:
“Kill them even if you find them hanging to the drapes of the
Ka‘bah.” They included: ‘Ikrimah Ibn Abi Jahl, ‘Abdullah Ibn
48

Khatal, Miqyas Ibn Subabah, and ‘Abdullah Ibn Sa’d Ibn Abi
Sarh. As for ‘Abdullah Ibn Khatal, he was found hanging on the
drape of the Ka‘bah, Sa’eed Ibn Huraith and ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir
raced toward him, but Sa’eed was faster for he was the younger
of the two, and he killed him. Miqyas was found in the market
and he was killed. ‘Ikrimah fled to the high sea, where they were
caught in a storm. The occupants of the ship said to one another,
“Worship Allah sincerely for all your (false) deities will not
suffice you in the least in this precarious situation.” ‘Ikrimah
said: “By Allah, if one cannot be saved on the high sea except
through sincerity to Allah, then one cannot possibly be saved (at
any othertime) by other than Him. O Allah, I give You my
solemn pledge that if You deliver me from this situation I will go
to Muhammad and place my hand in his.” True to his vow,
‘Ikrimah came and accepted Islam.
‘Abdullah Ibn Sa’d Ibn Abi Sarh was with ‘Uthman. When
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
invited the people to pledge allegiance, ‘Uthman brought him to
the presence of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, and said: “O Messenger of Allah, take ‘Abdullah’s (pledge
of) allegiance.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, lifted his gaze to look at him three times, each time
refusing (to accept) his allegiance. After the third time, he
accepted his pledge of allegiance and then turned to his
Companions and said: “Wasn’t there any intelligent person who
would have killed him when you saw that I tarried in accepting
his allegiance?” They said: “We did not know what you intended.
Why didn’t you wink at us (to give a sign) ?” The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “It is not fitting for a
Prophet to kill by gestures.” Related by Abu Dawood and AnNasa’i also related a similar narration.
49

Ibn Ishaq related on the authority of Abu Murrah, the freed slave
of ‘Aqeel Ibn Abi Talib that Umm Hani, the daughter of Abi
Talib, said that when the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, disembarked at upper Makkah,
two men from my in-laws among Banu Makhzoom fled to me.
Ibn Hisham added: They were Al-Harith Ibn Hisham and Zuhair
Ibn Abi Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah. She was married to
Hubairah Ibn Abi Wahb AlMakhzoomi.
Umm Hani continued: “My brother, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, came in
to see me and insisted: ‘I shall kill both of them.’ So I locked the
door of my house on both of them and went to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, at the
upper part of Makkah. I found him taking a bath from a bowl
with dough stain and Fatimah was hiding him with a cloth. When
he finished his bath, he donned his cloth and offered eight units
of Dhuha prayer and then came to meet me, and said: ‘Welcome,
O Umm Hani, what brought you here?’ I informed him about the
two men and ‘Ali’s insistence (on killing them). He said: 'I have
granted asylum to whoever you grant asylum and safety to whom
you grant safety. He shall not kill them'.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn Abi Laila that no one
narrated to us that he saw the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, offering the Salat ud-Dhuha other than Umm
Hani. She mentioned that on the Day of the Conquest of Makkah
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, took a
bath in her house and then offered eight units of prayer. She
added: "I never saw him offering a lighter prayer than that, even
though he completed the bowing and prostration properly."

50

Ibn Ishaq related on the authority of Safiyyah Bint Shaibah that
when Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, arrived int Makkah and the people settled down, the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, came to the
House (Ka‘bah) and circumambulated it seven times while riding
his animal touching the corner with a staff in his hand. When
hecompleted his tawaf, he called ‘Uthman Ibn Talhah and took
the key to the Ka‘bah and opened it. When he entered it, he found
a wooden pigeon which he broke and threw it (out). Then he
stood by the door of the Ka‘bah while the people gathered around
him in the Grand Mosque.
Ibn Ishaq said that some people of knowledge informed him that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
stood by the door of the Ka‘bah and said: “I bear witness that
none is worthy of worship (in truth) except Allah, He is Alone
without any associate. He has fulfilled His promise and helped
His slave and routed the confederates. Take note! All the merits
mentioned in pre-Islamic times, and the claims made for blood
or property are now under my feet, except the custody of the
Ka‘bah and the supply of water to the pilgrims.
“Take note! The blood-money for unintentional murder, which
appears intentional — such as those murdered with a whip or a
stick — is one hundred camels, forty of which should be
pregnant. O company of the Quraish, Allah has eliminated the
haughtiness of the time of ignorance and pride in ancestry. Every
man is from Adam and Adam is from dust.”
Then he recited this Verse: “O mankind! We have created you
from a male and a female...” (Soorah Al-Hujurat 49:13) in its
entirety, and then said: “O people of Quraish! What do you think
51

of the treatment that I am about to accord on you?” They replied:
“We expect nothing but goodness from you, (you are a) noble
brother and the son of a noble brother!” Upon this the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Go,
for you are free.”
Then the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, sat in the Mosque. ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib went up to
himbearing the key to the Ka‘bah and said: “Grant us the custody
(of Ka‘bah) and the (job of the) supplying water to the pilgrims,
Allah’s peace be upon you.” Upon that Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Where is ‘Uthman Ibn
Talhah?” He was called and the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said to him: “O ‘Uthman, this is
your key. Today is a day of benevolence and fealty.”
Ibn Hisham related that some people of knowledge informed me
that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, entered the Ka‘bah on the Day of the Conquest and saw the
pictures of angels and others. He also saw a picture of Ibrahim
with divining arrows in his hand. The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “May Allah kill them
all! They turned our chief into an arrow diviner! What has
Ibrahim got to do with divining arrows?” and recited the
Verse,“Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a
true Muslim Haneef (Islamic Monotheism - to worship none but
Allah Alone) and he was not of Al-Mushrikoon.” (Soorah Aal
Imran 3:67) Then he commanded that the pictures be destroyed.
Al-Bukhari related that ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood said: When the
Messenger of Allah entered Makkah on the Day of Conquest,
there were 360 idols around the Ka‘bah. He started striking them
52

with a stick, which he had in his hand, and kept saying, “The
truth has come, and falsehood can neither create anything nor
resurrect (anything).”
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, entered Makkah on the Day ofthe
Conquest riding his camel and circumambulated the House on it.
Surrounding the Ka‘bah were idols bound with lead. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, began to
point to the idols with a something in his hand, saying: “Truth
has come and falsehood has vanished. Surely, falsehood is ever
bound to vanish.” He did not point at the face of any of the idols
except that it fell on its back, and he did not point at its back
except that it fell on its face, until all the idols fell down. Tameem
Ibn Asad Al-Khuza‘i said in a verse of poetry:
In the (fate of the) idols are lessons and knowledge
For he who hopes for reward or punishment
Abu Hurairah narrated in the Hadith of the Conquest of Makkah
saying: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, proceeded
until he approached the (Black) Stone. He kissed it and
circumambulated the Ka‘bah. He approached an idol by the side
of the Ka‘bah which was worshipped by the people. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
had a bow in his hand, and he was holding it from a corner. When
he came near the idol, he began to pierce its eyes with the bow
saying: “Truth has been established and falsehood has perished.”
When he finished the circumambulation, he came to Safa,
ascended it to a height from where he could see the Ka‘bah,
raised his hands (in prayer) and began to praise Allah and
supplicate as much as he wanted.
53

Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that upon the
arrival of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, in Makkah, he refused to enter the Ka‘bah while
idolsstill remained inside it. He commanded that they be thrown
out. Then they brought a picture of Ibrahim and Isma‘eel, peace
be upon both of them, with divining arrows in their hands to
which he said: “May Allah ruin them! They knew that both of
them never divined by arrow.” He then entered the Ka‘bah and
extolled the Greatness of Allah by all its sides and he came out
without offering any prayer in it.
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that when
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
entered the Ka‘bah, he supplicated by its corner and then came
out to offer two units of prayer.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
entered Makkah on the Day of the Conquest from its upper part
while riding his she-camel, and Usamah was riding behind him.
Bilal and ‘Uthman Ibn Talhah, one of the servants of the Ka‘bah,
were also accompanying him until he made his camel kneel in
the Mosque and asked the latter to bring the key of the Ka‘bah.
He opened the door of the Ka‘bah and Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered in the company of
Usamah, Bilal and ‘Uthman, and stayed in it for a long time.
When he came out, the people rushed to it, and ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar was the first to enter it and found Bilal standing behind
the door. He asked Bilal: “Where did the Prophet offer his
prayer?” He pointed to the place where he had offered his prayer.
‘Abdullah said: “I forgot to ask him how many Raka‘hs he had
performed.”
54

It is mentined in Saheeh Bukhari and others that the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, prayed in the
Ka‘bah, with his back to the door between the two pillars, one on
the right and the other on his left and three other pillars toward
his back. At the time, the House had six pillars. Between him and
the western wall (of the Ka‘bah) was a distance of three arms
length.
Yoonus Ibn Bukair related on the authority of Ibn Ishaq who said:
"My father informed me that a member of the household of
Jubair Ibn Mut‘im informed him that when Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered Makkah, he
ordered Bilal to climb the roof of the Ka‘bah and give the call to
prayer, to whichh he complied." One of Banu Sa’eed Ibn Al-‘As
said: “Allah has conferred honor on Sa’eed for he died before he
could witness the spectacle of this black man on the rooftop of
the Ka‘bah.”
Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that Abu
Sufyan saw Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, walking while the people were trailing behind him. He
said to himself: “What if I were to renew fighting with this man?”
Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, came and struck me on the chest with his hand and said:
“Then you will be disgraced.” Then Abu Sufyan said: “I repent
to Allah and seek His forgiveness for what I have uttered.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Mujahid that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
Allah’s Messenger got up on the Day of the Conquest of
Makkahand said: “Allah has made Makkah a sanctuary since the
day He created the heavens and the Earth, and it will remain a
55

sanctuary by virtue of the sanctity Allah has bestowed on it until
the Day of Resurrection. It (i.e. fighting in it) was not made
lawful to anyone before me nor will it be made lawful to anyone
after me, and it was not made lawful for me except for a short
period of time. Its game should not be chased, nor should its trees
be cut, nor its vegetation or grass uprooted; its Luqatah
(i.e. lost things) should not be picked up except by the one who
makes a public announcement of it.” ‘Abbas Ibn ‘AbdulMuttalib interjected: “Except the Idhkhir, O Allah’s Messenger,
as it is indispensable for blacksmiths and houses.” On that, the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, kept quiet
and then said: “Except the Idhkhir as it is lawful to cut.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Shu‘aib from
his grandfather through his father that when Allah allowed His
Messenger to conquer Makkah, he said: “All hostilities must
cease except for the Khuza‘ah against Banu Bakr.” He gave them
permission until he offered the ‘Asr prayer. He then said: “All
hostilities should cease.” The following day a man from
Khuza‘ah came across another man from Banu Bakr at
Muzdalifah and killed him. When the news of that (incident)
reached the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, he rose to address the people. (The narrator added: I
saw him while his back was against the Ka‘bah saying): “The
one who transgressed most against Allah is he who killed in the
sacred precinct or murdered one not guilty of murder or took
vengeance of the time of ignorance.”
On the authority of Al-Harith Ibn Malik Ibn Al-Barsa’ AlKhuza‘i who narrated: I heard Allah’s Messenger say on the Day
of the Conquest of Makkah: “After this day, this (city) shall not
be invaded again (forever) till the Day of Resurrection.”
56

It is recorded in Saheeh Muslim on the authority of Mutee’ Ibn
Al-Aswad AlAdawi who narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said on the Day of the
Conquest of Makkah: “The Quraish shall not be killed helplessly
after this day until the Day of Resurrection.” This statement is
similar to the previous one.
Ibn Hisham related that "some people of knowledge informed me
that Fadalah Ibn ‘Umair Ibn Mulawwah, that is, Al-Laithi,
wanted to kill the Prophet while he was circumambulating the
Ka‘bah in the Year of the Conquest. When he approached him,
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said (to him): “Is this Fadalah?” He replied: “Yes, it is Fadalah,
O Messenger of Allah.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, then asked: “What are you nursing in your
mind?” Fadalah said: “Nothing. I am merely remembering
Allah.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
smiled and said: “Seek Allah’s forgiveness.” Then he placed his
hand on his bosom and his heart became calm. Fadalah used to
say: “He had hardly removed his hand from my bosom when I
felt that there was no one more beloved to me than he.”
Fadalah added: “Thereafter, I returned to my family. On the way,
I came across a woman with whom I used to have an affair
(during Jahiliyyah). She said: ‘Come over so that we may chat'."
He (Fadalah) declined and then began to say (in verse):
She said: come so that we may chat
I said: No, Allah and Islam forbid it to me
If you had seen Muhammad and his tribe

57

On the Day of the Conquest when the idols were shattered
You would have seen the religion of Allah becoming manifest
And the face of idolatry being smothered in darkness
Ibn Ishaq related on the authority of ‘Urwah from ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) who narrated: Safwan left for Juddah
with the intention of boarding (a ship) to Yemen. ‘Umair Ibn
Wahb said: “O Allah’s Prophet, Safwan Ibn Umayyah is the
chief of his people but he has left in flight from you so as to
plunge himself into the sea, please grant him amnesty.” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “He is
granted amnesty.” Again he asked: “Messenger of Allah, give
me a sign for your amnesty.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, gave him his turban which he
had put on when he entered Makkah.
So ‘Umair left in search of Safwan. He found him while he was
trying to go to sea. He caught him and said: “O Safwan, may my
father and mother be sacrificed for you! Allah has saved your
soul from perdition. Here is an amnesty that I obtained from
Allah’s Messenger (for you).” He said: “Stay away from me and
don’t talk to me.” ‘Umair insisted: “Safwan, may my mother and
father be sacrificed for you, your cousin is the best of men, the
most benevolent, most forbearing. His glory is equally yours, his
honor is yours and his reign is yours as well.” Safwan said: “I am
afraid for my life.” ‘Umair insisted: “He is far more forbearing
and nobler than that.” Finally, he conceded and returned with
him. When he came to the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, Safwan said: “This one claims
that you have given me amnesty.” “He has spoken the truth,” the
Prophet, peace andblessings of Allah be upon him, replied. Then
58

Safwan requested: “Can you give me two months to choose?”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “You can have four months to choose.”
Ibn Ishaq related on the authority of Az-Zuhri that Fakhitah Bint
Al-Waleed, Safwan’s wife, and Umm Hakeem Bint Al-Harith
Ibn Hisham, ‘Ikrimah Ibn Abi Jahl’s wife, had gone after him to
Yemen and brought him back, and he accepted Islam. When both
of them (Safwan and ‘Ikrimah) accepted Islam, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, allowed
their wives to remain with them (in marriage) with the first
contract.”
Ibn Ishaq also related that the number of those who witnessed the
Conquest of Makkah among the Muslims were 10,000. Banu
Sulaim contributed 700 while another opinion put their
contribution at 1,000. Banu Ghifar had 400 men. As many as 400
men were from Banu Aslam. Banu Muzainah contributed 1,003
men while the rest of the army was from the Quraish, the Ansar
and their allies from the various Arab tribes of Tameem, Qais,
and Asad. ‘Urwah, Az-Zuhri and Moosa Ibn Uqbah narrated: the
number of the Muslims with the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, on the Day of the Conquest was
12,000. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

The Prophet’s Dispatching of Khalid Ibn AlWaleed to Bani Jadheemah of Kinanah After
the Conquest
Ibn Ishaq related that Hakeem Ibn Hakeem Ibn ‘Abbad Ibn
Hunaif said on the authority of Abu Ja‘afar Muhammad Ibn‘Ali,
who said: When he conquered Makkah, Allah’s Messenger,
59

peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, dispatched Khalid Ibn
Al-Waleed for the purpose of inviting him (to Islam) and not to
fight. He sent along with him some Arab tribes from Sulaim Ibn
Mansoor and Mudlij Ibn Murrah. They calmed Banu Jadheemah
Ibn ‘Amir Ibn ‘Abd Manaf Ibn Kinanah. When they saw him
coming they drew their weapons, but Khalid said: “Drop your
weapons for the people have accepted Islam.”
Ibn Ishaq also said that some people of knowledge from our
companions among Banu Jadheemah informed me that when
Khalid ordered us to drop our weapons, a person from among us
named Jadham said: “O Banu Jadheemah, woe be to you, this is
Khalid, by Allah, nothing will follow your laying down your
weapons except strapping (cuffs) and nothing more will come
after except the striking of your necks. By Allah, I shall never lay
down my weapon.”
(The narrator added): Some men from his tribe spoke to him
saying: “Jadham, do you wish for our blood to be spilled? The
people have accepted Islam and have laid down their weapons,
war has ended and there is now pervading security.” They kept
pressurizing him until they took away his weapons and all the
people laid down their weapons (relying) on the statement of
Khalid.
Ibn Ishaq related that Hakeem Ibn Hakeem related that Abu
Ja‘afar said that when they laid down their weapons, Khalid
ordered that they be shackled and then put a number of them to
the sword. When the news of his action reached the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, he raised his
hand to the sky and said: “O Allah, I am innocent of what Khalid
Ibn AlWaleed has done.”
60

Ibn Ishaq also said that Jadham had said to them when he saw
what Khalid had done to Banu Jadheemah: “The striking (of the
necks) has manifested itself. I had warned you concerning what
you have fallen victim to.” Ibn Ishaq related that some altercation
occurred between Khalid and ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn ‘Awf on the
same issue. The latter asked: “Did you carry out an act from the
period of Ignorance?” Khalid replied: “I took revenge for your
father.” ‘Abdur Rahman responded: “You have lied, you have
killed my father’s murderer previously; rather, you have taken
revenge for your uncle Al-Fakih Ibn AlMugheerah.” There was
an altercation between them which came to the attention of
Allah’s Messenger, so he said: “Khalid, take your time, and let
my Companions be (i.e. none should revile my Companions), for
if you have as much gold as Uhud and you were to spend it (all)
in charity, it would (still) not amount to as much as the early
morning striving or evening striving of one of my Companions.”

The Dispatch of Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed to
Destroy Al‘Uzza
Ibn Ishaq related that afterward, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, dispatched Khalid to destroy Al‘Uzza, which was an idol housed surrounded by palm groves and
venerated by Quraish, Kinanah and Mudar. Its custodian and its
drapers were from Banu Shaiban from the clan of Banu Sulaim
who were allies of Banu Hashim. When its custodian, AsSulami,
heard of Khalid’s movement toward the idol, he hung his sword
on the Al-‘Uzza and then rushed to the hill where it was
locatedwhile saying:
O ‘Uzza, in a manner that is unprecedented, be prepared

61

For Khalid, jettison your veil and be prepared
For O ‘Uzza, if you do not kill a man like Khalid
You will be displaced and cut short in haste
When Khalid came to the idol, he destroyed it and returned to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.

The Length of the Prophet’s Stay in Makkah
There is no disagreement that he spent the remainder of the
month of Ramadan shortening prayers and not fasting. This is a
proof for some of the scholars who argue that if a traveler does
not intend residency, then he may shorten the prayers and refrain
from fasting for 18 days according to one of the two opinions.
Al-Bukhari related that Anas Ibn Malik said: "We stayed with
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
(in Makkah) for ten (days) and we were shortened the prayers."
Al-Bukhari related that Ibn ‘Abbas said: Allah’s Messenger
stayed (in Makkah) for 19 days offering prayers of two raka‘ahs
(i.e. shortening them).
‘Imran Ibn Husain said: "I participated in military expeditions
with the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and I witnessed the Conquest along with him.
Hestayed for 18 nights offering two raka‘ahs of (shortened)
prayers. He would say: 'O residents, pray four (units) for we are
travelers'.” This is how At-Tirmidhi related it and he said: This
Hadith is hasan saheeh.

62

Judgment Passed by Allah’s Messenger in
Makkah
‘Utbah Ibn Abi Waqqas authorized his brother, Sa’d, to take the
son of the slave-girl of Zam‘ah into his custody. ‘Utbah said (to
him) “he is my son.”
When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, arrived in Makkah during the Conquest (of Makkah), Sa’d
Ibn Abi Waqqas took the son of the slave-girl of Zam‘ah to the
Prophet. ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah too came along with him. Sa’d said,
“This is the son of my brother and the latter has informed me that
he is his son.” ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah said, “O Allah’s Messenger!
This is my brother who is the son of the slave-girl of Zam‘ah and
was born on his (i.e. Zam‘ah’s) bed.” Allah’s Messenger looked
at the son of the slave-girl of Zam‘ah and noticed that he, of all
the people, had the greatest resemblance to ‘Utbah Ibn Abi
Waqqas. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, then said (to ‘Abd), “He is yours; he is your brother,
O ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah, he was born on the bed (of your father).”
(At the same time) Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said (to his wife, Sawdah): “O Sawdah, veil
yourself before him (i.e. the son of the slave-girl),” because of
the resemblance he noticed between him and ‘Utbah Ibn Abi
Waqqas. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him,added, “The boy is for the bed (i.e. for the owner of the
bed where he was born), and stoning is for the adulterer.” Ibn
Shihab said: “Abu Hurairah used to say that publicly.”
Al-Bukhari also related that Ibn Shihab said: ‘Urwah Ibn AzZubair narrated to me that a lady committed theft during the
lifetime of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
63

upon him, in the Ghazwah of Al-Fat'h, (i.e. the Conquest of
Makkah). Her folk went to Usamah Ibn Zaid to intercede for her
(with the Prophet). When Usamah interceded for her with Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, the color
of his face changed and he said: “Do you intercede with me in a
matter involving one of the legal punishments prescribed by
Allah?” Usamah said: “O Allah’s Messenger! Ask Allah’s
Forgiveness for me.” So in the afternoon, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, got up and addressed
the people. He praised Allah as He deserved and then said: “The
nations before you were destroyed because if a noble from
among them were to steal, they would excuse him, but if a poor
person from among them were to steal, they would apply
(Allah’s) legal punishment on him. By Him in Whose Hand is
Muhammad’s soul, if Fatimah, the daughter of Muhammad, were
to steal, I would cut her hand.” Then Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, gave his order in the case of
that woman and her hand was amputated. Afterward, her
repentance proved sincere and she was married. ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) said: “That lady used to visit me and
I used to convey her demands to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him.”
It is recorded in Saheeh Muslim from the Hadith of Sabrah Ibn
Ma‘bad AlJuhani who said: “Allah’s Messenger ordered us to do
Mut‘ah (temporary marriage) in the Year of the Conquest
(ofMakkah) when he entered Makkah. Then he prohibited before
he left (Makkah).”In another version, the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Beware, it is
prohibited from this day (of yours) until the Day of
Resurrection.”

64

I say: the most emphatic prohibition of it occurred in the Battle
of Khaibar. It is said that he permitted it twice and prohibited
twice. Ash-Shafi‘i and others prefer this opinion. It is also argued
that it was prohibited only once, which was after the Conquest.
It is also said that it was permitted due to necessity. Based on
this, once necessity calls for it, then it becomes permissible. This
is a reported opinion from Imam Ahmad. Another opinion argues
that it was not absolutely prohibited and it is still under
permissibility. This opinion is well-known from Ibn ‘Abbas
andsome of his companions.
Ibn Jareer related that the people then gathered in Makkah to
pledge allegiance to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, upon Islam. According to what was related
to me, he sat for that purpose on Mount Safa while ‘Umar sat
below him and he began to accept from people their oath to listen
and obey Allah and His Messenger in whatever way they are able
to. When he finished taking the pledge from the men, he then
took the pledge from the women. Among them was Hind Bint
‘Utbah who came veiled because of the (evil) that she had
perpetrated on Hamzah and therefore fearing that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, might
apprehend her. When the women moved closer to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to give
their pledge, he said (to them): “Doyou give me your pledge that
you will not associate any partner with Allah?” Hind said:
“Would you take from us what you did not take from the men?”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, continued: “That you will not steal,” again she interjected:
“I took something from the wealth of Abu Sufyan, but I do not
know whether that is permissible for us or not.” Abu Sufyan, who
65

was witnessing all that she was saying, said: “As for what you
had taken in the past, it is permitted to you.” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked: “Are you Hind
Bint Utbah?” She replied in the affirmative and she entreated:
“Overlook what has gone by, may Allah overlook for you (your
mistakes).”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, then continued: “That you will not commit adultery.” Again
Hind interjected: “O Allah’s Messenger, does a woman born free
commit adultery?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, continued: "That you will not kill your children.” She
said: “We had nurtured them in their infancy, while you and your
Companions killed them in adulthood at the Battle of Badr.” At
this, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab laughed heartily. Again, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
"That you shall not peddle slander.” She said: “Peddling rumor
is indeed a despicable thing.” He said: “That you shall not
disobey me.” She interjected: “In righteousness.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to
‘Umar: “Accept their pledge and seek Allah’s forgiveness for
them for He is Oft-Forgiving and Merciful.” ‘Umar took their
pledge. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, neither shook the hands of women nor did he touch any
woman other than the one whom Allah had permitted for him or
those who were Dhat Mahram (those close relatives to whom
marriage was permanently forbidden for him).
It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) that: “By Allah, the hand of Allah’s
Messenger never touched that of any (strange) woman.” In
another version: “He never used to accept their pledge except by
66

word of mouth and he would say: ‘My address to one woman is
similar to addressing a hundred women'.”
It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of ‘A’ishah (May
Allah be pleased with her) that Hind Bint ‘Utbah said: “O Allah’s
Messenger! Abu Sufyan is a miser and he does not give me what
is sufficient for me and my children. Can I take from his wealth
without his knowledge?” The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Take what is sufficient for
you and your children, and the amount should be just and
reasonable.”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said on
the Day of the Conquest of Makkah: “There is no migration (after
the Conquest), but (there is still) Jihad and good intentions; when
youare called for Jihad, you should respond to the call
immediately.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Majashi’ Ibn Mas‘ood
who said: "I took Abu Ma‘bad to the Prophet so that he might
give him the pledge of allegiance for migration." The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Migration has
ended, but I take the pledge from him (i.e. Abu Ma‘bad) for Islam
and Jihad.” (The sub-narrator said): "Then I met Abu Ma‘bad
and I asked him and he said: 'Majashi’ has spoken the truth'.”
Khalid related on the authority of Abu ‘Uthman from Majashi’
that he came with his brother Mujalid.
These Ahadeeth indicate that Hijrah, either in its entirety or
absolutely, has ceased after the Conquest of Makkah, because
people entered the religion of Allah in throngs, Islam prevailed
(and become manifest), and its pillars and beams became well67

entrenched so there was no more Hijrah except in a situation
which requires migration as a consequence of living in proximity
with war-mongers and one does not have the power to openly
practice the religion among them. In that situation, migration
becomes obligatory from there to Dar Al-Islam (the land of
Islam). There is no difference among the scholars on this issue.
However, this Hijrah is not similar to the one that occurred before
the Conquest. Similarly, Jihad and spending in the path of Allah
are both legislated and highly recommended until the Day of
Resurrection, but they are not similar to Jihad and spending in
the path of Allah before the Conquest of Makkah. Allah says:
“Not equal among you are those who spent and fought before the
conquering (of Makkah) (with those among you who did so
later). Such are higher in degree than those who spent and
foughtafterwards. But to all, Allah has promised the best
(reward).” (Soorah Al-Hadeed 57:10)
Al-Bukhari also related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that
‘Umar used to admit me (into his house) along with the older
men who fought in the Battle of Badr. Some of them said (to
‘Umar): “Why do you allow this young man to enter with us,
while we have sons of his own age?” ‘Umar said: “Do you know
who he is?” One day ‘Umar called them and called me along with
them, I had thought he called me on that day to show them
something about me (i.e. my knowledge). ‘Umar asked them:
“What do you say about (the Soorah): ‘When comes the Help of
Allah (to you, O Muhammad against your enemies) and the
Conquest (of Makkah), and you see that the people enter Allah’s
religion (Islam) in crowds, so glorify the Praises of your Lord,
and ask for His Forgiveness. Verily, He is the One Who accepts
the repentance and forgives. ’” (Soorah An-Nasr 110:1-3)

68

Some of them replied: “We are ordered to praise Allah, and
repent to Him if we are helped and granted victory.” Some said:
“We do not know.” Others remained silent. ‘Umar then said to
me: “Do you say similarly?” I said: “No.” ‘Umar said: “What do
you say then?” I said: “This Verse indicates the approaching
death of Allah’s Messenger, which Allah informed him about.
‘When comes the Help of Allah (to you, O Muhammad against
your enemies) and the conquest (of Makkah) ’ that will be the
sign of your (Prophet’s) approaching death, ‘So glorify the
Praises of your Lord, and ask for His Forgiveness. Verily, He is
the One Who accepts the repentance and forgives.’ On that,
‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “I do not know
about it anything other than what you say.”
On the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Salimah who narrated that
AbuQilabah said to me: “Shouldn’t you meet him and ask him?”
so I met him and asked him and he said: We were at a place which
was a thoroughfare for the people, and the caravans used to pass
by us and we would ask them: “What is wrong with the people?
What is wrong with the people? Who is that man?” They would
say, “That man claims that Allah has sent him (as a Messenger),
that he has been Divinely inspired, and that Allah has revealed to
him such-and-such.” I used to memorize that (Divine) speech,
and felt as if it was ingrained in my heart. The ‘Arabs (other than
Quraish) delayed their conversion to Islam until the Conquest (of
Makkah). They used to say: “Leave him (i.e. Muhammad) and
his people Quraish: if he overpowers them then he is a true
Prophet.”
So, when Makkah was conquered, every tribe rushed to embrace
Islam, and my father hurried to embrace Islam before (the other
members of) my tribe. When my father returned (from the
69

Prophet) to his tribe, he said: “By Allah, I have surely come to
you from the Prophet.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, afterward said to them: "Offer such-and-such
prayer at such-and-such time, and when the time for the prayer
comes, then appoint someone to pronounce the Adhan (for the
prayer), and let someone from among you, who knows the most
Qur’an, to lead the prayer.” So they looked for a person and
found none who knew more Qur’an than I because of the
Qur’anic portions which I would learn from the caravans. They
made me their Imam (to lead the prayer) and at that time I was a
boy of six or seven years. I would wear a Burdah (i.e. a black
square garment) whichh proved to be very short for me (and my
body became partly naked). A lady from the tribe said: “Won’t
you cover the backside of your reciter for us?” So they bought (a
piece of cloth) and made a shirt for me. I have never been so
happy with anything before as I was with that shirt.

The Expedition of Hawazin on the Day of
Hunain
Allah, the Almighty, says: “Truly, Allah has given you victory
on many battlefields, and on the Day of Hunain (battle) when you
rejoiced at your great number but it availed you naught and the
Earth, vast as it is, was straitened for you, then you turned back
in flight. Then Allah did send down His Sakinah (calmness,
tranquility and reassurance, etc.) on the Messenger
(Muhammad), and on the Believers, and sent down forces
(angels) which you saw not, and punished the disbelievers. Such
is the recompense of disbelievers. Then after that Allah will
accept the repentance of whom He will. And Allah is
OftForgiving, Most Merciful.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:25-27)

70

Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Yasar has mentioned in his book that
the Messenger of Allah’s march to Hawazin took place after the
Conquest (of Makkah) on the 5th of Shawwal, in the 8th year.
He also claimed that the Conquest occurred ten days toward the
end of the month of Ramadan and 15 days before his march
against them.
Ibn Ishaq related that when the Hawazin heard that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had
conquered Makkah, its ruler, Malik Ibn ‘Awf An-Nasri,
convened a meeting which was attended by all the Hawazin of
Thaqeef, the people of Nasr and Ju‘sham, Sa’d Ibn Bakr and a
few from Banu Hilal. None was present from Qais of Ailan aside
from these. Ka‘b and Kilab of the Hawazin stayed away and no
one of repute attended. Among Banu Ju‘sham was Duraid Ibn
As-Simmah, an elderly and experienced man who was known for
his valuable advice and experience in warfare.
Thaqeef had two chiefs: Qarib Ibn Al-Aswad Ibn Mas‘ood Ibn
Mu‘attib, who was the leader of Al-Ahlaf, and Dhul-Khimar
Subai’ Ibn Al-Harith, who was the leader of Bani Malik and his
brother Ahmar Ibn Al-Harith. However, the overall affairs were
in the hands of Malik Ibn ‘Awf An-Nasri. When he decided to
march against the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, he was accompanied with his men, their
wealth, women and children. When he camped at Awtas, the
people gathered around him and inlcuded in them was Duraid Ibn
As-Simmah, who was sitting in a hawdaj (howdah-like carriage)
in which he was carried. As soon as he dismounted he asked: “In
what valley are you?” They said: “Al-Awtas.” So he said: “It is
suitable for the horse. Neither a rocky mount nor a dusty plain,
but why do I hear the growl of camels, the braying of asses, the
71

cries of children, and the bleating of sheep?” They informed him:
“Malik brought the army with their wealth, wives, and children.”
Duraid asked: “Where is Malik?” Malik was summoned for him
and he said to him: “Malik, you have become the leader of your
people and today will be a precipitation of events of the
subsequent days. Why do I hear the growl of camels, the braying
of asses, the cries of children, and the bleating of sheep?” Malik
answered: “I have brought the army along with their children,
wives, and wealth.” Duraid asked: “Why did you do such a
thing?” Malik replied: “I want to place behind every soldier his
family and wealth so that they might encourage him to fight
without thinking of retreat.” Duraid said exasperatedly: “You are
no more than a shepherd of sheep! By Allah, do you think
anything will change the situation of a defeated man? In case
things go well nothing will help but a man with a sword and
spear; and in case it goes against you, you will be debased in your
family and wealth.”
He then asked: “What happened to Ka‘b and Kilab?” He was
told: “No one is present from them.” So he said: “Boldness
andmight are absent. If it were a day of sublimity, Ka‘b and Kilab
wouldn’t have been absent. I wish you would act in a similar
manner as Ka‘b and Kilab. Who among your clan is present?”
They informed him: “ 'Amr Ibn 'Amir, 'Awf Ibn 'Amir.” He said:
“Those two weak branches of 'Amir who can neither benefit nor
harm.” Then he turned to Malik and said: “Malik, you have erred.
When you advance the mass of the Hawazin to encounter the
cavalry, let them ascend to a high and inaccessible part of their
land and confront the Subayy riding your horses. In case the fight
is to your advantage, those in the back can proceed and join you,
and in the event that it goes against you, you would have rescued
your families and property.” Malik said: “By Allah, I will not do
72

what you have asked. It appears you have grown old both
physically and mentally.” Then Malik said: “Hawazin, you will
either follow me or I will pierce myself with this sword until it
comes out from my back.” He simply detested to allow Duraid
have a say in the matter. When Hawazin chose to follow Malik,
Duraid said: “This is a day I will neither witness nor miss.” Then
Malik addressed his men: “Once you see them, break your
scabbard and assault them as a single man.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Umayyah Ibn Safwan
Ibn Umayyah from his father that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, borrowed some armor (from
Safwan). He asked: “O Muhammad, do you wish to take them by
force?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
replied: “No, they are warranted loans until we return them to
you.” Eventually, some of them were lost and the Messenger of
Allah went to compensate him for them, but Safwan said: “O
Messenger of Allah, I have never had a desire for Islam more
than today.”
Abu Dawood related on the authority of ‘Abdul-Azeez Ibn Rufai’
from some people from the descendants of ‘Abdullah Ibn Safwan
who reported that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, asked: “O Safwan, do you have any
weapons?” He (Safwan) asked: “As a loan or (will you take
them) by force?” He replied: “As a loan.” So he lent him between
thirty to forty coats of mail. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, fought in the Battle of Hunain.
When the polytheists were defeated, Safwan’s coats of mail were
collected and it was noticed that some of them were lost. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said to Safwan: “We have lost some of your coats of mail. Should
73

we compensate you for them?” He replied: “No, O Messenger of
Allah, for I have in my heart today what I did not have that day.”
I say: Based on the statement of ‘Urwah, Az-Zuhri and Moosa
Ibn ‘Uqbah the total number of the two armies which he (the
Prophet) took to the Hawazin was 14,000 soldiers. This is
because he arrived in Makkah with 12,000 men (according to
their own opinion) and 2,000 more joined them from the freed
(people of Makkah).
Ibn Ishaq related that he (the Messenger of Allah) left Makkah
on the 5th of Shawwal and added that he appointed ‘Attab Ibn
Aseed Ibn Abul-Ees Ibn Umayyab Ibn Abd Shams Al-Umawi to
oversee the affairs of the people of Makkah on his behalf.
I say: His age (i.e. ‘Attab’s) was close to twenty. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, proceeded
to confront the Hawazin, and he cited the poem of ‘Abbas Ibn
Al-Mirdas:
Inform the Hawazin, the high and the low of them
From me is a letter, a clear counsel
I think Allah’s Messenger will reach you in the morning
With an army like pillars in the expanse of the land
Among them is Sulaim, your brother, who would not let you be
And the Muslims who are ardent servants of Allah
On his right flank is Banu Asad
74

The land itself trembles in awe of him In his front are ‘Aws and
‘Uthman
Abu Dawood related on the authority of As-Salooli that Sahl Ibn
AlHanzaliyyah narrated to him that on the Day of Hunain we
traveled with the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, for a long time until evening came and I
attended the prayer along with the Messenger of Allah.
A horseman came and said: “O Messenger of Allah, I went ahead
of you and climbed a certain mountain where I saw the Hawazin
gathered together with their women, cattle, and sheep at Hunain.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, smiled and said: “That will be the booty of the Muslims
tomorrow, if Allah wills.” He then asked: “Who will be on guard
tonight?” Anas Ibn Abu Marthad AlGhanawi said: “I shall, O
Messenger of Allah.” He said: “Then mount your horse.” He
mounted his horse, and came to the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him.
The Messenger of Allah said to him: “Proceed to the top of this
ravine. We should not be exposed to danger from your side.” In
the morning, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, came out to his place of prayer, and offered
two raka‘ahs. He then asked: “Have you seen any sign of
yourhorseman?” The people said: “We have not, O Messenger
of Allah.” The announcement of the time for prayer was then
made, and while the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, was praying, he glanced toward the ravine.
When he finished his prayer with the utterance of the salutation,
he said: “Be cheerful, for your horseman has returned.” We
began to look between the trees in the ravine, and there he was.
75

He stood beside the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, greeted him, and said: “I continued until I
reached the top of this ravine, where the Messenger of Allah
commanded me, and in the morning I looked down into both
ravines but saw no one.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, asked him: “Did you dismount during the night?” He
replied: “No, except to pray or to relieve myself.” The Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “You
have ensured your entry to (Paradise). No blame will be attached
to you from this day onward.”

The Description of the Battle: Initial Fleeing
and the Event Victory of Al- Muttaqoon
Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah related from his father that Malik Ibn ‘Awf
with and his army advanced to Hunain and arrived before Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. They hid
themselves in the crevices and curvatures along the mountain
pass, well-prepared (for a surprise attack). Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and his
Companionsthen approached and he (the Prophet) climbed down
with them into the valley in the early morning. Soon, the horses
became agitated and the enemy inundated them from all sides,
dealing them a surprise attack. The people scampered as they fled
in a hasty retreat, with no one caring for another. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, withdrew
to the right flank saying: “Where are the people? Come around
me, I am the Messenger of Allah, I am Muhammad Ibn
‘Abdullah.” But there were only carriages of camels scattered
about topsy-turvy. The people had fled. Only a few stood firmly
76

with the Prophet. Some of them were members of his household
and includeed: ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Abu Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith Ibn
‘Abdul-Muttalib and his brother, Rabee‘ah Ibn Al-Harith Ibn
‘Abdul-Muttalib, Fadl Ibn ‘Abbas (it is claimed that it was AlFudail Ibn Abi Sufyan), Aiman Ibn Umm Aiman, Usamah Ibn
Zaid. Also among the others who remained with him was
Qutham Ibn ‘Abbas, and a group among the Muhajiroon which
included Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Abbas.
The narrator added: A man from Hawazin riding a red-stained
camel held a black flag fixed to the end of a long spear and rode
in the vanguard of the Hawazin. Whenever he came across a
Muslim he would stab him and if he escaped he would raise his
spear as a signal to those behind and they would pursue him.
While he was devastating the ranks of the Muslims, ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib and an Ansari man went toward him with the intention of
killing him. ‘Ali approached him from behind and severed the
two achilles’ tendons of the camel causing it to fall backward.
The Ansar pounced on the man and dealt him a big blow which
severed his foot and half his shank, making them fly high (in the
air), causing him to fall from his saddle. The warriors did their
best in the fight. When those who had fled came back, they found
prisoners fettered with the Messenger of Allah, peace
andblessings of Allah be upon him.
Ibn Ishaq related that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, turned to Abu Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith Ibn
‘Abdul-Muttalib, who was among those who remained steadfast
with him on that day and demonstrated his sincerity in his Islam.
He held on to the rein of the mule of Allah’s Messenger and when
he asked: “Who is that?” Abu Sufyan replied: “O Allah's
Messenger, It is I, your cousin.”
77

Ibn Ishaq related that when the people were routed and beat a
hasty retreat, a number of Bedouins betrayed the Muslims
because of some enmity that still lurked in their hearts. Abu
Sufyan Sakhr Ibn Harb, who had recently embraced Islam, said,
“Their retreat will not stop until they reach the sea.” Kaladah Ibn
Al-Hanbal who came along with his half-brother, Safwan Ibn
Umayyah, yelled: “Surely magic has grown inactive today.”
Safwan retorted back at him: “Keep quiet, May Allah break your
mouth! By Allah, it is more beloved for me to be ruled by a man
from Quraish than by a man from Hawazin.”
Anas Ibn Malik reported that the Hawazin came with their
children, women, camels and sheep and they arranged them in
rows. When the two forces clashed, the Muslims fled as Allah
said (in the Qur’an). Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, called them: “O servants of Allah, I am the
servant of Allah and His Messenger.” Then he said: “O Ansar! I
am the servant of Allah and His Messenger.” Thereafter, Allah
routed the polytheists. ‘Affan added: “He (the Prophet) was not
struck by a sword nor was he shot by an arrow.” On that day the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him,said: “Whoever kills a polytheist, for him is his spoils.” On
that day, Abu Talhah killed twenty men and he took possession
of all their spoils.
Abu Qatadah said: “O Allah’s Messenger, I struck a man on his
neck tendon (i.e. I killed him) and he had an armor on him but
my attention was taken away from him (by other combatantss)
so please check who took it.” A man got up and said: “I have the
loot of that slain person with me, so give him compensation for
it, O Messenger of Allah.” The character of the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was such that
78

he was not asked for anything except that he gave it or he
remained quiet, so Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, remained silent. ‘Umar then said: “No, by
Allah! Allah will not allow that one of His lions should fight and
then give you his spoils.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, smiled and said: “‘Umar has
spoken the
truth.”
Abu Talhah saw Umm Sulaim with a small dagger and he asked
her: “What is this in your possession?” She replied: “I am
holding a dagger in case a polytheist comes close to me so I can
rip open his bowels with it.” Abu Talhah said: “O Messenger of
Allah, do you not hear what Umm Sulaim is saying?” She turned
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
and said: “O Messenger of Allah, kill those who fled from you
just as you killed those who fought against you, for they are
deserving of that.” He replied: “O Umm Sulaim, Allah has
sufficed us and has been good to us (i.e. there is no need for
that).”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik who
narrated that part of the supplication of the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, on the day of
Hunainwas: “O Allah, if You wish, You will not be worshipped
after today.” Its chain is threefold on the standard of the two
Shaikhain.
Abu Ishaq related that he heard a man from Qais ask Al-Bara’
Ibn ‘Azib: “Did you desert Allah’s Messenger during the Battle
of Hunain?” Al-Bara’ replied: “But Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, did not flee. The people of
79

the tribe of Hawazin were good archers, so when we met them,
we attacked them, and they fled. When the Muslims started
collecting the war booty, the pagans barraged us with arrows, but
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
did not flee. No doubt, I saw him on his white mule and Abu
Sufyan was holding its reins. The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, was saying: ‘I am the Prophet in truth'.”
Al-Bara’ said: "Whenever we were hard-pressed by fright we
would take recourse with Allah’s Messenger, and it is indeed a
brave person that people take recourse to."
Sayabah Ibn ‘Asim As-Sulami narrated that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said on the Day of
Hunain: “I am the son of Al-Awatik.”
Abu Qatadah related: "We set out along with the Prophet during
the year of (the Battle of) Hunain, and when we confronted the
enemy, the Muslims (with the exception of the Prophet and some
of his Companions) retreated. I saw one of the polytheists
overpowering one of the Muslims, so I struck the polytheist
frombehind his neck causing his armor to break loose. The
polytheist turned toward me and pressed me so forcibly that it
was as if I could perceive the odor of death. Then death took him
and he released me. Afterward, I followed
‘Umar and said to him: 'What is wrong with the people?' He said:
'It is the order of Allah.' The Muslims then returned (to the battle
after retreating) and (after overcoming the enemy) the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sat and said: 'Whoever
killed an infidel and has evidence to this, will have the spoils (of
the deceased).' I (stood up) and said: 'Who will be my witness?'
and then sat down. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
80

upon him, repeated his question, and then did so again (a third
time). I got up and asked: 'Who will be my witness?' and then sat
down. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
asked his question again, so I got up. The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: 'What is the matter, Abu
Qatadah?' I narrated the whole story. A man said: 'Abu Qatadah
has spoken the truth, and the spoils of the deceased are with me,
so please compensate Abu Qatadah on my behalf.' Abu Bakr
said: 'No, by Allah, it will never happen that the Prophet will
leave a lion of Allah who fights for the sake of Allah and His
Messenger and give his spoils to you.' The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: 'Abu Bakr has spoken the
truth. Give it (the spoils) back to him!' So he gave it to me and I
bought a garden in (the land of) Banu Salimah with it; that was
the first property I got after embracing Islam."
Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said on the day of (the Battle) of
Hunain when he saw how the people had scattered in disarray:
“‘Abbas, call out: ‘O company of Ansar! The people who
pledgedfealty under the tree!” When ‘Abbas carried out the
command of Allah’s Messenger, they responded to the call
saying: “Here we are, at your service. Here we are.” You would
see them trying to goad their camels back to the battlefield
unsuccessfully. Hastily dismounting, they would snatch their
armor from their necks, take their shield and sword and then head
in the direction of the call until close to one hundred of them
gathered around the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. The people were arrayed and a grim battle
ensued. The first call was for the Ansar and the other for the
Khazraj. They persevered, displaying prodigious stamina in the
heat of the battle. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
81

of Allah be upon him, commanded the Muslim army from his
mount and when he observed the place where a grim and furious
swordfight was taking place, he said: “Now the fight has grown
fierce.” By Allah, when those who had fled came back, they
found prisoners fettered with the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. Allah caused some of the enemy
to be killed, while others were routed. Allah granted their
property and children as booty to His Messenger.
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah mentioned in his History of Military
Expeditions on the authority of Az-Zuhri that when Allah
delighted His Messenger with the Conquest of Makkah, he
marched on to the Hawazin. The people of Makkah also went
along with him. A large number of them went, not minding
whether they were riding or walking until even women marched
out, not for the religious intention, but as spectators and in quest
for war booty.
Accompanying him was Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb and Safwan Ibn
Umayyah; the latter's wife had accepted Islam but he had still
remained upon polytheism. It is also said that the leader of the
polytheists on that day was Malik Ibn ‘Awf An-Nasri and
alongwith him was Duraid Ibn As-Simmah who was trembling
from old age. With him were women, children and livestock.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
dispatched ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi Hadard to spy on them. He spent
the night in their camp and heard Malik address his men: “In the
morning, attack them as a single man (i.e. in one swoop) and
break the scabbards of your swords and arrange your livestock
and your women in different rows.” The following morning, Abu
Sufyan, Safwan and Hakeem Ibn Hizam withdrew to the rear of

82

the battle to observe which of the opposing forces would
eventually prevail.
When the two armies were arrayed against each other, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, rode his
female donkey toward the lines. He inspected his men, gave them
instructions and urged them to fight, promising them victory if
they persevered. Unexpectedly, the polytheists attacked the
Muslim lines in one swoop. The Muslims dispersed and took
flight.
Harithah Ibn Nu‘man said: "I estimated those who remained with
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to
be a hundred men." A man came across Safwan Ibn Umayyah
and said: “Glad tidings of the defeat of Muhammad and his
Companions, by Allah, they can never reverse it.” Safwan said:
“You are giving tidings of the victory of the Arabs (Bedouins),
by Allah, a lord from the Quraish is far more beloved to me than
a lord from the Arab tribesmen,” demonstrating his anger at the
information.
Moosa said: Safwan dispatched one of his slave boys to find out
whose war cry was heard on the battlefield. The boy came back
to him and said: “I heard them say: Banu ‘Abdur Rahman, Banu
‘Abdullah, Banu ‘Ubaidullah.” Upon hearing this, he said:
“Muhammad has prevailed for that is their usual slogan on
thebattlefield.” When the battle enveloped him, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, stood
between two riders on his female donkey and he raised his hands
to Allah in supplication saying: “O Allah, I beseech You to fulfill
Your promise to me. It is not fitting that they should prevail over
us.” Then he called out to his Companions: “O compatriots of the
83

pledge of fealty on the Day of Hudaibiyah, by Allah, they are
assaulting your Messenger!”
It is also said that he spurred them by saying: “Helpers of Allah
and His Messenger! Banu Al-Khazraj! Companions of Soorah
Al- Baqarah!” He also ordered someone from among his
Companions to make a similar call. (Narrators also say): The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
took a handful of earth and he hurled it at the faces of the
polytheists and their collective forelocks while saying: “May
your faces be humiliated!” Instantly, his Companions began to
hasten back to him. It is stated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Now the fight has grown
fierce.” Allah then defeated the enemy from every angle where
the pebbles from the handful of earth had gone. The Muslims
pursued them and killed them. Allah granted their women and
children as booty and Malik Ibn Awf fled to the fortress of Ta’if
along with some noblemen from his tribe. Consequently, upon
seeing the victory of Allah and His Messenger, and the honor of
his religion, many people of Makkah accepted Islam.” Related
by Al-Baihaqi.
‘Abbas narrated: I witnessed the Battle of Hunain with Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and I
remained with him along with Abu Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith without
abandoning him. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, was riding a white mule presented to him
byFarwah Ibn Nufathah Al-Judhami. When the two armies
clashed, the Muslims turned in flight but the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, kept goading his mule
in the direction of the polytheists. ‘Abbas added: "I was holding
the rein of the mule to restrain it so as to prevent it from running,
84

while Abu Sufyan held on to the stirrup of Allah’s Messenger.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him
said: 'O ‘Abbas, call the companions of As-Samurah.' By Allah,
it was as if I motivated them. The moment they heard my voice,
they (took heed like a) cow motivated with compassion to its
calves. They chorused: 'Here we are, at his service. Here we are.'
They clashed with the polytheists. The clarion call was also
directed to the Ansar: 'O Company of the Ansar! O company of
the Ansar!' The call was then restricted to Banu Al-Harith Ibn
Al-Khazraj: 'Banu Al-Harith Ibn AlKhazraj!' While still on his
mule, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, was observing the course of the battle and said: 'Now the
fighting has grown fierce.' He took a handful of pebbles and
threw it at the faces of the disbelievers and said: 'You will be
routed, by the Lord of Muhammad.' I went to observe the
proceedings of the battle, and, by Allah, the moment the
Messenger flung those pebbles at them, I never ceased to see
them being incapacitated and their initial advantage was
reversed."
On the authority of Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa’ who narrated: "We
fought by the side of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, in the Battle of Hunain. When we
encountered the enemy, I advanced and ascended a hill. A man
from the enemy turned toward me and I shot him with an arrow.
He (ducked and) hid himself from me. I could not understand
what he did, but (all of a sudden) I saw a group ofpeople
appearing from the other hill. They and the Companions of the
Prophet met in combat, but the Companions of the Prophet
turned back and I too turned back defeated. I had two mantles,
one of which I had wrapped round the waist (covering the lower
part of my body) and the other I had put around my shoulders.
85

My waistwrapper got loose and I held the two mantles together.
(In this downcast condition) I passed by the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, who was riding on his
white mule. He said: 'The son of Akwa’ finds himself to be
utterly perplexed.' When the Companions rallied around him, the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
dismounted from his mule, picked up a handful of dust from the
ground, threw it at the (enemies’) faces and said: 'May these faces
be deformed!' There was no one among the enemy whose eyes
were not filled with the dust from this handful. So they turned
back in flight and Allah defeated them. The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, distributed their booty
among the Muslims.”
On the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Al-Fihri who narrated: “We
were with the Messenger of Allah at Hunain. We marched under
sweltering weather and we camped under the shadows of AsSamur (trees). When the sun declined from its zenith, I donned
my armor, jumped on my horse and came to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, while he was in his
tent. I said to him: 'Peace and mercy of Allah be on you, Allah’s
Messenger, the time for departure has come.' He responded:
'Certainly! get up, Bilal.' So he roused from under As-Samurah
whose shadow was no more than that of a bird. Bilal said: 'Here
I am at your service and may I be ransomed for you.' So the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be uponhim, instructed
him: 'Saddle my horse for me.' So he brought him two sheets of
palm fiber bereft of glamor or haughtiness. We traveled that day
and we clashed with the enemy while each side was confident of
victory.

86

"We fought against them and the Muslims turned on their heels
in flight as Allah mentioned (in the Qur’an). The Messenger kept
shouting: 'O servants of Allah, I am the slave of Allah and His
Messenger!' The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, dismounted from his horse and someone who
was closer to him than I was, informed me that he took a handful
of earth and threw it at the face of the enemy saying: 'May these
faces be deformed!' Ya‘la Ibn ‘Ata’ added: Some of their
children related to us from their father that there was no one
(among the enemy) whose eyes and mouth were not filled with
the dust (from this handful). We heard clanging sounds from the
sky similar to the clanging of steel when two forces confident of
victory clash. Then Allah, the Exalted, defeated them."
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood narrated: "I was with Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, at the Battle of Hunain
when the people turned on their heels in flight. However, 80 men
among the Ansar and the Muhajiroon remained steadfast with
him. Though we retreated backward for a distance of 80 steps,
we did not turn our backs to the enemy. These were the people
upon whom Allah sent down tranquility. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, who was on his female
mule lunged forward and he tilted toward the ground from his
saddle so I said to him: 'Rise, may Allah elevate you.' He said to
me: 'Scoop for me a handful of dirt.' He threw it at the faces of
the enemy and their eyes were filled with dust. He then asked:
'Where are theMuhajiroon and the Ansar?' I said: 'Here they are.'
He said: 'Call out to them.' So I called out to them (in a loud
voice) and they came with their swords in their right hands like
meteors. Soon after, the polytheists turned on their heels in
flight."

87

On the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Iyyad Ibn Al-Harith AlAnsari, narrating from his father, said: Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, went to the Hawazin with
12,000 men, and the number of the dead from the people of Taif
in the Battle of Hunain was similar to that of the Battle of Badr.
He also added: "Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, took a handful of pebbles and threw it at our faces
and we were defeated in the Battle of Hunain."
On the authority of ‘Abdur Rahman Mawla Umm Burthun who
narrated from someone who witnessed the Battle of Hunain as a
polytheist. He said: “When we clashed with Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, the Muslims were
unable to withstand our onslaught even for the moment within
which a goat is milked. We advanced brandishing our swords in
front of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, until we overwhelmed him. Just then, some men with
handsome faces stood between us and him. They said: 'May these
faces be deformed! Go back!'” We were defeated owing to that
statement."
On the authority of Mus‘ab Ibn Shaibah, narrating from hisfather,
said: "I advanced with Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, on the day of the Battle of Hunain. Neither
Islam nor its cognizance impelled my going with them, but I
detested that the Hawazin should prevail over Quraish. While I
was standing by his side, I said: 'O Messenger of Allah, I see that
the horses are few in numbers.' He said: 'O Shaibah, no one sees
that except a disbeliever.' So he struck my chest with his hand
and supplicated: 'O Allah, guide Shaibah.' He struck the second
time and repeated the supplication: 'O Allah, guide Shaibah.'
Then a third time he struck my chest and said: 'O Allah, guide
88

Shaibah.' (1) By Allah, he had barely raised his hand from the
third strike when no one became dearer to me from the creatures
of Allah than him."
On the authority of Shaibah Ibn ‘Uthman who narrated: "When I
saw that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, became vulnerable on the Day of Hunain, I
remembered the killing of my father and uncle at the hands of
Hamzah. So I said to myself: 'Today I will exact my revenge
from Allah’s Messenger.' So I snuck in on him from the right and
found ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul- Muttalib standing over him with a
white silver-like shield. I said to myself: His uncle will never
abandon him. I then approached him from his left and found Abu
Sufyan Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul- Muttalib. Again I said to
myself: His cousin will never abandon him. Then I came from
behind him and I was just about to rush with my sword when a
blaze of fire, like a lightening, crossed between me and him. I
was scared that it might incinerate me, so I covered my face with
my hands and retreated. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, turned to me and said: 'O
Shaibah! O Shaibah! Come close to me. O Allah,estrange
Shaitan from him.' I raised my gaze to look at him and he became
more beloved to me than my hearing and sight. Then he said: 'O
Shaibah, fight against the disbelievers'.”
When the Hawazin were defeated, their leader, Malik Ibn ‘Awf
An-Nasri stood on a hill with a section of his men and said: “Wait
for your weak ones to pass and those in the rear to catch up with
you.”
Ibn Ishaq related: "It has reached me that when the horses
appeared while Malik and his companions were on the hill, he
89

said to them: 'What can you see?' They replied: 'We can see a
group of people whose spears are placed between the ears of their
horses with long forearms.' He then said: 'They are Banu Sulaim,
no harm will come to you from them.' When they approached,
they went through the valley. Then another group of horsemen
appeared in quick succession. Again, Malik asked his
companions: 'What can you see?' They replied: 'A group of
people bearing their spears in an unassuming manner on their
horses.' He said: 'These are the Aws and Khazraj, but no harm
will come to you from them.' When they got to the foot of the
hill, they also went in the direction of Banu Sulaim. A horseman
appeared, and he once again he asked his companions: 'What can
you see?' They said: 'We can see a horseman with long forearms
carrying his spear on his shoulder with a red band wrapped
around his head.' He said: 'That is Az-Zubair Ibn Al-‘Awwam. I
swear by Al-Lat, he will attack you so persevere against him."
When AzZubair got to the foot of the hill and saw the enemy, he
confronted them and keptshooting at them until were neutralized
and deserted the hill.
"Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
ordered that the booty be gathered and be herded to Ji‘ranah
where it would be kept. He appointed Mas‘ood Ibn ‘Amr AlGhifari incharge of the booty."
On the authority of Rabah Ibn Rabee‘, brother of Hanzalah AlKatib, who narrated that he informed him that he marched along
with Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, in one of the battles he participated in. In the vanguard (of
the Muslims) at that battle was Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed. Rabah and
some of the Companions of Allah’s Messenger came across a
woman who was killed by the vanguard of the Muslim army. So
90

they stopped and marveled at the features of the woman until
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
caught up with them on his mount and they dispersed from her.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
stood by her and said: “This is not the manner of fighting,” and
he said to one of them: “Catch up with Khalid and inform him
not to kill children and slaves.”

The Expedition of Awtas
The reason for this expedition was that when Hawazin were
defeated, a group from them, which included Malik Ibn ‘Awf
An- Nasri, went to Ta’if and entrenched themselves in a fortress,
while another group fled to a place called Awtas. Allah’s
Messenger dispatched against the latter group a raiding
contingent from his Companions, and appointed Abu ‘Amir AlAsh‘ari as their commander. They fought and conquered them.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
himself went to lay siege to the inhabitants of Ta’if.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari
who narrated that "when the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, finished from the Battle of
Hunain, he sent Abu ‘Amir at the head of an army to Awtas. He
(i.e. Abu ‘Amir) met Duraid Ibn As-Simmah. Duraid was killed
and Allah defeated those who were with him. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent me with
Abu ‘Amir. Abu ‘Amir was shot in his knee with an arrow that
became fixed in it by a man from Ju‘sham. I went to him and
said, 'O uncle! Who shot you?' He pointed me out (to his killer)
saying: 'That is my killer who shot me (with an arrow).' I headed
toward him and overtook him, and when he saw me, he fled; I
91

followed him and shouted at him saying: 'Won’t you be
ashamed? Won’t you stop?' So that person stopped, and we
exchanged two strokes of the swords and I killed him. Then I said
to Abu ‘Amir: 'Allah has killed your attacker.' He said: 'Take out
this arrow.' I removed it, and water oozed out of the wound. He
then said: 'O son of my brother! Convey my compliments to the
Prophet and request him to ask Allah’s forgiveness for me.'
"Abu ‘Amir made me his successor in commanding the people
(i.e. troops). He survived for a short while and then died. (Later)
I returned and entered upon the Prophet at his house, and found
him lying on a bed made of stalks of date-palm leaves knitted
with ropes, and on it there was bedding. The strings of the bed
had left their traces over his back and sides. I told the Prophet
about our and Abu ‘Amir’s news and how he had said: 'Tell him
to ask Allah’s forgiveness for me.' The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, asked for water, performed
ablution and then raised his hands, saying: 'O Allah! Forgive
‘Ubaid, Abu ‘Amir.' At that time I saw the whiteness of the
Prophet’s armpits. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, then said: 'O Allah, make him (i.e. Abu ‘Amir) on the
Day of
Resurrection,superior to many of Your human creatures.' I said:
'Will you ask Allah’s forgiveness for me?' (On that) the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: 'O Allah, forgive
the sins of ‘Abdullah Ibn Qais and admit him to a nice entrance
(i.e. Paradise) on the Day of Resurrection.' Abu Burdah said:
'One of the prayers was for Abu ‘Amir and the other was for Abu
Moosa (i.e. ‘Abdullah Ibn Qais) '.”
On the authority of Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri who narrated: "We
obtained some women from the captives of the Battle of Awtas
92

who had husbands and we detested having relations with them
while they had husbands. So we asked the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and this Verse was revealed:
“Also (forbidden are) women already married, except those
(captives and slaves) whom your right hands possess.” (Soorah
An-Nisa’ 4:24) So they were made permissible.
A group of the pious predecessors have advanced this Verse as
evidence that the sale of a slave-girl is her divorce. This opinion
is related from Ibn Mas‘ood, Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b, Jabir Ibn
‘Abdullah, Ibn ‘Abbas, Sa’eed Ibn AlMusayyab and Al-Hasan
Al-Basri. However, a majority of scholars oppose them using as
evidence the Hadith of Bareerah when she was sold and she was
given the choice either to dissolve her marriage or sustain it. If
her sale was her divorce, she would not have been given a choice.
We have extensively explored this issue in the Tafseer in a
manner that suffices.

Martyrs of the Battle of Hunain and the
Expedition of Awtas
They include Aiman Ibn Umm Aiman, the freed slave of Allah’s
Messenger. He is the same person as Aiman Ibn ‘Ubaid, Yazeed
Ibn Zam‘ah Ibn AlAswad Ibn Al-Mutallib Ibn Asad who was
thrown by his horse named Wings resulting in his death. The list
also includes Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Adiyy AlAnsari from Banu Ajlan,Abu ‘Amir Al-Ash‘ari, the commander
of the military detachment to Awtas. May Allah be pleased with
them all.

93

Ghazwah At-Ta’if
‘Urwah and Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah related from Az-Zuhri that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
fought the Battle of Hunain and besieged Ta’if in Shawwal of the
8th year. ‘Urwah narrated: Afterward, Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, marched to
Ta’if and left the captives at Al-Ji‘ranah and their number filled
the entrepot of Makkah. He dismounted at the hill by the fort of
Ta’if and fought them for about 10 days while they also fought
back from behind their fortress. None of them ventured out
except Abu Bakrah Ibn Masrooh, Ziyad’s half-brother from his
mother. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, manumitted him. There were a considerable number of
injured. They cut some of their vineyards to infuriate them. The
Thaqeef protested: “Do not destroy the property for it is either
for us or for you.”
‘Urwah added: Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, commanded each man to cut down five date-palm
trees. Then he dispatched someone to announce: “Whoever
comesout to us is free.” A group of them broke through among
whom was Abu Bakrah Ibn Masrooh, Ziyad Ibn Abi Sufyan’s
half- brother from his mother. So he freed them and put each of
them under the charge of one Muslim, both for sustenance and
care.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq related: Two of the wives of Allah
Messenger were with him; one was Umm Salamah. A tent was
erected for each of them and the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, would take turns praying in
them. He besieged (the fort) and fought against them (the
94

inhabitants) a grim battle. They pelted one another with hails of
arrows. Ibn Hisham added: They also shot at them with a ballista.
Someone whom I trust narrated to me from the Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, that the first person to shoot
with a ballista in Islam was against the people of Ta’if.
Ibn Ishaq mentioned that a group of the Companions ducked
under a wooden tank and then crept toward the wall of the people
of Ta’if intent on burning it. Unfortunately, the people of
Thaqeef poured molten hot iron down on them and they
scampered out from under the tank and again they were pelted
with a flurry of arrows; a number of them were killed.
At that point, in order to force the enemy to surrender, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered
that their crops be cut. The Muslims swarmed in on their
vineyards in order to cut their vines. Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb and
Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah stepped forward and requested
Thaqeef to agree to a cease-fire so that he could talk to them.
They granted the cease- fire and requested that some women
from Quraish and Banu Kinanah be sent to them (as pawns). Both
of them feared that they could be taken hostage in the event of
downfall of the fortress so they refused the request. Abul-Aswad
Ibn Mas‘ood said to both of them: “Should I not direct you to
what is better than what hasbrought you both? The property of
Abul-Aswad is located where you two are aware of and Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, has
camped at a valley called ‘Al-Aqeeq’ which is between the
property of Banu Al-Aswad and that of Ta’if. The people of Ta’if
do not have a property to which they are more attached or which
is more valuable to them than that. If Muhammad were to cut
that, then they will never prosper again forever. So speak with
95

him and let him take it for himself or leave it (for them) for the
sake of Allah and out of the ties of kinship.” They claimed that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
left it for them.
Al-Waqidi also related a similar narration on the authority of his
Shaikh, saying in his narration that it was Salman Al-Farisi who
suggested the idea of the ballista and he himself operated it. It is
also said that he was presented with it and two wooden tanks.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Umm Salamah narrated: "Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, came to visit me while an eunuch
was with me and he heard him say to ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu
Umayyah: If Allah grants you victory in Ta’if the next day, I will
show you the daughter of Ghailan for she has four folds (upon
her body) on the front side of her stomach and eight folds on the
back. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: 'Such (people) should not visit you'.”
On the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr who narrated: When
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
besieged Ta’if and could not conquer it, he said: “We will return,
if Allah wills.” That distressed the Companions (of the Prophet)
and they said: “Shall we go away without conquering it (i.e.
thefort of Ta’if) ?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, then said (to them): “Fight tomorrow.” They fought
and (many of them) were wounded, whereupon the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “We will return
tomorrow, if Allah wills.” That delighted them, whereupon the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, smiled. The
sub-narrator, Sufyan said once: “ (The Prophet) smiled.”
96

Following is a list of the Muslims who were martyred in the
campaign of Ta’if as related by Ibn Ishaq. Among the Quraish
were: Sa’eed Ibn Sa’eed Ibn Al‘As Ibn Umayyah, Urfutah Ibn
Janab, an ally of Banu Umayyah from Al-Asad Ibn Al-Ghawth,
‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, who was shot with an arrow
and later died in Madinah from the injury after the death of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. It
also included ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah
Al- Makhzoomi who was among the casualties of the hails of
arrows. Among them were also ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amir Ibn
Rabee‘ah, an ally of Banu ‘Adiyy; As-Sa’ib Ibn Al-Harith Ibn
Qais Ibn ‘Adiyy As-Sahmi and his brother ‘Abdullah; Julaihah
Ibn ‘Abdullah from Banu Sa’d Ibn Laith.
The martyrs from the Ansar and the Khazraj were: Thabit Ibn AlJidh’ AsSulami, Al-Harith Ibn Sahl Ibn Abi Sa‘sa‘ah Al-Mazini
and Al-Mundhir Ibn ‘Abdullah from Banu Sa‘idah. Only Ruqaim
Ibn Thabit Ibn Tha‘labah Ibn Zaid Ibn Lawdhan Ibn Muawiyah
was martyred from the Aws. Thus, the aggregate number of those
who were martyred on that day were twelve: seven from Quraish,
four from the Ansar and a man from Banu Laith. May Allah be
pleased with them all.
I say: Divine wisdom dictates that perhaps the victory was
delayed that year so as to prevent a large number of casualties
fromthem. It has been mentioned earlier that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had gone to Ta’if to
invite them to Allah and to grant him protection so that he could
deliver the Message of his Lord, the Exalted. This incident
occurred after the death of his uncle, Abu Talib. The people of
Ta’if rejected and belied him. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, returned with distress. He had
97

not gone beyond Qarn Tha‘alib when he saw Jibraeel in the
clouds and the two angels in charge of the mountain called out to
him saying: “o Muhammad, your Lord conveys His greetings of
peace, and He has heard what your people have said to you and
their response to your call. Do you desire that the two mountains
be overturned on them?” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said: “No, grant them respite instead,
perhaps Allah will bring from their loins those who would
worship Him alone without associating any partner with Him
whatsoever.” Thus, in harmony with the statement of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
“No, grant them respite instead,” Allah prevented the conquest
of their fortress so that they may not be killed (cutting short their
progeny whom the Prophet hoped would practice Islam). Thus
Allah delayed their conquest so that they may declare their Islam
in Ramadan of the following year, as shall be related shortly, if
Allah willing.

The Return of the Prophet From Ta’if and the
Distribution of the Booty Gained From the
Battle of Hunain
Ibn Ishaq related that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, withdrew from Ta’if and proceeded
toJi‘ranah accompanied by the Muslims who were with him,
along with a considerable number of the captives of Hawazin. A
man from his Companions said to him when they were retreating
from the Thaqeef: “O Messenger of Allah, curse them.” The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
instead said: “O Allah guide Thaqeef and bring them (to Islam).”

98

Ibn Ishaq added that the delegates of the Hawazin came and met
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, at Ji‘ranah and he had with him from the captives of
Hawazin, 6,000 of their children and women as well as sheep and
camels, the number of which I could not count.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Al-Miswar Ibn
Makhramah and Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam that when the delegates
of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, they requested him to return
their properties and captives. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, stood up and said to them: “I
have other people with me in this matter (as you see), and the
most beloved statement to me is the true one; you may choose
either the properties or the prisoners as I have delayed their
distribution.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, had waited for them for about ten days since his arrival from
Ta’if. So, when it became evident to them that the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was not going
to return to them no more than one of the two, they said: “We
choose our prisoners.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, got up among the people, glorified and
praised Allah as He deserved and said: “These brethren of yours
have come to us in repentance, and I see it logical to return to
them the captives. So, whoever amongst you likes to do that asa
favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you likes to stick to his
share until we recompense him from the very first war booty
which Allah will give us, then he can do so (i.e. give up the
present captives).” The people unanimously said: “We (return
the captives) willingly.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “We do not know which of
you has agreed to it and which have not, so go back and let your
99

leaders forward to us your decision.” So, all the people then went
back and discussed the matter with their leaders who returned
and informed the Prophet that all the people had willingly given
their consent to return the captives. This is what has reached us
about the captives of Hawazin.
Al-Bukhari did not contradict the objection to Al-Aqra’ and
Uyainah and their people; rather he was silent concerning them
and affirmation takes precedence over negation, how much more
this is true of a silent situation.
Abu Wajzah Yazeed Ibn Ubaid As-Sa’di related that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, gave ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Talib a slave-girl named Raitah Bint Hilal Ibn Hayyan
Ibn Umairah. He gave to ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan a slave-girl called
Zainab Bint Hayyan Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Hayyan and he gave to ‘Umar
another slave-girl whom he in turn gave as a gift to his son
‘Abdullah. The import of this is that Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, returned to the Hawazin their
captives after he had apportioned them as clearly indicated by
this and other statements. The apparent importance of the Hadith
of ‘Amr Ibn Shu‘aib which Muhammad Ibn Ishaq cited from him
through his father from his grandfather is that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, returned to the
Hawazin their captives before their distribution. Therefore, when
he returned thecaptives and set out on his mount, the Arab
tribesmen snatched his garment saying: “Distribute to us our
booty of camels and herds.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, snatched his garment and said: “Return my
garment! O people, by Him in Whose Hands is my soul, if your
sheep were as many as the trees of Tihamah, I would share it
among you and you would not find me to be niggardly, cowardly
100

or a liar.” It is related by AlBukhari on the authority of Jubair Ibn
Mut‘im.
It was as if he was wary of returning to the Hawazin their
properties as he returned their women and children. Thus they
asked about the distribution and he shared (amongst them) as
Allah, the Exalted, has commanded. He gave preference to some
people in the distribution and consequently people gathered
among the leaders and chiefs of the tribes. Some of the Ansar
made apparent their displeasure and the Prophet addressed them
explaining the wisdom behind his action, in such a way that they
were pleased with it. Some ignorant fellows among the Khawarij
like Dhul-Khuwaisirah, may Allah disfigure him, and his likes
remained critical of the Prophet’s action.
On the authority of Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri who narrated: When
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
obtained booty of livestock in Hunain, he gave a large portion to
those whose hearts needed to be reconciled (to Islam) among the
Quraish and other Arab tribes, and he allotted nothing to the
Ansar. A group from the Ansar felt so uneasy about it that a lot
of ill-statements against the Prophet were spread among them to
the extent that one of them said: “By Allah, the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was ill-spoken
of by his folksmen!” Those illstatements went on spreading until
Sa’d Ibn ‘Ubadah went to the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessingsof Allah be upon him, said: “O Messenger of Allah, this
group of the Ansar are unhappy with you.” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked: “Concerning
what?” Sa’d replied: “About the distribution of the booty that you
have won. You have allotted shares to your own kinsmen and
allotted lots of gifts to the Arab tribes. But they (the Ansar) have
101

received nothing.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, then asked Sa’d: “Sa’d, what is your
opinion of this matter?” Sa’d replied: “O Messenger of Allah. I
am no more than a member of my people.” The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Call out to your
people and bring them forth to me and when they have gathered,
let me know.”
So Sa’d went out and summoned them and when they gathered,
an Emigrant came, he let him in but debarred others. None of the
Ansar remained without being in attendance. When they were all
gathered together, he informed the Prophet saying: “The Ansar
have gathered where you have commanded me.” Then the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
went out to address them. After he thanked Allah and praised
Him, as is due, he said: “O Ansar, did I not come to you when
you were astray and Allah guided you? You were poor and Allah
gave you wealth. Were you not foes and Allah reconciled your
hearts?” They said: “Yes.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “What prevents you from
replying to me?” They said: “What should we say? With what
should we reply to you, O Messenger of Allah, while to the Lord
and to his Messenger belong all benevolence and grace.”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, again
said: “But, by Allah, you might have answered and answered
truly, for I would have testified to its truth myself: ‘You came to
us belied and rejected and we accepted you; you came to us
helpless and we helped you; a fugitive, and we granted you
asylum; poorand we comforted you'.”

102

The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, also added: “O Ansar, do you feel anxious for the things of
this world, with which I have sought to incline these people to
the Faith, which is already established in you? O Ansar, are you
not satisfied that the people go with ewes and camels while you
return with the Messenger of Allah to your homes. By Him in
Whose Hands is my life, had there been no migration, I would
have been one of the Ansar. If the people would go through a
valley and passage, and the Ansar were to go through another
valley and passage, I would go through the valley and passage of
the Ansar. O Allah! Have mercy on the Ansar, their children and
their children’s children.” The audience wept until tears
moistened their beards as they said: “Yes, we are satisfied, O
Messenger of Allah with our lot and share.” The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, then left the gathering and
the people also dispersed.
On the authority of Abu Moosa who narrated: "I was with the
Messenger of
Allah when he was camping at Ji‘ranah (a place) between
Makkah and Madinah and Bilal was with him. A Bedouin came
to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and
said: 'Will you not fulfill what you have promised me?' The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: 'Rejoice (at what I will do for you).' The Bedouin said: '
(You have said to me) rejoice too often.' Then the Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, turned to me and Bilal in an
angry mood and said: 'The Bedouin refused the good tidings, so
you both accept them.' Bilal and I said: 'We accept them.'
TheMessenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, then asked for a drinking bowl containing water and washed
his hands and face in it, and then took a mouthful of water and
103

threw it therein saying (to us): 'Drink (some of) it and pour
(some) over your faces and chests and be happy at the good
tidings.' So they both took the drinking bowl and did as
instructed. Umm Salamah called from behind a screen: 'Keep
something (of the water) for your mother.' So they left some of it
for her."
On the authority of Anas who narrated: “I was once walking with
Allah’s Messenger while he was wearing a Najrani Burd with a
thick margin. A Bedouin caught up with him and tugged at his
Burd so violently that I noticed the side of the shoulder of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, which was
bruised by the violent pull of the Burd. The Bedouin said: 'Order
that I be given from Allah’s wealth that is with you.' Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, turned to
look at him and smiled and then he ordered that he be given
something."
In an authentic Hadith on the authority of Safwan Ibn Umayyah
who narrated: “Even when he was the most detestable person to
me, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, never ceased to give me from the booty of Hunain
until he became the most beloved person to me.”

The Coming of Malik Ibn ‘Awf An-Nasri to
Allah’s Messenger
Ibn Ishaq related that when the delegates of the Hawazin came to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
he asked them about Malik Ibn ‘Awf and they said: “He is in
Ta’if with the Thaqeef.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, then said: “Inform him that if he
104

comes to me as a Muslim, I shall return to him his family and
property and I shall grant him 100 camels.” When the message
was delivered to Malik, he sneaked away from Thaqeef and came
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
while he was still (either) at Ji‘ranah or Makkah, and he accepted
Islam and his family and property were returned to him (as
promised), and he was given an additional 100 camels.
Ibn Ishaq added that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, appointed (him) the leader of those who
accepted Islam from his people which consisted of Thumalah,
Salimah and Fahm tribes.
‘Amr Ibn Taghlib narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, gave (gifts) to some people to
the exclusion of others, who seemed to be displeased of that. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I give
to some people lest they should deviate from the true faith or lose
patience, while I refer other people to the goodness and
contentment which Allah has put in their hearts, and ‘Amr Ibn
Taghlib is amongst them.” ‘Amr Ibn Taghlib said: “The
statement of Allah’s Messenger is dearer to me than red camels.”

The Objection to the Fair Distribution of the
Messenger of Allah by Some Ignoramuses
From the People of Schism and Hypocrisy
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abdullah who narrated:
"When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, distributed the war booty of Hunain, a man from the Ansar
said: 'He (i.e. the Prophet), did not intend to please Allah in this
distribution.' So I came to the Prophet, peace and blessings of
105

Allah be upon him, and informed him of that (statement)
whereupon the color of his face changed and he said: 'May Allah
bestow His Mercy on Moosa, for he was troubled with more than
this, but he remained patient'.”
It is recorded in the Saheehain from the Hadith of Abu Sa’eed
who narrated: "While we were with the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, when he was
distributing (the booty), there came DhulKhuwaisirah, a man
from the tribe of Bani Tameem, who said: 'O Allah’s Messenger!
Do justice.' The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: 'Woe to you, who could do justice if I
were not to? I would be a desperate loser if I did not do justice.'
‘Umar said: 'O Allah’s Messenger! Allow me to chop his head
off.' The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
'Leave him, for he has companions who pray and fast in such a
way that you would consider your fasting negligible in
comparison to theirs. They recite the Qur’an but it does not go
beyond their throats (i.e. they do not act on it) and they will desert
Islam as an arrowgoes through a victim’s body, so that the
hunter, on looking at the arrow’s blade, would see nothing on it;
he would look at its Rusaf (arrow head) and see nothing: he
would look at its Nadiyy (arrow shaft) and see nothing, and he
would look at its Qudhadh (arrow vanes) and see nothing (neither
meat nor blood), for the arrow has been too fast even for the
blood and excretions to smear. The sign by which they will be
recognized is that among them will be a black man, one of his
arms will resemble a woman’s breast or a lump of meat moving
loosely. Those people will appear when there will be differences
among the people.' I testify that I heard this narration from
Allah’s Messenger and I testify that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib fought
with such people, and I was in his company. He ordered that the
106

man (described by the Prophet) should be looked for. The man
was brought and I looked at him and noticed that he looked
exactly as the Prophet described him."

The Arrival of Ash-Shaima’, the Foster Sister
of Allah’s Messenger, at Ji‘ranah
Ibn Ishaq related that some of the members of Banu Sa’d Ibn
Bakr narrated to me that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said on the day (of the Battle) of Hawazin:
“If you happen upon Bijad, a man from Banu Sa’d Ibn Bakr, do
not let him run away from you for he had committed an evil act.
When the Muslims seized him, they took him away along with
his family and Ash-Shaima’ Bint Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdul ‘Uzza,
the foster sister of Allah’s Messenger. They were tough with her
on their way. She said to the Muslims: 'By Allah, do you know
that I am the foster sister of your Companion (i.e. the Prophet) ?'
but they did not believe her until they brought her to the
Messengerof Allah, peace and blessings be upon him."
Ibn Ishaq also related that Abu Wajzah, Yazeed Ibn ‘Ubaid AsSa’di narrated to me that when they brought her to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, she said:
“O Messenger of Allah, I am your foster sister.” He asked: “What
is the proof of that?” She said: “A bite which you bit me on my
back while I was carrying you on my hip.” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, recognized the sign
and spread out his mantle for her and asked her to sit on it. Then
he gave her a choice: “If you wish, you may stay with me in
endearment and honor or return to your people with plentiful
presents.” She said: “Give me the presents and return me to my
family.” The Messenger of Allah returned her to her people and
107

gave her a slave-boy named Makhool and a slave-girl whom he
gave in marriage to the former (the slave-boy) and their progeny
continued.

The ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah in Dhul-Qa‘dah
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Qatadah who narrated
that "I asked Anas Ibn Mallik: 'How many Hajj did Allah’s
Messenger perform?' He said: 'He performed Hajj once and
‘Umrah four times; one ‘Umrah at the time of Hudaibiyah, one
in Dhul-Qa‘dah from Madinah and yet another from Ji‘ranah in
Dhul-Qa‘dah when he distributed the booty of Hunain and the
fourth one was with his Hajj'."
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
performedfour ‘Umrahs; the ‘Umrah of Hudaibiyah, the ‘Umrah
of redemption, the third is the ‘Umrah from Ji‘ranah and the
fourth was the one he performed along with his Hajj.
I say: Nafi’ and his teacher, Ibn ‘Umar, used to object to the claim
that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, performed ‘Umrah from Ji‘ranah at all and that is contained
in what Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar that
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said: “O Allah’s Messenger! I vowed to
observe I‘tikaf for one day during the pre-Islamic period.” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered him
to fulfill his vow. ‘Umar gained two lady captives from the war
prisoners of Hunain and he left them in some of the houses at
Makkah. When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, freed the captives of Hunain without ransom, they
came out walking in the streets. ‘Umar said (to his son): “O
108

‘Abdullah! See what the matter is.” ‘Abdullah replied: “Allah’s
Messenger has freed the captives without ransom.” He said (to
him): “Go and set free those two slave-girls.” (Nafi’ added:)
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
did not perform the ‘Umrah from Ji‘ranah, and if he had
performed the ‘Umrah, it would not have been hidden from
‘Abdullah.
It is also recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of ‘A’ishah
(May Allah be pleased with her) that she objected to Ibn ‘Umar’s
saying that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, performed ‘Umrah in Rajab and she said: “May Allah
forgive Abu ‘Abdur Rahman, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, never performed ‘Umrah except
that he was present but he neverperformed any ‘Umrah in
Rajab.”
On the authority of Mukharrish Al-Kalbi who narrated that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
proceeded from Ji‘ranah for ‘Umrah in the night. He entered
Makkah by night to perform his rites of ‘Umrah and then went
out again back to Ji‘ranah under the cover of the darkness like
the one who spent the night (sleeping). He remained till the
decline of the sun (from its zenith), then he proceeded from
Ji‘ranah amid pomp until he beat the road to Madinah.
Mukharrish said: “This is why his ‘Umrah was inconspicuous to
many people.”
The import of this is that the ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah is confirmed by
authentic texts which can neither be interdicted nor refuted and
whoever obviates it is bereft of evidence against the one who
affirms it. And Allah (SWT) knows best. He also cast doubt at
109

those who reconciled that it occurred in DhulQa‘dah after the
Ghazwah of Ta’if and then he distributed the booty of Hunain.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ya‘la that he used to say:
“I wish I could see Allah’s Messenger at the time of his Divine
inspiration.” Ya‘la added: “While the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, was at Ji‘ranah, shaded under a
cloth sheet (in the form of a tent) with some of his Companions,
a Bedouin wearing a cloak and perfumed extravagantly suddenly
came to him and asked: 'O Allah’s Messenger, what is your
opinion regarding a man who assumes the state of Ihram for
‘Umrah wearing a cloak after applying perfume to his body?'
‘Umar signaled with his hand to Ya‘la to come (near). Ya‘la
came and put his head (underneath that cloth sheet) and saw the
Prophet red-faced, and when that state (of the Prophet) was over,
he asked: 'Where is theone who had asked me about ‘Umrah?'
The man was looked for and brought to the Prophet. The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said (to him): 'As for
the perfume you have applied to your body, wash it off thrice,
and take off your cloak, and then in your ‘Umrah perform the
rites that you do in your Hajj'.”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and his
Companions proceeded on ‘Umrah from Ji‘ranah and they
walked briskly around the House (Ka‘bah) in three circuits and
walked the remaining four circuits; they wore their Rida’ under
their right armpit and over their left shoulder.
Ibn ‘Abbas informed him that Mu‘awiyah narrated to him saying:
“I shaved the hair of Allah’s Messenger with a long blade.” Or
he said: “I saw him having his hair cut at Al-Marwah.” (3) The
110

import of that is an indication that the haircut must have occurred
in the ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah. This is because in the ‘Umrah of
Hudaibiyah, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, did not enter Makkah as he was prevented,
and this has been explained previously. As for the ‘Umrah of
redemption, Abu Sufyan had not accepted Islam and none of the
inhabitants of Makkah remained in the town when Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered it.
Rather, they vacated the town for a period of three days during
which the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
beupon him, remained in Makkah. Concerning his ‘Umrah,
which he performed along with his Hajj, he did not come out of
Ihram after it (the ‘Umrah rites) by consensus. It becomes clear
that cutting of the hair, which Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan
performed on the hair of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, at al-Marwah was at the ‘Umrah of
Ji‘ranah as we have said. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq related that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, proceeded from Ji‘ranah for
‘Umrah and he ordered that the remaining booty of war be
brought, and it was kept at Majannah in the direction of MarrazZahran.
Obviously, he deliberately left some of the booty so as to
distribute it to the Arab tribemen living between Makkah and
Madinah.
Ibn Ishaq related that when Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, completed his ‘Umrah rites, he
returned to Madinah and appointed ‘Attab Ibn ‘Aseed to govern

111

Makkah and left Mu’adh Ibn Jabal to teach the people the
religion and the recitation of the Qur’an.
‘Urwah and Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah mentioned that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, left
Mu’adh with ‘Attab at Makkah before his departure to Hawazin,
and he also deputized both of them again when he returned to
Madinah.
Ibn Ishaq related that the people performed Hajj in a similar
manner that the Arabs used to perform Hajj. In the same year,
‘Attab Ibn Aseed led the people in the performance of Hajj, and
that was in the 8th year. He added: The inhabitants of Ta’if
persisted on their polytheism and recalcitrance in their
vacillation for the period between Dhul-Qa‘dah and Ramadan of
the 9th year.

Ka‘b Ibn Zuhair Ibn Abi Sulma’s Acceptance
of Islam. His Father Was the Author of Seven
Mu‘allaqat (compilation of poems).
Ibn Ishaq related that when Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, returned from his expedition of
Ta’if, Bujair Ibn Zuhair Ibn Abi Sulma wrote to his half- brother
(from his father) Ka‘b Ibn Zuhair informing him that "Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had
executed some poets who lampooned and harmed him while the
remaining ones among the Quraish poets, Ibn Az-Ziba‘ra and
Hubairah Ibn Abi Wahb had scattered in all directions. If you are
still keen about your life, then hurry to Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, for he does not kill anyone
who comes to him repentant, but if you would not do that then
112

betake yourself to any place on Earth where you will feel safe.
Ka‘b wrote thus saying in poetry:
Won’t you give a message to Bujair from me?
Do you accept what I said? Confound you!
Tell us plainly if you will not implement what I say
For what reason other than that has led you
To a behavior (religion) I cannot find his father ever held
And you cannot find your brother ever followed
If you would not implement what I say, I shall not feel sorry
Nor say if you stumble: Allah help you!
Al-Ma‘moon (the Safe) has given you a full cup to drink And
added a second draught of the
same
Ibn Ishaq related that then he sent it to Bujair. When the poem
reached Bujair, he detested to conceal it from Allah’s
Messenger,peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and he
went and recited it to him. Upon hearing it, “AlMa’moon (the
Safe) has given you a full cup to drink,” he said: “That is right,
although he is a liar, I am truly Al-Ma’moon.” When he heard
the stanza: “To a behavior (religion) I cannot find his mother or
father ever held,” he commented: “That is right, neither his father
nor mother held it.” Then Bujair also composed a poem in reply
and sent it to Ka‘b saying:
113

Who would inform Ka‘b: do you have any interest
What you are wrongfully blaming (me) I have resolved
Turn to Allah alone and neither ‘Uzza nor Lat
Then you will succeed and be safe
On the day in which no one will succeed or be saved
Among men except the Muslims with pure heart
The religion of Zuhair is a nonentity
And the religion of Abi Sulma is forbidden to me
When he received the letter, he was deeply frightened and
worried about his life. His foes around him spread rumors that he
would be slain. When he saw himself in a dire situation, he wrote
a poem in which he praised the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and he referred in it to his deep
fright and the disturbing rumors of his enemies. Afterward, he
headed for Madinah and stayed with a man from Juhaynah whom
he knew. He took him to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, at the time of the morning prayer and he
prayed along with him. Then they pointed out the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to him and said
to him: “That is the Messenger of Allah, go to him and ask for
your safety.” (The narrator added:) It was related to me that he
rose and went to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
ofAllah be upon him, sat in front of him and placed his hands in
his. Meanwhile, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, did not recognize him and said: “O Messenger of
114

Allah, Ka‘b has come to you repentant and as a Muslim to seek
safety. Would you accept it from him if I bring him to you?”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “Yes.” So he said: “Then O Messenger of Allah, I am Ka‘b
Ibn Zuhair.”
Ibn Ishaq related that ‘Asim Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Qatadah narrated to
me that an Ansari pounced on him and said: “O Allah’s
Messenger permit me to chop off his head.” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Let him be for
he has come repentant.” He added: Ka‘b Ibn Zuhair became
angry at the group of Ansar for what their man had done to him
and because none among the Emigrants said anything concerning
him except good.

Notable Events and Deaths Which Occurred in
the 8th Year
The Battle of Mu‘tah occurred in the month of Jumada, and
Ramadan witnessed the Conquest of Makkah. Afterward, in
Shawwal, the Ghazwah of Hawazin took place followed by the
siege of Ta’if, then the ‘Umrah of Ji‘ranah in Dhul-Qa‘dah and
then the Prophet, peace be upon him, returned to and remained
in Madinah for the remainder of the year.
I say: Al-Bukhari has mentioned after the (story of the) Conquest
of Makkah, the story of the demolition of the House which was
worshipped and named the Ka‘bah of Yemen analogous to the
Ka‘bah in Makkah. They used to call the Ka‘bah in Makkah,
Ka‘bah of Shamiyah. It is concerning that Ka‘bah that AlBukhari
related:

115

Jareer said that Allah’s Messenger said to me: “Won’t you
relieve me of DhulKhalasah?” I replied, “Yes, (I will relieve
you).” So I proceeded along with one hundred and fifty cavalry
from Ahmas tribe who were skillful in riding horses. I could not
sit firm over horses, so I informed the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, of that and he stroked my
chest with his hand until I saw the marks of his hand over my
chest and he said, “O Allah! Make him firm and one who guides
others and is guided (on the right path).” Since then I have never
fallen from a horse. Dhul-Khalasah was a house in Yemen
belonging to the tribe of Khath‘am and Bajeelah, and in it were
idols that were worshipped, and it was called Al-Ka‘bah.”
Jareer went there, burned it with fire and dismantled it. When
Jareer reached Yemen, there was a man who used to foretell and
give good omens by casting arrows of divination. Someone said
to him: “The messenger of Allah’s Messenger is present here and
if he should get hold of you, he would chop off your neck.” One
day while he was using them (i.e. arrows of divination), Jareer
stopped there and said to him: “Break them (i.e. the arrows) and
testify that none has the right to be worshipped (in truth) except
Allah, or else I will chop off your neck.” So the man broke those
arrows and testified that none has the right to be worshipped
except Allah. Then Jareer sent a man called Abu Artat from the
tribe of Ahmas to the Prophet to convey the good news (of
destroying Dhul-Khalasah). When the messenger reached the
Prophet, he said: “O Allah’s Messenger! By Him Who sent you
with the Truth, I did not leave it until it was like a scabby camel.”
So the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, blessed the horses of Ahmas and their men five times.

116

9th Year of Hijrah and the Ghazwah of
Tabook in the Month of Rajab of That Year
Allah says: “O you who believe (in Allah’s Oneness and in His
Messenger (Muhammad) ! Verily, the Mushrikoon (polytheists,
pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah, and in the
Message of Muhammad) are Najasoon (impure). So let them not
come near Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah) after this year, and
if you fear poverty, Allah will enrich you if He Will, out of His
Bounty. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. Fight against
those who (1) believe not in Allah, (2) nor in the Last Day, (3)
nor forbid that which has been forbidden by Allah and His
Messenger (4) and those who acknowledge not the religion of
Truth (i.e. Islam) among the People of the Scriptures (Jews and
Christians), until they pay the Jizyah with willing submission,
and feel themselves subdued.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9 :28, 29)
It is related that Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Sa’eed Ibn
Jubair, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and others opine that when Allah
commanded that the polytheists be prevented from coming near
Masjid Al-Haram whether during the Hajj or any other time, the
Quraish said: “It will certainly infringe on our commerce and
markets during Hajj, and it will deprive us from our gains,” but
Allah compensated them for that with the command to wage war
on the People of the Book until they become Muslims or they
pay the Jizyah with willful submission, and feel themselves
subdued.
I say: Afterward, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, resolved to fight against the Romans because
they were closer in proximity to him and more deserving of being
invited to the truth because of their closeness to Islam and
117

Muslims. Allah says in the Qur’an: “O you who believe! Fight
those of the disbelievers who are close to you, and let them
findharshness in you, and know that Allah is with those who are
theAlMuttaqoon.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9: 123)
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
decided to invade the Romans in the year of Tabook at a time
when the weather was extremely hot and conditions were
daunting. The matter was extremely hard on the people. He
invited the surrounding Arab chiefs to come along with him on
the campaign. Many people advanced with him, with their
number being close to thirty thousand, as shall be related shortly.
Meanwhile, there were others who remained behind. Allah
reproached those, among the hypocrites and the negligent, who
remained behind without a genuine excuse. Allah berated,
upbraided and censured them in the most severe manner and
disgraced them. He revealed a (Verse of the) Qur’an concerning
them and exposed their affairs in the chapter Al-Bara’ah, which
we have explained extensively in the Tafseer. He commanded
the believers to go forth regardless of the condition.
Allah, Most High, says: “March forth, whether you are light or
heavy, and strive hard with your wealth and your lives in the
cause of Allah. This is better for you, if you but knew. Had it
been a near gain and an easy journey, they would have followed
you, but the distance was long for them; and they would swear
by Allah. If we only could, we would certainly have come forth
with you.” They destroy their ownselves, and Allah knows that
they are liars.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:41, 42) and the Verse
following it.
Then Allah says: “And it is not (proper) for the Believers to go
out to fight (in Jihad) all together. Of every troop of them, a party
118

only should go forth, that they (who are left behind) may get
instructions in (Islamic) religion, and that they may warn their
people when they return to them, so that they may beware (of
evil).” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9 :122) Some people said that this
Verse abrogates the previous one and others disagree. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
Ibn Ishaq said that afterward, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, remained in Madinah from DhulHijjah to Rajab of the 9th year. He then ordered the people to
prepare for a campaign against the Romans. AzZuhri and Yazeed
Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Bakr, ‘Asim Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Qatadah and
others from among our scholars mentioned the Battle of Tabook,
each one of them relating the narrations that reached him
concerning this campaign. Some of them would relate part of
these narrations exclusive of others. They related that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered
his Companions to prepare for an invasion of the Romans. This
campaign fell at a most difficult time for the people. The weather
was scorchingly hot, the land was arid and caked and the fruits
were ripe for harvest and the people wanted to savor their fruits
and the shade of their lush date trees. They detested that anything
should disturb the calm situation in which they were. In most
instances when the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, decided for an invasion, he would hide the
object of their march. But in the Battle of Tabook, he made clear
the enemy owing to the length and difficulty of the journey as
well as the large number of the enemy forces they were going to
confront. Thus, he clarified it to them so that they may be wellprepared. He ordered that preparation be made in earnest and
informed them that they were headed against the Byzantines.

119

One day while making arrangements for the invasion, the
Messeneger of Allah said to Al-Jadd Ibn Qais: “O Jadd, would
you like to fight Banu Asfar this year?” He said: “O Messenger
of Allah, would you excuse me from the fight so as not to put me
to trial? By Allah, my people are well aware that there is no man
who admires women as much as I do. I am afraid that if Iset my
eyes on the women of the red people (i.e. the Romans) I might
not be able to control myself.” The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah beupon him, turned away from him and
said: “You are excused.” It was concerning Jadd that Allah
revealed this Verse: “And among them is he who says: ‘Grant
me leave (to be exempted from Jihad) and put me not into trial.’
Surely, they have fallen into trial. And verily, Hell is surrounding
the disbelievers.” (Soorah At-Tawbah: 49)
Some of the hypocrites said to one another: “Do not go forth in
the heat,” detesting war, doubting the Truth and spreading
rumors about the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. Concerning them Allah revealed: “Those
who stayed away (from the Tabook expedition) rejoiced in their
staying behind the Messenger of Allah; they hated to strive and
fight with their properties and their lives in the Cause of Allah,
and they said: 'March not forth in the heat’.Say: 'The Fire of Hell
is more intense in heat', if only they could understand. So let them
laugh a little and (they will) cry much as a recompense of what
they used to earn (by committing sins).” (Soorah AtTawbah: 81,
82)
On the authority of Katheer, the freed slave of ‘Abdur Rahman
Ibn Samurah, who said: ‘Uthman Ibn Affan came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, with 1,000
Dinars in his cloth while the Prophet was equipping the Jaish Al120

‘Usrah (the army of difficulty). He spread the money in the
Prophet’s room. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, kept turning the money in his hand saying: “None of
Ibn ‘Affan’s action will harm him after today.”
On the authority of Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais who said: "I heard
‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan say to Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas, ‘Ali Ibn
AbiTalib, Az-Zubair Ibn Al-‘Awwam and Talhah: 'I beseech you
by Allah, are you aware that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: Whoever equips the army
of distress, Allah will forgive him and I equipped them such that
they neither lacked bridle or hubble'?” They responded: “By
Allah, yes.”

Those Who Remained Behind Due to an
Excuse Among the Weepers as Well as Others
Allah, the Almighty, says: “And when a Soorah is revealed,
enjoining them to believe in Allah and to strive hard and fight
along with His Messenger, the wealthy among them ask your
leave to exempt them (from Jihad) and say, ‘Leave us (behind),
we would be with those who sit (at home).’ They are content to
be with those (the women) who sit behind (at home). Their hearts
are sealed up (from all kinds of goodness and right guidance), so
they understand not. But the Messenger (Muhammad) and those
who believed with him (in Islamic Monotheism) strove hard and
fought with their wealth and their lives (in Allah’s Cause). Such
are they for whom are the good tidings, and it is they who will
be successful. For them Allah has got ready gardens (Paradise)
under which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. That is the
supreme success.

121

And those who made excuses from the Bedouins came (to you,
O Prophet) asking your permission to exempt them (from the
battle), and those who had lied to Allah and His Messenger sat at
home (without asking the permission for it) ; a painful torment
will seize those of them who disbelieve. There is no blame on
those who areweak or ill or who find no resources to spend (in
Jihad), if they are sincere and true (in duty) to Allah and His
Messenger. No ground (of complaint) can there be against the
Muhsinoon (good-doers). And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful. Nor (is there blame) on those who came to you to be
provided with mounts, and when you said: “I can find no mounts
for you,” they turned back, while their eyes were overflowing
with tears of grief that they could not find anything to spend (for
Jihad). The ground (of complaint) is only against those who are
rich, and yet ask exemption. They are content to be with (the
women) who sit behind (at home) and Allah has sealed up their
hearts (from all kinds of goodness and right guidance) so that
they know not (what they are losing). (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:8693)
We have extensively explained this in the Tafseer in a mannerthat
suffices, and all praise and grace is due to Allah.
The weepers are those who approached the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to provide them with
mounts so that they can accompany him in this battle; however,
they could not find any mounts with him so they returned
weeping out of sorrow for missing the Jihad and spending in the
path of Allah.
Ibn Ishaq related: They were seven individuals from the Ansar as
well as from other groups. From Banu ‘Amr Ibn ‘Awf were
122

Salim Ibn ‘Umair, ‘Ulbah Ibn Zaid from Banu Harithah, Abu
Laila ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Ka‘b from Banu Mazin Ibn An-Najjar,
‘Amr Ibn Al-Humam Ibn Al-Jamooh from Banu Salimah and
‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Mughaffal Al-Mazani. Some people said it was
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr Al-Muzani, Haramiyy Ibn ‘Abdullah of
Banu Waqif and Irbad Ibn Sariyah Al-Fazari.
Abu Moosa narrated: "My Companions sent me to
Allah’sMessenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to
ask him for some riding animals as they were accompanying him
in the army of Al-‘Usrah, which was the Ghazwah of Tabook. I
asked: 'O Allah’s Prophet! My companions have sent me to you
to provide them with means of transportation.' He said: 'By
Allah! I will not make you ride anything.' It happened that when
I reached him, he was in an angry mood, and I didn’t notice it.
So I returned in a sad mood because of the refusal of the Prophet
and for the fear that the Prophet might have become angry with
me. So I returned to my companions and informed them of what
the Prophet had said. Only a short while had passed when I heard
Bilal calling: 'O ‘Abdullah Ibn Qais!' I replied to his call. Bilal
said: 'Respond to Allah’s Messenger who is calling you.' When I
went to him (i.e. the Prophet), he said: 'Take these two camels
tied together and also these two camels tied together,' referring
to six camels he had brought from Sa’d at that time.
"The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, added:
'Take them to your companions and say: ‘Allah (or Allah’s
Messenger) permits you to ride on these,’ so ride on them.' So I
took those camels to them and said: 'The Prophet permits you to
ride on these (camels), but by Allah, I will not leave you until
some of you proceed with me to some one who heard the
statement of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
123

upon him. Do not think that I narrate to you a thing which Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, did not
say.' They said to me: 'We consider you truthful, and we will do
what you like'.”
The sub-narrator added: So Abu Moosa proceeded along with
some of them until they came to those who had heard the
statement of Allah’s Messenger, in which he (had initially)
denied them (some animals to ride on) and (his statement)
whereby he gave them the same. So these people told them the
same information as Abu Moosa had told them.
Ibn Ishaq said: A couple of Muslims vacillated in their intention
until they eventually lingered behind, neither out of doubt nor
dubiety. Among them were: Ka‘b Ibn Malik Ibn Abi Ka‘b from
Banu Salimah, Murarah Ibn Rabee’ from Banu ‘Amr Ibn ‘Awf
and Hilal Ibn Umayyah from Banu Waqif and Abu Khaithamah
from Banu Salim Ibn ‘Awf. They were truthful individuals
whose (belief in) Islam cannot be impugned.
I say: As for the first three, the summary of their story shall be
related in a short while, insha’Allah. It is concerning them that
Allah revealed: “And (He did forgive also) the three [who did not
join the Tabook expedition (whom the Prophet) ] left (i.e. he did
not give his judgment in their case, and their case was suspended
for Allah’s Decision) till for them the Earth, vast as it is, was
straitened and their own selves were straitened to them, and they
perceived that there is no fleeing from Allah, and no refuge but
with Him.” (Soorah AtTawbah 9:118)
As for Abu Khaithamah, he resolved to catch up with Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, as shall
be related shortly.
124

The Mobilization of the Muslim Army
Numbering Thirty Thousand
Yoonus Ibn Bukair related on the authority of Ibn Ishaq that the
preparation progressed well and the march became near. When
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, marched
out on a Thursday, he camped with his army numbering over
30,000 men at Thaniyat Al-Wada‘. ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy
campedhis own army in a section of the Prophet’s location.
While Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, proceeded, ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy lagged behind and
eventually withdrew along with a contingent of the hypocrites
and the people of doubt.
Ibn Ishaq added that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, appointed ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib to oversee the
affairs of his family and commanded him to remain with them.
Consequently, the hypocrites began to spread rumors that he had
left him behind because he was a burden to him and wanted to
rid himself of him.
On the authority of Mus‘ab Ibn Sa’d who related from his father
that he said that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, left ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib behind in the Battle of
Tabook and he complained: “O Messenger of Allah, would you
leave me behind among the women and children?” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Are
you not pleased to be to me as Haroon was to Moosa with the
exception that there will be no Prophet after me?”
On the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood who said that when
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
proceeded to Tabook, each time a person would lag behind, the
125

people would say: “O Messenger of Allah, so and so has lagged
behind.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, would say: “Leave him, if Allah finds any good in
him, He will cause him to catch up with you. If He finds in him
something that is contrary, then Allah has relieved you of him.”
They said: “O Messenger of Allah, Abu Dharr has lagged behind,
his camelhas slowed him down.” Again the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Leave him, if Allah finds
any good in him, He will cause him to catch up with you. If He
finds in him something contrary, then Allah has relieved you of
him.” Abu Dharr rebuked his camel and when it became too slow
for him, he took his belongings and placed it on his back and
proceeded on the trail of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, on foot.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
camped at one of his rest areas when a Muslim, who was keeping
watch, called out: “O Allah’s Messenger, there is a man
approaching on foot along the road.” Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “That is Abu Dharr.”
When the people looked more carefully they said: “O Allah’s
Messenger, by Allah it is truly Abu Dharr!” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “May Allah have
mercy on Abu Dharr, he walks alone, he will die alone and will
be resurrected alone.” As time went by, Abu Dharr relocated to
Rabadhah. When his death approached, he instructed his wife
and his young boy: “Once I am dead, wash and shroud me in the
night and then place me in the middle of the road. When the first
passersby come, tell them: ‘This is Abu Dharr'.” When he died,
they did as he instructed. A caravan appeared in which there was
‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood among a group of people from Kufah.
(When he saw the spectacle) he asked: “What is this?” He was
126

told: “This is the corpse of Abu Dharr.” Ibn Mas‘ood began to
cry and said: “Truthful are the words of Allah’s Messenger: ‘May
Allah have Mercy on Abu Dharr, he walks alone, he will die
alone and will be resurrected alone'.” He dismounted and took
charge of the corpse by himself and buried him.
‘Umar said: "We proceeded to Tabook in extremely hot weather
and we camped at a location where we were seized by such an
extreme thirst that we feared that our necks would be severed.
One of us would go in search of luggage and he would not return
except with a thought that his neck would be choked due to
extreme thirst. The situation deteriorated to such an extent that
someone would slaughter his camel and he would squeeze its
waste and then drink it. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with
him, approached the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and said: 'O Messenger of Allah, Allah has
vouchsafed your response to supplication, so beseech Allah on
our behalf.' He asked: 'Would you really like that?' Abu Bakr
replied in the affirmative. Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, raised his hands toward the sky
and did not lower them till the sky became cloudy and there was
a downpour; they filled all their containers. We went to check
and found that the rain did not fall beyond the area of the army.”
On the authority of Abu Hurairah or Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri (AlA‘mash was doubtful) who said: During the Battle of Tabook,
the Muslim army was seized by starvation so they complained to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him
saying: “O Messenger of Allah, do you permit us to slaughter our
animals for consumption?” He replied: “You may do so.” ‘Umar
came and said: “O Messenger of Allah, if you permit them, then
the riding animals will be depleted. Rather, order them to gather
127

the remnant of their provision and ask Allah to bless it, perhaps
He will cause it to be blessed.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, liked ‘Umar’s suggestion and
called for a leather mat to be spread and ordered the people
tobring the remnants of their provision. A man would bring a
handful of sorghum, another would come with a handful of dates,
and yet another would bring only a morsel till a very small
quantity was collected on the leather sheet. Then Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
supplicated for Allah’s blessings and said: “Fill your bags.” So
they scooped the food and filled their bags until there was no
container in the camp except that it was filled with provision.
They ate to their fill and there was much more left in stock. Then
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “I bear witness that none deserves to be worshipped except
Allah and that I am the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, and by it (the statement) Allah shall not
cast (into the Fire) except the doubters who would be screened
from Al-Jannah.”

The Prophet’s Passing by the Ruins of
Thamood at AlHijr on the Way to Tabook
On the authority of Jabir who narrated that when Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, passed by
Al-Hijr, he said: “Do not request for a miracle, for the people of
Saleh had asked for it. It (the shecamel) would return through
this pass and emerge from this pass but they became arrogant
against the command of their Lord and they killed her; thus they
were overtaken by As-Saihah (awful cry) and Allah caused all
those who were under the surface of the sky to be killed except a
man who was in the Haram (sacred precinct) of Allah.” Someone
128

asked: “Who was he, O Messenger of Allah?” He said: “He was
Abu Rigal. When he left the Haram, he was overtaken by the
punishment meted out to his people.”
On the authority of Humaid As-Sa‘idi who narrated: "We took
part in the Battle of Tabook in the company of the Prophet and
when we arrived at the Wadi Al-Qura, there was a woman in her
garden. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
asked his Companions to estimate the amount of the fruits in the
garden, and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, estimated it at ten Awsuq (measures). The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to that lady,
'Check what your garden will yield.' When we reached Tabook,
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
'There will be a strong wind tonight and so no one should stand
and whoever has a camel, should fasten it.' So we fastened our
camels. A strong wind blew at night and a man stood up and he
was blown away to Mount Tayy.
Then the king of Ailah sent a white mule and cloth to the Prophet
as gifts, and wrote to him that his people will stay in their place
(and would pay the Jizyah taxation.) When the Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, reached Wadi Al-Qura, he
asked that woman how much her garden had yielded. She said:
'Ten Awsuq,' and that was what Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, had estimated. Then the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: 'I want to reach
Madinah quickly, and whoever among you wants to accompany
me, should hurry.' The subnarrator added: When the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, saw Madinah he said:
'This is Taba.' And when he saw the mountain of Uhud, he said:
'This mountain loves us and we love it. Shall I tell you of the best
129

amongst the Ansar?' They replied in the affirmative. He said:
'The family of Banu An-Najjar, and then the family of Banu
Sa‘idah or Banu Al-Harith Ibn Al-Khazraj. The aforementioned
are the best but there is goodness in all the families of Ansar'.”
On the authority of Abu Tufail ‘Amir Ibn Wathilah who related
that Mu’adh Ibn Jabal informed him that when they accompanied
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, in the year of Tabook, the Messenger of Allah joined Zuhr
with ‘Asr and Maghrib with ‘Isha’. Mu’adhsaid: “One day he
delayed the prayer, and then came out and prayed Zuhr and ‘Asr
together. Then he said: ‘Tomorrow you will come, insha’Allah,
to the spring of Tabook. But you will not reach it until the
morning. Whoever arrives there should not touch any of its water
until I reach there.’ We came to it and two men had gotten to it
before us and the spring was dripping with a little water. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
asked them: ‘Have you touched any of its water?’ They replied:
‘Yes.’ The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, scolded them and said what Allah wished him to say.
Then they took water with their hands from the spring little by
little until it had been collected in something. Then the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
washed his face and hands in it. Then he put it back into the
spring and the spring flowed with an abundance of water and the
people drew water from it. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: ‘Mu’adh, if you live long
enough you will see this place filled with gardens'.”

130

The Messenger of Allah’s Arrival at Tabook
On the authority of Sa’eed Ibn Abi Rashid who narrated: "I
metAt-Tanookhi, the messenger of Heraclius to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, who was
my neigbor at Hims. He had become an extremely old man who
had reached senility or was close to it. I asked him: 'Can you
relate to me concerning Heraclius’ letter to the Prophet and vice
versa?' He said: 'Certainly, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, arrived at Tabook and sent
Dihyah Al-Kalbi to Heraclius. When the letter of Allah’s
Messenger reached him, he invited the vicars and the Roman
patriarchs and then locked the door behind them. He addressed
them saying: A letter has reached me from this man, as you have
seen, inviting me to one of three choices: follow his religion, give
him our wealth from our land even though the land belongs to us,
or to confront him in battle. By Allah you are well aware from
what you have read in the Divine Book that he will conquer
whatever is under my feet, therefore come, so that we may follow
his religion or give him the wealth of our land.'
They snorted unanimously and said: 'You are inviting us to
apostatize from Christianity and become slaves to an Arab who
has come from Hijaz?' When he suspected that if they left his
presence they would sow mischief and turn the Romans against
him, he said: 'I only said that to test your steadfastness on your
religion.' He invited a man from an Arab tribe who was a
Christian Arab and said to him: 'Ferret for me someone with a
strong retentive memory (and can keep secrets) and speaks
Arabic, so that I may send him to this man to relay the response
to his letter.' I was brought to him and Heraclius handed over to
me a letter and said: 'Take my letter to this man in response to
131

his previous letter and whatever you miss of his words at least
preserve for me one of three things: check if he says anything
concerning my letter to him; when he reads my letter, does he
make any reference to night, and look at his back, does he have
a strange mark?'
So I proceeded until I arrived at Tabook, where I found him
sitting in the midst of his Companions in an amicable manner. I
asked: 'Where is your man?' I was told: 'There is he is.' I
approached until I sat in front of him and handed over the letter
to him. He dropped it on his lap and asked: 'From whom are you?'
I said: 'I am one of the Tanookh.' He said: 'Do you wish to belong
to the path of Islam, Al-Hanifiyyah; the path of your forefather
Ibrahim?' I replied: 'I am a messenger of a people and I am upon
their religion; I shall not forsake it until I return to them.' The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, smiled and
recited: Verily! You (O Muhammad) guide not whom you like,
but Allah guides whom He wills. And He knows best those who
are the guided. (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:56)
Then he added: 'O Brother of Tanookh, I wrote a letter to Qaisar
which he tore and Allah will tear his kingdom into shreds. I wrote
another letter to Negus which he shredded and Allah will shred
him and his kingdom. I wrote and sent my letter to your
companion which he accepted and the people will not cease to
find in him bravery as long as he lives in good condition.' I said
(to myself): 'This is one of the three things my companion
instructed me to observe.' So I took an arrow from my quiver and
I wrote with it on the leather of my sword. Then he handed over
the letter to a man on his left. I asked: 'Who is your secretary that
reads your letters?' They said: 'Mu‘awiyah.' He read the content
of my companion’s letter which said: 'You are inviting me to a
132

Paradise, the expanse of which is heaven and Earth that is
prepared for the pious, then where is Hellfire?' Then Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
'Glory be to Allah! Where is the night when daylight comes?' I
took out an arrow from my quiver and wrote it on my scabbard.
When he finished reading my letter he said: 'You have a right for
you are a messenger, if something is found with us, we would
furnish you with it. Travelers at timessuffer from paucity of
provision.' A man, from those present, said: 'I will furnish him.'
Then he opened his bag and brought out a Safooriyyah garment
and placed it on my lap.' I asked about the identity of the owner
of the garment and I was told it was ‘Uthman.
"Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, asked: 'Who among you would host the man?' A young man
from the Ansar said: 'I will.' And the Ansari stood and I also got
up and followed him until we passed by a section of the assembly
when Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, called me and said: 'Come here, O brother of Tanookh.' I
went toward him a stood at the same spot I had sat in front of him
and he raised his Burdah (garment) from his back and said: 'Here!
Have a look at what you have been commanded.' I went round to
look at his back and there was a ring in the middle of the shoulder
blade like a fatty mass."

His Treaty With the King of Ailah and the
People of Jarba’ and Adhruh While
Encamped at Tabook
Ibn Ishaq related that when Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, reached Tabook, Yuhannah Ibn
Ru’bah, the chief of Ailah, came to him and a treaty was brokered
133

with him in which he agreed to pay the jizyah. The people of
Jarba’ and Adhruh also did the same and the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, wrote for them a
document which they kept with themselves. He wrote for
Yuhannah and thepeople of Ailah the following:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a
guarantee from Allah and Muhammad, the Prophet and
Messenger of Allah, to Yuhannah Ibn Ru’bah and the people of
Ailah for their ships and caravans. They, along with those who
are with them from the people of Syria, Yemen, and the seamen
will all have the protection of Allah and of the Prophet
Muhammad. Whoever infringes on this pact from them, his
property shall not save him and it is permissible for whoever
takes. It is impermissible that they be prevented from their
watering places or from a road they want to pass through by land
or sea.”
Yoonus narrated from Ibn Ishaq that the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, also wrote another
document for the people of Jarba’ and Adhruh that they are given
the guarantee of Allah and the guarantee of Muhammad and they
are obliged to pay voluntarily 100 Dinars and 100 Ooqiyyah
every year in the month of Rajab. In return, they are awareded a
warrantee of sincerity and good relations with the Muslims and
those who take recourse to them from among the Muslims. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
gave to the people of Ailah his Burdah along with his document.
(The narrator added): Subsequently, Abu Al-Abbas Abdullah Ibn
Muhammad purchased it at a price of 300 Deenars.

134

The Prophet’s Dispatch of Khalid Ibn Waleed
to Ukaidir Doomah
Ibn Ishaq related that afterward, Allah’s Messsenger invited
Khalid Ibn Waleed and dispatched him to Ukaidir Doomah.
Ukaidir Ibn ‘Abdul Malik from Kindah was their king and hewas
a Christian. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said to Khalid: “You will find him hunting wild
cows.” Khalid set out until he was within sight of his fortress. It
was a moonlit summer night when Ukaidir was with his wife on
the rooftop. The wild cows were rubbing their horns against the
gate of his castle. His wife urged him to go after the wild cows.
He came down and ordered that his horse be saddled and went
off with a band of his family members, among whom was his
brother, Hassan. During their pursuit, the cavalry of Allah’s
Messenger intercepted them, captured him and killed his brother,
Ukaidir was dressed in a cloth brocade embellished with gold.
Khalid took the outfit and sent it to the Prophet ahead of his
arrival.
‘Asim Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Qatadah related on the authority of Anas
Ibn Malik who said: "I saw the garment of Ukaidir when it was
brought to Allah’s Messenger and the Muslims began to marvel
at its beauty. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: 'Do you marvel at its beauty? By Him in Whose
Hand is my soul, the handkerchief of Sa’d Ibn Mu’adh in
Paradise is far more beautiful than this'.”
On the authority of ‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair who narrated that
when Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, returned to Madinah from Tabook, a group of hypocrites
decided to assassinate him. Their plan was to push him from the
135

precipice of a mountain pass. Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, was informed of their plan, so
he ordered the people to march along the valley while he
ascended the mountain. The group involved in the assassination
scheme followed him while hiding their facess. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered
‘Ammar Ibn Yasir and Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman to come along
with him. ‘Ammarheld the rein of the camel while Hudhaifah
drove it. While they were going, they heard the people who had
betrayed them. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, became angry. When Hudhaifah saw his
anger he turned back toward them with a staff and approached
their camels with it. When they saw Hudhaifah, they thought
their grave secret had been exposed and they hastily retreated
until they mingled with the people. Hudhaifah returned and
caught up with the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, urged them and they quickly traversed the mountain
path and stopped to wait for the other people.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said to Hudhaifah: “Did you recognize this group of people?” He
said: “I do not recognize them except that I saw their camels in
the darkness of the night.” He said: “Did you both know the
intention of these riders?” Both of them replied in the negative
and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, informed them of what they had planned to do to him
and he told them their names and asked them to keep it secret.”
They both said: “Shouldn’t you order that they be executed?”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I
detest that people say that Muhammad kills his Companions.”

136

Ibn Ishaq related this story with the difference that the Prophet
related their names only to Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman, and this is
more probable. And Allah (SWT) knows best. This is
corroborated by the statement of Abu Darda’ to ‘Alqamah, the
companion of Ibn Mas‘ood: “Don’t you have among you (i.e. the
people of Kufah) the bearer of a secret which no one knows
except him (i.e. Hudhaifah) ? Don’t you have among you the one
whomAllah protected from Shaitan on the tongue of Muhammad
(i.e. ‘Ammar).” It is related on the authority of AmeerulMu’mineen ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with
him, that he said to Hudhaifah: “I beseech you by Allah, am I
among them?” He said: “No, but I shall not exempt anyone after
you,” i.e. so that he may not reveal the secret of the Prophet.
I say: They were four men while some say they were twelve. Ibn
Ishaq related that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, sent Hudhaifah to convene them and the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
informed them about what they had been planning against him;
Ibn Ishaq then listed their names. It was concerning them that
Allah, the Exalted, revealed: “and they resolved that (plot to
murder Prophet Muhammad) which they were unable to carry
out.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:74)
On the authority of At-Tufail who related that when Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was
returning from the Ghazwah of Tabook, he commanded someone
to announce that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, was passing through the mountain path so no
one should follow the same path. While Hudhaifah was driving
the Prophet’s camel and ‘Ammar was steering it, a group of
people, who were concealing their faces, approached on their
137

camels. ‘Ammar turned toward them and began to beat the face
of their camels. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, said to Hudhaifah: “Faster! Faster,” until they
descended from the valley. When they had descended, ‘Ammar
returned and the Prophet asked him: “O ‘Ammar, did you
recognize the people?” He said: “I just saw their camels but the
people themselves were covered.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, further asked: “Do you know
what they intended to do?” ‘Ammar replied: “Allah and His
Messenger know best.” The Prophet,peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “They intended to startle the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, so that they
might cause him to be thrown.” ‘Ammar confided in one of the
Companions of the Prophet who asked him: “We beseech you by
Allah, how many were the people of the steep mountain pass?”
He replied: “They were fourteen men.” The man said: “If I am
among them, then they were fifteen.” ‘Ammar added: “Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, excused
three of them for they said: ‘We did not hear the crier of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
making that announcement and neither were we aware of what
the people intended to do.’” ‘Ammar said: “I call you to witness
that the remaining ten individuals rebelled against Allah and His
Messenger in this world and the witnessing of that day shall be
established.”

The Story of the Masjid Ad-Dirar
Allah, the Exalted, says: And as for those who put up a mosque
by way of harming and disbelief, and to disunite the Believers,
and as an outpost for those who warred against Allah and His
Messenger (Muhammad) aforetime, they will indeed swear that
138

their intention is nothing but good. Allah bears witness that they
are certainly liars. Never stand therein.
Verily, the mosque whose foundation was laid from the first day
on piety is more worthy that you stand therein (to pray). In it are
men who love to clean and to purify themselves. And Allah loves
those who make themselves clean and pure (i.e. who clean their
private parts with dust (i.e. to be considered as soap) and water
from urine and stools, after answering the call of natureIs it then
he, who laid the foundation of his building on piety to Allah and
His Good Pleasure, better, or he who laid the foundation of his
building on an undetermined brink of a precipice ready to
crumble down, so that it crumbled to pieces with him into the
Fire of Hell. And Allah guides not the people who are the
Zalimoon (cruel, violent, proud, polytheist and wrong-doer. The
building which they built will never cease to be a cause of
hypocrisy and doubt in their hearts, unless their hearts are cut to
pieces. (i.e. till they die). And Allah is All - Knowing, All-Wise.”
(Soorah At- Tawbah 9:107-110)
We have explained all that is connected to this Verse in our
Tafseer in a manner that suffices. Ibn Ishaq mentioned how this
mosque was built and how Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, was commanded, even before he
entered Madinah, to demolish it on his return from Tabook. The
story behind that is that a group of hypocrites built something
like a mosque close to the mosque of Quba’ and they wanted
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to
come and lead them in prayer so as to validate and popularise
their intent of corruption, disbelief and obstinacy. However,
Allah protected His Messenger from prayer in it. This occurred
at a time when he was on his way to Tabook. When he returned,
139

he stopped at Dhu Awan, a location at a distance of an hour’s
journey from Madinah when Revelation came to him concerning
the affair of the mosque:
“And as for those who put up a mosque by way of harming and
disbelief, and to disunite the Believers, and as an outpost for
those who warred against Allah and His Messenger
(Muhammad) aforetime, they will indeed swear that their
intention is nothing but good. Allah bears witness that they are
certainly liars.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:107)
As for Allah’s statement “by way of harming”, this is due to the
fact that they intended to compete with the mosque of Quba’,
“and disbelief” in Allah and not borne from any kind of sincere
belief in Him; “and to disunite” the general congregation from
the mosque of Quba; “and as an outpost for those who warred
against Allah and His Messenger,” referring to Abu ‘Amir, the
monk and the sinner, may Allah disfigure him. When Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, invited
him to Islam, he objected and went to the people of Makkah to
stir them (against the Muslims) and they came in the Year of
‘Uhud and their affairs have been mentioned previously. When
his desire was not accomplished, he went to the Roman king,
Qaisar, to seek his assistance against Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him. Abu ‘Amir belonged to the
religion of Heraclius and he was from among the Arab
Christians. He used to write to his brothers who became
hypocrites, giving them promises and false hope and the promise
of Shaitan is nothing but deception. His correspondence and
letters came to them at every epoch. They constructed this
building in the semblance of a mosque but in reality it was a
house of rebellion and an exemplification of what they received
140

from Abu ‘Amir, and an assembly for all those who were upon
their path among the hypocrites. For this reason, Allah says: “and
as an outpost for those who warred against Allah and His
Messenger aforetime.” Allah further says: “they will indeed
swear,” i.e. those who built the mosque, “that their intention is
nothing but good,” i.e. by building the mosque, we intended
good. Allah also says: “Allah bears witness that they are certainly
liars.”
Then Allah told His Messenger: “Never stand therein;”
forbidding him from standing in it so as to not acknowledge it.
He then commanded and urged him to stand in the mosque whose
foundation was laid from the first day on piety, referring to
themosque of Quba’ as indicated by the context and a number
ofAhadeeth related to the purity of its people, as an advice to
him.
Nebertheless, the Hadith recorded in Saheeh Muslim which
indicates that the mosque whose foundation was laid on piety
from the first day refers to the Mosque of Allah’s Messenger is
not a negation of the Quba’ mosque because if its foundation was
laid on piety from the first day, then the Mosque of Allah’s
Messenger is more worthy and more deserving of that
appellation and its virtues are more well-established and
stronger. We have sufficed us with comments on that in the
Tafseer. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
While Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, was still at Dhu-Awan, he called Malik Ibn Ad-Dukhshum
and Ma‘n Ibn Adiyy or his brother, ‘Asim Ibn ‘Adiyy, may Allah
be pleased with them both, and commanded them to proceed to
that mosque whose builders were unjust with the instruction to
141

destroy it. They complied and burned the mosque and its
inhabitants dispersed.
I say: During this Battle of Tabook, Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, offered the early morning
prayer behind ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn ‘Awf. He caught the second
ra‘akah with him.
On the authority of Abu Humaid who said: “We returned in the
company of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, from the Ghazwah of Tabook till we got to the
outskirts of Madinah. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “This is Tabah, this is Uhud, that is a
mountain which loves us and we love it.” (1) It is also related by
Muslim.
On the authority of As-Sa’ib Ibn Yazeed who said: "I remember
that I once went with some children to welcomeAllah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, at
Thaniyat Al-Wada’ on his return from the Ghazwah of Tabook."
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ka‘b Ibn
Malik, who was from among Ka‘b’s sons and his guide when he
became blind, said: "I heard Ka‘b Ibn Malik narrating the story
of (the Ghazwah of) Tabook in which he failed to take part."
Ka‘b said, “I did not remain behind Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, in any Ghazwah that he
fought except the Ghazwah of Tabook. I failed to take part in the
Ghazwah of Badr, but Allah did not admonish anyone who had
not participated in it, for in fact, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, had only gone out in search of
the caravan of Quraish until Allah made them (i.e. the Muslims)
and their enemy meet without any appointment. I witnessed the
142

night of Al-‘Aqabah (Pledge) with Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, when we pledged for Islam, and
I would not exchange it for the Badr Battle although the Badr
Battle is more popular among the people than it (i.e. Al-‘Aqabah
Pledge). As for my news (in this Battle of Tabook), I had never
been stronger or wealthier than when I remained behind the
Prophet in that Ghazwah.
“By Allah, I never had two she-camels before, but I had them at
the time of this Ghazwah. Whenever Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, wanted to undertake a
military expedition, he used to hide his intention by apparently
referring to a different Ghazwah. However, at the time of that
Ghazwah (of Tabook), which Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, was to fight in severe heat, facing
a long journey,the desert, and the great number of the enemy
force, the Prophet announced to the Muslims clearly their
destination so that they might get prepared for their Ghazwah.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
was accompanied by a large number of Muslims.”
Ka‘b added: “Any person who wanted to be absent would think
that the matter would remain hidden, (due to the shear size of the
force), unless Allah revealed it through Divine Revelation. So,
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
went out for that Ghazwah at the time when the fruits had ripened
and the shade looked pleasant. Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and his Companions prepared
for the battle and I started to go out in order to get myself ready
along with them, but I returned without doing anything. I would
say to myself: ‘I can do that.’ So I kept on delaying it and the
people had gotten ready and departed with Allah’s Messenger,
143

peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. I had not prepared
anything for my departure, and I said: ‘I will prepare myself for
departure one or two days after him, and then join them.’ In the
morning following their departure, I went out to get myself ready
but returned having done nothing. The same happened again the
next morning, I went out to get ready but returned without doing
anything.
“Such was the case with me until they left and the battle was
missed (by me). Even then I intended to depart to overtake them.
I wish I had done so! But it was not in my luck. So, after the
departure of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, whenever I went out and walked amongst the people
(i.e, the remaining persons), it grieved me that I could see none
around me, but those accused of hypocrisy or those Allah had
excused because of their weakness. Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, did not remember me untilhe
reached Tabook. While he was sitting among the people in
Tabook, he asked: ‘What did Ka‘b do?’A man from Banu
Salimah said: ‘O Allah’s Messenger! He has been held back by
his two burdas (i.e. garments) and his looking at his own flanks
with pride.’ Mu’adh Ibn Jabal said: ‘What a bad thing you have
said! O Allah’s Messenger, by Allah, we know nothing about
him but good.’ Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, kept silent.”
Ka‘b Ibn Malik added: “When I heard that he (i.e. the Prophet)
was on his way back to Madinah I was overwhelmed by my
concern, and began to think of false excuses, saying to myself:
‘How can I avoid his anger tomorrow?’ I took the advice of a
wise member of my family in this matter. When it was said that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
144

had come near, all the evil false excuses abandoned my mind and
I knew well that I could never come out of this problem by
forging a false statement. I then decided to firmly speak the truth.
So Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
arrived in the morning, and whenever he returned from a journey,
he used to visit the Mosque first and offer two units of prayer and
then sit for the people. When he had done all that this time, those
who had failed to join the army in the Battle came and started
offering excuses and taking oaths before him. They were more
than eighty men. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, accepted the excuses they expressed, took
their pledge of allegiance, asked for Allah’s forgiveness for
them, and left the secrets of their hearts for Allah to judge. Then
I came to him, and when I greeted him, he smiled a smile of an
angry person and said: ‘Come,’ so I came sat before him. He said
to me: ‘What prevented you from joining us. Did you not
purchase an animal for riding?’ I answered: ‘Yes, O Allah’s
Messenger! But, by Allah, if I were sitting before any person
from among the people of the worldother than you, I would have
avoided his anger with an excuse.’
“‘By Allah, I have been bestowed with the power of fluent and
eloquent speach, but, by Allah, I knew well that if today I were
to tell you a lie to seek your favor, Allah would surely make you
angry with me in the near future; but if I tell you the truth, though
you will become angry due to it, I hope for Allah’s forgiveness.
By Allah, there was no excuse for me. By Allah, I had never been
stronger or wealthier than I was when I remained behind you.’
Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: ‘As regards this man, he has spoken the truth. Get up
until Allah decides your case.’

145

“I got up, and many men of Banu Salimah followed me and said:
‘By Allah, we never witnessed you doing any sin before this.
You failed to offer an excuse to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, as the others, who did not join
him, have offered. The supplication of Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, to Allah to forgive you
would have been sufficient for you.’ They continued blaming me
so much that I intended to return to the Prophet and accuse
myself of having told a lie, but I asked them: ‘Is there anyone
else who has met the same fate as I have?’ They replied: ‘Yes,
there are two men who have said the same thing you have, and
both of them were given the same order as you.’ I asked: ‘Who
are they?’ They replied: ‘Murarah Ibn Ar-Rabee’ Al-Amri and
Hilal Ibn Umayyah AlWaqifi.’ They mentioned to me two pious
men who had attended the Ghazwah of Badr, and in whom there
was an example for me, so I did not change my mind. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, forbade
all the Muslims from speaking with three of us, who had
remained behind in that Ghazwah. We were kept away from the
people and they changed their attitude toward us till the very land
(where I lived) appeared strange to me as if I did not know it.
We remained in that position for fifty nights. My two fellows
remained in their houses and wept, but, as, I was the youngest
and the most resolute of them, I would go out and join the
Muslims in the prayers and roam about in the markets, but no one
would speak to me. I would come to Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, and offer him the greetings,
while he was sitting in his gathering after the prayer, and I would
wonder whether the Prophet moved his lips to return my
greetings or not. I would then offer my prayer near to him and
look at him stealthily. When I was busy with my prayer, he would
146

turn his face toward me, but when I turned my face to him, he
would turn his face away from me.
“When this harsh attitude from the people lasted a long time, I
walked until I scaled the wall of the garden of Abu Qatadah who
was my cousin and the dearest person to me. I offered my
greetings to him, but, by Allah, he did not return my greetings. I
said: ‘Abu Qatadah! I beseech you by Allah! Do you know that
I love Allah and His Messenger?’ He kept quiet. I asked him
again, beseeching him by Allah, but he remained silent. Then I
asked him again in the Name of Allah. He said: ‘Allah and His
Messenger know better.’ Thereupon my eyes flowed with tears
and I returned and jumped over the wall.”
Ka‘b added: “While I was walking in the market of Madinah, I
suddenly saw a Nabati (i.e. a Christian farmer) from the Nabatis
of Sham who had come to sell his grains in Madinah. He was
asked: ‘Who will lead me to Ka‘b Ibn Malik?’ The people began
to point me out to him until he came to me and handed me a letter
from the king of Ghassan in which the following was written:
'I have been informed that your friend (i.e. the Prophet) has
treated you harshly. Nevertheless, Allah will not let you live at a
place where you feel inferior and your right is lost. So join us,
andwe will console you.'
“When I read it, I said to myself: ‘This is also a test.’ I took the
letter to the oven, made a fire and burned it. When forty of the
fifty nights passed, the envoy of Allah’s Messenger came and
said: ‘Allah’s Messenger orders you to keep away from your
wife.’ I said: ‘Should I divorce her; what should I do?’ He said:
‘Only keep away from her and do not have sexual relations with
her.’ The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent
147

the same message to the other two. I said to my wife: ‘Go to your
parents and remain with them until Allah gives His verdict in this
matter.’ The wife of Hilal Ibn Umayyah came to the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and said: ‘O
Allah’s Messenger! Hilal is a helpless old man who has no
servant to attend to him. Do you dislike that I should serve him?’
He said: ‘No (you may serve him) but he should not come near
you.’ She said: ‘By Allah, he has no desire for anything. By
Allah, he has not ceased weeping until his case began till this
day.’
“On that, some of my family members said to me: ‘Will you also
not ask Allah’s Messenger to permit your wife (to serve you) as
he has permitted the wife of Hilal Ibn Umayyah to serve him?’ I
said: ‘By Allah, I will not ask the permission of Allah’s
Messenger regarding her, for I do not know what Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, would say
if I asked him to permit her (to serve me) while I am a young
man.’ I remained in that state for ten more nights until the period
of fifty nights was completed from the point when Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, prohibited
the people from speaking to us. When, on the morning of day
fifty, I finished offering the Fajr prayer on the roof of one of our
houses, I was sitting in the condition which Allah described (in
the Qur’an), i.e. my very soul seemed straitened to me and even
the earth seemed narrow to me for all its spaciousness, and I
heard the voice of onewho had ascended the mountain of Sala’
calling with his loudest voice: ‘Ka‘b Ibn Malik! Be happy (by
receiving good tidings).’ I fell down in prostration before Allah,
realizing that relief has come.

148

“Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
had announced Allah’s acceptance of our repentance when he
offered the Fajr prayer. The people came out to congratulate us.
Some bringers of good tidings went out to the other two, and a
horseman came to me in haste, while a man from Banu Aslam
came running and ascended the mountain, and his voice was
swifter than the horse. When he (i.e. the man) whose voice I had
heard, came to me conveying the good news, I took off my
garments and dressed him with them; and by Allah, I owned no
other garments than them on that day. I borrowed two garments
and wore them and went to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him.
“The people started receiving me in batches, congratulating me
on Allah’s acceptance of my repentance, saying: ‘We
congratulate you on Allah’s acceptance of your repentance.’
When I entered the Mosque. I saw Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, sitting with the people around
him. Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaidullah swiftly came to me, shook hands
with me and congratulated me. By Allah, none of the Muhajiroon
(i.e. Emigrants) got up for me except him (i.e. Talhah), and I will
never forget this of Talhah. When I greeted Allah’s Messenger,
his face being bright with joy, said: ‘Be happy with the best day
that you have got since your mother delivered you.’ I said to the
Prophet: ‘Is this forgiveness from you or from Allah?’ He said:
‘It is from Allah.’
“Whenever Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, became happy, his face would shine as if it werea
piece of the moon, and we all knew that characteristic of his.
When I sat before him, I said: ‘O Allah’s Messenger, because of
the acceptance of my repentance I will give up all my wealth as
149

alms for the sake of Allah and His Messenger.’Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
‘Keep some of your wealth, as it will be better for you.’ I said:
‘So I will keep my share from Khaibar with me,’ and added: ‘O
Allah’s Messenger, Allah has saved me for telling the truth, so it
is a part of my repentance to speak only the truth as long as I am
alive.’ By Allah, I do not know anyone from the Muslims whom
Allah helped for speaking the truth more than me. Since I
mentioned that truth to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, until today, I have never spoken a lie. I
hope that Allah will also save me (from telling lies) for the rest
of my life. So, Allah revealed to His Messenger:
“Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the Muhajiroon and the
Ansar” (up to the
Verse): “and be with those who are true (in words and deeds).”
(Soorah AtTawbah 9:117-119)
“By Allah, Allah has never bestowed upon me, apart from His
guiding me to Islam, a greater blessing than the fact that I did not
tell a lie to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, which would have caused me to perish as those who
lied and perished; Allah described those who told lies with the
worst description Allah, the Almighty, said: “They will swear by
Allah to you (Muslims) when you return to them, that you may
turn away from them. So turn away from them. Surely, they are
Rijsun [i.e. Najasun (impure) because of their evil deeds], and
Hell is their dwelling place - a recompense for that which they
used to earn. They (the hypocrites) swear to you (Muslims) that
you may be pleased with them, but if you are pleased with them,
certainly Allah is not pleased with the people who are AlFasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah.” (Soorah At-Tawbah
150

9:95, 96) “We, the three persons, differed altogether from those
whose excuses Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, accepted when they swore to him. He took their
pledge of allegiance and asked Allah to forgive them, but Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, left our
case pending until Allah gave His Judgment about it. As for that
Allah said: ’And (He did forgive also) the three [who did not join
the Tabook expedition (whom the Prophet) ] left (i.e. he did not
give his judgment in their case, and their case was suspended for
Allah’s Decision) till for them the Earth, vast as it is, was
straitened and their own selves were straitened to them, and they
perceived that there is no fleeing from Allah, and no refuge but
with Him. Then, He accepted their repentance that they might
repent (unto Him).
Verily, Allah is the One Who accepts repentance, Most Merciful.'
(Soorah AtTawbah 9:118)
"What Allah said (in this Verse) does not indicate our failure to
take part in the Ghazwah, but it refers to the deferment of making
a decision by the Prophet about our case in contrast to the case
of those who had taken an oath before him and he excused them
by accepting their excuses.”We have narrated it in At-Tafseer
from Musnad Imam Ahmad and it contains a slight addition and
to Allah belong praise and grace.

Other Disobedient Individuals Who Also
Lagged Behind
They were ten individuals who lagged behindAllah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in the Battle of
Tabook. Upon the Prophet’s return, they tied themselves to the
pillars of the Mosque. When Allah’s Messenger, peace and
151

blessings of Allah be upon him, passed by, he asked: “Who are
these people?” He was told: “This is Abu Lubabah and his
compatriots who lagged behind you (and have tied themselves)
till you free andexcuse them.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I swear by Allah, I shall
not free them nor shall I excuse them until Allah Himself frees
them. They turned away from me and lagged behind from the
battle alongside the Muslims.” When this statement of Allah’s
Messenger was conveyed to them they resolved: “We shall not
unbind ourselves until Allah Himself frees us.”
Then Allah revealed: “And (there are) others who have
acknowledged their sins.” Upon the revelation of this Verse,
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
sent word to them freeing and excusing them. As a token of their
gratitude, they came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, with their wealth saying: “O Messenger of
Allah, this is our wealth, give it in charity and seek forgiveness
on our behalf.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: “I have not been commanded to take your
properties.” Then Allah revealed: “Take Sadaqah (alms) from
their wealth in order to purify them and sanctify them with it, and
invoke Allah for them. Verily! Your invocations are a source of
security for them, and Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower” (Soorah
At-Tawbah 9:103) upto the Verse: “And others await Allah’s
Decree, whether He will punish them or will forgive them.”
(9:106) These are those who did not fetter themselves to the
pillars of the mosque so they kept hoping till Allah revealed yet
another Verse: “Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the Muhajiroon
and the Ansar who followed him (Muhammad) in the time of
distress (Tabook expedition, etc.) ” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:117)
upto the Verse: “And (He did forgive also) the three [who did not
152

join the Tabook expedition (whom the Prophet) ] left (i.e. he did
not give his judgment in their case, and their case was suspended
for Allah’s Decision).” (9:118) till the end of the Verse. This is
how ‘Atiyyah Ibn Sa’d Al-A‘wfi hasrelated it on the authority of
Ibn ‘Abbas.
I said: Perhaps these three were not mentioned along with the
remainder of his compatriots and he was just mentioned because
he was their leader as indicated by the wordings of Ibn ‘Abbas.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
I said: Those who lagged behind from the Battle of Tabook were
in four categories: those who were ordered (to remain behind)
and will be rewarded, such as ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Muhammad
Ibn Maslamah and Ibn Umm Maktoom. The second category
consists of those who were excused. These were the weak and
sick ones as well as those who turned back weeping. The third
category is the disobedient and guilty ones. They were three
individuals: Abu Lubabah and his compatriots. The fourth
category was of the blameworthy and disparaged ones and they
were the hypocrites.

Events that Occurred After the Prophet’s
Return to Madinah and the Conclusion of the
Battle of Tabook
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “This is Heerah Al-Baida’, it has been shown to me, and
here is Ash-Shaima’ Bint Buqailah Al-Azdiyyah riding an ashcolored mule donning a black veil.” I said: “Messenger of Allah,
if we enter Heerah and I find her as you have described, would
she be mine?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah beupon
153

him, said: “She will be yours.” Later (after the Prophet’s death)
occurred the apostasy (of the Arab tribes)
Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed marched against Musailimah, the liar, and
we marched along with him. When we were through
withMusailimah, we went toward Basrah where we confronted
Hurmuz at Kazimah; he was in command of an army which
outnumbered ours. There was no one who had a greater enmity
to the Arabs and to Islam than Hurmuz. Khalid stepped forward
inviting him to a duel. He accepted Khalid’s challenge and
Khalid killed him quickly. He wrote the account of the event to
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with him, and he sent
along with it Hurmuz’s cap. The price of the cap reached 100,000
Dirhams. It was the custom of the Persians that if a man attained
a high rank among them, they would make for him a cap worth
100,000 Dirhams.
Then we returned to the route back to Heerah. The first person
we met upon entering Heerah was Shaima’ Bint Buqailah,
exactly as mentioned by Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him. She was riding an ashcolored mule
donning a black veil. I loved the sight of her and I said: “This is
a gift which Allah’s Messenger had given to me.” Khalid
summoned me concerning her and asked for evidence, which I
brought to him. The evidences were (the testimony of)
Muhammad Ibn Maslamah and Muhammad Ibn Basheer AlAnsari. Convinced of my claim, he handed her to me. Her
brother, Abdul-Maseeh, came to me with the intention of taking
her back. He said to me: “Sell her to me.” I replied: “I shall not
decrease her price from one thousand Dirhams.” He gave me one
thousand Dirhams and I handed her over to him. Some people
said: “If you had placed a price of 100,000, he would have paid
154

that to you.” I said: “I did not know that there was a number
greater than 1,000.”

The Visit of the Deputation of Thaqeef to
Allah’s Messenger in the Month of Ramadan,
the 9th Year
It has been mentioned earlier that when Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was withdrawing from
the Thaqeef, he was asked to curse them, but, rather, he
supplicated for their guidance. It has also been mentioned that
when Malik Ibin ‘Awf An-Nasri accepted Islam, he was kind to
him and granted him profound gifts and made him the chief of
those who accepted Islam among his people. He would raid the
land of Thaqeef and straitened them till he compelled them to
enter the fold of Islam.
A few months after ‘Urwah was killed, Thaqeef deliberated
among themselves and came to the conclusion that they did not
have the capability to wage war against the surrounding Arab
tribes, who had pledged allegiance (to the Prophet) and had
accepted Islam. Based on the advice of ‘Amr Ibn Umayyah of
Banu ‘Ilaj, they had a mutual consultation and decided to
dispatch one of them to Allah’s Messenger. They sent Abd
Yaleel Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Umayr along with two men from Ahlaf and
three from Banu Malik.
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah said that they were about ten individuals and
among them were Kinanah Ibn ‘Abd Yaleel, who was their
leader, and ‘Uthman Ibn Abu Al-‘As, who was the youngest of
the delegates.

155

Ibn Ishaq related that when the delegates approached Madinah,
they stopped at Qanat; where they met Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah
whose turn it was to graze the camels of the Prophet’s
Companions for they took this task in turns. When he saw them,
he quicklywent to inform Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, of their arrival. Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him, met him on the way and he informed
him of the arrival of the delegation from Thaqeef with the
intention of pledging allegiance and accepting Islam on the
conditions of the Prophet and provided that a document of
guarantee would be written for their people. Abu Bakr said to AlMugheerah: “I beseech you by Allah, please do not precede me
to inform the Messenger of Allah, let me be the one who will
relate the good news to him.” Mugheerah agreed and Abu Bakr
went in to inform the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, of their arrival.
Mugheerah went back to the delegates of Thaqeef. Although he
taught them the proper etiquette of greeting the Prophet, still
upon arriving at his presence, they greeted him with the greeting
of the pre-Islamic period. He erected a tent for them in the
Mosque and it was Khalid Ibn Sa’eed Ibn Al-‘As who was the
intermediary between them and Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. Whenever he brought food to
them from Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, they would not eat it unless Khalid Ibn Sa’eed ate of
it first. He was also the one who wrote down the document of
guarantee for them.
Among the conditions they stipulated to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was that they be
allowed to maintain their idol, Al-Lat, for three years without
156

being demolished. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, refused and they persisted imploring him for
a moratorium of two or even one year but the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, did not accede to their demand.
Eventually, they asked for a month from their arrival back home
and they impressed it upon him that the reason was so that the
foolish ones might be reconciled (to Islam). However, the
Prophet,peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, refused to
stipulate any time limit for them; rather, he sent Abu Sufyan Ibn
Harb and Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah with them to demolish the
idol.
They also requested that they be exempted from offering Salat
and from having to destroy their idols by their own hands.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “As for your request not to demolish your idols by your own
hands, we shall exempt you from that, but concerning your being
excused from offering Salat, there is no good in a religion which
is bereft of Salat.”
On the authority of Wahb who said: "I asked Jabir concerning
Thaqeef and their pledge of allegiance. He said: 'They stipulated
that they be exempted from paying Zakah and from participating
in Jihad.' He heard the Prophet say afterward: “They will pay the
Zakah and participate in Jihad once they accept Islam.”
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah mentioned that whenever their delegates went
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
they would leave ‘Uthman Ibn Abul-‘As in their camp and when
they returned to him around midday, he would approach Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to ask him
for some knowledge and to learn the Qur’an. Whenever he found
157

him sleeping, he would go to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq and he did not
cease from this practice until he acquired the understanding of
Islam and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, loved him dearly.
On the authority of ‘Uthman Ibn Abul-‘As who narrated: I once
said: “O Messenger of Allah, make me the Imam of my
people,”and he said, “You are appointed their Imam and lead
according to the ability of the weakest of them and choose a
Mu’adhdhin who would not receive payment for his calls.”
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah related that the delegation from Thaqeef
consisted of ten individuals. When they came to the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, he lodged
them at the Mosque so that they may listen to the Qur’an; they
asked him concerning Riba' (interest), Zina (adultery) and Khamr
(intoxicants) and he forbade for them all that.
They also asked him as to what should be done to their idol, and
he said: “Demolish it.” They said: “Impossible, if it comes to
know of your intention to demolish it, its kindred will kill you.”
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, said:
“Woe to you, Ibn ‘Abd Yaleel, how ignorant you are. The deity
is just a stone.” They said: “O Messenger of Allah, undertake the
demolition yourself. As for us, we shall never destroy it (with our
own hands).” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, said: “I shall send with you someone who will
destroy it.” (2) They entered into a pact with him on that and
further requested that they be allowed to precede his messengers
to their town. Upon their return back home, their people
inundated them asking for the news of their encounter with
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
158

They feigned grief saying that they had returned from a man who
was severe and harsh-hearted who had unsheathed his sword and
judged as he deemed fit and had stunned the Arabs. They told
their people that he had prohibited Riba', Zina and Khamr and
had ordered the demolition of their deity. Thaqeef broke into a
frenzy saying: “We shall never consent to that!” They mobilized
for war and preparedtheir weapons and lay in wait for two or
three days. Then Allah cast terror into their hearts and they
returned to their town and became repentant.
They turned to their delegates and said: “Return to him and relay
to him our willingness and conclude a peace pact with him on
our behalf.” The delegates said: “We have already done that and
we found him to be the most pious of men, the best in fulfilling
the terms of a treaty, the most merciful of men and the most
truthful. We have been blessed by our journey to him and
concerning the agreement which we have entered with him, have
a full grasp of the agreement.” They said: “So why did you
conceal all these things?” The delegates responded: “We
intended that Allah remove from your hearts the arrogance of
Shaitan.”
They yielded their position and a few days afterward, the envoys
of the Prophet arrived. Khalid Ibn Al-Waleed had been appointed
their leader. Among the Prophet’s envoys was Mugheerah Ibn
Shu‘bah. They headed to Al-Lat and the men, women and
children of Thaqeef gathered around Al-Lat. The majority of the
people did not believe that demolishing it would be possible. In
fact, they had assumed that it was invincible. Mugheerah got up,
took a pick-ax and said to his companions: “I shall make you
laugh at Thaqeef.” He struck the idol with the pick-ax and then
he fell down shaking his leg. The people of Thaqeef broke into a
159

frenzied cry of joy. They said: “Allah has forsaken Mugheerah,
the deity has killed him; let anyone dare to come near it again!”
Upon hearing that, Mugheerah got up and said: “By Allah,
people of Thaqeef, it is merely a despicable (statue made of)
stone and mud; accept the Will of Allah and worship Him alone.”
Then he struck the door and broke it. Then he climbed the effigy
and other men ascended with him and they did not cease to
demolish it stone by stone until they pulled it down.
The custodian of the idol said: “Its foundation shall be extremely
angry and it will convulse the earth beneath them.” When
Mugheerah heard that he said to Khalid, “Permit me to excavate
its foundation.” He excavated it until he removed all the soil and
made it into a heap. Then they returned to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and they distributed
its wealth the same day and they gave thanks to Allah for giving
glory to His religion and for aiding His Messenger.

The Death of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy, MayAllah
Disfigure Him
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq related on the authority of Usamah Ibn
Zaid who narrated: Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, went to visit ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy during his
illness from which he eventually died. When Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, saw in him the sign of
death, he said: “By Allah, I used to warn you against loving the
Jews.”
On the authority of Ibn ‘Umar who narrated that when ‘Abdullah
Ibn Ubayy died, his son ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abdullah came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, who gave
160

his shirt to him and ordered him to shroud his father in it. Then
he stood up to offer the funeral prayer for the deceased, but
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, took hold
of his garment and said: “Would you offer the funeral prayer for
him though he was a hypocrite and Allah has forbidden you to
ask forgiveness for the hypocrites?” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Allah has given me the
choice (or Allah has informed me) saying: “Whether you (O
Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them (hypocrites) or ask not
forgiveness forthem ... (and even) if you ask seventy times for
their forgiveness ... Allah will not forgive them” (Soorah AtTawbah 9.80)
Then he added: “I will (appeal to Allah for his sake) more than
seventy times.” So Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, offered the funeral prayer for him and we
also offered the prayer along with him. Then Allah revealed:
“And never (O Muhammad) pray (funeral prayer) for any of
them (hypocrites) who dies, nor stand at his grave. Certainly,
they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger”. (Soorah AtTawbah 9:84)
On the authority of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah who narrated that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, came to
the dead body of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy after it had been placed
in his grave. He ordered that he be taken out of the grave) and he
was taken out. Then he placed him on his knees and threw some
of his saliva on him and clothed him in his (the Prophet’s) own
shirt.And Allah (SWT) knows best (why he did so).
A similar narration is recorded in Saheeh Al-Bukhari indicating
that he gave him his shirt as compensation as he had given his
161

own shirt to ‘Abbas when he arrived in Madinah because no shirt
fit him except that of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy.
Ibn Ishaq related that the Ghazwah of Tabook was the last battle
that was fought by Allah’s Messenger.

9th Year of Hijrah: The Messenger of Allah’s
Appointment of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq as the
Leader of the Hajj Delegation and the
Revelation of Soorah Al-Bara’ah
Ibn Ishaq related that after the deputation of the people of Ta’if,
who came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, in the month of Ramadan, Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, remained in Madinah for the
remainder of Ramadan, Shawwal, Dhul-Qa‘dah and then he
dispatched Abu Bakr as leader of the Hajj delegates in the 9th
year to apprise the people of the Hajj rites. Meanwhile, the
polytheists remained in their residences and did not hinder access
to the House (Ka‘bah). Among them were those who had a
temporary pact for a period of time with the Muslims. When Abu
Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, exited along with the other
Muslims who were with him and they had evacuated the House,
Allah revealed these first few Verses of Soorah At-Tawbah:
“Freedom from (all) obligations (is declared) from Allah and His
Messenger to those of the Mushrikoon, (with whom you made a
treaty). So travel freely (O Mushrikoon) for four months (as you
will) throughout the land” up to the Verse: “And a declaration
from Allah and His Messenger to mankind on the greatest day
(the 10th of Dhul-Hijjah - the 12th month of Islamic calendar)
that Allah is free from (all) obligations to the Mushrikoon and so
162

is His Messenger. So if you (Mushrikoon) repent, it is better for
you, but if you turn away, then know that you cannot escape from
the Punishment of Allah. And give tidings (O Muhammad) of a
painful torment to those who disbelieve.” (Soorah At-Tawbah
9:3) till the end of the story.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
dispatched ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, after Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with him, in order to join him
and to undertake the conveyance of AlBara’ah to the polytheists
on behalf of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, owing to his blood relationship with him as his cousin.
On the authority of Abu Hurairah who narrated: “Abu Bakr sent
me during that Hajj in which he was the leader of the pilgrims
along with an announcers whom he sent on the Day of Nahr to
announce at Mina: 'No pagan shall perform Hajj after this year,
and none shall perform the Tawaf around the Ka‘bah in the state
of nudity.' Humaid added: The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, sent ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased
with him, and ordered him to recite Soorah Al- Bara’ah aloud in
public. Abu Hurairah added: “So ‘Ali, along with us, recited
Bara’ah (loudly) before the people at Mina on the Day of Nahr
and announced: 'No pagan shall perform Hajj after this year, and
none shall perform the Tawaf around the Ka‘bah in a state of
nudity'.”
On the authority of Muharrar Ibn Abi Hurairah reported from his
father that: “I was with ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib when Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent him.
(He said): ‘What were you announcing?’ They replied: ‘We were
announcing that none shall enter Paradise except a Believer and
163

none should circumambulate the Ka‘bah while in a state of
nudity, and anyone with whom Allah’s Messenger has a pact, the
duration of that pact is now four months. When the four months
expire, Allah dissociates His Messenger from the polytheists. No
polytheist shall be allowed to make pilgrimage to the Houseafter
this year.’ I kept announcing till my voice became hoarse.”This
chain of narrations is good except that there is an objection
concerning the reporter’s statement that: “Anyone with whom
Allah’s Messenger has a pact, the duration of that pact is now
four months.”
Even though some have adopted this opinion, the more correct
position is that: whoever had a pact (with Allah’s Messenger), its
deadline was according to the fixed duration, however long it
was— even if it spanned beyond four months. However,
concerning those pacts whose durations were not determined,
then for such was a moratorium of four months. The majority of
pacts were those whose duration was less than four month from
the beginning of the moratorium, then it was possible to apply
the terms of the first category which is that its deadline was
according to the fixed duration, however short it was. It is equally
possible to say: It is deferred till four months elapsed because
they have a greater right than those who did not have any pact at
all in the first instance. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

Among the Various Events That Took Place in
the 9th Year Was the Ghazwah of Tabook in
the Month of Rajab
Al-Waqidi related that in Rajab of the same year, Najashi, the
ruler of Abyssinia, died and Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, announced his death to the
164

people. In Sha‘ban, ‘Umm Kulthoom, the daughter of Allah’s
Messenger’s died and Asma’ Bint ‘Umais along with Safiyyah
Bint ‘Abdul-Muttalib washed her body . Some, however,
claimed that she was washed by a number of Ansari women
among whomwas Umm ‘Atiyyah.
I say: This is established in the Saheehain.
The 9th year also witnessed the peace treaties concluded with the
king of Ailah, the people of Jarba’, Adhruh and the chief of
Doumatal-Jandal as explained earlier on appropriate places.
In the same year, "Masjid Ad-Dirar" was built by a group of
hypocrites and was soon demolished. It was a clandestine hostile
camp. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, made a proclamation concerning it and it was razed to the
ground. In the month of Ramadan of that year, the delegation of
Thaqeef arrived and they concluded a peace treaty on behalf of
their people and returned to their people with a guarantee. Their
chief idol, AlLat, was also broken as related earlier. Toward the
end of the same year, ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy, the patron of the
hypocrites died, May Allah curse him. A few months earlier,
Mu‘awiyah Ibn Mu‘awiyah Al-Laithi, or Al-Muzani, also died.
He was the one on whom Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, offered the funeral prayer, if the story is
authentic.
In the same year, Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, led
the Muslim pilgrims to Hajj with the permission of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. It (the 9th
year) also witnessed the arrival of various Arab delegations. This
is why the 9th year is nicknamed the Year of the Delegates.

165

Emulating Al-Bukhari and others, here we put together a chapter
on that.

The Book of Various Delegations that Came to
Allah’s Messenger
According to Ibn Ishaq, after Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, conquered Makkah and returned
from Tabook, and after Thaqeef had embraced Islam and pledged
allegiance, Arab delegations came to him from different
directions.
Ibn Hisham added that "Abu ‘Ubaidah related to me that the
event occurred in the 9th year and that it was known as the Year
of Delegations. Ibn Ishaq said that the Arab tribes were watching
the emerging relationship between Islam and the Quraish for they
did not deny that the Quraish were leaders and guides of men,
the people of the Sacred Mosque, the pure progeny of Prophet
Isma‘eel, the son of Ibrahim, and the leaders of the Arabs. In the
first place, it was the Quraish who first waged war and opposed
the Messenger of Allah. After the Conquest of Makkah, when the
Quraish surrendered to Islam and Allah’s Messenger, the Arab
tribes were convinced that they were in no position to wage war
on Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
or demonstrate animosity toward him. Thus, they entered into the
religion as Allah stated ‘in throngs’ coming to him from all
directions. Allah says to His Prophet: When comes the Help of
Allah (to you, O Muhammad, against your enemies) and the
Conquest (of Makkah), And you see that the people enter Allah's
religion (Islam) in crowds, glorify the Praises of your Lord, and
ask for His Forgiveness. Verily, He is the One Who accepts the
repentance and forgives. (Soorah An-Nasr 110:1-3) " Meaning,
166

give praise to Allah for having made your religion triumphant
and ask for His Forgiveness. Verily, He is the One Who accepts
repentance and forgives.
I say: Muhammad Ibn Ishaq, Al-Waqidi, Al-Bukhari, and AlBaihaqi have all mentioned that among the delegations were
those whose arrival we have already mentioned under the events
of the 9th year, or even from the Conquest of Makkah. Allah
says: Not equal among you are those who spent and fought
before the conquering (of Makkah) (with those among you who
did so later). Such are higher in degree than those who spent and
fought afterward. But to all, Allah has promised the best
(reward). (Soorah Al-Hadeed 57:10)
Earlier we mentioned that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said on the day of the Conquest
of Makkah: “There is no Hijrah (i.e. migration) after the
Conquest (of Makkah), but Jihad and good intentions
remain.”Thus, it is incumbent to make a distinction between the
earlier delegations at the time of the Conquest among those
whose arrival was considered a migration and the latter ones who
joined them after the Conquest among those whom Allah has
promised the best reward. Nevertheless they (latter ones) cannot
be compared to those who preceded them in time, both in reward
and excellence.

The Deputation of Muzainah
The first delegation to come and meet Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, was from Mudar. They were
four hundred delegates from Muzainah arriving in the month of
Rajab of the 5th year. Allah’s Messenger granted them the status
167

of migration in their locality. He said: “You are Muhajiroon
wherever you are so you may return to your properties.” So they
returned to their country.
Al-Bukhari, may Allah have Mercy on him, related in the
chapterof the delegation of Banu Tameem, on the authority of
Imran Ibn Husain who narrated that a delegation from Banu
Tameem came to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and he said (to them): “Accept the good tidings, Banu
Tameem!” They said: “O Allah’s Messenger! You have given us
good tidings, so give us (something else).” Signs of displeasure
appeared on his face. Then another delegation from Yemen came
and he said (to them): “Accept the good tidings, for Banu
Tameem refuses to accept them.” They replied, “We have
accepted them, O Allah’s Messenger!”
Al-Bukhari also related that ‘Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair informed
them that a group of riders belonging to Banu Tameem came to
the Prophet. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said (to
the Prophet): “Appoint Al-Qa‘qa’ Ibn Ma‘bad Ibn Zurarah as
(their) leader.” ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said (to
the Prophet): “Appoint Al-Aqra’ Ibn Habis instead.” Thereupon
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said (to ‘Umar): “You
just want to oppose me.” ‘Umar replied: “I did not want to
oppose you.” So both of them argued so much that their voices
became louder, and then the following Verses were revealed
concerning that: O you who believe! Do not put (yourselves)
forward before Allah and His Messenger... (till the end of Verse)
(Soorah Al- Hujurat 49:1)
Al-Bukhari also related it through more than one route on the
authority of Ibn Abi Mulaikah with different wordings. We have
168

mentioned that in the Tafseer in the interpretation of the Verse:
O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the
Prophet. (Soorah Al-Hujurat 49:2)
Al-Waqidi has mentioned the reason for their coming. He said:
They had declared war on Banu Khuza‘ah and Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
dispatched against them Uyainah Ibn Badr at the head of a
raiding contingent of fifty men which consisted of neither an
Ansari nor a Muhajir. The contingent captured eleven men, ten
women and thirty children from them. So their leaders came on
account of their prisoners.
It is said that 60 or 70 of them arrived for that reason. Among
them were: ‘Utarid, Az-Zibriqan, Qais Ibn Asim, Qais Ibn AlHarith, Nu‘aim Ibn Sa’d, Al-Aqra’ Ibn Habis, Rabah Ibn AlHarith and ‘Amr Ibn Al-Ahtam. They entered the mosque when
Bilal had given the call for the Zuhr prayer and the people were
waiting for the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, to come
out to lead them (in prayer). These people, in haste, called him
from behind the dwellings, and then the revelation concerning
came. Al-Waqidi also mentioned about their orator and poet and
that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, ordered for each of them 10 Ooqiyyahs except ‘Amr Ibn AlAhtam who was given 5 Ooqiyyahs due to his young age. And
Allah (SWT) knows best.
Ibn Ishaq related that this Divine Revelation came concerning
them: Verily! Those who call you from behind the dwellings,
most of them have no sense. And if they had patience till you
could come out to them, it would have been better for them. And

169

Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (Soorah AlHujurat
49:4,5)
Ibn Jareer related on the authority of Al-Bara’ concerning the
Verse: Verily! Those who call you from behind the dwellings,
that a man came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and said: “O Muhammad, O Muhammad!
My praise is embellishing and my disparagement is damning.”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“That (description is fitting) (only) for Allah, the Exalted.” This
chain is good and well-connected.
It is related fromAl-HasanAl-Basri and Qatadah in a mursal form
and the name of this man has been mentioned from Abu Salamah
Ibn ‘Abdur Rahman from Al-Aqra’ Ibn Habis said that he called
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
saying: “O Muhammad, O Muhammad!” In another narration, he
said: “O Messenger of Allah!” But he did not respond to him.
Then he said: “O Messenger of Allah, my praise is embellishing
and my disparagement is dishonoring.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, then said: “That (description is
fitting) (only for) Allah.”

Narration Concerning the Merits of Banu
Tameem
Abu Hurairah narrated: "Since I heard three things from Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, my love
for Banu Tameem has never declined. I heard Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, say about
them that they would put up the strongest resistance against the
Dajjal from my Ummah. There was a slave-girl in the house of
170

‘A’ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) who was from Banu
Tameem and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: 'Set her free, for she is from the offspring of
Isma‘eel'.” The narrator said: When their consignment of Zakah
was brought to him, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “This is the charity of our people.” It is
related by Muslim.

Delegation of Banu ‘Abdul Qais
After the delegates of Banu Tameem, Al-Bukhari mentions the
delegation of Banu ‘Abdul-Qais.
Abu Jamrah narrated: "I said to Ibn ‘Abbas that I have an
earthenware containing Nabeedh (i.e. water and dates or grapes)
for me, and I drink it while it is sweet. If I drink too much of it
while with the people for a long period of time, I get afraid that
they may discover it (for I will appear as if I were drunk).” Ibn
‘Abbas said: “A delegation of ‘Abdul Qais came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and he
said to them: ‘Welcome, O people! You will neither have any
disgrace nor will you regret.’ They said: ‘O Allah’s Messenger,
there are the Mudar polytheists between you and us, so we cannot
come to you except in the sacred months. So please teach us
some injunctions to which if we adhere they will cause us to be
admitted into Paradise. We will preach that to our people who
have remained behind.’ The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: ‘I order you to do four things and forbid
you from four things. (I order you) to believe in Allah. Do you
know what it is to believe in Allah? It is to testify that none has
the right to be worshipped (in truth) except Allah, Alone. I also
order you to offer prayers perfectly, to pay the Zakah, and to fast
171

the month of Ramadan and to give the Khums (i.e. one-fifth of
the booty) (for Allah’s sake). I forbid you from four other things
(i.e. the wine that is prepared in) Ad-Dubba’, AnNaqeer, AlHantam and Al-Muzaffat'.”
Al-Wazi’ Ibn Zari’ narrated: On the authority of Umm Aban, the
daughter of Al-Wazi’ Ibn Zari‘, from her grandfather, who was
a member of the deputation of ‘Abdul Qais, who said: “When we
came to Madinah, we raced to be the first to dismount and kissthe
hand and foot of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. But Al-Ashajj Al-Mundhir waited until he
came to the bundle of his clothes. He put on his two garments
and then he went to the Prophet. He said to him: ‘You have two
characteristics which Allah likes: gentleness and deliberation.’
He asked: ‘Have I acquired them or has Allah created (them as
part of) my nature?’ He replied: ‘Allah has created (them) in your
nature.’ He said: ‘Praise be to Allah Who has created in my
nature two characteristics which Allah and His Messenger like'.”
She also narrated that her grandfather Az-Zari’ went to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, along with
a mentally disabled son of his or his nephew. "My grandfather
said: 'When we got to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, in Madinah, I said to him: I have with me my
son (or my nephew) who is insane, I have brought him to you so
that you may supplicate to Allah, the Exalted, for him. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: ‘Bring
him to me.’ I took him with me to see him while he was on his
mount. I removed his journey cloth and adorned him in two nice
garments and I held his hands and took him to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. (When we
got to him) he said: ‘Bring him closer to me and turn his back
172

toward me.’ He held his upper and lower garments and began to
beat his back until I could see the whiteness of his armpit. He
kept saying: ‘Come out, O enemy of Allah! Come out, O enemy
of Allah!’ Then the boy wore a healthy look different from his
earlier appearance. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, made him sit in his front and then requested
for water. When it was brought, he wiped his face with it and
supplicated for him. Consequently, there was no one in the
delegation that was preferred to him after the supplication of
Allah’s Messenger (for him) '.”
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, who narrated:
The first Jumu‘ah prayer which was offered outside of the
Mosque of Allah’s Messenger took place in the mosque of the
tribe of ‘Abdul Qais at Juwatha in Bahrain.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Umm Salamah that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
delayed the two Raka‘ahs after the Zuhr prayer until after the
‘Asr prayer in her house on account of the arrival of the
delegation from ‘Abdul -Qais.
I say: There is an indication in the words of Ibn ‘Abbas which
suggest that the arrival of the delegation of ‘Abdul Qais occurred
before the Conquest of Makkah owing to their statement:
“Allah’s Messenger, the polytheists of Mudar are between us and
you, so we cannot come to you except during the sacred months.”
And Allah (SWT) knows best.

173

The Story of Thumamah and the Delegation
from Banu Haneefah With Musailimah, the
Liar, May the Curse of Allah be on Him
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Abu Hurairah who
narrated that the Prophet sent some cavalry toward Najd and they
brought a man from the tribe of Banu Haneefah who was
namedThumamah Ibn Uthal. They fettered him to one of the
pillars of the Mosque. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, went to him and said: “What have you got,
Thumamah?” He replied: "I have got a good thought, O
Muhammad! If you kill me, then you will have killed a person
who has already killed somebody; if you were to set me free, you
would do a favor to one who is grateful; and if you want property,
then ask me for whatever wealth you want.” He was left until the
next day when the Prophet said to him: “What have you got,
Thumamah?” He said: “What I have told you; i.e. if you set me
free, you would do a favor to one who is grateful.” The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, left him until the day
after, and he said: “What have you got, Thumamah?” He said: “I
have got what I told you.” On that the Prophet said: “Release
Thumamah.”
So, Thumamah went to a garden of date-palm trees near the
Mosque, took a bath and then entered the Mosque and said: “I
testify that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, and
I also testify that Muhammad is His Messenger! By Allah, O
Muhammad, there was no face on the surface of this Earth that
was more disliked by me than yours, but now your face has
become the most beloved to me. By Allah, there was no religion
more disliked by me than yours, but now it is the most beloved
religion to me. By Allah, there was no town more disliked by me
174

than your town, but now it is the most beloved town to me. Your
cavalry arrested me (at the time) when I was intending to perform
‘Umrah. What should I do?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, gave him good tidings (congratulated him)
and ordered him to perform ‘Umrah. So when he came to
Makkah, someone said to him, “You have become a Sabian?”
Thumamah replied, “By Allah, I have embraced Islam with
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah. By Allah, not a single grain
of wheat will come to youfrom Yamamah unless the Prophet
gives his permission.”
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority Ibn ‘Ubaidullah Ibn ‘Utbah
who narrated: "We were informed that Musailimah AlKadhdhab (the liar) had arrived in Madinah and stayed in the
house of the daughter of Al-Harith. The daughter of Al-Harith
Ibn Kuraiz was his wife and she was the mother of ‘Abdullah Ibn
Amir. There came to him Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, accompanied by Thabit Ibn Qais
Ibn Shammas, who was called the orator of Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was holding a stick in
his hand. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
stopped before Musailimah and spoke to him. Musailimah said
to him: 'If you wish, we would not interfere between you and the
rule, on condition that the rule will be ours after you.' The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: 'If you
were to ask me for this stick, I would not give it to you. I think
you are the same person who was shown to me in a dream. And
this is Thabit Ibn Qais who will answer you on my behalf.' The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, then went
away.

175

"I asked Ibn ‘Abbas about the dream Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, had mentioned. Ibn ‘Abbas
said: 'Someone told me that the Prophet said: 'When I was
sleeping, I saw in a dream that two gold bangles were put in my
hands, which frightened me and made me dislike them. I was
allowed to blow on them, and when I blew at them, both of them
flew. I interpreted them as two liars who would appear.’ One of
them was Al-Ansi who was killed by Fairooz in Yemen and the
other was Musailimah AlKadhdhab.”
Abul-Qasim As-Suhaili said: He was Musailimah Ibn
Thumamah Ibn Kabeer Ibn Habeeb Ibn Al-Harith Ibn AbdulHarith Ibn Hiffan Ibn Dhuhl Ibn AdDool Ibn Haneefah. He was
nicknamed Abu Thumamah or Abu Haroon. He also named
himself Rahman so he was referred to as Rahman of Yamamah.
His age by the time he was killed was 150 years. He knew some
magic. He could insert an egg into a small bottle and he was the
first person to do that. He would also break the wing of bird and
join it together again. He claimed that a deer used to come to him
from the mountain and he would milk it.
I say: We shall relate some of his story while discussing his
killing.
As-Suhaili and others relate that Ar-Rajjal Ibn Unfuwah, hisreal
name being Nahar Ibn Unfuwah, had accepted Islam andhad
learned some portions of the Qur’an and accompanied the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
for a while. Once, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, met him while he was sitting along with Abu
Hurairah and Furat Ibn Hayyan and he said to them: “The molar
of one of you in the Hellfire will be (as big) as Uhud.” The latter
176

two individuals never ceased to be afraid till Rajjal apostatized
along with Musailimah and acknowledge for him visitors and
that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, gave him a share in the matter along with him. He rendered
a portion of what he used to memorize from the Qur’an.
Musailimah invited him to himself and the great Fitnah (trial) of
Banu Haneefah came to pass. Zaid Ibn Al-Khattab killed him in
the battle of Yamamah as shall be related shortly.
As-Suhaili also related that the mu’aththin of Musailimah was a
man called
Hujair. He was a battle schemer in the presence of Muhakkam
Ibn At-Tufail. Sajah, who was nicknamed UmmSadir, also
aligned with them and Musailimah married her. There are a
couple of licentious stories concerning her. The name of her
mu’aththin was Zuhair Ibn ‘Amr while some said he was Janabah
Ibn Tariq. It is also said that Shibth Ibn Rib‘ee also acted in that
capacity for her as well but later accepted Islam. She also
accepted Islam during the reign of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab and she
became a very good Muslim.
On the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood who narrated: Ibn
An-Nawwahal and Ibn Uthal, two emissaries of Musailimah AlKadhdhab came toAllah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
ofAllah be upon him, and he said to both of them: “Do you testify
that I am a Messenger of Allah?” They both said: “We bear
witness that Musailimah is a messenger of Allah.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I
believe in Allah and His Messengers, if I were to kill any
messenger I would have killed both of you.” ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘ood added: “Thus the practice of not killing messengers
continued.” ‘Abdullah said: “As for Ibn Uthal, Allah has sufficed
177

him. As for An-Nawwahah, he never ceased to dominate my
mind until Allah made me overpower him.
Shortly, we shall relate the death of Al-Aswad Al-Ansi toward
the end of the life of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and the death of Musailimah Al-Kadhdhab
during the days of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate, and what became of
Banu Haneefah.

The Delegation of the People of Najran
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Hudhaifah who narrated:
Al-Aqib and Sayyid, the rulers of Najran, came to
Allah’sMessenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
with the intention of doing Li‘an. One of them said to the other:
“Do not do (this Li‘an) for, by Allah, if he is a Prophet and we
do this Li‘an, neither we, nor our offspring after us will be
successful.” Then both of them said (to the Prophet): “We will
give what you ask, but you should send a trustworthy man with
us, and do not send any person with us but an honest one.” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I will
send an honest man who is truly trustworthy.” Every one of the
Companions of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, wished to be that person. The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Get up, Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn
Al-Jarrah.” When he got up, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “This is the trustworthy
man of this (Muslim) nation.”
Yoonus said: The ruler of Najran was a Christian but became
Muslim. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be

178

upon him, had written to the people of Najran prior to their
coming to him:
“In the Name of the God of Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya‘qoob. From
Muhammad, Allah’s Messenger, to the prelate and to the people
of Najran; if you accept Islam then I will give praise to the God
of Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya‘qoob. I am inviting you to the worship
of Allah away from the worship of slaves; I invite you to the
Authority of Allah away from the authority of slaves. However,
if you decline, then it is incumbent on you to pay the Jizyah. If
you reject, then I warn you of a war.”
When the letter was received by the prelate and he readits
contents, he was filled with great fright. He sent for a man from
the people of Najran who was known as Shurahbeel Ibn Wada‘ah
from Hamdan. Whenever a problem erupted, no one was
consulted before him. When he came, the prelate handed him the
letter sent by Allah’s Messenger. The prelate said: “Abu
Maryam, what is your opinion?” Shurahbeel said: “You are well
aware of Allah’s promise to Ibrahim concerning the progeny of
Isma‘eel and Prophethood so there is no assurance that this is not
the same man (promised). I do not have an opinion in the matter
of Prophethood. If it were an issue from the mundane matters I
would have preferred an opinion and exerted effort to arrive at a
sound judgment for you.” The prelate said to him: “Relax and
take a seat.” Shurahbeel sat down close to him and the prelate
sent for another person from the people of Najran named
‘Abdullah Ibn Shurahbeel. He read the letter to him and then
asked him his opinion and he spoke in a manner similar to what
Shurahbeel had said. Again the prelate said to him: “Relax and
take a seat,” and he sat close to him. The prelate sent for yet
another person from the people of Najran called Jabbar Ibn Faid
179

from Banu Al- Harith Ibn Ka‘b, a member of Banu Al-Himas.
Again, he read the letter to him and asked him for an opinion
concerning it. Again, the man responded in a similar manner as
that of Shurahbeel and ‘Abdullah and the prelate asked him to
take a seat, which he did.
When their opinions were heard, and it was established that they
all had the same opinion, the prelate asked for a bell and rang it.
He raised his hood in the hermitage. This was their manner when
they were alarmed in the daytime. Whenever they were alarmed
in the night time, they would ring the bell and then kindle a fire
in their hermitage. Once the bell was rung and the hood was
raised, all the people, from the upper and the lower part of the
entire valley up to the distance of a day’s journey for a fast rider,
gathered. There were 73 villages and one hundred and twenty
fighters. The prelate read the letter of Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, to them and then requested
for their opinion. The intelligent ones among them suggested that
they send Shurahbeel Ibn Wada‘ah Al-Hamdani, ‘Abdullah Ibn
Shurahbeel Al-Asbahi and Jabbar Ibn Faid Al-Harithi to gather
more information about the Messenger of Allah.
So they headed for Madinah. Once they arrived there, they took
off their journey clothes and adorned themselves with jewelry
and gold rings, and then they proceeded to see the Messenger of
Allah. They gave him the greetings but he did not return their
greeting. They attempted to engage him in a discussion all day
long but he refused to speak with them while they were wearing
their jewelry and gold rings. They then went in search of
‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan and ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, may Allah
be pleased with them, both of whom they had known. They found
both of them in the midst of a gathering of the Ansar and the
180

Muhajiroon. They said: “O ‘Uthman and ‘Abdur Rahman, your
Prophet wrote to us and we came in response to him but when
we went to see him, we gave him the greeting but he did not
respond to our greeting; we attempted to speak with him all day
but he declined to speak to us. What do you both suggest we do,
should we return (back home) ?” ‘Uthman and ‘Abdur Rahman
turned to ‘Ali, may Allah be pleasede with him, who was also
present in the gathering and asked for his opinion concerning the
complaint of the delegates. ‘Ali said to them: “I suggest that they
take off their jewelry and gold rings, wear their journey clothes
and then return to him.”
They did so and they greeted the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and this time he returned their greeting and
then said:
“By the One Who sent me with the Truth, they had come to me
at first instance while Iblees was with them.” They exchanged
questions and they continued in that until they finally asked:
“What do you say about ‘Eesa, for we shall
returnto our people who are Christians? We will be pleased to
hear what you have to say concerning him if you are truly a
Prophet.” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I do not
have anything (to say) concerning him today, but wait until
I tell you what Allah will say
concerning him.” By the following morning Allah had revealed
this Verse:
Verily, the likeness of ‘Eesa (Jesus) before Allah is the likeness
of Adam. He created him from dust, then (He) said to him:
‘Be!’ - and he was. (This is) the truth from your Lord, so be not
of those who doubt. Then whoever disputes
181

with you concerning him ‘Eesa after (all this) knowledge that
has come to you,
(i.e. ‘Eesa) being a slave of Allah, and having no share in
Divinity. Say: (O
Muhammad) ‘Come, let us call our sons and your sons, our
women and your women, ourselves and yourselves - then we
pray and invoke (sincerely) the Curse of Allah upon those who
lie’.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:59-61)
However, they failed to acknowledge that.
The following morning they still showed sign of not accepting
Allah’s Words concerning ‘Eesa. The Messsenger of Allah came
forward, wrapping AlHasan and Al-Husain under his garment
while Fatimah was walking behind him, to challenge them to a
Mubahalah (a mutual cursing on the liar between two contending
individuals or groups). At the time, he had a number of women.
Apprehensive of the course of events, Shurahbeel said to his
remaining two companions: “You both know well that if you
were to merge all of the inhabitants of the upper and lower part
of the valley, they will not initiate an action except from my
opinion. I swear by Allah, right now, I foresee a grave matter. If
this man is truly a Prophet that has been sent and we dare
exchange curses with him then not a single hair or nail of us will
escape destruction.” His two other companions asked: “So what
do you suggest, Abu Maryam?” He said: “I suggest that we ask
him to decide upon the matter for I see him to be a man who
would neverexceed the limit in judgment.” The other two
companions agreed and Shurahbeel went to meet the Messenger
of Allah. He said to him: “I opine something better than engaging
you in an exchange of curses.” The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, asked: “What is that?” Shurahbeel replied:
182

“We leave you to decide on a matter from this day until nightfall
and from night till daybreak. Whatever you decide will be
acceptable to us.”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
asked: “Perhaps, someone will oppose you from those whom you
left behind?” Shurahbeel said: “You may ask my two
companions.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, asked them and they said: “The entire valley does
not initiate or reject except by Shurahbeel’s advice.” Thus
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
returned without engaging them in Mubahalah. The following
morning he came back and wrote this document for them:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful. This is a
document written by Muhammad, the unlettered Prophet, the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
for (the people of) Najran on condition that they would pay to the
Muslims two thousand suits of garments, half in Safar, and the
rest in Rajab...”
The sub-narrator related the terms of the agreement in its entirety
until he said: “Witnessed by Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb, Ghailan Ibn
Amr, Malik Ibn ‘Awf from Bani Nasr, Al-Aqra’ Ibn Habis AlHanzali and Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah.” They took their
document and left for Najran.
The delegates entered Najran and came to the monk Ibn Abi
Shamir AzZabeedi in his hermitage and said to him: A Prophet
has been raised in Tihamah and they related to him the deputation
of Najran to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allahbe
upon him, and that he had challenged them to an exchange of
mutual curse and they had declined, Bishr Ibn Mu‘awiyah had
183

gone over to him and had accepted Islam.” The monk said:
“Bring me down otherwise I shall throw myself down from this
hermitage.” They lowered him, bringing along with him a gift.
Then he proceeded to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him,. He stayed with him for a while listening to
the Qur’an and then returned to his people. He did not accept, but
had promised to return; however, it was not possible for him until
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
died.
The prelate Abul-Harith also came to Allah’s Messenger along
with some leaders, deputies and noblemen and they stayed
listening to what was being revealed to Allah’s Messenger. Then
he (the Prophet) wrote this document for this prelate and the
prelates after him:
“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. From
Muhammad, the Prophet, to the prelate, Abul-Harith, and all the
prelates of Najran after him, as well as all the priests, monks and
all those under their authority, small or large, all (have been
provided the) security of Allah and His Messenger. No prelate,
priest, or monk shall be displaced and none of their rights or
authorities, which they currently enjoy, shall be denied to them.
This is a security of Allah and His Messenger forever as long as
they give good advice and behave well and they are not burdened
with oppression and not being oppressors.” Mugheerah Ibn
Shu‘bah wrote down the document.

184

The Deputation of Banu ‘Amir and the Story
of ‘Amir Ibn At-Tufail and Arbad Ibn Qais,
May Allah Curse Them Both
Ibn Ishaq said: Among the delegates of Banu ‘Amir which came
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
were ‘Amir Ibn AtTufail, Arbad Ibn Qais and Jaz’ Ibn Khalid Ibn
Ja‘afar and Jabbar Ibn Sulma Ibn Malik Ibn Ja‘afar. The three of
them were the leaders of their people and the evil ones from
among them. Allah’s enemy, ‘Amir, arrived in the presence of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
while intending treachery against him. His people told him: “O
Amir, people are already accepting Islam, why don’t you also
follow suit?” He said: “I have vowed that I shall not cease until
the Arabs follow my heels. Should I then follow this fellow from
the Quraish?” He then said to Arbad: “When we get to him, I will
divert his attention away from you so that you may smite him
with your sword.”
When they got to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, ‘Amir said to him: “O Muhammad, take me
as a friend.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “By Allah, not until you believe in Allah, Alone.”
Again, ‘Amir repeated his request and continued to engage him
in discussion while expecting Arbad to do what they had agreed
on, but the latter remained still. When ‘Amir saw the inaction of
Arbad, he put the same request to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him: “O Muhammad, take me as a
friend.” Again the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “Not until you believe in Allah, Alone, and not
associating any partner with him.” When Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, declined insistently,
185

hesaid: “By Allah, I will spread the earth against you with
cavalry and infantry.” When he departed, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, supplicated: “Allah
suffice me (i.e. protect me) against ‘Amir Ibn At-Tufail.”
When they left the presence of Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, ‘Amir said to Arbad: “Why
didn’t you do as I had commanded you? By Allah, there was no
man on Earth whom I feared more than you, but, by Allah, I shall
never fear you after today.” Arbad said: “Do not be hasty in
passing judgment on me. By Allah, each time I made an effor to
carry out what you had ordered me, you came in between me and
the man in such a way that I could see none but you. Should I
then smite you with the sword?”
They continued on their homeward journey. After they had
covered part of the distance, Allah sent a plague on ‘Amir which
afflicted him on the neck and he died as a result of it in the house
of a woman from Banu Salool. He kept saying: “Banu ‘Amir, a
boil like the boil of a young camel in the house of a woman from
Banu Salool!”
I say: Apparently, the story of ‘Amir Ibn At-Tufail preceded the
Conquest of Makkah even though Ibn Ishaq and Al-Baihaqi have
both mentioned it after the Conquest. That is owing to Al-Hafiz
Al-Baihaqi’s narration.
On the authority of Anas Ibn Malik came the story of Bi’r
Ma‘oonah, ‘Amir Ibn At-Tufail’s murder of Haram Ibn Milhan,
maternal uncle of Anas Ibn Malik and his treachery against the
companions of Bi’r Ma‘oonah till they were all slaughtered
except ‘Amr Ibn Umayyah.”

186

Al-Awza’i related that Yahya said: Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, spent thirty days cursing ‘Amr
Ibn At-Tufail: “Allah suffice (protect) me with whatever You
wish against ‘Amr Ibn At-Tufail and send to him what will kill
him.” Then Allah sent upon him a plague.
Ibn Ishaq related: After burying him, his companion returned in
winter to the land of Banu ‘Amir. When he arrived, the people
questioned him about what had happened and he said: “Nothing.
By Allah, he invited us to worship someone. I wish he were here
now so that I could shoot him with arrows to kill him.” After a
day or two, he went out to sell his camel when Allah sent a
thunderbolt upon him and his camel and they were incinerated.
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas who said: Then Allah revealed
concerning ‘Amir and Arbad: Allah knows what every female
bears, and by how much the wombs fall short (of their time or
number) or exceed. Everything with Him is
in (due) proportion. All-Knower of the Unseen and the seen,
the Greatest, the
Highest.It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceal his
speech or declare it openly, whether he be hid by night or go
forth freely by day. For
each (person), there are angels in succession, before and
behind him. They guard him by the Command of Allah (Soorah
Ar-Ra‘d 13:8-11) i.e. Muhammad.
Then Allah mentions about Arbad and his death: It is He who
shows you the lightning, as a fear (for travelers) and as a hope
(for those who wait for rain). And it is He Who brings up (or
originates) the clouds, heavy (with water). And Ar- Ra‘d
(thunder) glorifies and praises Him, and so do the angels because
187

of His Awe, He sends the thunderbolts, and therewith He strikes
whom He wills, yet they (disbelievers) dispute about Allah. And
He is Mighty in strength and Severe in punishment. (Soorah ArRa‘d 13:11-13)

The Arrival of Dimam Ibn Tha‘labah to
Allah’s Messenger as a Delegate of His People,
Banu Sa’d Ibn Bakr
On the authority of Anas Ibn Malik who narrated: “We were
forbidden from asking Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, (too many) questions and we would be
delighted when an intelligent Bedouin came to ask him questions
while we listened. Once a Bedouin came and asked: 'O
Muhammad, your envoy came to us and informed us that you
claim that you have been sent by Allah.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “He has spoken the truth.”
The Bedouin said: “Who created the heavens?” The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, replied: “Allah.” The
Bedoiun asked: “Who created the Earth.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, again said: “Allah.” He
againasked: “Who erected this mountain and created in it
whetever He has created?” Again the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, answered: “Allah.” The Bedouin
said: “I ask you by Allah, the One Who created the heavens and
the Earth, and Who erected the mountain, is it Allah Who has
sent you?” “Yes,” the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, answered.
The Bedouin further said: “Your envoy also claims that five
salawaat are obligatory on us day and night.” “He has spoken the
truth,” the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
188

replied. “Is it Allah who has commanded you this?” the man
asked and the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
replied in the affirmative. The Bedouin also asked: “Your envoy
also states that we are obliged to pay Zakah from our wealth.”
Again the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “He has spoken the truth.” “Is it Allah who has commanded
you this?” the man asked and the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, again replied in the affirmative. Again the
Bedouin said: “Your envoy also says that fasting in the month of
Ramadan is obligatory on us every year.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “He has spoken the truth.”
The man then said: “ (I ask you) by Him Who has sent you, is it
Allah Who has commanded you this?” The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Yes.” The
Bedouin said: “Your envoy also says that upon us is the
obligation of Hajj to the House for he who is able and finds the
way to it.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “He has spoken the truth.” Then he turned to go and
said: “By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, I shall neither
increase this nor decrease it whatsoever.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, then said: “If he is truthful (to
his vow), he shall enter Paradise.” This Hadith is recorded in
theSaheehain and other books.

The Arrival of the Delegation of Tayy’ Along
With Zaid Al-Khail
Ibn Ishaq related about the delegation of Tayy’ which included
Zaid Al-Khail who was their leader. When they reached Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, they had
a discussion with him and he presented Islam to them, which they
accepted and became good Muslims. As related to me by an
189

impeccable source from the people of Tayy’, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to them: “The
Arabs are never exact at estimating people. They have never told
me about the virtues of a man correctly; for when I see the man
concerned I realize that they have overestimated him except Zaid
Al-Khail, when I met him I knew that they had underestimated
him.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, nicknamed him Zaid Al-Khair and apportioned to him Faid
and two other pieces of land with it and wrote a document for
him concerning that.
He left the presence of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, to return to his people. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “If Zaid survives
the fever of Madinah, then he would not (be blemished).” Ibn
Ishaq added: When he got to a part of the territory of Najd by one
of its oases called Fardah, he was gripped by fever and he died
there. When he felt the pangs of death, he said:
Are my people departing toward the East in the early morning?
While I am left alone in house by (the spring of) Fardah at Najd
How many days have gone by when I took ill and I was
visitedby the visitors
Whoever (from them) is not righteous will toil.
When he died, his wife, due to her ignorance, paucity of
intelligence and piety she burned the document written for him
by Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
I say: It is recorded in the Saheehain on the authority of Abu
Sa’eed that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib sent to the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, from Yemen some
190

gold alloyed with clay in a leather bag dyed in the leaves of
Mimosa. He distributed it among four men: Zaid Al-Khail,
‘Alqama Ibn Ulathah, Aqra’ Ibn Habis and ‘Uyainah Ibn Badr.

The Story of Adiyy Ibn Hatim At-Tayy’
Al-Bukhari related in the Saheeh the delegation of Tayy’ and the
Hadith of Adiyy Ibn Hatim: On the authority of Adiyy Ibn Hatim
who narrated: "We came to ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with
him, in a delegation (during his rule). He started calling the men
one by one, calling each by his name. (As he did not call me
early) I said to him: 'Do you not recognize me, O Commander of
the Believers?' He said: 'Yes, you embraced Islam when they (i.e.
your people) disbelieved; you came (to the Truth) when they ran
away; you fulfilled your promises when they broke theirs; and
you recognized it (i.e. the Truth of Islam) when they denied it.'
On that, Adiyy said: 'From now on I do not care (what happens
to me) '.”
Ibn Ishaq related that as for Adiyy Ibn Hatim, he used to say as
related to me: “No Arab detested the Messenger of Allah when
he first knew him as I did. I was a Christian leader of noble birth,
and I used to take a quarter of my people’s spoils. I was religious
and my people treated me like a king. On hearing about the
Prophet, I hated him and said to an Arab servant of mine who
was taking care of my camels: ‘Choose some well-trained, wellfed camels, to be near me, and once you hear of Muhammad’s
army conquering this land, then give me a signal.’ One morning
he came to me and said, ‘Whatever you had intended to do when
the army of Muhammad comes, you had better do it now for I
have seen flags and I asked about them and I was told that it was
Muhammad’s army.’ I ordered him to get my camels and made
191

my family ride them and set forth to join the Christians of Syria.
I went as far as Al-Jaooshiyyah. Meanwhile, I left one of Hatim’s
daughters behind. When I arrived in Syria, I settled there.
“Some of the cavalry of the Messenger of Allah followed me and
took captives from Tayy’among whom was Hatim’s daughter,
who was brought to the Prophet. The Messenger of Allah was
aware of my flight to Syria. When he passed by Hatim’s
daughter, who was imprisoned along with the other captives in
an enclosure by the gate of the Mosque, she went to him, for she
was a courteous woman. She said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, my
father is dead and the one who should replace him has fled, so be
kind to me, may Allah be kind to you.’ He asked her about the
man who should look after her, and she told him it was Adiyy
Ibn Hatim. He said: ‘The one who has escaped from Allah and
His Messenger?’ Then he went out.
“The next day, they exchanged a similar conversation but on the
third day, she lost hope. A man behind him waved to her to talk
to him (again). She repeated the same words: ‘O Messenger of
Allah, my father is dead and the one who should replace him
hasfled, so be kind to me, may Allah be kind to you.’ He
answered: ‘I have done so, but do not be hasty in leaving until
you find a person from your own people whom you trust to take
you home, and then let me know.’ She asked about the name of
the man who had motioned to her to talk and was informed that
it was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. She remained there until a caravan
arrived from Baliy or Quda‘ah. All that she wished for was to
join her brother in Syria. When she went to inform Allah’s
Messenger that she had found a reliable, well-reputed man from
her people, he provided her with clothing and a mount and gave
her provisions. Then she left with them until she reached Syria.”
192

Adiyy further narrated: “While sitting in the midst of my people,
I saw a howdah coming toward us, so I exclaimed: ‘Hatim’s
daughter?’ and so it was. She came to me and started to blame
me saying: ‘You are irresponsible and unjust. You took away
your family and children and abandoned your father’s daughter.’
I said: ‘Do not say but good, little sister, for, by Allah, I have no
excuse, I am guilty of all that you have said.’ Then she
dismounted and stayed with me. She was a discerning woman so
I asked her about her opinion of this man. She said: ‘I think you
should join him immediately, for if the man is a Prophet, then he
will be bountiful to those who will come to him first, and if he is
a king, you will not be humiliated in the glory of Yemen,
especially with your high position.’
“I was convinced by her argument, so I set out to meet the
Messenger of Allah and I found him in his Mosque in Madinah.
I greeted him, and he asked: ‘Who is this?’ I introduced myself
and he got up to take me to his house. On our way, an old feeble
woman stopped him and they had a long discussion concerning
her needs. I said to myself: ‘By Allah, this is not a king.’ On
reaching his house, he took a leather cushion stuffed with palm
leaves and passed it to me saying: ‘Sit on this.’ I said: ‘Rather,
you sit on it.’
‘No, you sit,’ he insisted. So I sat on it while he sat on the ground.
I said to myself: ‘By Allah, this can never be the behavior of a
king.’ Then he said: ‘Adiyy Ibn Hatim, are you not a Rakoosi?’
I responded saying: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘Yet it is not allowed for you
in your religion.’ ‘Undoubtedly, by Allah,’ I said. Immediately,
I became convinced that he was a Prophet who has been truly
sent by Allah. He knew what was not generally known. Then he
said: ‘Perhaps what prevents you from entering this religion is
193

the indigence in which they are, but, by Allah, money will soon
flow so profusely among them that there will not be (enough)
people to take it. Perhaps what restrains you from embracing it
is that you see their enemy is great in number while they are few!
However, by Allah, you will soon hear that a woman will have
traveled on her camel from Al-Qadisiyyah to visit this House
(Ka‘bah) without fear. Perhaps what restrains you from
embracing it is that you see that the others have the dominion and
power, but, by Allah, you will soon hear that the white palaces
of Babylon will have been opened to them.’ Then I accepted
Islam.”
Adiyy said: “Two of the three prophecies of Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, have taken place and
the third will surely happen. I saw the white palaces of Babylon
laid open and I saw women unafraid of coming alone from
Qadisiyyah to make pilgrimage to this House. And, by Allah, the
third will happen when the money will flow until there will not
be enough people to take it.” This is how Ibn Ishaq, may Allah
have Mercy on him, quoted it in these words without a chain of
narrations. It has corroborations through other narrations.
Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Baihaqi related on the authority of Adiyy
Ibn Hatim who narrated: "While I was with the Prophet, a man
came and complained to him of destitution and poverty.
Thenanother man came and complained of robbery (by
highwaymen). The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: “Adiyy! Have you visited Al-Heerah?” I said: “I
have not been to it, but I was informed about it.” He said: “If you
should live long enough, you will certainly see that a lady in a
howdah traveling from Al-Heerah will (safely reach Makkah
and) perform the Tawaf of Ka‘bah, fearing none but Allah.” I
194

said to myself: “What will happen to the robbers of the tribe of
Tayy’ who have spread evil throughout the country?” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, further
said: “If you live long enough, the treasures of Kisra will be
opened (and taken as booty).” I asked: “You mean Kisra, the son
of Hurmuz?” He said: “Kisra, the son of Hurmuz; and if you
should live long enough, you will see that one will carry a
handful of gold or silver and go out looking for a person to accept
it from him, but will find none to accept it from him. Any of you,
when meeting Allah, will meet Him without needing an
interpreter between him and Allah, and Allah will say to him:
‘Did I not send a messenger to teach you?’ He will say: ‘Yes.’
Allah will say: ‘Did I not give you wealth and give you favors?’
He will say: ‘Yes.’ Then he will look to his right and see nothing
but Hell, and look to his left and see nothing but Hell.”
Adiyy further said: I heard the Prophet say, “Save yourself from
the (Hell) Fire even with half a date (to be given in charity) and
if you do not find a half date, then with a good pleasant word.”
Adiyy added: “ (Later on), I saw a lady in a howdah traveling
from Kufah till she performed the Tawaf of Ka‘bah, fearing none
but Allah. And I was one of those who opened (conquered) the
treasures of Kisra, son of Hurmuz. If you should live long, you
will see what Prophet Abul-Qasim had said.”

The Story of Daws and At-Tufail Ibn ‘Amr
On the authority of Abu Hurairah who narrated: At-Tufail Ibn
‘Amr came to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and said, “O Allah’s Messenger! The tribe of
Daws has disobeyed (Allah and His Messenger) and refused (to
embrace Islam), so invoke Allah’s wrath on them.” The people
195

thought that the Messenger would invoke Allah’s wrath on them,
but he said: “O Allah! Guide the tribe of Daws and bring them
(to us).” Al-Bukhari related it exclusively with these wordings
from Qais on the authority of Abu Hurairah who narrated: When
I was coming to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, I said on the way, “Oh what a long, tedious
and tiresome night; nevertheless, it has rescued me from the
place of heathenism.” A slave-boy of mine ran away. When I
reached the Prophet I gave him the oath of allegiance (for Islam),
and while I was sitting with him, suddenly the slave-boy
appeared. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said to me: “Abu Hurairah! Here is your slave.” I said: “He
is (free) for Allah’s sake,” and I manumitted him.
This is what Al-Bukhari related concerning the arrival of AtTufail Ibn ‘Amr which was probably before the Hijrah and if his
arrival occurred after the Hijrah, then it occurred before the
Conquest because the Daws arrived along with Abu Hurairah,
and Abu Hurairah’s arrival coincided with the time Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, besieging
Khaibar. Abu Hurairah set out until he came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, at Khaibar
after the Conquest and he gave to them some of the booty.

The Arrival of Al-Ash‘aris and the People of
Yemen
On the authority of Abu Hurairah who narrated that the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “There has come
to you the people from Yemen; they have tender heart and mild
feelings, faith is Yemeni, wisdom is Yemeni. Pride and
conceitedness is (found) among the uncivil owners of the camels.
196

Tranquility and calmness is (found) among the owners of goats
and sheep.” It is related by Muslim.
Al-Bukhari related on the authority of ‘Imran Ibn Husain who
narrated: A delegation from Banu Tameem came to the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and he said (to them):
“Accept the good tidings, Banu Tameem!” They said: “O Allah’s
Messenger! You have given us good tidings, so give us
(something else).” Signs of displeasure appeared on his face.
Then another delegation from Yemen came and he said (to
them): “Accept the good tidings; as Banu Tameem refuses to
accept them.” They replied: “We have accepted them, O Allah’s
Messenger!” At- Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’i have also related it.
All this points to the merit of the delegation of the people of
Yemen and there is no contradiction concerning the time of their
arrival and the arrival of Banu Tameem even though their arrival
was later; it does not suppose that their arrival coincided with
that of the Ash‘aris. Rather, the Ash‘aris preceded their
delegation, for they came in the company of Abu Moosa AlAsh‘ari, in the company of Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib, and his
companions among the Emigrants who were in Abyssinia. All of
that occurred at a time when Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be uponhim, was engaged in the Battle of
Khaibar.

The Story of Oman and Bahrain
On the authority of Jabir who narrated that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I will give you
this much (the Prophet pointed thrice with his hands) when the
funds of Bahrain will come to me.” But the Prophet, peace and
197

blessings of Allah be upon him, died before the money reached
him. (When it came) Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him,
ordered a Companion to announce that whoever had a money
claim on the Prophet or was promised to be given something,
should come to Abu Bakr. I went to Abu Bakr and told him that
the Prophet had promised to give me so much. On that, Abu Bakr
gave me three handfuls (of money).” Another time he said: “I
came to Abu Bakr and I asked him, but he did not give me, then
I asked him once again but he did not give me. I came back to
him for the third time and said to him: ‘I asked you (the first time)
but you did not give me. I came again and asked you but you still
did not give me. Now I ask you (a third time) and yet you still do
not give me. So you should either give me or else you are miserly
to me.’ On that, Abu Bakr said: ‘Do you say that I am miserly?
There is no worse disease than miserliness.’ Abu Bakr added:
‘Whenever I had refused to give you, I had the intention of giving
you'.” (In another narration) Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah said: “ (I went
to Abu Bakr) and he gave me a handful of money and told me to
count it, I counted and found it five hundred, and then Abu Bakr
said (to me): ‘Take the same amount twice more'.”

The Arrival of Farwah Ibn Musaik Al-Muradi
Ibn Ishaq related that Farwah Ibn Musaik Al-Muradi went to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
leaving the kings of Kindah. Just before the advent of Islam, a
battle called Ar-Radm had taken place between Murad and
Hamdan in which Murad lost many of its men. The leader of
Hamdan in the battle was Al-Ajda’ Ibn Malik.
Ibn Ishaq added that when Farwah headed toward Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
198

abandoning the kings of Kindah he said: “When I saw the kings
of Kindah appearing like the infracted limb, with my camel, I
approached, betaking myself to Muhammad in quest of his
generosity and fortune.”
When Farwah came to the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, he asked him: “Farwah, are you
distressed at what had happened to your people at the Battle of
Ar-Radm?” He replied: “Allah’s Messenger, who would not feel
upset when his people suffer a similar defeat as the one my
people suffered?” The Messenger of Allah said: “Nevertheless,
in Islam, your people will not record an increase except in
goodness.” Then he appointed him over all of Murad, Zubaid and
Madhhij and sent with him Khalid Ibn Sa’eed Ibn Al-‘As to
collect the alms. Khalid remained with him until the death of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.

The Arrival of ‘Amr Ibn Ma‘deekarib Among
a Group From Zubaid
When the news of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
ofAllah be upon him, reached him, ‘Amr Ibn Ma‘deekarib said
to Qais Ibn Makshooh AlMuradi: “O Qais, you are the leader of
your people. It has reached us that a man from Quraish named
Muhammad from the Hejaz claims to be a Prophet, so take us to
him in order to find out the truth. If he is truly a Prophet as he
claims, you can know and then we will follow him. In case he is
not, then we will know.” Qais declined his proposal and
castigated his opinion. Thereupon, ‘Amr headed for the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
and embraced Islam, acknowledged his truthfulness and believed
in Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
199

When Qais Ibn Makshooh heard this, he got angry and threatened
‘Amr. He said: “You opposed me and went against my order and
opinion!”
Ibn Ishaq added that ‘Amr remained with his people from Banu
Zubaid while Farwah Ibn Musaik ruled them. When Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, died,
‘Amr Ibn Ma‘deekarib apostatized along with others and
lampooned Farwah Ibn Musaik saying:
We found the reign of Fawah a worse one
(like) an ass whose nostril has been destroyed by perforation
Whenever you saw Aba Umair
You would have seen the placenta of slyness and treachery
I say: He later returned to Islam and became a good Muslim. He
participated in numerous conquests, many of them during the
reigns of As-Siddiq (Abu Bakr) and ‘Umar Al-Farooq, may
Allah be pleased with them both. He was one of those whose
bravery was notable and one of the popular heroes and one of the
most skillful poets. He died in 21 A.H. after he had witnessed the
Battle of Nahawand. It is also claimed that he witnessed the
Battle of Qadisiyyah in which he was killed.
Abu ‘Amr Ibn Abd Barr said: His deputation to the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, took place in
the 9th year (of Hijrah) and some said in the 10th year based on
what was mentioned by Ibn Ishaq and AlWaqidi. There is an
indication of that too in the statement of Ash-Shafi‘i. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
200

The Arrival of Ash‘ath Ibn Qais Among the
Delegation of Kindah
Ibn Ishaq related that Ash‘ath Ibn Qais came to the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, among the
delegation of Kindah. AzZuhri informed me that he was one of
80 riders from Kindah. They met Allah’s Messenger in the
Mosque. They had combed their hair and lined their eyelids with
kohl. They were dressed in striped Yemeni garments hemmed
with silk. When they met the Prophet, he asked them: “Have you
accepted Islam?” They replied in the affirmative and the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
further asked: “So why do have this silk on your necks?”
Immediately, they tore it and threw it away. Then Ash‘ath Ibn
Qais said to him: “O Allah’s Messenger, we are children of the
eaters of bitter herbs just like you are.” The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, smiled and said: “This
is related to ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib and Rabee‘ah Ibn
Harith. They were both merchants and whenever they moved
around among the Arabs they would be asked: ‘From where are
you?’ They would reply: ‘We are children of the eaters of bitter
herbs’ that is attributing themselves to Kindah so that they may
be loved in that land for Kindah. I believed the Quraish were
from them because of the saying of ‘Abbas and Rabee‘ah. And
that was Al-Harith Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Hujr Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Mu‘awiyah
Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Mu‘awiyahIbn Thawr Ibn Murti’ Ibn
Mu‘awiyah Ibn Kindi and he was called Ibn Kindah.” Then
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said to them: “We are children of An-Nadr Ibn Kinanah. We do
not follow our maternal lineage denying our father’s.” Then
Ash‘ath Ibn Qais said to them: “Have you finished, people of

201

Kindah? By Allah, if I hear a man say it again, I will give him 80
strokes.”
This Hadith has been related in a connected form through another
chain on the authority of Ash‘ath Ibn Qais who narrated: I came
to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
among the delegation of Kindah and he asked me: “Do you have
any child?” I said: “ (Yes) only a son was delievered to me from
one of the daughter of Jamd on my departure to you even though
I would have preferred a large quantity that would satisfy the
people.” He said: “Do not say that for in them is a coolness of
the eyes and reward if they die. If you were to say that they are
source of sorrow then they will eventually turn out to be one.”
Ahmad related this exclusively and it is a hasan Hadith with a
good chain of narrators.

The Arrival of A‘sha of Banu Mazin
‘Abdullah Ibn Imam Ahmad related from his father that a person
from Banu Mazin named Al-A‘sha, whose real name was
‘Abdullah Ibn Al-A‘war, had a wife named Mu’adhah. He went
on a journey leaving his wife (behind). After Al-A‘sha had left,
his wife eloped with another man called Mutarrif Ibn Nahshal
Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Qumaithi’ Ibn Dhulaf Ibn Ahdam Ibn ‘Abdullah
Ibn AlHirmaz. When he came back and did not find his wife at
home, he was told that she had eloped with Mutarrif. A‘sha went
to him and said: “My cousin, is my wife Mu’adhah with you? If
she is, please return her to me.” He replied: “She is not with me.
Even if she was, I would not return her to you.” Mutarrif was
stronger than him so he left and came to the Prophet to seek his
protection. Then he began to say:

202

O leader of men and the judge of the Arabs
To you I complain concerning a licentious (woman)
Like a female ash-colored wolf in the shadow of a herd
I went out seeking for her food in Rajab
She repaid me with discord and abscondment
She reneged on her promise clinging on to the sin
She maligned me during a mixed epoch
They (women) are the worst conquerors for the one who has
been conquered
At this point, the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, also said: “They (women) are the worst conquerors for the
one who has been conquered.” He then complained about his
wife, her treatment of him, and that she was with a man from his
tribe named Mutarrif Ibn Nahshal. The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, wrote a letter to Mutarrif saying:
“Check this man’s wife, Mu’adhah, and restore her to him.”
A‘sha brought the Prophet’s letter and read it to him. Upon
receiving the Prophet’s letter, Mutarrif said to the woman:
“Mu’adhah, here is the Prophet’s letter concerning you so I am
restoring you back to him.” She said: “Take from him, on my
behalf, a promise, a covenant and the immunity of his Prophet
that he will not punish me for what I have done.” Mutarrif did so
and then returned her to him.

203

The Arrival of Surad Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Azdi
and Then the Deputation of Ahl Jurash
Ibn Ishaq related that Surad Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Azdi came to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
among the delegation from Al-Azd. He accepted Islam and
turned out to be a good Muslim. The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, appointed him as the leader
of the Muslims among his people and commanded him to fight
the neighboring polytheists from the tribes of Yemen. To comply
with the Prophet’s order, Surad marched out and besieged Jurash
in which were some Yemeni tribes along with Khath‘am, who
had also joined them to seek refuge when he heard of the
approaching Muslim army. Surad besieged them for close to a
month without gaining access to the fort. Consequently, he
retreated as far as a moutain known as Shakar. The people of
Jurash thought that he had retreated from them in defeat so they
went in pursuit. Surad turned on them and killed them in large
numbers.
Meanwhile, the people of Jurash had sent two of their men to the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
in Madinah. They stayed with the Prophet until after the ‘Asr
prayer. He asked them: “Which part of Allah’s land is Shakar
located?” The two emmisaries got up and said: “Messenger of
Allah, there is a mountain in our land known as Kashar.” So it
was called by the people of Jurash. The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “It is not Kashar; rather, it
is Shakar.” They asked: “Then what is happening to it now?” The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, replied:
“Sacrificial camels of Allah are being slaughtered by it right
now.”
204

The two men sat close to Abu Bakr or ‘Uthman, who said: “Woe
to you! Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, has just announced to you the defeat of your people, so get
up and ask him to supplicate to Allah to save them.” They did as
they were told and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, supplicated: “O Allah lift from them (their
defeat).” Afterward, they returned home and found that their
people were beaten at the same time the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, informed them of the
incident. Subsequently, the delegates of the Jurash came with the
remaining people of their town to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and accepted Islam and became
good Muslims. He delineated for them a special sanctuary around
their town.

The Arrival of the Envoy of the King of
Himyar
Al-Waqidi said: That occurred in Ramadan of the 9th year.
On his return from the expedition of Tabook, an envoy brought a
letter to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, from the kings of Himyar announcing their conversion
to Islam. The kings were: Al-Harith Ibn Abd Kulal, Nu‘aim Ibn
Abd Kulal and Nu‘man, the chieftain of Dhu Ru‘ain, Ma‘afir and
Hamdan. Zur‘ah Dhu Yazan dispatched Malik Ibn Murrah ArRahawiyy with a message declaring their acceptance of Islam
and their estrangement from polytheism and polytheists. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
sent them the following letter in response:

205

“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. (Thisis a
letter) from Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, the Prophet, to
Al-Harith Ibn Abd Kulal, Nu‘aim Ibn Abd Kulal and Nu‘man,
the chieftain of Dhu Ru‘ain, Ma‘afir and Hamdan. I praise Allah
beside Whom there is no god. Your envoy came to us as we were
coming back from the Roman land. On meeting us in Madinah,
he conveyed to us your letter informing us of your acceptance of
Islam and your killing of the polytheists. Surely, Allah has
guided you with His Guidance as long as you work with
righteousness, obey Allah and His Messenger, perform prayers,
pay Zakah and give out from war booty one-fifth for Allah, the
share of the Prophet as well as what he selects for himself (from
the booty).

"The obligatory alms on the believers are (to be given out as
follows): from the land, a tithe of what is watered by wells and
rain, and half of a tithe of what is watered by buckets; a young
she-camel is to be given out for every forty camels; a young male
camel for every thirty camels; a sheep for every five camels; two
sheep for every ten camels; a cow for every forty cows; a young
bull which has completed one or two years of age, or a young
cow, which completed two years of age; and a sheep for every
forty sheep at pasture. This is what Allah has obligated on the
believers concerning alms. He who gives more (than this out of
his own) goodness, it is good for him, and he who performs this,
declares his (acceptance of) Islam; and whoever supports the
believers against the polytheists is one of the believers; he shares
with them the same rights and obligations and he has a guarantee
of protection from Allah and His Messenger.

206

"If a Jew or Christian accepts Islam, then he belongs to the (fold
of the) Muslims. He shares with them the same rights and
obligations. He who persists upon his religion, whether Judaism
or Christianity, not converting (to Islam), shall not be compelled
to abandon it but must pay the Jizyah: for every adult, male or
female, free or slave, one full Dinar calculated on the valuation
of Ma‘afir or its equivalent in clothes. He who pays that to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
shall have a guarantee of protection from Allah and His
Messenger.
"The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, Muhammad, has sent to Zur‘ah Dhu Yazan: When my
envoys arrive to you, I command them to your good offices.
These are Mu’adh Ibn Jabal, ‘Abdullah Ibn Zaid, Malik Ibn
Ubadah, Uqbah Ibn Namir and Malik Ibn Murrah and their
companions. Collect the Zakah and Jizyah that is due from your
territories and deliver them to my envoys whose leader is Mu’adh
Ibn Jabal, and let him not return unless he is satisfied.
"Muhammad testifies that there is no god but Allah and that he is
His slave and His Messenger. Malik Ibn Murrah Ar- Rahawi has
recounted to me that you were from among the first Himyar to
accept Islam and have slain the polytheists, so be happy. I order
you to treat Himyar well, and not to betray or forsake one
another, for the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, is the patron of both your poor and rich. The alms
are not lawful to Muhammad or his household, they are a Zakah
which is to be given to the poor Muslims and the wayfarers.
"Malik has also delivered the news and preserved what is
confidential and I command you to treat him well. I have
207

dispatched to you some of the best people, both in religion and
in knowledge, and I order you to treat them well, for they must
be respected. Peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be on you.”

The Arrival of Jareer Ibn ‘Abdullah Al- Bajali
and His Acceptance of Islam
Imam Ahmad related from Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shibl who
narrated that Jareer said: "When I came near Madinah, I tethered
my camel and made it kneel down, unpacked by leather bag and
I put on my clothes. Afterward, I entered the Mosque where
theMessenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, was addressing the people. The people cast their gaze upon
me, so I asked the person next to me: “Did Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, mention anything
about me?” The man said: “Yes, he mentioned about you in the
best form of description; while he was delivering his sermon, he
said: ‘Verily, the best of the people of Yemen will enter upon
you through this opening and on his face will be the radiance of
an angel'.” Thereupon, I praised Allah. Abu Qatan said: Then I
said to him: “Did you hear this from him or from Mugheerah Ibn
Shibl?” He said: “Yes.”
When he accepted Islam the Prophet dispatched him to DhulKhalasah (the idol-house) which was venerated by Khath’am and
Bajeelah. They referred to it as the Ka‘bah of Yemen. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said to him: “Will you not relieve me of Dhul-Khalasah?”
Thereupon, he complained to the Prophet of his inability to sit
firmly on a horse. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, stroked him on the chest with his noble hand

208

in such a way that it left a mark, and he supplicated: “O Allah!
Make him firm and make him a guiding and rightlyguided man.”
Subsequently, he never fell from the back of a horse.
Heproceeded with one hundred and fifty cavalry men from his
tribe, Ahmas, and they demolished and razed that idol-house in
such a way that it remained like a mangy camel. Then he sent a
bearer for the good news, who was known as Abu Artat. He gave
the Prophet the news of their accomplishment. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, prayed for
Allah’s blessings on the horses and men of Ahmas five times.
The Hadith is related extensively in the Saheehain and other
places.
Apparently, Jareer’s acceptance of Islam occurred much later
after the Conquest. On the authority of Jareer Ibn ‘Abdullah AlBajali who narrated: “I accepted Islam after Soorah Al-Ma’idah
had been revealed. I saw Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, wipe (his feet) after I had accepted Islam.”
Ahmad related exclusively with a good chain albeit it is broken
between Mujahid and himself.

The Arrival of Wa’il Ibn Hujr Ibn Rabee‘ah
Ibn Wa’il Ibn Ya‘mar Al-Hadrami, Abu
Hunaid and One of the Yemeni Kings
Abu ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul Barr related that he was one of the
chieftains of Hadramawt and his father was their king. It is also
said that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, gave the tidings of his coming to his Companions even
before his arrival. He said: “The remaining children of kings will
(soon) come to you.” When he eventually arrived, Allah’s
209

Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, welcomed
and drew him close to himself. He brought his seat close to him
and spread his garment for him and he supplicated: “Allah bless
Wa’il, his children and grandchildren.”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
appointed him the head of all the chieftains of Hadramawt and
wrote three documents for him. One to Al-Muhajir Ibn Abu
Umayyah and the other two to the chieftains and Al-Abahilah.
He earmarked for him a portion of land and sent along with him
Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan. He set out in his company but soon
complained to him of the scorching heat (of the desert). Wa’il
said to him: “Travel in the shade of the camel.” He said: “What
use would that be for me? Perhaps you should let me ride behind
you.” Wa’il snapped at him: “Keep quiet! I am not from the kings
that tolerate co-riders.”
Wa’il Ibn Hujr lived until he visited Mu‘awiyah while he was the
chief of Muslims. Mu‘awiyah recognized him and welcomed
him warmly. He also drew him close to himself and he reminded
him of the Hadith. He also awarded him two years bonus but
Wa’il declined and said: “Give it to someone who is more in need
of it than me.” Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi related it in part and he
indicated that al-Bukhari related some of it in his book of history.

The Arrival of Laqeet Ibn Amir Ibn AlMuntafiq, Abu Razeen Al-Uqaili
On the authority of ‘Asim Ibn Laqeet who narrated that Laqeet
went as a delegate to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, along with a companion of his known as
Naheek Ibn ‘Asim Ibn Malik Ibn AlMuntafiq. Laqeet said: “I set
210

out along with my companion until we came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, toward
the end of Rajab, and met him when he had just concluded the
early morning prayer.”

The Deputation of Ziyad Ibn Al-Harith AsSuda‘i
On the authority of Ziyad Ibn Al-Harith As-Suda‘i who narrated:
"I came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and I gave him the pledge of Islam. I informed him
that he had dispatched an army to fight my people so I said to
him: 'Allah’s Messenger, bring back the army and I give you the
promise of my people’s aceptance of Islam and their obedience.'
So he said to me: 'Go and bring them back.' I said: 'O Messenger
of Allah, my camel is exhausted.' Then Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, dispatched someone to bring
them back. As-Suda‘i added: 'I sent a letter (to my people) and
their delegation came to declare their acceptance of Islam.'
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,