death – then brought back to al-Madinah and put in prison. At
that point, Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab said: “By Allah! Had I
known that you were not going to kill me, I would never have
worn these clothes of straw! ”
Our noble Shaykh adh-Dhahabi says: “Aban bin ‘Uthman bin
‘Affan, the Ameer of al-Madinah and one of the ten jurists of
the city, died during this year. ”
Among the other notable people who died during this year
were : ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amir bin Rabee‘ah, ‘Amr bin Huraith
and ‘Amr bin Salimahdied this year.
Wathilah bin al-Asqa‘, who according to al-Waqidi was
Yahya bin Ma‘een who lived during the time of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and embraced
Islam when the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was assembling his army for the Battle of Tabook,
also died in this year. It is said that he participated in the
conquest of Damascus where he later stayed and where he
also owned a mosque located within the Bab us-Sagheer. His
357

Masjid was later burnt down during the period of the
Tamarlank (Tamerlane) upheaval, until nothing remained of
it other than sketches in which the waterway running from its
eastern doorway can be seen.
Khalid bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah bin Abi Sufyan Sakhr bin
Harb bin Umayyah had a reputation for being the most
knowledgeable in the sciences amongst the Quraish. He was
an influential figure in the field of medicine and an authority
on the subject of chemistry. One day, he entered upon ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan who was in the presence of al-Hakam bin
Abul-‘As and complained to him that ‘AbdulMalik’s son, alWaleed, was demeaning his brother, ‘Abdullah bin Yazeed.
‘Abdul-Malik therefore said to him (what means): “Verily,
kings, when they enter a town (country), they spoil it and
make the most honourable of its people the lowest. ” [anNaml, 27:34]
In response to that, Khalid quoted the Verse (which means):
“And when We decide to destroy a town (population), We
(first) send a definite order (to obey Allah and be righteous)
to those among them [or We (first) increase in number those
of its population] who lead a life of luxury. Then they
transgress therein, and thus the word (of torment) is
justified against them. Then we destroy it with complete
destruction. ” [al-Isra’, 17: 16]
‘Abdul-Malik therefore exclaimed: “By Allah! If your
brother, ‘Abdullah, entered upon me, he would not be able
speak properly (with correct Arabic grammar). ” At this,
Khalid retorted: “Al-Waleed does not know how to speak
correctly. ” To that ‘Abdul-Malik said: “It is his brother,
Sulaiman, who does not speak intelligibly”, whereupon
Khalid said: “Because I am the brother of ‘Abdullah, I do not
speak properly. ” At that point, al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik
(who was also present) said to Khalid bin Yazeed: “Be quiet,
358

for by Allah, you belong to neither here nor there (i. e. you
are insignificant; unimportant) ! ”Khalid replied: “Listen, O
Ameerul-Mu’mineen! ” and at that point he drew near to alWaleed and said: “Woe unto you! What is neither here nor
there other than my grandfather, Abu Sufyan, the father of all
here, and my grandfather, ‘Utbah bin Rabee‘ah, the father of
all there! However, had you spoken of ‘spoils of war’,
‘bonds’, ‘at-Ta’if’, or for example, had said, ‘may mercy be
on ‘Uthman’, then we would have said that you have spoken
the truth. ” (He meant that al-Hakam was an exile from atTa’if, he tended to the spoils of war and he betook himself to
nobles such that ‘Uthman accommodated him when he came
to power). ” Upon hearing this, al-Waleed and his father could
not come up with a suitable rejoinder and were left speechless
– Allah, the Sublime, knows best.

Upon Entering the Eighty-Sixth Year
This was the year in which Qutaibah bin Muslim, al-Hajjaj’s
deputy, undertook a military expedition against Marw (Merv),
Khurasan and many lands within the Turk and Kuffar (nonMuslims; disbelievers) dominions. In the course of this
expedition, he took many people captive, gained considerable
war booty and seized the citadels, fortresses and properties,
and then returned home as his army preceded him. AlHajjaj
subsequently wrote to him, rebuking him for that, saying: “If
you are heading towards the land of the enemy then station
yourself at the forefront of the army, and if you are returning
home then be positioned at their rear, meaning that it is your
responsibility to shield them from being harmed by the enemy
or anyone scheming against them. ”This is a sound opinion
derived from the Sunnah.
During this year, the plague struck ash-Sham (the Levant) and
the cities of al-Basrah and Wasit. It later became known as alFatayat, meaning: “young women”, as it first affected the
women.
359

Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik invaded the land of ar-Room
wherein he fought, killed and captured its people, gained war
booty and handed it over. He then conquered the fortresses at
Walaq and al-Akhram in the land of ar-Room.
‘Abdul-Malik entrusted leadership over Egypt to his son,
‘Abdullah, following the death of his brother, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez.
‘Abdullah then entered it during the month of JumadalAkhirah at the age of twentyseven.
King al-Akhram of ar-Room died during this year in Wara.
Al-Hajjaj imprisoned Yazeed bin al-Muhallab and the Hajj
Pilgrimage was led by Hisham bin Isma‘eel al-Makhzoomi.
This year also witnessed the deaths of Abu Umamah Sudayy
bin ‘Ajlan al-Bahili, ‘Abdullah bin Abu Awfa and ‘Abdullah
bin al-Harith bin Jaz’ az-Zubaidi.
In mid-Shawwal, the Ameerul-Mu’mineen also passed away.

‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, the Father of the
Khulafa’al-Umawiyyeen (Umayyad
Caliphate)
His name was ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan bin al-Hakam bin
Abul-‘As bin Umayyah, Abul-Waleed alUmawi, the
Ameerul-Mu’mineen. His mother was ‘A’ishah bint
Mu‘awiyah bin al-Mugheerah bin Abul‘As bin Umayyah.
Ibn Abu Khaithamah said on the authority of Mus‘ab bin azZubair that he was the first person in Islam to be named
‘Abdul-Malik. He also goes on to say that the first person to
be named Ahmad in Islam was the father of al-Khaleel bin
Ahmad al-‘Aroodi.
360

‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan inherited the caliphate in the sixtyfifth year of the Hijrah during his father’s lifetime, which
coincided with the caliphate of Ibn az-Zubair who held it
simultaneously. ‘Abdul-Malik therefore asserted his authority
over ash-Sham (the Levant) and Egypt for a period of seven
years during which time Ibn az-Zubair was recognised as the
Khaleefah throughout the rest of the Muslim world. ‘AbdulMalik then secured the caliphate for himself within the rest of
the countries and provinces following Ibn az-Zubair’s murder
in the seventy-third year that lasted up until this year, as we
shall come to mention.
In accounts that give a description of him, ‘Abdul-Malik is
said to have had gold-plated teeth that were so widely spaced
that a fly could pass through them if his mouth was open, for
which reason he was nicknamed Abudh-Dhibban. He was
white skinned, of medium build and he was neither thin nor
broad in structure. His eyebrows were joined and he had big
black eyes that had a tint of blue in them. His nose was slim,
his face was radiant and handsome, and the hair on his head
and in his beard was white, which he had never dyed
(although it is said that he dyed it later on).
Al-A‘mash said on the authority of Abuz-Zinad: “There were
four Fuqaha’ (jurists) of al-Madinah:Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab,
‘Urwah and Qabeesah bin Dhu’aib and ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan prior to his coming to power. ”
Ash-Sha‘bi said: “I never sat in the company of anyone where
I was not given more credit, except for ‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan. I never quoted a Hadeeth to him without him adding
embellishments from his own knowledge, nor could I recite
poetry to him without him doing the same. ”
Ath-Tha‘lab said on the authority of Ibnul-A‘rabi that when
‘Abdul-Malik succeeded to the caliphate, he had a Mus-haf
361

(Arabic Qur’an manuscript) in his room, which he then closed
shut and said: “This is farewell between you and I. ”
‘Abdul-Malik was audacious in the face of bloodshed, his
associates were selected from his own Mathhab (school of
Islamic jurisprudence; denomination), amongst whom was alHajjaj, al-Muhallab and others. He was astute, insightful and
judicious. He was concerned with the politics of this world
and he would not entrust his own worldy affairs to anyone
other than himself. His mother was ‘A’ishah bint Mu‘awiyah
bin al-Mugheerah bin Abul-‘As whose father, Mu‘awiyah, cut
off the nose of Hamzah, the paternal uncle of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on the day of
Uhud.
Ibn Juraij narrates that his father said: “‘Abdul-Malik bin
Marwan led the Hajj Pilgrimage for us in the seventy-fifth
year, two years after the death of Ibn az-Zubair. He delivered
a sermon to us whilst on the Pilgrimage in which he said: ‘To
proceed:There were those caliphs before me who would
devour money and be devoured by it. By Allah! I do not treat
the illnesses of this Ummah except with the sword, for my
caliphate will not be deemed weak (referring to ‘Uthman), nor
hypocritical (referring to Mu‘awiyah), nor defective
(referring to Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah). O people! We will
endure all your pains and needs except for initiating
partisanship or ambushing the pulpit. ’”
Az-Zuhri says: “I heard ‘Abdul-Malik say in his sermon:
‘Knowledge will soon be suppressed, therefore let every man
who possesses it make it manifest without him being seized
or shunned. ’”
Al-A‘mash says: “Muhammad bin az-Zubair informed me
that Anas bin Malik wrote to ‘Abdul-Malik complaining
about al-Hajjaj, whereupon he said in his letter: ‘If a man had
served ‘Eesa (Jesus) for just one night, or if he had served him
362

at all, the Nasara (followers of Christ) would know who he
was and he would stay with them. Similarly, if a man had
served Moosa (Moses) or even if he had just seen him, the
Yahood (followers of Moses) would know who he was and he
would be mentioned amongst them. Verily, I am a servant of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and his Companion, and al-Hajjaj has harmed me by
doing what he did to me and by saying: ‘Tell me who has ever
witnessed ‘Abdul-Malik crying whilst reading the Book of
Allah! ’ He has brought anger upon himself, if Allah wills it
so. ” He then wrote a strongly worded letter to al-Hajjaj that
caused al-Hajjaj’s face to change upon reading it. He then said
to the messenger: ‘Leave, and go to him so that we might
please him. ’”
It was said to ‘Abdul-Malik: “What makes the best of men?”
He replied: “He who is humble on the basis of his high
standing, he who becomes an ascetic on the basis of his ability
and he who abandons assistance on the basis of his strength.
”
Al-Mada’ini says: “‘Abdul-Malik once said to his children’s
tutor, Isma‘eel bin ‘Ubaidullah bin AbulMuhajir: ‘Teach
them honesty just as you teach them the Qur’an. Deter them
from obscene people, as it is they who lack piety and manners
the most. Keep them away from the servants, as they are
corruptive. Compose their emotions, toughen their necks,
feed them meat that will strengthen them, and teach them
poetry so that they may be able to praise and felicitate.
Discipline them to sip water and not to gulp it down and fill
their stomachs with it. Should the need arise, give it to them
and have them do it with the right etiquette and in secret so
that it is not made known to those less fortunate or those who
are deceitful, who may feel contempt towards them. ”
Abu Bakr bin Abud- Dunya said: “According to al-Husain bin
‘Abdur-Rahman, it was said to Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab that
363

‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan said: ‘I have resolved to neither
rejoice over good deeds nor to feel saddened by the
perpetration of a sin or crime. ’”At this Sa‘eed remarked:
“The death of his heart is now absolute. ”
Al-Asma‘i is reported to have said on the authority of his
father that he said: “‘Abdul-Malik was delivering a powerful
and deeply-moving sermon one day when all of a sudden he
interrupted his speech and began to cry hysterically. He then
said: ‘O Allah! My sins are great, though even if You pardon
them just a little, that would be greater than they are. O Allah!
Wipe away the greatness of my sins by pardoning me just a
little! ”It is said that when al-Hasan heard that he had said
that, he also began to cry and said: “If words were to be
written in gold, this would have been written down! ”Others
have similarly narrated this tradition.
It is said that when he was dying, his son, al-Waleed, entered
upon him and started to cry and so ‘AbdulMalik said to him:
“What is this?Do you pity the servants and the Ummah?When
I die, prepare yourself, put on your garments, wear the fur of
a tiger, rectify matters in keeping with its equals and be wary
of the Quraish. ” He then said to him: “O Waleed! Fear Allah
in that which is appointed to you in succession and carry out
my will. Turn to my brother, Mu‘awiyah, and maintain the
bonds of kinship with him, turn to my brother, Muhammad,
and appoint him permanently over al-Jazeerah without
dismissing him, and turn to the son of our uncle, ‘Ali bin
‘Abbas, who imparted his love and advice to us and who
shares our lineage and rights. Therefore, maintain the bonds
of kinship with him and observe the fulfilment of his rights.
With respect to al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf, respect and honour him
as it was he who put the country in order for you, triumphed
over the enemy, consolidated the kingdom and dissolved the
unity of the Khawarij (Dissenters). Refrain from breaking
away from your brothers by being the sons of one mother and
364

by being free men during war, so that you may become
famous, as war does not reveal the fate of death before its
time. The one who is known is celebrated by his comrades
until the hearts are favourably disposed towards him and
tongues utter beautiful things about him. ”
Abu Mus-hir says: “It was said to ‘Abdul-Malik when he was
on his death bed: ‘How do you feel?’He replied: ‘I find myself
as Allah, the Sublime, says (what means):
“And truly, you have come to Us alone (without wealth,
companions or anything else) as We created you the first time.
You have left behind you all that which We had bestowed on
you. ’” [al-An‘am, 6:94]
His son, al-Waleed, offered the prayer at his funeral and
following this, he assumed the caliphate. According to
Ma‘shar, ‘Abdul-Malik was aged sixty when he died, which
is further verified by al-Waqidi. On the other hand, alMada’ini and others maintain that he was aged sixty-three,
whilst some have said he was aged eighty-five. He was buried
at the site of the Bab ul-Jabiyat is- Sagheer graveyard.

Some accounts mention that the following
people might have also died in this year:
Arta’t bin Zufar bin ‘Abdullah bin Malik bin Shaddad bin
Damrah who lived to be more than a hundred and thirty years.
He was a pious and praiseworthy noble, as well as an
acclaimed poet.
Yoonus bin ‘Atiyyah al-Hadrami, the chief judge of Egypt.
Mutarrif bin ‘Abdullah bin ash-Shikhkheer, a companion of
‘Imran bin Husain and a senior Tabi‘i (the second and third
generation following the Companions) is said to have died
this year. He would tell the people: “If there is something that
365

you need from me then do not come to me about it for I hate
to see the look of humiliation on your face, rather write it
down on a piece of paper and send it to me. ” He would also
say: “This thing called death spoils the grace of the people of
favour, therefore seek the immortal favour. ”
Mutarrif had also dug himself a grave in his house, which he
would lie in at some point every day and wherein he would
spend time praying and reading the Qur’an to remind himself
of death. He died in alBasrah and held a great status with the
caliphs, kings and leaders.

The Khilafah of al-Waleed bin ‘AbdulMalik, the Founder of the Damascus
Mosque
Upon returning from buryng his father outside of the Bab ulJabiyat is-Sagheer, which took place on either a Thursday or
Friday during mid-Shawwal of this year (i. e. the eighty-sixth
year), al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik did not enter his house
without first ascending the pulpit of the Masjidul-A‘zam (the
Greatest Mosque) in Damascus and delivering a sermon to the
people. As part of that speech, he said : “Verily, to Allah we
belong and to Him we shall return and we seek His help
concerning our tragedy with the Ameerul-Mu’mineen. Praise
belongs to Allah for this favour of the caliphate that He has
bestowed upon us, therefore rise and pledge your allegiance.
” The first to stand up was ‘Abdullah bin Hammam asSalooli
who said:
“Allah has granted you that which has no superior
Which atheists wanted to obstruct.
366

But Allah wanted it for you
So that you may be adorned with its ring (i. e. invested with
authority). ”
He then pledged his allegiance and the people followed his
lead.
He was disciplined, abstinent and his outlook was so prudent
that it was said he was never really acquainted with his
boyhood or youth. One outstanding saying out of his many
good qualities and traits is: “If Allah had not related to us the
story of the nation of Loot in His Book, we would not know
that man had been with man as he is with women. ”

Upon Entering the Eighty-Seventh Year
Al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Hisham bin Isma‘eel
from office in al-Madinah and appointed ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez, the son of his paternal uncle and husband of his sister,
Fatimah bint ‘AbdulMalik. It is said that ‘Umar – he was aged
twenty-five at this time – entered the city with thirty camels
during the month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal, disembarked at the
house of Marwan and the people came to acknowledge his
ascension to power there. He then offered the Dhuhr (noon)
prayer and summoned alMadinah’s ten jurists, namely:
‘Urwah bin az-Zubair, ‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Utbah,
Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Harith bin Hisham, Abu
Bakr bin Sulaiman bin Abu Khaithamah, Sulaiman bin Yasar,
al-Qasim bin Muhammad, Salim bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar,
his brother, ‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, ‘Abdullah
bin ‘Amir bin Rabee‘ah and Kharijah bin Zaid bin Thabit.
As they entered upon him, they sat down and then praised and
glorified Allah, whereafter he said: “Indeed, I called on you
for your contribution concerning my affairs and so that you
might be facilitators to the truth. I certainly do not want to
367

decide in favour of a matter without having consulted you
first, therefore if you see someone trespass or should you be
informed that one of my delegates has carried out some
misdeed, I urge whoever informs you of that to tell no one
other than me. ” After saying that, they left his presence
feeling satisfied with him and then went their separate ways.
During this year, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik invaded the
land of ar-Room where he killed hundreds of people,
conquered many of its citadels and fortresses, and gained a
great deal of war booty.
Qutaibah invaded Beekand where a considerable number of
Turks, specifically the inhabitants of Bukhara (capital
province of Uzbekistan), joined in association with him. As
he disembarked in their land, they appealed to him for help
over the people of as-Sughd (Soghdiana; a province of the
Archaemenid Persian Empire) and the surrounding Turks. In
view of this, Qutaibah decided to advance against the people
of asSughd with an enormous army, which caused them to
block off all passes and roads. Subsequently, both sides met
in battle for a period of two months during which Qutaibah
was unable to send a messenger out to them, whilst no
messenger came to them from the opposing side either.
Consequently, al-Hajjaj did not receive word from Qutaibah,
and he began to fear for him and the Muslims amidst their
many enemies among the Turks. In response to this situation,
the Muslims were urged in the mosques across all major cities
of the Muslim world to make Du‘a’ (supplication) for their
safety and wellbeing.
In the meantime, Qutaibah and the Muslim army engaged in
battle against the Turks on a daily basis. Qutaibah had been
acquainted with an important fugure among the non-‘Arabs
by the name of Tandar who he appointed over the people of
Bukhara, who subsequently bribed him with a generous
amount of money to approach Qutaibah on some matter.
368

Annoyed by this, Qutaibah decided to forsake the people and
so Tandar went to him and said: “Forsake me instead”, which
he did, leaving Qutaibah with nobody other a man by the
name of Dirar bin Husain. Tandar then said to Qutaibah: “This
agent comes to you in haste in pursuit of al-Hajjaj’s
dismissal”, at which point Qutaibah said to his guard: “Chop
off his head! ”, and thus, he was executed.
Following this ordeal, Qutaibah asserted to Dirar: “Nobody
will ever know of this apart from you and I, and I vow to Allah
that until our war is over, I will stick by you through thick and
thin; therefore refrain from saying anything about this, as by
allowing news of this to spread, the people will become
discouraged by it. ” Qutaibah then stood up and began to
motivate the people for war and boost the spirits of the flag
bearers. Soon afterwards, the people engaged in a fierce battle
wherein Allah bestowed patience and perserverance upon the
Muslims, such that they did not cease fighting throughout the
day until He finally granted them a victorious outcome
through the obliteration of the Turk army who were either
killed, taken captive or taken to al-Madinah where they
sought refuge.
It follows that Qutaibah gave orders for the refugees to be
executed, although they inevitably attempted to reconcile
with him by offering him a large amount of money and so he
conceded. He then appointed a man from his own people
along with a detachment of his army to return them to their
land but, midway into their journey, the people violated their
agreement by killing their commander and cutting off the
noses of those who were with him. As a result, Qutaibah
returned and laid siege to them for a whole month, following
which he ordered his troops and workers to cover the
enclosure with hay with the intention of setting it alight.
However, in the process of doing so, the enclosure fell down
and forty of his workmen were killed. Not long after this, the
people tried to enter into negotations with Qutaibah towards
369

making peace but he outright refused and did not break the
siege until he had conquered them and killed all of their
combatants. The people were then taken captive and their
wealth was seized.
The Muslim army acquired an abundance of gold and silver
vessels, idols made from solid gold, and many other valuable
things that altogether amounted to one hundred and fifty
thousand Deenars, not to mention the large amount of money,
precious jewels and various types of weapons that were found
in the king’s treasury. They obtained even more riches from
what they appropriated of the captives’ personal possessions.
Notably, Qutaibah wrote to al-Hajjaj requesting his
permission to distribute the spoils between his soldiers, to
which al-Hajjaj consented. Thus, the Muslims prospered, a
large number of people and weaponry fell into their hands,
and their strengthened position meant that they gained a
decisive advantage over their enemies – all praise and thanks
belong to Allah.
Also during this year, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, the deputy
of al-Madinah, led the Hajj Pilgrimage with the people.

Amongst the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
‘Utbah bin ‘Abd as-Sulami who was an honourable Sahabi
from as-Suffah.
Al-Miqdam bin Ma‘di Karib, an honourable Sahabi who
resided in Hims (ancient Emesa, city in central Syria).
Abu Umamah al-Bahili whose real name was Sudayy bin
‘Ajlan, was an honourable Sahabi who also resided in Hims.
Qabeesah bin Dhu’aib, Abu Sufyan al-Khuza‘i al-Madani,
who was born in the year of the Conquest (of Makkah), on
370

which occasion he was taken to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who supplicated for him on
his behalf.
‘Urwah bin al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah, who was appointed to
office in al-Koofah by al-Hajjaj.
Yahya bin Ya‘mar who was a former judge of Marw (Merv)
and the first to apply dots to the Masahif (Arabic manuscripts
of the Qur’an).
Shuraih bin al-Harith bin Qais, a judge who reached the age
of maturity during Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic period of
ignorance) and was appointed by ‘Umar as the judge of alKoofah.

Upon Entering the Eighty-Eighth Year
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik and his brother’s son, al-‘Abbas
bin al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik undertook a military
campain throughout the summer that resulted in the Muslims
seizing the Tuwanah citadel during the month of Jumada of
this year. A severe battle ensued among the people, in the
course of which the Muslims launched an attack against the
Christians, who were routed and took sanctuary in their
churches. The second attack came from the Christians after
they came out from their churches and defeated the Muslims
to the point that none of them held their positions except for
al-‘Abbas bin alWaleed who was with Ibn Muhaireez alJumahi at the time. On that occasion, al-‘Abbas said to Ibn
Muhaireez: “Where are the Qurra’ (reciters) of the Qur’an
who seek the Countenance of Allah, the Majestic and
Sublime?” He replied: “Call them to come to you. ” So he
shouted: “O people of the Qur’an! ” and at that instant the
Muslims turned back and launched another attack on the
Christians that forced them to take refuge within the fortress.
371

The Muslims subsequently blockaded them within its
confines until they won the battle.
Ibn Jareer mentions that in the month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal of
this year, al-Waleed sent his scribe to‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez in al-Madinah bearing orders to renovate the
Prophet’s mosque along with the appended compartments
belonging to the wives of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). He further instructed him to expand its
Qiblah (point and direction of prayer) and the rest of its
diameter to two hundred by two hundredDhira‘ (cubits), in
addition to buying the property of whoever wished to sell it at
a reasonable price. He was instructed to subsequently
demolish the newly-bought properties and to fix high house
prices on the residents, and by doing this he maintained it was
in keeping with the practice of the pious precedessors, ‘Umar
and ‘Uthman.
Having received the Ameerul-Mu’mineen’s letter, ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez decided to convene a meeting of the chiefs,
the ten Fuqaha’ (jurists) and the people of al-Madinah. As he
was reading out alWaleed’s directive, the people grew
increasingly troubled and angered, andexclaimed: “But these
apartments have low ceilings made from palm branches, the
walls are made of unburnt bricks and the doors are made from
cloth, that must remain intact in their orginal form for the Hajj
pilgrims, visitors and travellers to look at so that they might
contemplate on the houses of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and be humbled by them. It
is incumbent that they are not renovated except out of
necessity and even in those dire circumstances should they
remain as they are. These lofty buildings that al-Waleed
proposes are indeed like the dwellings of the Pharoah and
Khosrau (a general designation of the Persian kings) in origin
and, moreover, they are symbolic of their high hopes of
everlasting life in this world. ” Upon concluding the meeting,
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez wrote to al-Waleed notifying him
372

of the consensus that was reached between him and the ten
Fuqaha’ but in spite of that, al-Waleed still commissioned him
to execute his plans on the mosque which involved raising its
ceiling.
Inevitably, ‘Umar was unable to find anyone willing to tear
down the humble houses, however, when the project finally
got underway, the nobles and prominent people of the Banu
Hashim tribe along with others began to scream and cry as
they had done on the day of the Prophet’s death (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). The people who owned
properties neighbouring the Masjid also agreed to sell them,
and so ‘Umar exerted every effort to carry out Waleed’s
specific instructions. This involved making modifications to
the house of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and ‘A’ishah’s house (in which the Prophet’s grave
had originally been located in the eastern quarters but was
moved within the Masjid during the current renovations), and
the rest of the apartments belonging to the UmmahatulMu’mineen.
Ibn Jareer mentions that al-Waleed wrote to the king of arRoom requesting him to send materials and resources for the
project and, in fulfilment of his request, the king dispatched
one hundred labourers, materials amounting to approximately
fifty loads that were specially crafted for the Prophet’s
Masjid, and a further one hundred thousand Deenars (unit of
currency). In fact, these resources had first been allotted to the
project for the Masjid of Damascus – Allah knows best.
This year also saw Qutaibah bin Muslim’s military expedition
against the king of the Turks, Koor Maghanoon, who was the
son of the sister of the Chinese king.
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez led the Hajj Pilgrimage for the
people, amongst who were many of Quraish’s nobles. Upon
arriving in Makkah, he came across some people who notified
373

him of a water shortage due to the lack of rain, upon which he
asked his companion: “Did we not invoke for rain?” He then
summoned the people to congregate together in order to
collectively supplicate for rain, which they continued to do
until it eventually began to rain.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
‘Abdullah bin Busr bin Abu Busr al-Mazini, an honourable
Sahabi like his father who lived in Hims, and transmitted
narrations to some of the Tabi‘een.
‘Abdullah bin Abu Awfa ‘Alqamah bin Khalid bin al-Harith
al-Khuza‘i, who was later ascribed the name al-Aslami, was
an honourable Sahabi, who was in fact the last Sahabi to
remain in al-Koofah.
Hisham bin Isma‘eel bin al-Waleed al-Makhzoomi al-Madani
also died in this year.
Hakeem bin ‘Umair al-‘Ansi ash-Shami, to whom the
transmission of narrations has been ascribed, was the only
person along with his son, Muhaireez [Abul-Ahwas], in ashSham who could publicly criticise al-Hajjaj. He was killed in
this year during the invasion of Tuwanah in the land of arRoom.

Upon Entering the Eighty-Ninth Year
This was the year in which Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik and
the son of his brother, ‘Abbas bin al-Waleed, undertook a
military invasion against the land of ar-Room during which
they killed hundreds of people and conquered many
fortresses, including the fortresses of Sooriyah (situated in
ash-Sham), Ammooriyah (situated in the land of ar-Room),
Hiraqlah (the name of a city in ar-Room) and Qamoodiyah.
374

As a result, they gained extensive booty and took a large
number of people captive.
Qutaibah bin Muslim invaded the lands of as-Sughd
(Soghdiana; a province of the Archaemenid Persian Empire),
Nasaf (the name of a city between Jaihoon and Samarqand)
and Kiss (Kish, a city near Samarqand) wherein he
encountered many of the Turks who he vanquished and killed.
He then moved on to Bukhara where he came into contact
with many of the Turks and fought in combat against them for
two days and nights in a place called Kharqan (a town in
Samarqand), the outcome of which was the Qutaibah’s
triumph over them.
Following this, Qutaibah advanced against Wardan Khudhah,
the king of Bukhara , and engaged in a fierce battle against
him. Qutaibah, however, was unable to defeat him and so
withdrew his army to Marw (Merv) where he was delivered a
letter from al-Hajjaj, in which he reprimanded him for fleeing
from the battlefield and surrendering before the enemies of
Islam. He also instructed him to send him a picture (plan) of
the land of Bukhara, which Qutaibah did. Al-Hajjaj therefore
wrote back to him, saying: “Go back and repent to Allah for
your error. Take such and such a road and return to Wardan
Khudhah but in doing so, refrain from taking the small side
roads. ”
During this year, al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik appointed
Khalid bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri as a figure of authority over
Makkah, who later built a well at the site of Thaniyyat Tuwa
and another at Thaniyyat alHajoon under al-Waleed’s orders;
a project which proved successful in generating fresh sweet
water for the people.
In this year, Qutaibah bin Muslim invaded the Turks until he
penetrated as far as the border of Adhrabeejan and in doing so
375

he conquered many citadels and towns. ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez led the Hajj Pilgrimage for the people in this year.
Siqilliyyah (Sicily) and Mayoorqah (Palma de Mallorca) were
conquered in this year.
Moosa bin Nusair and his son advanced against an-Niqrees,
the king of the Europeans, which resulted in the acquisition of
many lucrative lands.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died:
‘Abdullah bin Busr bin Abu Busr al-Mazini, who was a
Sahabi (Companion) like his father, died during the
aforementioned events.
‘Abdullah bin Tha‘labah bin Su‘air who was one of the
Tabi‘een and a poet belonging to the tribe of Banu ‘Udhr. It
is said that he had reached the age of maturity during the
lifetime of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) who is reported to have stroked his head. Az-Zuhri
studied the sciences of lineage and ancestry under his
tutelage.

Upon Entering the Ninetieth Year of the
Hijrah
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik and al-‘Abbas bin al-Waleed bin
‘Abdul-Malik invaded the land of ar-Room in which they
conquered its fortresses, killed most of the opposition, gained
war booty and took many people captive.
Ar-Room took as captive the army’s naval commander,
Khalid bin Kaisan, and upon returning to their king with him,
he respectfully handed him over to al-Waleed bin ‘AbdulMalik.
376

Al-Waleed dismissed his brother, ‘Abdullah bin ‘AbdulMalik, from his post in Egypt and appointed Qurrah bin
Shareek instead.
Muhammad bin al-Qasim ath-Thaqafi, the commander of alHajjaj’s army, killed the king of as-Sind (Indian province),
Dahir bin Sassah. Qutaibah bin Muslim conquered the city of
Bukhara and in doing so defeated various sects among the
enemy Turks, the events and details of which are too many
and too lengthy to mention but can be found in Ibn Jareer’s
account. Essentially, following the conquest of Bukhara in
this year, Tarkhoon, the king of as-Sughd, sought
reconciliation with Qutaibah by offering him a yearly stipend,
which Qutaibah accepted from him for an assurance of
security.
Wardan Khudhah, the leader of Bukhara subsequent to
Qutaibah’s acquisition of it, appealed to the Turks for help,
who in turn responded to his request and in doing so came to
his assistance from all directions. Hence, Wardan Khudhah
advanced forth and launched an attack against the Muslims
that won him the upper hand by debilitating the Muslim army.
In spite of this¸ the Muslims turned back to make a second
attack and this time succeeded in killing a large percentage of
the enemy combatants, following which Qutaibah and the
king of as-Sughd made peace and Qutaibah conquered
Bukhara and its fortresses. He then returned home with his
soldiers under the orders of al-Hajjaj.
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab escaped from al-Hajjaj’s prison and
met with his two brothers, al-Mufaddal and ‘Abdul-Malik,
who together went to seek refuge with Sulaiman bin ‘AbdulMalik, who offered them protection from al-Hajjaj. The
reason for Yazeed’s imprisonment was that al-Hajjaj had
imposed a hefty fine of six million Deenars on him and his
brothers but Yazeed defiantly contested the penalty more than
377

the other two and so al-Hajjaj decided to make an example
out of him by casting him in prison.
It so happened that once, when al-Hajjaj had set out to
administer to the army that he was planning to send against
the Kurds, which he was due to accompany as soon as a trench
had been dug and guards had been assigned to it, Yazeed bin
al-Muhallab seized the opportunity to escape in his absence.
One night, Yazeed arranged for a large quantity of food to be
prepared for the prison guards in a ploy to distract them, while
he disguised himself as one of the cooks by making his beard
white. As he left the prison, one of the guards saw him and
said to the other guards: “Have you seen that man over
there?His gait is just like that of Yazeed bin al-Muhallab!
”The guard then caught up with him to verify his identity but
when he saw that his beard was white, he left him alone.
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab subsequently met his brothers,
boarded a ship and set sail towards ash-Sham. When al-Hajjaj
found out about this he became furious and in the heat of the
moment, he decided to go after them himself under the
assumption that they had headed for Khurasan.
Two days had passed before al-Hajjaj was informed about
Yazeed’s escape and after setting out towards ash-Sham, he
then wrote to al-Waleed to notify him of it. Meanwhile,
Yazeed had disembarked the ship in Jordan and gone to stay
with Wuhaib bin ‘Abdur-Rahman al-Azdi, an official of
Sulaiman bin ‘AbdulMalik. Wuhaib therefore sent word to
Sulaiman, saying: “Yazeed bin al-Muhallab and his two
brothers are staying in my house. They came seeking refuge
from al-Hajjaj. ” Sulaiman replied: “In that case, bring them
to me and they will be safe”, and so they went to Sulaiman
who granted them his protection. After this, Sulaiman wrote
to his brother, al-Waleed, saying: “Indeed, the al-Muhallab
family is under my protection. They have three million
Deenars that remains to be paid to al-Hajjaj, which is now in
my possession. ” Al-Waleed wrote back saying: “No, by
378

Allah! Do not grant them protection until you have sent them
to me. ” Sulaiman therefore replied: “No, by Allah! I will not
send them back unless I accompany them. I therefore implore
by Allah that you, O Ameerul-Mu’mineen, do not infringe
upon my decision concerning this. ” So he wrote to him
saying: “No, by Allah! Do not come with them; rather, send
them to me in chains. ” At that point, Yazeed said: “Send me
to him, as I do not want to be the cause of hostility or war
between the two of you but I suggest that you send me with
your son and write to him in an exceptionally courteous
manner. ” Hence, Sulaiman sent Yazeed in the company of
his son, Ayyoob, who Sulaiman warned before their
departure: “Once you enter the lobby, chain yourself to
Yazeed in shackles”, which is what they did.
Upon seeing his brother’s son in shackles, al-Waleed
remarked: “By Allah! What has Sulaiman done! ”Ayyoob
then handed the letter from his father to his uncle and said: “O
Ameerul-Mu’mineen! I sacrifice myself so that you do not
infringe upon my father’s covenant of protection, even though
you have the most right to deny it. Do not extinguish our
hopes for peace within the area appointed to us by you and do
not diminish our power by cutting us off from you. ” At that
point, al-Waleed read out Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik’s letter,
which stated: “O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! By Allah, if I thought
that he posed a threat to you or if he was working against you,
I would have taken action against him without delay and put
him in chains myself. Therefore, do not violate my contract
or undermine my authority, for I do not act except out of
compliant obedience to you, that is Allah’s good favour, the
way of Islam and the way of him (alMuhallab), his father and
the members of his family. However, if you choose to
dishonour our relations by failing to safeguard my contract,
and you will ultimately do as you will, then I pray that Allah
protects you from my fury and my violation of the sanctity of
my duty and affiliation to you.
379

By Allah, O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! You do not know what
remains of you and I, or when death will be the cause of
separation between us. Therefore, if you will it, O AmeerulMu’mineen, do not bring death upon us and return him to me.
By Allah, I do not desire anything in this world besides Taqwa
(fear of and obedience to Allah) more than your pleasure and
satisfaction with me, for that is certainly dearer to me than my
own pleasure and satisfaction. By Allah, I ask that we gain the
pleasure of Allah, the Majestic and Sublime, through our
relations and therefore if, one day, you want to honour our
relationship and my dignity by showing regard for my rights,
then hand over Yazeed to me and fulfill all that I have
requested that is rightfully mine. ”
Upon reading his letter, al-Waleed said: “Sulaiman has
certainly troubled me”, whereupon he called on his brother’s
son who drew close to him and began speaking to him, which
he began by praising and glorifying Allah and invoking
prayers on the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), and then he said: “O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! Your
being tried with us is from Allah’s good favour and the best
of trials, therefore, whoever forgets this then let us not be
among those who forget and whoever disbelieves in this then
let us be among the disbelievers. One of the trials of the AhlulBait (family of theProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) ) is to obey you and contest your enemies in the
greatest lands of the east and the west; our fate is nothing other
than great in that respect. ” So al-Waleed said to him: “Sit
down”, which he did and at that point al-Waleed granted
Yazeed protection and sent him back to Sulaiman bearing
gifts and fine foods, which Yazeed presented to him upon his
arrival.
Al-Waleed subsequently wrote to al-Hajjaj, saying: “I have
returned al-Muhallab and the members of his household to
Sulaiman, therefore desist from him and his family and write
to me confirming your obedience to this. ” Al-Hajjaj
380

acquiesced and refrained from pursuing the al-Muhallab
family and in doing so waived any outstanding fines,
including a fine amounting to one million Deenars that was
owed by ‘Uyainah bin al-Muhallab. Yazeed continued to
remain with Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik until the death of alHajjaj.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Miswar bin Makhramah died this year,
as did Abul-‘Aliyah ar-Riyahi and Sinan bin Salamah bin alMuhabbaq who was renowned for his courage and gallantry
and who embraced Islam on the day of the Conquest. He was
appointed in charge of the invasion of al-Hind (India) and he
lived a long life.
Muhammad bin Yoosuf ath-Thaqafi, al-Hajjaj’s brother and
the Ameer of Yemen, who would slander ‘Ali from the pulpit,
died this year.
Khalid bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah, Abu Hashim al-Umawi
ad-Dimashqi, who had a house in Damacus adjacent to the
Darul-Hijarah. He was a poet of high standing and has also
been attributed works relating to the science of chemistry and
the natural sciences. He transmitted narrations on the
authority of his father and Dihyah al-Kalbi, which he later
transmitted to Az-Zuhri and others.
‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair bin Sulaim al-Asadi, the poet Abu
Katheer, while others have said “Abu Sa‘d”, was a famous
poet who once entered upon ‘Abdullah bin az-Zubair and
began to laud him through his poems. However, when Ibn azZubair failed to give him anything for it, he said: “May Allah
cure the shecamel that carried me to you! ”So Ibn az-Zubair
said to him: “The camel and its owner! ”It is said that he died
during the period of al-Hajjaj.
381

Upon Entering the Ninety-First Year
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik and the son of his brother,
‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin al-Waleed, mobilised a military campaign
in the summer of this year.
Maslamah invaded the land of the Turks, which he penetrated
as far as the border of Adhrabeejan, conquering many
fortresses and towns in the process.
Moosa bin Nusair invaded the land of Morocco wherein he
conquered many cities.
Qutaibah bin Muslim settled his affairs with the Turks who
had breached the peace treaty that was reached between them.
This did not happen without the outbreak of a devastating war
that caused alWaleed a lot of grief, since the Turk kings had
made mutual arrangements in the spring of the previous year
to join forces and fight against Qutaibah. On that occasion,
they had come to a settlement that their armies would not pull
out unless they had eradicated all ‘Arabs from within their
lands during a grand meeting they had convened for that very
purpose, the size of which was unprecedented. However,
Qutaibah was able to rout their armies and further kill many
of their divisions; in this manner, the status quo was restored
to normal.
As-Sa’ib bin Yazeed bin Sa‘eed bin Thumamah whose father
had taken him on the Hajj Pilgrimage with the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he
just seven years old died in this year. Al-Bukhari gives an
account of this.
Sahl bin Sa‘d as-Sa‘idi who was an honourable Sahabi from
al-Madinah also passed away this year. The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) died when
he was aged fifteen years and he was one of those to have his
neck shackled by al-Hajjaj in the seventy-fourth year, along
382

with Anas bin Malik and Jabir bin ‘Abdullah (who was
handcuffed) in order to humiliate them in view of the people.

Upon Entering the Ninety-Second Year
Maslamah and the son of his brother, ‘Umar bin al-Waleed,
invaded the land of ar-Room wherein he conquered many
fortresses and gained extensive war booty. The Romans
consequently fled from them to the farthest part of their
dominion.
Tariq bin Ziyad, the deputy of Moosa bin Nusair, invaded alAndalus (Andalucia) with an army numbering twelve
thousand, that inevitably provoked its king, Adhareenooq, to
advance against them with his grand army, wearing his crown
and being carried on his throne. The outcome of their
engagement in battle was Tariq’s victory and the acquisition
of his military base and everything in it.
Following this, Tariq wrote to al-Waleed conveying the good
news of his conquest to him, which he credited to his own
judgement. However, al-Waleed wrote back to him
condemning him for taking action without orders and
instructed him not to alter his position until al-Waleed had
caught up with him, upon which al-Waleed promptly
embarked towards him with his armies. Thus, Tariq, who was
with Habeeb bin Abu ‘Ubaidah al-Fihri, hastily made his way
to al-Andalus with his armies and after a decisive victory,
Tariq brought most of the Iberian Peninsula under Muslim
occupation in an extensive seven-year campaign. Not only did
the Muslims conquer the land, they seized its cities and
wealth, killed its men and took its women and children
captive. They also acquired jewels and precious gems, gold
and silver beyond description, gold and silver vessels and
furniture, horses and mules, and many other valuable spoils
in the major cities and towns that made this conquest
especially lucrative.
383

Maslamah and his brother’s son, ‘Umar bin al-Waleed,
successfully conquered the fortresses of ar-Room, including
the fortress of Soosanah, and in doing so, were able to
penetrate as far as the Gulf of Constantinople.
Qutaibah bin Muslim conquered Shooman, Nasaf (the name
of a city between Jaihoon and Samarqand) and Kiss (Kish a
city near Samarqand). During his campaign, the people of
Firyab had proven a hindrance to him and so he burnt down
their town. His brother, ‘Abdur-Rahman, prepared his army
to advance towards as-Sughd (Sogdiana) to meet with its
king, Tarakhoon Khan, who he made peace with upon
receiving a great deal of money from him. He then advanced
forth to his brother who was in Bukhara (capital of the
Bukhara province of Uzbekistan), after which he returned to
Marw (Merv). Following Tarakhoon Khan’s reconciliation
with ‘Abdur-Rahman who then departed from there, the
people of asSughd gathered to reproach Tarakhoon Khan, to
whom they said: “You have disgraced us and incurred the
Jizyah (head tax on free non-Muslims under Muslim rule)
upon us. You are an old man who we no longer have any need
for! ”In this manner, they deposed him and appointed
Ghawzak Khan (his brother) over them as his substitute, and
used this as grounds to rebel and break their pact with ‘AbdurRahman.
Qutaibah invaded Sijistan in pursuit of Rutbeel, the supreme
king of the Turks. Having reached the first of his kingdoms,
Qutaibah encountered Rutbeel’s messengers who he had sent
to reconcile with Qutaibah for a grand sum of money, horses,
slaves and women from the king’s quarters, all of which they
bore upon their meeting, and so he conceded and made peace
with him there.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year were:
384

Malik bin Aws bin al-Hadathan an-Nasri, Abu Sa‘eed alMadani, about whom there is a difference of opinion
concerning his affiliation of companionship to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Tuwais al-Mughanni, whose real name was ‘Eesa bin
‘Abdullah, Abu ‘Abdul-Mun‘im al-Madani, the patron of the
Banu Makhzoom tribe. He was proficient in his trade, lanky
in stature, cross-eyed and consistently unfortunate, given that
he was born on the day that theProphet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) died, weaned on the day that asSiddeeq ( i. e. Abu Bakr) died, attained puberty on the day
that ‘Umar was killed, married on the day that ‘Uthman died
and his wife gave birth to their son on the day that al-Husain
bin ‘Ali was killed. Alternatively, Ibn Khallikan and others
maintain that his son was actually born on the day that ‘Ali
was killed.

Upon Entering the Ninety-Third Year
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik conquered many fortresses
within the land of ar-Room during this year.
Al-‘Abbas bin al-Waleed invaded and conquered Sabasatiyah
(Sebastia, located in the city of Nablus, Palestine).
Marwan bin al-Waleed invaded ar-Room until he reached
Khanjarah.
Khuwarizm Shah wrote to Qutaibah proposing to make peace
by offering him control over the major cities within his
country plus a large sum of money and slaves, on the
provision that he wage war against his brother and hand him
over to him in return. The reason for this was that Khuwarizm
Shah’s brother had instigated a great deal of corruption and
injustice in the land, since he possessed the type of
temperament that meant he could not hear about anyone
385

having anything good without appropriating it for himself,
whether that be money, women, sons, animals or whatever
else. Qutaibah approached Khuwarizm Shah with his army
and accepted his proposal for reconciliation, upon which he
then dispatched an army to the land of Khuwarizm Shah’s
brother. They killed a large number of people there, in
addition to taking his brother and four thousand others
captive. Qutaibah then handed over Khuwarizm Shah’s
brother to him, and on this occasion, Khuwarizm Shah
commissioned Qutaibah to execute all the captives in his
presence by beheading. In fulfilment of his request, Qutaibah
beheaded a thousand captives in front of him, a thousand to
his right, a thousand to his left, and a thousand behind him,
which he executed as a means of instilling fear in his Turk
enemies and any others.

The Conquest of Samarqand
Once Qutaibah was no longer preoccupied with these affairs,
he decided to return to his country where some of the leaders
said to him: “The people of as-Sughd have felt safe from you
this year and so they would not anticipate an attack from you,
if you were to attack them on any given day. ” So Qutaibah
said: “Have you told anyone about this?” They said: “No. ”
He continued: “Should anyone hear you say this, he would slit
your throat. ” Following this, Qutaibah sent his brother,
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Muslim, to head the vanguard of his
army of twenty thousand men to Samarqand, after which
Qutaibah and the rest of the army caught up with him.
Having found out about Qutaibah’s advancing forces, the
Turks elected every powerful and influential person of
authority from among the sons of their kings and leaders to
subsequently advance towards Qutaibah during the night. The
Muslims, however, had an advantage over them and so when
Qutaibah was informed about what they were planning, he
dispatched his brother, Salih, with a military detachment of
386

six hundred valiant horsemen, who he instructed to “intercept
and obstruct. ” Accordingly, Salih embarked towards them
and as he and his men reached the middle of the roadway, they
came a halt and formed three separate units in preparation for
the opposition who were fast approaching in their direction
that very night, but who were completely unaware of what
was lying ahead of them. As they suddenly encountered the
Muslims, they were ambushed from all directions and a fierce
battle broke out. On that occasion, all but a small band of left
wing troops among the participating Turks had their heads
severed, in addition to having their weapons, which were
adorned with gold, and their possessions seized. Qutaibah
said to some of his men: “Do you know that the ones you have
slain here today are none other than the sons of kings or heroes
from among their hundreds of thousands of horsemen?” Due
to this, he generously distributed everything that had been
acquired as spoils – from gold to weaponry –among his men.
Qutaibah subsequently advanced towards Samarqand, the
largest city in as-Sughd, and devised a plan to ambush it by
launching fire cannons from a distance. However, his
attempts were futile when he was unable to take them out,
which continued to be the case even after both armies clashed
in combat. At that point, Qutaibah sought the counsel of the
people from Bukhara and Khuwarizm who were with him
concerning the people of as-Sughd who had put up
remarkable resistance. Ghawzak, the king of asSughd,
subsequently sent a message to them, which read: “Instead of
fighting against me with my own brothers and Ahl baiti (the
members of my household; family), bring on the ‘Arabs! ”
Qutaibah was angered by the remark of the king of as-Sughd,
to which he reacted by singling out the ‘Arabs from the non‘Arabs in his army and then ordering the latter group to retreat
until only the ‘Arabs were left. The remaining brave ‘Arab
soldiers then marched towards the city, armed with the best
artillery and defence weaponry, as they launched fire cannons
387

at the enemy until they made an opening in their blockade.
The Turks speedily covered the opening as they struggled
through the dense smoke and because of this, one of their
combatants climbed to the top of the wall and began to shout
malicious insults at Qutaibah. Angered by his audacity, a
soldier from the Muslim army shot an arrow at him in
retaliation that struck his eye and penetrated right through his
head to the other side, which proved fatal (may Allah revile
him). Qutaibah gratefully presented his archer with ten
thousand Deenars as a reward.
Eventually it was night and the armies returned to their camps
until the following morning whereupon the Muslims made
their attack by launching fire cannons once again in
anticipation of breaking down another opening in the
opposition’s blockade. They succeeded in doing so and the
Muslims climbed to the top and engaged in battle with the
opposition using their archers. The Turks said to Qutaibah:
“Pull back from us on this day and we will reconcile with you
tomorrow! ”Hence, Qutaibah withdrew his army and the next
day they agreed to reconcile on a settlement of two million,
one hundred thousand that the Turks would pay annually to
Qutaibah, in addition to handing over thirty thousand ablebodied slaves, thus excluding all women, children and elderly
(another account states one hundred thousand slaves).
On Qutaibah’s part, he stipulated that all ornaments and idols
from every firing station be removed and for all combatants
to evacuate the city until Qutaibah had built a mosque with a
pulpit from which he could address the people. In compliance
with his terms, the combatants ate supper and then left the
city. After the Masjid was completed and the Minbar was
built, Qutaibah entered the city with four thousand of his
heroic soldiers, prayed in the Masjid, delivered a sermon and
then ate together. At that point, he was brought some idols
that had been left behind and so he stripped the entire city of
them, piled the retrieved idols on top of each other and then
388

ordered for them to be set ablaze. The people began to scream
and cry, in the midst of which one man shouted out: “There
are ancient idols amongst them and whoever sets them on fire
will surely perish! ”At that point, King Ghawzak arrived and
condemned Qutaibah for what he had done, to which
Qutaibah responded: “I have some advice for you. ” He then
went on to say: “It was I who set them on fire with my own
hands”, and he stood up and extolled Allah, shouting: “Allahu
Akbar (Allah is the Greatest) ! ” until the fire had died down
and all that remained of the cremated idols was their ashes
and the gold that they had been embellished with, which
altogether amounted to fifty thousand Mithqal (one Mithqal
is equal to the weight of a dust speck).
Qutaibah then summoned the people of Samarqand, to whom
he said: “I do not demand anything from you other than what
you have already agreed to, however, it is also necessary that
our soldiers reside amongst you. ” At this point, King
Ghawzak Khan stood up and walked off. Despite that,
Qutaibah continued by reciting the verses (which mean):
“And that is He (Allah) Who destroyed the former ‘Ad
(people) ; And Thamood (people). He spared none of them”
[an-Najm, 53: 50-51].
Afterwards Qutaibah made off towards Marw (Merv) and
appointed his brother, ‘Abdullah bin Muslim, as his deputy
over Samarqand.
This was also the year in which Moosa bin Nusair, the deputy
of Morocco, dismissed his deputy, Tariq, from al-Andalus.
It was a rainless year for the people of Africa who suffered
from a severe drought as a result. Accordingly, Moosa bin
Nusair went out to assist them by praying for rain, which he
continued to do until midday. As he was about to descend
from the Minbar it was said to him: “Are you not going to
389

supplicate for the Ameerul-Mu’mineen?” He replied: “This is
neither the time nor the place for that. ” Soon afterwards,
Allah sent down the rain in abundance.
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez flogged Khubaib bin ‘Abdullah bin
az-Zubair fifty lashes under the orders of al-Waleed, after
which he poured a vessel of freezing cold water over his head
on a cold wintry day and then stood him outside the door of
the Masjid that brought about his death (may Allah have
mercy on him). Shocked to realise he had died, ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez greatly feared for his own well-being so much
that whenever anyone mentioned anything relating to the
Akhirah (the Hereafter), he would say: “Is Khubaib waiting
for me?” Another narration states he would say: “Would this
have happened to me were it not for Khubaib?” He once heard
a woman shrieking, upon which he said: “Is that Khubaib?If
I am delivered from him then I am safe! ”
Muhammad bin al-Qasim, the son of al-Hajjaj’s paternal
uncle, conquered the city of Daibul (Dvin, or Duin, the capital
of early medieval Armenia) and other regions within the land
of India.
Al-Waleed dismissed ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez from office
in al-Madinah after ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez wrote to tell him that the people of al-‘Iraq were
suffering and had been treated unjustly by alHajjaj. When alHajjaj heard this, he wrote to al-Waleed saying: “‘Umar is
certainly too weak to hold the offices of al-Madinah and
Makkah and, in fact, a group of ill-natured people from al‘Iraq have taken refuge with him there, which is a prime
indication of his deficiency and feebleness as far as leadership
is concerned. ”

Amongst the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
390

Anas bin Malik, the servant and Companion of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). It is
verified in the collection of Al-Bukharithat his mother took
him to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and said: “Anas is your servant”, whereupon she offered
her son to him and so the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) agreed and supplicated for him, saying:
“O Allah! Increase his wealth and offspring, and enter him
into Paradise. ” It is also true that Anas said: “The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) gave me
my epithet because of a plant that I used to care for. ” Abu
Bakr and then ‘Umar employed him within the province of alBahrain, for which they both held him in great esteem.
Makhool said: “I saw Anas walking in the Masjid of
Damascus and so I approached him to ask him about the
ruling of ablution after attending a Janazah (funeral), to which
he answered: ‘There is no Wudhoo’. ”
Al-Awza‘i said: “Isma‘eel bin ‘Ubaidullah bin Abul-Muhajir
said: ‘Anas bin Malik went to al-Waleed who said to him:
‘What did you hear the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say concerning the Hour?’He
replied: ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘You (people) and the Hour are
like these two’ (and he crossed his fingers). ”
Az-Zuhri said: “I entered upon Anas bin Malik in Damascus
and he was crying, so I said: ‘Why are you crying?’He said:
‘I do not find (nowadays) things as they were (practised) at
the time of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and his Companions except for the Salat (prayer) and
you have strayed even from that. ’” In another narration, he
says: “And this Salat has been lost”, alluding to the fact that
the caliphs of the Banu Umayyah tribe used to delay their
prayers until the last possible time that they could be offered.
Actually, they would practice this habitually – all except for
391

‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez during his caliphate, which we
shall come to shortly.
Anas is reported to have said: “I asked the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) about intercession on the
Day of Judgement. He said: ‘I am the one who would do so. ’
I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) ! Then where shall I seek you?’He said: ‘Seek
me. The first time you should seek me will be on the Sirat
(Bridge; Path) ’. I said: ‘And if I do not meet you on the
Sirat?’He said: ‘Then seek me at the Meezan (the weighing
up of deeds on the Day of Judgement). ’ I said: ‘And if I do
not meet you at the Meezan?’ He said: ‘Then seek me at the
Hawdh (Pool in Paradise), for indeed I will not be missed at
these three locations on the Day of Resurrection. ’”
An-Nadr bin Shaddad said on the authority of his father that
when Anas fell ill, it was said to him: “Should we not call the
doctor for you?” He replied: “Can the doctor treat me?” It it
also said that upon being asked: “Should we not call the
doctor for you?” He replied: “The doctor has already given
me the medicine. ” Then he began to say: “Rather, encourage
me with the words la ilaha illallah (i. e. there is no one worthy
of worship except Allah). ” He continued to utter this until the
point of death, prior to which he requested to be buried with
the staff that had been given to him by the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).

Upon Entering the Ninety-Fourth Year
This was the year in which al-‘Abbas bin al-Waleed invaded
the land of ar-Room and it is said that he conquered Antaliyah
(Anatolia). His brother, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin al-Waleed,
invaded it as far as Ghazalah after him, during the period
when al-Waleed bin Hisham al-Mu‘aiti penetrated the land of
Burjul-Hamam and Yazeed bin Abu Kabshah penetrated the
land of Syria.
392

There was an earthquake in ash-Sham during this year.
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik conquered Sandarah in the land
of ar-Room.
Allah granted victory to Islam through a series of decisive
triumphs during the period of al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik’s
state at the hands of his sons, relatives and generals in such a
manner that their Jihad (fighting for Allah’s cause) was said
to have resembled the Jihad that was carried out during the
days of ‘Umar bin al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with
him).
Al-Qasim bin Muhammad ath-Thaqafi conquered the land of
India wherein he gained spoils of war that were beyond
description. His invasion is cited in a Hadeeth narrated by alHafiz Ibn ‘Asakir and others.
Qutaibah bin Muslim invaded ash-Shash (a town situated
behind the river and adjacent to the land of the Turks),
Farghanah (the capital city of Fergana province, east
Uzbekistan) penetrating as far as Khujandah (Khujand, the
second-largest city in Tajikistan) and Kashan (a city situated
behind the river). This happened upon completion of his
campaigns in as-Sughd (Sogdiana, Tajikistan) and his
conquest of Samarqand, following which he boldly embarked
on conquering those lands until he reached Kabul
(Afghanistan) which he additionally laid siege to and
conquered. There, he encountered many sects among the Turk
disbelievers whom he clashed with on the battlefield of
Khujandah on numerous occasions and reigned victorious
each time.

393

The Death of Sa‘eed bin Jubair (May Allah
have mercy upon him)
Ibn Jareer says: “In this year, al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf ath-Thaqafi
killed Sa‘eed bin Jubair. ”
When Sa‘eed stood in front of al-Hajjaj, the latter said: “O
Sa‘eed! Did I not extend my protection to you?Did I not invest
you with authority?Did I not do this and that?Did I. . . ?” To
all of this, Sa‘eed replied in the affirmative thinking that alHajjaj would then allow him to go but instead he said: “So
what prompts you to dissociate from me and renounce your
pledge to the Ameerul-Mu’mineen?” He replied: “Ibn alAsh‘ath has taken my pledge in this regard and invited me to
him”, which stunned al-Hajjaj so much that it caused one of
his garments to fall off his shoulder as he lost his breath.
Infuriated with him, al-Hajjaj said: “Woe unto you! Did I not
arrive in Makkah to kill Ibn az-Zubair and take the pledges of
its people and your pledge on behalf of the AmeerulMu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik?” He said: “Yes, you did. ” He
continued to say: “Then I proceeded to al-Koofah as the
deputy and guardian of al-‘Iraq where I renewed the pledge
of allegiance for the Ameerul-Mu’mineen and took your
pledge for a second time?” He answered: “Yes, you did. ” He
then said: “That means you are contravening two pledges to
the Ameerul-Mu’mineen with the intention that you honour
one pledge to ‘the weaver, the son of the weaver’?! Guards!
Chop off his head! ”In this manner, Sa‘eed was beheaded,
after which al-Hajjaj picked up his head and gouged out his
eyes.
Ibn Jareer says: “Al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik appointed
Sulaiman bin Habeeb as the chief judge of ashSham during
this year and according to some, his brother, Maslamah, led
the Hajj Pilgrimage for the people. ”

394

Remembering The Prominent People Who
Died in this Year
Sa‘eed bin Jubair bin Hisham al-Asadi al-Walibi, Abu
Muhammad, and also, Abu ‘Abdullah, al-Koofi alMakki, was
one of the senior companions of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas.
Furthermore, he was an Imam (religious leader) of Islam in
the sciences of Tafseer , Fiqh (jurisprudence) and a number of
other disciplines. He is widely recognised for performing
numerous good deeds (may Allah have mercy on him).
There is a difference of opinion surrounding the age of Sa‘eed
bin Jubair (may Allah have mercy on him) at the time of his
death. Some maintain he was forty-nine while others say he
was fifty-seven – and Allah knows best.
Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab bin Hazn bin Abu Wahb bin ‘A’idh
bin ‘Imran bin Makhzoom al-Qurashi, Abu Muhammad alMadani al-Makhzoomi, was one the finest nobles among the
Tabi‘een (second and third generation following the
Companions). Ibn ‘Umar said: “Sa‘eed was one of the
Mufteen (official expounders of Islamic Law).
In reference to him, Az-Zuhri said: “Seven Hajj pilgrims sat
in his company at a time when I thought that no one possessed
knowledge other than him. ” Muhammad bin Ishaq said on
the authority of Makhool: “I travelled across all the land in
search for knowledge and I did not find anyone more
knowledgeable that Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab. ”
Al-Awza‘i says: “Az-Zuhri and Makhool were asked: ‘Who
is the most erudite person in terms of Fiqh (jurisprudence) that
you have met?’They answered unanimously: ‘Sa‘eed bin alMusayyab. ’”
Qatadah said: “I never saw anyone who knew more about the
Haram (forbidden injunctions) and the Halal (permissible
395

injunctions) than him” and “whenever al-Hasan was unsure
about a matter he would write to Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab. ”
Others have referred to him as Faqeehul-Fuqaha’ (the Jurist
of all
Jurists).
Malik said on the authority of Yahya bin Sa‘eed that Sa‘eed
bin al-Musayyab used to say: “I would travel days and nights
in search of just one Hadeeth. ”
Malik says: “I was informed that Ibn ‘Umar used to send
messages to Sa‘eed bin al-Mussayab asking him about certain
cases and their rulings. ”
Ar-Rabee‘ said on the authority of ash-Shafi‘i who said: “The
transmissions that we have from Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab are
Hasan (good, pertaining to the classification of Ahadeeth with
respect to their degree of authenticity). ”
Al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal alternatively said: “They are
Saheeh (sound; authentic) and Sa‘eed bin alMusayyab was
the best among the Tabi‘een. ”
‘Ali bin al-Madeeni said: “I do not know of any other person
among the Tabi‘een who possessed more extensive
knowledge than him. ”
Ahmad bin ‘Abdullah al-‘Ijli said: “Sa‘eed was an upright
man and knowledgeable in the field of Fiqh. He would not
take donations or charity even though he only owned four
hundred Deenars himself. He traded in oil and he was oneeyed. ”
Abu Zur‘ah said: “He was a faithful Imam from al-Madinah.
”
Talq bin Habeeb al-Anazi, who also died in this year, was an
honourable Tabi‘i who narrated traditions on the authority of
396

Anas, Jabir, Ibn az-Zubair, Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr
and others.
‘Urwah bin az-Zubair bin al-Awwam, al-Qurashi al-Asadi,
Abu ‘Abdullah al-Madani, an honourable Tabi‘i, transmitted
narrations on the authority of his father, al-‘Abadilah (the
Companions named Abdullah), as well as from Mu‘awiyah,
al-Mugheerah, Abu Hurairah, his mother, Asma’, his
maternal aunt, ‘A’ishah, and Umm Salamah. He also
transmitted narrations to some of the Tabi‘een and others
besides them.
Muhammad bin Sa‘d said: “’Urwah was reliable, he knew
many Hadeeth and he was a proficient and upstanding
scholar. ” Similarly, Al-‘Ijli notes: “He was an upright Tabi‘i
from al-Madinah who never involved himself in anything to
do with Fitan (discord; trials and tribulations). ” ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul‘Azeez adds: “There was nobody more knowledgeable
than ‘Urwah, as he would know things that I was ignorant of.
”
‘Ali bin al-Husain bin ‘Ali bin Abu Talib, al-Qurashi alHashimi, commonly know as Zainul-‘Abideen, also died in
this year. The judge Ibn Khallikan says: “His mother was
Sallamah bint Yazdajird, the last king of Persia. ” AzZamakhsharielaborates in Rabee‘ul-Abrar [The Spring of the
Righteous] that Yazdajird had three girls who were captured
during the time of ‘Umar bin al-Khattab:one was given to
‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar and later gave birth to Salim; the second
was given to Muhammad bin Abu Bakr asSiddeeq and gave
birth to al-Qasim; and the third was given to al-Husain bin
‘Ali and bore his son ‘Ali, Zainul-‘Abideen”, all of whom
were from the Banu Khalah tribe.
Muhammad bin Sa‘d said: “He was trustworthy and reliable,
he would speak little, and he was knowledgeable and
earnestly pious. After al-Husain’s death, ‘Ali’s mother,
397

Ghazalah remarried his deputy, Zubaid, and they had a child
by the name of ‘Abdullah bin Zubaid who was older than ‘Ali.
As for al-Husain’s older son, also by the name of ‘Ali he was
killed with his father and others of his party. ”
Tawoos said: “I heard him as he was prostrating before the
Hijr saying: ‘I am your servant in your precincts, your needy
in your precincts, your beggar in your precincts, your destitute
in your precincts. ’ Reports also mention that he would give a
lot of charity throughout the night, about which he would say:
‘Charity by night extinguishes the wrath of the Lord’. He
distributed all his wealth twice for the sake of
Allah. ”
Az-Zuhri said: “I would be in the company of ‘Ali bin alHusain most of the time and I have never come across anyone
more knowledgeable in Fiqh (Jurisprudence) than him. He
would speak little, he was the most obedient of all his family
and the most beloved to Marwan and his son, ‘Abdul-Malik,
who would call him “Zainul-‘Abideen”. ”
‘Ali bin al-Husain said: “The masters of this world are the
generous and godfearing and in the Hereafter they are the
people of the Deen (Religion; Islam), virtue and knowledge,
just as the ‘Ulama’ (scholars; knowledgeable) are the
inheritors of the prophets. ”
‘Abdur-Razzaq said: “A slave-girl was pouring some water
for ‘Ali bin al-Husain to make ablution with, when the vessel
slipped out of her hands and onto his face and cut him. As he
raised his head to look at her, she said: ‘Verily, Allah, the
Sublime, says (what means):
“Those who repress anger. ” [Al-‘Imran, 3:134]
So he said: ‘I have repressed my anger. ’ And she went on:
[‘And pardon people’] [ibid], to which he replied: ‘May Allah
forgive you. ’She then said: [‘Verily, Allah loves al398

Muhsineen (the good-doers) ’ [ibid], at which point he said:
‘Go, you are free. ’”
Al-Mada’ini says: “Az-Zuhri had commited a sinful act and it
caused him to feel so ashamed and disgusted with himself that
he became estranged and began to wander aimlessly, leaving
his family and wealth behind. When he met with ‘Ali bin alHusain he said to him: ‘O az-Zuhri! You despair over Allah’s
Mercy that is so much vaster than your greatest sin?! ’So AzZuhri replied (what means):
“Allah knows best with whom to place His Message. ” [AlAn‘am, 6:124]
In another narration, it states that he had wrongly spilt
unlawful blood and so ‘Ali ordered him to repent and seek
forgiveness in addition to paying blood money to the family
of the deceased, which he did accordingly. Az-Zuhri would
say: “’Ali bin al-Husain was the kindest person towards me.
”
Sufyan bin al-‘Uyainah said: “‘Ali bin al-Husain would say:
‘A man does not say something good about a man without
him knowing except if he is on the verge of saying something
bad about him without him knowing, and two people do not
become friends out of disobedience, except if they have
become divided over something other than obedience to
Allah. ”
Al-Fallas said: “‘Ali bin al-Husain, Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab,
‘Urwah and ‘Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdur-Rahman died in the
ninety-fourth year of the Hijrah. ”
Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin al-Harith bin Hisham bin
al-Mugheerah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar bin Makhzoom alQurashi al-Madani, one of the seven Fuqaha’ (jurists) was
also amongst the prominent people who died in this year.
399

Upon Entering the Ninety-Fifth Year
Al-‘Abbas bin al-Waleed invaded the land of ar-Room in this
year wherein he conquered many fortresses.
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik conquered the city of al-Bab in
Armeeniyyah (Armenia), which he brought to complete ruin,
but restored it after nine years.
Muhammad bin al-Qasim conquered the city of al-Mooltan in
the land of India wherein he seized a great deal of wealth.
Moosa bin Nusair embarked on a journey from al-Andalus
(Andalucia) to Africa with a vast amount of money in his
possession in addition to thirty thousand captives of war.
Qutaibah bin Muslim entered the land of ash-Shash (east
Samarqand) conquering many cities and towns therein. It was
while he was there that he received the news of the sudden
death of al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf and so, taken aback by this, he
allowed the people to return to the city of Marw (Merv).
Al-Waleed wrote to Qutaibah instructing him to carry on
fighting against the enemies.
This was also the year in which Abu Ja‘far al-Mansoor,
‘Abdullah bin Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas,
was born.

The Biography of al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf athThaqafi and an Account of his Death
His name was al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf bin al-Hakam bin Abu
‘Aqeel bin Mas‘ood bin ‘Amir. He owned several houses in
Damascus including the Dar uz-Zawiyah located next to Ibn
Abul-Hadeed’s palace. He was assigned by ‘Abdul-Malik to
al-Hijaz where killed Ibn az-Zubair, after which he was
400

dismissed and posted to al-‘Iraq. He then moved on to
Dimashq to be closer to ‘Abdul-Malik.
It is reported that Qutaibah bin Muslim said: “Al-Hajjaj bin
Yoosuf delivered a sermon in which he spoke about the grave
and he kept on saying: ‘It is the house of solitude, the house
of estrangement’, until he started to cry, which then caused
those around him to start crying too. He then said: ‘I heard the
AmeerulMu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, say: ‘I heard
Marwan say in his sermon: ‘‘Uthman bin ‘Affan addressed us
in a speech and he said: ‘The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) would neither look at a grave
nor mention the grave without crying. ’”The authenticity of
this Hadeeth is verified in the Sunan by Abu Dawood and
others.
Ash-Shafi‘i (may Allah have mercy on him) said: “I heard
someone mention that al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah entered
upon his wife in the first part of the day while she was picking
at her teeth and so he said to her: ‘By Allah! Had you eaten
your dinner early, I would have thought that this was a
disgusting habit of yours, but if what you are cleaning is from
yesterday then you are dirty’, and because of that he divorced
her. In response, she protested: ‘By Allah, it was neither of
those things. Rather I have been trying to remove a splinter
that I got in my mouth from the Siwak (a small stick used for
brushing the teeth) that I was using earlier on’. Al-Mugheerah
later said to Yoosuf, the father of al-Hajjaj: ‘Marry her, as she
will give birth to a dominant man’, and so he married her. ”
Ash-Shafi‘i also said: “I was informed that once the father of
al-Hajjaj has finished consummating his marriage with her,
he then went to sleep and in his dream it was said to him:
‘Before long you will beget a slaughterer. ’”
Al-Hajjaj built the city of Wasit in the eighty-fourth year,
which he completed by the eighty-sixth year, while others
maintain he finished before this.
401

It was during his time that dots on the Arabic script were
introduced into the Masahif (Arabic manuscripts of the
Qur’an) for the purposes of clarity and accuracy.
He was remarkably astute. It was said that his sword had
become heavy from the oppression and destruction it had
wrought in committing the vilest killings prohibited by Allah.
He would openly display his rage in the manner of the kings
and it is said that he resembled Ziyad bin Abeehi who in fact
looked like ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, according to the claims of
some, despite them being in no way similar.
Al-Hajjaj was born in the thirty-ninth year, while others say
the fortieth or the forty-first year. As he was growing up, he
was known for being sensible and well-spoken, as well as a
Hafiz (memoriser) of the Qur’an. Some of the Salaf (pious
predecessors) even maintain that al-Hajjaj would accomplish
a complete recitation of the Qur’an every night. ‘Abul-‘Ala’
said: “I never saw anyone more eloquently spoken than him
or al-Hasan al-Basri, although al-Hasan was the most
eloquent out of the two. ”
When al-Hajjaj killed Ibn az-Zubair, Makkah was overcome
with grief and so al-Hajjaj ordered the people to gather in the
mosque on which occasion he ascended the pulpit and said,
upon praising and glorifying Allah first: “O people of
Makkah! Your superiors commissioned me with executing
Ibn azZubair’s death and although he was one of best people
of this Ummah, he desired the caliphate and in this way posed
a threat to its people. Regarding this, he was far from obedient
to Allah due to his pursual of what Allah has prohibited. Even
as Adam, who Allah created with his Hands and blew his soul
into him, made His angels prostrate before him, endowed him
with dignity and placed him in His Paradise to dwell therein,
after all this, he fell into error and was therefore removed from
Jannah for his mistake. Adam was certainly much more noble
in the Sight of Allah than Ibn az-Zubair, just as Jannah is a
402

more revered sanctuary than the Ka‘bah. Be mindful of Allah
and He will be mindful of you. ”
It is narrated by Nafi‘ that Ibn ‘Umar remained in isolation on
the nights in which Ibn az-Zubair and alHajjaj were in battle
for the reason that he refused to pray with al-Hajjaj. AthThawri said on the authority of Muhammad bin al-Munkadir
who heard it from Jabir that Ibn ‘Umar would enter upon alHajjaj without greeting him and he would not pray behind
him. Ishaq bin Rahwaih said that Jareer stated that alQa‘qa‘
bin as-Salt said: “Al-Hajjaj gave a sermon in which he said:
‘Verily, Ibn az-Zubair altered the Book of Allah’, to which
Ibn ‘Umar remarked: ‘Allah did not give him the authority to
do such a thing and you neither. Rather, I would say that you
are a liar and it was you who did that! ’”
Al-Asma‘i said: “I heard my paternal uncle say that he was
informed that when al-Hajjaj had finished his business with
Ibn az-Zubair and headed towards al-Madinah, he
encountered a Shaykh (religious elder) who was leaving alMadinah and so he asked him about the condition of its
people. To this, he answered: “It is in the worst of states, as
the son of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)’s disciple has been killed. ” Al-Hajjaj
therefore said: “And who killed him?” The man replied: “The
insolent, damned al-Hajjaj! May Allah curse and ruin him and
deprive him of His good favour! ” The man’s remarks
infuriated al-Hajjaj who said: “O Shaykh! Would you
recognise al-Hajjaj if you saw him?” The man answered:
“Yes. May Allah decree no good for him nor safeguard him
from any harm! ” At that point, al-Hajjaj removed the cover
from his face and said: “You will now know, O Shaykh, when
your blood will be spilt!” Upon realising the severity of the
situation, the Shaykh quickly remarked: “By Allah, what a
strange thing I said, O al-Hajjaj! If you knew me you would
know that I would not normally say such a thing but I am al‘Abbas bin Abu Dawood and I suffer from at least five
403

epileptic fits every day. ” So al-Hajjaj said: “Leave, and may
Allah neither restore health to this insane man nor pardon
him!”

Chapter
Ibn Abud-Dunya said: “Al-Hajjaj, who was remarkably
articulate, would say in his speeches: ‘Verily, Allah created
Adam and his progeny from earth and then caused them to
walk on its surface, eat its fruits, drink its waters and tear it up
to make roads and enclosures, after which He grants victory
over it to some rather than others. He then returns them to the
earth, which devours their flesh just as they ate its fruits,
drinks their blood just as they drank from its rivers, engulfs
them into its belly and then decomposes their bodies just as
they tore it apart to build their roads and enclosures. ”
Ash-Sha‘bi said: “I heard al-Hajjaj give a speech in an
inimitable manner. He once said: ‘Verily, Allah, the Sublime,
prescribed ruin for the world and eternity for the Hereafter
and therefore no ruin comes to that which has been prescribed
eternity just as there is no eternity for that which has been
prescribed ruin. For this reason, do not let yourselves be
deluded by the presence of the world over the absence of the
Hereafter but rather subdue long-term hopes for short-lived
ones. ”
Shareek al-Qadi said on the authority of ‘Abdul-Malik bin
‘Umair who said: “One day, al-Hajjaj said: ‘Whoever has
been afflicted with some trial, we will provide for him in
accordance with his needs’. At that point, a man stood up and
said: ‘Then give me, as I was the one who killed al-Husain. ’
So al-Hajjaj said: ‘And how did you kill him?’The man
replied: ‘I stabbed him with a spear and then carved him into
pieces with my sword. Nobody else participated with me in
his killing. ’So al-Hajjaj said: ‘Get out from here, as by Allah,
404

you and he have never even met in the same place before!
”Thus, he did not give him anything.
Al-Haitham bin ‘Adiyy said: “A man came to al-Hajjaj and
said: ‘My brother left off with Ibn al-Ash‘ath and because of
that my name has been defamed in a collection of poems, I
have been denied maintenance and my house has been ruined.
” So al-Hajjaj said: “Have you not heard the words of the poet
(in alKamil poetic meter) ?
“A criminal is the one who hurts you,
It is possible that even the good are afflicted
By the sins of a close one;
A human might be troubled by the guilt of his kinfolk,
While the guilty is relieved of it. ”
The man therefore said: “O Ameer! I heard Allah say
something else and the saying of Allah is more correct than
that (of the poet). ” So he said: “And what does He say?” The
man said (what means):
“They said: ‘O ruler of the land! Verily, he has an old
father (who will grieve for him), so take one of us in his
place. Indeed we think that you are of the Muhsinoon (gooddoers) ; He said: ‘Allah forbid that we should take anyone
but him with whom we found our property. Indeed (if we did
so), we should be Zalimoon (wrongdoers). ” [Yoosuf, 12:
78, 79]
Upon hearing this, al-Hajjaj shouted to his slave: “O boy!
Remove his name from the poetry, build him a house, give
him his stipend and then go round declaring: ‘Allah speaks
the Truth and the poet is a liar! ’”
405

It is saidthat one day al-Hajjaj was delivering a speech in
which he said: “O people! Patience concerning the
prohibitions of Allah is easier than enduring His punishment.
” A man then stood up and said to him: “Woe unto you, O
Hajjaj! How impudent and immodest you are! You behave as
you do and yet you still have the audacity to say such a thing?!
Your efforts to be humble before Allah are in vain! ”So alHajjaj said to his guard: “Seize him”, and then once he had
finished his sermon he said to the man: “How dare you
address me like that?” So the man replied: “Woe unto you, alHajjaj! You are the one who is impudent towards Allah, not
me. And who are you for me not to be daring towards you,
when you are daring towards Allah, the Lord of the worlds?!
”So al-Hajjaj said: “Let him go”, whereupon he was released.
Al-Mada’ini said: “Al-Hajjaj brought two captives from
among the associates of Ibn al-Ash‘ath whose execution he
ordered. At this point, one of them said: ‘You are obliged to
me for a favour. ‘ Al-Hajjaj therefore asked: ‘And what might
that be?’He said: ‘One day, Ibn al-Ash‘ath spoke ill of your
mother and I rebuked him for it. ” Al-Hajjaj said to him: “And
who can attest to that for you?” He replied: “This companion
of mine”, whereupon al-Hajjaj asked him if it were true and
he replied in the affirmative. AlHajjaj then said: “What
caused you to do what you did?” to which the man replied:
“Hatred and anger for you. ” Thus, al-Hajjaj said: “Release
this man on account of his honesty” and so they were both
released.
Despite his high level of articulacy and eloquent manner of
speech, al-Hajjaj would at times mispronounce some words
when reciting the Qur’an and when he did, Yahya bin Ya‘mar
would pretend not to acknowledge his mistakes. He would
frequently confuse the Arabic “in” with “an” that caused him
to get them the wrong way round. In this manner, he would
read the Verse (which means):
406

“Qul in kana aba’ukum wa abna’ukum” (Say: if your fathers,
your sons. . . ) [at-Tawbah, 9:24] up until “Ahabba ilaikum
(dearer to you than Allah) ” [ibid] that therefore rendered a
grammatically incorrect reading.
On one occasion, al-Hajjaj refused to acknowledge that alHusain belonged to the progeny of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) given that he was
the son of the Prophet’s daughter. Thus, Yahya bin Ya‘mar
said to him: “You have told a lie”, to which al-Hajjaj said:
“Refute what I said from the Book of Allah otherwise I will
chop off your head! ”At which point he recited (what means):
“And among his progeny, Dawood (David) and Sulaiman
(Solomon). ” [al-An‘am, 6:84] up until “And Zakariyya
(Zechariah), and Yahya (John) and ‘Eesa (Jesus) ” [ibid:85].
” Then he said: “According to that, ‘Eesa belongs to the
progeny of Ibraheem (Abraham) because he is a descendant
of his mother Maryam (Mary), just as al-Husain is the son of
the Prophet’s daughter. ” Al-Hajjaj therefore said: “You have
spoken the truth”, upon which he exiled him to Khurasan.
Ibn Duraid narrated on the authority of Abu Hatim as-Sijistani
who heard it from Abu Ubaidah that Ma‘mar bin al-Muthanna
said: “When al-Hajjaj killed Ibn al-Ash‘ath, the people of al‘Iraq praised him for it. Thereupon he made generous
offerings to them in return, and so ‘Abdul-Malik wrote to him,
saying: “It has been brought to the Ameerul-Mu’mineen’s
attention that you spend in one day what he spends in a whole
week, and you spend in one week what he spends in a month.
” He then went on to recite the verses (in at-Taweel poetry):
“You must have Taqwa (fear in and obedience to Allah) in
all matters
And be, for the threat of Allah, humiliate oneself and
horror.
407

Enhance the Kharaj (land tax) of the Muslims and their
spoils,
And be a fortress of strength that surrounds and protects
them. ”
Having received a lengthly reply in poetic form from alHajjaj, ‘Abdul-Malik approved of his justification and wrote
back to him, saying: “Do as you see fit. ”

Demeaning and Audacious Statements
Attributed to al-Hajjaj
Abu Dawood narrates that ‘Asim said: “I heard al-Hajjaj
speaking as he was up on the pulpit and he said: ‘Fear Allah
in what you can, as you will not get a second chance. Listen
to and obey the AmeerulMu’mineen, ‘Abdul-Malik, as you
will not get a second chance in that either. By Allah! If I
instructed the people to exit the Masjid from one door, they
would exit it from another to make their blood and wealth
lawful for me on account of their rebelliousness, and by Allah,
I would not feel remorse over killing a single one of you
either! ”
As-Salt bin Deenar said that he heard al-Hajjaj say on the
Minbar in Wasit: ‘‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ood is the chief of the
hypocrites and if I ever come across him I would cover the
earth in his blood. ” He also said that he once heard him
delivering a sermon whilst on the Minbar in Wasit in which
he recited the Verse (which means):
“Bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any
other after me. ” [Sad, 38:35]
He also said in that speech: “Sulaiman (Solomon) had an
envious eye”, and it was impudent statements like these that
408

made him fall into disbelief – may Allah revile and disgrace
him.
Abu Dawood further narrates that Bazee‘ bin Khalid ad-Dabbi
is reported to have said: “One day, I heard al-Hajjaj say in one
of his sermons: ‘What is nobler, responding to one of the
Messengers or for a people to respond to their caliph?’ So I
said to myself: ‘By Allah! I must never pray a single prayer
behind him and if I find a nation waging war against him then
I will certainly join them. ’”Ishaq adds in his narration: “Abu
Dawood later fought against him in al-Jamajim until his
death. ” If this has been correctly attributed to al-Hajjaj then
it serves to demonstrate his disbelief in that he showed
preference to the status of the caliphate over the status of
prophethood and because he considered a caliph from the
Banu Umayyah tribe better than the Messengers.
Al-Asma‘i said: “One day, when al-Hajjaj was delivering a
sermon, he turned to his right and said: ‘Is alHajjaj not a Kafir (disbeliever; infidel) ?’, and he bowed his
head in silence. He then said again: ‘AlHajjaj is indeed a Kafir
(disbeliever; infidel) ’, whereupon he bowed his head in
silence again. Turning to his left, he repeated himself, saying:
‘Is al-Hajjaj not a Kafir ?’ and he continued to do this several
times until he eventually said: ‘I am certainly a disbeliever, O
people of al-‘Iraq, in al-Lat and al-‘Uzza (preIslamic idols) !
”
By and large, al-Hajjaj showed antipathy towards the people
of al-‘Iraq because of their previous misdeeds, dissension
from the Ummah, disobedience and rebellion.
Al-Baihaqi says that ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez said: “If
nations behave wickedly then those nations will in turn be
supplemented by their own malicious person, and ours is alHajjaj, to dominate over them. ” Abu Bakr bin ‘Ayyash said
on the authority of ‘Asim bin Abun-Najood who said: “There
409

is not a single injuction of Allah except that al-Hajjaj has
violated it. ”
Imam Ahmad narrates that az-Zubair bin ‘Adiyy said: “We
went to Anas bin Malik and complained about how were
being wronged at the hands of al-Hajjaj. Regarding that, Anas
bin Malik said to us: “Be patient till you meet your Lord
(Allah), for no time will come upon you except that the time
following it will be worse than it. I heard that from your
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). ”
Maimoon bin Mihran said: “Al-Hajjaj was summoned to alHusain who was troubled by him and as he stood in front of
him, al-Husain said: “O al-Hajjaj! How many fathers are there
between you and Adam?” He answered: “Many. ” Al-Husain
said: “And where are they?” He replied: “They are dead. ” At
that point, al-Hajjaj bowed his head and al-Husain left.
Abu Dawood Sulaiman bin Salm al-Balkhi narrated on the
authority of an-Nadr bin Shumail from Hisham bin Hassan
who said: “They counted the total number of people that alHajjaj killed indiscriminately and the figure reached
somewhere around one hundred and twenty thousand
murders. ”
Abu Bakr bin al-Muqri’ said: “Abu ‘Aroobah informed us that
‘Amr bin ‘Uthman was informed by his father that he heard
his grandfather say: ‘‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez wrote to
‘Adiyy bin Artat saying: ‘It has been brought to my attention
that you are following the example of al-Hajjaj. Do not follow
his way, as he used to pray the prescribed prayers at the wrong
time and he would exact the Zakat (prescribed charity)
illicitly; whosoever acts in this way has certainly deviated. ”
Ibn ‘Asakir narrated that ash-Sha‘bi said: “Al-Hajjaj is a
believer in the Jibt and the Taghoot (false gods; idols;
seducers to error) and a Kafir (disbeliever; infidel) in Allah,
410

the Magnificent” – and Allah knows best. Ath-Thawri
narrates on the authority of Ma‘mar who heard from Tawoos
that his father said: “It is odd that our brothers in al-Iraq call
al-Hajjaj a believer! ”Ath-Thawri said that Ibn ‘Awn said that
he heard Abu Wa’il asking about al-Hajjaj: “Do you testify
that al-Hajjaj will be among the people of the Hellfire?” It was
answered: “Are you asking me to give a testimony over Allah,
the Magnificent?” AthThawri also said on the authority of
Mansoor: “I asked Ibraheem about the curse of al-Hajjaj and
some of the tyrants about whom he said: ‘Does Allah, the
Sublime, not say (what means):
“No doubt! The Curse of Allah is on the Zalimoon
(polytheists, wrongdoers, oppressors) [Hood, 11:18]?
’Ibraheem said: “It is sufficient for the blind man to be blind
to al-Hajjaj’s affairs. ”
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez is reported to have said: “I did not
envy anything belonging to al-Hajjaj, the enemy of Allah,
other than his love for the Qur’an, the way he would give to
his family and his statement when death approached him,
which was: ‘O Allah, forgive me, for verily the people claim
that You will not. ’”
Abu Bakr bin Abud-Dunya is reported to have said: “‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez used to hate al-Hajjaj and so as al-Hajjaj
was on the brink of death, he uttered to ‘Umar: ‘O Allah,
forgive me as they claimed that You would not. ’”
It is reported that some people of knowledge said: “It was said
to al-Hasan: ‘Al-Hajjaj said such and such a thing as he was
on the brink of death’. Al-Hasan replied: ‘He said that?’They
answered: ‘Yes’. So alHasan said: ‘That befits him. ’”
Abul-‘Abbas al-Mubarrid said on the authority of ar-Riyashi
who said that al-Asma‘i said: ‘When death approached alHajjaj, he began to say (in al-Baseet poetic meter):
411

“O Lord! Enemies have sworn and persisted,
Saying that I am a dweller of Hell;
Do they swear while being ignorant? Woe unto them!
They do not realize the Merciful, Benevolent, and Tolerant.
”
Later, when al-Hasan was told about this, he said: “By Allah!
If he is saved then it is because of those statements! ”Some
have maintained that he then said:
“Indeed, when slaves become grey
In slavery, they are freed reverently.
My Creator, You are more deserving of this benefaction
I have become grey-haired in slavery, so relieve me of Hell.
”
Ibn Abi Dunya said: “Ahmad bin ‘Abdullah at-Tamimi said:
‘When al-Hajjaj died, nobody knew about his death until a
slave-girl happened to see him lying dead, upon which she
began to cry and said: ‘Can it be so that the one who devoured
the food, orphaned of the orphans, the one who widowed the
women, the dispenser of important matters and the master of
the people of ash-Sham is dead?! ’She then began to recite (in
al-Baseet poetic meter):
‘Today, He who was angry with us will show mercy on us.
Today, He who used to put fear in us will give us security. ”
‘Abdur-Razzaq narrated from Ma‘mar who narrated from
Tawoos who narrated from his father that he was informed of
412

al-Hajjaj’s death several times and upon discovering he had
died, he quoted the Verse (which means):
“So the root of the people who did wrong was cut off. And
all praise and thanks are Allah’s, the Lord of the ‘Alameen
(mankind, jinn, and all that exists) ]. ” [al-An‘am, 6:45]
Al-Asma‘i said on the authority of his father: “I saw al-Hajjaj
in my sleep and I said to him: ‘What did Allah do with you?’
So he replied: ‘He killed me in every way that man has ever
been killed. ’”

Amongst the Prominent People Who Died in
the Ninety-Fifth Year Were:
Ibraheem bin Yazeed al-Nakha‘i who once said: “If we
attended a Janazah (funeral) or heard about the death of a
person we would keep thinking about that for days, as we
knew it would be decided during that very time whether the
dead person was going to be taken to Paradiseor to Hellfire. ”
He also said: “An opinion is not sound without a narration and
there is no narration without an opinion. ” He also said: “If
you see a man paying little heed to the first Takbeer (the
exclamation:Allahu Akbar meaning ‘Allah is the Greatest! ’
said at the beginning of the call to prayer), then wash your
hands off his prosperity. ”
Al-Hasan bin Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyyah, whose epithet
was Abu Muhammad, was known for sending generous gifts
to his siblings, he was one of the most learned people in the
fields of Ikhtilaf (difference of opinion; religious variance;
controversy), Fiqh (Jurisprudence) and Tafseer (Qur’anic
Exegesis), and he was one of the most charming and prudent
people amongst the Banu Hashim tribe.

413

Upon Entering the Ninety-Sixth Year
Qutaibah bin Muslimconquered Kashghar in the land of China
and upon attaining his feat, he sent his messengers to
intimidate and threaten the king of China. In the past,
Qutaibah had sworn to Allah that he would not return unless
he had set foot on that land, shackled its kings and dignitaries,
and imposed the Jizyah (head tax on non-Muslims under
Muslim rule) on them should they choose not to enter into
Islam. The messengers were instructed to enter upon the
supreme king who had a magnificent palace in the grand city
of Khan Balaq. The city has been described as possessing
ninety gateways along its boundaries, being one of the richest
cities in terms of produce, trade and wealth such that even
India, with its vast empires and commercial and cultural
wealth, was in awe of China owing to its dynamism and
domination. In fact, the people of China felt no need to travel
beyond their own domain to seek gains from other kingdoms
due to their own abundance of wealth and produce, yet other
nations would travel far and wide to trade with them. Due to
the vastness of their land, other kings aspired to impose the
Kharaj (land tax) on the king of China by subjugating him and
many of his soldiers.
When Qutaibah’s messengers entered the city of Khan Balaq,
they were amazed to discover a highly developed and modern
civilisation. The king of China possessed a powerful empire,
a strong central government and civil service, and a large,
well-organised and efficient army that was firmly entrenched
within its own boundaries. As they approached the grand
citadel, as befitted the great kingdom, the king of China
received them. Addressing Qutaibah’s thirty messengers, of
whom Hubairah was the frontman, the king told his
interpreter: “Ask them: ‘Who are you and what do you
want?’”They replied: “We are the messengers of Qutaibah bin
Muslim and he invites you to Islam; but if you do not accept
his proposal then he imposes the Jizyah (head tax on non414

Muslims under Muslim rule) on you, which he insists you pay
or else he will declare war. ”
The king was annoyed by Qutaibah’s ultimatum and ordered
them to be taken to his chambers until the following day, upon
which he summoned them to his court and began to ask: “How
do you worship your god?” The messengers then offered the
prayer in the usual manner but as they bowed and prostrated,
the king laughed at them and continued to ask: “‘How are you
in your homes?” and so they put on their casual clothes, after
which the king ordered them to be taken away. The next day,
they received a message from the king that said: “How do you
enter upon your kings?” and so they got dressed into their
finest garments, turbans and shawls, after which they went to
see the king who said to them: “Go back”, which they did.
The king then said to his companions: “What did you think of
them?” They replied: “That was similar to how they looked
when they came the first time. ” On the third day, the king
sent another message to them asking: “How do you encounter
your enemies?” Accordingly, they put on their armour and
shields, took up their swords and spears, went outside,
mounted their horses, and then passed by the king so that he
could watch them. As they approached a mountain, they acted
like they were making an attack and in doing so they assumed
their target positions and hurled their spears, following which
they advanced towards the king as if to attack him too and at
that instant it was shouted: “Pull back! ”It was from this point
that fear of the Muslims primarily penetrated the hearts of the
people of China. It follows that the messengers withdrew,
mounted their horses, retrieved their spears and then gave
their horses water to drink as if they had just launched a real
attack. The king later said to his companions: “What do you
think of them?” They replied: “We have never seen anyone
like them! ”
That evening the king sent for their frontman and the best
among them, upon which they sent Hubairah. The king said
415

at his arrival: “You have seen for yourself the majesty of my
kingdom, nobody has prevented you from entering my
presence and you have been treated with dignity and
generosity, so I want to ask you about a matter of which you
must convey the truth to me, otherwise I will have you killed.
” So he said: “Ask me. ” The king then went on to say: “Why
did you not wear the same attire on the first, second and third
days?” Hubairah replied: “As for the first day, that is how we
dress when we are with our families, women and friends. As
for what we wore on the second day, that is our dress for
entering upon our kings. And as for the third day, that is how
we encounter our enemy. ” So the king said: “Your fortune
could not have been better. Go back to your commander
(referring to Qutaibah) and tell him to draw back from my
country as I am aware of his envy and his lack of manpower,
otherwise I will dispatch an army that will annihilate you once
and for all. ” Hubairah then said to him: “Is this what you
would say to Qutaibah?How can he have so few associates
when the first part of his cavalry dispatchment is in your
country and the last is in Manabituz-Zaitoon?! How can he be
envious when he possesses the ability to attack you in your
own country?As for you trying to threaten us with death, we
know that we have our appointed time and so we would be
honoured to die fighting; therefore we neither hate nor fear
it. ”
Thereafter the king enquired: “So what would satisfy your
commander?” He replied: “He has sworn that he will not turn
back until he has set foot on your land, put your kings in
shackles and exacted the Jizyah. ” At that point, the king
proposed: “I will fulfil his vow and exonerate him of it by
sending him some earth from my land and four young men
from the sons of the kings in addition to a large quantity of
gold and priceless Chinese rare silks and materials. . . ” and
the list went on.

416

Thus, they continued to exchange words that ended with both
parties threatening each other. Eventually, however, they
reached an agreement that the king would grant him several
plates of gold, an ample amount of earth from his land for
Qutaibah to step on and send some of his sons and the sons of
other kings of the land so that he could put their necks in
shackles, in addition to a generous amount of money - all in
accordance with Qutaibah’s oath. Sources suggest that,
altogether, the king sent four hundred males comprising his
own sons and the sons of the other kings.
Qutaibah willingly accepted the terms, partially because the
matter had taken a turn for the worse when al-Waleed bin
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan passed away, which devastated his
vision and aspirations in this matter.
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik undertook a military campaign
throughout as-Sa’ifah while al-‘Abbas bin alWaleed
penetrated ar-Room as far as Toolas and al-Marzabaneen,
which he conquered.
This year witnessed the impressive completion of the Jami‘
al-Umawi (Umayyad Mosque) in Damascus at the hands of
its founder, the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, al-Waleed bin ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan (may Allah reward him the best of
rewards). The foundations of this mosque were originally laid
for a temple built by the Ancient Greek Chaldeans who at one
time prospered in Damascus. During the Roman period, the
Temple of Jupiter occupied the space. This edifice was
transformed to a church in the fourth century, which was later
expanded to form the Cathedral of St. John situated on the
western side of the older temple.
From the time of the Ancient Greeks, this temple was the site
for worshipping the seven planets, which were attributed to
the seven heavens or skies. Each of these divinities was
depicted in some form on each of the doors to the temple such
417

that each door held a special significance that they then
attached to an annual celebration. In fact, it was the Ancient
Greeks who first built observatories to study the movement of
stars and planets, their connections and comparisons, which
had been observed specifically from this site, situated
adjacent to the flowing water from between the two
mountains. The water from these rivers would be channelled
and filtered to flow to high and low buildings around
Damascus, which during the Greek era was undoubtedly one
of the most prosperous cities, if not the most prosperous.
Interestingly, the original temple that formed the foundations
of the Damascus Mosque was built in alignment with the
poles, which meant that the people would pray in the with the
direction of the North Pole while its Mahareeb (recesses
indicating the direction of prayer) were facing the South Pole.
The door to the temple would open in the direction of the
Qiblah (facing the Ka‘bah in Makkah) behind the Mihrab that
exists today, which we can see for ourselves along with the
Mahareeb facing the Poles. We can also see the door made
from stone on which is inscribed some writing in its original
script and two relatively smaller doors on the right and left
sides of the building. To the west of the temple was an
extremely lofty palace supported by huge pillars, while to the
east was the Qasr Jairoon palace belonging to the king, and
there were also two grand chambers that had also belonged to
previous rulers.
The Greeks continued to flourish in Damascus and one of
their many accomplishments was that they succeeded in
erecting numerous extraordinary and wonderful buildings and
strengthening the city’s commercial influence until
approximately three hundred years after Christ, when the
people of ash-Sham were defeated at the hands of Constantine
II, the eldest son of Constantine I. It was under the rule of
Constantine I that the imperial capital of ar-Room (the already
existing Byzantium), Constantinople, was established and a
418

new religious policy that tolerated Christianity was
implemented therein. Despite his patronage to Christianity
Constantine instructed that the Christians and non-Christians
should be united in observing the “venerable day of the sun”,
referring to the eastern sun-worship which Aurelian had
helped introduce. Moreover, his coinage still carried the
symbols of the sun-cult. Even when Constantine dedicated the
new capital of Constantinople, which became the seat of
Byzantine Christianity for a millennium, he did so wearing
the Apollonian sun-rayed diadem. In this way, the figures of
the old deities were either replaced or assimilated into the
framework of Christian symbolism.
Throughout his rule, Constantine supported the Church
financially, built basilicas, granted privileges to the clergy (e.
g. exemption from certain taxes), promoted Christians to high
offices, and returned property confiscated during the
Diocletianic persecution. His most famous building projects
include the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and Old Saint
Peter’s Basilica. In fact, it has been claimed that during his
rule alone, he built some twelve thousand churches.
The Christians tranformed this splendid temple built by the
Greeks in Damascus into a church wherein they built an
eastern altar and named it the Church of Maryuhanna, while
others say its was called the Church of Yoohanna, i. e. St.
John’s Church. Christianity continued to be practiced in
Damascus and other places in that region for close to three
hundred years until Allah sent Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) as His Messenger as we
recalled in his biographical account in this book. It was
Allah’s decree to send his message (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) to the emperor of ar-Room, who at that
time was Caesar (Heraclius), to call him to the Way of Allah,
the Majestic and Sublime. Accounts relate how Heraclius
questioned and addressed Abu Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb
regarding Islam.
419

It follows that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) dispatched three of his delegates, Zaid bin Harithah
(his freed slave), Ja‘far bin Abu Talib and ‘Abdullah bin
Rawahah, to al-Balqa’ (in modern day Jordan) bordering ashSham. In retaliation, the Romans dispatched an enormous
army against them, killing these three delegates and many
others who were with them. This forced the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to wage war against the
imminent threat of ar-Room and therefore they entered ashSham in the year of the Battle of Tabook. The Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) returned with the
Muslims that year in the season of severe heat, having
contained the situation and restricted the opposition.
Following the Prophet’s death, as-Siddeeq (i. e. Abu Bakr)
dispatched several armies to ash-Sham and al‘Iraq, the details
of which have been provided in this book for which all praise
is due to Allah. Following this, Allah granted victory to the
Muslims over the entire region of ash-Sham, which included
the stronghold of the city of Damascus. In our account of the
conquest of Damascus, we briefly mentioned that once
Islamic rule had been established therein, Allah bestowed His
Mercy upon it and guided it to piety and righteousness. Abu
Ubaidah was appointed by Khalid bin al-Waleed to besiege
the al-Jabiyah Gate of Damascus. It was Abu Ubaidah who
conceded peace to Damascus after Khalid bin al-Waleed
attacked the city and conquered it by force. However, due to
some differences, Abu Ubaidah, Shurahbeel bin Hasanah and
‘Amr bin al-‘As proposed peace to the Christians, unaware of
Khalid’s attack from the eastern gate on the other side of the
city. In spite of this, Khalid agreed to sign the peace treaty in
accordance with which an agreement of peace had been
reached for one-half of the city, while the other half was to be
taken by force. In this manner, ‘Abu ‘Ubaidah was able to
convert the eastern half of the ancient temple structure, which
was then St. John’s Church, into a mosque, with the western
half remaining in Christian hands.
420

As we previously mentioned, St. John’s Church continued to
be divided between the Muslims and Christians from the
fourteenth year of the Hijrah until the month of Dhul-Qa‘dah
in the eighty-sixth year, when al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik
ascended to the caliphate during the month of Shawwal. The
prayer space had become inadequate in terms of capacity and
the structure required renovation, and at the same time, the
Christians would often try to annoy the Muslims by raising
their voices when reading the Gospels and praying. For these
reasons, al-Waleed wanted to distance the Christians from the
Muslims and at the same time to add the acquisition of this
grand church to the Muslims’ victories. Hence, he negotiated
with Christian leaders to take over the space, and in return, alWaleed promised that the remaining churches around the city
would go untouched – specifically the Church of the Cross
inside the eastern gate, the Tillul-Jubn Church, Humaid bin
Darrah’s Church and the Virgin Mary’s Cathedral.
Yet, the Christians strongly opposed al-Waleed’s ideas,
saying: “Hand over your treaty” and in order to gratify them,
the treaty that had been ratified during the time of the Sahabah
(Companions of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was read out to them in the presence of al-Waleed.
Notably, the Church of Tooma that was situated outside the
Tooma gateway by the riverbank was not stipulated in the
treaty, even though it was supposedly bigger than St. John’s
Church, and so al-Waleed said: “You shall see! I am going to
destroy this church (of Tooma) and convert it into a mosque.
” At this, the people exclaimed: “No, leave it as it is, O
Ameerul-Mu’mineen, and take the rest of St. John’s Church
instead! ”Due to this, al-Waleed refrained from interfering
with the other churches and instead occupied the other half of
St. John’s Church to complete the Masjid. When the project
began, all the remaining fragments from the Roman to
Byzantine periods were removed and the grand, magnificent
Masjid was planned as inspired by Islamic principles.
421

As the construction of the Masjid commenced, al-Waleed
issued instructions for the preparation of demolition
equipment in full view of the leaders and senior chiefs among
the people. Consequently, they gathered before al-Waleed
with their bishops and pastors, who shouted: “O AmeerulMu’mineen! It is written in our books that whoever destroys
this church is a mad man. ” Al-Waleed responded: “I would
love to be mad for the sake of Allah, the Majestic and
Supreme, and by Allah, nobody has destroyed it before me!
”He then climbed to the top of the minaret that accommodated
a large clock and monasteries of the monks, where he came
across a monk whom he ordered to climb down. However, the
monk challenged him and so al-Waleed took him by the back
of his head and pushed him all the way down the stairs. After
this, al-Waleed climbed to the highest part of the church,
above the grand altar where the statue that had come to be
known as ash-Shahid (the Witness) stood, and because of
which the monks began to shout: “Beware of the Witness!
”Al-Waleed replied: “I am the first to put an axe in the face of
the Witness”, at which point it is said that he took up his
golden axe, glorified Allah and then smashed it to pieces. He
then went to another statue and began to demolish that as the
Christian leaders rushed to the debris and the Muslims
exclaimed: “Allahu Akbar (Allah is the Greatest) ! ” three
times.
The Christians bawled and screamed in despair together at the
doorway of Jairoon (the door of the Damascus Mosque facing
east) and so al-Waleed ordered his commander-in-chief, Abu
Natil Riyah alGhassani, to beat them until they moved off,
which he did accordingly. Al-Waleed and the Muslims then
took it upon themselves to destroy every altar, ark and statue
existing within the Christian quarters of the church until all
that remained was open space. The task of rebuilding it got
underway, consistent with a superbly elegant and unique
design worthy of a grand Masjid, which we shall elaborate on
in the forthcoming chapters.
422

Before embarking on the project, al-Waleed employed many
labourers, engineers and architects to undertake the
construction of the Masjid. His brother and heir to the
caliphate, Sulaiman bin ‘AbdulMalik, had been the one to
prompt al-Waleed to commence the project. Having resolved
to do so, it is said al-Waleed contacted the emperor of arRoom requesting him to produce marble amongst other things
and to assist him in supplying the resources and materials he
required for the construction of this Masjid.
He warned him, stating that if he did not comply with his
requests then he would dispatch his armies to invade his
country and ruin every church in the land, even the Church of
al-Quds (Jerusalem), namely, the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre and Old Saint Peter’s Basilica. The emperor of arRoom acquiesced and provided immense resources upon
request, in addition to two hundred workmen. In spite of this,
he wrote to al-Waleed saying: “If your father had known your
weakness and what it is that you are doing then he would
certainly have been disgraced by you! ”
Having received the letter of the emperor of ar-Room, alWaleed wanted to send him a reply butbefore he did so, he
called a meeting with his people, amongst whom was alFarazdaq, the well-known poet, who said: “I will give him an
answer from the Book of Allah, the Sublime. ” So al-Waleed
said: “And what is that? Woe unto you! ”He replied: “Allah,
the Sublime, says (what means):
“And We made Sulaiman (Solomon) understand the case
[better, ] though to each of them we gave Hukm (right
judgement of the affairs of Prophethood) and knowledge. ”
[al-Anbiya’, 21:79]
Even though Sulaiman was the son of Dawood (David), Allah
granted him better understanding than that of his father. ”
423

Satisfied with his reply, al-Waleed sent it to the emperor of
ar-Room. Al-Farazdaq had also said (in al-Baseet poetry):
“You have separated Christians in their churches
And worshippers at daybreak and darkness; They are united
when they pray but their faces differ as they kneel before
God and their idols;
How does it compare?! A bell being struck
By the people of the cross and sleepless recitals;
You have understood the need for conversion away from
them as
They rule for cultivation and sheep;
Allah has granted you insight to convert their pledge of
allegiance
Into a mosque where pleasant words are recited;
Dawood (David) and the rightly-guided leaders when they
ruled
Had their children pulling wool;
We do not know of a father living on earth
Who had the best descendants and not the best rule. ”
Plans were afoot to build the dome in the centre of the prayer
hall which came to be known as the Nasr Dome (Dome of the
Eagle), since it seemed to represent an eagle’s head, while the
transept represented the body and the aisles were the wings.
The top of the dome was made of stone and built to rest on
four great pillars above the transept. Fortuitously, as the dome
424

was being raised above the pillars, both the dome and pillars
came crashing to the ground, which prompted al-Waleed to
turn to one of the engineers and say: “I want you in particular
to build me this dome. ” To this, he replied: “I will do so
provided that you take a contractually binding oath with Allah
that nobody but I shall build it”, and so he did. As an initial
development, the engineer erected the pillars immediately and
covered them with sheets. However, once he had done that,
he withdrew from the project for a whole year during which
time he never reported to al-Waleed even once. A year later,
the engineer reappeared to resume the construction of the
dome, however, by this time, al-Waleed had grown impatient
about its progress and so the engineer took alWaleed to show
him what he had done as the people looked on. However, as
he removed the sheets from the pillars, he was shocked to find
that they had sunk into the ground. At that point, al-Waleed
yelled: “Is this all that you have accomplished?! ”It was
following this incident that the engineer eventually took great
pains to complete the job in fulfillment of his contract.
The two main materials used for the ceiling and walls were
Fusayfusa’a mosaic and marble. The Fusayfusa’a fragments
were mixed with coloured glass particles and others of gold
and silver leaf covered glass in addition to bits of stone and
marble between, to create a unique reflective material that
accentuated its geometric and floral patterns. The Fusayfusa’
was originally used to cover the top parts of the walls on the
interior and exterior sides in the Haram (sanctuary), the
Riwaqs, the arches and the undersides of the vaults. The
painters constructed patterns forming scenic panels that
symbolized the magnificent natural landscapes of Damascus,
like the River Barada flowing alongside the great Umawi
(Umayyad) palaces on its banks and orchards of fruit-bearing
trees that are thought to be an imaginative vision of Paradise.
Heavily veined marble was used to clad the lower parts of the
walls, since it is a stronger, more durable material than the
425

mother of pearl mosaics. The veins of the marble were used
to create patterns in which the panels were joined and attached
to the wall, which is about four meters above the ground. All
that is left of these panels are small holes that mark the place
where the marble masons attached them to the wall. A highly
ornate band of carved marble separated these two materials
on the walls, the vegetationinspired designs were known as
the “great golden vines” because of their resemblance to
intertwined grape vines that were common in the Classical
(Roman and Byzantine) periods. Some fragments of this
famous band still remain today in the Masjid.
Textual inscriptions filled the gaps between these materials
and ornaments, and added another layer of detail to the
artistically designed walls. They portrayed religious verses,
dates and dedications to various patrons to the restorations of
specific parts of the Masjid. The words were scripted using
the Fusayfusa’in two contrasting colours, usually gold
calligraphic text over a royal blue background.
Al-Waleed went to great lengths to adorn the roof of the
Masjid along with its golden interior decor with such
diligence that some of his people said to him: “You have
certainly inconvenienced those people after you with daubing
its surfaces with clay”, as the Masjid needed this to be done
every year as maintenance. Al-Waleed therefore ordered for
all the lead in the land to be collected in place of the clay,
based on the logic that lead would be lighter on the ceiling’s
surfaces.
Accordingly, the task of gathering lead from every province
of ash-Sham and other regions was undertaken but sooner
than expected, al-Waleed’s men became desperate in their
search for it until they eventually came across a woman who
possessed tremendous sums of lead in a storehouse. Assuming
that they could take possession of it, al-Waleed’s men began
to estimate its value but to their surprise the woman said: “I
426

am not prepared to sell it unless its weight is valued at the
price of silver. ” Thus, they wrote to the Ameerul-Mu’mineen
in that regard and he replied: “Purchase it from her even at the
value of silver. ” It was after they had made the woman a
generous offer for the lead that she said: “Since you were
willing to pay all that then accept this lead as charity for the
sake of Allah to go onto the ceilings of the Masjid. ” Upon
this, they accepted her donation and marked its sheets with
the words “lillah” (For Allah’s sake). It is even said that the
woman was an Israelite and that they courteously wrote on the
sheets of lead:
“These were contributed by the Israelite woman. ”
Abu Qusayy said: “Four hundred crates of gold, each of which
was valued at fourteen thousand Deenars, were spent on the
construction of the Grand Masjid of Damascus. ” He also said:
“A guard went to alWaleed and said: ‘O AmeerulMu’mineen! The people are saying that you are illegitimately
spending money that belongs to the Baitul-Mal (Public
Treasury). ” After the congregational prayer, al-Waleed
therefore shouted for the people to gather round whereupon
he ascended the Minbar and began to address them, saying: “I
have been informed about what you have been saying about
me spending money from the Baitul-Mal improperly. O ‘Amr
bin Muhajir, get up and go and account for the money within
the Baitul-Mal” and so he was escorted by mule to the Masjid.
The money was then brought to him as he sat under the great
dome and the bags of solid gold and pure silver were emptied
out in front of him, which formed such high piles that a man
standing on one side of the Masjid would not be able to see a
man standing on the other side of it.
Accordingly, ‘Amr was brought some scales and he dutifully
weighed all the money, which by his estimation amounted to
enough to provide for the people for the next three years,
while another narration states sixteen more years. At this, the
427

people rejoiced and began to praise and glorify Allah, the
Majestic, after which al-Waleed said: “O people of
Damascus! O people of Damascus! Four things mark your
superiority over the rest of the world: your climate, your
water, your fruits and your baths. To these I wanted to add a
fifth: this mosque. ” Delighted and elated, the people praised
Allah, the Sublime, and then left as they gave thanks to Him
and invoked His name.
The exterior walls of the mosque were built in the Roman
period when the building functioned as a temple. Four defense
towers were built in each corner, but only the two southern
ones remained when alWaleed began his project. These
towers were used as foundations to erect the eastern and
western minarets. Al-Waleed then built a third square towershaped minaret known as the Mi’dhanatul-Aroos (The Bride
of Minarets) near the northern gate. In each corner of this
temple there used to stand very tall minarets that were built
by the Greeks as watch towers; however, in later years the two
northern towers collapsed, while the other two are still
standing today. After the eastern part of the temple fell down
in later years, the Christians contributed a great deal of money
towards its reconstruction, which they performed to the
highest standards, specifically with regards to the Eastern
Minaret that – and Allah knows best – ‘Eesa (Jesus (Peace be
upon him) ) will descend onto towards the end of time after
casting out the Dajjal (Anti-Christ), as Imam Muslim verifies
in his Saheeh on the authority of an-Nawwas bin Sam‘an.
Following the successful completion of the Umawi
(Umayyad) Mosque, there was not a more marvelous or more
impressive building standing on the face of the earth, so much
so that if one were to look at it for its exquisiteness and beauty,
it would be hard to believe that one was not looking at an
absolute miracle.

428

In later days, Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik contributed to
enhancing the embellishments of the Masjid during his rule.
However, upon ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s ascension to the
Khilafah, he ordered that the gold be stripped off the walls
and ceilings and for all the mother of pearl mosaics and
marble masons to be removed and returned to the Baitul-Mal,
which he then replaced with clay mud. Of course, the people
were extremely annoyed by this and so the dignitaries
gathered together to confront ‘Umar, upon which Khalid bin
‘Abdullah al-Qasri said: “I will speak to him. ” Thus, upon
meeting him, Khalid said: “That was not for you to do, O
Ameerul-Mu’mineen”, to which ‘Umar said: “And why not,
O Ibnul-Kafirah (son of an infidel)?” The reason ‘Umar
addressing him in this way was beacuse Khalid’s mother was
a Byzantine Christian who bore just one son and so Khalid
replied: “O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! Even though she was a
Kafirah (disbeliever; infidel), she gave birth to a believing
man! ”So ‘Umar said: “You are right”, which caused him to
feel embarrassed. He then said: “So why did you say that?”
Khalid replied: “O Ameerul-Mu’mineen, it is because most of
the marble that was in the Masjid was purchased by the
Muslims from the different regions with their own money and
so it does not belong to the Baitul-Mal”, at which point ‘Umar
bowed his head in silence.
Al-Farazdaq once said in reference to the Grand Mosque of
Damascus: “The people of Damascus have a palace belonging
to the palaces of Paradise in their land. ”
Accountsmention that when al-Mahdi, the ‘Abbasid AmeerulMu’mineen, entered Damascus, he had wanted to visit the
Baitul-Maqdis (Holy Sanctuary in Jerusalem) but upon
looking at the Masjid of Damascus, he said to his scribe, Abu
‘Ubaidullah al-Ash‘ari: “The Banu Umayyah tribe
(Umayyads) preceded us in three things:this Masjid, the likes
of which I do not know on the face of the earth; their nobility;
and ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, as by Allah, we could never
429

match him! ”He then went to the Baitul-Maqdis and as he
looked at the Sakhrah (Dome of the Rock), which was built
by ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, he said to his scribe: “And this
is the fourth thing. ”
Ibn ‘Asakir said: “Some literary figures once sang to me in
the Masjid of Damascus:
“The beauty of the Damascus Mosque is widely recognised
As well as its marvellous contents;
A splendid, fine grace for
What the eye catches of its charm;
Its land is pleasant and blessed
With favour and fortune that marks its prosperity;
Its mosque contains all gracefulness
That excels other cities’ mosques;
A building that has been established skilfully
May Allah never waste its founder’s efforts
To whom tribute and credit can be given;
Honest news is narrated that pleases its hearer,
Its trees are still fruitful
Not affected by the pushing winds
As if the fruits were implanted emeralds
In a shining gold land;
430

It has fruits that you might think are already ripe
And it is not feared that they will be rotten’
They are picked by glance and are not damaged
By hands or by traders;
If you contemplate its viaduct or roof
Its founder’s dexterity is apparent;
If you focus on its dome adornment
Its diversity will confuse reason;
Assemblies of knowledge are neatly organized within it
That relieves the mind in its gatherings;
Each of its doors has a place of purification
The security of which has been secured by the people;
Water continues to flow there
From the source of its fountains;
Its markets are still bustling
And its streets are crowded with people. ”

The Superiority of the Grand Mosque of
Damascus According to the Accounts and
Sayings of the Best of Men
It is narrated that Qatadah said concerning the words of Allah,
the Sublime, (which mean): “By the fig” [at-Teen, 95:1] refers
431

to the Mosque of Damascus, while the latter part of the Verse
(which means): “And the olive” [ibid] refers to the BaitulMaqdis (Holy Sanctuary in Jerusalem). The second Verse
(which means): “By Mount Sinai” [ibid:2] alludes to when
Allah spoke to Moosa (Moses) and the Verse (which means):
“By this city of security” [ibid:3] refers to Makkah. Similarly,
‘Uthman bin Abul-‘Atikah said that with regard to the Verse
(which means): “By the fig” [at-Teen, 95:1], the people of
knowledge held this to mean the Mosque of Damascus, as
maintained by Ibn ‘Asakir.
Duhaim is reported to have said: “The four walls of the
mosque were built by Prophet Hood (the prophet known in
the Old Testament as Eber, upon him be peace), though they
were not clad in mother of pearl mosaic, as this was done later
by al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik who raised the walls above
the marble. ” It has otherwise been said that Prophet Hood
only built the Qiblah Wall (facing Makkah).
More recently, historians tend to refer to the Qiblah Corner on
the side of the western gate as the “Corner of al-Khidr” (a
well-known legendary figure) for reasons that are unknown to
me. In any case, frequent reference is given to the Sahabah
(Companions) praying within the mosque, which alone
suffices as confirmation of its superiority and revered position
above other mosques in which they also prayed. The first
person to lead the prayer in the mosque was Abu ‘Ubaidah
bin al-Jarrah, the Ameer of the leaders of ash-Sham, one of
the ten promised Paradise and a trustee of this Ummah.
Actually, many of the Sahabah prayed in this moque before it
underwent the aforementioned changes made by al-Waleed.
However, subsequent to these changes, none of the Sahabah
are reported to have been seen praying therein, other than
Anas bin Malik (May Allah be pleased with him) who arrived
in Damascus in the ninety-second year of the Hijrah as alWaleed was building it. When Anas prayed inside it, alWaleed saw him and on that occasion Anas criticized him for
432

performing his prayers at the last possible time (as we
mentioned in the biography of Anas), which happened in the
year before his death in the ninety-third year.
According to tradition, ‘Eesa Ibn Maryam will pray in this
mosque after he reappears towards the end of time, once he
has cast out the Dajjal (Anti-Christ) and prevailed over the
region. The people will unanimously become united under his
rule in Damascus, which will be ordained with guidance and
the elimination of deviance. It is said that he will descend
upon the Eastern Minaret in Damascus at the time of the Fajr
(dawn) prayer whereupon the call to prayer will customarily
be made and the Imam (prayer leader) of the people will say:
“Proceed, O Spirit of Allah! ” Some reports state that once the
call to prayer has been established, ‘Eesa will pray behind a
man from that Ummah who is referred to as the Mahdi– and
Allah knows best.
‘Eesa will then set forth with the people and catch up with the
Dajjal at the site of ‘Aqabah Afeeq (other reports give Bab
Ludd as the place), where ‘Eesa will slay the Dajjal with his
own hands. We previously mentioned this when elucidating
the saying of Allah, the Sublime (which means):
“And there is not one of the people of the Scripture (Jews and
Christians) who will not believe in him [‘Eesa (Jesus, son of
Mary), as only a Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and a human being] before his death. ”
[an-Nisa’, 4:159] In the Saheeh traditions it is narrated that
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “By Him (Allah) in Whose Hands is my soul,
surely the son of Maryam (Mary), ‘Eesa (Jesus), will before
long descend amongst you people (Muslims) and judge
mankind justly by the Law of the Qur’an (as a just ruler). He
will then break the cross, slaughter the pigs and abolish the
Jizyah (head-tax on all non-Muslims under the protection of
433

the Muslim government). He will not accept (any religion)
other than Islam. ”
This narration altogether implies that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon
him) will descend once this region has been besieged by the
Dajjal and this will take place at the site of the minaret that
was built during the period under discussion by the Christians
who restored it with their own money after it had been burnt
down. Subsequent to this, ‘Eesa will bring about their
destruction, causing them to perish and ruin. When he
descends, it is said that he will be standing in between two
angels with his hands on both their shoulders. In appearance,
he is described as having a reddish complexion, of medium
height and some accounts further mention that he will be
wearing Mumassaratan (two garments), while his head will
look as if it is dripping although it will not be wet. This will
take place at the time of Fajr (dawn) whereupon he will
descend upon the minaret and establish the prayer within the
greatest mosque in Damascus, i. e. the Great Mosque of
Damascus.
The narration of an-Nawwas bin Sam‘an al-Kilabi is verified
in Saheeh Muslim, which states: “He will descend upon the
White Minaret east of Damascus. ” According to the
narrator’s understanding – and Allah knows best – this could
imply that ‘Eesa will descend upon the Eastern Minaret in
Damascus. I have been informed, although I have never
endorsed this claim myself, even now, that these are the words
of this Hadeeth in some compilations. Allah will determine
which of these views are in fact correct.

References Made in Connection with the
Head of Yahya bin Zakariyya (Peace be
upon him)
Ibn ‘Asakir narrates on the authority of Zaid bin Waqid who
said: “Al-Waleed put me in charge of the workers assigned to
434

the project of constructing the Mosque of Damascus, during
which time we unearthed a cavern that we then informed alWaleed about. That night, he turned up holding a candle in his
hand and as we proceeded down into the cavern, we disovered
a modest little church, just three cubits by three cubits in size,
and in which lay a closed chest. Al-Waleed then opened it and
inside it was a basket containing the head of Yahya bin
Zakariyya (John, the son of Zachariah) and on which (the
basket) was written the words:[This is the head of Yahya bin
Zakariyya]. Without further ado, al-Waleed firmly ordered
that it be returned to its original place and said: ‘Erect a pillar
above this cavern amidst the other pillars’, and so, a pillar was
made so that the head could be placed safely inside it. ”
Al-Waleed bin Muslim is reported to have said: “When alWaleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik ordered for the Mosque of
Damascus to be built, a stone tablet with inscriptions was
discovered in the Qiblah Wall of the mosque. It was sent to
al-Waleed, who forwarded it to ar-Room. However, the
people of ar-Room were unable to decipher it and they passed
it on to the Hebrews who also failed to to make sense of it. ”
It was later suggested that al-Waleed should consult Wahb bin
Munabbih on the matter. Upon informing him about the stone
tablet being found in the Wall of the Qiblah– significantly,
this wall was supposedly built by Prophet Hood (Peace be
upon him) – and the issue of decoding its inscription, Wahb
took a look at it and right away he began to shake his head as
he read it. The contents of the tablet were as follows:
[In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful:O son
of Adam! If you could see how little remains of your lifespan,
you would be less keen to pursue your hopes and desires.
Indeed, you will regret it when your feet eventually slip from
beneath you and when your family and servants will leave you
on your own, when your beloved ones forsake you and your
companions desert you; you will then be reduced to a state
where you will suffer cold and are unable to respond.
435

At that time, you will neither be able to turn to your family
nor increase your good deeds, so do something for yourself
before the Day of Judgement, before the time of regret and
remorse, before your death will take place and your soul will
be taken from you. At that time, no wealth will benefit you
nor will any son you have begotten nor a brother you have left
behind. Then, you will be in a condition amid the earth where
your neighbours will be dead people. Therefore, seize the
opportunity of your life before your death, your strength
before your weakness and your health before your sickness,
and before you will be seized and prevented from taking any
action. This has been written at the time of Sulaiman
(Solomon) the son of Dawood (David (Peace be upon him) ).
”

“The Door of the Clock”
The judge ‘Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Zabr said: “The Qiblah
entrance to the mosque was otherwise known as the ‘Door of
the Clock’ due to the waterclock feature that used to be in
constant operation just outside of the door. During the day a
small crescent moved at a constant speed in front of the doors;
at every hour, a door rotated to reveal a different colour and
the figure of a falcon would lean forward, discharging pellets
onto cymbals, upon which they resumed their upright
positions. Above the doors, a zodiac circle rotated at constant
speed. ” This description could suggest two things:that the
waterclock was situated outside the Qiblah entrance to the
mosque, which was called the Bab uz-Ziyadah, although it is
also said that this name was given to it in more recent times
after the building of the mosque -- a claim that does not
contradict that the clock was present since the days of the
judge Ibn az-Zabr. Or it could otherwise imply the existence
of another door on the eastern side of the Qiblah wall to the
mosque resembling the Babuz-Ziyadah, outside of which was
the waterclock. It is possible that it could have later been
shifted to outside of the Bab ul-Warraqeen to where it stands
436

until the present day (i. e at the entrance to the mosque from
the East) – Allah knows best.

The Inauguration of the Umayyad Mosque
Hisham bin ‘Ammar, the public speaker of Damascus, said:
“The first person to recite in the Mosque of Damascus was
Hisham bin Isma‘eel bin Hisham bin al-Mugheerah alMakhzoomi and in Palestine it was al-Waleed bin ‘AbdurRahman al-Jurashi. ”
The person Hisham bin Isma‘eel who is being referred to here
was the former deputy of al-Madinah and the one who beat
Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab upon his refusal to pledge allegiance
to al-Waleed bin ‘AbdulMalik prior to his father’s death. AlWaleed later dismissed him from his post in al-Madinah and
entrusted it to ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-Azeez as we mentioned
earlier.
The inaugural ceremony of this mosque was attended by
various prominent predecessors belonging to the Tabi‘een
(second and third generations following the Companions),
including Hisham bin Isma‘eel alMakhzoomi, his slave,
Rafi‘, and Isma‘eel bin ‘Abdullah bin Abul-Muhajir. The sons
of ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan were appointed to office such
that the deputyship of Africa was assigned to Hisham bin
‘Abdul-Malik, and his sons, ‘Abdur-Rahman and Marwan.
Among the district judges who attended it were Abu Idrees alKhawlani, Numair bin Aws al-Ash‘ari, Yazeed bin Abu
Malik al-Hamdani, Salim bin ‘Abdullah al-Muharibi and
Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah bin Labeed al-Asadi.
As for the jurists, Muhaddithoon (transmitters of Prophetic
traditions) and Huffaz (memorisers of the Qur’an) in
attendance was Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman al-Qasim bin ‘Abdur437

Rahman, the servant of the family of Mu‘awiyah, Makhool,
and so on.

438

Chapter
The project of building the Mosque of Damascus commenced
towards the end of the eighty-sixth year, and the church that
originally stood on its foundations was destroyed during the
month of Dhul-Qa‘dah also of this year. Hence, once the
demolition had been carried out and the construction had
commenced, it was completed after a period of ten years,
whilst any progress that was to be made in this year (i. e. the
ninety-sixth year) was brought to a halt.
It was during this year that the mosque’s founder, al-Waleed
bin ‘Abdul-Malik, passed away and so responsibility of the
project was entrusted to his brother, Sulaiman, as we
previously stated.

439

The Biography of al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik,
the Founder of the Mosque of Damascus
His name was al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan bin
al-Hakam bin Abul-‘As and he was born in the fiftieth year
after the Hijrah. His parents afforded him a luxurious life and
consequently he grew up undisciplined, besides lacking
proficiency in the Arabic language. He was tall, had a dark
complexion that had been scarred by smallpox, and was flat
nosed. During his lifetime, he saw Sahl bin Sa‘d and Anas bin
Malik, the latter of whom he also spoke to. As we mentioned
in the biography of Anas, when al-Waleed approached him,
he asked him what he had heard concerning the portents of
the Hour. He also spoke to Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab as
maintained by Az-Zuhri and others.
Al-Laith says: “In the seventy-eighth year, al-Waleed invaded
the land of ar-Room in addition to leading the people on the
Hajj Pilgrimage. ” Others maintain that he invaded ar-Room
in the year prior to this while he invaded Malatyah (Malatya
Province, Turkey) and elsewhere in the following year. His
ring was engraved with the words: “I sincerely believe in
Allah”, while others say it said: “O Waleed! Verily, you are a
dead man. ” It is said that his last words before death were:
“Glory be to Allah, all praise belongs to Allah and there is no
one worthy of worship but Him. ”
There are claims suggesting that al-Waleed spoke
ungrammatical Arabic, like it has been falsely alleged that one
day he read the following verse when delivering a sermon
(what means): “Ya laitaha kanatilqadiyah (Would that it
(death) had been my end! ) ” [al-Haqqah, 69:27] whereupon
he put a dammah (the vowel u) on the ta’ in “laitaha” to
incorrectly render “laituha” to mean: “Would that it be your
end and Allah relieves us of it! ”He also used to say: “Ya
ahlul-Madinah [O people of al-Madinah]” with a dammah
vowel (u) on the ahl instead of a fathah (the vowel a).
440

One day, ‘Abdul-Malik said to a man from the Quraish: “You
are a man who speaks ungrammatical Arabic”, to which he
responded: “Your son, al-Waleed, speaks ungrammatically. ”
So ‘Abdul-Malik said: “But, my son Sulaiman does not”,
whereupon the man said: “Nor does my brother, Abu so and
so. ”
Ibn Jareer says: “I was informed by ‘Umar that ‘Ali (Ibn
Muhammad al-Mada’ini) said: ‘Al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik
was the best Caliph in the eyes of the people of ash-Sham for
various obvious reasons:he built the Mosque of Damascus
and erected minarets. He would give stipends to the people,
especially those afflicted with leprosy, to whom he would say:
“Do not beg from the people. ” He also gave maintenance to
disabled people and appointed guides to the blind. A series of
victories and conquests were secured during his rule, such as
al-Andalus (Andalucia), India and Sindh Province to name
but a few.
Al-Waleed’s interests extended to building and construction,
which could also be said of the public in his time, such that a
man would meet another man and ask: “What have you
built?” or “What buildings have you designed?” On the other
hand, his brother, Sulaiman, was more passionate about
women, which was also a trait shared by the people such that
one man would ask another: “How many women have you
married?” “How many concubines do you have?” ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez, however, possessed an eagerness for reciting
the Qur’an, praying and worshipping, for which the people
also showed an eagerness. During his time, a man would meet
another man and ask: “How much time do you devote to
private worship (in addition to the five prescribed prayers) ?”
“How much of the Qur’an do you recite on a daily basis?”
“What prayers did you pray yesterday?” and so forth.
Al-Waleed died in Dair Murran on which occasion he was
carried on the shoulders of men to where he was buried in the
441

Bab us-Sagheer graveyard or, according to Ibn ‘Asakir’s
account, in the Bab ul-Firadees graveyard.
Al-Mada’ini said: “Jareer lamented him in an
elegy in which he
said (in al-Baseet
poetry): ‘O eye!
Shed

unstinted

tears aroused by
memory
Your tears are no longer spared.
Indeed, the Khaleefah’s fine traits are explicit.
Within the crooked land
His children rose up, at times of evident calamity,
Similar to the stars amongst which the moon has fallen.
They were, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, Rawh, and ‘Umar,
Who together could not defeat his fate. ’
Of those who died during the era of al-Waleed was Ziyad bin
Jariyah at-Tameemi ad-Dimashqi and ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin
‘Uthman, also known as Abu Muhammad, the judge of alMadinah and a noble.

442

The Caliphate of Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik
Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik assumed power as the Khaleefah
on a Saturday in mid-Jumadal-Akhirah in the ninety-sixth
year -- the same day that his brother, al-Waleed, died. Under
the rule of his brother, he had been the governor of Ramlah in
Palestine and he was stationed there on the occasion of alWaleed’s death. He was his brother’s heir to the throne in
accordance with the will of their father, ‘Abdul-Malik.
Prior to his death, however, al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul-Malik had
resolved to abolish Sulaiman’s claim to power and instead
handed it over to his son, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin al-Waleed. AlHajjaj bin Yoosuf, one of two prominent leaders (the other
being Qutaibah bin Muslim), had supported the succession of
alWaleed’s son, rather than Sulaiman, which was in fact also
true for Qutaibah and his party within ashSham. Jareer and other poets eulogised this situation in their
poems, which lingered to the point of alWaleed’s death, on
which occasion Sulaiman was granted the pledge of
allegiance. As al-Hajjaj had died before al-Waleed, he no
longer posed a threat to Sulaiman, whilst Qutaibah bin
Muslim on the other hand, was considered dangerous by
Sulaiman and had to be contained. Thus, Sulaiman fell out of
favour with Qutaibah and appointed his post to Yazeed bin alMuhallab as the governor of al-‘Iraq and then Khurasan, who
had to be reappointed to it after he had been replaced by alHajjaj ten years ago. Yazeed thereafter commissioned the
arrest and execution of al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf’s family as
revenge for dismissing him from Khurasan and then
imprisoning and torturing him.
Seven days before the end of Ramadan in this year, Sulaiman
dismissed ‘Uthman bin Hayyan as the governor of alMadinah and appointed Abu Bakr bin Muhammad bin ‘Amr
bin Hazm to the position, who was one of the scholars of his
community.
443

When Qutaibah bin Muslim heard about Sulaiman bin
‘Abdul-Malik’s ascension to the caliphate, he immediately
sent a chain of letters with an envoy to him. The subject of the
letters was: first, to offer his condolences for his brother’s
death; second, to congratulate him on assuming power; third,
to notify him of the trepidation and awe his enemies
harboured towards him; fourth, that Allah had granted him
victory upon victory by willing the Muslims to penetrate and
conquer many major cities and regions; and finally, he
asserted his loyalties lay with him just as he had showed
obedience and devotion to al-Waleed before him. In doing so,
he urged Sulaiman not to replace him as the governor of
Khurasan with Yazeed bin alMuhallab. Moreover, Qutaibah
had an inkling that he was not in favour with the new
Khaleefah and so he wrote two other letters in anticipation of
the foreseeable outcomes. In one of the letters he listed the
battles and conquests he had carried out against kings and
non-‘Arabs in foreign lands, vilified Yazeed bin al-Muhallab
and swore by Allah that he would absolutely renounce his
allegiance to Sulaiman should he decide to appoint Yazeed
over Khurasan. The other letter confirmed Yazeed’s
renunciation of allegiance to Sulaiman.
He sent the letters with an envoy who he gave specific
instructions to deliver the first letter, and that they should
deliver the second letter only in the event they saw Sulaiman
favouring Yazeed. In this manner, the letters were delivered
to Sulaiman and in the presence of Yazeed. As Qutaibah had
anticipated, Sulaiman read the first letter and passed it to
Yazeed, and then as he read the second, his face changed and
he clutched the letter in his hand without passing it on to
Yazeed. At that point, he ordered the envoy to be held in the
guesthouse and later that evening he summoned them to his
courtyard where he presented him with a generous quantity of
gold and a letter confirming Qutaibah’s governorship of
Khurasan. To accompany the envoy, Sulaiman also sent his
own envoy to report to him, but when they arrived in
444

Khurasan, they discovered that Qutaibah had already struck
first and staged a revolt. The revolt, however, miscarried and
Qutaibah was killed by his own men before Sulaiman’s
messengers returned to him.

The Motive Behind Qutaibah bin Muslim’s
Murder
Once he had assembled his troops and detachments, Qutaibah
openly disclosed his intentions and aspirations to rebel against
Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik and denounce obedience to his
rule, upon which he offered his men a generous amounts of
money for their participation. After he had finished saying his
piece, however, he stopped to find that nobody was willing to
comment on what he had said and so he began to degrade and
insult them, tribe by tribe, sect by sect. The people were
angered as a result of that and so they eschewed and
dissociated from him, following which they tried to revolt
against him and tried to kill him. It was supposedly Wakee‘
bin Sood who took it upon himself to mobilise the masses to
stage a revolt and it was against this tumultuous backdrop that
they killed Qutaibah during the month of DhulHijjah in this
year.
Qutaibah bin Muslim bin ‘Amr bin Husain bin Rabee‘ah Abu
Hafs al-Bahili was a prominent leader and amongst the best
of them. He was courageous, of noble and distinguished
descent, and he had taken the Muslim empire from the banks
of Khurasan into the heartland of Central Asia and brought
them into contact with the Chinese Empire through a
succession of glorious victories and triumphs. He was known
to have a sound mind, enjoyed the good opinion of others and
Allah guided many individuals through him -- while it is
Allah alone Who guides whoever he wills – who then
surrendered and draw near to Him, the Majestic and Sublime.
Glory be to Allah Who did not will for his efforts to be in vain
or his endeavours to be unsuccessful.
445

In spite of this, Qutaibah unequivocally committed an error
that was to bring about his ruin. He acted rebelliously by his
disobedience to the Caliph, and inevitably fate swiftly took its
toll on him. Furthermore, he dissociated himself from the
Ummah and this is why he died in a state of ignorance, but in
a condition where hisprevious good deeds could expiate his
bad ones. May Allah enhance his good deeds, pardon and
forgive him, and reward him for all the suffering he endured
when struggling against the enemies of Islam.

Upon Entering the Ninety-Seventh Year
During this year, Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik assembled his
armies against Constantinople and appointed his son, Dawood
as the military commander to as-Sa’ifah, who successfully
overthrew the Hisnul-Mar’ah (Fortress of the Woman).
Al-Waqidi says: “This was the year in which Maslamah bin
‘Abdul-Malik invaded the land of alWaddahiyyah wherein he
conquered over the fort that had originally been conquered by
al-Waddah, the founder of al-Waddahiyyah. ” Maslamah also
invaded Barjamah wherein he conquered its fortresses and
took its citizens captive. He later passed the winter in arRoom.
‘Umar bin Hubairah al-Fazari undertook a naval expedition
against ar-Room, as a result of which he spent the winter
there. ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Moosa bin Nusair was killed in this
year and his head was sent to Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik, the
Ameerul-Mu’mineen, with Habeeb bin Abu ‘Ubaid al-Fihri.
Sulaiman appointed Yazeed bin al-Muhallab as the governor
of Khurasan and further extended his authority to include the
governorship of al-‘Iraq.
The Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik, led
the Hajj Pilgrimage for the people in this year. He reassigned
446

his deputies who had already held office the previous year to
the provinces, with the exception of Wakee‘ bin Abu Sood
who was dismissed from Khurasan and replaced by Yazeed
bin alMuhallab bin Abu Sufrah who also took control of al‘Iraq as previously mentioned.

Among the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
Al-Hasan bin al-Hasan bin ‘Ali bin Abu Talib Abu
Muhammad al-Qurashi al-Hashimi who narrated the
following Hadeeth on the authority of his father who
transmitted it from his grandfather: “Whoever reveres the
Ahlul-Bait (household of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) ) among the Muslims day and night, Allah
will pardon his sins. ” He also narrated the Du‘a’
(supplication) for anxiety and fear on authority of ‘Abdullah
bin Ja‘far who narrated it from ‘Ali.
One day he said to a man belonging to the Rafidah
(Dissenters; Rafidites, a Shee‘ah sect): “Killing you would be
a means of getting closer to Allah, the Majestic”, to which the
man responded: “You are joking! ”At this, he said: “By Allah,
I am not trying to joke with you, I am deadly serious. ” At that
point another man amongst the Rafidah said: “Did the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) not say: ‘If I am the Mawla (master; guardian; patron) of
someone, ‘Ali is his Mawla too’? Al-Hasan replied: ‘Yes.
And in determining the caliphate he, too, said to the people:
‘O people! Know that this (‘Ali) is a successor to your affairs
and he will prevail over you after me. Therefore listen to him
and obey him, for by Allah, by deserting ‘Ali it is as if one
has first deserted the will of Allah and His Messenger.
’”
Moosa bin Nusair Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman al-Lakhmi was a
servant of the Banu Umayyah tribe who conquered the land
447

of Morocco where he seized a formidable amount of money.
Moosa bin Nusair was highly skilled and proficient in the art
of warfare because of his resoluteness and determination.
AlFasawi further states: “Moosa bin Nusair was appointed as
governor of Africa in the seventy-ninth year where he
conquered many lands. ” He died this year.
At the time when Moosa bin Nusair conquered the eastern
lands, Qutaibah bin Muslim was conquering the western
lands, for which may Allah reward the both of them. It is true
that they both succeeded in penetrating and conquering many
provinces and regions, but it is also a fact that Moosa bin
Nusair acquired things not gained by Qutaibah, to the extent
that when Qutaibah conquered al-Andalus (Andalucia), a man
approached him and said: “Assign some men to me so that I
might retrieve a magnificent treasure for you. ” He therefore
allocated a group of men whom he took to some place and
began digging a massive hole to unearth the most remarkable
precious stones, jewels and chrystolite, besides a vast quantity
of gold. They also found a velvet-like mockado carpet
embroidered with golden thread and embellished with
expensive rare pearls, as well as another similar carpet that
was decorated with precious jewels and stones beyond
description.
Moosa bin Nusair made an urgent supplication for rain on
behalf of the people in the ninety-third year of the Hijrah at a
time when Africa was afflicted with drought and famine. He
thereby ordered the people to fast for three days before
praying for rain, which they then did in congregation after he
had gone out to the people and separated the Muslims from
the Ahl udh-Dhimmah (free non-Muslim subjects living in
Muslim lands) and the livestock from its young. He further
instructed all the wailing and screaming people to be
removed, upon which he began to invoke Allah until midday.
Upon descending fom the pulpit it was said to him: “Will you
not supplicate for the Ameerul-Mu’mineen?” He replied:
448

“No. This is a time to mention no one other than Allah”, and
at that instant, Allah, the Majestic and Sublime, caused it to
rain. In fact, it is said that several amazing things similar to
this incident happened to him during his conquest of alAndalus.

Upon Entering the Ninety-Eighth Year
During this year, Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik, the AmeerulMu’mineen, initiated plans for his brother,
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik, to undertake a second military
expedition to the Byzantine capital, Constantinople in
succession to the army that had already been sent out.
Therefore, he advanced forth with the backing of a formidable
army, as the first army returned, carrying loads of foodstuff
on horseback. Upon arriving at his destination, Maslamah
accumulated the provisions together at the foot of the
mountain and told his men: “Leave this food as stores and eat
from the food that you find in their land instead. Cultivate and
yield crops in the places of cultivation and build houses for
yourselves out of wood, as we will not be turning back from
this land until we have conquered it by the will of Allah! ”
A Christian man, reportedly by the name of Ilyoon, had
approached Maslamah and proposed that if he attempted to
seize ar-Room, he would disclose any vital information to
him. Not long after this, the king of Constantinople passed
away, following which Ilyoon entered the official royal court
with a letter from Maslamah that caused ar-Room to become
overcome with fear. They therefore said to Ilyoon: “Suppress
him and we will make you sovereign over us” and so he
betrayed Maslamah by devising a plan of treachery and deceit
that even involved burning the food stores belonging to the
Muslims. He managed to accomplish this by telling
Maslamah: “As long as the people see that you have
provisions stored away here they will continue to think that
you are putting off going into battle against them. Therefore,
449

if you burn it all, they will be convinced that you have finally
resolved to wage war and so they will quickly surrender the
country to you. ” And so, Maslamah took his advice and
ordered for all the provisions to be burnt. However, that same
night Ilyoon arranged to board a ship, taking with him as
much of the Muslim army’s possessions as he could, and he
emerged the following morning among the opposition
declaring his determination to fight against the Muslims. In
doing so, he declared the situation as critically hostile and so
accordingly, fortified himself in the land after having joined
forces with ar-Room and left the Muslims in such a horrific
crisis that they had eaten everything they owned, apart from
mud. In spite of this, the Muslim army persevered in their
endeavour until the occasion of Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik’s
death and the ascension of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, which
we shall come to, at which point they returned to ash-Sham
having exerted arduous efforts. Maslamah did not leave
Constantinople without first building a magnificent and
elegantly designed mosque that he erected high into the sky.
Ibn Jareer says: “This was the year in which Sulaiman bin
‘Abdul-Malik made his son, ‘Ayyoob, the hereditary heir of
the caliphate after him, which happened following the death
of his brother, Marwan bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan. In
doing so, Sulaiman usurped power from his brother, Yazeed,
and handed it over to his son, Ayyoob, but as fate would have
it, Ayyoob died during the lifetime of his father that same
year. Given that Sulaiman’s only other eligible son was
fighting at Constantinople and it was uncertain whether he
was still alive, while his other sons were too young, Sulaiman
broke the tradition by not maintaining a hereditary dynasty
and appointed his paternal cousin, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez,
as his successor, which proved to be a truly excellent decision.
The city of as-Saqalibah (a city situated between Bulgaria and
Constantinople) was conquered during this year.
450

Yazeed bin al-Muhallab invaded Dihistan in the land of China
in this year, which he besieged and waged a fierce attack
against, not stopping until it was forced to surrender. He
further killed four thousand Turks in captivity and seized the
wealth and valuable commodities and possessions within the
land. Then he moved on to Jurjan (in modern-day north Iran)
where its ruler mobilised an army in ad-Dailam (a people
from north Iran). There, the ruler offered his assistance;
however, Yazeed bin al-Muhallab attacked and killed their
army. Muhammad bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Sabrah alJu‘fi, a prominent, valiant horseman, made an attack against
the king of ad-Dailam that resulted in his death and whereby
Allah, the Majestic, put the enemy to flight. Ibn Abu Sabrah
also met some of the Turk horsemen in combat, during which
one of them struck his helmet with his sword so hard that it
got stuck, which enabled Ibn Abu Sabrah to slay him. As he
returned to the Muslims in their military base, his sword was
dripping with blood while the sword of the Turk horseman
was still attached to his helmet, which caused Yazeed bin
alMuhallab to say as he looked at him: “I have never seen a
sight better than this! Who is this man?” The people said: “Ibn
Abu Sabrah. ” He said: “What an excellent man he would be
if it were not for his drinking! ”It follows that Yazeed bin alMuhallab then decided to besiege Jurjan whose beleaguered
leader reconciled with him at a cost of seven hundred
thousand Dirhams, four hundred thousand Deenars, two
hundred thousand garments, four hundred saffron-coloured
donkeys, and four hundred armed men all equipped with a
shield of armour and silver vessels for eating and drinking.
Before this, the city had been conquered by Sa‘eed bin al-‘As
who reached a peace agreement by imposing an annual Kharaj
(land tax in Islamic law) of one hundred thousand, while
paying two hundred thousand one year and three hundred
thousand at other times. However, in other years, they
completely withheld paying anything until eventually they
rejected the Kharaj altogeter and renounced their faith. Due to
451

their lack of cooperation, Yazeed bin al-Muhallab launched a
military campaign against them in order to reinstate the
agreement to the way it had been at the time of Sa‘eed bin al‘As. It is saidthat Yazeed bin al-Muhallab acquired a vast
amount of wealth from Jurjan including a priceless
jewelencrusted crown. He said: “Have you ever seen anyone
forsake something like this?” The people said: “We do not
know of anyone. ” So he said: “By Allah! I know a man who
would renounce this or anything like it if he were offered it. ”
He then summoned Muhammad bin Wasi‘, who had carried
out a raid during the military expedition and offered the crown
to him but he humbly asserted: “I have no need for it. ”
However, Yazeed said in return: “I have taken an oath that
you must take it. ”

Amongst Those Who Died in this Year:
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Utbah, an Imam (religious
leader) and a tutor of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez. He also
reported many narrations on the authority of the Sahabah.
Abul-Hafs an-Nakha‘i.
‘Abdullah bin Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafayyah.

Upon Entering the Ninety-Ninth Year
This year witnessed the death of Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik,
the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, on a Friday, ten days into the month
of Safar, or it is also said ten days before the end of the month,
at the age of fortyfive, yet some say forty-three and others
generally state above the age of forty.
His name was Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan bin
al-Hakam bin Abul-‘As bin Umayyah bin ‘Abd Shams alQurashi al-Umawi, Abu Ayyoob. He was born in the city of
al-Madinah into the Banu Jazeelah tribe, after which he was
452

raised with his father in ash-Sham. He transmitted the
Hadeeth from his father who narrated it on the authority of his
grandfather
who
narrated
it
from
‘A’ishah,
UmmulMu’mineen, regarding the story of false accusations
that were made against her. It is recorded in the account of Ibn
‘Asakir through his son, ‘Abdul-Wahid bin Sulaiman, on his
authority.
Abu Bakr as-Sooli narrated that ‘Abdul-Malik gathered his
sons, al-Waleed, Sulaiman and Maslamah, before him to ask
them to recite the Qur’an to him and they all proved proficient
in their reading. He then asked them to recite poetry to him,
which they also did excellently apart from their lack of
command over A‘sha poetry (by the poet, Maimoon bin Qais
al-A‘sha (570-696 AD) who was nicknamed “night-blind”
after he lost his sight) which caused ‘Abdul-Malik to scold
them. He then went on to say: “Each man amongst you must
recite the most temperate verses spoken by an ‘Arab without
any obscene language. ” So he began by saying: “Proceed, O
Waleed! ”At which point, al-Waleed started to recite the
following verses:
“No mount or journey pleases me
Like the voyage between Dumlooj and Khalkhal. ”
‘Abdul-Malik then asked: “Is there any poetry more subtle
than those verses?! Proceed, O Sulaiman! ”So he recited:
“How nice it would be if she drew back her hand
In order to disrobe her garment. ”
However, ‘Abdul-Malik said: “That was not good enough.
Proceed, O Maslamah! ” And so he recited a saying of
Imra’ul-Qais:
“Your eyes do not shed tears except that they shoot
453

Arrows in the chest and kill the heart. ”
So ‘Abdul-Malik said: “Imra’ul-Qais lied and that was not
good enough. If her eyes cried tears of passion then nothing
but reunion remains for the lover to relieve her of her
estrangement and clothe her with affection. ” He therefore
resolved: “I will grant you all a deadline of three days after
which whoever can deliver that verse to me, he will receive
whatever he desires”, whereupon they left his presence. It
happened that as Sulaiman was riding on his mount, he came
across a desert nomad who was reciting as he rode his camel
(in al-Baseet poetic meter):
“Even if I am beheaded for seeking her love
The head would hastily turn towards her. ”
Upon hearing these words, Sulaiman quickly detained the
desert nomad and then went to his father to whom he said: “I
have come to give you the answer. ” So he said: “Proceed”,
upon which he recited the verse to him. At this, ‘Abdul-Malik
said: “Well done! Where did you come across this?” Sulaiman
told him about the desert nomad, upon which his father said:
“Make your request and make sure not to forget about your
friend. ”
During Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik’s days, he renewed the
Maqsoorah (the detached portion of a mosque set aside for the
communal prayer) and employed his paternal cousin, ‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, as his advisor and minister. Regarding
this, Sulaiman had said to him: “We have pursued our
interests and we have no knowledge of how to manage them,
for I am incapable of discerning what is good for the welfare
of the public”, upon which ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez took it
upon himself to act as his personal advisor.
Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik commissioned the invasion of
Constantinople and in doing so he sent military detachments
454

from ash-Sham (the Levant), al-Jazeerah (the Arabian
Peninsula) and al-Mawsil (Mosul) consisting of
approximately one hundred and twenty thousand combatants.
He sent a further one thousand naval vessels from Egypt and
Africa under the commandership of ‘Umar bin Hubairah
whilst appointing his brother, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik
and his son, Dawood bin Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik, as the
commanders-in-chief.
Hammad bin Zaid said on the authority of Yazeed bin Hazim:
“Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik would deliver a sermon to us
every Friday and he would never fail to say: ‘Whilst the
people of the world are departing, no intention can advance
them, nor can any house provide them with comfort until the
decree of Allah is ordained and they are promised their
everlasting abode for what they did not believe in and for not
distancing themselves from the evil of the people’. He then
recited the verse (which means):
“Think, (even) if We do let them enjoy for years; And
afterwards comes to them that punishment which they had
been promised; All that with which they used to enjoy shall
not avail them. ” [ash-Shu‘ara’, 26: 205-207]”
Abu Mus-hir said on the authority of Abu Muslim Salamah
bin al-‘Ayyar al-Fazari said: “Muhammad bin Seereen would
invoke mercy on Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik because he
began his caliphate well and he ended it well, and because he
began it by attending the prayers on time and ended it by
appointing ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez as his successor. ”
Ibn Jareer narrated that Raja’ bin Haiwah, who was the
minister of marriage endowments to the Banu Umayyah tribe,
said: “Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik consulted me when he was
ill about appointing a son who had not yet reached the age of
maturity as his successor, to which I said: ‘Indeed, amongst
the things that preserves the caliph in his grave is his
455

appointment of a righteous man over the Muslims (after him)
’. He then asked me about appointing his son, Dawood, as his
heir, so I said: ‘Dawood is away in alQustanteeniyyah and you
do not even know if he is alive or dead’. So he said: ‘What do
you think?’I replied: ‘Whatever you think, O AmeerulMu’mineen! ’He therefore asked me: ‘Then what do you think
of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez?’So I said: ‘I know him and, by
Allah, he is a good, virtuous Muslim’. So he said: ‘He is
definitely that but I fear that this will not please my brothers’.
It follows that Raja’ advised him to make Yazeed bin ‘AbdulMalik the successor to the throne after ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez in order to satisfy the Banu Marwan tribe. Hence,
Sulaiman wrote:
(“In the Name of Allah, the Benficient, the Merciful:This
letter is from the servant of Allah, Sulaiman bin ‘AbdulMalik, concerning ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez. Verily, I have
appointed the caliphate to him and then to Yazeed bin ‘AbdulMalik after him. Therefore listen to him and obey him, and
fear Allah by not disagreeing over it or desiring it for
yourselves. ” )
He then sealed the letter and sent it to Ka‘b bin Hamid al‘Absi, the chief legislator, to whom he said: “Gather my
family together and then instruct them to pledge their
allegiance as mentioned in this letter. If anyone amongst them
refuses to do so, chop off his head. ” Thus, a meeting was
convened and as the men entered upon the AmeerulMu’mineen, they greeted him with greetings of peace. He
then addressed them, saying: “This letter is my covenant to
you; therefore you must listen to, obey and pledge your
allegiance to whoever I have appointed as my successor in it.
Now, pledge your allegiance to him one by one. ”
Raja’ said: “When they became divided over the issue, ‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez came to me and said: ‘I implore to you by
Allah, with all my respect and love, that if the letter concerns
456

me then tell me so that I might ask Allah to pardon me from
now before I fall into a state in which I cannot do anything
before the time of the Hour! ”So I said: “By Allah! I will not
tell you a single letter of it. ” Raja’ said: “I met with Hisham
bin ‘Abdul-Malik who said: ‘O Raja’! Indeed, I have a
profound love and respect for you, therefore tell me if you
think that this affair has been entrusted to me or to someone
else not equal to me who will be unsuited to it’. I therefore
said to him: ‘By Allah! I will not inform you of a single word
of what has been disclosed to me in confidence. ’”
Raja’ said: “I entered upon Sulaiman when he was on his
death bed and as he began to suffer the agonies of death, I
turned him round to face the Qiblah (direction of Makkah).
Once he regained consciousness, he said to me: ‘You are not
done yet, O Raja’! ’So I turned him round two more times and
as I was about to turn him the third time he said to me: ‘Just a
minute, I now want to say something. I bear witness that there
is no one worthy of worship other than Allah and that
Muhammad is His Messenger and Servant’. I then turned him
towards the Qiblah and soon after that he passed away. After
that, I covered him with a green velvet sheet and then went
out and closed the door behind me. Accordingly, I wrote to
Ka‘b bin Hamid to assemble the people in the Dabiq mosque
where I said: ‘Pledge your allegiance to whoever is stated in
the letter’. So the people said: ‘We have already pledged our
allegiance’. I said: ‘Then pledge it a second time’ and so they
did. I then said: ‘Go and visit your companion as he has died’
and then I read the letter to them. Once I mentioned that it was
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez who had been appointed as caliph,
the faces of the Banu Marwan tribe began to change, and as I
read the latter part stating that Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik was
to be the successor after him, they grandually began to leave.
At this point Hisham shouted: ‘We will never pledge
allegiance to him! ’So I said: ‘By Allah! I will chop off your
head without hestitation! Stand and pledge your allegiance! ’
457

Thus, the people got up to go to ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
who was at the far end of the Masjid and upon realising what
had happened, he said: ‘To Allah we belong and to Him we
shall all return’. However, as his legs had given in, the people
took him by his arms and lifted him to the pulpit where he
stood in silence. Raja’ bin Haiwah announced: ‘Will you not
come to the Ameerul-Mu’mineen and pledge allegiance to
him?’At that moment, the people stood up and pledged their
allegiance, including Hisham who even ascended the Minbar
to do so while saying: ‘To Allah we belong and to Him we
shall return’. ‘Umar then said: ‘Yes, to Allah we belong and
to Him we shall return and it is He Who determined that we
would contend over this matter’. Following this, ‘Umar gave
an eloquent speech to the people and they continued to pledge
their allegiance to him. ” Part of what he said in this speech
was: “I am not an innovator, rather I am a follower; if those
inhabitants of the surrounding major cities and towns pledge
their allegiance as you pledged yours then I will be your ruler.
However, if you refuse, then I have no power over you” and
then stepped down from the Minbar. Thus, the people
willingly complied with Sulaiman’s wishes.
Muhammad bin Ishaq said: “Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik died
in Dabiq in the land of Qinnasreen (one of the five subprovinces of Syria) on a Friday night, ten days before the end
of the month of Safar in the ninety-ninth year and precisely
two years, nine months and twenty days from the time of alWaleed’s death. ”

The Caliphate of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
We mentioned earlier that he was appointed to the caliphate
on Friday, ten days into, or according to some, ten days before
the end of, the month of Safar in this year on the day of
458

Sulaiman bin ‘AbdulMalik’s death. ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
had been oblivious to Sulaiman’s choice of successor and due
to ‘Umar’s fine characteristics such as his piety, faith,
asceticism, respectability and integrity, he made no attempt to
seize the caliphate; instead, he was content with continuing
on his travels on his beautiful steed.
It is said that in a sermon delivered to the people, ‘Umar said:
“O people! Indeed, I possess an ambitious soul such that it is
not granted anything except that it desires something more. I
have been granted the caliphate and for that reason my soul
yearns for that which is higher than that, namely, Paradise,
therefore help me to achieve it and may Allah bestow His
mercy upon you. ” An account of his life will be given once
we have reached the occasion of his death, by the will of
Allah.
Upon assuming his position as caliph, one of the first tasks
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez embarked on was to send for
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik and the Muslims accompanying
him who were in the land of arRoom laying siege to
Constantinople and whose situation had become critical and
severely restricted due to the size of their army. Thus, ‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez wrote to them, ordering them to pull back
and return home to ash-Sham, in addition to sending huge
quantities of food supplies and some five hundred stallions,
which was an occasion for the people to rejoice.
During this year, the Turks committed an aggressive attack
against the Muslims in Adhrabeejan (Azerbaijan) that resulted
in them suffering a staggering death toll. In response, ‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez dispatched Hatim bin an-Nu‘man alBahili to annihilate them, which he did, so that no one but
their women and children escaped from being killed.
‘Umar dismissed Yazeed bin al-Muhallab from governorship
in al-‘Iraq in this year and put ‘Adiyy bin Artat al-Fazari in
459

charge of al-Basrah instead. During his time in office, he
appointed al-Hasan al-Basri to occupy the position of chief
judge, but he later resigned and was replaced with Iyas bin
Mu‘awiyah adhDhaki al-Mashhoor. He further delegated
‘Abdul-Hameed bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zaid bin al-Khattab
over al-Koofah in addition to assigning Abuz-Zinad as his
scribe under his authority. He appointed ‘Amir ash-Sha‘bi as
its district judge, about whom al-Waqidi says: “He continued
to be the judge of al-Koofah for the entire period of ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s caliphate. ” To the other provinces he
appointed alJarrah bin ‘Abdullah al-Hakami as governor of
Khurasan, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin ‘Abdullah bin Khalid bin
Aseed as the deputy of Makkah and Abu Bakr bin
Muhammad bin ‘Amr bin Hazm as governor of alMadinah
and who also led the Hajj Pilgrimage for the people in this
year.
‘Abdul-Malik bin Rifa‘ah was dismissed from office in Egypt
and substituted by Ayyoob bin Shurahbeel.
The office of Futya (formal legal opinion under Islamic law)
was jointly entrusted to Ja‘far bin Rabee‘ah, Yazeed bin Abu
Habeeb and ‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Ja‘far, whose roles
primarily entailed issuing legal rulings to the people. Umar
appointed Isma‘eel bin ‘Abdullah al-Makhzoomi as governor
of Africa and the land of Morocco, whose good conduct and
etiquettes is said to have influenced a great deal of the
indigenous Berber population in Morocco to submit to Islam
– Allah, the Sublime, knows best.

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
Al-Hasan bin Muhammad, the son of al-Hanafiyyah and an
honourable Tabi‘i (the second or third generation following
the Companions).

460

‘Abdullah bin Muhaireez bin Junadah bin Wahb al-Qurashi
al-Jumahi al-Makki who was an occupant of the BaitulMaqdis (Holy Sanctuary in Jerusalem).
Mahmood bin Labeed bin ‘Uqbah Abu Nu‘iam al-Ansari alAshhali al-Madani who was born during the lifetime of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on whose
authority he transmitted a number of narrations. Al-Bukhari
ascribes companionship to him and Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr states
that he was older than Mahmood bin ar-Rabee‘, who died in
either the ninety-sixth or ninety-seventh year.
Nafi‘ bin Jubair bin Mut‘im bin ‘Adiyy bin Nawfal, alQurashi an-Nawfali al-Madani.
Kuraib bin Muslim, the servant of Ibn ‘Abbas, who
transmitted narrations from a number of the Sahabah and
others. He possessed many books and he was acknowledged
as a trustworthy person in terms of performing good deeds
and practising his religion.
Mahmood bin ar-Rabee‘ al-Ansari, Abu Muhammad, to
whom many narrations are ascribed.
Muslim bin Yasar Abu ‘Abdullah al-Basri, the ascetic jurist
to whom many narrations are ascribed.
Hanash binAbdullah bin ‘Amr as-San‘ani who was the
administrative governor of Africa and the land of Morocco.
He died carrying out a raid in Africa and he transmitted many
narrations on the authority of the Sahabah.
Kharijah bin Zaid bin ad-Dahhak al-Ansari al-Madani, was a
jurist who would issue Fatawa (legal rulings) in al-Madinah.

461

The 100th Year of the Prophetic Hijrah
Nu‘aim bin Dijajah is reported to have said: “Abu Mas‘ood
entered upon ‘Ali and said: ‘You are the one who said that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: ‘A hundred years do not pass on the earth except
that Allah sends someone to renew its religion. ’”According
to Ahmad, this implied that the Ummah will be rectified and
relieved with the passing of one hundred years.
The Khawarij were expelled from al-Harooriyyah in al-‘Iraq
in this year and so ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez wrote to ‘AbdulHameed, the deputy of al-Koofah, ordering him to invite them
to the Truth and to treat them with compassion as opposed to
waging war against them and causing corruption on the earth.
However, having done that, he also dispatched an army
against them but the Khawarij of al-Harooriyyah put them to
flight. Thereafter, ‘Umar wrote to ‘Abdul-Hameed,
reproaching him for his army and instead sent out his paternal
cousin, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik, from al-Jazeerah (the
Arabian Peninsula) to wage war against them. Allah granted
victory over them at his hands, following which ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul‘Azeez wrote to the leader of the Khawarij (whose
name was Bistam) telling him: “What causes you to challenge
me?If it is because you are angry then I have more right to be
angry than you do. Go ahead and vie with us if you think
doing so is right, but if you think that it is wrong then we can
judge between the two parties. ”
The leader of the Khawarij dispatched a band of his closest
delegates to ‘Umar, who then selected two of them for
questioning, upon which he asked: “What is the reason behind
your being hostile?” They replied: “Because Yazeed bin
‘Abdul-Malik was made a successor after you. ” So he said:
“I would never have appointed him just like he would never
have appointed me. ” So they said: “Then how can you be
satisfied that he will be trusted with the Ummah after you?”
462

He answered: “Because of three things: The Banu Umayyah
tribe will scheme to poison and kill him for fear that he will
seize the Khilafah from them and deny them their wealth –
Allah knows best. ”
Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez appointed ‘Umar bin Hubairah as
deputy of al-Jazeerah (the Arabian Penisula) in this year.
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab was escorted to Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez from al-‘Iraq due to the fact that ‘Adiyy bin Artat, the
deputy of al-Basrah, had sent ‘Umar a message claiming that
Yazeed had been showing signs of rebelliousness and
opposition along with Moosa bin Wajeeh. Notably, ‘Umar
hated Yazeed bin al-Muhallab and his family, about whom he
would say: “They are tyrants and I do not like people like
them. ”
Upon entering his presence, ‘Umar instructed Yazeed to pay
back the money that Sulaiman had previously allocated to
him, to which he said: “I was allocated it to frighten the
enemies with. Nothing remains (to be paid) between Sulaiman
and I, I knew my place with him. ” So ‘Umar said to him: “I
will not listen to this from you nor will I release you until you
reimburse what you took from the money of the Muslims”,
upon which he ordered his imprisonment.
‘Umar subsequently delegated al-Jarrah bin ‘Abdullah alHakami as governor of Khurasan in his place.
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab’s son, Makhlad bin Yazeed, arrived
before ‘Umar and said: “O AmeerulMu’mineen! Verily,
Allah, the Majestic and Sublime, has blessed us with your
appointment over us. However, we have not been the most
terrible of people towards you so why is it that you imprison
this old man even as I stand here and make peace with you on
his behalf?” So ‘Umar said: “I will not make peace with you
unless you can present everything that has been asked of him
and I will not accept anything from him other than all the
463

money he has in his possession belonging to the Muslims. ”
So he said: “O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! If you have proof to
support what you are claiming against him then take an oath
by it otherwise make peace with me concerning him. ” ‘Umar
stated once again: “I will not take anything from him other
than what he has in his possession”, at which point Makhlad
bin Yazeed left. It was not long before Makhlad died, on
which occasion ‘Umar said: “He was better than his father. ”
It follows that ‘Umar ordered for Yazeed bin al-Muhallab to
be dressed in a woollen Jubbah (long dresslike garment worn
by men) and transported by camel to the island of Dahlak (one
of the Dahlak Archipelago islands located in the Red Sea near
Massawa, Eritrea) to where the wanton offenders would be
banished. The people, however, pleaded on his behalf and so
he was returned to prison where he remained until ‘Umar took
sick with the illness that eventually killed him, at which time
Yazeed managed to escape while also in a sick condition. In
fact, it is most likely that Yazeed knew that ‘Umar was fatally
ill, which is why he wrote to him, as we shall come to shortly,
with the knowledge that ‘Umar had been poisoned.
In the month of Ramadan of this year, al-Jarrah bin ‘Abdullah
al-Hakami, who had held the office of governor of Khurasan
for a period of one year and five months, fell out of favour
with ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez. The reason for his fall from
grace was that he began exacting the Jizyah (head tax on free
nonMuslims under Muslim rule) from the disbelievers who
had entered into Islam, on thegrounds he claimed that they
were only submitting to Islam to evade paying taxes. As a
result of his misbehaviour, they renounced Islam, returned to
their own religions and settled with paying the Jizyah tax.
With regard to this, ‘Umar wrote to him saying: “Indeed,
Allah sent Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) as a preacher and not as a tax collector! ”Hence, al-Jarrah
was dismissed, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Nu‘aim al-Qushairi was
464

put in charge of warfare and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Abdullah
was put in charge of the Kharaj (land tax).
‘Umar wrote to his officials this year directing them to enjoin
good and prohibit evil, expounding and clarifying the Truth
to them, attaching immense importance to the relationship
between him and them, and warning them to fear Allah’s
punishment and retribution. Part of what he wrote to ‘AbdurRahman bin Nu‘aim al-Qushairi read: (“Be a servant of Allah
and an advisor to his servants, and do not be an accuser and
criticiser of Allah for He is the closest to you over all people
and His right over you is the greatest. Do not turn your back
on the affairs of the Muslims except to enhance them or if it
is in their genuine interests. Execute that which has been
entrusted to you with respect to your subjects and be wary of
being drivenan inclination other than the Truth, for Allah will
not conceal it for you. And do not fall into denominations and
sects concerning Allah, as there is no refuge in anything other
than Allah”). In this manner, he wrote many letters of
religious and spiritual exhortation to all his workers.
It is narrated by al-Bukhari in his Saheehthat ‘Umar wrote the
following to ‘Adiyy bin ‘Adiyy: “Belief includes Fara’id
(enjoined duties), laws, Hudood (legal punishments) and
Sunan (deed or acts of worship, etc). Whoever follows and
implements all of them completely has complete faith, and
whoever does not, his belief is incomplete. As long as I am
alive I will continue to tell you all about them so that you
might act in accordance with them. And should I die, I am not
anxious to have your company. ”

This was the year in which the claim of the
Banul-‘Abbas (Abbasids) to the caliphate
began to surface:
This began with Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin
‘Abbas, who was residing in the land of the Sharat (a sect of
465

the Khawarij based in the outskirts of al-Koofah), when he
sent one of his men (named Maisarah) to al-‘Iraq, while
another party consisting of Muhammad bin Khunais, Abu
‘Ikrimah as-Sarraj (Abu Muhammad as-Sadiq) and Hayyan
al-‘Attar (the paternal uncle of Ibraheem bin Salamah) were
sent to Khurasan, which at that time was under the
governorship of al-Jarrah bin ‘Abdullah al-Hakami, before he
was dismissed in the month of Ramadan. Upon their arrival,
al-Jarrah summoned them to him and his family and so they
met together and then departed, following which al-Jarrah
wrote to them to grant them their request to travel to al-‘Iraq.
He subsequently delegated Muhammad bin ‘Ali to al-‘Iraq,
who in turn was delighted and considered it to be a good sign,
given that this was a primary principle executed in fulfilment
of Allah’s will. At this point, the Banu Umayyah (Umayyad)
state had shown signs of vulnerability and weakness,
especially following the death of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez,
which we shall elaborate on in the forthcoming chapters. Abu
Muhammad as-Sadiq had therefore chosen twelve chiefs for
Muhammad bin ‘Ali, namely:Sulaiman bin Katheer alKhuza‘i, Lahiz bin Quraiz at-Tameemi, Qahtabah bin
Shabeeb at-Ta’i, Moosa bin Ka‘b at-Tameemi, Khalid bin
Ibraheem Abu Dawood (from the
Banu ‘Amr bin Shaiban bin Dhuhl tribe), al-Qasim bin
Mujashi‘ at-Tameemi, ‘Imran bin Isma‘eel AbunNajm (the chief of the Abu Mu‘ait family), Malik bin alHaitham al-Khuza‘i, Talhah bin Zuraiq alKhuza‘i, ‘Amr bin
A‘yan Abu Hamzah (a cheif of Khuza‘ah), Shibl bin Tahman
Abu ‘Ali al-Harawi (servant to the Banu Haneefah tribe) and
Moosa bin A‘yan (also a chief of Khuza‘ah). Besides them,
he selected a further seventy men for whom Muhammad bin
‘Ali subsequently wrote a set of instructions, in order to direct
and guide their conduct and behaviour.
During this year, Abu Bakr bin Muhammad bin ‘Amr bin
Hazm, the deputy of al-Madinah, led the Hajj Pilgrimage and
the officials already in office were reinstated, except for those
466

who we mentioned had been dismissed, in which case
someone else was appointed – Allah knows best.
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez did not lead the Hajj Pilgrimage
during his days as Caliph due to being preoccupied with the
affairs of the Muslims. Instead, he would write to al-Madinah
saying: (“Send peace upon the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) from me”).

Among the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
Salim bin Abul-Ja‘d al-Ashja‘i, the brother of Ziyad,
‘Abdullah, ‘Ubaidullah, ‘Imran and Muslim, who was an
honourable Tabi‘i (the second and third generations following
the Companions).
Abu Umamah bin Sahl bin Hunaif al-Ansari al-Awsi alMadani was born during the lifetime of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and saw him in person.
He narrated traditions on the authority of his father, ‘Umar, as
well as from ‘Uthman, Zaid bin Thabit, Mu‘awiyah and Ibn
‘Abbas.
Abuz-Zahiriyyah Hudair bin Kuraib al-Himsi, an honourable
Tabi‘i.
Abut-Tufail ‘Amir bin Wathilah bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr alLaithi al-Kinani who there is consensus about him being the
last Sahabi to see the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) before his death. He also narrated the Hadeeth
in which he stated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to leave Makkah via
ash-Shajarah and enter via al-Mu‘arras. When he entered
Makkah, he entered from the upper mountain pass and exited
from the lower mountain pass.
467

Abu ‘Uthman an-Nahdi, whose name was ‘Abdur-Rahman
bin Mall al-Basri, reached the age of maturity during the
lifetime of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in the days of Jahiliyyah (Pre-Islamic period). He
performed the Hajj Pilgrimage twice during Jahiliyyah and
submitted to Islam during the lifetime of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) though he never saw
him.
This was the year in which ‘Abdul-Malik bin ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez died. He was considered better than his father
with regard to worship and giving his attention to the people,
and he also said many beautiful words of religious and
spiritual exhortation during his time.

Upon Entering the 101st Year
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab escaped from prison in this year
having heard that ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez had fallen ill. In
doing so, he made arrangements for his servants to meet him
with a horse, other reports state a camel, at a number of
locations. He subsequently climbed down from his cell with a
group of others including his wife, ‘Atikah bint al-Furat al‘Amiriyyah, and once his servant met him, he then mounted
his riding animal and set off. He later wrote to ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez: (“Verily, by Allah, I only decided to break
out of your prison once I heard that you were sick, though had
you been expected to live, I would not have escaped, but the
fact remains that I feared Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik who has
threatened to kill me”).
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-Malik’s illness continued to intensify until
it brought about his death while he was in Khunasirah (near
Aleppo) located between Hamat and Halab (Aleppo) on a
Friday, while others say on Wednesday, five days before the
end of Rajab of this year, aged thirty-nine, or others maintain
he was above forty years old – Allah knows best.
468

As we mentioned earlier, his caliphate lasted for a period of
precisely sixty-five months and four days. He had an
impeccable reputation for being a just ruler, an upright leader,
pious and god-fearing, and it was certainly not in his character
to be defiant towards Allah (SWT).

The Biography of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez,
the Famous Umayyad
His name was ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin Marwan bin alHakam bin Abul-‘As bin Umayyah bin ‘Abd Shams bin ‘Abd
Manaf, Abu Hafs al-Qurashi al-Umawi, the AmeerulMu’mineen. His mother was Umm ‘Asim, Laila bint ‘Asim
bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab.
‘Umar was an honourable Tabi‘i (the second or third
generation following the Companions) and he is reported to
have narrated traditions from Anas bin Malik, as-Sa’ib bin
Yazeed, Yoosuf bin ‘Abdullah bin Salam and Yoosuf, the
young Sahabi, as well as from many of the other Tabi‘een.
Abu Bakr bin Abu Khaithamah said that Dawood bin Abu
Hind said: “‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez entered upon us from
this door and pointed to one of the doors belonging to the
Mosque of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), upon which a man from among the people said: ‘The
Fasiq (dissolute, sinful, wanton one) sent us this son of his in
order to teach us the Fara’id (enjoined duties) and the Sunan
(deeds, acts of worship, traditions). It is alleged that he will
469

not pass away without becoming the caliph and following in
the footsteps of ‘Umar bin al-Khattab. ” Dawood said: “By
Allah, he did pass away except that we witnessed that from
him first. ”
During his rule, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez extended the
Masjid of the Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) beyond al-Waleed’s changes to incorporate the
Prophet’s tomb within its space. At that particular time,
‘Umar was considered to have the best social relations of all
people, in addition to being the most reasonable and fair in his
conduct. If he was faced with a peculiar dilemma, he would
convene a meeting with the jurists of al-Madinah to address
it. In fact, he appointed ten Fuqaha’ who he held in such high
esteem that he would not issue a decision without first
consulting them. These were: ‘Urwah, ‘Ubaidullah bin
‘Abdullah bin ‘Utbah, Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin alHarith bin Hisham, Abu Bakr bin Sulaiman bin Abu
Hathmah, Sulaiman bin Yasar, al-Qasim bin Muhammad,
Salim bin ‘Abdullah, ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amir bin Rabee‘ah and
Kharijah bin Zaid bin Thabit.
He was not outside of the circle of Sa‘eed bin al-Musayyab’s
company, as even though Sa‘eed had never gone to any of the
caliphs before, he did go ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez in alMadinah. Ibn Wahb said on the authority of ‘Abdul-Jabbar alAili on the authority of Ibraheem bin Abu ‘Ablah: “I arrived
in alMadinah and Ibn al-Musayyab was there along with those
who had been assigned by ‘Umar in those days to deal with
judicious judgements and opinions. ”
Imam Malik said: “At the time when ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez was dismissed from al-Madinah (in the ninety-third
year of the Hijrah), he turned around as he was leaving to look
at it and began to weep, upon which he said to his servant: “O
rival! I fear that we are among those who al-Madinah has
denied”, as if to suggest that al-Madinah had rejected them in
470

the same manner that bellows eliminate impurities from iron
and give off an odour.
Imam Malik also mentions that Sulaiman and ‘Umar once
accused each other of mutually spreading rumours about one
another, upon which Sulaiman said to ‘Umar something along
the lines of: “You are a liar. ” ‘Umar therefore said: “Did you
say that I am a liar?By Allah, I have not lied since I learned
that lying harms the people”, and from that very incident
‘Umar parted ways with him and resolved to immigrate to
Egypt. Sulaiman, however, refused to let him leave and so he
summoned him so that they reconcile their differences, saying
to him: “A matter has never troubled me except that it keeps
playing on my mind. ”

Chapter
Abu Dawood at-Tayalisi said that Ibn ‘Umar said: “How
strange! The people claim that the world will not come to an
end until there comes a man belonging to the family of ‘Umar
(bin al-Khattab) who will behave in the same manner as him.
” He went on to say that the people saw Bilal bin ‘Abdullah
bin ‘Umar who was generally egotistical and so they
concluded it was definitely not him. In that case, it had to have
been ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez whose mother was the
daughter of ‘Asim bin ‘Umar bin al-Khattab.
Al-Baihaqi said that Juwairiyah Ibn Asma’ said on the
authority of Nafi‘: “We were informed that ‘Umar bin alKhattab said: ‘From my progeny will be a man possessing a
somewhat disgraceful reputation who will be succeeded by a
man who will spread justice across the land. ’”

471

Az-Zubair bin Bakkar said: “When ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
assumed the caliphate, he ascended the pulpit whereupon the
first speech he ever delivered was in praise and glorification
of Allah. Following that, he said: “O people! Whosoever
befriends us then let him befriend us on the grounds of the
following five principles, otherwise let him dissassociate
himself from us:
1) He raises the needs of those who are unable to present them
to us.
2) He exerts all his effort to assist us in enjoing good
3) He demonstrates good conduct in matters that we are not
aware of.
4) He does not degrade our subjects
5) He does not expose that which does not concern him. ” He
drove away the poets and orators in favour of the jurists and
ascetics whom he kept close to him and who said about
him: “We did not want to leave this man’s company until
his actions contradict his words. ”
Sufyan bin ‘Uyainah said: “When ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-Azeez
ascended to power, he sent for Muhammad bin Ka‘b, Raja’
bin Haiwah and Salim bin ‘Abdullah to whom he said: ‘You
have seen what I have been afflicted and tried with, therefore
what do you suggest?’So Muhammad bin Ka‘b said:
‘Consider the old man a father, the youth a brother and the
young a son so that you may then revere your father, bond
with your brother and show compassion to your son’. Raja’
advised: ‘Please the people as you please yourself, do not hate
that a thing should befall you without hating that it befalls
them and know that you are not the first Khaleefah to die’.
Lastly, Salim said: ‘Deal with matters one day at a time,
disdain the temptations of the world and make death your last
472

disposition, as it certainly will be’. At that point, ‘Umar said:
‘There is no might or power except with Allah. ’”
Malik bin Deenar, nicknamed “Malik, the Ascetic”, would
say to the people: “What asceticism do I possess?Rather, the
ascetic is ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez who has been given the
world and everything in it but is still disdainful of its luxuries
and so he abandons them. ” It is said that ‘Umar owned no
more than one outer garment and if it were being washed he
would stay in his house until it was ready. On one occasion,
he stood before a monk and said: “Woe unto you! Admonish
me! ”The monk replied: “You must know the saying of the
poet (in at-Taweel poetry):
“Disdain from the world before you
Leave it while you are distracted. ”
It is saidthat ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez was informed that Abu
Sallam al-Aswad had narrated a Hadeeth that he heard from
Thawban concerning the Hawdh (Pool in Paradise) and so he
requested that he pay him a visit, upon which Abu Sallam
travelled to him by mule, which proved a somewhat
troublesome journey for him. As he entered upon the
Khaleefah, he said to Abu Sallam: “We did not want to trouble
you, O Abu Sallam, but a Hadeeth that you narrated from
Thawban was conveyed to me and I wanted you to narrate it
directly to me. ” Abu Sallam therefore said: “Thawban
narrated to me from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him): ‘My Hawdh (is as large as)
from ‘Adan to ‘Amman of al-Balqa’ and its water is whiter
than milk and sweeter than honey. Its cups are as numerous
as the stars and whoever drinks one drink from it will never
feel thirst again. The first people to arrive at it are the poor
among the Emigrants with dishevelled heads, dirty clothes,
those whom the women of favour would not marry nor who
would have doors opened for them. ’”Upon hearing this,
473

‘Umar said: “But I have a woman of favour and doors are
opened for me. I married Fatimah bint ‘Abdul-Malik. I shall
certainly not wash my head until it is dishevelled, nor wash
the garment that touches my body until it becomes dirty. ”
A man once said to ‘Umar: “May Allah preserve all things
that are good for you”, upon which ‘Umar replied: “This is
something that one should abstain from. Rather, say: ‘May
Allah grant you a good life and cause you to die with the
righteous and god-fearing. ’”So the man said: “How were you
when you woke up this morning, O Ameerul-Mu’mineen?”
He replied: “I felt sluggish and heavy, corrupted by sin and
desirous for Allah, the Majestic and Sublime. ”
Raja’ bin Haiwah said: “I once spent the night talking to
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez to whom I said: ‘O AmeerulMu’mineen! Should you not waken this servant boy and
takehim to task?’‘Umar replied: ‘No. Let him sleep. Will
waking him up rectify him?’So he said: ‘No, but it is not
honourable for a man to use his guest (to serve) ’, upon which
Raja’ got up himself, told off the slave and poured oil over
him. He then sat back down, upon which ‘Umar said: ‘You
stood up while I am ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez and you sat
down while I am ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez. Be more mindful
of the good favours, as to remember is to be grateful. ’”
Muqatil bin Hayyan said: “I prayed behind ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez and as he read the Verse (which means): “But stop
them, verily, they are to be questioned. ” [as-Saffat, 37:24] he
began to repeat it over and over again as if he could not move
on from that Verse. Similarly, his wife once said: “I have
never seen anyone pray or fast more than him or anyone who
is more fearful of his Lord. He would pray the ‘Isha’ prayer
and then sit down, at which point he would cry so much that
he would fall asleep. He would then wake up and continue to
cry until his eyes could not take it anymore. ” She also said:
“Whenever he would mention something to do the Hereafter
474

as he was with me in bed, he would begin to shake as a bird
shakes off water, upon which he would sit up and cry. I would
cover him with a blanket to calm him down, while saying:
‘Would that there be between us and the Caliphate the
distance between the setting and rising of the sun! ’By Allah,
since we became burdened with the responsibity of the
Caliphate, we have never felt pleasure or happiness. ”
‘Ali bin Zaid said: “I never saw two men behave as if the
Hellfire had been created purposefully for them like al-Hasan
and ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez. ”
Some traditions report that ‘Umar was seen crying tears of
blood. It is said that when he would retire to his bed, he would
recite the verses (which mean):
“Indeed, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and
earth in six days. ” [al-A‘raf, 7:54]
And he recited (what means):
“Did the people of the towns then feel secure against the
coming of out punishment by night while they were asleep?”
[ibid:97], and other related Verses. Every night he would
gather together with his companions among the jurists and
they would remember death and the Hereafter, after which
they would cry as if they had just attended one of their
funerals.
Abu Bakr as-Sooli said on the authority of al-Mubarrad that
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez would quote the poet’s words (in
al-Baseet poetic meter):
“He did not benefit from what he gained
Except for the scent of death during times of grief in ragged
clothes;
475

And other than the striking of matchsticks,
He has very little provision for the start of a journey.
Wherever his death is decided,
Even if he does not go there willingly, he will nevertheless
be obliged. ”
‘Abdullah bin al-Mubarak said: “‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez
used to say:
‘You are glad with ephemeral matters and delighted with
wishes
As the dreaming, sleeping person is tempted by lusts.
Your day is spent in carelessness and ignorance,
Your night is wasted by sleeping while death is inevitable.
You pursue what you will come to hate,
In this way do beasts live. ’”

476

Chapter
In the section dealing with Dala’ilun-Nubuwwah [The Proofs
of Prophecy], we cited the Hadeeth narrated by Abu Dawood
in his Sunan in which the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: “At the beginning of every century,
Allah will send to this Ummah someone who will renew its
religion. ” Some learned men, including Ahmad bin Hanbal,
maintained the view in accordance with that of IbnulJawzi
and others that ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s rule started at the
beginning of the first one hundred years. Others went further
by asserting that he was of those sent by Allah at the
beginning of a century to renew the religion. In fact, he was
the first person to have claimed this about himself and he was
the most worthy of it too, due to the precedence he set in his
leadership, general governorship and the effort he exerted to
administer to the Truth. In this manner, his life story
resembles that of ‘Umar bin al-Khattab and it can be seen that
he tried to imitate him in many ways. Abul-Faraj Ibnul-Jawzi
compiled biographies on both ‘Umar bin al-Khattab and
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez. In terms of the size of their
biographies, it was necessary to dedicate a whole volume to
the biography of ‘Umar bin al-Khattab and another narrating
the traditions traceable to him. As for the biography of ‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, we have provided just an overview of his
life, which should suffice as proof of his virtuous personality.
He would eat plain lentils to humble his heart and to make
him vulnerable to weeping frequently. Whenever death was
mentioned, he would get restless and when a man read the
verse (which means):

477

“And when they shall be thrown into a narrow place thereof,
chained together, they will exclaim therein for destruction. ”
[al-Furqan, 25:13] in front of him, he began to cry hysterically
whereupon he entered his house and isolated himself from the
people. He would always say: “O Allah! Deliver, deliver! ”He
would also say: “O Allah! Rectify whoever serves the Ummah
of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and annihilate whoever ruins the goodness of the Ummah of
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). ”
He said: “The best form of worship is the execution of the
Fara’idh (obligatory duties) and abstinence from prohibitions.
” He also said: “If one does not enjoin the good and forbid the
evil such that he judges affairs for himself, then he causes the
disappearance of the act of enjoining good and forbidding
evil, so that there will be fewer preachers and fewer people
seeking advice for the sake of Allah. ” He also said: “How
prosperous is one who is safeguarded from doubt, anger and
greed! ”
He once aked a man: “Who is the master of your nation?” He
said: “I am. ” So he said: “If you were, you would not have
said that. ” He also said: “The most ascetic person in this
world was ‘Ali bin Abu Talib. ” He is reported to have said:
“The thing you can be most unsuccessful in is in asking your
Lord for something, as it might either be granted or refused. ”
He said: “Knowledge is bound to the Book. ” He once said to
a
man:
“Teach
your
child
the
greatest
jurisprudence:moderation and suppressing harm. ” A man
was once speaking while in ‘Umar’s company whereby he
happened to say something good, so ‘Umar said: “This is the
permissible magic. ”
The story about him and Abu Hazim relates to when Abu
Hazim saw the Khaleefah, ‘Umar, whose face looked pale and
withdrawn from living a life of asceticism so much so that it
had altered his appearance. Startled by this, he asked ‘Umar:
“Has your Thawb (garment) not been cleaned, your face
478

washed, your food made tasty or your means of transport
made ready for you?” He humbly replied: “Did you not tell
me that Abu Hurairah said that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: ‘Verily, ahead of
you lies an insurmountable obstacle that cannot be overcome
except by the feeble and thin?. ’”

The Cause of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s
Death (May Allah be pleased with him)
Accounts of his death maintain that his servant was bribed
with a thousand Deenars into poisoning his food or drink,
which caused him to fall severely ill. ‘Umar learned of this on
his deathbed, whereupon he said: “I knew I would be
poisoned one day. ” After this, he summoned the culprit and
said: “Woe unto you! What motivated you to do what you
did?” He replied: “I was given a thousand Deenars”, and so
the money was taken from him and deposited into the BaitulMal (public treasury). He then pardoned him by saying: “Go
to [a place] where nobody can see you and perish. ”
On this occasion, it was said to ‘Umar: “Cure yourself with
some remedy. ” So he said: “By Allah, if I were given
something [medication] in my ear or a scent to smell, I would
not take it. ” So it was said to him: “And what about your
twelve children? Will you not bequeath them anything in your
will as they are already poor?” He said (what means):
“And those whom you call upon besides Him (Allah)
cannot help you nor can they help themself. ” [alA‘raf,
7:197]
By Allah! I will not give them the right of anyone, as they are
one of two types of men:they are either righteous, in which
case Allah takes care of the righteous; or they are sinful, in
which case I will not assist them in spreading their corruption.
479

” In another narration it states: “I do not care in which valley
I perish”, while he says in another: “Should I allow him that
which helps him to disobey Allah so that I would be his
partner in it after I die?I will not! ”Following this, he
summoned his children to whom he bade farewell, consoled
them and then determined his will. He then said: “You may
leave now. May Allah safeguard you and endow you with the
best caliphate. ”
In fact, it is said that some of the sons of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez were seen donating eighty horses for Allah’s sake,
whereas the sons of Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik, who each
inherited a great deal of wealth from their father, would ask
for charity and beg from ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s sons.
This is because ‘Umar entrusted his children to Allah, the
Majestic and High, unlike Sulaiman and others who entrusted
their children to whatever transitory wealth they left behind
for them that served to lead them astray and follow their
desires.
When death approached ‘Umar, he said to his family around
him: “Come and sit by me”, so they did. He then said: “O my
Lord! I am the one who You invested with authority, yet I was
inadequate; You forbade me, yet I defied You [three times],
however, there is no one worthy of worship but Allah. ” He
then lifted his head and began to glance sharply, so his family
said: “You are delirious, O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! ”At that
point he said: “Indeed, I see a being that is neither human nor
Jinn (a species created from smokeless fire; Jinn) ”, and at that
point his soul was seized, i. e. he passed away. Another
tradition maintains that he said to his family: “Leave from
here”, so his family went out, although Maslamah bin ‘AbdulMalik and his sister, Fatimah, sat outside the door whereupon
they heard him saying: “Welcome to this existence that is
neither human nor Jinn. ” He then recited (what means): “That
home of the Hereafter (i. e. Paradise), We shall assign to
those who rebel not against the truth with pride and
480

oppression in the land nor do mischief (by committing
crimes). And the good end is for the Muttaqoon (pious). ” [alQasas,
28:83]
Having recited that verse, his voice then became faint and so
his family entered upon him to find him unconscious. Thus,
they turned him to face the Qiblah (direction of Makkah) and
soon after he passed away.
Raja’ bin Haiwah said: “‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez had
enjoined on me the duty of performing Ghusl (ritual
cleansing) on him and shrouding him in his burial sheet. Upon
doing this, I unfastened the knot in his shroud and as I looked
at his face, it was like a bright white sheet of paper. ‘Umar
told me that he had previously buried three of the caliphs
before him and as he uncovered their faces he saw that they
had become blackened. ”
Al-Haitham bin ‘Adiyy said: “He died in the month of Jumada
in the hundredth year of the Hijrah. His paternal cousin,
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik, offered the prayer at his funeral,
while other traditions differ, stating either Yazeed bin ‘AbdulMalik or ‘Umar’s son, ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul‘Azeez, did so. At the time of his death, he was aged
thirty-nine, while other accounts vary claiming he was above
the age of forty, aged thirty-three, thirty-six, thirty-seven or
just generally, that he had reached between the age of thirty
and forty.

481

The Caliphate of Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik
Yazeed was appointed as the heir to the caliphate by his
brother, Sulaiman bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, following
the succession of his cousin, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez, which
meant that upon ‘Umar’s death in the month of Rajab this
year, the people pledged their allegiance to Yazeed, who at
the time was twenty-nine years of age. In the month of
Ramadan, he commenced his rule as caliph by dismissing
Abu Bakr bin Muhammad bin ‘Amr bin Hazm from
governorship in al-Madinah and invested authority over it to
‘Abdur-Rahman bin ad-Dahhak bin Qais instead. This
resulted in a great deal of malice and rivalry between the two
parties that went to such extremes that the issue of
government was settled by the sword.
During this year, war broke out between the Khawarij,
specifically, between the associates of Bistam alKhariji, and
the troops of al-Koofah.
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab broke out of prison to renounce
Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik and lay siege to alBasrah after a
long and brutal battle. Upon gaining a foothold, he spread
justice amongst the people, distributed money to them and
imprisoned ‘Adiyy bin Artat, as he had imprisoned alMuhallab’s family residing in al-Basrah upon hearing that alMuhallab had escaped from prison at the time when ‘Umar
bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez fell ill, as mentioned previously.
When news that Yazeed bin al-Muhallab had made an
appearance reached the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Yazeed bin
‘Abdul-Malik, his brother’s son, al-‘Abbas bin al-Waleed bin
‘Abdul-Malik, mobilised an army of four thousand men,
while his paternal uncle, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik,
advanced ahead of him with his troops from ash-Sham
towards al-Basrah to wage war. Upon hearing about the
advancement of the Ameerul-Mu’mineen’s armies, Yazeed
482

left al-Basrah and appointed his brother, Marwan bin
alMuhallab, as his deputy while he went to the garrison town
of Wasit. There, he consulted the chiefs as to what course of
action he should adopt, although a consensus could not be
reached. Some of them suggested that he should travel to alAhwaz and build a fortress in the mountain peaks. To that he
said: “Do you want to turn me into a bird on the mountain
peak?” On the other hand, some men from al-‘Iraq advised
him to go and reside in al-Jazeerah (the Arabian Peninsula)
and to fortify himself in the strongest fortress he finds. He was
also advised to break off from the people of al-‘Iraq and join
forces with the people of al-Jazeerah so that he might then go
into battle against the people of ash-Sham with them on his
side.

Upon Entering the 102nd Year of the Hijrah
This was the year in which Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik met
with Yazeed bin al-Muhallab. Having now departed from
Wasit, Yazeed bin al-Muhallab appointed his son,
Mu‘awiyah, as his successor over it while he, on the other
hand, embarked with his army that had been preceded by his
brother, ‘Abdul-Malik bin al-Muhallab, towards a place
known as al-‘Aqr (located near Karbala’). When Maslamah
bin ‘AbdulMalik arrived there with his troops, Yazeed had no
power over it and so the first detachments from both sides
encountered each other from the onset, at which point they
engaged in an intense battle that resulted in the people of alBasrah defeating the people of ash-Sham. The people of ashSham, however, were extremely bothered by this and so they
launched a second attack against the people of al-Basrah until
they managed to defeat them, killing a large number of valiant
soldiers, including al-Mantoof who was well known for his
bravery, in the process.
When Maslamah and his brother’s son, al-‘Abbas bin alWaleed, drew near to Yazeed bin al-Muhallab’s army,
483

Yazeed bin al-Muhallab gave a speech to the people in which
he incited them to go to war against the people of ash-Sham.
Yazeed’s army consisted of approximately one hundred and
twenty thousand men who had pledged their allegiance “to
listen to and obey” him, the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
They further vowed not to trample on their own soldiers and
that they would not repeat the sinful and reckless behaviour
demonstrated by al-Hajjaj. Whoever pledged their allegiance
on these grounds, it was accepted from him and whoever
opposed any part of it would be forced to fight against them.
In these days, al-Hasan al-Basri advocated putting an end to
any Fitnah (trials; discord) and desisting from having any
involvement with it, which he strictly prohibited, given that
this was the reason for the ongoing tragedy that ensued with
Ibnul-Ash‘ath that caused many people to lose their lives. AlHasan alBasri therefore embarked on a mission of addressing
the people in order to preach this message of abstaining from
Fitnah, which eventually reached the deputy of al-Basrah
himself, Marwan bin alMuhallab. Consequently, he called the
people to enter into battle and wage Jihad (fighting for Allah’s
cause) diligently. He then said: “I have been informed about
this deviant and argumentative Shaykh (learned elder) and he
is impeding the people from assisting us, though by Allah, if
he does not stop what he is doing then I will do what I have
to do” and he went on threatening him in this manner. When
alHasan learned of this, he said: “By Allah! I do not hate that
Allah should bestow honour upon me through his insults” and
as such Allah protected him from him until the cessation of
his state.
Upon meeting face to face, the armies failed to contend
against each other and so no serious war broke out. In fact, the
people of al-‘Iraq were unable to withstand the opposition,
forcing them to speedily flee from the battlefield. Upon
hearing that the people of ash-Sham were crossing the bridge
484

to get to them, the people of al-‘Iraq set it on fire and in this
way defeated their army. Following this incident, Yazeed bin
al-Muhallab asked: “What is the condition of the people?” It
was said to him: “They were crossing the bridge when the
people of al-‘Iraq set it on fire. ” So he exclaimed: “May Allah
revile them! ”
It follows that Yazeed attempted to go back to recover the
defeated soldiers but he was unable to do so and so he formed
a band of troops comprised of his associates who began to
advance singly or in small groups, until just a small group of
them remained. He nevertheless made an advance with those
few troops without stopping until they defeated the
opposition, while the people of ash-Sham withdrew to the
right and to the left. Prior to this, Yazeed’s brother, Habeeb
bin al-Muhallab, was killed in battle as he was targeting
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik, but in doing so he was attacked
and killed by the people of ash-Sham who closed in on him
on horseback. Not only did this fuel their rage and anger, but
Yazeed’s other brother, Muhammad bin al-Muhallab, and asSamaida‘, a brave and courageous soldier, were also slain
amidst the fighting.
The man who reportedly killed Yazeed bin al-Muhallab was
known as al-Qahl bin ‘Ayyash who made his attack from the
side and then took his head to Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik
bin Marwan, who sent it with Khalid bin al-Waleed bin
‘Uqbah bin Abu Mu‘ait to his brother, the AmeerulMu’mineen, Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik. Maslamah bin
‘Abdul-Malik subsequently seized Yazeed bin al-Muhallab’s
military base, taking approximately three hundred of his men
captive who he then sent to his brother in al-Koofah. The letter
notifying the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Yazeed bin ‘AbdulMalik, of their deaths had arrived and Maslamah subsequently
moved on to al-Heerah.

485

When news of Yazeed bin al-Muhallab’s downfall reached his
son, Mu‘awiyah bin Yazeed, who was in Wasit at the time, he
turned to approximately thirty of the captives at his disposal
and executed them all, amongst whom was ‘Adiyy bin Artat,
his son, Malik and ‘Abdul-Malik, the two sons of Misma‘ and
a group of dignitaries. He then moved onto al-Basrah with a
chest of money in his possession where he first met with his
paternal uncle, al-Mufaddal bin al-Muhallab and then the rest
of the al-Muhallab family who together assembled ships and
resources in preparation for their escape. Soon afterwards,
they boarded with their families and belongings to set off on
their voyage, not stopping until they came to the mountains of
Karman (Taurus) where they disembarked. There, they were
met by a group of defeated soldiers who had fought alongside
Yazeed bin al-Muhallab and who were now under the
authority of alMufaddal bin al-Muhallab. In the meantime,
Maslamah dispatched an army headed by Hilal bin Ahwaz alMazini, while other sources mention a man called Mudrik bin
Dabb al-Kalbi, in pursuit of the alMuhallab family.
The two armies encountered each other by the mountains of
Karman where they fought a fierce battle that resulted in a
band of al-Mufaddal’s associates being killed, a band of their
dignitaries were taken captive and the rest defeated.
Following that, al-Mufaddal was intercepted and killed, upon
which his head was taken to Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik,
while a band of Yazeed bin al-Muhallab’s associates sought
the protection of the Ameer of ash-Sham, amongst whom was
Malik bin Ibraheem bin al-Ashtar an-Nakha‘i. They were then
sent to Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik with their baggage,
money, women and children, as well as the heads of alMufaddal and ‘Abdul-Malik bin al-Muhallab. Upon receiving
them, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik took the heads along with
nine of the young men mounted on horses to his brother,
Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik. Yazeed, however, received them
with hostility and beheaded the nine boys, whose heads he put
up on public display in Damascus, and then in Halab
486

(Aleppo). Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik therefore swore that
he would sell the offspring of the al-Muhallab family who
were bought soon after that by some righteous dignitaries for
one hundred thousand Deenar. They were then released and
so Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik did not take anything from
the dignitaries for them whatsoever. According to the account
of Ibn Jareer, poets later celebrated the personage of Yazeed
bin al-Muhallab in their poems.

Maslamah’s Governorship over the
Provinces of al-‘Iraq and Khurasan
Now that he was no longer engaged in war against the alMuhallab family, Maslamah’s brother, Yazeed bin ‘AbdulMalik, the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, wrote to him during this
year concerning the leadership of al-Koofah, al-Basrah and
Khurasan. He was thereby deputed over al-Koofah and alBasrah while his sonin-law, Sa‘eed bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez bin alHarith bin al-Hakam bin Abul-‘As (nicknamed Khudhainah),
was delegated to Khurasan. Upon his arrival, he urged the
people to have patience and courage and punished those
officials who had caused harm to the al-Muhallab family,
seizing a great deal of wealth from them and even causing
some of them to die from the severity of their punishment.

The Battle between the Turks and Muslims
This was occasioned when Khaqan, the supreme king of the
Turks, dispatched an army to as-Sughd (Sogdiana) under the
commandership of a man named Koorsool to fight against the
Muslims. Koorsool advanced with his army until they reached
the al-Bahili palace, which he then laid siege to while a large
number of Muslims were inside it. The deputy of Samarqand,
‘Uthman bin ‘Abdullah bin Mutarrif, subsequently sought
reconciliation with them for a sum of forty-thousand Dirhams
in addition to handing over seventeen leading personalities
who had been taken hostage by the Muslims. Following this,
487

‘Uthman delegated the people, including a man named alMusayyab bin Bishr ar-Riyahi, who was entrusted with
authority over four thousand men, to advance towards the
Turks.
Having completed part of the journey there, al-Musayyab
stopped to address the people, whereby he incited them to
wage war and reminded them that their marching towards the
enemy was in pursuit of the Shahadah (martyrdom).
However, more than a thousand men turned back and every
time he gave a speech to the remaining soldiers, more and
more of them withdrew to the point that only seven hundred
combatants remained. Despite this, he closed in with his army
until they forced the Turks to declare a pledge to be ransomed,
whilst the Muslims who had been blockaded in the palace
further demanded that the Turk women should be killed and
their children sacrificed before them. Inevitably, the two sides
combated against one another during which men from both
sides were killed and so al-Musayyab sent out reinforcements
enabling them to maintain their position on that day, and in
doing so, persisting in activity until the time of Sahar (before
daybreak).
At that point, al-Musayyab exclaimed: “Takbeer” (the
exclamation: “Allah is the Greatest! ”), which his comrades
responded to by shouting: “Takbeer! ” even louder and
chanting: “O Muhammad! ” as their slogan. Following that,
they then carried out a valliant campaign against the Turks,
killing a vast number of them and stringing up their mounts.
The Turks, however, revolted against them once again, which
led to a severe battle in which the majority of the Muslims
fled the battlefield and al-Musayyab’s mount was debilitated.
As a result, he dismounted his horse, as did the other bold
soldiers, and they advanced on foot, which only served to
demonstrate their perseverance in withstanding a fierce battle.
Al-Musayyab’s comrades continued to dutifully guard over
488

and defend him until Allah eventually granted victory in the
Muslims’ hands.
Also during this year, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik fell out of
favour with his brother, Yazeed bin ‘AbdulMalik, AmeerulMu’mineen, who dismissed him from his post as the governor
of al-‘Iraq and Khurasan due to him spending money obtained
as war booty on personal needs.

Among the Nobles and Dignitaries who Died
in this Year:
‘Adiyy bin Artat al-Fazari, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez’s
deputy over al-Basrah who seized Yazeed bin alMuhallab and
sent him in shackles to ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez who then
ordered his imprisonment.
Ad-Dahhak bin Muzahim al-Hilali, Abul-Qasim, also known
as Abu Muhammad al-Khurasani, who was an Imam
(religious leader) and an expert in the science of Tafseer
(Qur’anic Exegesis). Ath-Thawri said: “Tafseer was imparted
by four (people): Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Sa‘eed bin Jubair and
ad-Dahhak. ”

Upon Entering the 103rd Year of the Hijrah
The governor of al-‘Iraq, ‘Umar bin al-Hubairah, replaced
Sa‘eed (nicknamed Khudhainah) with Sa‘eed bin ‘Amr alHarashi as the deputy of Khurasan in this year.
Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik extended the governorship of both
al-Madinah and Makkah to ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ad-Dahhak
bin Qais and appointed ‘Abdul-Wahid bin ‘Abdullah anNadri as the deputy of at-Ta’if.

489

Amongst the Prominent People who Died in
this Year:
Yazeed bin Abu Muslim, Abul-‘Ala’, al-Madani.
‘Ata’ bin Yasar al-Hilali, Abu Muhammad, al-Qass alMadani.
Mujahid bin Jabr al-Makki, an Imam from the Tabi‘een (the
second and third generations following the Companions) and
Mufassireen (Qur’anic exegetes).
Mus‘ab bin Sa‘d bin Abu Waqqas who was a reliable,
honorable Tabi‘i of high-standing.
Moosa bin Talhah bin ‘Ubaidullah [at-Taimi] who was
nicknamed al-Mahdi on account of his goodness.

Upon Entering the 104th Year
Sa‘eed bin ‘Amr al-Harashi, the deputy of Khurasan, battled
against the people of as-Sughd in this year and laid siege to
the people of Khujandah (second largest city of Tajikistan),
where he killed many people and seized a great deal of wealth.
In the month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal, Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik,
the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, dismissed ‘AbdurRahman bin adDahhak bin Qais from governorship over the Haramain (Two
Holy Sites, i. e. Makkah and al-Madinah).
‘Umar bin al-Hubairah dismissed Sa‘eed bin ‘Amr al-Harashi
due to his disregard for ‘Umar bin Hubairah’s orders.
Al-Jarrah bin ‘Abdullah al-Hakami, the deputy of
Armeeniyyah (Armenia) and Adhrabeejan (Azerbaijan)
invaded the land of the Turks.

490

‘Abdul-Wahid bin ‘Abdullah an-Nadri, the Ameer of the
Haramain (Two Holy Sites) and at-Ta’if, led the people in
performing the Hajj Pilgrimage.
Abul-‘Abbas had a son by the name of ‘Abdullah bin
Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas, also known
as-Saffah (the shedder of blood; murderer), who would
become the first Khaleefah of the Banul‘Abbas tribe (the
Abbasids). A party from the people of al-‘Iraq also secretly
pledged their allegiance to his father in this year.

Among the Prominent People who Died:
Khalid bin Ma‘dan al-Kala‘i.
‘Amir bin Sa‘d bin Abu Waqqas who narrated many traditions
from his father and others.
‘Amir bin Sharaheel ash-Sha‘bi.
Abu Burdah bin Abu Moosa al-Ash‘ari who was appointed to
the office of chief judge before ashSha‘bi’s tenure.

Upon Entering the 105th Year
Al-Jarrah bin ‘Abdullah al-Hakami invaded the land of al-Lan
(a vast region within Armeeniyyah) where he conquered
many fortresses.
Muslim bin Sa‘eed invaded the land of the Turks.
Sa‘eed bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan invaded the land of arRoom.
Five days before the end of the month of Sha‘ban, the
Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan,
passed away in Arbad within the land of al-Balqa’ (Balqa,
north-west of Amman, Jordon). This happened on a Friday
491

and he was aged between thirty to forty years old. A brief
overview of his biography is as follows:
His name was Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan bin alHakam bin Abul-‘As bin Umayyah bin ‘Abd Shams bin ‘Abd
Manaf, Abu Khalid, al-Qurashi al-Umawi, the AmeerulMu’mineen.
Muhammad bin Yahya adh-Dhuhli said : “A Muslim would
not inherit from a Kafir (Disbeliever; Infidel) nor would a
Kafir inherit from Muslim under the rule of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), AbuBakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman
and ‘Ali. However, after Mu‘awiyah ascended to the
caliphate, a Muslim could inherit from a Kafir but not the
other way round -- a principle that later was adopted by the
successive caliphs. It was ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul‘Azeez who
revived the Sunnah (Prophetic tradition) by returning this
tradition to its original practice, which was also followed by
Yazeed bin ‘Abdul-Malik. In spite of this change, when
Hisham seized the caliphate, he reinforced the Sunnah
(example; tradition) of the caliphs which implied that, once
again, a Muslim could inherit from Kafir. ”
This Yazeed, who we just mentioned, would frequent the
gatherings and assemblies of the ‘Ulama’ (scholars) prior to
his ascension to the caliphate. Therefore upon his
appointment as caliph, he was determined to imitate the
attitude of ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez but as he failed to detach
himself from keeping bad company, he only served to better
his ability at being an oppressor.
Some people have further questioned his religion, but this is
incorrect. His son, al-Waleed bin Yazeed, was definitely a
Fasiq (sinner; rebellious), which we shall come to, although
there was nothing wrong with Yazeed himself. ‘Umar bin
‘Abdul-‘Azeez once wrote to Yazeed saying: “I do not know
492

other that what you have shown me and I do not see this affair
(the caliphate) other than being occupied by you. By Allah,
Allah is with the Ummah of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and you will shortly be dead; therefore
leave the world to whoever does not praise you and engage
someone who does not apologise to you. Peace. ”

The Caliphate of Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik
bin Marwan
Hisham inherited the caliphate from his brother, Yazeed bin
‘Abdul-Malik, on Friday, five days before the end of the
month of Sha‘ban of this year, that is, the one hundred and
fifth, at the age of thirty-four. He was born at the time when
his father, ‘Abdul-Malik, killed Mus‘ab bin az-Zubair in the
seventysecond year and as a result he named his newly-born
son Mansoor (meaning:victorious). However, upon ‘AbdulMalik’s return home, he found that his wife had called their
son after her father, Hisham, which was pleased with and
consented to.
Al-Waqidi said: “The caliphate was tendered to him while he
was at home in Zaitoonah (a place in the nomad steppes of
ash-Sham) on which occasion he was delivered the official
staff and ring. He therefore accepted his assumption of the
caliphate and travelled eagerly to Damascus where the affair
of the caliphate was settled, and he assumed his role in the
undertaking of matters. In the month of Shawwal of this year,
he dismissed ‘Umar bin Hubairah from the offices of
governorship over al-Iraq and Khurasan and appointed Khalid
bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri in his place.
In this year, Ibraheem bin Hisham bin Isma‘eel alMakhzoomi, the paternal uncle of the AmeerulMu’mineen,
led the people in perfoming the Hajj Pilgrimage.

493

The Banul-‘Abbas’ (Abbasids) secret claim to the caliphate
became more prevalent during this year in al‘Iraq.

Among the Prominent People who Died:
Aban bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan who was one of the jurists and
scholars of the Tabi‘een (followers of the second and third
generations). ‘Amr bin Shu‘aib said: “I never saw anyone
more learned than him in relation to Hadeeth (sayings of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) and Fiqh
(Jurisprudence). ”
Abu Raja’ al-‘Utaridi who was one of the Rijal (antecedents,
i. e. transmitters of traditions) of the Saheehain.

Upon Entering the 106th Year of the Hijrah
Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed ‘Abdul-Wahid bin
‘Abdullah an-Nadri from the offices of governorship over alMadinah, Makkah and at-Ta’if and appointed them all to his
maternal uncle, Ibraheem bin Hisham bin Isma‘eel alMakhzoomi.
Sa‘eed bin ‘Abdul-Malik carried out a military expedition to
As-Sa’ifah in this year.
Muslim bin Sa‘eed invaded Farghanah (capital of Fergana
Province, east Uzbekistan) and its associate districts where he
encountered the Turks in a gruesome battle; King al-Khaqan
and a large party of Turks were consequently killed in action.
Also during this year, al-Jarrah al-Hakami penetrated into the
heart of land of al-Khazar (north Tabaristan) where the people
conceded to peace by paying the Jizyah (head-tax on every
non-Muslim under Muslim rule) and the Kharaj (land tax in
Islamic law). At the same time, al-Hajjaj bin ‘AbdulMalik
invaded al-Lan (a vast region within Armeeniyyah) wherein
he killed many people and gained a great deal of war booty.
494

Khalid bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri dismissed Muslim bin Sa‘eed
from governorship in Khurasan and assigned it to his brother
Asad bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri.
The Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik, led the
people in perfoming the Hajj Pilgrimage in this year, prior to
which he wrote to Abuz-Zinad requesting him to meet him
before his arrival in alMadinah and for him to write to him
regarding the rites and rituals attached to the Pilgrimage,
which he did. Accordingly, Abuz-Zinad fulfilled his requests
and met up with Hisham and the people as they embarked on
their journey to al-Madinah.

Among Those Who Died in this Year:
Salim bin ‘Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab, who was one
of the jurists.
Tawoos bin Kaisan al-Yamani, who was one of the senior
companions of Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them).

Upon Entering the 107th Year
A man by the name of ‘Abbad ar-Ru‘aini emerged from
Yemen advocating the principles of the Khawarij sect in this
year.
A terrible epidemic of the plague befell ash-Sham in this year.
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham undertook a summer military
campaign with an army from the people of ashSham under the
commandership of Maimoon bin Mihran, who crossed the
river into Cyprus, while Maslamah undertook a naval
expedition against it with another army.

495

Asad bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri seized a party who had been
promoting the interests of the Banul-‘Abbas tribe in Khurasan
who he had deprecated and crucified.
Asad al-Qasri invaded Jibal Namroon (the mountains of
Lambron) whereby its chief, Lambron of Armenia, reconciled
with him and submitted to Islam at his hands.
Asad also invaded al-Ghoor (a rift valley in the Herat
mountains of Afghanistan) where the people shifted all of
their produce, wealth and belongings to an impenetrable cave
so that nobody could gain access to them. Thus, Asad ordered
some men to bring a load of caskets and lead him to the cave
where he told them to fill the caskets with whatever they
found there. Once they had collected everything, the men
carried the caskets back and handed over the spoils. This
account is widely known.
Asad gave orders for the annexation of the surrounding areas
of Balkh (a small city in Afghanistan) where he appointed
Barmak, the father of Khalid bin Barmak, as its deputy who
therein embarked on an impressive building project that
entrenched the city and made it a stronghold for the Muslims.
Ibraheem bin Hisham bin Isma‘eel, the Ameer of the
Haramain (Two Holy Sites) led the people in performing the
Hajj Pilgrimage in this year.

Among the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
Sulaiman bin Yasar, one of the Tabi‘een.
‘Ikrimah, who was the servant of Ibn ‘Abbas and one of the
Tabi‘een and Mufassireen (Qur’anic exegetes), also died.

496

Al-Qasim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq who
was a famous jurist as well as a renowned poet. Ibn
Khallikan would call him “Zabbudh-Dhubab” (the male
organ of flies), as when he would walk down the street, one
would think that he was smaller than he actually was. When
he used to enter upon ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan, he would
say to him: “Bow your head so that you do not damage the
ceiling”, which would make him laugh. He was amongst
those who visited ‘Abdul-Malik and he also used to visit
‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Azeez during his rule.
It was said that he was the most versatile of Islamists because
he carried a strong sense of partisanship that some reckon
traced back to the Tanasukhiyyah sect (a sect who believed in
the transmigration of souls and claimed there is no
resurrection after death). This belief was derived from his
ignorance and lack of intelligence concerning a matter that is
substantiated by Allah’s Saying (which means):
“In whatever form He willed, He put you together. ” [alInfitar, 82:8]
He asked permission to enter upon ‘Abdul-Malik and upon
doing so, ‘Abdul-Malik said to him: “You listen to al-Mu‘aidi
more than you see him. ” He therefore said: “Slow down, O
Ameerul-Mu’mineen! Even though he is a man whose heart
and tongue are ridiculed, if he utters a word he does so with
clarity, if he fights he does it with heart and soul, and it is I
who say (in al-Wafir poetic meter):
‘I have experienced matters that have tried me
And that served to reveal my nature;
Men are not inclined to me
On account of my encounters and perspicacity;
497

You despise the thin man when you meet him
While a fierce lion is garmented in his clothes;
You admire the neatly dressed man
While he is a disappointment to you;
Men are not exalted for adornment
Rather, they are glorified for bounty and goodness;
Mean birds are the bulky ones
Falcons and buzzards do not have big bodies;
A camel is irrationally bulky,
It does not benefit from its great body;
As it is ridden and steered
It does not have the power of refusal;
Puny creatures continue to thrive off fountains
That do not sustain their feebleness. ”
Many have also quoted the wise saying:
“He who does not tolerate his friend’s deficiencies
Will die while pointing the finger;
For the one who counts every wrong step,
Time will not leave him a friend. ”

498

Upon Entering the 108th Year
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik conquered Qaisariyyah
(Caesarea; an ancient seaport in Palestine) in the land of arRoom while Ibraheem bin Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik
conquered one of its fortresses. During this year, Asad bin
‘Abdullah al-Qasri, the governor of Khurasan, ran a military
campaign against the Turks that won him a profound victory.
Ibraheem bin Hisham bin Isma‘eel al-Makhzoomi, the Ameer
of the Haramain (Two Holy Sites) and at-Ta’if, led the people
in the Hajj Pilgrimage during this year. The same officials
were appointed over the provinces as the previous year.
Bakr bin ‘Abdullah al-Muzani, Rashid bin Sa‘d al-Maqra’i alHimsi, Muhammad bin Ka‘b al-Qurazi and Abu Nadrah alMundhir bin Malik bin Qit‘ah al-‘Abdi died during this year.

Upon Entering the 109th Year
Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Asad bin ‘Abdullah alQasri from office in Khurasan whereupon he commissioned
him to perform the Hajj Pilgrimage, which he did in the month
of Ramadan. Al-Hakam bin ‘Awanah al-Kalbi was appointed
as his replacement as governor of Khurasan.
Ibraheem bin Hisham, the Ameer of al- Haramain and atTa’if, led the people in the Hajj Pilgrimage.

Upon Entering the 110th Year of the
Prophetic Hijrah
In this year, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik attacked the
supreme authority of the Turks, Khaqan, who in turn marched
towards Maslamah with a formidable army. Both sides met in
battle for close to a month, following which Allah granted
victory to the Muslims over Khaqan during the winter period
and Maslamah returned home safely bearing the spoils of war.
499

Ashras bin ‘Abdullah as-Sulami, the deputy of Khurasan,
called the Ahl udh-dhimmah (free non-Muslim subjects living
in Muslim lands) living in Samarqand and beyond the river to
submit to Islam after having imposed the Jizyah (head-tax on
non-Muslims under Muslim rule) on them. Being receptive to
the call, it so happened that the overwhelming majority of
them embraced Islam. However, Maslamah did not cease to
demand the Jizyah tax from them and so, they declared war
on him. Subsequent to that ordeal, many wars ensued between
Maslamah and the Turks that have been described by Ibn
Jareer who provides meticulously detailed accounts of them.
The Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Hisham, sent a message to
‘Ubaidah notifying him of his appointment over Africa. Upon
his arrival there, he assigned his son and brother to mobilise
an army that he then dispatched against the polytheists within
the land. The battle resulted in most of the indigenous
population being killed, while the others were either taken
captive or defeated. The Muslims gained extensive spoils
from there.
Duing this year, Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham conquered two
fortresses in the land of ar-Room, thus seizing the war booty.
Ibraheem bin Hisham led the people on the Hajj Pilgrimage.
Remembering the Prominent People who Died in this
Year:
Jareer, the poet, whose name according to various accounts is
Jareer bin al-Khatafa or Jareer bin ‘Atiyyah bin al-Khatafa,
died this year‘Uthman al-Batti is reported to have said: “I
once saw Jareer as his lips were immersed in Tasbeeh (the
glorification of Allah), so I said to him: ‘What use is this to
you when you slander women of unblemished reputation?’He
therefore replied: ‘Glory be to Allah, praise be to Allah, there

500

is no one worthy of worship but Allah, Allah is the greatest
and to Allah belongs all praise Who says (what means):
“Verily the good deeds remove the evil deeds. ” [Hood,
11:114]. And Allah’s promise is true. ’”
Hisham bin Muhammad al-Kalbi said on the authority of his
father: “A man from the Banu ‘Udhrah tribe entered upon
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan and began to eulogise him in his
poetry. ‘Abdul-Malik had three poets in his presence at the
time: Jareer, al-Farazdaq and al-Akhtal, who the desert ‘Arab
was not familiar with and so ‘Abdul-Malik asked him: ‘Do
you know the most satiric verse of poetry said by an ‘Arab in
Islam?’He answered: ‘Yes, in the words of Jareer:
‘Overlook this, as you descend from Numair
You are not venerable enough to be affiliated with the Ka‘b
or Kilab (tribes) ’’.
So ‘Abdul-Malik said: ‘Well done! So then, do you know the
most commending verse of poetry said in Islam?’ He replied:
‘Yes, the saying of Jareer:
‘Are you not the best of those who have ridden on mounts
And the most heroic of all the world’s tribes?’’
‘Abdul-Malik therefore remarked: ‘Well done! In that case,
do you know the most graceful verse composed in
Islam?’Again, he relied: ‘Yes, it is Jareer’s verse:
‘Indeed, the eyes whose glances are defined by Hawr (the
intense whiteness and deep blackness of the eye)
Have killed us, to never revive our fallen;
They throw down the rational until they become motionless,
501

Even as they are the most feeble of Allah’s creatures’’.
At that point, ‘Abdul-Malik said: ‘Correct, well done! Do you
know Jareer personally?’ He said: ‘No, by Allah, but I would
love to see him! ’At this, ‘Abdul-Malik said: ‘This is Jareer
right here, and this is alFarazdaq and al-Akhtal’ as he
introduced them to him and upon meeting them, the desert
Arab began to recite:
“The Lord revives Abu Hazrah!
O Akhtal! May things defy your will;
Al-Farazdaq’s grandfather is unfortunate with his descendant,
As stones washed to shore by the river bring his nose to the
ground.”
Al-Farazdaq retorted by reciting (in al-Baseet):
“May God bring your nose to the ground!
You of obscene language, fabrications, and loose talk;
You are not the ruler whose judgment is accepted
Nor are you well-bred or judicious. ”
After that al-Akhtal started to recite (in al-Baseet):
“O most evil of those who are carried on legs [living
creatures]!
Similar words by nations are not tolerated;
Power is not your father’s lot
Neither is it ascribed to your kinfolk;
They are despicable. ”
502

At that point, Jareer stood up out of anger and said (in alBaseet):
“You have
insulted a
teller

of

truth from
the

onset

For

the

sake of the
caliph,
your
sayings are
full

of

pride!
Do you foolishly resent who is better in repute?
I swear that you are manipulators and fabricators of lies
You have insulted him despite my superiority and your
inadequacy;
It is you two who are perverted and despicable! ”
Jareer then leaned forward and kissed the desert Arab on his
head, after which he said: ‘O AmeerulMu’mineen! Give my
reward to him! ’which was in fact a sum of fifteen thousand
503

Dirhams. Thereupon, ‘Abdul-Malik exclaimed: ‘And grant
him the same amount from my own money! ’And in this way,
the desert Arab acquired all that money and set out on his way.
Already famous for his verses of satire and eulogy, Jareer
became widely known for his feud with his rival poets, alFarazdaq and al-Akhtal. Reports state that Jareer and alFarazdaq died in the one-hundred and tenth year and
according to Khaleefah bin Khayyat and others, al-Farazdaq’s
death was followed by the death of Jareer a month later. AsSooli, on the other hand, maintains that they both died in the
one hundred and eleventh year and that al-Farazdaq died forty
days before Jareer.
As for al-Farazdaq, his name was Hammam bin Ghalib bin
Sa‘sa‘ah bin Najiyah bin ‘Iqal bin Muhammad bin Sufyan bin
Mujashi‘ bin Darim bin Malik bin Hanzalah bin Zaid bin
Manat bin Tameem bin Murr bin Udd bin Tabikhah, Abu
Firas bin Abu Khatal at-Tameemi al-Basri, the acclaimed poet
otherwise known as al-Farazdaq. His grandfather, Sa‘sa‘ah
bin Najiyah was a Companion of theProphet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who was taken to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) as a newborn
baby in the days of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic period of
Ignorance).
Al-Farazdaq said that he and his father arrived in his presence
of ‘Ali who asked: “Who is this?” His father replied: “My son,
the poet. ” ‘Ali therefore said: “Teach him the Qur’an as that
is better for him than poetry. ” Al-Farazdaq directly heard alHusain bin ‘Ali speak and he also saw him in person as he
was on his way to al-‘Iraq with Abu Hurairah, Abu Sa‘eed alKhudri, ‘Arfajah bin As‘ad, Zurarah bin Karib, and atTirimmah bin ‘Adiyy, the poet.
Ash‘ath bin ‘Abdullah said that al-Farazdaq said: “Abu
Hurairah looked at my feet and said: ‘O Farazdaq! Your feet
504

look small, so request a place in Jannah for them’. I therefore
said: ‘I have sinned a lot’. So he said: ‘Do not worry about
that, for I heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) saying: ‘Verily, the setting of the sun
is an open door for repentance that will not close until the sun
rises from that point again. ’”
Al-Asma‘i and others maintain that when an-Nawar bint
A‘yana bin DuBai‘ah al-Mujashi‘i, the wife of al-Farazdaq
died, previous to which she had requested that al-Hasan alBasri offer the prayer at her funeral, the nobles of al-Basrah
witnessed her body being carried with al-Hasan who was on
his mule and al-Farazdaq who was on his camel. As they
proceeded, al-Hasan said to al-Farazdaq: “What are the
people saying?” He said: “They are saying that this funeral
today has been attended by the best of people, referring to
you, and the worst of people, referring to me. ” Al-Hasan
therefore said to him: ‘What did you prepare for today?’He
replied: ‘The testimony: ‘There is no one worthy of worship
but Allah’ for the past eighty years’. Once al-Hasan had
completed the prayer, the people moved towards her grave to
bury her, upon which al-Farazdaq began to recite (in atTaweel):
“I fear what is beyond the tomb in case I am not forgiven
That is more fiery and constricted;
When a guide will come to me on the Day of Resurrection
Who is furious and seeks to steer al-Farazdaq;
Verily, Adam’s children will walk
Towards Hell fettered in chains
Guided to Hell as they are dressed
505

In tattered and ragged garments;
There they will drink pus and you will see them
Melting and permeated by its heat. ”
Abu Amr bin al-‘Ala’ went on to say that al-Hasan cried when
he said this until his tears wet his clothes, after which he drew
close to al-Farazdaq and said: “You used to be the most
loathed person to me but today you are one of the most
beloved. ”
As for Al- Hasan bin Abul-Hasan, his name is Yasar Abu
Sa‘eed al-Basri, and he was the a freedman of Zaid bin Thabit
and it is also said of Jabir bin ‘Abdullah and others.
Anas bin Malik was once asked about a problem and so it said
to him: “Ask our Mawla (master; leader) al-Hasan about it, as
although he has heard what we have, he would commit it to
memory whilst we would forget. ”
Qatadah said: “I never sat with a man learned in Fiqh
(Jurisprudence) who was better than al-Hasan. ”
Al-A‘mash said: “Al-Hasan would continue to learn a wise
saying or ruling by heart until he could articulate it by heart
and whenever Abu Ja‘far mentioned him, he would say: ‘He
is the one whose speech resembles the speech of the prophets.
’”
According to the accounts of historians, al-Hasan died at the
age of eighty-eight in the one hundred and tenth year of the
Hijrah, specifically, at the beginning of the month of Rajab
such that there was a difference of a hundred days between
his death and that of Muhammad bin Seereen.
As for Ibn Seereen, his full name was Muhammad bin Seereen
Abu Bakr bin Abu ‘Amrah al-Ansari, the servant of Anas bin
506

Malik an-Nadri. His father was captured at ‘Ainut-Tamr by
Khalid bin al-Waleed and was later bought by Anas and then
by his scribe. He later begot offspring who would grow up to
be the finest group of people, namely, Muhammad, Anas bin
Seereen, Ma‘bad, Yahya, Hafsah and Kareemah, all of whom
belonged to the honourable and loyal Tabi‘oon (May Allah
have mercy upon them).
Al-Bukhari said: “Muhammad was born two years before the
cessation of ‘Uthman’s caliphate. ”
Hisham bin Hassan said: “He was the most honest and reliable
person I ever knew. ”
Muhammad bin Sa‘d said: “He was a trustworthy,
respectable, praiseworthy jurist and Imam who was
tremendously knowledgeable and pious. He was also partially
deaf. ”
It is said that he died on the 9th Shawwal in this year, one
hundred days after the death of al-Hasan.
This year also witnessed the death of Wahb bin Munabbih alYamani who was an honourable Tabi‘i, learned in the ancient
scriptures.

Upon Entering the 111th Year
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham carried out an invasion to the left asSa’ifah of this year at the same time that Sa‘eed bin Hisham
carried out an invasion to the right as-Sa’ifah until they
penetrated as far as Qaisariyyah (Caesarea) in the land of arRoom.
Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik dismissed Ashras bin ‘Abdullah asSulami from his post as governor of Khurasan and in turn
appointed it to al-Junaid bin ‘Abdur-Rahman al-Murri. He
507

also appointed al-Jarrah bin ‘Abdullah al-Hakami to the office
of governor of Armeeniyyah (Armenia).
The Turks targeted the land of Adhrabeejan (Azerbaijan) in
this year wherein they encountered al-Harith bin ‘Amr who
put their army to flight. and once al-Junaid bin ‘AbdurRahman arrived in Khurasan as its appointed governor, he
came across the beleaguered Turks. Backed by an army of
seven thousand men, al-Harith first proposed a peaceful
settlement with the Turks; however, the outcome of their
encounter was determined by a severe battle that broke out
between the two sides.

Upon Entering the 112th Year
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham undertook a military campaign to asSa’ifah which he conquered a number of fortresses within the
territories closest to Malatyah.
The Turks set out from al-Lan (a vast region within historic
Armenia) in the course of which they encountered al-Jarrah
bin ‘Abdullah al-Hakami and those who were with him from
ash-Sham and Adhrabeejan (Azerbaijan). The two sides
clashed in battle before the remainder of al-Jarrah’s army
caught up with them and as a result al-Jarrah was martyred in
battle (may Allah bestow mercy on him) along with a group
of others at the site of Marj Ardabeel, which fell into the
enemies’ hands. When Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik received
news of this, he commanded Sa‘eed bin ‘Amr al-Harashi to
attend to them as a matter of urgency. On his way there, he
came upon the Turks who were transporting the Muslim
captives towards their king, Khaqan. He managed to rescue
the captives, including the Muslim women and the Ahl udhDhimmah (free non-Muslim subjects living in Muslim lands),
and massacred the Turkish combatants while taking some of
them hostage. In this way, Sa‘eed succeeded in appeasing the
hearts of the Muslims, yet Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik on the
508

other hand refused to let matters go without launching a
second attack against the Turks under the commandership of
his brother, Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik, during the extreme
cold of the winter. As he drew close to the Turks’ domain,
Maslamah appointed his deputy over the army and they then
proceeded in pursuit of the Turks and their king, Khaqan.

Amongst the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
Raja’ bin Haiwah al-Kindi, Abul-Miqdam, also known as,
Abu Nasr, the honourable Tabi‘i, who was highly influential,
reliable, virtuous and just; thus possessing the characteristics
suited to his position as a trusted minister to the Banu
Umayyah (Umayyad) caliphs.
Shahr bin Hawshab al-As‘ari al-Himsi (from Hims), while it
is also said that he was ad-Dimashqi (from Damascus), the
honourable Tabi‘i, died in this year.

Upon Entering the 113th Year
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham invaded ar-Room from the direction
of Mar‘ash (the capital city of Kahramanmara¹ Province in
southeastern Turkey).
A group of proponents of the Banul-‘Abbas tribe (Abbasids)
advanced towards Khurasan where they dispersed after one of
their own men killed their Ameer and threatened to do the
same to the others.
Maslamah bin ‘Abdul-Malik penetrated into the heartland of
the Turks, killing a vast number of them and even more
among the dispersed communities, including Khaqan’s son.
He gained a series of conquests across the Turk territories and
placed the kingdoms and its officials from the Balanjar region
under his power.
509

Sulaiman bin Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik led the people on the
Hajj Pilgrimage.

Among the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
Ibn Jareer said: “This was the year in which the Ameer,
‘Abdul-Wahhab bin Bukht, who was with “the hero”,
‘Abdullah, in the land of ar-Room, was slain on the
battlefield. He died as a martyr. ” A brief overview of his life
is as follows:
His name was ‘Abdul-Wahhab bin Bukht, Abu ‘Ubaidah, also
known as Abu Bakr. He was a deputy under the Marwan
family, he was originally from Makkah and he lived in ashSham and later in alMadinah.
He narrated the following Hadeeth directly from Anas bin
Malik who said that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “May Allah cause a
slave (of His) to prosper, who hears my words and
understands them, then he conveys them from me. There are
those who have knowledge but no understanding, and there
may be those who convey knowledge to those who have more
understanding of it than they do. Three things do not prove
treacherous in the heart of a believer:Good deeds performed
for the sake of Allah; good advice before commencing with a
matter; and adhering to the Muslim community. ”
Abuz-Zinad narrated on the authority of al-A‘raj who narrated
that Abu Hurairah said : “Once one of you meets his brother
and greets him with ‘Salam’ (peace), a tree, wall or rock then
comes in between them; then when he meets him again, let
him greet him with ‘Salam’ again. ” Mu‘awiyah said:
“‘Abdul-Wahhab bin Bukht similarly narrated this to me,
from Abuz-Zinad, from Al-A‘raj, from Abu Hurairah, from
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
510

him). ” In this manner, ‘Abdul-Wahhab was considered a
reliable source in the view of those communities possessing
knowledge.
Makhool ash-Shami, the honourable Tabi‘i, who was a highly
influential figure and the Imam (religious leader) of his
contemporaries in ash-Sham.

Upon Entering the 114th Year
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham carried out an invasion in the left side
ofas-Sa’ifah this year while Sulaiman bin Hisham bin ‘AbdulMalik bin Marwan invaded to the right side of this.
In this year, ‘Abdullah al-Battal encountered the emperor of
ar-Room, otherwise known as Constantine (the eldest son of
Heraclius I to whom the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him, wrote a letter). Al-Battal
managed to take the emperor captive, following which he sent
him to Sulaiman bin Hisham who accordingly took him to his
father.
Hisham dismissed Ibraheem bin Hisham bin Isma‘eel from
the joint offices of governorship in Makkah, al-Madinah and
at-Ta’if and appointed them to his brother, Muhammad bin
Hisham, who fittingly led the people in performing the Hajj
Pilgrimage.

Among the Prominent People Who Died in
this Year:
‘Ata’ bin Abu Rabah al-Fihri, Abu Muhammad al-Makki, one
of the senior and chief Tabi‘een who is said to have known
two hundred of the Companions.

511

Upon Entering the 115th Year
The plague hit ash-Sham during this year. Muhammad bin
Hisham bin Isma‘eel, the deputy of the Haramain (Two Holy
Sites) and at-Ta’if, led the people on the Hajj Pilgrimage in
this year. Deputyship over the other provinces was entrusted
to those already in authority – and Allah knows best.

Among Those Prominent People Who Died
in this Year:
Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir, that is, Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin al-Husain
bin ‘Ali bin Abu Talib, al-Qurashi alHashimi, Abu Ja‘far alBaqir, who the Twelver Shee‘ah sect claim was one of the
twelve infallible Imams. He did not, however, conform to this
view himself nor did he practice their manner of conduct nor
was he influenced by the fantasies and delusions they ascribe
to him. He was still amongst those who favoured Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar and, in any case, it is true that he was from the
lineage of Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).

Upon Entering the 116th Year
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham undertook a military campaign to asSa’ifah and both ash-Sham and al-‘Iraq were afflicted by a
severe epidemic epidemic of the plague during this year,
which mainly affected the garrison town of Wasit.
During the month of al-Muharram, al-Junaid bin ‘AbdurRahman al-Murri, the Ameer of Khurasan, died from an
abdominal disease. Al-Junaid had been married to al-Fadilah,
the daughter of Yazeed bin alMuhallab, which was a source
of annoyance for the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Hisham bin
‘Abdul-Malik. This is the reason why he dismissed al-Junaid
as the governor of Khurasan and appointed ‘Asim bin
‘Abdullah in his place, who on that occasion said: “If I come
512

across him before he dies then I would certainly annihilate
him. ” Because of this, ‘Asim bin ‘Abdullah did not travel to
the land of Khurasan until after his death, which took place in
the month of Muharram in Marw (Merv).

Upon Entering the 117th Year
Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham invaded as-Sa’ifah al-Yusra, as
Sulaiman bin Hisham invaded as-Sa’ifah alYumna.
Marwan bin Muhammad (also known as Marwan al-Himar),
who had been sent out with two delegations to Armeeniyyah
(Armenia), succeeded in conquering a number of fortresses in
the land of al-Lan (a vast territory within Armenia), wherein
many of its citizens turned to faith.
Hisham dismissed ‘Asim bin ‘Abdullah al-Hilali from office
in Khurasan, upon which he extended authority over it to
Khalid bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri who was aready in charge of
al-‘Iraq.
Ibn al-Musayyab said: “I never knew an ‘Iraqi (person from
Iraq) better than him (Khalid al-Qasri). ” Bakr al-Muzani said:
“I never saw anyone commit something to memory like him”,
and Muhammad bin Seereen said: “He was one of the most
skilled people in the art of memorisation I knew. ” Abu Hatim
said: “He died in Wasit from the plague at the age of fifty-six
or –seven. ”
Others that died include: Abul- Hubab Sa‘eed bin Yasar, alA‘raj, Ibn Abi Mulaikah, ‘Abdullah bin Abu Zakariyya alKhuza‘i, Maimoon bin Mihran, Moosa bin Wardan, Nafi‘ (the
servant of Ibn ‘Umar Abu ‘Abdullah al-Madani) who was
originally from Morocco, while others maintain from
(Nishapur), and it was said from Kabul and elsewhere.

513

Among Those People Who Died in the 117th
Year:
Dhur-Rimmah, the poet, whose name was Ghailan bin ‘Uqbah
bin Buhaish, died this year. He would compose romantic
verses about Mayyah bint Muqatil bin Talabah bin Qais bin
‘Asim al-Minqari, in his poems while he, quite the opposite,
was ugly in appearance and dark skinned. They never
indulged in any sinful or illicit act together, nor had they even
seen each other before, but they merely got to hear of one
another. It is said that she swore that if she ever got the chance
to see him, she would sacrifice an animal in gratitude, though
when she actually saw him she exclaimed: “How shameful,
how shameful! ”She never revealed her face to him except on
one occasion, upon which he began to recite (in at-Taweel):
“On Mayyah’s face there is the blessing of beauty
Shame lies under garments even if it were apparent. ”
At that point she stripped off her clothes, whereupon he
recited (in at-Taweel):
“Do you not see that water is contaminated
Even if its colour is pure white?”
She said in response: “Do you want to taste it?” He replied:
“Yes, by Allah! ”So she said: “You will taste death before you
get to taste this. ” He therefore recited:
“Alas! For the wasted poetry that has been composed and
elapsed
Concerning Mayyah; and never will I rule by my heart’s
delusion. ”

514

Upon Entering the 118th Year
Mu‘awiyah and Sulaiman, the two sons of the AmeerulMu’mineen, Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik, invaded the land of
ar-Room in this year.
A person by the name of ‘Ammar bin Yazeed, who later
became known as Khidash, headed for Khurasan, where he
pressed for the caliphate of Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas. Many people responded to the call,
though when they rallied around him he began to propagate
the beliefs of the atheist Khurramiyyah sect, whereby he
permitted the women of one person to another, claiming that
Muhammad bin ‘Ali had said this, which was in fact a lie he
fabricated against him.
However, Allah exposed him to the state and he was taken to
Khalid bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri, the Ameer of Iraq and
Khurasan, who gave orders for his hands to be amputated and
his tongue to be cut off, after which he was crucified.
Muhammad bin Hisham bin Isma‘eel al-Makhzoomi, the
Ameer of al-Madinah, Makkah and at-Ta’if, led the people on
the Hajj Pilgrimage this year.
This was the year in which ‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas bin
‘Abdul-Muttalib bin Hisham al-Qurashi alHashimi died. The
‘Ali we are referring to was born on the night that ‘Ali bin
Abu Talib was killed, which was the reason why his father
named him after him and gave him his Kunyah (epithet).
Once, ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan sat this ‘Ali down next to
him on the couch and asked him about his name and Kunyah
and so he told him. ‘Abdul-Malik then asked him: “Do you
have a son?” He replied: “Yes, a son by the name of
Muhammad”, upon which ‘Abdul-Malik remarked: “So you
are also Abu Muhammad! ”Pleased by this, he made a
generous gesture to him and treated him favourably.
515

‘Ali would spend most of his time absorbed in acts of worship
and ascetic practices, pursuing knowledge and performing
good deeds. He was attractive, just and honest and he would
pray a thousand Rak ‘ah (units of prayer) every day and night.
‘Amr bin ‘Ali al-Fallas said: “He was the best of people. ” He
died in the land of al-Balqa’ during this year at the age of
almost eighty.
‘Amr bin Shu‘aib, ‘Ubadah bin Nusayy, Abu Sakhrah Jami‘
bin Shaddad and Abu ‘Ushshanah alMa‘afiri were some of
the other people who died in this year.

Upon Entering the 119th Year
Al-Wa leed bin Qa‘qa‘ al-‘Absi invaded the land of ar-Room.
Asad bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri killed the supreme king of the
Turks, Khaqan, in this year. This was because Asad bin
‘Abdullah, the Ameer of Khurasan, was acting as deputy of
al-‘Iraq in place of his brother, Khalid bin ‘Abdullah. He then
advanced with his armies to the city of Khuttal (a city located
in the furthermost part of Khurasan), which he conquered
with his soldiers scattered across the land, killing the people,
taking others captive and seizing booty.
The dignitaries subsequently went to the king of the Turks,
Khaqan, informing him that Asad’s army had dispersed
throughout the city of Khuttal. Khaqan seized this opportunity
by immediately sending out his soldiers to target Asad bin
‘Abdullah, and along with his associates, he took along an
extensive amount of weaponry, equipment and food supplies,
following which they advanced towards Asad with a vast
army. In the meantime, a loyal informant went to Asad to
inform him about Khaqan’s movements, after which Asad
immediately ordered his soldiers in the different regions to
reassemble. However, some people began to spread rumours
that Khaqan had attacked and killed Asad bin ‘Abdullah and
516

his comrades in a ploy to trick his men into not joining him.
Fortunately, Allah caused their plots to fall back on them and
their own schemes destroyed them, as when the Muslims
heard what they were saying, they placed their trust in Islam,
intensified their rage against the enemy and became
determined to take vengeance for Asad, who they believed
had been killed. They gathered and advanced towards the site
where Asad was stationed, and decided if they found he was
still alive, they would marshal their armies from all directions.
Meanwhile, Asad had moved in on Khaqan who was by this
time at Jabal al-Milh where he wanted to cross the River of
Balkh (a small city in Afghanistan), although he faced the
problem of having a large number of young livestock in his
possession. He detested the idea of leaving them behind and
so he instructed every one of his horsemen to carry one lamb
in his hands and one round his neck, and threatened to
amputate the hands of anyone who refused to comply.
Accordingly, his men picked up the sheep and began crossing
the river but before they were able reached the other side,
Khaqan suddenly appeared on horseback from behind and
killed whoever crossed his path on the way down to the river.
Khaqan and some of the more feeble soldiers desisted from
crossing it and simply waited there in order to dupe the
Muslims into thinking that they were not planning on crossing
over. The Turks continued to deliberate amongst themselves
over what steps they should take until they reached the
decision to launch a single decisive attack (given that they
were fifty thousand in number) against the Muslims.
Instantaneously, the Turks hurtled into the river while
violently beating their drums of war, thus causing the
Muslims who were not familiar with their drums to believe
mistakenly that their armies had caught up with them.
The Turks plunged into the river one by one, as their horses
grunted and neighed loudly but as they crossed over onto the
other side, the entrenched Muslim army stood firm and
517

inaccessible. The two armies subsequently decided to retreat
for the night until the next morning when Khaqan revolted
against a detachment of the Muslim army, taking out a
significant portion of them, incarcerating its leaders and
seizing its wealth and fertile camels. It follows that the two
armies collided in battle on the day of ‘EedulFitr (the Minor
Feast), on which occasion, Asad’s army feared praying the
‘Eed prayer and for that reason they offered Salatul-Khawf
(prayer used in times of battle because of fear of an imminent
attack). Asad later advanced forth with those troops who were
with him to the site of Marja Balkha where they passed the
winter. It was on the day of ‘Eedul- Adha (the Feast of
Sacrifice) when Asad delivered a sermon to the people and
consulted them on the problem of Khaqan. Some of the people
said: “We should fortify ourselves in Balkh and send word to
Khalid and the Khaleefah”, while others suggested: “We
should go to Marw (Merv; the metropolis of Khurasan) ” and
others yet said: “We should confront him and put our trust in
Allah. ”
Asad conclusively agreed with the latter opinion and so his
army headed towards Khaqan, in the course of which he led
the people in praying prolonged Rak‘atain (two units of
prayer) followed by a lengthly Du‘a’ (supplication). He then
proceeded, saying (three times): “May Allah grant you victory
if He wills it so! ”At that point, he marched forth with his
Muslims troops behind him until the first dispatchment of
men encountered Khaqan’s army, upon which the Muslims
killed a considerable number of them in addition to taking
captive their commander and seven of their chiefs. Asad then
moved in on them and as he came across their livestock,
which altogether amounted to approximately one hundred and
fifty thousand sheep, he gave them some water to drink. He
would later come into contact with Khaqan’s army of around
four thousand strong, including an ‘Arab by the name of alHarith bin Suraij who had bore a long-standing grudge against
518

him and for that reason informed Khaqan of the Muslims’
weakenesses and shortcomings.
Once the battle commenced, the Turks fled in all directions,
including Khaqan who was with the aforementioned al-Harith
who tried to protect and defend him. As such, Asad followed
them to azZaheerah where approximately four hundred of
Khaqan’s associates had encountered him with
disappointment as they were wearing silk cloaks and carrying
their drums in anticipation of victory. When the Muslims
realised this, they ordered for the beat of withdrawal to be
sounded on the drums three times, but as they were not able
to pull back, the Muslims advanced and surrounded their
military base. Thereafter, they took possession of all their
valuables, such as their gold and silver vessels, the quantities
of which were too vast to be mentioned, in addition to taking
the Turk women and children into captivity.
It happened that while they were in Khinjar, Khaqan had
beaten his wife so badly that he almost killed her and so when
the Muslims arrived back at their military base, they were
surprised to find her there in a bad state, nevertheless moving
around and cooking food for them in their cooking pots.
Khaqan, on the other hand, had fled with his comrades to one
of the neighbouring cities where he fortified himself within
its fortress but as he was playinga game of backgammon with
some of the chiefs, he got beat by one of them and in a heated
frenzy Khaqan threatened to amputate his hand. It was
because of this incident that the chief had come to feel
embittered towards Khaqan and resolved to kill him, which
he eventually did. Soon afterwards, the Turks became divided
to the point of being rivals of one another and, as we know
from historical accounts, they even pillaged and ransacked
one another.
Hence, Asad wrote to his brother, Khalid, informing him of
the Muslim victory and triumph over Khaqan as well as
519

sending him Khaqan’s enormous drums that sounded like
thunder when beaten and the vast array of magnificent spoils
he had seized from the Turks. Accordingly, Khalid had them
delivered to the Ameerul-Mu’mineen, Hisham, who was
overjoyed by what he had received and at once granted his
messengers a generous amount of money from the Baitul-Mal
(Public Treasury).
Also during this year, Khalid bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri, the
governor of al-‘Iraq, killed al-Mugheerah bin Sa‘eed and a
party of his associates who followed his absurd ways even
though he was a sinful, evil, magic-practicing Shee‘i (Shi’ite).
A man by the name of Buhlool bin Bishr, also known as
Kutharah, emerged during this year with a band of Khawarij
supporters who were bent on killing Khalid bin ‘Abdullah alQasri. As a result, Khalid sent out a military detachment to
suppress them but to their astonishment, the situation got out
of control due to the extent of Buhlool and his party’s vigour
and zeal, and because of the lack of directions given to
Khalid’s army. The two parties subsequently retreated, after
which Buhlool and his supporters armed themselves and
headed for ash-Sham with the intention of killing the
Khaleefah, Hisham. On their way, however, they were
intercepted by an army in the land of al-Jazeerah (Arabian
Peninsula) whereafter a brutal battle broke out that resulted in
the extermination of the majority of Buhlool’s Khawarij
associates. Subsequent to this incident, a man from Jadeelah
known as Abul-Mawt (the Father of Death) attacked Buhlool
by striking him a blow that brought him to the ground (i. e.
killed him), after which Bahlool’s associates split up and
dispersed.
Also during this year, as-Suhari bin Shabeeb, al-Khariji and
his small band of some thirty followers, emerged on the scene,
which caused Khalid bin ‘Abdullah al-Qasri to send a
dispatcment of soldiers against them. The outcome of this was
520

the death of as-Suhari and all of his followers such that not
even one of them remained, for which all praise belongs to
Allah.
Abu Shakir, Maslamah bin Hisham bin ‘Abdul-Malik, led the
people on the Hajj Pilgrimage during this year. Ibn Shihab
Az-Zuhri performed it with him in order to instruct him on the
Hajj rituals and customs.

The Hundred and Twentieth year of the
Hijrah
Therein: Hisham bin Abdul Malik raided the Roman lands and
conquered various forts there.
Ishaq bin Muslim attacked the forts of Tooman Shah,
conquered them and laid to waste his lands.
Marwan bin Muhammad attacked the land of the Turks.
And therein occurred the death of Asad bin Abdullah AlQasri, the Ameer of Khurasan, due to an abscess in his
abdomen. Therefore, when the annual festival took place this
year, all of the gentry – who were actually the nobles from the
large towns in all of the lands – came and presented gifts and
offerings. Among those who came was the governor of
Haratand its elder, Khurasan Shah whose gifts were
exceptionally magnificent.
It was then that Asad divided all the gifts and wealth he had
received and distributed them among the nobles and elders
present there, until nothing was left of it. Then he got up to
leave the gathering as he was ailing from the abscess when it
suddenly burst and caused his demise.

521

And therein: Hisham dismissed Khalid bin Abdullah Al-Qasri
from the governorship of Iraq. This was because he had
become estranged from him after it reached him that that he
(the governor) had been disrespectful towards him and would
call him, ‘Ibnul-Hamqa’ (Son of the Foolish).
In this same month, Yoosuf bin Umar was promoted to the
governorship of Iraq in place of Khalid bin Abdullah AlQasri, while Judai‘ bin Ali Al-Karmani was appointed to the
governorship of Khurasan and consequently, Ja‘far bin
Hanzalah, who had been appointed there by Asad was
dismissed. Later on that year, even Judai‘ was dismissed from
the governorship of Khurasan by Yusuf bin Umar himself
while Nasr bin Sayyar was put in charge of it. As a result, all
that he had acquired and gathered through favours bestowed
upon him by Khalid, from property and possessions was lost
instantly. This happened despite the fact that when Hisham’s
reproachful message reached him, ordering him to present
himself and some of his possessions before him so that he
might take from it what he willed, some of his associates
cautioned him and said, ‘It is better to have some of your
wealth and lose some rather than losing it all as well as being
dismissed and living in fear.
However, he refused and was beguiled by this world, his ego
not allowing him to humble himself. Thus, his dismissal took
him by surprise and he lost all that he had gathered, collected
and withheld. Subsequently, Yoosuf bin Umar’s governorship
became established over Iraq and Khurasan as did Nasr bin
Sayyar’s governorship over Khurasan as his deputy. In this
way, the lands were stabilized and the people secured – and
to Allah belongs all praise and favour.
Also, during this year: The partisans of the Abbasid family
disclosed the letter that had been sent to them by Muhammad
bin Ali, in which he had reproached them for following the
infidel known as ‘Khidash’ who was a Khurramite. He was
522

responsible for rendering lawful all sorts of wrongdoings for
them, including besmirching those relatives who were too
closely related to them for marriage or those whose
relationship to them because of marriage made them unlawful
for them. Consequently, he was executed by Khalid Al-Qasri
and it was due to this that they were rebuked by Muhammad
bin Ali – for believing in him and following him in his
falsehood. Therefore, when they made the letter written to
them known, he sent a messenger explaining his point of view
to them and they in turn sent a messenger to him.
When their messenger arrived, Muhammad explained to him
that his criticism had been due to the ‘Khurramite’ and then,
he sent back with this messenger a letter with his seal. When
they opened it all that was written in it was: ‘In the Name of
Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most Beneficent. Know that we
have reproached you because of the Khurramite. ’ After that,
when he sent another messenger to them, many of them did
not believe in him and in fact conspired against him. Then,
when they received a staff from him with iron and copper
twisted upon it, they came to know that this was a sign for
them that they were sinning and that they were differing
amongst themselves like the difference between the colour of
iron and copper.

523

Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-First
Year
Therein: Maslamah bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik attacked the
Roman lands and captured from them the stronghold of
‘Matameer’. Marwan bin Muhammad attacked the lands of
‘Sahib udh-Dhahab’ (the Gold Holder), conquered its forts
524

and laid its lands to waste until its leader surrendered to him
by agreeing to give him a Jizyah (tribute) of a thousand heads
of livestock every year, which would be personally presented
to him and also gave him security as a guarantee for the
agreement.
And therein: in the month of Safar, Zaid bin Ali bin Al-Husain
bin Ali bin Abi Talib was killed, to whom the Zaidis ascribe
themselves according to Al-Waqidi.
And in this year: Nasr bin Sayyar, the governor of Khurasan
raided the lands of the Turks and even captured their king,
Koorsool during some of these battles not knowing it was
him. However, when he managed to ascertain and confirm
this, Koorsool asked him to free him in exchange for a
thousand Turkic (Bakhati) and a thousand Birdhawn camels,
even though he was now a very old man. Nasr consulted with
those present around him from the nobles regarding this
matter and some of them did advise him to free him. However,
when Nasr asked him, ‘How many battles have you fought?’
He answered, ‘Seventy two battles. ’
At this, Nasr said to him, ‘It is not possible to let the likes of
you go free after all you have witnessed. ’ After which he gave
the order regarding him and he was decapitated and crucified.
When the news of his execution reached his army, they spent
the night bellowing and crying over him, cut their beards and
hair off, cut off their ears, burnt many of their own tents and
killed many of their own livestock. When day broke, Nasr
further ordered his remains to be burnt so that they may not
get hold of his body. This had a worse effect on them than his
execution did and they departed frustrated, humiliated and
defeated. Then Nasr attacked their lands, killing them in large
numbers and enslaving countless scores of them.

525

A mention of the personalities who died
therein:
Zaid bin Ali bin Al-Husain bin Ali bin Abi Talib. However,
what is well known is that he was killed in the following year
as will be mentioned, Allah Willing.
Maslamah bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan bin Al-Hakam bin
Abul-‘As bin Umayyah, al-Qurashi alUmawi.
Regarding him said Az-Zubair bin Bakkar that, ‘He was from
the men of the Umayyad clan and was given the title of ‘The
Yellow Locust. ’ He left a lasting impression on the wars and
the final conquest of the Romans.
I say: He also conquered numerous forts and strongholds in
the Roman lands.

Then Began the Hundred and TwentySecond Year
Therein: occurred the killing of Zaid bin Ali bin Al-Husain
bin Ali bin Abi Talib (May Allah be pleased with him). What
led to this was that he took an oath of allegiance from whoever
would give it to him from the people of Koofah, ordering
them to rise up in revolt by the beginning of this year and to
start preparing for that. When they began their preparations, a
man called Sulaiman bin Suraqah set out to meet Yoosuf bin
526

Umar, the governor of Iraq – who was in Al-Heerah that day
– and informed him of what was going on between Zaid bin
Ali and the people of Koofah. As a result, Yoosuf bin Umar
issued orders calling for him to be brought in front of him
urgently. When the Shiites found out about this, they gathered
around Zaid bin Ali and asked him, ‘What do you say, may
Allah have mercy on you, regarding Abu Bakr and Umar?’
He said, ‘May Allah forgive them both, I have never heard
anyone from my household disavowing themselves from the
both of them and I do not say regarding them except that
which is good. ’
They responded by saying, ‘Then why do you demand
compensation for the Ahlul-Bait (the people of the household
of theProphet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) )
?’
He answered, ‘We were the most deserving of this matter but
the people took it from us and pushed us away from it.
However that does not amount to disbelief on their part as far
as we are concerned, for both of them ruled and ruled justly,
acting upon the Book and the Sunnah. ’
They asked, ‘Then in that case, why do you fight these (rulers)
now?’
He said, ‘Because they are not like them. They have oppressed
the people and oppressed themselves, whereas I am calling to
the Book of Allah and the way of His Prophet and the revival
of authentic religious practices and the eradication of
innovations in the religion. So if you listen to me, it will be
better for you and me and if you refuse then I have not been
set in charge over you. ’
At this, they rejected and abandoned him, broke their oath of
allegiance to him and left him, due to which they have been
called the Rafidis (the Rejectors) ever since and those from
527

the people who followed him were called the Zaidis. Thus,
most of the people of Koofah are Rafidis and most the people
of Makkah up to this day are upon the Zaidi school of thought.
In this school, there is some truth i. e. their endorsement of
the two Shaikhs (Abu Bakr and Umar (May Allah be pleased
with them) ), as well as falsehood i. e. their giving precedence
to Ali over the both of them. Whereas in reality, Ali is not
preferred to them, nor over Uthman according to what is more
correct from the two opinions authentically attributed to
AhlusSunnah as well as the sound traditions, authentically
attributed to the Companions of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). We have mentioned all of
this previously in the biographies of Abu Bakr and Umar
(May Allah be pleased with them).
Notwithstanding this, Zaid was intent on revolting with
whoever was left with him from his supporters. Thus, the
appointed time for the revolt was fixed to be a Wednesday
night, at the very beginning of the month of Safar that year.
However, this news reached Yoosuf bin Umar who promptly
wrote to his deputy in Koofah, Al-Hakam bin As-Salt,
ordering him to gather all the people in the main
congregational mosque there, which he did on the last
Tuesday, at the end of the monthof Muharram, i. e. before the
appointed time for Zaid’s revolt, by a day. Zaid came out on
an extremely cold Wednesday night, his supporters raising
fires and calling out, ‘O Mansoor! O Mansoor! ’ However,
when dawn broke, only two hundred and eighteen men were
able to gather around him. When Zaid exclaimed, ‘Exalted be
Allah!
Where are the people?’
It was said to him, ‘They are trapped in the mosque. ’
Thus, when Al-Hakam bin As-Salt wrote back to Yoosuf bin
Umar, informing him of Zaid bin Ali’s revolt, he dispatched
a military contingent to Koofah and so, all these troops were
528

mobilized with the deputy governor in Koofah. Moreover,
Yoosuf bin Umar himself reached there as well, with another
large contingent under him. Right away, Zaid and those who
were with him faced one of their encampments , which
consisted of five hundred horsemen and defeated them. Then,
he proceeded to Al-Kunasah and attacked a party of Syrians
who had gathered there and defeated them as well.
Then he crossed over to Yoosuf bin Umar who was stationed
by himself on a hill. Zaid reached there with two
hundredhorsemen and had he approached Yoosuf bin Umar
directly, he would have probably been able to eliminate him.
However, he chose to take the right flank and whenever he
encountered a party of the Koofans against him, he defeated
them until his supporters started to call out to them saying, ‘O
people of Koofah! Come towards religion, honour and the life
of this world, for at present, you have neither religion, nor
honour nor the life of this world! ’
As dusk set in, a party of the Koofans did join in with them,
some of whom were killed in the first day of fighting there.
On the second day, he fought a band of Syrians, killing
seventy of them after which they departed from the field in a
dire state. As night fell, Yoosuf bin Umar re-armed and
mobilized his forces once again. The next morning, they met
Zaid bin Ali and his followers again, who drove them out until
they were forced to retreat to ‘As-Sabakhah ’ and from there
he put them under further pressure until he forced them into
the lands of Banu Tameem. Then he pursued them on
horseback as well as on foot until they retreated to a damof
water there. Severe fighting ensued there until sunset when an
arrow struck Zaid on the right side of his forehead and pierced
it all the way to his brain. At this, he and his followers
returned from the battlefield, the Syrians thinking that they
were returning due to the setting of the sun and nightfall. Zaid
was taken to a house in the locality of ‘Sikkatul-Bareed. ’ A
doctor was brought to him who extracted the arrow from his
529

forehead. However, the arrow had not even been fully
extracted before his death occurred at that moment. May
Allah the Exalted have mercy on him.
Ibn Jareer mentions: and in this year, Abdullah Al-Battal was
killed while fighting in the Roman lands along with a party of
Muslims, however, Ibn Jareer does not elaborate anymore
than this. Ibn Asakir however, does mention this man in his
‘Tareekhul-Kabeer’ as follows: ‘Abdullah, Abu Yahya
known as Al-Battal, used to reside in ‘Antakia’. Most of what
has been related about him is by Abu Marwan AlAntaki. ’
Then he narrates via his own chain that when Abdul Malik bin
Marwan resolved to send his son, Maslamah to fight in the
Roman lands, he appointed Al-Battal over all the commanders
from the north of the Arabian Peninsula and Syria and said to
his son, Maslamah, ‘Keep him as the head of your advance
units and tell him to move his forces by night, for without a
doubt, he is trustworthy, bold and brave. ’ Abdul Malik then
accompanied them to the gates of Damascus to see them off.
He then says: Maslamah placed Al-Battal at the head of ten
thousand soldiers who were to act like a shield, preventing the
Romans from even approaching the main body of the Muslim
army.
Khaleefah bin Khayyat reports: Al-Battal was killed in the
Roman lands in the hundred and twenty first year. Ibn Jareer
however asserts that it was in the hundred and twenty second
year.

From the personalities who died in this year:
Iyas ‘the Intelligent. ’ He is Iyas bin Mu‘awiyah bin Qurrah
bin Iyas bin Hilal, the judge of Basrah. He was a Tabi‘i– his
grandfather being a companion of the Prophet (Peace and
530

Blessings of Allah be upon him) – and was celebrated for his
intelligence.
About him, Muhammad bin Seereen said: ‘He is the astute
[one], he is the astute [one]! ’
Abu Ubaidah and others report that while he was a young boy,
'Iyas and an old man went to the judge of Abdul Malik bin
Marwan in Damascus to solve a dispute between them. The
judge said to him, ‘He is an old man and you are young so do
not try to be his equal by your speech. ’
Iyas replied, ‘If he is bigger than me then the truth is bigger
than him. ’
The judge responded by telling him, ‘Be quiet! ’
At this Iyas said, ‘… and who will speak in as cogent a manner
as me if I were quiet?’
The judge retorted, ‘I don’t think you will say anything valid
in this sitting of ours until you leave…’
At which Iyas instantly said, ‘I declare that there is no deity
worthy of worship except Allah…’
Others narrate that the judge then said, ‘I don’t see you except
as being unjust towards him (the old man) …’
At this the judge got up and went straight to Abdul Malik and
informed him about what had occurred at which he said,
‘Take care of his needs and then send him out of Damascus
immediately so that he does not set the people against us!
Some have also narrated about Iyas that he said, ‘I was in a
schoolwhen I was a boy and it so happened that the Christian
boys started laughing at the Muslims saying, “They think that
531

the food for the people of Paradise will have no waste
products! ”
So I said to the scholar – who happened to be a Christian –
present there, “Do you not believe that there is a component
of our food that is used up as nutrition for the body?”
He replied, “Of course. ”
At which I said, “So what is so wrong with Allah making all
of the food for the people of paradise serve as nutrition for
their bodies?”
The teacher replied by saying, “You are but a devil! ”’
In fact what Iyas said when he was a young boy has actually
been stated in an authentic Hadeethas we will mention, God
willing, when we talk about the descriptions of the people of
Paradise that their food will even be consumed in
producingperspiration with the likeness of musk, so much so
that their bellies will be left lean and slim.
And some have also narrated that: a man asked Iyas about a
type of wine called ‘Nabeedh’ to which he replied by saying
that, ‘It is forbidden. ’
The man then said, ‘Inform me about (the ruling regarding)
water. ’
Iyas informed him that it was, ‘Lawful’
He then asked, ‘and Kashooth ?’
Iyas said, ‘Lawful’
He then asked, ‘And dates?’
Iyas said, ‘Lawful’
532

He then asked, ‘So what difference does it make if all of these
are mixed that they should become forbidden?’
At this, Iyas said, ‘If I threw this handful of dust at you, do
you think it would hurt you?
He said, ‘No. ’
Iyas asked, ‘What about this handful of straw?’
He said, ‘No, that would not hurt me. ’
Iyas asked, ‘What about this container of water?’
He said, ‘No, that would not hurt me at all. ’
Iyas then asked him, ‘What if I mixed all of these with each
other until I had formed clay and then left it to harden and
then threw it all at you, do you think it would hurt you?’
He replied, ‘Yes by Allah! And it would kill me too! ’
At this, Iyas explained to him, ‘The same is true for those
ingredients if they were combined. ’
Similarly, another man came to him and told him, ‘I deposited
some of my money with so and so as a trust and now he has
denied me. ’
Iyas said to him, ‘Go now and come back to me tomorrow. ’
After this, he immediately sent for the person who was
denying the trust and said to him, ‘It so happens that we have
collected a lot of money so keep it with yourself in a secure
place for us. ’
The person assented saying, ‘At your service! ’
533

However, Iyas told him to, ‘Go back now and come back to
me tomorrow. ’
The next morning, when the owner of that trust came back to
Iyas, he told him to, ‘Go to him now and say to him, “Give
me back what is rightfully mine or I will complain to the judge
about you! ”’ When he did so, the man with the trust feared
that the judge (Iyas) would not entrust him with the money if
he heard about this, so he returned his trust to him. He in turn,
went straight to Iyas and informed him of what had happened.
So, when that man came to Iyas the next day, hoping to be
entrusted with all that money, Iyas scolded him and expelled
him from his court, saying to him, ‘You are a swindler! ’
Khaleefah and others have asserted that he passed away in
Wasit in the hundred and twenty second year.
Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Third Year
Al-Mada’ini has mentioned from his authorities that when
Khaqan, the king of the Turks, was killed during the reign of
Asad bin Abdullah Al-Qasri upon Khurasan, the Turks fell
into great division amongst themselves, turning upon each
other and killing each other until it seemed that their lands
would be devastated. Moreover, this infighting kept them
preoccupied among themselves rather than the Muslims.
And in this year: the people of As-Sughd asked the governor
of Khurasan, Nasr bin Sayyar for them to be allowed to return
to their lands. They also had some demands which the
scholars objected to, like the demand to not punish those who
apostate out of Islam from them, to not take back the prisoners
of war from the Muslims who were still with them as well as
other demands like that.
However, he decided to agree to these demands due to the
damage they had caused among the Muslims. When the
people criticized him for this, he wrote to Hisham about the
534

matter, who paused and hesitated in taking a decision about
it. However, when he saw that if these people were to persist
in their enmity to the Muslims, then their harm would be
greater, he acceded to their demands.
Meanwhile, Yoosuf bin Umar, the governor of Iraq sent a
delegation to the Commander of the Faithful asking him to
merge the governorate of Khurasan and Iraq under him and
complaining about the governor of Khurasan, Nasr bin
Sayyar. He said that although Nasr bin Sayyar was noble and
brave, he had now aged and his eyesight had weakened such
that he could not recognize anyone except at close proximity,
by hearing his voice. They made numerous allegations about
him however, Hisham did not lend them an ear and
maintained his rule and governorship over Khurasan.
Ibn Jareer also mentions: and the Hajj Pilgrimage this year
was led by Yazeed bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik and the
officials serving at various positions in the land this year were
the same as the last. Among those who died this year were
Rabee‘ah bin Yazeed Al-Qaseer from the people of
Damascus, Abu Yoonus Sulaim bin Jubair, Simak bin Harb
and Muhammad bin Wasi‘ bin Jabir.

535

Then Began the Hundred and Twenty
Fourth Year
Therein: Sulaiman bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik raided the
Roman lands and encountered their king Alion whom he
fought, returning safely with war booty.
And Therein: came a group of supporters of the Abbasid
family from the lands of Khurasan, making their way to
Makkah. When they were passing by Koofah, it came to their
notice that a number of nobles from the deputies of Khalid bin
Abdullah Al-Qasri were in the prison there, imprisoned on the
orders of Yoosuf bin Umar. Among them was also ‘Eesa bin
Ma‘qil Al-‘Ijli, so they gathered around them in the prison,
calling them to pledge allegiance to the Abbasids and as they
gave these prisoners a lot of importance, they accepted the
offer from them. They also found in the prison Abu Muslim
Al-Khurasani, who at that time was a slave, serving ‘Eesa bin
Ma‘qil Al-‘Ijli and was a Magian. However, they admired his
gallantry, strength and the extent of his loyalty to his master,
so that one of them, Bukair bin Mahan, bought him from his
master for four hundred Dirhams and brought him out of
prison with them. He charged him with carrying out their
mission, for they would not dispatch him to any place except
536

that he would comply and then return with the results they
desired. There is more to say about him, which we will
mention afterwards, God Willing.
And Therein: died Al-Qasim bin Abu Bazzah Abu Abdullah
Al-Makki Al-Qari, the servant of Abdullah bin As-Sa’ib, who
was an eminent Tabi‘i.
Az-Zuhri, Muhammad bin Muslim bin Ubaidullah, another
celebrated Tabi‘i, who narrated from several of the
Companions of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) also died this year.
He was born in the fifty-eighth year, at the end the
Mu‘awiyah’s caliphate. He was short, with a scanty beard,
long hair and light cheeks.
They say that he used to read the Qur’an approximately eighty
eight times every day and that he sat as a student with Sa‘eed
bin Al-Musayyab for eight or ten years, his knees
approximating his teahcer’s.
It is also said that he used to serve Ubaidullah bin Abdullah,
bringing saline water for him and that he used to frequent the
scholars of Hadeeth with writing tablets, writing down
Hadeeth and anything else he heard from them until he
became the most learned or one of the most learned men in
his time, his contemporaries depending and relying upon him.
Abdur- Razzaq said, ‘Ma‘mar informed us upon the authority
of Az-Zuhri that he said, “We used to dislike the writing down
of knowledge until these rulers compelled us to do it so we
decided not to prevent any of the Muslims from it. ” ’
And Ibn Ishaq said, ‘Once Az-Zuhri was returning from a visit
to ‘Urwah when he started narrating to a bondswoman with
him, who happened to not have a good grasp of the language
537

, “‘Urwah narrated to us that so and so narrated to him…”
relating to her what he had heard from him.
The bondswoman responded to this by saying, “By Allah, I
have no idea what you are saying! ”
Az-Zuhri simply responded by saying, “Be quiet! I’m not
saying this for you, I’m saying it for myself! ”’
And he (Ibn Ishaq) said, ‘He used to dislike eating apples or
the remainsof what had been contaminated by mice. He used
to say that, “They make one forgetful, ” while he would drink
honey and say, “This enhances the memory. ” ’
Ibn Mahdi also mentions that he heard Malik say, ‘One day,
Az-Zuhri narrated a Hadeeth and when he got up after that, I
grabbed on to the reins of his riding animal and asked him to
explain it to me, upon which he exclaimed, “You ask me to
explain this to you? I have never had it in me to ask any
scholar to explain anything to me nor have I ever answered
any scholar back! ”’ Upon this, Ibn Mahdi comments, ‘Thus
were the giants of that time and such are their stories! ’
Umar bin Abdul Azeez asserted, ‘Never did I see anyone
better at recollecting and imparting Hadeeth when he narrated
them, than Az-Zuhri.
Similarly, Sufyan bin ‘Uyainah said on the authority of ‘Amr
bin Deenar that, ‘I never saw anyone as textually accurate in
narrating Hadeeth as Az-Zuhri, nor anything as worthless in
his eyes as Dirhams and Deenars for they were not worth
more than droppings to him! ’
‘Amr bin Deenar further says, ‘I stayed in the company of
Jabir, Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Umar and Ibn AzZubair and did not
see anyone as sequentially organized in narrating Hadeeth as
Az-Zuhri. ’
538

Imam Ahmed said, ‘The best of people in terms of Hadeeth
and the finest of them in terms Isnadis AzZuhri. ’
An-Nasa’isaid, ‘The best of Isnads is: Az-Zuhri from Ali bin
Al-Husain from his father from his grandfather, Ali from the
Prophet of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
’
Az-Zubair bin Bakkar said, ‘Az-Zuhri passed away in the
town of ‘Shaghb, ’ where all his assets were, on a Tuesday
night after the passing of seventeen nights of Ramadan in the
hundred and twenty fourth year at that age of seventy two
years. He was buried in the middle of the main road so that
passers-by would remember to pray for him. It is also said that
he died in the hundred and twenty-third year, whereas Abu
Ma‘shar asserts that it (his date of death) was in the hundred
and twenty-fifth year. However, the correct opinion is the first
and Allah knows best.
Also, of those who died during the reign of Hisham bin Abdul
Malik according to what Ibn ‘Asakir menions are:
Bilal bin Sa‘d bin Tameem As-Sakooni Abu Amr, also known
as Abu Zur‘ah, the Imam of the main congregational mosque
in Damascus, the narrator of parables from the people of
Syria, one of the great ascetics of his time and an extensive
worshipper who used to fast during the day and pray through
the night.
Al-Awza‘i used to write down from what he said, the great
lessons in his parables and his sermons and said, ‘I never saw
a preacher like him! ’ About his he (Al-Awza‘i) also said, ‘I
have not heard about the worship of anyone what I have about
his worship; he used to pray a thousand units of prayer in
every day and night. ’
Others like Al-Asma‘i said about him, ‘If ever he felt drowsy
during the winter nights, he would throw himself with his
539

clothes into the nearby pond. When some of his friends
reproached him for this, he said to them, “The pond water is
easier upon me than the pus in Hellfire. ” ’
Al-Waleed bin Muslim, said about him, ‘Whenever he would
proclaim, “Allah is the Greatest! ” in the prayer niche for the
Imam, his voice was heard up to the locality of Al-Awza‘i. ’
This is actually beyond the Al-Faradees Gate , where the
Qameelah market is currently located. He further said, ‘… and
we used to be able to recognize his recitation from
‘Aqabatush-Sheeh, near the official guesthouse (Dar
udDiyafah), that is, from the Dar udh-Dhahab with in the AlFaradees Gate.
Ahmad bin Abdullah Al-‘Ijli said, ‘He was a Syrian, a Tabi‘i
and thoroughly trustworthy. ’
Abu Zur‘ah Ad-Dimashqi said about him, ‘He was from the
scholars, the relaters of parables and very effective parables
at that. ’
From what he used to say is, ‘Do not be a friend of Allah in
public and His enemy in private and do not be two faced or
duplicitous in what you say to show the people that you fear
Allah so that they might praise you while your heart is
corrupt. ’
From the supplications he used to make is, ‘O Allah! I seek
refuge in You from the deviance of the hearts and from the
consequences of sin and from those works which are rejected
and from those trials which cause one to be lead astray. ’
Al-Ja‘d bin Dirham: He was the first to posit the ‘Createdness
of the Qur’an’ and he was he one whom the last Umayyad
Caliph, Marwan Al-Ja‘di – also known as Marwan al-Himar–
was attributed to as Al-Ja‘d bin Dirham, who was originally
from Harran, was his teacher.
540

Ibn ‘Asakir and others have said, ‘Ja‘d learnt this heresy from
Bayan bin Sim‘an who learnt it from Taloot (who was the
nephew of Labeed bin A‘sam and his son-in-law) from
Labeed bin A‘sam, the accursed magician.
He was killed by Khalid bin Abdullah Al-Qasri on the day of
Eedul-Adha, in Koofah. This occurred whilst Khalid
addressed the people that day. In his sermon, he said, ‘O
people! Sacrifice and may Allah accept from you your
offerings, for I am going to sacrifice Al-Ja‘d bin Dirham (as
my offering) as he has claimed that Allah did not take
Ibraheem as a close friend and that He did not directly speak
to Moosa; far Exalted be Allah from what Al-Ja‘d says! ’ At
this point, he came down from the pulpit and slaughtered him
with his own hands right next to it, may Allah reward him for
this and accept his offering from him. All of this occurred
during the reign of Hisham bin Abdul Malik who had already
summoned him to Damascus when he expressed what he
expressed. However, he fled from him after that so Hisham
wrote to his deputy, Khalid bin Abdullah Al-Qasri and
ordered him to kill him.

541

Then Began the Hundred and Twenty Fifth
Year
The great scholar of Hadeeth, Abu Bakr Al-Bazzarmentioned
upon the authority of Abu Salamah bin Abdul Rahman from
his father that he said, ‘The Prophet of Allah said, “The beauty
of this world will be lifted from it in the hundred and twenty
fifth year. ” ’ This is what Abu Ya‘la narrates in his
‘Musnad’as well.
And therein: An-Nu‘man bin Yazeed bin Abdul Malik fought
the expeditions during the warmer seasons of the year within
the Roman lands.

542

Hisham Bin Abdul Malik (May Allah have
mercy upon him) A Mention of His Life and
His Death.
He is Hisham bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan bin Al-Hakam bin
Abul-‘As bin Umayyah bin Abd Shams, Abul- Waleed.
He was given the oath of allegiance for the Caliphate after the
passing of his brother, Yazeed bin Abdul Malik by his decree
for him to become Caliph after him.
Abdul Malik once saw himself in a dream, urinating four
times in the prayer niche. So, he sent someone to Sa‘eed bin
Al-Musayyab enquiring of him the meaning of this dream;
who interpreted it to mean that four of his sons would go on
to become Caliphs after him. Out of these four, Hisham was
the last. During his caliphate, he was firm and unwavering in
the opinions he held and intent on accumulating wealth to the
extent of stinginess. However, he was intelligent and a wise
administrator who was insightful in big and small matters. He
also possessed the characteristics of lenience and forbearance,
for on one occasion, when he abused a nobleman, he said to
him, ‘Do you abuse me while being the vicegerent of Allah
on this earth?’
On hearing this, Hisham felt embarrassed and said to him,
‘Avenge yourself in exchange for what I did, ’ or he said (in
another narration), ‘… by inflicting the same upon me. ’
The nobleman replied, ‘Then I will become a fool like you. ’
Hisham said to him, ‘Then take something from me in return.
’
The nobleman insisted, ‘I will not. ’

543

At this, Hisham implored, ‘Then overlook it for the sake of
Allah. ’
The nobleman responded by saying, ‘It is (forgiven) for the
sake of Allah… and then, for yours. ’
Upon this, Hisham declared, ‘By Allah, I will never return to
it again! ’
Moreover, Hisham was the furthest away from the undue
spilling of blood and so the slaying of Zaid bin Ali and his son
Yahya weighed heavily on him indeed, to the extent that he
would say, ‘Would that I could give away all that I owned in
exchange for their lives! ’
Al-Mada’ini mentions that a person once gifted two birds to
him and sent them via a messenger, who reached him in
Damascus while he was seated on his throne in the centre of
his palace. On receiving them, he ordered him to have them
sent inside, to his quarters, which he did. It was then that the
messenger asked him, ‘Reward me, O Commander of the
faithful, ’ for having brought the birds to him.
Hisham exclaimed, ‘Woe to you, what could I possibly give
you for bringing a gift of just two birds? So be it, take one of
them! ’ At this, the man started to go after one of the birds in
particular so Hisham asked him, ‘Woe be unto you, what is
the matter with you now?’
The man responded, ‘I want to take the better of the two. ’
At this, he exclaimed again, ‘And now (inspite of your
reward) you still insist on taking the better of the two and
leaving that which is worse?’ After this, he ordered that the
man be given forty or fifty Dirhams.

544

Abu Bakr Al-Khara’iti also mentions that, ‘It is said that
Hisham did not utter any verse of poetry except for the
following, rather lengthy couplet:
If you do not disobey your desires, lead you they will
To that which brings along with it, censure upon you. ’
However, other verses have also been narrated from him by
others.
Hisham only ever complained to his father about three
matters: that getting up on the pulpit to address the people
made him nervous, that he could not find it in him to eat a lot
and that he had in his palace a hundred slave girls, from the
most beautiful of women, however, he hardly ever got the
opportunity to be with them. His father wrote back to him,
‘As for getting up on the pulpit, when you have ascended it,
fix your gaze upon the people who are furthest away from you
as that will make it easier for you. As for the lack of appetite,
then order the cook to make foods of many different types and
colours for you so that may at least have a morsel from each
kind and finally, you should keep slave girls with light, tender
skin who are pretty and beautiful. ’
It has also been mentioned that when Hisham bin Abdul Malik
(at the time of his death) looked at his children as they cried
over him, he said, ‘Hisham bequeathed the world to you and
all you give back to him are these tears. Surely, he left for you
whatever he gathered and you did not leave with him except
what he deserved. What an ignoble end lies ahead of Hisham
if Allah does not forgive him! ’
Hisham’s death occurred in the town of Ar-Rusafah on a
Wednesday, before the end of the month of Rabee’ul- Akhir,
during the hundred and twenty-fifth year. He was in his fifties
when he died, however, some say he had crossed sixty.
545

I would say that the death of Hisham brought with it the
demise of the Umayyad dynasty due to the instability and
disorder that ensued amongst them. In spite of this, their reign
would last for seven more years, albeit, in discord and turmoil.
This state of affairs carried on until Abbasids revolted against
them and dispossessed them of their wealth and their power,
killing many of them and stripping them of the Caliphate.

The Caliphate of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed bin
Abdul Malik, the Depraved (May he be
defaced and distanced from Allah)
He was given the oath of allegiance on a Saturday, in the
month of Rabee‘ul-Akhir, at which time, he was thirty-four
years old. The reason behind his appointment as caliph was
that his father, Yazeed bin Abdul Malik had designated his
brother Hisham for the caliphate after himself and then this
son of his, AlWaleed after him. Thus, when Hisham became
Caliph, he pampered his brother’s son until he became
overcome with drinking, got involved in bad company and
gatherings of worldly amusement and diversion. Hisham
wanted to put an end to this conduct of his so he charged him
with leading the Hajj Pilgrimage in the hundred and sixteenth
year. Al-Waleed however, secretly took hunting dogs with
him for the trip, infact it is said that he had them placed in
trunks and when one of the trunks fell and the cry of the dog
was heard, they blamed the camel driver for it, due to which
he was beaten.
It is also said that he ordered a dome-like tent the size of the
Ka‘bah to be built for him so that it could be set up on top of
546

the Ka‘bah where he and his companions would sit. He also
took along with him various wines, intoxicants, instruments
for his entertainment and other means of vice. However, when
he reached Makkah, he was too scared to carry out what he
intended to do, fearing the reaction of the people against him.
When his uncle came to know of this, he would constantly
forbid him. However, he persisted in his repulsive state as
well as his foul actions until his uncle resolved to take the
Caliphate from him – and would that he had done so – and
designate his son Maslamah bin Hisham for the post. Even
many of his governors and nobles, his uncles as well as the
people of Madinah and other than them had assented to him
in this matter – if only it had come to pass – however, it could
not be finalized. So much so that one day Hisham said to AlWaleed, ‘Woe be unto you! By Allah I do not even know if
you are upon Islam anymore or not, for you have not left any
vice except that you have indulged in it without any fear and
in a brazen manner. ’
At this, Al-Waleed wrote back to him the following verses:
O you who questions our faith!
My faith is based upon the faith of Abu Shakir, We drink
from it mixed as well as in its pure form,
Sometimes while it is hot and at others, lukewarm.
On reading this, Hisham became angry at his son Maslamah,
who was also known as Abu Shakir and said to him, ‘Do you
imitate Al-Waleed bin Yazeed while I want to elevate you to
the Caliphate?’ He subsequently deputed him to lead the
Pilgrimage when the season arrived in the hundred and
nineteenth year. Maslamah on his part conducted himself very
well, demonstrating devotion, dignity and leniency and
distributing money amongst the people of Makkah and
Madinah. So much so that one of the slaves of the people of
547

Madinah replied (to what Al-Waleed had said) in the
following verses:
O you who questions our faith!
We are upon the faith of Abu Shakir,
The generous donor, devoted and yielding to its reins,
Neither is he an infidel, nor a kafir (disbeliever).
Thus, there ensued between Hisham and Al-Waleed a sense
of intense alienation due to Al-Waleed’s licentious and
impious deeds. Hisham shunned Al-Waleed and resolved to
depose him, appointing his son as heir to the Caliphate. AlWaleed, in turn, fled from him into the desert and both of them
began what was to be an unseemly exchange of
correspondences with Hisham threatening and warning him
severely. The situation remained thus until Hisham passed
away, with Al-Waleed still in the wilderness. Finally, when
the night, at the end of which he was to be informed of his
becoming Caliph fell, Al-Waleed became very restless and
exclaimed to some of his companions, ‘Woe be unto you! I
am overcome with an intense worry this night so let us ride so
that we may become lively and spirited once again! ’ They
had barely travelled a couple of miles, talking about Hisham
and the affairs concerning him, his threats and warnings when
they noticed some disturbance with voices and dust coming
from the distance. When he discovered that the source of this
was messengers searching for him to give him news of his
appointment as the Caliph, he said to his companion, ‘Woe be
unto you! These are messengers from Hisham. O Allah, let
them be harbingers of good! ’ When the messengers came
closer and recognised him, they dismounted their rides and
started walking towards him and when they finally
approached him, they greeted him as the new Caliph. He was

548

left dumbfounded and asked them, ‘Woe be unto you! Has
Hisham died?’
They replied, ‘Yes. ’
He then asked them, ‘So, who sent you?’
They said, ‘Salim bin Abdur Rahman, the chief of the post
office, ’ upon which, they handed over the official letter to
him, which he read and then began to ask them about how the
people were and how Hisham had died, of which they
informed him. Immediately he wrote a letter ordering that
Hisham’s wealth and assets at Ar-Rusafah be well protected
and said the following verses:
Would that Hisham had lived to see,
That his abundant scales had evened out,
For we paid him back with the same measure he gave us,
And in that we did not wrong him by even a single digit,
And we did not do this without precedence,
For it is the Qur’an that had made all of this lawful for me.
Then, he proceeded to Damascus and met all the governors
with the oaths of allegiance coming in from all corners of the
realm and various delegations coming to meet him in this
regard. From those who wrote to him was Marwan bin
Muhammad who at that time was the governor of Armeenia
and Azarbaijan, congratulating him on attaining the Caliphate
of Allah upon His servants and authority in His lands,
welcoming the death of Hisham and his triumph over him and
his gaining control over Hisham’s wealth and assets. He
informed him that he had retaken the oath of allegiance for
him in his lands and that his people had been delighted and
549

welcomed it wholeheartedly. He said that had it not been for
his fear of the situation at the borders, he would have deputed
someone there in his place so that he could himself ride up to
him in his desire to see him and meet him in person.
Subsequently, it appears that Al-Waleed adopted a good line
of conduct amongst the people, ordering the provision of
individual servants to the ill, the lepers and the blind. He also
gave out perfumes and other gifts from the treasury to the
families of the Muslims. Thus, he profusely gave out gifts to
the people, especially the people of Syria and the delegations.
He was generous, well praised and a good poet, never saying,
‘No’ to anyone who asked him for anything.
And in this year: Al-Waleed bin Yazeed took the oath of
allegiance for his son Al-Hakam as the next Caliph and then
Uthman as the heir apparent after him.
And in this year: Al-Waleed bin Yazeed appointed Yoosuf bin
Muhammad bin Yoosuf Ath-Thaqafi as the governor of
Madinah, Makkah and Ta’if.
And in this year: Al-Waleed bin Yazeed dispatched an army
to Cyprus with his brother and said to him, ‘Give them a
choice: whoever wants shift to Syria, let them and whoever
wants to go to the Roman lands, let them. ’
Ibn Jareer states, ‘And therein: Sulaiman bin Katheer, Malik
bin Al-Haitham, Lahiz bin Quraidh and Qahtabah bin
Shabeeb proceeded to Makkah where, according to various
historians, they met Muhammad bin Ali and informed him of
Abu Muslim. Muhammad asked them, ‘Is he free or is he a
slave?’
They responded, ‘As far a he is concerned, he claims to be
free. As for his master, he still thinks that he is a slave. ’ So,
they bought him and freed him.
From the personalities who died in this year:
550

Muhammad bin Ali bin Abdullah bin Abbas bin
AbdulMuttalib Al-Qurashi Al-Hashimi Abu Abdullah AlMadani, who was the father of As-Saffah and Al-Mansoor.

Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Sixth
Year
Therein: occurred the assassination of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed
bin Abdul Malik of whom the following is a brief account. He
is Al-Waleed bin Yazeed bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan bin
Al-Hakam Abul-Abbas alUmawi ad-Dimashqi, the
551

Commander of the Faithful, who was given the oath of
allegiance after his uncle Hisham.
He was killed on a Thursday with just two days left until the
end of the month of Jumadal-Akhirah in the hundred and
twenty sixth year. There occurred a great tribulation amongst
the people due to his assassination, being the Caliph, due to
his impiety and it is even said due to his heresy.

An Account of his Assassination and the
downfall of his Dominion
This person would openly display his acts of indecency and
vice and was unrepentantly insistent upon them, violating the
prohibitions of Allah, the Exalted and not willing to give up
his sinfulness. Some may have even accused him of heresy
and leaving the fold of Islam altogether and Allah knows best.
However, what is more apparent is that he was a sinful, a
shameless poet who would commit sins, neither concealing
them from anybody nor feeling any sense of shame about
them from anyone before and after he became Caliph.
Al-Mu‘afa bin Zakariyya related on the authority of Ibn
Duraid from Abi Hatim from Al-Utbi that AlWaleed bin
Yazeed once saw a Christian lady who was from the most
beautiful of the Christian women, whose name was Safra and
took a liking to her. Subsequently, when he tried to entice her
and she declined, he began to insist on his love for her,
however, she still refused to oblige him. It so happened that
there was an assembly at some of the churches during a
Christian festival which took place at that time. Al-Waleed
went to one of the gardens there and disguised himself as
someone who was injured. When the women came out of the
church and entered that garden, they saw him and
immediately surrounded him, upon which he began to chat
with Safra, joking and laughing with her, without her knowing
that it was him, until he had had his fill of seeing her. When
552

she had left, someone asked her, ‘Woe be unto you! Do you
know who that was?’
She said, ‘No. ’
Upom which, she was told, ‘That was Al-Waleed. ’ When she
realized this, she started yearning for him and became more
inclined towards him than he was to towards her. Thus did AlWaleed say the following verses on this situation:
Your heart O Al-Waleed has become infatuated,
For it is an old lover, an ensnarer of these beauties,
From the love of those prominent, soft cheeks,
Which appeared before us from the church during the festival,
I continue to even now, gaze at her as a lover would,
Until I saw her once, kissing a piece of wood,
The wood of a cross, woe be unto me, for whom…
From us has ever seen a cross like that, worshipped?
Thus it was, that I asked my Lord that I be in its place,
And due to it, become fuel for the blaze of the fire of Hell!
Qadi Abul-Faraj has said that, ‘The reports gathered
collectively as well as individually by the reporters regarding
Al-Waleed are many. Most of his biography, his other
remnants, his poetry – in which he describes the sins he
committed due to his brazenness and foolishness – displays
his stupidity, lack of sobriety and shamelessness. It also
shows his absurd attitude regarding his religion and clearly
expresses his heretical beliefs regarding the Qur’an, his
553

disbelief in the One who sent it as well as the Messenger it
was revealed upon. I have thus opposed the foolish verses in
his poetry with judicious verses of my own and the invalid,
baseless verses with what is true, well-known and dignified
and have intended by this gaining the pleasure of Allah and
His forgiveness. ’

554

A Mention of how Yazeed bin Al-Waleed –
Also known as ‘The Deficient’ – Killed AlWaleed bin Yazeed
We have mentioned some of the affairs relating to Al-Waleed
bin Yazeed, such as his depravity and his shamelessness. We
have also mentioned accounts regarding his neglect of the
prayers as well as his trivializing matters relating to the
religion before and after he became Caliph, for he did not
increase during his Caliphate except in his indulgence in vice,
useless distractions and pleasures, riding out for hunting,
drinking and keeping the company of the morally corrupt.
Thus, the Caliphate did not increase him, as compared to what
he was upon before becoming Caliph, except in his obstinacy
and arrogance. All of this weighed very heavily upon the
various governors, the public as well as the troops who began
to loathe him intensely.
However, the biggest disservice he did to himself, one which
would eventually lead to his assassination, was to turn the
sons of two of his uncles – Hisham and Al-Waleed – against
him. This was in addition to his completely ruining ‘AlYamaniah’ which was his greatest army in Khurasan.
Al-Mada’ini narrates that, ‘All of this was very unpopular
with the people and so, the sons of Hisham and Al-Waleed
charged him with disbelief and incest with his stepmothers.
They further said about him that, “He has designated a
hundred handcuffs or shackles, each with the name of a
person from the Umayyads whom he will kill in them. ”
Subsequently they accused him of disbelief with the severest
of allegations coming from Yazeed bin Al-Waleed bin Abdul
Malik, to which the people inclined due to the piety and
humility he exhibited, for he used to say, “We will never be
satisfied with Al-Waleed until the people eliminate him. ” ’

555

It is said that a group of the Quda‘ah and Yamani tribes, in
addition to many of the nobles and the households of AlWaleed bin Abdul Malik and Hisham bin Abdul Malik were
deputed for this purpose. At the head of all of this and its main
advocate was none other than Yazeed bin Al-Waleed bin
Abdul Malik who was from the elite of the Umayyads and
well known for his righteousness, religiosity and piety and so
it was that the people gave him their allegiance for this
objective. This was despite the fact that his brother, Al-Abbas
bin Al-Waleed tried to deter him from his goal but he did not
assent to his request and said to him, ‘By Allah! If I did not
fear harm for you from Al-Waleed, I would have sent you to
him in shackles! ’
It so happened that a plague struck Damascus at this time due
to which people started to leave it. From those who left was
Al-Waleed bin Yazeed, Commander of the Faitful, with his
party of around two hundred of his companions and friends,
who departed for the hilly areas around Damascus. This
occurrence set all of Yazeed bin Al-Waleed’s affairs in order,
according to what he had planned. All this while, his brother
kept trying to dissuade him as much as he could, yet Yazeed
would not comply.
Finally, when Yazeed bin Al-Waleed became confident of his
situation and after the people gave their allegiance to him, he
set out for Damascus and entered it in the absence of AlWaleed, upon which, most of its inhabitants also gave him
their allegiance during the night. It then reached him that the
people of AlMizzah had given their allegiance to one of their
elders by the name of Mu‘awiyah bin Masad. Yazeed
immediately set out on foot with a party of his supporters to
meet him. On the way, they encountered heavy rain and so,
ended up reaching their destination and knocking on
Mu‘awiyah’s doorstep at night. On entering his house,
Yazeed spoke to him about the matter and eventually,
Mu‘awiyah bin Masad too gave his allegiance to him.
556

Subsequently, on the same night, Yazeed returned to
Damascus via the AlQanat route, riding a black donkey.
However, his companions swore to him that he should not
enter Damascus without arming himself. Therefore, he wore
his weapons under his clothes and entered Damascus. In the
meanwhile, during his absence, Al-Waleed had left Abdul
Malik bin Muhammad bin Al-Hajjaj bin Yoosuf Ath-Thaqafi
as his deputy over the city of Damascus. However, even he
had left Damascus due to the plague and was stationed nearby
at Qatana. He in turn, left his son in his place to take care of
Damascus and appointed Abul-‘Aj Katheer bin Abdullah AsSulami as the chief of police. As Friday night set in, Yazeed’s
supporters gathered between the two evening prayers at the
Al-Faradees Gate. When the call for the latter of the two
prayers i. e. the Isha prayer was called, they entered the main
mosque and when they had completely occupied it, they sent
for Yazeed bin Al-Waleed. When he reached them, they
proceeded to the door of the one of the cabins nearby. When
the servant there opened the door for them, they entered only
to find Abul-‘Aj, completely drunk. With him out of the way,
they took all the riches from the state treasury, took control of
the provisions therein as well as all the arms, strengthening
themselves in the process. Thereafter, Yazeed ordered that all
doors to the city be locked and not opened except to those who
were known to them. When people woke up the next morning
and the local city dwellers came back from all directions to
enter the city, they entered through every gate, the residents
of each locality entering through the gates nearest to their
respective areas. Thus, the forces supporting Yazeed bin AlWaleed multiplied with all of these people pledging their
allegiance to him as their Caliph.
Thereafter, Yazeed bin Al-Waleed dispatched Abdur Rahman
bin Masad with two hundred horsemen to Qatana to bring
Abdul Malik bin Muhammad bin Al-Hajjaj – who had been
left in charge of Damascus – back to him with an offer of
amnesty. Abdul Malik had fortified himself in one of the
557

castles there. When they entered upon him, they found with
him two travelling bags with thirty thousand Deenars in each
one. So, on their way back, when the passed by Al-Mizzah the
companions of Ibn Masad suggested to him that, ‘You should
take this money, for it will be of more benefit to you than
Yazeed bin Al-Waleed. ’
However, he replied to them saying, ‘No, by Allah! I will not
let the Arabs say that I was the first one to betray! ’ So they
brought it all before Yazeed bin Al-Waleed, who used it to
raise a fighting force consisting of nearly two thousand
horsemen and then dispatched it under the command of his
brother, Abdul Azeez bin Al-Waleed bin Abdul Malik to go
after Al-Waleed bin Yazeed bin Abdul Malik and bring him
back to them. However, some of Al-Waleed’s supporters
there rode ahead of them, to the extent that they had reached
their liege that same night and their horse had perished from
being forced to run that quickly.
When Al-Waleed was informed about what had happened, he
refused to believe it and in fact, ordered that the rider be
beaten. Then, as more reports reached him one after another,
some of his companions advised him to leave and shift his
position from where he was to Hims, which was a wellfortified location. Moreover, another one of them, Al-Abrash
Sa‘eed bin Al-Waleed Al-Kalbi said to him, ‘Come and stay
at Tadmur where my people are. ’ However, he refused to
accept any of these suggestions and continued to ride with
whoever was with him from the two hundred horsemen,
seeking out the supporters of Yazeed and taking for
themselves whatever provisionsthey found on the way. He
arrived and fortified himself in the fort at Al-Bakhra’ which
belonged to An-Nu‘man bin Basheer and there approached
him a messenger from Al-Abbas bin Al-Waleed – who was
actually one of his supporters – that he was coming to his aid.
Thereafter, Al-Waleed ordered that his throne be taken out
and he sat on it saying, ‘Will these men dare to pounce on me,
558

while I am the one who pounces on lions and grabs snakes
with my own hands?’ Meanwhile, Abdul Azeez bin AlWaleed advanced upon them with the forces that were with
him. However, at this stage only eight hundred of the two
thousand horsemen had remained faithful to him. They
reorganized their ranks and fought fiercely so that many of
Al-Abbas’ men were killed. Thereafter, their heads were
taken to Al-Walid even though Al-Abbad had come to support
Al-Walid.
Subsequently, his brother Abdul Aziz sent for him and he was
forcibly brought before him until he finally assented to give
allegiance to his brother Yazid Bin Al-Walid and they agreed
to fight Al-Walid Bin Yazid. When the people saw their
accord, they fled from Al-Walid to join them, Al-Walid was
left humiliated and with little support, so he retreated into the
fort. When they got to him, they surrounded him from all
sides, laying siege to the fort he was in. Al-Walid drew near
to the gate of the fort and called out, ‘Let one of your
noblemen talk to me! ’ So, Yazid Bin ‘Anbasa Al-Saksaki was
sent to talk to him. Al-Walid said to him, ‘Did I not ward off
death from you? Did I not give to your poor? Did I not serve
your sick?’
At this, Yazid bin ‘Anbasa replied, ‘Our grudge against you
is because of violating the prohibitions, drinking alcohol, your
illicit relations with your stepmother and belittling the
commandments of Allah. ’
Al-Walid responded, ‘Enough from you O brother of
Sakasak! I swear upon my life that you have already said too
much and exceeded all proper bounds, for the matters that
Allah has made lawful for me are vast in scope, including
what you have mentioned. ’ Then, he said, ‘Verily, by Allah!
If you kill me, this tribulation of yours will never end, nor will
the anarchy you are spreading go away and never will you be
united amongst yourselves! ’ After this, he returned to his
559

quarters and sat down with a copy of the Quran in front of
him, which he opened and proceeded to read from it, saying,
‘This day is like the day of Uthman’ after which he yielded,
resigning himself to whatever would happen. The walls of the
fort were scaled and the first to reach him was Yazid bin
‘Anbasa who advanced towards him while there was a sword
at his side, so he said to him, ‘Remove it from your side! ’
Upon which, Al-Walid said, ‘Had I intended to use it to fight,
then surely, it would have been for a battle other than this one!
’ Thereafter, Yazid grabbed his arm in an effort to restrain him
so that he could have him sent to Yazid bin Al-Walid.
However, about ten other noblemen came unexpectedly upon
them, approached Al-Walid and started to strike his head and
his face with their swords until they had killed him. Then, they
began to drag him out with by his legs but the women of the
house started to scream, so they left him. However, not before
Abu ‘Ilaqah had severed his head, after which they sutured
back the injuries he had sustained on his face and dispatched
ten of their people to Yazid with it. From these ten was
Mansur bin Jamhur, Ruh bin Muqbil, Bishr the slave of
Kinanah from the tribe of Bani Kalb and Abdul Rahman, who
was also known as the ‘Face of money. ’ When they reached
him, they gave him the glad tidings of the killing of Al-Walid
and greeted him as the Caliphate for which he rewarded each
of them with ten thousand Dirhams. Ruh bin Bishr said to
him, ‘Rejoice, O Commander of the Faithful, at the killing of
Al-Walid the corrupt! ’ at which Yazid went down in
prostration, thanking Allah, the Exalted.

The Caliphate of Yazid Bin al-Walid Bin
Abdul Malik Bin Marwan
He was also known as ‘The Deficient’ because he decreased
the amount of gifts, and stipends Al-Walid had given to the
people, which were ten in number for each of them. He
560

brought this amount down to what it was during the reign of
Hisham.
He was given the oath of allegiance for the Caliphate after the
killing of Al-Walid bin Yazid, which was on a Thursday
night, two nights before the end of the month of Jumadi AlAkhir, that year – i. e. the hundred and twenty sixth year – and
he was known for his piety and asceticism before that. The
first thing he did was to reduce the number of stipends given
to the troops, which Al-Walid had increased to ten times every
year; for this, he was called, ‘The Deficient. ’ In fact there was
a well-known saying, ‘The Injured One and the Deficient
were the most just of rulers from the household of Bani
Marwan. ’ That is, Umar bin Abdul Aziz and him. However,
his reign did not last long as he passed away by the end of the
year and even during his reign, the affairs of the state became
disordered with turmoil spreading throughout the realm and
disunity affecting the household of Bani Marwan itself.
And in this year: The people of Palestine gave their allegiance
to Yazid bin Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik. This was because the
household of Bani Sulaiman owned many estates there that
they would visit and live in and people of Palestine liked their
proximity. Thus, when Al-Walid bin Yazid was killed, Sa’eed
bin Ruh bin Zinba’, the leader of the people of that region,
wrote to Yazid bin Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik calling on him
to take the people’s allegiance. Yazid fulfilled his request but
when this news reached the people of Jordan, they too gave
their allegiance to Muhammad bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan
and declared him their leader. When this news finally reached
Yazeed bin Al-Waleed, the Commander of the Faithful, he
dispatched his forces from the people of Damascus and Hims
– those who were with Al-Sufyani – towards them under the
command of Sulaiman bin Hisham. The people of Jordan
were the first to make peace with them and return to obeying
him. The people of Palestine soon followed them.
Subsequently, Yazeed bin Al-Waleed wrote to his brother
561

Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed, designating him as the governor of
Ar-Ramlah and its adjoining areas, after which, stability
returned to the territories there.
And in this year:Yazeed bin Al-Waleed removed Yoosuf bin
Umar from the governorship of Iraq when his rancour against
the Al-Yamaniah – the people of Khalid bin Abdullah AlQasri hailed from – became apparent. This was after AlWaleed bin Yazeed was killed, for he had most of those
residing in his lands from them imprisoned and had scouts
placed on the borders watching the Caliph’s forces. Thus, the
Commander of the Faithful, Yazeed bin Al-Waleed removed
him from his office and appointed Mansoor bin Jumhoor in
his place along with granting him governorship of the lands
of Sindh, Sijistan and Khurasan. Mansoor bin Jumhoor was a
coarse Bedouin who was upon the religion of the
Ghailaniyyah alQadariyyah. However, he had some good
achievements to his credit and his active role in the killing of
Al-Waleed bin Yazeed especially, had put him in good
standing with Yazeed bin Al-Waleed.
As for Yoosuf bin Umar, he fled from Iraq and entered into
the lands of Al-Balqa’, where the Commander of the Faithful
sent for him and had him brought before him. Thereupon, he
took him by his beard – for he had a very long beard, one that
perhaps exceeded his umbilicus, him being of short stature –
and thereafter, he berated him, rebuked him and then, had him
imprisoned, stripping him of all his titles and possessions.
As for Nasr bin Sayyar, the governor of Khurasan, he refused
to obey Mansoor bin Jumhoor and would not comply with his
orders, however since he used to send many gifts to Yazeed
bin Al-Waleed, he was allowed to continue at his post.
And in this year:Marwan bin Muhammad, also known as ‘AlHimar’ wrote to Al-Ghamr bin Yazeed, brother of Al-Waleed
bin Yazeed, inciting him to stand up and take revenge for the
562

blood of his brother, Al-Waleed bin Yazeed. Marwan was the
governor of Azerbaijan and Armeenia at that time.
Later on, Yazeed bin Al-Waleed dismissed Mansoor bin
Jumhoor from the governorship of Iraq and appointed in his
place, Abdullah bin Umar bin Abdul Azeez, saying to him,
‘The people of Iraq were fond of your father, which is why I
am entrusting its governorship to you. ’
Thereafter, the Caliph wrote to Nasr bin Sayyar, entrusting to
him the governorship of Khurasan independent of Iraq.
Thereupon, a man whose name was Abu Ali Judai‘ bin Ali
bin Shabeeb Al-Ma‘ni but was known as Al-Karmani because
he was born in Karman, revolted against him along with
several of his followers. He used to lead a congregation of one
thousand five hundred worshippers in the Jumu‘ah prayer and
he used to greet Nasr bin Sayyar but would not sit with him.
This perturbed Nasr bin Sayyar and his governors and they
wondered what they should do about him. Eventually, after
great deliberation, they agreed among themselves to imprison
him because of which he was imprisoned for about a month
and then let out. Thereafter, a horde of people gathered around
him and rode with him, so Nasr bin Sayyar dispatched a
fighting force towards them, which subdued, defeated and
killed them.
Subsequently, many groups from the people of Khurasan
belittled Nasr bin Sayyar and began to undermine his rule and
authority, insisting upon an increase in their stipends and
verbally abusing him, especially by means of what was said
to him by Salm bin Ahwaz while he was on the pulpit. After
this, all the traders walked out of the mosque while he was
giving the sermon, in addition to many others who left him as
well. Consequently, Nasr said to them, ‘By Allah! I have tried
to discipline you while being lenient with you and been
lenient with you while disciplining you. But I do not see even
ten of you steadfast upon this religion so fear Allah, for by
563

Allah, even if two swords among you clash with each other, a
man would want to be far away from his family, wealth and
children even if he wasn’t there to witness the incident. ’
And in this year:The Caliph took the oath of allegiance from
all the governors and other than them for the appointment of
his brother, Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed bin Abdul Malik as the
heir apparent and then, after Ibraheem, for Abdul Azeez bin
Al-Hajjaj bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan.
And therein: did Caliph Yazeed dismiss Yoosuf bin
Muhammad ath-Thaqafi from the governorship of Hijaz,
replacing him with Abdul Azeez bin Umar bin Abdul Azeez,
who arrived there at the end of the month of Dhul-Qa‘dah,
that year.
And therein: Marwan Al-Himarbegan to publicly oppose
Yazeed bin Al-Waleed, emerging from the lands of Armenia
and giving the impression that he was demanding revenge for
the blood of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed. However, when he
reached Harran, acted as if he was in agreement with him,
giving his allegiance to the Commander of the Faithful,
Yazeed bin Al-Waleed.
And therein: Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Abdullah
bin Abbas sent Abu Hashim Bukair bin Mahan to the lands of
Khurasan. He was able to gather a party from the people of
Khurasan at Marw, to whom he read out the message and
testament of Ibraheem bin Muhammad, the Imam, for him as
well as for them. This was message was received with
acceptance from them and they sent Abu Hisham back with
whatever funds and donations they could muster.
Finally, it is said that at the end of the month of Dhul-Qa‘dah
or Dhul-Hijjah or after the passage of ten days of that month
or after the in the beginning of it, the Commander of the

564

Faithful, Yazeed bin AlWaleed (May Allah have mercy upon
him) died. The following is a brief account of his life.
He is Yazeed bin Al-Waleed bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan bin
Al-Hakam bin Abul-‘As bin Umayyah bin Abd Shams bin
Abd Manaf bin Qusayy, Abu Khalid, al-Umawi, Commander
of the Faithful who was given the oath of allegiance for the
Caliphate, initially, at one of the sub districts of Damascus
known as Al-Mizzah. Subsequently, he entered Damascus
and brought it under his control and then, he sent his armied
after the son of his father’s brother, Al-Waleed bin Yazeed
and killed him, taking over the Caliphate by the end of the
month of Jumadal-Akhirah, that year. He was known as ‘the
Deficient’ due to his reducing the stipends that Al-Waleed bin
Yazeed has increased for them.
From the sayings of Yazeed bin Al-Waleed ‘the Deficient’ is,
‘O household of Banu Umayyah, beware of music, for it
diminishes our sense of modesty, increases the desires within
us, destroys good manners/etiquette and is a substitute for
alcohol for it acts in the same way as any intoxicant. But if
you must listen to it then do so, keeping it away from women
for it (music) also lures to fornication. ’
Muhammad bin Al-Mubarak said of him that, ‘The last words
Yazeed bin Al-Waleed uttered were, “Alas! O regret! ” while
the inscription on his seal read, “All Magnificence is for
Allah! ”’
His death occurred at Al-Khadra’ due to the plague, which
had afflicted him.
The duration of his reign was six months according to the
best-known opinion and it is also said that it was five months
and a few days. His brother Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed who was
also his successor prayed upon him. May Allah’s mercy be
upon him.
565

From the personalities who died in this year:
Khalid bin Abdullah bin Yazeed bin Asad bin Kurz bin ‘Amir
bin ‘Abqari Abul-Haitham Al-Bajali AlQasri ad- Dimashqi
who remained the governor of Makkah and Hijaz under AlWaleed and Sulaiman and the governor of both parts of Iraq
under Hisham for a period of fifteen years. It is narrated that
he narrated upon the authority of his grandfather from the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) regarding
the expiation of sins due to illness.
Al-Utbi mentions upon the authority of his father that, ‘One
day Khalid Al-Qasri was giving a sermon when he became
tongue tied and lost track of what he was saying, so he said,
‘O people! Surely, what I say to you comes easily to me
sometimes while at other times, it is forgotten. The means for
its coming become available when it comes; while when it is
forgotten, the intent behind it is lost. And it might be that its
expression comes back to the sharp-witted and the words of
the one who is at a loss for them, are returned to him. And so,
what you desire will be retuned to us and we will return to you
as you desire. ’
Al-Asma‘i mentions that, ‘A Bedouin once asked Khalid AlQasri to fill his sack with flour, at which he ordered that it be
filled with Dirhams. When he left, the Bedouin was asked,
“How did he treat you?” to which he replied, “I asked him for
what I desired and he ordered that I be given what he desired!
”
So it was that whenever he sat down with money in his
possession, he would give it away saying, ‘Verily, this wealth
is a trust which must be parted with. ’
Once, a ring worth thirty thousand, belonging to one of his
slave girls by the name of Rabi‘ah fell into the drain, so she
asked for someone who would take it out. At this, he said,
566

“Your hand is too precious to wear it again after its falling
into that dirty place. ” He then ordered for her to be given five
thousand Deenars in exchange while at that time, this slave
girl Rabi‘ah had an extensive collection of jewellery which
included precious stones and jewels, each worth seventy three
thousand Deenars. ’
Also, it is narrated by Al-Bukhari in his book, ‘Af‘alul-Ibad,
’ Ibn Abi Hatim in his book, ‘As-Sunnah’ as well as many
other authors who wrote about the correct beliefs that Khalid
bin Abdullah Al-Qasri delivered a sermon to the people on the
occasion of Eedul-Adha and said, ‘O people! Sacrifice and
may Allah accept from you your offerings, for I am going to
sacrifice Al-Ja‘d bin Dirham (as my offering) as he has
claimed that Allah did not take Ibraheem as a close friend and
that He did not directly speak to Moosa; far Exalted be Allah
from what Al-Ja‘d says! ’ At this point, he came down from
the pulpit and slaughtered him at its base.
Several other authorities have mentioned that, ‘Al-Ja‘d bin
Dirham was from the people of Syria. He was also the tutor
of Marwan ‘Al-Himar’ due to which he was also called
Marwan Al-Ja‘di ascribing him to Al-Ja‘d.
Al-Mada’ini further asserts that, ‘A man who claimed
prophethood for himself in Koofah was brought to Khalid bin
Abdullah, who said to him, “What is the sign of your
prophetood?”
He replied, “Revelation has been sent down upon me. ”
Upon being asked, “What is it?”
He said, “Verily We have granted you the multitude.
Therefore, turn in prayer to your Lord and do not proclaim
(this). And do not obey every disbeliever and profligate. ”

567

Thereupon, Khalid gave his orders regarding him, due to
which he was crucified. Finally, while he was being put on
the cross, he said the following lines to him, “Verily we have
granted to you this pillar. Therefore, pray to your Lord upon
this piece of wood. For we guarantee for you that you will not
return
(from there). ” ’
Al-Asma‘ifurther records that. ‘A bedouin once entered upon
Khalid and said to him, “I have composed two couplets in
your praise, however, I will not recite them except for ten
thousand and a slave in return.
”
He replied saying, “Alright. ”
Upon which, the bedouin said the following lines:
You remained inseparable from “Yes” as if you had never,
Heard anything from the words (of men) except “Yes”
And you denied “No” as if you had never,
Heard it – neither from bygone times nor nations.

And from those who died in this year:
Jabalah bin Suhaim, Darraj Abus-Samh, Sa‘eed bin Masrooq
according to one opinion, Sulaiman bin Habeeb Al-Muharibi
– the judge of Damascus, Abdur-Rahman bin Qasim – one of
Imam Malik’s teachers, Ubaidullah bin Abu Zaid and Amr
bin Deenar.

568

Then Began the Hundred and TwentySeventh Year
This year commenced with Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed bin
Abdul Malik as the Caliph, according to his brother, Yazeed
had willed. Accordingly, all the governors gave him their
oaths of allegiance as did all of the people of Syria except
those in Hims. Moreover, it has already preceded that Marwan
bin Muhammad also known as ‘Al-Himar’ or ‘the Donkey’
was the governor of Azerbaijan and Armenia as was his father
before him. He harboured ill will towards Yazeed bin AlWaleed for the killing of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed and he had
begun to call for revenge for the blood of Al-Waleed.
However, when he reached Harran, he retracted from his
position and gave his allegiance to Yazeed bin Al-Waleed.
Not much time passed after that before Yazeed’s death, upon
which he suddenly advanced upon the people in the north of
the Arabian Peninsula itself until he reached Qinnasreen,
laying siege to it until the people there surrendered, declaring
their obedience to him. He then advanced upon Hims, which
was under the governorship of Abdul Azeez bin Al-Hajjaj
under the authority of the Commander of the Faithful
Ibraheem bin AlWaleed, who, seeing that they had refused to
give allegiance, had laid siege to their city in order to force
them to give it to Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed. However, when
the news of Marwan’s advance towards him reached Abdul
Azeez, he retreated, leaving them and Marwan reached them
whereupon, they gave their allegiance to him and proceeded
towards Damascus with him and the force from the north of
the peninsula and Qinnasreen already with him. Marwan, thus
advanced upon Damascus with a force of eighty thousand
strong.
However, Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed had already dispatched
Sulaiman bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik with a force of a
hundred and twenty thousand towards him. Thus, the two
569

armies met near the land of AinulJarr, whereupon Marwan
called upon them to desist from fighting and release the two
sons of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed – Al-Hakam and Uthman –
whom Al-Waleed had designated as his heirs and whom
Yazeed had imprisoned in Damascus. However, they refused
to accept his demand and the intense battle that ensued
afterwards lasted from noon up to the time of Asr prayers.
During this clash, Marwan dispatched a band of his soldiers
to attack Sulaiman bin Hisham’s forces from the rear. This
plan succeeded with this unit pouncing upon them from
behind calling out ‘Allah is the Greatest! ’ while the rest of
Marwan’s forces attacked them from the front. This resulted
in the defeat and slaughter of Sulaiman’s supporters of whom
the people of Hims killed scores. The number of those who
were killed from the people of Damascus that day neared
seventeen or eighteen thousand with as many being taken as
captives. Subsequently, Marwan rebuked them for having
violated the oath of allegiance they had previously given to
the two sons of Al-Waleed, Al-Hakam and Uthman, after
which he set all of them free, except for two men; Yazeed bin
Al-Aqqar and Al-Waleed bin Masad Al-Kalbi, whom he had
whipped in front of him and then imprisoned. The two, who
eventually died in prison, were from those who had directly
partaken in the killing of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed.
As for Sulaiman bin Hisham and the rest of his supporters,
they continued after their defeat towards Damascus, which
they reached the same morning, upon which they informed
the Commander of the Faithful, Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed
about what had happened. Subsequently, all of the principal
governors of the realm present there, including Abdul Azeez
bin Al-Hajjaj, Yazeed bin Khalid bin Abdullah alQasri, Abu
Ilaqah As-Saksaki, Al-Asbagh bin Dhu’alah Al-Kalbi and
their likes came to an agreement that they would have to kill
the two sons of Al-Waleed, Al-Hakam and Uthman, in case
they ever regained control of the Caliphate and began slaying
all those who opposed them and killed their father.
570

Consequently, they dispatched Yazeed bin Khalid bin
Abdullah Al-Qasri for this purpose. He approached the prison
in which the two sons of Al-Waleed, Al-Hakam and Uthman
were being kept. Both of them had grown up by now and it is
said that a child was born to one of them. In the ensuing
encounter, he killed them as well as Yoosuf bin Umar who
was in prison with them. Also with them in prison was Abu
Muhammad As-Sufyani who fled from them and entered
another room within the prison, shutting its door and securing
it from behind with earth and rubble. When they surrounded
him and he refused to come out, they brought a fire to burn
the door down. However soon, they abandoned their efforts,
becoming preoccupied by the arrival of Marwan bin
Muhammad and his forces at the gates of Damascus in pursuit
of the defeated.

571

The Entry of Marwan Al-Himar into
Damascus, His taking over the Caliphate And
the Ouster of Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed
When Marwan and his forces advanced from Ainul-Jarr and
came near Damascus after defeating its people just the day
before, Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed, on hearing of their arrival
fled from the vicinity while Sulaiman bin Hisham proceeded
to the treasury, opening it and giving away its contents to their
supporters and the forces that had followed them to that point.
Subsequently, the supporters of Al-Waleed bin Yazeed
stormed the residence of Abdul Azeez bin Al-Hajjaj, killing
him there and plundering his possessions therein. Then, they
exhumed the grave of Yazeed bin Al-Waleed and crucified
his body at the Al-Jabiyah Gate. Finally, Marwan bin
Muhammad entered the city, entering its heights whereupon
the dead bodies of the two boys, Al-Hakam and Uthman as
well as Yoosuf bin Umar were brought to him upon which he
ordered that they be buried. Then, Abu Muhammad AsSufyani was brought to him in his shackles at which point he
immediately greeted him as the Caliph. Marwan exclaimed,
‘What! ’ in surprise whereupon he responded by saying, ‘The
two boys named you as their heir after them. ’
As soon as he had gained control over Syria, Marwan bin
Muhammad returned to Harran. Thereafter, Ibraheem bin AlWaleed asked him to grant him amnesty, which he did. Soon
afterwards, Sulaiman bin Hisham approached him with the
people of Tadmur and gave him their allegiance.
After the situation stabilized in Harran, Marwan remained
there for three more months, however, suddenly the people of
Syria revolted against him, violating their previous pledge of
allegiance to him – especially the people of Hims as well as
others from amongst them. Therefore, he sent an army to the
people of Hims, which suddenly came upon them on the night
of Eidul-Fitr that year. Finally, when they surrounded them,
572

the people of Hims called out to them saying, ‘We are in your
obedience! ’
As for the people of Damascus, the people of Al-Ghootah
besieged their governor, Zamil bin Amr, choosing Yazeed bin
Khalid Al-Qasri as their leader. The governor of Damascus
remained in the city until the Commander of the Faithful,
Marwan dispatched as a force of ten thousand towards them.
When they came near to Damascus, its governor managed to
get out with his supporters and together with the army sent by
Marwan came face to face with the people of Al-Ghootah,
defeating them, burning the city of Al-Mizzah and its
surrounding localities.
In addition to this, Thabit bin Nu‘aim from the people of
Palestine also revolted against the Caliph and approached
Tabariyyah with his supporters, laying siege to it, whereupon,
the Caliph dispatched an army towards them which forced
them to withdraw and killed scores of them thereafter.
Thus, Syria was stabilized as well, except for Tadmur.
Marwan proceeded from Damascus and entered upon AlQastal from the lands of Hims when it reached him that the
people of Tadmur had sealed and filled upthe water sources
that were common to them with mud. This enraged him at a
time when he had a whole legion of armies with him at his
disposal. However, Al-Abrash bin Al-Waleed – who was
from these people – spoke and requested that he be sent to
them to negotiate a settlement, so Marwan dispatched his
brother, Amr bin Al-Waleed. However, when he entered upon
them, they did not listen or pay heed to him so he returned,
upon which the Caliph resolved to dispatch his forces.
However, AlAbrash asked of him another time, saying that
this time, he should be the one to be directly sent to them. His
request was accepted and this time, when he entered upon
them and tried to convince them to hear and obey the Caliph,
a majority of them accepted his call with only some of them
573

holding back this time. Thus, Al-Abrash wrote back to the
Caliph, informing him of what had occurred at which the
Caliph ordered him to knock down some of the walls of their
city and accept those who came out to him in his obedience,
which he did.
When those who wanted to come out to him had done so, he
proceeded with them and all his other forces towards ArRusafah. With him at this time were the deposed Ibraheem
bin Al-Waleed, Sulaiman bin Hisham and a group from the
offspring of Al-Waleed, Yazeed and Sulaiman. He remained
in Ar-Rusafah for a few days and then departed for ArRaqqah where Sulaiman bin Hisham requested to be allowed
to stay behind over there for a few days to rest and recuperate,
which he was granted. At this, Marwan came down,
approaching Wasit on the bank of the Furat River, staying
there for three days and then proceeding towards Qarqeesiya
where Ibn Hubairah was based so that he could dispatch him
to Iraq to fight AdDahhak bin Qais Ash-Shaibani Al-Khariji
Al-Haroori, the renegade. In this way, Marwan came to be
preoccupied with this matter.
Meanwhile, about thirty thousand horsemen who had been
previously dispatched by Marwan on various missions,
approached this area, passing through Ar-Rusafah, where
Sulaiman bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik had taken permission
to stay and rest. When they met him, they called on him to
take their allegiance, to depose Marwan bin Muhammad and
fight him. Thereupon, Satan misguided him and he agreed to
their request, declared that he had deposed Marwan and
proceeded with this force towards Qinnasreen. He wrote to
the people of Syria from there, who also came and joined him
from everywhere. Thereafter, Sulaiman wrote to Ibn Hubairah
who Marwan had readied to fight the renegade Ad-Dahhak
bin Qais, ordering him to come to him, which he did along
with seventy thousand of his troops.
574

Thereupon, Marwan dispatched ‘Eesa bin Muslaim with a
force of seventy thousand towards them and they came to face
to face in the lands of Qinnasreen where an intense battle
ensued between them. Marwan and his people came and
participated in this battle as well, defeating them and killing
Ibraheem bin Sulaiman bin Hisham that day, who was
Sulaiman’s eldest son. Overall, about thirty thousand of his
forces were killed and Sulaiman returned in defeat from there
and proceeded to Hims, where all of those who had been
defeated from his forces gathered around him once again. He
camped there and rebuilt the walls that had been demolished
by Marwan before. Soon, Marwan arrived and besieged them,
installing more than eighty catapults around the city. The
siege lasted about eight months, with the city being
bombarded day in and day out, its inhabitants coming out
everyday and fighting them before returning.
Meanwhile, Sulaiman tried to slip out with a part of his army
towards Tadmur when they came across a part of Marwan’s
army, which they decided to attack and loot. However, they
were not allowed this, as Marwan got ready for them just
before they struck. However, in the resulting fight, about six
thousand of his forces were killed even though there were
only nine hundred of them in all. Subsequently, Sulaiman and
his forces were able to depart for Tadmur while Marwan
continued to besiege Hims for a period of ten months. When
adversity began to hit the besieged people within the city and
their situation became wretched, they asked Marwan to grant
them amnesty, which he refused to do until they submitted to
his rule. Thereupon, they asked him for amnesty once again
on the condition that they would hand over Sa‘eed bin Hisham
and his two sons, Marwan and Uthman to him, in addition to
As-Saksaki who was imprisoned with them as well as an
Abyssinian who used to slander and abuse him. Marwan
agreed to this condition, granting them amnesty and executing
the aforementioned.
575

Then, he proceeded towards Ad-Dahhak, the renegade with
whom Abdullah bin Umar bin Abdul Azeez, the governor of
Iraq had signed a truce upon whatever he had taken in his
control from the city of Koofah and its surrounding districts.
Marwan proceeded with his horsemen towards Koofah, where
they came across Milhan Ash-Shaibani, the governor who had
been appointed over it by Ad-Dahhak. In the ensuing fight,
Milhan was killed and consequently, Ad-Dahhak appointed
Al-Muthana bin Imran from the tribe of Banu ‘A’idhah in his
place as the next governor. Meanwhile, Ad-Dahhak himself
proceeded towards Mawsil in the month of Dhul-Qa‘dah
while Ibn Hubairah proceeded towards Koofah with his
forces, taking it back from the Kharijites. Subsequently, when
Ad-Dahhak sent his forces to Koofah, he found that none of
it was left in his control.
And in this year:Ad-Dahhak bin Qais Ash-Shaibani rose up in
revolt. The reason for this was that a man known as Sa‘eed
bin Bahdal – who was a Khariji by persuasion – took
advantage of the heedlessness of the people and their
preoccupation with the assassination of Al-Waleed bin
Yazeed and rose up in revolt along with a group of Kharijites
in Iraq. About four thousand of his supporters gathered
around him – which was unprecedented for a Kharijite –
whereupon, the state forces began to confront them due to
which they would intermittently face defeat as well as achieve
victory. Then, Sa‘eed bin Bahdal died due to the plague,
which had afflicted him, leaving Ad-Dahhak bin Qais as his
heir and leader of the Kharijites due to which all of his
supporters gathered around Ad-Dahhak. It was then that they
came face to face with a big army and in this confrontation;
the Kharijites were victorious and ended up killing scores of
people.
And in this year:A group of the supporters of the clan of Banu
‘Abbas gathered around Ibraheem bin Muhammad, their
leader along with Abu Muslim Al-Khurasani.
576

And in this year:Abdullah binMu‘awiyah bin Abdullah bin
Ja‘far bin Abu Talib revolted in Koofah, calling unto himself
and rising up to fight against the governor of Iraq Abdullah
bin Umar bin Abdul Azeez. This led to a long series of
conflicts taking place between them, which would be too
cumbersome to mention at this point.
And in this year:Al-Harith bin Suraij also revolted. He had
affliliated himself with the Turks and incited them against the
Muslims. However, Allah blessed him with guidance and
helped him so that he left them and entered the lands of Syria.
And from those who died in this year:
Bukair bin Al-AsHajj, Sa‘d bin Ibraheem, Abdullah bin
Deenar, Abdul Kareem bin Malik Al-Jazari, Umair bin Hani,
Malik bin Deenar, Wahb bin Kaisan and Abu Ishaq AsSabee‘i.

Then Began the Hundred and TwentyEighth Year
Therein: Al-Harith bin Suraij killed. This was due to the fact
that Yazeed bin Al-Waleed ‘the Deficient’ had decreed that
he be granted amnesty so that he would leave the land of the
Turks and join the Muslims once again, abandoning the
polytheists and returning to supporting Islam and its people.
Previously, an estrangement had developed between him and
Nasr bin Sayyar, the governor of Khurasan, due to the many
conflicts that had occurred between them, which would be too
cumbersome to detail here. So, when the Caliphate returned
to Marwan bin Muhammad, Al-Harith bin Suraij became
alarmed at this development. Then, Ibn Hubairah was
appointed as the governor of Iraq and the oath of allegiance
was given to Marwan, whereupon Al-Harith refused to give
his allegiance to him and started criticizing Marwan.
577

Thereafter, Salm bin Ahwaz, the local police chief came to
him along with a group of military as well as political leaders,
asking him to restrain his tongue and hand and to not cause
division amongst the ranks of the Muslims. However, he
refused and began to separate himself from what the people
were upon and called Nasr bin Sayyar to what his perception
of the Book and Sunnah was. Nasr bin Sayyar refused to
accept his call and he in turn, continued on the path leading
him out of Islam. Furthermore, he ordered alJahm bin Safwan,
the slave from the clan of Banu Rasib, also nicknamed Abu
Muhriz and to whom the
Jahmiyah sect is ascribed, to read out a document with AlHarith’s biography in front of the people. AlHarith also used
to claim, ‘I am the bearer of the black banners. ’
So it was that Nasr dispatched a message to him saying, ‘If
you are really who you claim, then by my life, you will be the
people who will destroy the walls of Damascus and depose
the Umayyad dynasty in which case take from me five
hundred slaves and two hundred camels and whatever wealth
you desire. However, if you are not whom you claim to be,
then surely you have destroyed your family. ’
At this, Al-Harith sent him a message in return saying,
‘Verily, this matter will come to pass! ’
Whereupon Nasr replied to him saying, ‘Then begin with AlKarmani first and then go to Ar-Rayy for if you manage that
much, then I will be in your obedience. ’
Thus, Nasr and Al-Harith continued to debate and dispute
until they agreed to let Muqatil bin Hayyan and Jahm bin
Safwan adjudicate between them. When this occurred, it was
decreed that Nasr be deposed and the matter should be
decided by mutual consultation. On hearing this, Nasr refused
to comply and so, Jahm bin Safwan and others continued to
read out his biography to the people in their meeting places
578

and on the streets until many of them, amounting to a great
multitude had responded to their call. Thereafter several army
units were assigned to fight them on the orders of Nasr bin
Sayyar. These units primarily targeted his supporters in their
fight rather than him, killing several of them, including Jahm
bin Safwan himself, who was killed when a man stabbed him
in his mouth. It is also said that he was in fact imprisoned and
brought before Salm bin Ahwaz who ordered his execution
upon which he said, ‘I have been granted protection by your
son. ’
Whereupon, Salm replied to him saying, ‘It was not for him
to give you protection and even if had I would never have
complied in doing so even of you were to fill this sheet with
the stars or sent down ‘Eesa the son of Mary to me, you would
not be saved. By Allah! Had you been in my belly, I would
have cut it open just to kill you! ’
He then ordered the slave of his master, Ibn Seereen, who
killed him.
Thereafter, Al-Harith bin Suraij and Al-Karmani agreed
between themselves to oppose and fight Nasr, to call to the
Book and the Sunnah as well as following the rightly guided
Imams and forbidding all vice and evil in addition to other
aspects of the Sharee‘ah. However, they fell apart with each
other soon after and this lead to bitter infighting between them
in which Al-Karmani finally prevailed, defeating the
supporters of Al-Harith. It is said that he was riding a mule
when he got off to shift to a horse, whereupon the horse
refused to obey him and move. Subsequently, most of his
followers abandoned him with no one left with him except a
hundred of his supporters. Thus, Al-Karmani’s supporters
eventually caught up with him and killed him under an olive
tree – and it is also said under a kind of tree – on the last
Sunday of the month of Rajab that year. With him were killed
a hundred of his supporters and Al-Karmani took control all
579

of his wealth and property and the wealth of all those who
were with him. He then ordered that AlHarith be beheaded
and his body put on the cross upon the gates of the city of
Marw.
And in this year:Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Ali bin
Abdullah bin Abbas dispatched Abu Muslim AlKhurasani to
Khurasani and sent a message with him to their followers
there saying, ‘Verily, this (person before you) is Abu Muslim.
So hear and obey him for he has been appointed by me as the
leader of all of the lands of Khurasan he is able to conquer. ’
However, when Abu Muslim entered Khurasan and read out
this message to the people, they did not pay any attention,
completely disregarding and ignoring it and not implementing
the contents of the message in the least. Consequently, Abu
Muslim returned to Ibraheem during the Hajj season that year,
complaining about what had happened to him and informing
him about the opposition he had faced.
Thereupon, Ibraheem said to him, ‘O Abdur Rahman, surely
you are one of us and from the Ahlul-Bait, so return to them
and take special care of this particular tribe from the people
of Yemen; honour them and remain in their midst, for surely,
Allah will not fulfil this affair for us except through them. ’
Then he cautioned him regarding the other tribes and said to
him, ‘If you are able to eradicate the Arabic language from
these lands then do so and if whoever from their offspring
reaches a height of even five hand spans and is accused (of
being against you) then kill him. Also, give that old man, that
is, Sulaiman bin Katheer special regard and do not disobey
him. ’
And in this year:Ad-Dahhak bin Qais Al-Khariji, the renegade
was killed according to an opinion held by Abu Mikhnaf. The
reason for this was that Ad-Dahhak besieged Abdullah bin
Umar bin Abdul Azeez in the city of Wasit with the agreement
and consent of Mansoor bin Jumhoor. Thereupon, Abdullah
580

bin Umar bin Abdul Azeez wrote to him saying, ‘There is no
benefit for you in laying siege upon me. You should be in
pursuit of Marwan bin Muhammad, so go after him and if you
are able to kill him, I will follow and obey you. ’ Thus, they
agreed with each other on opposing Marwan bin Muhammad
and AdDahhak left him and proceeded towards Marwan bin
Muhammad, the Commander of the Faithful with the intent of
fighting him.
On his way, when Ad-Dahhak passed through Mawsil, he
wrote to its people, who inclined towards him whereupon he
entered the city, killed its governor and took control of it.
When this news reached Marwan, he was besieging Hims and
was preoccupied with its people and their refusal to pledge
their allegiance to him. So, he wrote to his son, Abdullah bin
Marwan, who was the governor of the northern Arabian
Peninsula, ordering him to fight Ad-Dahhak at Mawsil.
Consequently, Ad-Dahhak proceeded towards Abdullah bin
Marwan with about a hundred and twenty thousand men who
had by then, joined his ranks and laid to siege to the city of
Naseebeen. Subsequently, Marwan was able to set out in
pursuit of him and their forces met thereabouts, fighting
intensely with each other. Ad-Dahhak engaged him upon his
steed along with a group of powerful governors and noblemen
who had sides with him. However, he was killed in the fierce
battle that ensued.
Ad-Dahhak designated a man known as Al-Khaibari as the
leader of his army after him. So it was that the rest of the army
gathered around him after Ad-Dahhak’s death. Moreover,
Sulaiman bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik along with his
household, their supporters as well as the army that had
pledged allegiance to him the year before as their Caliph, also
aligned themselves with Al-Khaibari. When dawn broke the
next day, they confronted Marwan and his forces and AlKhaibari launched an attack directly on Marwan with four
hundred of his bravest soldiers, with him in their midst.
581

However, he was forced to retreat in defeat with Marwan’s
forces behind him in hot pursuit until they chased him out of
his army, entering its encampments while Al-Khaibari sat on
his carpet. In the meantime, the right flank of Marwan’s army,
led by his son, Abdullah remained stable and unharmed, as
did the left flank under the command of Ishaq bin Muslim AlUqaili. When they saw his army fleeing with Al-Khaibari,
while their right and left flanks remained untouched, they
could not stop themselves from pursuing them with the poles
of their tents, with which they finally killed him. When the
news of Al-Khaibari’s death reached Marwan, who had left
the main part of his force behind by about five to six miles, he
returned in delight, for the supporters of Ad-Dahhak had
finally been defeated. Al-Khaibari had designated Shaiban as
their next leader, however, even he was fought and defeated
by Marwan at Al-Karadees.
And therein: Marwan dispatched Yazeed bin Umar bin
Hubairah to Iraq as its governor to fight the Kharijites therein.
And in this year:Abdul Azeez bin Umar bin Abdul Azeez led
the people in the Hajj Pilgrimage while he was the governor
of Madinah, Makkah and Ta’if with Yazeed bin Umar bin
Hubairah being the governor of Iraq and Nasr bin Sayyar that
of Khurasan.

And from those who died in this year:
Bakr bin Sawadah Jabir Al-Ju‘fi Al-Jahm bin Safwan who
was killed as described earlier Al-Harith bin Suraij, one of the
prominent leaders of his time, a brief mention of whom has
already been made ‘Asim bin Bahdalah Abu Haseen Uthman
bin ‘Asim Yazeed bin Abu Habeeb Abut-Tayyah Yazeed bin
Humaid Abu Jamrah Ad-Duba‘i Abuz-Zubair Al-Makki Abu
Imran Al-Jawni Abu Qabeel Al-Ma‘afiri.

582

Then Began the Hundred and Twenty-Ninth
Year
Therein: the Kharijites gathered around Shaiban bin Abdul
Azeez Al-Hulais Al-Yashkuri, the renegade. They were
advised by Sulaiman bin Hisham to fortify themselves in
Mawsil and make it the centre of their activitites, so they
proceeded towards Mawsil with Mawan, the Commander of
the Faithful pursuing them. Finally, they encamped right
outside Mawsil and dug a trench towards the army of the
Caliph. Similarly, Marwan too entrenched his forces from
where Shaiban’s forces were located. He then remained there
for the next year, besieging them with the two sides fighting
each other every day, day in and day out. It was then that
Marwan captured Umayyah bin Mu‘awiyah bin Hisham, one
of Sulaiman bin Hisham’s nephews, who was caught by some
of his soldiers. He then gave the orders regarding him: his
arms were severed, and he was beheaded while his uncle
Sulaiman and his army watched on.
Marwan also wrote to his governor in Iraq, Yazeed bin Umar
bin Hubairah, ordering him to fight the Kharijites in his land.
Thus, several military encounters took place between them, at
the end of which Ibn Hubairah prevailed, laying their lands to
waste such that no trace of them was left in Iraq. He also took
back Koofah from their control – which was under the
governorship of Al-Muthanna bin Imran Al-A’idhi who was
from the A’idhah clan, from the tribe of Quraish – during the
month of Ramadan that year. To this end, Marwan wrote to
Ibn Hubairah asking him to send one of his brave men, Amir
bin Dubarah to support him once he had finished with the
Kharijites in his lands.
Accordingly, Amir was dispatched with a force of six to eight
thousand strong, which encountered another expedition on
their way, consisting of around four thousand Kharijites who
583

were quickly defeated by Ibn Dubarah, their leader, Al-Jawn
bin Kilab Ash-Shaibani Al-Khariji killed. Thereafter, Ibn
Dubarah advanced upon Mawsil with the remnants of the
defeated Kharijite force joining in with them. Thereupon,
Sulaiman bin Hisham advised them to leave Mawsil, for their
remaining there had become untenable, with Marwan in front
of them and Ibn Dubarah at their rear and with their provisions
completely cut off until they could not find enough to eat.
Thus, they left Mawsil and proceeded via Hulwan towards
AlAhwaz upon which Marwan immediately sent Ibn Dubarah
in pursuit of them with a force a three thousand that followed
their tracks, killing those who were left behind and fighting
them wherever they caught up with them. Thus did they
continue to chase them until the unified structure of their force
dispersed and was left in a state of chaos.

The Emergence Abu Muslim Al-Khurasani
in Khurasan
And in this year: A message was sent from Ibraheem bin
Muhammad, the Abbasid leader to Abu Muslim Al-Khurasani
summoning him from Khurasan. He therefore set out to
towards him with seventy of his top lieutenants, not passing
through any land except after being questioned about where
they were headed to which Abu Muslim replied saying, ‘We
want to perform Hajj. ’ However if he felt any inclination
from any them towards their cause, he would invite them to it
and they would accept. However, while he was on his way,
another message from their leader or Imam, Ibraheem reached
him telling him that, ‘I have sent the banner of victory to you,
so return to Khurasan and publicly proclaim our movement
and mission to the people. ’
At this, he ordered Qahtabah bin Shabeeb to proceed towards
Imam Ibraheem with all the gifts and riches that were with
them and to meet him during the Hajj season that year.
584

Meanwhile, Abu Muslim returned with the message and
entered Khurasan on the first day of Ramadan. On his return,
he showed the message to Sulaiman bin Katheer in whichit
was stated that he should, ‘Proclaim their call and not hesitate
or wait any longer. ’ Abu Muslim thus entered upon the
people of Khurasan calling to the household of Banu Abbas
and dispatching his emissaries to all parts of Khurasan,
proclaiming their message while the governor of Khurasan,
Nasr bin Sayyar was preoccupied with fighting Al-Karmani
and Shaiban bin Salamah Al-Haroori. So successful were they
in spreading their message that his supporters would address
him as their Caliph even in the presence of the Kharijites.
Thus it came about that Abu Muslim rose in fame to the extent
that people from all directions would seek him out. From
those who sought him on a particular day were the people of
sixty localities, whereupon he went and stayed with them for
forty-two days during which many other regions came under
his control. Finally, on a the night before the last Thursday,
with only five days remaining to the end of the month of
Ramadan that year, Abu Muslim finally unveiled and fastened
the banner that had been sent to him by their Imam. This
banner was termed as ‘The Shade’ and was fastened to a spear
fourteen cubits in length. He also fastened another standard
that the Imam had sent to him called, ‘The Cloud’ to a spear,
thirteen cubits in length. Both of these were black in colour
and he fastened them while reciting the following verse from
the Qur’an:
‘Permission to fight is being given to those who are being
fought, because they were wronged. And verily, Allah is
capable of giving them victory. ’ (al-Hajj22:39)
Abu Muslim, Sulaiman bin Katheer and their followers began
to wear black, which eventually became one of the symbols
of their movement. Then, they lit a huge fire that night calling
by it all those who lived in the surrounding areas. This also
585

became a sign amongst them by which they gathered together.
The significance of naming one of their banners, ‘The Cloud’
was that it denoted the movement of Banu Abbas would
encompass the entire earth as do the clouds envelop it. The
significance of calling the other banner, ‘The Shade’ was that
as the earth is never free of shade at any time so will it never
by without those that establish the rule of Banu Abbas in it.
Therefore, people in their hordes from all directions accepted
Abu Muslim as their leader and the number of his forces
multiplied tremendously.
When the festival of Eidul-Fitr arrived that year, Abu Muslim
ordered Sulaiman bin Katheer to lead the people in Eid prayer,
setting up for him a pulpit and telling him to oppose the way
of Banu Umayyah in it, conducting the prayers according to
the Sunnah. So it was that the prayer was announced with the
words, ‘As-Salatu Jami‘ah’ or ‘the prayer congregation has
gathered. ’ With no Adhan or Iqamah (the official calls for the
five prayers) as opposed to what was practiced by the
Umayyads. Similarly, the prayer was conducted before the
sermon with the Takbeer (declaring that Allah is the Greatest)
said seven times before the ritual recitation in the first unit of
prayer instead of four, and five times in the second unit
instead of three, again opposing established Umayyad
practice. Moreover, the sermon was initiated with various
invocations and the Takbeer and concluded with a recitation
from the Qur’an. After the prayer, the people dispersed but
not before the food that Abu Muslim had prepared for them
was distributed amongst them.
Then, he wrote a letter to Nasr bin Sayyar, which he
began with his own name and then said, ‘To Nasr
bin Sayyar,

586

In the Name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most
Beneficient
To proceed:
Verily, Allah has condemned various nations in His Book in
the following Verse:
“And they swore by Allah their strongest oaths, that if a
warner came to them, they would be more guided than any of
the nations (before them), yet when a warner came to them,
itdid not increase them except in aversion, (due to their)
arrogance in the land and their plotting of evil. However, the
evil plot
encompasses only its own people. Then, do they await
anything (else), but the way the peoples of old
(were dealt with) ? For no change will you ever find in
Allah’s way of dealing. ” ’ ( Fatir 35:42, 43)
This manner of writing, especially the preceding of his name
with Abu Muslim’s disturbed Nasr bin Sayyar greatly and he
declared after a lot of thought on the matter that, ‘Verily, this
letter is not without its answer. ’
Ibn Jareer states that, ‘Subsequently, Nasr bin Sayyar
dispatched a huge cavalry to fight Abu Muslim, eighteen
months after his rise to prominence. Abu Muslim, in turn, sent
Malik bin Al-Haitham AlKhuza‘i to them. When the two
sides met thereabouts, Malik called upon them to accept the
household of the Prophet of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) over them, which they refused to do. Both
forces then organized their ranks from midday to late
afternoon, during which more reinforcements joined Malik,
further strengthening him due to which he prevailed when the
battle finally took place. This was to be the first incident in
which the supporters of Banu Abbas fought with the forces of
Banu Umayyah.
587

Abu Muslim, at that time was still a young man, chosen by
the Imam, Ibraheem, to lead the movement due to his bravery
and resilience, his ability to comprehend as well as his
exceptional intelligence and due to the fact that he hailed from
the populace of Koofah.
Thus, when Abu Muslim’s fame spread throughout Khurasan,
the various factions amongst the Arabs living there came to
an agreement about fighting him. However, Al-Karmani and
Shaiban did not oppose him as they were in a state of revolt
against Nasr bin Sayyar and Abu Muslim was against him as
well, calling for Marwan ‘Al-Himar’ to be deposed.
Meanwhile, Nasr had already asked Shaiban to side with him
against Abu Muslim or at least to suspend all hostilities
between them so that he was free to fight him and that he
could return to opposing him once he had finished with Abu
Muslim. Shaiban acceded to this and when the news reached
Abu Muslim, he dispatched a message to Ibn Al-Karmani,
informing him of what had occurred upon which Ibn AlKarmani reproached Shaiban and dissuaded him from it. Abu
Muslim then dispatched An-Nadr bin Nu‘aim towards the city
of Harat, which he captured from its governor, ‘Eesa bin
Aqeel Al-Laithi and then wrote to Abu Muslim, informing
him about it, while the deposed governor fled to Nasr bin
Sayyar.
It was then that Shaiban final concluded an agreement with
Nasr bin Sayyar, suspending all hostilities between the both
of them. This occurred despite Ibn Al-Karmani’s opposition
to this agreement, upon which Ibn Al-Karmani sent a message
to Abu Muslim informing him that, ‘I am with you in fighting
Nasr. ’ Abu Muslim then rode out to meet Ibn Al-Karmani
personallyand they agreed to fight and oppose Nasr once
again. Abu Muslim then shifted to a more spacious location
as his forces had increased and his army had greatly enlarged.
So much so that by now, he had employed a number of
officials to manage the security, the police, the post, the
588

official register and records as well as other essential
government employees needed by a monarch. He also
appointed Al-Qasim bin Mujashi‘ At-Tameemi, who was one
of his lieutenants, as the judge for he used to lead Abu Muslim
in prayer and relate various stories, highlighting the virtues of
Bani Hashim while defaming Banu Umayyah. From here,
Abu Muslim moved on and entered another locality known as
‘Aleen ’ which was situated in a low lying area, due to which,
he feared that Nasr bin Sayyar might choke their water supply.
This took place on the sixth day of the month of Dhul -Hajjah
that year, after which Al-Qasim bin Mujashi‘ led them in the
Eid prayers on the day of sacrifice (the tenth day of DhulHajjah). Meanwhile, Nasr bin Sayyar advanced towards them
with a vast army with the intent of fighting Abu Muslim,
leaving behind one of his Nuwwabs to look after his lands.
What finally became of the both of them will be discussed in
the following year’s events, Allah willing.

589

The Killing of Al-Karmani
Subsequently, fighting broke out between Nasr bin Sayyar
and Al-Karmani – whose full name is Judai‘ bin Ali AlKarmani – which resulted in countless deaths occurring on
both sides of the conflict. During this period, Abu Muslim
began to write to both parties, trying to incline them towards
him, writing to Nasr and Al-Karmani, saying, ‘Our Imam had
advised us to do good to you and I am not from those who
will transgress against his wishes regarding you. ’ Then, he
wrote to the local districts and towns, calling on them to
support Banu Abbas. Right away, a vast multitude of people
responded to his call and gave him their support. Thereafter,
Abu Muslim advanced and moved into the area between the
trenches that both sides had dug for themselves, completely
intimidating the both of them. Consequently, Nasr bin Sayyar
wrote to the Caliph, Marwan bin Muhammad Al-Himar,
informing him of the state of affairs that had been created by
Abu Muslim; the multitudes who were with him and that he
was calling them to Ibraheem bin Muhammad.
From what he wrote in his extensive communication with the
Caliph regarding this affair were the following lines:
I see between the ashes the shimmering of a live ember,
Rather, it seems much more likely that it will break into a
blaze,
For verily, fire is not kindled except on heaps of timber, As
is war, surely not initiated but with words of phrase, I thus
exclaimed with wonder: Would that I only knew!
Is the Umayyad in a state of slumber or is he well awake?
Upon which, Marwan wrote back to him saying, ‘Verily, he
who is present is witness to that which he who is absent is not.
’
590

Whereupon, Nasr replied, ‘Your comrade has only informed
you that there is no Nasr (lit. victory) with him. ’
Similarly, Nasr also wrote to the governor of Iraq, Yazeed bin
Umar bin Hubairah, asking him for support. Among what he
wrote to him are the following lines:
Inform Yazeed – for the best of statements are those that are
true,
And with certainty have I come to know: there is no benefit
in deceit –
That Khurasan is a land wherein I have come to see,
An egg, if it hatches, will be a harbinger of wondrous tales
which you will be told,
A young nestling now, of two years, except that it has become
very big,
Almost able to take wing, yet still clothed with fluff,
For surely, if they fly and are not dealt with before,
They will set ablaze the flames of war and what a flame it will
be!
On receiving this, Ibn Hubairah dispatched this letter from
Nasr to Marwan. This happened to coincide with them
detecting one of Imam Ibraheem’s messengers in their midst
with a letter from him to Abu Muslim, in which he reviled and
insulted him and insisted that Abu Muslim oppose both Nasr
bin Sayyar and Al-Karmani and not to spare anyone who was
familiar with Arabic over there. Thereafter, Marwan
immediately dispatched a message from Harran (where he
was) to his deputy in Damascus, Al-Waleed bin Mu‘awiyah
bin Abdul Malik, ordering him to proceed to Al-Humaimah,
591

the locality where Ibraheem bin Muhammad, the Imam was
located. Once he was there, the Imam was to be arrested and
sent to him.
Thus, the governor of Damascus sent a message to the
governor of Al-Balqa’, who went to the mosque in the aforementioned locality, where he found Ibraheem, the Imam,
seated. He was promptly arrested and sent to Damascus where
the governor immediately sent him to Marwan bin
Muhammad, the Caliph, who ordered that he be imprisoned.
A further discussion as to what became of him will take place
in the following year’s events.
As for Abu Muslim, when he positioned himself between the
forces of Nasr and Al-Karmani, he wrote to Al-Karmani,
saying, ‘I am with you’ upon which Al-Karmani inclined
towards him. Immediately, Nasr wrote to him saying, ‘Woe
be unto you! Do not be fooled for he only wants to kill you
along with all your supporters. Come! Let us pen a treaty
between the two of us. ’ Al-Karmani entered his quarters and
then came out and departed for Ar-Rahbah with a hundred
horsemen after having sent a message to Nasr telling him to
come so that they could finalize the treaty. As soon as Nasr
realized that Al-Karmani had been fooled, he descended to
their meeting place with a huge force and attacked him, killing
him and a large number of his supporters. Al-Karmani himself
was killed in the ensuing battle when someone stabbed him
on his flank. Subsequently, Nasr ordered that he be crucified
along with a number of his supporters including Samakah.
Consequently, Al-Karmani’s son joined forces with Abu
Muslim along with what was left of Al-Karmani’s supporters.
Together, they formed a united front against Nasr bin Sayyar.
Ibn Jareer states: and in this year: Abdullah bin Mu‘awiyah
bin Abdullah bin Ja‘far triumphed over Persia and many of its
provinces as well as over Hulwan, Qoomis, Asbahan and ArRayy after a campaign too lengthy to detail here.
592

Ibn Jareer states: and in this year: Abu Hamzah Al-Khariji
took charge of managing the Hajj season. He openly
displayed his domination, power as well as opposition to
Marwan bin Muhammad bin Marwan and his disavowal from
him. Consequently, Abdul Wahid bin Sulaiman bin Abdul
Malik bin Marwan, who was the governor of Makkah,
Madinah and Ta’if and as such officially responsible for
conducting the Hajj Pilgrimage that year, wrote to Abu
Hamzah and agreed with him on an amnesty for himself till
the end of the Pilgrimage. Thus, in Arafat, they remained to
one sideof the people and then separated from them. Finally,
during the last three days of the Pilgrimage, Abdul Wahid
finished the last rites early on the first day and left Makkah
thereby allowing the Khariji to enter without a fight.

And from those who died in this year:
Salim Abun-Nadr, Ali bin Zaid bin Jud‘an according one
opinion and Yahya bin Abu Katheer.
The Hundred and Thirtieth Year
It was on a Thursday, with only nine days having elapsed from
the month of Jumadal-Oola that Abu Muslim Al-Khurasani
entered the city of Marw, heading straight to the governor’s
house there and taking it by force from the hands of Nasr bin
Sayyar. All of this occurred with the help of Ali bin AlKarmani and Nasr bin Sayyar was forced to flee with a small
band of his supporters numbering around three thousand,
including one of his Persian wives. Then he hurried until he
reached Sarakhs, leaving even his wife behind and saving
himself. Thus did Abu Muslim’s fame spread throughout
Khurasan, with various groups of people and even sections
from the Arab population turning to him in support.

593

The Killing of Shaiban bin Salamah AlHaroori
After Nasr bin Sayyar’s flight out of Marw, Shaiban AlHaroori, who had remained on his side against Abu Muslim,
remained in the city. Abu Muslim dispatched messengers to
him, however, they was captured by Shaiban. Thereupon,
Abu Muslim sent for Bassam bin Ibraheem, one of the
servants of tribe of Banu Laith, ordering him to advance upon
Shaiban and fight him, so he proceeded towards him and in
the ensuing battle between them, Bassam defeated Shaiban,
killing him and pursued his supporters, killing and
imprisoning them as well. Later on, Abu Muslim was also to
kill Ali and Uthman, the two sons of Al-Karmani.
And in this year:Abu Muslim directed Qahtabah bin Shabeeb
toward Naisaboor along with some of the most prominent
leaders of their movement including Khalid bin Barmak and
others, to fight Nasr bin Sayyar. They came face to face with
Tameem bin Nasr bin Sayyar who had been sent by his father
to fight them at Tus. In this encounter, Qahtabah’s forces
killed about seventeen thousand from the supporters of Nasr.
Moreover, Abu Muslim had dispatched a contingent of about
ten thousand horsemen under the command of Ali bin Ma‘qil
to bolster Qahtabah’s forces. Together, they fought Nasr’s
supporters, killing countless numbers of them, slaying
Tameem bin Nasr and taking lots of wealth as war booty.

An Account of Abu Hamzah Al-Khariji’s
Entry and Occupation of Madinah For a
period of three months Until his departure
Ibn Jareer states that: And during this year, an encounter took
place at Qudaid in the land of Al-Hijaz between Abu Hamzah
Al-Khariji and the people of Madinah at the beginning of the
Hajj season that year. Consequently, many of the people of
594

Madinah from the tribe of Quraish were killed after which the
local governor, Abdul Wahid bin Sulaiman fled and the
Khariji entered the city of Madinah, killing several of its
inhabitants.
Abu Hamzah remained in Madinah for a period of three
months, that is, the rest of the month of Safar, the two months
of Rabee‘ and some of the month of Jumadal-Oola, according
to what has been stated by AlWaqidi and others.
Moreover, Al-Mada’ini narrates upon the authority of AlAbbas from Haroon who narrates from his grandfather who
said, ‘Initially, Abu Hamzah Al-Khariji displayed good
conduct towards the people of Madinah due to which they had
begun to incline towards him. That is, until they heard him
saying upon the pulpit of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), “What was hidden has
become manifest ! Where can you possibly go and hide?!
Verily, the one who fornicates, he is a disbeliever and the one
who steals, he is too a disbeliever! ” On hearing this, the
people began to despise him and abandoned the affection they
had for him. ’
Abu Hamzah remained in Madinah until Marwan Al-Himar
dispatched Abdul Malik bin Muhammad bin Atiyyah from the
tribe of Banu Sa‘d with about four thousand Syrian horsemen
whom Marwan had handpicked from his own army, giving
every man from them a hundred Deenars and an Arabian
horse, as well as a mule to carry his belongings. He then
ordered them to persist in fighting Abu Hamzah and not to
return without him even if they had to go as far south as
Yemen to catch him and to even fight the governor of Yemen,
Abdullah bin Yahya if he stood in their way. Ibn Atiyyah
proceeded until he reached the valley of Al-Qura, where he
encountered Abu Hamzah Al-Khariji on his way to fight
Marwan in
Syria.
595

So they fought each other until night fell, whereupon Abu
Hamzah exclaimed, ‘Woe be unto you O Ibn Atiyyah! Verily,
Allah has appointed the night as a time for resting. Let us
postpone the fighting until tomorrow. ’ Ibn Atiyyah however
refused to discontinue the fight and persisted until he had
broken them whereupon they were forced to flee, their
defeated returning to Madinah where the people of Madinah
attacked them, killing several of them. Ibn Atiyyah finally
entered Madinah once its people had defeated the army of
Abu Hamzah.
Abu Ma‘shar states: Muhammad bin Abdul Malik bin
Marwan lead the people in Hajj that year after he was declared
the governor of Madinah, Makkah and Ta’if with Yazeed bin
Umar bin Hubairah remaining as the governor of Iraq and
Nasr bin Sayyar, that of Khurasan.

And from those who died in this year:
Shu‘aib bin Al-Habhab, Abdul Azeez bin Suhaib, Abdul
Azeez bin Rafee‘, Ka‘b bin ‘Alqamah and Muhammad bin
Al-Mundakir.

596

Then Began the Hundred and Thirty-First
Year
In the month of Muharram this year, Qahtabah bin Shabeeb
directed his son, Al-Hasan towards Qoomis to fight Nasr bin
Sayyar, following him up with reinforcements. However,
some of them joined forceswith Nasr who had moved on and
entered Ar-Rayy, only to remain there for two days after
which fell ill and departed towards Hamdan. However, just
before he reached Hamadhan, after the passing of twelve
nights from the month of Rabee‘ul-Awwal, that year, Nasr bin
Sayyar died at the age of eighty five. After Nasr’s death,
Khurasan came under the complete control of Abu Muslim
Al-Khurasani and his supporters and their power increased
immensely.
And in this year: ‘Amir bin Dubarah died, the reason for his
death being that Ibn Hubairah had written to him, ordering
him to advance upon Qahtabah after reinforcing him with
many army units. So Ibn Dubarah proceeded with a force of a
hundred and thousand strong – which was dubbed as the
‘army of armies’ – until he encountered Qahtabah, who only
had a force of twenty thousand with him. When the two sides
faced each other, Qahtabah and his supporters raised copies
of the Qur’an and an announcer from amongst them
proclaimed, ‘O people of Syria! We only invite you to what
is contained in this book! ’, whereupon he was met with
insults as was Qahtabah. At this, Qahtabah ordered his forces
to attack them after which it was not long before Ibn
Dubarah’s forces had been defeated, with Qahtabah’s soldiers
chasing after them and killing them in great numbers
including Ibn Dubarah, who was killed with his army due to
his bravery for he did not flee from the battlefield. Because of
the encounter, Qahtabah’s forces took what seemed to be a
limitless amount of war booty.

597

And therein: Qahtabah laid an intense siege to the city of
Nahawand until the Syrians there appealed to him that he give
the people therein respite so that they may open the city gates
for him. When they opened the gates and took an amnesty
from him for the local people there, these people from
Khurasan asked them, ‘What have you done?’
They informed them that, ‘We have taken an amnesty for
ourselves as well as for you. ’ So, all of them came out
thinking they would be safe. However, when they came out,
Qahtabah ordered his noblemen with the following, ‘Whoever
amongst you has a prisoner from the people of Khurasan will
behead him and bring his head to us! ’ His orders were
promptly carried out.
And in this year:Qahtabah advanced upon the governor of
Iraq, Yazeed bin Umar bin Hubairah, however, when he
closed in on him, Ibn Hubairah withdrew and kept on
retreating until he crossed over the Furat river.

Then Began the Hundred and Thirty-Second
Year:
In the month of Muharram this year, Qahtabah bin Shabeeb
crossed over the Furat river with cavalry in addition to his
army. Meanwhile, Ibn Hubairah had encamped at the mouth
of the river, next to AlFalloojah in what a huge multitude of
people as Marwan had provided him with a vast array of
forces as reinforcements in addition to those who had joined
up with him from the defated forces of Ibn Dubarah. At this
point Qahtabah diverted his forces and headed towards
Koofah, intending to take it. Ibn Hubairah followed suit and
with a Wednesday night approaching, with eight nights
having lapsed from the month of Muharram, the two forces
finally faced each other and fought what was an intense battle,
with both sides losing many men.
598

Eventually, the Syrians started fleeing in defeat, with the
people of Khurasan chasing after them. However, Qahtabah
was nowhere to be found. Finally, someone informed the
people that he was killed and had designated his son, AlHasan as his successor after him. However, due to Al-Hasan
not being present there at that time, his brother, Humaid bin
Qahtabah took the pledge of allegiance for him while a
message was sent to Al-Hasan, asking him to get there
immediately. Overall, a lot of prominent personalities and
leaders were killed that night amongst them Qahtabah, who
was killed by Ma‘n bin Za’idah and Yahya bin Hudain. It is
also said that a man who was with him killed him to avenge
the deaths of Nasr bin Sayyar’s two sons, and Allah knows
best. Al-Qahtabah was finally found amongst the dead and
buried at the spot where he was found. Thereafter, Al-Hasan
bin Qahtabah arrived and proceeded with the army towards
Koofah where Muhammad bin Khalid bin Abdullah Al-Qasri
had already come out in revolt, calling to the household of
Banu Abbas and wearing black. His revolt took place on the
day of AShoora’, the tenth day of Muharram, that year.
Thereafter, he forced out the local governor representing Ibn
Hubairah who was Ziyad bin Salih Al-Harithi and shifted into
the governor house there.
Conseqiently, Hawtharah was sent after him by Ibn Hubairah
with a force of twenty thousand. However, when Hawtharah
neared Koofah, his followers started to defect to Muhammad
bin Khalid’s side, giving their allegiance to Banu Abbas.
When Hawtharah saw this, he departed, heading towards
Wasit and it is also said that it was in fact Al-Hasan bin
Qahtabah who entered Koofah, however, Qahtabah had
willed that the position of deputy for the Caliph there be given
to Abu Salamah Hafs bin Sulaiman Al-Koofi AlKhallal, the
servant of As-Sabee‘ who was present in Koofah at that time.
So when they approached him for directions, he instructed AlHasan bin Qahtabah to proceed to Wasit with a number of
prominent leaders within the movement to fight Ibn Hubairah
599

there and that similalrly, his brother, Humaid bin Qahtabah
proceed towards Al-Mada’in.
In this way, he dispatched various expeditions to every part of
the surrounding regions to conquer them, as a result of which
Basrah was conquered. It had been previously taken by Salm
bin Qutaibah for Ibn Hubairah so when Ibn Hubairah was
killed – as will be detailed shortly – Abu Malik Abdullah bin
Aseed Al-Khuza‘i moved in and took it for Abu Muslim AlKhurasani.
And in this year:on a Friday night, after the passing of thirteen
nights from the month of Rabee‘ul Awwal, the oath of
allegiance was taken for Abul-Abbas Abdullah bin
Muhammad bin Ali bin Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib, also
known as ‘As-Saffah’ or ‘the Butcher. ’

An Account of how Ibraheem bin
Muhammad, the Imam was killed
As for Ibraheem bin Muhammad, the Imam, he was taken to
the Commander of the Faithful at that time, Marwan bin
Muhammad while he was in Harran upon which he was
imprisoned – as we have already mentioned – and he
remained in prison until his death during this year at the age
of forty eight. It is also said that he was suffocated with a
pillow , forced onto his face until he died at the age of fiftyone and was prayed upon by someone by the name of
Mahalhil bin Safwan. Some have also mentioned that he
perished because the building he was in collapsed on him. Yet
others have surmised that he was in fact given poisoned milk
to drink which caused his death.

The Caliphate of Abul-Abbas As-Saffah (the
Butcher):
600

When news of the killing of Ibraheem bin Muhammad, the
Imam reached the people of Koofah, Abu Salamah Al-Khallal
sought to transfer the Caliphate to the offspring of Ali bin Abu
Talib (May Allah be pleased with him). However, his
lieutenants and as well as the leaders around him prevailed
over him, getting hold of Abul-Abbas As-Saffah and handing
the Caliphate over to him in Koofah at which time, he was
twenty six. years old. The first person to give him the title of
Caliph was Abu Salamah Al-Khallal himself on a Friday night
after the passing of thirteen nights from the month of
Rabee‘ul- Akhir that year. Thus, when the time for the
congregational Friday prayers approached that day, AbulAbbas As-Saffah came out on a speckled steed along with his
forces and went to the governor house, after which he headed
to the mosque and led the people in prayer. Then he got up on
the pulpit and the people gave him their allegiance while he
was on top of the pulpit and his uncle Dawood bin Ali stood
three levels beneath him on it.
Then As-Saffah addressed the people and the first words he
said to them were:
‘Praise be to Allah, Who chose the religion of Islam for
Himself, honouring it, ennobling it and making it great,
choosing it for us and letting us serve it. For making us among
its people, its sanctuary, its custodians and from those always
guarding and supporting it. Moreover, for obliging us to
always say a word of virtue, making us more worthy of it and
its people, for He distinguished us due to our relationship and
kinship with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and bestowed upon us a high status due
to our position within Islam and among its people.
Regarding this, He revealed unto the people of Islam a Book,
recited amongst them wherein He said:

601

“Allah intends only to remove from you the impurity (of
sin), O members of the (Prophet’s) household, and to purify
you with a thorough purification. ” (al-Ahzab 33:33)
And He said:
Say: “No reward do I ask of you for this except to be kind
to me for my kinship with you. ” (ash-Shoora 42:23)
And He said:
“And warn your closest kindred. ” (ash-Shu‘ara 26:214)
And He said:
“What Allah gave as booty (Fai’) to His Messenger from
the people of the townships - it is for Allah and for the
Messenger and for (his) kindred and the orphans. ” (alHashr 59:7)
Thus did Allah make them aware of our excellence and
obligate upon them our right and affection, granting us a
generous share in the booty and spoils of war in our honour
and due to our merit, for Allah is the Posessor of Great
Bounty. ’

An Account of the Killing of Marwan bin
Muhammad bin Marwan:
The last of the Umayyad Caliphs, after whom the transfer of
the Calipate to the household of Banu Abbas was complete;
something that Allah describes in the Qur’an as follows:
“Say (O Muhammad): “O Allah! Owner of the kingdom,
You give the kingdom to whom You will, and
You take the kingdom from whom You will, and You endue
with honour whom You will, and You humiliate whom You
602

will. In Your Hand is (all) good. Verily, You are Able to do
all things. ” (Al-Imran 3:26)
We have previously mentioned that when news of what had
occurred in Khurasan and the ascendancy of Abu Muslim and
his followers reached Marwan, he shifted from Harran and
reached a river known as AzZab situated near Mawsil in the
northern lands of the Arabian Peninsula. Then, when it
reached him that As-Saffah had been given allegiance in
Koofah, that a multitude of forces having gathered around
him and that his affair had settled well, this weighed heavily
upon him and he started to gather his forces.
Meanwhile, Abu ‘Awn bin Yazeed, one of As-Saffah’s
governors was already advancing towards him with a large
force. He clashed with Marwan’s forces at the Az-Zab River
with further reinforcements, which had been sent to him by
As-Saffah. Thereafter, As-Saffah summoned all the
individuals from his household who were directing the fight
against Marwan and finally charged his uncle Abdullah bin
Ali with leading the effort, saying, ‘Go with the blessing of
Allah! ’
In turn, he proceeded with a vast army and entered upon Abu
‘Awn who promptly vacated his tent for him leaving all that
was in it for him. Then, Abdullah bin Ali appointed Hayyash
bin Habeeb At-Ta’i as his head of police and Nusair bin AlMuhtafiz as head of Security. Meanwhile, Abul-Abbas
dispatched Moosa bin Ka‘b along with thirty supporters as
emissaries to Abdullah bin Ali, urging him to start fighting
with Marwan soon before the situation on the ground changed
and the momentum driving the fighting died down. Thus,
Abdullah bin Ali and those who were with him advanced until
they came face to face with Marwan’s forces. Marwan
advanced into the field with his forces and the two sides
organized their ranks until noontime. It is said that Marwan
had a hundred and fifty or a hundred and twenty thousand
603

strong under his command that day, while Abdullah bin Ali
had only twenty thousand at his side.
The ensuing battle between the two sides was fierce.
However, when Marwan sent a message to the tribe of
Quda‘ah, ordering them into the battlefield, they said, ‘Order
Banu Sulaim to go first! ’ Similarly, when he ordered AsSakasik to attack they too said, ‘Tell Banu ‘Amir to attack. ’
And when he ordered As-Sakoon to attack, they responded by
saying, ‘Ask Ghatafan to attack. ’ Finally, when he ordered
his chief of police into the battlefield, he too said, ‘No, by
Allah! I will not make myself a target. ’
At this, Marwan exclaimed, ‘By Allah! I will punish you for
this! ’
Upon which he responded by saying, ‘It would have pleased
me, by Allah, if you had the ability to do that! ’ It is also said
that he said this to Ibn Hubairah.
Historians then state that, ‘Subsequently, the people of Syria
were defeated with the people of Khurasan pursuing them
from behind, killing and capturing whoever they could.
However, those who drowned from the people of Syria were
far greater in number than those who were killed. From those
who drowned was the lately deposed Ibraheem bin Al-Waleed
bin Abdul Malik. Thereafter, Abdullah bin Ali had a bridge
erected there to recover those who had drowned during the
whole encounter and all the while, he would recite the Verse
from the Qur’an:
“And (remember) when We separated the sea for you,
saving you and drowned the people of Pharaoh while you
watched on. ” (al-Baqarah 2:50)

604

An Account of How Marwan Al-Himar was
killed
After Marwan was defeated, he ceased to care or pay attention
to anything. Meanwhile, Abdullah bin Ali remained at the site
of the battle for another seven days, after which he moved out
with all of his forces in his pursuit on As-Saffah’s orders.
Ibn Asakir further mentions in his biography of Muhammad
bin Sulaiman bin Abdullah An-Nawfali that he said, ‘I was
with Abdullah bin Ali when he first entered Damascus. He
entered it, with it being lawful to strike with the sword for the
next three hours during the day. He then converted its main
congregational mosque into a stable for his camels and other
beasts for a period of seventy days. Then he dug up all the
graves of the household of Banu Umayyah but could not find
anything in the grave of Mu‘awiyah (t) except a black thread
or streak of dust. He then dug up the grave of Abdul Malik
bin Marwan wherein he found a skull. Similarly, he could
only find isolated body parts in the other graves he dug up
except for Hisham bin Abdul Malik whom he found intact
with the exception of the tip of his nose, which had decayed.
Thereupon, he lashed his dead body and had him put on the
cross for days and then finally, burnt with his ashes ground to
a fine powder and then dispersed in the air. All this because
Hisham had his brother Muhammad bin Ali lashed seventy
times and then exiled to Al-Humaimah in the land of AlBalqa’
on the charge of having killed his youngest son. ’
He further said that, ‘Abdullah bin Ali then followed up all of
the members of the Umayyad household including all of the
offspring of the previous Caliphs as well as other than them
and had ninety two thousand of them killed in a single day at
the river next to Ar-Ramlah. Then he had their bodies covered
with flooring and a tablecloth spread over that on which he
ate while those of them had not died yet twitched and quivered
605

from beneath. Thereafter, he had Hisham bin Abdul Malik’s
wife and the daughter of his maternal uncle, Abdah bint
Abdullah bin Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah sent out into the
wilderness with a group from Khurasan, walking, barefooted
and naked. They continued to rape her until she was finally
killed.
In this way, Abdullah bin Ali remained there for fifteen days
and then moved on in pursuit of Marwan. When he reached
the Al-Kuswah River, he dispatched Yahya bin Ja‘far AlHashimi as the governor of Damascus. Thereafter, he
proceeded towards Jordan where the people came out to meet
him wearing black. Then he left for Baisan, proceeding from
there to pastures near the Roman lands and finally reaching
the Abu Futrus River where he discovered that Marwan had
escaped and entered Egypt. It was here that a letter from AsSaffah reached him telling him to, ‘send Salih bin Ali in
pursuit of Marwan and stay you in Syria as its governor. ’ So
it was the Salih departed in search of Marwan in the month of
Dhul-Qa‘dah that year along with Abu ‘Awn, ‘Amir bin
Isma‘eel until he reached the coast where he readied a number
of ships for his use.
However, it reached him that Marwan had reached a place
known as Al-Farama or Al-Fuyoom according to some
historians, whereupon he set off after him along the coastline
with the ships keeping up with him from the sea until he
reached Al-‘Areesh from where he proceeded until he reached
the Nile from where he proceeded towards As-Sa‘eed. At this,
Marwan crossed the Nile, destroying the bridge used for that
purpose and burning whatever forage or sources of food there
were in the area. Salih however continued after him, catching
up with some of Marwan’s horsemen whom he defeated.
Similar encounters with Marwan’s cavalry took place a few
more time until some of his horsemen who he had captured
lead him to Marwan, who was found taking refuge in a church
by the name of Booseer. Consequently, they advanced upon
606

him suddenly in the thick of the night, due to which most of
his supporters were defeated and he came out to face them
with only a few men at his side. Thereafter, they were
surrounded until Marwan was killed, stabbed by a Basran by
the name of Maghood.
Thus, Marwan finally killed on a Sunday with only three days
left until the end of the month of DhulHijjah and it is also said
that he was killed on a Thurday before the end of the hundred
and thirty second year. His Caliphate lasted for a period of
five years, ten months and ten days according to what is
commonly accepted.

607

A Brief Account of the Life of Marwan AlHimar
He is Marwan bin Muhammad bin Marwan bin Al-Hakam bin
Abul-‘As bin Umayyah.
Az-Zubair bin Bakkar states upon the authority of his uncle,
Mus‘ab bin Abdullah that, ‘The household of Banu Umayyah
used to believe that the Caliphate would be wrested from them
if the son of a slave girl ever became the Caliph. So it was
when Marwan bin Muhammad assumed the Caliphate for his
mother was indeed a slave girl and consequently, the
Caliphate was taken from them in the hundred and thirty
second year by Abul-Abbas As-Saffah. ’
Some of the people of that time used to saythat, ‘A bin A bin
A bin A will kill M bin M bin M’ by which they meant that
Abdullah bin Ali bin Abdullah bin Abbas would kill Marwan
bin Muhammad bin Marwan.

608

Powered by TC PDF ( www.tc pdf.org)

609

