of thcse idols, from which wc seck victory and sustenance. And
in addi tion to th is, wc bel ieve that you are lying in your claim
to be a Messenger sent by Allah.
« Ilood) said, "0. m)' people! There is no foo lishness in me,
but (I <1m) a Messenger frol1lthe Lord of the 'A lall1eell (mankind.
j inn and all that exists)!. ) (Soora" AI-A 'raJ7:67) That is, the
mallcr is not as yo u thin k, nor as you believe:
" 1 convey
unto you the Messages of my Lord _ and I nln a trustworthy
adv ise r (or well -wis he r) to yo u," ) (SoO/'all A I-A 'raJ7:68) And
co nvey ing th e Message req uires that the conveyor be free from
untruthfulness and th at he makes no addi ti on, nor any om issio n
when deli vering the Message. I-lis delivery of the Message must
also be eloqu ent, succinct, co mprehensive and un arguab le, and
contai n no ambiguity, no contradicti on and no confusion.
But in spite of his delivery of the Message in this manner
and his adv ising his people to the utmost of his abi lity - and in
spite of his com passion towa rd them and his intense desire that
they be guided - he di d not seek any reward or pay ment from
them, ra ther, he devoted hi mself sincerely to Allah in his call to
(belicvc in) Him and his adv ice to His creat ion. He only sought
recompense frolll the One Who sent him. This is because the
good things in this life and in the Hereafter are in Allah's Hands

The SUn T of Hood "ta.
209
<r----~~--------------------------~
<~r.~
· ----~,

and at Hi s Command ; that is why he said, ( "0, my pr.:opl r.: ! I
ask of you no reward for it (the Message) . My reward is onl y
frol11 1-li l11 Who crea ted mc, Wi ll you not th cn und erstand'!" )
(500,.011 /-Iood 11 :5 1) That is, you have no minds w ith whi ch to
di sti ngui sh (truth frol11 error) and understa nd that I am in viti ng
you to the c lea r truth to w hich your innate nature - in whi ch He
created you - bears w itness; and that is the Re li gion of truth,
w ith w hi c h A ll ah sent Noo h ~ and He destroyed th ose who
opposed him. Now I am calling you to (be lieve in ) Him and I
do not ask any reward from you for it. Rather, I seek th at from
A llah , in Whose Hand is haml and benefi t and thi s is why a
Be li ever said in 5001'011 Yo Seen, ( "Obey those who ask no
wages o f you (for th emse lves), and who a rc ri ghtly guid ed.
And why should I not worship I-lim (Allah , A lone), Who ha s
creat ed me and to Whom YO ll shall be ret urned." ) (Soo/"{lll Ya

See" 36:2 1,22)
Among the things th at the people of Hood ~ sa id to him
was, ( " 0 , I lood ! No ev idence have yo u brought us, and we
shall no t leave our god s for you r (m cre) saying! And we arc
not be lie ve rs in you. 1\ 11 that we say is that som e of Ollr gods
(deiti es) have se izcd you with evil (madness)." I-Ie said , " I ca ll
A llah to w itn ess and bea r you w itness that I al11 frec 1"1'0111 that
which yo u asc ribe as partne rs in worship:' ) (500l'all I-Iood
II :53,54) That is, yo u have not produced any supernatural
mi racl e wh ich wou ld bea r witness for yo u o f the trut h of wha t
YOll have brought. And we are not a people who wi ll abandon th e
wo rship of ou r idols simpl y because on your wo rds, when you
ha ve brought no proo f. We do not th ink that you are anythin g
but a n insa ne pe rson in w hat you claim. You have on ly been
seized with thi s (madness) because some of our de iti es have
become angry wi th you and affl icted your mind with madness,
That is apparent from the ir words: ( All that we say is tha t some

2 10

The S/O/)' (ij·I /()od -M.'

.~--~'~~~~
' ------------------~~~~~~.

o f our gods (de iti es ) have se ized yo u w ith ev il (mad ness)." li e
sa id, " I ca ll A llah to witness and bea r yo u witness that I am
frce from that whi eh yo u asc ri be as pa rtne rs in wo rship w ith
Il im (A lla h). So pl o t again st me, all o f you. and g ivc mc 110
respi te. " ) (SoO/'ali I-Iood II :54,55) Th is was a chall enge from
him to them, a dec la rat io n o f his inn ocence of any compli city
in th e worship o f the ir idols and a statement of his contempt
for them. It is a lso a cl ear assertion th at th ey can nei th er benefi t
no r harm and that they are simp ly inanimate obj ects. If they
can , as yo u c laim, help, bene fi t and hann, then here I stand ,
declari ng mysel f in noce nt of th em and cursing them: ( " So
plot aga insl111 c, a ll o f you , and give me no respite.") (Soor ali
H ood I I :55) Th at is, yo u pco pl e and your ido ls toge ther, wit h
a ll o f the reso urces at your di sposa l and all of the power at
your co mmand , do no t gra nt me a res pite of a sin gle hour, or
even th e blink of an eye, because I do not ca re abo ut YOll a nd
I do no t eve n think of you , nor cven loo k at yo u. ( " I put my
trust in All ah, Illy Lo rd and your Lord! There is no t 11 mo vin g
(li ving) c rea ture bu t He ha s gra sp o f its fo re loc k. Ve ri ly, my
Lord is 011 the Strai g ht Path (the trllt h)." ) (Saara" Hood II :56)
That is, I pu t my fait h and trust in All ah and [ am supported by
Hi m and confi dcnt ofl-li s Protec tion, whic h does not mi sguid e
those who seek it and ha ve trust in it. So I do not care abollt any
c reature besidcs Him and I do not put my trust in anyone but
Him , and I do not worship anyo ne besides hi m.
Thi s alo ne is a decisive proof th atl-lood :'M.' was the slave o f
A ll ah and His Messenge r; the peopl e were ig norant and astray
in their worship o f o th er than Allah because th ey were un abl e
to infl ict any harm o n him and this proves the truthfulness of
what he bro ug ht to th cm and th e fa lsity o f wh at they foll owed
and the immorality o f the ir be li cfs. It is prec isely thi s evidence
wh ich Noah ~ cited be fo re him in His Words, ( And recite

to them the news of Noah , when he sa id 10 hi s peopl e, "0 my
people, if my stay (w ith you) and my rem indi ng (you) o f the
Ayat of All ah is hard on you, then I put my trust in Allah . So
dev ise yo ur pl ot, yo u and your part ners, and let not your pl ot
be in doubt for you. Then pass your sentence 0 11 me and g ive
me 11 0 respite." ) (Soorah YOOIIIIS 10: 7 1) He, Most Hi gh, says,
( And th e chiefs o f his people, who d isbelieved and den ied the
Mee ting in the Herea fter, and to whom We had given the lu xuries
an d comforts of th is life, said, " He is no more than a hum an
being li ke you , he eats ofl hat whieh you eat and drinks o f what
YOll drink . If you we re to obey a human bei ng like yourse lves,
th en verily, yo u indeed would be lose rs. Does he promi se you
that when you have d ied and have become dust and bones, you
shall come out alive (resurrected)?" ) (Soorall AI-MII'milloon
23:33-35) Th ey thought that th e idea th at Allah would send
a Messe nger was far-fetched and this spec ious argument was
offe red by many ignorant di sbelieve rs in the past and present,
as Allah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Is it wonder for mankind that We
ha ve sent Ou r Inspirat ion to a man fro m among th emselves
(i.c. Prophet M u ham m ad ~) (saying) : " Wa rn mank ind (or lhe
comi ng tonnent in Hel l}.") (Sooml! YOo/IUS 10:2). This is why
Hood ~ sa id to his peop le, ( " Do you wonder tha t there has
comc to you a Reminder from your Lord throu gh a man rrom
amongst you, that he may wa rn you, so tha t you may fea r All ah
and that you may receive (I-li s) Mercy?" ) (SoO/'all AI-A 'raj
7:63). That is, it is not surpris ing, because All ah, Most Hi gh
knows better regarding the se lecti on of H is Messengers.
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( Docs he prom ise you that when you
have died and ha ve bqcolll c dust and bones, you sha ll come
out alive (resurrected)? Far, very far is that which you arc
pro mised. Th ere is nothin g but our life o r this worl d! We die
and we li ve! And we arc not going to be resurrectcd! li e is

212
The S,o". o/"Hood ""-'.~----w------------------~~~,

onl y :I ma n who has i n vent~ d a lie agai nst Allah. but we arc
no t go in g to bclic,"c in hi m: ' , (SoOl'oll AI-Mit 'millooll 23:3538). They ex pressed th eir belief that the prom ised Resurrecti on
is far in the future and they rejected th e idea that the ir bodies
could be resurrec ted afler they had become dust and bones.
They said, " Far, fa r away is th is promise. ( "Therc is nothing
but our life of this world! We die and we live! And wc arc no t
going to be resurrcf.:tcd!" (SoOl'oil AI-Ml{ 'minoon 23:37) That
is, a people die and anot her people are born. This was the belief
of the Dahriyyall , ( I) as some of th e ignorant people among the
zOlladiqah (2) say, "The wombs deli ver and th e ea rth swallows."
And he said to them, with regard to that co ncerning whic h
he had warned them, "00 you build high p;lI aces on every
high place, wh ile you do not li \ e in them? And do yo u get fo r
yourselves mClsal1i ' (flnc bui ldings) as if YOli wi ll live therei n
ror clcr?" (SoO/'ah Ash-SIII/'art!' 26: 128, 129) Th at is, do you
build in every elevated place great and magn ificent buildings,
such as palaces and the like, buildin g them fo r fri volous
reaso ns, tho ugh yo u have no need of them? This was beca use
they used to li ve in tents, as Allah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Did YOll
(0. Mulmmmad.) not sec (thi nk) how your Lord dealt with' Ad
(peop le) of Iram, with lofty Jloles. the li ke of which wcre not
created in the land'! And (with) Thamood (people), who cui
(hewcd) out rocks in the va lley (to make dwell ings)'! ) (SoO/'all
AI-Fajr 89:6-9) So •Ad ofl ra l11 were the fi rst ' Ad who used to
li ve under huge poles, which supported th ei r tents.
He, Most Hi gh, says, { "A nd do you gel fer yourselves
(I) Dah,.iyyah: The bcl iefth:1I there is nOlhi ng save Ihis abooe in which one
person passes away only 10 be replaccd by another, and there is no Resurrection or Judgment. This was the "iew of the pagrlll Arabs who rejected
thc Resurrection.

(2) Zlll/lItiiqah: (sing. =illlleeq) Atheists, freethinkers.

Tlte Slot:\, (4 ' 1I(}f)d ~

213

,~~~~~-----------------w----~,

, (SoO/'ah Ash-S/w 'ara' 26: 129) It was said that
masani' means palaces. It was sa id that it means pigeon towers.
Il is also sa id that ilm eans water sou rces,
II I(ISlIJl i '?"

"As if you will li ve th crein for ever." r (Soorah AshShu 'ora' 26: 129) Th at is, it is your hope that you wi ll abide
in this earthly abode for a lo ng time, { "A nd whe n YO ll se ize ,
se i/c yo u as tyrant s? So fea r All ah, kecp your dUl y to I li m,
and obey me. A nd keep your dut y to !-l im. fea r !-l im Who has
aided you wilh all (good thi ngs) Ihal you know, l ie has aided
you wil h ca ttl c and child ren and gardens and springs, Veril y, I
fea r for you thc puni shment o f a G real Da y," ) (SoO/'all AshShll 'ara' 26: 130- 135).
Among the things they said to him was, ( " Have you comc to
us Ih al wc shou ld worship Allah Al one <lnd f'orsak e Ihal whic h
our Hlt hc rs lIsed to worship , So bring LIS that wherew ilh you
have threate ned us if you arc of the truthfuL" ' (Soorah A/A 'raf7:70) ThaI is, have you come 10 us (to ask us) to worship
All ah , Alone, and to oppose our fathers and our forefathers
and that which they fo ll owed? I f you are truthful regarding
wha l you have brought, then bring us the punishment th at you
promise, because we do not be lieve in you, we will not fo ll ow
you a nd we do not beli eve you. As they said, " It is the same to
us whcth er you prcac h or be not o f those who preac h. Thi s is no
1110rc tha n the ra ise tal es and relig ion o fl il e allcic nts, and we arc
nol go ing 10 be puni shed." , (Soorah Ash-SIIII 'ara '26: 136-138)
The word in Verse 137 has been reci ted as k/w/q and k/I/{/lIq,
According to th e formcr recitation, the mcanin g would be:
What you have brought to us is no more than fabri ca ti on from
you; and you ha ve take n it from the books of the ancients, Th is
was how it was exp lained by more than one of the Companions
~ and the Tabi '0011. And accordi ng to the second rec itation, the

meaning would be: This religion which we are following is no
more than the relig ion of our fathers and our grandfathers and
we will not change and we will continue to hold fas t to it.
Both recitat ions are suited to their wo rds, ( "and we are not
going to be puni shed." ) (Saarail Asil-Slw 'ara' 26: 138)
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( (Hood) sa id, "Pun ishment an d Wrath
have already fall en on you fcom your Lord. Dispute you wit h
me over names which you have named - YOll and your fa thers,
with no authority fro m Allah? Then wait, I am with you among
those who wail." ) (SoO/'ail AI-A 'raJ7:71) That is, you have
deserved because of these word s ignom iny and Anger from
Allah; do you reject worship of Allah, Alone, without partners,
in favo r of the worship o f idols, wh ich you have carved out
and called "gods" of your own accord and agreed upon - you
and your forefathers - and All ah has revea led no authority for
th em? That is, He has sent down no ev idence for your beliefs.
If you refu se to accept the tnuh and insist on falsehood, it is
all the sam e to you whether I forbid you to foll ow what you
are follo wing or not. So wait now for the Punishment of All ah
which will befa ll you and that Punishment cannot be rescinded
or prevented.
Allah, Most Hi gh, menti oned the story of their destruct ion in
detai l and in bri ef, as we said earli er, sllch as in His \Vords, ( So
We saved him and those who were with him by a Mercy from
Us, and We cut the roots of those who beli ed Our Ayal and they
were not believers. ) (Saarail A I-A 'raJ7:72)
His Words, ( And when Our Command ment came, We saved
Hood and those who be lieved wi th him by a Mercy fco m Us,
and We saved them fro m a severe pun isment. Such were' Ad
(people). They rejected the A)'ol or the ir Lord and disobeyed

215
Th e 5101)" of flood ~
.~--~~------------------------~
.~~,~
> --~.

His Messe ngers, and follow ed the command of every proud
obstinate (o ppresso r of (he truth. from their leade rs). And they
were pursued by a curse in thi s world and (so (h ey will be) 0 11
th e Day of Resurrecti on, No doubt! Veril y, . Ad di sbeli eved in
th eir Lord. So away with ' Ad, the peop le o f I-load, ) (Soorah
/-Iood II :58-60)
Hi s Words, ( So As-Saihah (puni shm ent - aw ful CI)" etc, )
ove rtook them with j ustice. and We made them as rubbi sh o f
dead plants . They said: The people of Salih were des troyed
with aw ful cry ) (SoOl'al1 AI-MII'minoon 23: 41 )
As for the detail s of their destruction, w hen Allah said , (
The n, when they saw it as a dense cl oud co mi ng towards their
vall eys. they said. "Th is is a cl oud bringi ng us rain! " Nay. but
it is that (pun ishment) whi ch you were asking to be hastcned!
A wi nd whe rein is a painful punishment ! ) (5001'011 AI-Ahqaf
46:24) - this was the beg inni ng or tile punishme nt whi ch came
(0 them , for they were suffering from a drought and so they
requested rain (from the ir idols). They saw a cl oud in the sky
and thought that it was a rai n of mercy (for them), but it was
a del uge of punishment. Thi s is why He, Most Hi gh, says, (
Nay, but it is that (pu ni shment ) which YOll we re aski ng to be
hastened! A wind w herein is a pai nful puni shme nt ! ) (Soorall
AI-Ahqaf46:2 4) Th at is, from the inflicti on o rthe Punishment
and that is thei r sayi ng, ( "So bring us th at w herewith you have
threatened liS if you are of the truthful." ) (Soorall AI-A 'raJ
7:70) And there are other similar Ve rses in SOOl-all AI-A 'raJ
He (Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar) sa id, "A nd Allah sent
the black cloud whic h Qai l Ibn ' ltr chose (acco rding to the
IIac/eet" narra ted by Imam Ahmad, on the aut hority of AIHarith A I-Bakri), with the punishment it contai ned to ' Ad until
it reached them at a va lley known <I S AI-Mu gheeth _When they

216
Tlte SrOl:1' of} lood ~
.r----~·o~.wr~'~------------------------~~----~,

sa w it, they rega rded it as a good sign and they said , "Thi s is a
cloud whieh wi ll bri ng rai n to us. But All ah said , ( Nay. but it
is that (punishment) whieh you were asking to be hastened ! A
wind where in is a pa inful punishment! Destroying everything
by the Command ori ts Lord! So they became sli ch that nothing
cou ld be see n except th eir dwellings! Thus do We recompense
Ihe peop k who arc ;\/1!irimoOIl (pol yt heists. disbelievers,
sinners, etc.)! ) (Soorah AI-Ahqaf46 :24,25) That is, it destroys
everyth ing that it is co mmanded to destroy.
Muhamm ad Ibn Ishaq said, "The first pe rso n who saw it and
rea lized tha t it was a wind was a woma n fro m ' Ad, whose name
was Mahd. Whe n it became clear what was ill it, she screamed
and then fain ted. When she rega ined consc iousness, thc peop le
as ked her, "W hat di d yo u see, Mahd?" She said , " ) saw a wind
ill it, li ke burni ng fla mcs and in front o f it were men, leading it.
Allah imposed it on them ( ror seven nights and eight days ill
succession ) (Soorah AI-Haqqah 69:7). It did not leave a single
person frolll 'Ad ali ve." He (Ibn lshaq) said, "Hood ~ and
those who believed in him were in an enclosed area. Nothing
hi t them or those with th em except that w hich was gentle to
the ski n and pleasing to the soul. The wi nd passed ove r ' Ad,
dest roying all that was betwee n the heaven and the earth and
marking them with stones." Then he reported the res t of the
story.
Im am Ahmad na rrated a hadeelh in his Mllsnad on the
authority of Al-H a rith (i. e. Jbn Hassan, or it was said , Ibn
Yazeed Al-Bakri) which resemb les this story; he said, " I sel
out to comp lain to lh e Messenger of A ll ah 3:i abollt A I- 'A Ia' Ibn
Al-Hadram i and I passed by Ar-Rabazah, where [ saw an old
woman from Banll Tameem, who was alone in that area. She
sa id to me, ' 0 , slave of All ah! I need to reach the Messenger

2 17
The SI0/1' of Ilood ~
.~----~~--------------------------~
~ ~~.~
' ----~,

of A Hah to ask him for somc of my needs, will you take me to
him?' So I took her along with me to AI-Madinah and found
the Mosque full of people. I also found a blaek fl ag ra ised
high, wh ile Bilal was holdi ng a sword before the Messenger of
All ah. I asked, ' What is the mattcr with the people?' Th ey said,
' Th e Prophct ~ intends to send ' Amf Ibn AI-' As (o n a military
expediti on) somewhere.' So I sat down. When the Prophet ~
went to his house, I asked fo r permission to see hi m, and he ga ve
me permi ss ion. I entered and greeted him. He said, ' Was there a
di spute be tw een you and Banu Tamee m?' I said, ' Yes. And we
had been victorious over them. I passed by an old woman from
Bantl Tamee m, who was alone, and she asked mc to bring her
to you, and she is at the doo r.' So he all owed her in and I said,
' 0 Messenger o f All ah ! What if you make a barrier betw ee n us
and (the tr ibe of) Banu Tameem. such as the desert?' The old
woman became angry and opposed me. So I said, ' My examp le
is the ex amp le of a shee p that carri ed its own destructi on. I
ca rried thi s woman and did not know that she wa s an opponent.
I seek refuge wit h All ah and 1-1 is Messenger that I become li ke
the emi ssary of ' Ad.' So the Prophet :ij: asked me about the
emissary o f ' Ad, having better know ledge in it, but he liked to
hear the story again. I said, ' Once, ' Ad suffe red from a famine
and they sent an emi ssary (to get reli ef), whose name was Qail.
Qa il passed by Mu 'awiyah Ibn Bakr and stayed with him for
a month . Mu' awiyah suppli ed him with alcoho lic drinks, and
two fe male singers were singing for hi m. When the month
ended, Qail went to th e mo untains of Tih amah and said, '0,
All ah! YOli kn ow that I d id not co me here to cure an ill person
or to ransom a pri soner. 0 , All ah! Give ' Ad wat er as You used
to.' So blac k clouds ca me and he was call ed, 'Choose which
one of them you wish (to go to ' Ad)!' So he po inted to one of
the bl ack clouds and he heard someone proclai mi ng fro m it,

~

Tlte Story of H()od
__~t?~~~~~----------------------~~----~,

2 18

.~--

' Take it , as ashes that wil ll eavc non c in 'Ad! " And it bas been
conveyed to me Ih al the w ind sent to thcm was no more than
what wou ld pass through thi s ri ng of mi ne, but il destroyed
them '," Abu Wa'il said, "That is true. When a man or a woman
wou ld send an em issary, they would tell him , 'Do not be like
the em issary of 'Ad (bring ing disaster and utter destruct ion to
them in stead of re li ef),' (I) At-Tirmidhi record ed it thu s on the
authority of' Abd Ibn l-iul11a id, who IlmTaled it on the au thori ty
ofZa id Ibn AI-Hubab. III

'A bdullah Ibn Ma s'ood, 'Abdullah Ibn ' Abbas (may Allah
be pl eased w ith them both ) and more th an one 11110111 from
among the Tabi'ool/ sa id th at it was a cold wi nd, which blew
seve rely. ( Wh ich A llah imposed on them for seven nights and
e ight days in successio n. ) (SoO/'all AI-Haqqah 69:7) Th at is,
comp let e and sll ccess ive days. It was sa id that thc first of the m
was a Friday and it was a lso sa id that it was a Wednesday. (
So that YOll co uld see men lying overthrown (destroyed), as if
they were hollow tru nks of date-palms! ) (SoO/'ah AI-I-Iaqqah
69:7) Allah comparcd thcm wi th holl owed out trunks of datepalms, whi ch have no heads and thi s was because the w in d
would co me to one of them and pick him up and ra ise him into
th e air, thcn it would in vert him and drop him on the to p of his
head and shatter it and hc wo uld remain li ke a body without
a head, as Allah , Most High, says, ( Verily. We sent against
them a furiou s w ind of harsh voice on a day of ev il ome n and
continuous calam ity. ) (SoO/'aII AI-Qamar 54 : 19) That is, all a
day of ev il omen for you and continuous pun ishmen t infl icted
upon you. ( Plucki ng out men as irthey wcre uproo ted sIems of
datc-palms. ) (Soorah AI-Qamar 54:20) W hoever says that th c
day of ev il omen and co nti nuous ca lam ity wa s a Wcdn esday
(I)

This Iwdeellz is h(l.w11 and it was narrated by Imam Ahmad ( 15524),

(2)

This 'I(ldeelh is h(ls(l11 and it was narrated by At-Tinnidhi (3273 ),

and based on thi s understanding, cons ider it to be a day o f
evil omen, is in error and contradic ted the Qur'an, because
He, Mos t Hi gh says in another Verse, ( So We sent upon them
furiou s wind in days of evil omen. ) (SoOl·all Fllssi/a{ 4 1: 16)
It is well known that they were eight consec uti ve days ; and if
they were th cmse lves evil ome ns, then all of th e seven days of
the week incl uded in th em wou ld be days of evi l omen - and
no one says this. What is meant is that they we re days of cv il
ome n for thclll.
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And in 'A d (there is also a sign) whe n
We sent against thcmlh e barrcll wind. ) (SoOl·all Adll-Dllar;yar
5 1:4 1) That is, whi ch di d not produce any good, because the
wind alone does not scalier clouds or pollinate trees. Rather,
it is barren and no good resu lt s from it, whi ch is why Allah
says, ( it spared nothing that it rcachcd , but blew it into broken
spreads of ro tt en ruins. ) (SoOl·all Ad-Dllariyat 5 1:42) That is,
like a thi ng tha t is decayed and vcI)' old and from which no
benefit whatsoever may be derived.
It has been co nfirmed in the Sallee/wiu on the authority of
' Abdullah Ibn 'Abbas .:;o that he reported fro m the Prophet
:i: that he said, " I have bcen made victorious with the Saba
(caste rly wind), and the people of 'Ad were destroyed wi th the
Daboor (westc rl y wi nd)." (1)

As for the Words of Him, Most Hi gh: ( And remember th e
brother of ' Ad , when he wa rned his peop le in AI-Ahqaf (the
curved sand-hill s in the southern pari of the Arabian Peninsula).
And surely, th ere have passed away warners before him and
after him (sayi ng): "Worship none but Allah; truly, I fear for
you the pu ni shmcn t of a mighty Day." ) (Soorall AI-Ahqql
46:2 1) So it is apparent tha i the' Ad referred to here is the first
( I)

Narralcd by AI-Bukhari (1035) and Muslim (900).

220

The SfOlT olffood ~

.

.~----w~----------------~--~--~

•Ad, because the co nt ext of thc Verse is s imil ar to th e contex t
o f (the story of) the peop le of I-I ood 'f,!! and they were the firsl.
It is also possible that the peop le mention ed in thi s story were
the second ' Ad ; and Ihe ev idence for thi s is in what we have
ment ioncd and wha t we shall mention la te r in the hadeeth of
'A' ishah (may All ah be pl eased with her).
As fo r the Wo rds of Hi m, Most Hi gh: Then, whcn Ihey
saw it as a dcnse c loud comi ng toward th e ir valleys. they sa id.
"This is a cloud bringing us rain:' (SoO/'ali AI·Ahqaf46:24),
when ' Ad saw the cloud whi ch was loomi ng up in th e sky, like
a rain cloud, they thought that it was bringing them ra in , but
it was a cloud of pu ni shm cnt whi ch they mi stook for a c loud
of mcrcy. Th ey ho ped that they wo ul d get something good
from it, but they rece ived th e utmost evi l from il. All ah . Most
High, says, ( Nay, but it is that which you were asking to be
haslelled! ) (SoO/-ail 1I1-IIIIqaf46:24)_ Th"1 is, Ihe puni shm enl ;
then He ex pl ained it in I-Iis Words: 1 a wind where in is a painfu l
punishmen t. , (Soo/'ol1 AI-Ahqaf46:24)

It is poss ib le that the punishm cnt whic h affl icted thcm from
the fur ious and violent wi nd , which continued to afflic t them
for sevcn ni ghts and e ight days leaving not a singlc one of
them, followcd th em even as they sought she lter in mou nta in
caves and caverns, w inding around them , expe ll ing them,
ann ihilating them and destroying their sturdily constnlcled
houses and pa laces over th em, Just as they had bee n blessed
w ith stre ngth and powe r and said , "W ho is greate r in strength
than we?" - A llah inAicted on them tha t whi ch was grea ter
in stren gt h and more powcrfu l th an they - and that was the
barren wi nd . It is possib le that at the end , this wind rai scd up a
cl oud, which those who remai ned, th ought was a cloud bearing
mercy and abu nd ant rain fo r them. But Allah se nt it agains t

111c S(m:1' of/lood .'~

221

.~--~~------------------w--~.

thcm fill cd with spa rks and firc. as morc than one pc rso n has
mcntioncd. Thi s would be si milar to that whi ch amictcd thc
Compan ions o f th e Canopy from among the pcoplc ofMadyan .
A combination of a co ld wi nd and a punishm ent of fire was
infl ictcd on thcm - a nd tha t is th c most seve re pu nishment,
consisting ofd ifTcrc llt and opposing c1emcnts, accomp,lIl ied by
th e cry whi ch was menti oned in 500mh Qad Ajlaha (50omh AIMIf'minoon). And Allah knows better. The apparent mea ning
of the Verse is that they saw .1I1 'aridh a nd what is understood
from it lingui sli c<lll y is a cl oud . Muslim narrated in his 5aheeh
on the au thority of 'A' ishah (may Alla h be pl eased with her)
Ihat she said: Whe ne ver th e wind was sto rm y, the Messenger
o f A ll ah ;fi; used to say: "0, All ah! I ask You for what is good
in it, th e good whi ch it contains and the good of that whic h
it was sent for. I seek refuge with You n·o m wha t is evi I in it,
what cv il it contai ns, and the ev il o f that whi ch it was sent for. "
And when th ere was thunder and lightning in th e sky, hi s co lor
underwent a change, a nd he woul d pace in a nd ou t, backward
and forward ; and when Ihe rai n ca me, he felt rel ieved, and I
wou ld notice the (sign of reli ef) on hi s face. ' A' ishah (may
Allah be pl eased with her) asked hi m (a bout it) and he said,
" It may be as the peop le of' Ad sa id, when they saw a cloud
formatio n co ming to their va ll ey, ( "Thi s is a cl oud bring ing us
rain." ) (Soorall AI-IIllq'1[46:24) ( I)

(I)

Narmlcd by Muslim (899).

v::St::! S(lle~l/ tt:
(Y -

A1 ~~av'[{f(f/
They were a well-know n tri be, who were named Thamood
after the ir ancestor, Thamood, the brothe r of Jadees; they were
bo th sons of ' Abir. son o f lra m, son o[Sal11, son ofNooh. They

were Arabs from AI-' Aribah and they li ved in AI-I-Iij r, whi ch
li es between AI-I-I ij az rmd Tabook. The Messenger of All ah ~
passed by it ( I) w hen he was goi ng to Tabook with some of

the Muslims, as we 511<111 ex plain later. They came aftcr the
pco}:ic of ' Ad a nd like them, they lIsed 10 worshi p ido ls. So

Allah sent to th em a mun from am ong th em who was Allah 's
s lave and Messenger: Saleh, SOil of 'U ba id, son of Masikh , son
of ' Ubaid, son of Hajir, SO il of Thamood, son of 'A bir, son
(\) N:lrmlcd by AI-llukhnri (3380), Muslim (2980) and illlamAhlllad (4547),
onlhc authority of' Abdullah Ibn 'Umar ....

Tht' Swry OfS(lfeh. the Prophet (J(Thomood

223

.~--~------~~----------~~---~,

of Iram, son of Smn, son o f Noah. I-Ie ca lled upon them to
worshi p All ah , Alone. wi thout partners and to re noull ce their
idols and riva ls (to A ll ah); he call ed upon the m not to ascri be
any partne rs to Him . A group o f them believed in him , bu t th e
majority of them di sbelieved in hi m and attacked him , bo th
phys ica ll y and verball y a nd they tried to kill hi m. They kill ed
the camel which A ll a h had made as a proof against them, Allah
sei zed them wi th the Seizin g ofthcA lmi ghty, as I-Ie, Most High
says in SOOl'all AI-A 'raJ, ( And to Thamood (peop le, We sent)
their broth er Salih. li e sa id, "0, my people! Worsh ip All ah !
You have no other ita" (god) but Him . (La ilo"o //lalla": none
has th e right to be worshipped but Allah). Ind eed therc has
come to yo u a clear sign (the miracle of the coming out of a
huge she-camel from the midst ofa rock) from your Lord. This
shc-emnc l of Allah is a sign unto you; so you leave her to graze
in Allah's ea rth , and touc h her not with hann , lest a painful
punishmcnt should se ize you. And rcmcmber when He made
you successors after' Ad (peoplc) a nd gave you habi tat ions in
thc land , you build for yo urse lves palaces in plains, and carve
out homes in the mOlln tains. So rCl11cmbert he graces (bestowed
upon you) from Alla h, and do not go abollt mak ing mi schicf
on th e carth:' Th e leaders of those who were arrogant among
his people said to those who were cOlln ted weak - to such or
them as bel ieved. "Know you that Salih is one sent frol11 his
Lord?" They sa id. "We indeed belie ve in Lhat with which he
has been scn t. " Those who were arrogan t sa id, "Verily, we
disbelieve in that which you believe in:' So they killcd the
shc-ca mel and inso lentl y dcfi ed the Commandm ent or thei r
Lord and said. "0, Sahh! Bring about your threats if you arc
indeed OIlC of the Messengers (of Allah)." So lh e earthquak e
seized them a nd th ey lay (dead) , prostrate in their homes .
Thcn he (Sa lilt) tumcd rrol11 them and said, "0, my people!

224
71,e S((n:I' (lISa/eft, fhe Pmphel u{T/uI/I /(wd
.r----~·~qw~~>------------~~--------~--~-----,

( ha ve indeed con veyed to you the Message of my Lord , and
h.w e g iven yo u good adv ice but you like 110t good advisers."
) (Soarail AI-A 'raf7:73-74)" He, Most Hi gh, says in SoO/"ail
Hood, ( And to Th amood (peopl e. We sent) their broth er Sa lih .
He said, " 0, my people! Worship All ah, yo u have no ot her
ilah (god) but I-lilll. He brought you forth from the earth and
se ttl ed you there in, then ask forg iveness o f Il im and tll rn to
(lim in repent,mce . Certain ly, my Lord is Ncar (to all by Hi s
Knowledge), Respo nsive." They sa id. "0. Sa lih! You havc
been among us as a fi gure o f good hope (a nd wc w ished fo r you
to be ou r chi c f) . till this (new thing which yo u have bro ug ht;
that we leave our gods and worship your God [A ll ah] A lone) !
Do you (now) forbid us fro m th e worship o f what o ur fath ers
have wo rshipped? Bu t we arc really in g ra ve doubt as to lhat
whi ch you in vite us to (mo noth eism}," l ie said . "0, Illy people!
Te ll me. if I hav..:: a clea r proo f from my Lord . and there has
come to me a Mercy ( Propheth ood, etc,) fro m Ilim , who then
ca n help me again st All ah, if I were to di sobey I-I im? Theil you
increase me not hut in loss, And 0. my peopl e! This she-ca mel
o f A llah is a sign to you. leave her to feed o n All ah 's earth, and
to uch her not with evil int enti o n. lest a ncar to rment w ill seize
you." But they klll ed her. So he sai d, "Enjoy yourse lves in your
home s for three days . Thi s is a promise (i.e . a th rea t) that will
not be be li ed." So when O ur Commandm ent ca me, We saved
Sali h and those who be li eved w ith him by a Mercy from Us,
and fro m the d isgrace o f th at Day. Veril y, your Lord, l ie is
the Strong, the A lmi g hty. And A.\'-Sailwl! (to rment - aw ful cry,
etc.) overt ook the wrongdoers, so they lay (dead ), pros trate in
the ir ho mes, as if they had never li ved there . No do ubt! Veril y.
Tham ood disbe lieved in their Lo rd . So away w ith Tham ood! )
(SoO/"ail Hood 11:61-68)
He, Most Hi gh, says in SoO/'all Ash-Shu 'am " ( Thamood

The S'OI:I' o/Saleh. 'he Pmphl!' o/Th(flllood

.<'"---'-'------'---'--------.:.:;
~ :"}J$'::..--""",

(peop le) be lied the Messe nger. When the ir brothe r Sa lih said to
the m: " Wi ll yo u not lear A llah and obey Him? I am a trustworthy
Messe nge r to you. So fear A ll ah. kee p your dUl y to Ilim . and
obey me. No reward do I ask o f you for it (m y Message of
Islami c Mo nothe ism), my rewa rd is onl y from th e Lord o f the
·A/ameen . Will you be left sec ure in Ih al whi ch you have hcre'!
In gard ens and sprin gs .lI1d green crops (fi clds. etc.) and datcpa lms w ith son spadi x. And you carvc hou ses out ofmoulltains
wilh great skill. So fear Alla h, kee p your duty to I lim, a nd obey
me. And fo llow not the comma nd o f a/-musri/ilOl1 (i,e, thei r
chi efs, Icaders who were polythe ists. crimin als and sinners).
who mak c mi schi e f in th e land , and refo rm not." They said ,
" You arc on ly of th ose bewitched! You a re but a human be in g
like liS. T hen bring us a sign if you are of the truthfuL " li e
said , " I lcre is a she-camcl: it has a ri ght to drink (watcr). and
you ha vc a right to drink (wat er) (each) on a day, know n. And
tOllch her not w ith harm , les t the punishm ent o f a Great Da y
se ize YOll. ' · But they kil led her and then th ey beca mc regre tful ,
So the punishment overtook th elll , Verily, in thi s is indeed a
sign, yet most o fth ell1 arc no\ bdi eve rs. And ve ril y! Your Lord.
li e is indeed the Almi ght y. th e Most Me rciful. ) (5001'011 AsIIShu 'ara' 26: 141 - 159)
A ll ah frequen tl y links in Hi s Book the menti on of' Ad wi lh
that of Th amood, as in SOOl'all Bara 'all (5001'(111 Af- TalVhah),

SOOl'all lbralleem , Soorall AI-Flirqan, Soorall Sad, SoO/'all
Qa/, SOOl'ali AI/-Na)m and SOOl'ail AI-Fa)r, It is said that Ihe
stol)' o r these two nati ons is not known to the People of the
Scri pture and th at they were not ment ioned in th ei r Sc ripture,
the Torah. But in the Qur ' an there is evidence that Moosa
ifS infonned his peop le about them. as Allah says in SOOl'al1
lbralleem, ( And Moosa (Moses) sa id , " Ir you di sbelie ve,
you and a ll on earth togeth er, then ve ril y, Allah is Ri ch (Free

71/{: SlOl)' vjSa/ell. Ille pIYJpltet ojTlulI/wor/
226
.~--~.~
~~
> ------------~~--------~--------~.

of all want s), O wner of all Praise. lias not th e news reached
YOll , o f those before you, th e people o f Noeh, and' Ad a nd
Thamood? And those after th em? None kn ows them but A ll ah.
To them came their Messe ngers with cl ear proo fs, but they put
their hands in their mouths (b iling th em from ange r) and sa id,
Verily. we di sbeli eve in Iha l with whi ch you have been sent,
and we a rc rca lly in grave doubt as 10 that to whi ch you in vite
us (i.e. Islami c Monotheism)." ) (SoO/'all /brall eelll 14: 8,9).
II is apparent that these word s are en tirely those of Moosa
~\ which he addressed to hi s people. But because these two
nati ons were from among the Arabs, their stories were not well
document ed and no attempt wa s made to record th em, although
they were well-known during the time of Moosa ~ . We have
spoken in detail concernin g all of thi s in th e Tc!fseer; all praise
anci thanks be 10 Allah , from Whom procecds all Grace.
What is int ended now is to mcnlion their story and their
circum stances a nd how All ah saved I-li s Prophet, Saleh
~ , and those who believed in him , and how He eradicated
those who wcre guilty of inju sti ce because of th eir di sbelief,
their arrogance and the opposition they di splayed to their
Messenger, Sale h ~ . Wc have already mentioned that they
were Arabs andlhallhcy came after th e peopl e of' Ad, but they
did not pay heed to wha t had befallen th em. This is why Saleh
:-Ml said to them, ( And to Thamood (peopl e, We sellt) their
brother Salih . He said , "0, my pcople ! Wors hip Allah ! You
ha vc no olher ilalt (god) but Him. (La i/alla II/allah: no nc has
the ri ght to be worshipped but All ah). Indeed there has co me
to you a cl ear s ign (the miracle of Ihc eomjn g oul of a huge
she-cam el fro m the midst of a rock) from your Lord. This shecamel of All ah is a sign unt o you; so YOll leave her 10 graze
in Allah 's earth , and touch her not with harm . lest a pa inful
puni sh mc nt should se ize you. And reme mber when '-Ie made

The
Stol"Y o{Sa/ch.
rhe Pmpiter o/Tlwlllood
__
________
____________

.~

~~

~~

227
L-__

~
.~~~
~

~.

you sllccessors ailer 'Ad (people) and gave you habitations
in the land, you build for yourseh'cs palaccs in plains, and
carve out homes in the mountains. So remember the graccs
(bestowed upon yo u) from Alla h, and do not go about making
mischief on the Earth." ) (Soorah AI-A ·raf7:73,74) That is,
He has onl y made yo u successors aner them in orde r that you
migh t pay heed to their fa te and act in a manne r cont ra ry 10
their actions. He has permitted to YO ll th ese lands, allowing you
10 build palaces in their plains. ( "And you carve houses out o f
moun tains with gre:.u sk ill .·' ) (Sooralt Ash-Shll 'ora' 26: 149)
That is, yo u a rc profic icnt in bui lding thclll , perfec ting them
and preci sely exccuting (the building of) thc m, so respond to
Allah's Bless ing with gra titude, righteous deeds a nd worship
Him, Alone, without ascribing partners to Him. Bcwarc of
oppos ing Him and rcfrain ing from Hi s obedic ncc, beca use the
punishmc nt fo r that is an evil one. Thi s is why he warned them,
saying, ( "\Vi II you be left secu re ill that which you have here,
in gardens and spri ngs and green crops (fields e tc .) and dalcpalms wi th sofi spad ix'!" , (Soorah AsII-Slw 'ara . 26: 146-148)
That is, yo ur provisions are nUlllerOll S, lu xuriolls and ripe . (
'·And you carve houses out or mountains wi th great sk ill. So
fca r Allah . kecp your duty to Hi m, and abe)' me. And follo\\
not thc cOlllmand of (l1-lIIusr[fe('1I (i.e. their chiefs, Icaders who
we re polytheists, crim inals and sinners), who make mi schicf
in the land, and reform nol." (SoO/'all As h-Shu 'ara' 26: 149152). He also sa id to th em, ( "0, my people! Worship A ll ah,
you hm'c no other i/all (god) bu t Ilim . Il c brought you forth
from thc earth and se ttled you therein:' ) (SoO/·all No od II :6 1)
That is, it is I-Ie Who ereatcd you and brought you forth from
the earth and made yo u to popul ate it (i.c. He gave it to YO ll ,
with all that it contains, such as cro ps and fruits), for He is the
Crca lor and the Suslainer and it is I-Ie, Alone, without partn crs,

228
The SIrIl:I' oISalch. flit: Prophef (~r71/(//J/ood
.r----~<~~~
> ------------~~--------~--~----~>

Who ha s the right to be wo rshipped. ( "T hen ask forg iveness
of I-Iim and turn to Him in repentance." ) (Soorah l'lood II :6 1)
That is, des ist from what yo u now fo llow, and engage in wo rship
of All ah , A lo ne, beca use He w ill accept it frol11 yo u and pardon
yo u fo r your s ins. f And to Tha mood (people. We se nt) their
brot her Sa lih. He sa id, "Oil, my people! Wo rsh ip A ll ah, yo u
have no other i/oh (god) but I-l im . I-I e brought you for th fro m
111m
the ea rth and sctt led you thc re in, then <lsk forgiveness
and turn to I-lim in repcn tan ce. Certainly. my Lord is Ncar (10
all by lI is Know ledge), Rcspon sivc." They sa id , "0. Sa lih! You
have been among us as a figure of good hope (a nd we wished
for you to be o ur c hief), till thi s (new th ing which you have
brough t; tha t we leave our gods and wo rshi p your God [A ll ah)

or

Alone)!" ) (Saora" Hood II :61 ,62) Thai is, we had hoped
that your mind was unimpaired be fo re you said these words,
Ihat is you r in vitation to us to wo rship A llah, Alone, w ithou t
pa rtners and to abando n the riva ls that we used to worship
and desist from fo ll ow ing the religion of our fath ers and our
gra ndfat hers. Th is is why they said , ( "00 you (now) forb id
us from the worship of what our fathers ha ve worshipped? But
we are rea ll y in g rave do ubt as to that w hic h you invi te LI S to
(Mo nothe ism): He sa id, '0, my pcople! Te ll me . if I ha ve a
c lear proof from my Lord , and there ha s come to me a Mercy
(Prophcthood, etc. ) from Him , who th en ca n help me again st
All ah . if I were to disobey Hi m? The n you inc rease me not but
in loss." ) (Saara" !-load 11 :62.63)
Thi s was kindn ess and gentlen ess from him to them in his
mode of ex press io n and a beaut i ful manller of in vitin g thcm to
goodn ess. T hat is, what do you think, if the matter is as 1 tell
yo u and I in vit e you to it , what will be yo ur exc use to A lla h?
What wi ll save you whe n you stand be fore Him, when yo u ask
me to refrai n from invit ing you to o bey A llah? 1 a m unable to

229
The StOl")' (JISah-II, the Pmphet o/TI/(II/wor/
.~--~------~~--------~W~~,

do thi s, beca use it is an ob ligation upo n me a nd if I abandon
it , the n no one from a mong you or from a ny oth er peopl e can
protec t me from Him or he lp me, So I w ill conti nu e to ca ll yo u
to A ll ah, A lone, w ith partners , un til A ll ah judgcs be tween mc
and YO ll.
They also sa id to him , ( "You arc only or til e I1II1.m!tl/(//"OOIl ! "
) (SoOl'(lh A'\"h-SII/I'a/'{l' 26: 153) Tha t is, yo u arc bew itched
and YO ll do no t know wha t you <I re saying in your invilation
to LI S to wors hip A ll ah , Alone. lind to abandon the wo rship o f
rivals to Him . The majority o f scho lars are agreed lIpon th is
understa nding, i.e. that '111I1sahhamon' mea ns bewi tched. But
it was a lso sai d that ( "o f" the IIII1.W1hhanJolI" ) mea ns those
who have lun gs. So it is as if they we re saying. " You arc only
a hum an bei ng, possessing lungs." Bu t th e first ex pl anation is
more ap parent , because they sa id arier that , ( "Yo u are but a
human be in g lik e us." ) (Soora" Ash-SIIII 'ara' 26: 154) and
they sa id, ( " T hen bring LIS a sign if yo u arc of th e truthfu!' "
) (500/'011 Ash-Shu'ara' 26: 154) They asked hi m to produce
some miracle w hi c h would prove the trut h of what he brought
to them. ( l ie said, " I {e re is a she-ca mel: it has a right to drink
(water) . and you have a right to drink (wa tc r) (each) on a day.
known. And touc h he r not with ha rm , lest thc punishment of
a Great Day se ize you." ) (Soomh Ash-SIIl/'ora . 26: 155, 156)
Sc holars of fq(<;eer ha ve reported that Thamood g,1Ihered one
day in the ir mee tin g pl ace and Sale h ~, ca me to th em and
invited thcm to Allah and hc remi ndcd titem, wa rn ed the m,
<Idmo nished the m and com manded them , but they said to him,
" 11' you brin g forth far us li'Dln this rock," and they indi ca tcd
a rock therc, "a she-came l o f slic h-a nd -sucil a descripti on .,,"
and th ey described and named , and became stubborn regarding
it , in sisting th at it be in the te nth month o f' pregnancy. tha t it be

230

77le SlOry of Sall!h, the Prophet of Tlwmood

.r----~·~~~'~----------~~--~--~~--~----~.
tall and possessed of thi s attribute and that att ri bute. Prophet
Sal eh ~ sa id to them, " I f I do as YO ll ask, in the manner you
have requested, w ill you ha ve faith in what I ha ve brought and
believe in that wi th whi ch I have been se nt?" They said, <;Yes."
So he took the ir cove nant and their ag reement on tha L. T hen he
went to a place of praye r and prayed to Allah, the A lmighty, the
All-Powerfu l as much as Al lah had orda ined for him , then he
in voked his Lord , the Almighty, the A ll- Powe rful, asking Him
to give what they had asked for. So Allah, the A lmighty, the
All- Powerful comma nded that rock to spl it open and produce a
huge camel, with a great hump, wh ich was in the tenth month
of pregnancy, as they had requested, or in accordance wi th
the descripti on they had given. When they saw w ith their own
eyes a great thing, an amaz ing sight , (A ll ah 's) overwhe lming
Ab ili ty (to do a ll thin gs) and an irrefutabl e proof, a large
number of them be lieved , but 1110st of the m conti nued in thei r
disbeli ef, error and obsti nacy. Thi s is why A llah says, ( but
they did wrong by them (i.e. Allah's Signs) ) (Saara" AI-A 'raf
7: I 03) That is, they (i.e. 1110st of them) rejected them and d id
not follow th e truth in spite of them.
This is why Saleh ~ said to them , ( "Th is she-came l of All ah
is a Sign unto you.") (SoO/'ah AI-A 'raJ7:73) I-Ie attributed it to
A ll ah, as a term o f hon or and veneration, as in th e ex press ions
" the HOllse of AII.lh" and " the slave of Allah ". ( "A sign for
you (Jews)." ) (Saarah Ali 'hllrall 3: 13) That is, evidence of
th e tTuth of what I have brought to you. ( "leave her to feed on
Al lah's carth, and tOll ch her not w ith evi l, lest a nen r puni shment
wi ll seize you." ) (Saarah Haad II :64) They agreed to let the
she-ca me l rema in among them, grazin g wherever it wished
fro m th eir land and drink ing the water at fixed times. When it
drank the wate r, it would consu me thc water of the we ll that
day and they knew their need for wate r from one day to the

Tlte StOlJ' ofSalc:h. ,he i'lVphC!( ofT/mll/oad
.r------____

231

------------------------~
· =~~~~--~,

next. It was said that th ey lI sed to drink it s milk and that it was
sullicicnt for a ll oft hcm, whi ch is w hy hc said , ( "It has a ri ght
to drink (water), and you havc a righ t to drink (water) (each)
on a day, known." ) (Sool"Oll A.~·"·SIIlI·ara ·26: 155) Thi s is why
A llah, Most Hi gh , sa id (to Saleh
), ( Veril y, We arc send ing
the she-camc l as a lest for thl!lll . ) (Sooralt AI-Qamar 54:27)
That is as a test to sec whether they will believe or disbclicve.
And A ll ah knew better what they wou ld do. ( So watch th em
(Salih» (SoOl'oll AI-Qall/ar 54:27) That is, see what th ey will
do ( and be patient. ) (Soora" AI-Qamar 54:27) That is, in thc
face of the haml thcy inflict, because news w ill come to you for
sure . ( And infonll thc1l1tha t the wate r is to be shared between
(her and) them , Each one's right to drink be in g establi shed (by
turn s) ) (SoO/'oli AI·Qamor 54 :28) Bu t wh cn this state o f amli rs
had lasted for a long timc, the ir cide rs gathered <lnd agreed tha t
they wou ld kill this she-c<l mcl in order to be free o f it and have
their wa ter a ll to th emselves, and Sa tan made the ir deeds sec m
fair 10 them . A llah says, ( So they ki ll ed the she-camel and
insolentl y defied th e Com mandmcnt or their Lord, and said,
' 0, Salih ! Bring about your threa ts if you arc indeed one of the
Messengers (of A llah )." ) (SoO/'a" AI-A 'raf7:77 )
Imam Ahmad narra ted on th e aut hori ty o f 'Abdulla h Ibn
lam'a h _~ that hc said, " The Messenge r of A ll ah ~ deli vered
a se rmon a nd he mentioned the she-ca mel and he named th e
person who kill ed it; he sa id, .,( When the 1110St w icked man
among the m went forth (to kill the she-came l) ) (Sooroll
Ash-Sllams 91: 12) : A viole nt , strong and impos in g man , who
was a lcader amo ng hi s peo ple, wcnt forth to (ki ll) th e shecame!.';1) A I-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it from the hodeel"
of 1-1 isham, m
( I)

I\n :unhcntic fmeleelll na1T31cd by Imam Ahmad ( 15790).

(2)

NarrJ1cd by Al-Bukhari (4942) and Muslim (2855).

The SWI)' olSa/eh. Ihe Pmplief o(TlulI1lOod
232
.r----~·m~wr~
' ------------~~--------~--------~,

A llah, Most Hi gh, says, ( So th ey killed the she-ca mel and
in solently defied the Com mand ment of their Lord, a nd sa id.
"0, Salih! Bring about you r threOl ts if you arc ind eed one of
Ihe Messenger< (of Allah)." ) (SoO/'"II AI-A 'raf7 :77) In Ihese
words of theirs they comb ined extrc mc di sbeli cf in a number of
ways: Onc bei ng th Olt they di sobeyed A llah and Hi s Messenger
~ by doing what they had becn fir ml y forbidd en to do, which
was to ki ll the she-camel which Allah had made a Sign for
them. Another wa s tlIat thcy were impatient for the impositi on
of Allah's Punishment upon them a nd they deserved it for two
reasons: One ofthcm is tha t it was orda ined upon them in I-li s
Words, ( "A nd touch her not wit h ev il , lest a nca r punishment
w ill se ize you,") (SoO/'"II Hood II :64)
In one verse A ll ah says, ( great ) (Saara" As"-SJIII'ora'
26: 156) a nd in anolher Verse, He says, ( pa inful ) (Soorall
AI-A 'raJ 7:73) and both of them arc true. T he seco nd is
th e ir impati c nce fo r it. A noth er was that they be lied the
Messe nger $!l who had prod uced the irrefuta ble ev idence of
hi s Prophethood and his truthfu lness and they knew thi s with
certainty. But their di sbe lief, the ir error and their willful ness
caused them to di sbelieve in the tmlh and the infl ict ion of th e
punishmcn t on th em.
A ll ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( l3ul Ihey killed her, So he sa id:
"Enjoy yourse lves in your homes fbr three days. This is a
promise (i.e, a threat) tha t willnol be beli ed." ) (Soorah Hood
11 :65) It was sa id tha. when they we nt to kill the she-camel, th e
first person to attm:k her was Qudar Ibn Salif- may A llah curse
him - and he hamstrung her and she fell to the ground . Th en
they mshed upon he r wi th the ir swords and cut her up. When
its calf saw th is, it fled from them and climbed the highest
mountain there and it le t out three cries, Thi s is why Saleh ~

'l7,e St(J/:1' ojSa/elt, the Prophet oj 111llfl/uut/

233

<~--~~--------~~------------~UO~
_W-~,~
' --

__,

sa id to titem, ( Enjoy yourse lves in your homes for three days,
) (SoO/'ali Hood II :65) Thm is, three days, not including that
day, But they also d id not believe thi s certain pro mise of his,
Instead, in the eveni ng or tha t day, they pl ann ed to kill him and
so they we nt out to him , in order to kill him , like the she-came l.
( Th cy sai d, '·Swear on c to another by Allah that we shallmak c
a secret ni Qhl attack on him and hi s house hold," ) (SoO/'ali AlINaml 27:49) Th aI is, we shall attack him in his home, along
with his fa m ily and we shall surely ki ll hi m, then we shall dcny
any know ledge of hi s killing, if we are as ked abo ut it by his
kin . Thi s is why they sa id, ( "and afterward we will surely say
10 hi s ncar relatives: ' We witn essed not the des truc tion of his
hou seho ld, and veri ly! We arc tellin g the trut h." ) (Soorah AnNaIll127:49)
Allah, Mosl Hi gh, says, ( So Ih ey p laited a pial, and lVe
pl an ned a pla n, whil e they pe rce ived not. Then see how was
th e end o f th eir plot! Veril y, We destroyed the m and th eir
nati on, all toge ther, These arc thei r houses in utl er rui n, for
th ey did w rong. Veri ly, in thi s is indeed an Ay ah (a lesson or a
sign) for peop le who know, And We saved those who beli eved,
and used to fear Allah , and keep th eir duty to Him ) (Sool"ah
An·NamI27:50-53) This was beca use Allah, Most Hi gh, sent a
rock aga ins l those people who had tried to kill Saleh :M1 whieh
crushed th em a nd kil led them in adva nce o f th e rest of their
people.
( And they lay prostrate in th eir homes ) (SoO/'alr A/-A 'raj
7:78) Tha I is, mot ionless co rpses, wi thout souls.
An d All ah, Most High, says, ( As if they had neve r dwe lt
th ere, ) (Sooralr AI-A 'raJ7 :92) That is, as if th ey had never
lived in their homes in co mfort, with sLlstena nce a nd wea lt h,

234
The Story o/'Saleh. Ihi' Pmpltel oj71lllm(Jod
.~----~<~
~W-~'------------~~--------~--~----~.

( No doubt ! Veril y, Tlmmood di sbclieved in their Lord. So
away with Thamood! ) (Soomh Hood II :68) Thm is, the voice
of AI-Qadar ca ll ed to them.
Imam Ahmad said: 'A bdur-Razzaq told me: Ma ' mar told
me: 'Abdu ll ah Ibn ' Uthma n Ibn Khuthai m reported on the
au thority of Abu z-Zubair, who reported on the aut hority of
Jabir that he said: When th e Messenge r of All ah ~ passed by
AI-H ijr, he said , "Do not ask for signs, beca use the people of
Sal eh asked for thcm and it (i.c. th e camel) used to arrive by
this path and reWm by th is path, but they deficd the cOlllmand
of their Lord and ki ll ed it. It lI sed \0 drink their water on onc
day and they would dri nk its milk on that day (and th ey wou ld
drink the water on the following day). But they killed it and

the Cry took them and Allah destroyed all of them exce pt for
one man who was in Allah's Sanctuary." They sa id, "Who was
he, Messe nge r of Allah?" He sa id, " He was Abu Righal; and
when he wenI out from th e San ctuary, tha t which hac! befallen
his people also befell hi m." This /wdeelh conform s to th e
criteria fo r accepw nce stipul ated by Muslim, but it is not in
any of the Six Books. And' Abdur-Razzaq also said: Ma ' mar
sai d: Isma'cel Ibn Umayya h ...;0 informed me that the Prophet
~ passed by the grave of Abu Righal and he said , "Do yo u
know who thi s is?" They replied, "A llah and I-lis Messenger
know beller." He sa id, "This is the grave of Abu Righal. a man
frol11 Th amood. He: was in Allah's San ctuary and the Sanctuary
protected him froll1 Allah 's Punishment. But when he left it,
th at whi ch had befa llen his peop le also befell hi m and he was
buried herc_ A branch of go ld was also buricd with him." So
th e people used thcir swords and looked for the golden branc h
and found it.
'Abdur-Razzaq sa id: Ma' mar said: Az-Zuh ri said: 'A bu

The Story QfSaleh. the Pmphel ojThamoor/

235

.~~~~~~~~~~----~.~
~>~~>

Righal was th e father of (the tribe of) Thaqee r. But thi s
narration is mll/'sa/ from thi s source, It has been reported from
another source in a 11II1f/tlSi/ (conn ec ted) form, <I S mention ed by
Muh ammad Ibn Ishaq in his SeaafT,
( Th en he (Sa lih ) tllm ed from them and said: " 0 , my peop le !
I have indeed conveyed to you the Message of my Lord , and
have given you good ad vice but yo u like not good advisers ," )
(SoorafT A/-A '/"0/7:79) This informs liS that Salih ~ addressed
hi s people after the destru cti on had befa ll en th em and he had
taken hi s departure from th eir place and was heading elsewhere;
and he said to them , ( " 0 . my peo pl e! I ha ve ind eed conveyed to
yO ll th e Message of my Lord , and ha ve g iven yOll good advice
.) (SoO/'afT A/-A '/"0/ 7:79 ) Th at is, I strove to the utmost o f my
ab ili ty to guide you and I endeavored to do so by my words,
my acti ons and my (s ince re) intention: ( " bu t you li ke not good
advisers," ) (SoO/'afT A/-A 'ra/ 7:79) That is, your nature could
not accept the truth and did 110t des ire it. And thi s is why you
reached th e situation you are now in : a painful and continuous
punishment which will ami CI you forever, I have no ability to
repel it from yo u. What was in cumbent upon me was to convey
the Message and that I have done, exert ing myse l f to the utmost
to that end, But Allah docs as He wills.

The Prophet's Passage Through Wadi Al-Hijr
ill the Lalld ofThamood ill the Year ofthe Battle
of Tabook
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of 'Abd ull ah Ibn
'U mar ..tc that he said: When th e Messe nge r of Allah ~ camped
with the people on the road to Taboo k, he camped with them

Till' Story of Saleh. Ihe Pmpltl.'f olTlICIl/1oO(/
236
.~----w----------~----------------~,

at A I-Hij r, whi ch was ncar to the hOllses o f Thamood and the
peoplc sought WOlter fr0111 the well s fro m whi ch Thamood used
to d ri nk a nd they l1Iade do ug h fro m thel11 nnd prepared the ir
coo ki ng po ts 10 cook mea t. BUI the Messcngcr o f Al lah ~
orde red the m to po ur o ut the conte nt s of the cooki ng pots nlld
give the dough to the eamels. Thcn he moved o n with them and
he camped w ith them ncar the wel l from whi ch the she-camel
used 10 drink and he forbade th em from en le ring the ho uses
o f the peop le who had been pu ni shed, say ing, " I fear that you
might be affl icted by what nnl icted them, so do 110t enter the ir
dwe ll ings." (I)

Imam Ahmad a lso na rrated o n the authority of ' Abd ull ah Ibn
'U mar ~ that he sOlid: When the Mcssenger of A ll ah ~ wns at
AI- Hijr, he said, " Do not enter the dwc ll ings o f those peop le
who we re punished, un less YO ll (I rc weeping; and if yo u are
110 t weeping, then do 110 t e nter the ir dwc ll ings, so tha t YO LI will
110t be afflicted by a pun ishment simib r to th at which afflicted
them." (2) AI-Buk hari and Muslim na rrated it in the Saheeltaill
from more than o ne source. (3)
Imam Ahmad narra ted o n the au tho ri ty of ' Amr Ibn Sa'd ..:e
th at he sa id: At the time of the Ba il ie of Tabook, the peop le
haste ned to cnte r th e houses of th e peopl e o f AI- I-I ijr; the
Messe nger o f All ah :t5 was in for med of th is and he ca ll ed to Ih e
people, " Pray in cong rcgnt ion:' 'Alllr ';" sa id: So I wenl 10 th e
Prophet :I;; a nd fo und him holding o nto his came l and he was
saying, " Do not enter the d well ings of a people upon who m
All ah's Wrath was visited. " A Illall ca ll ed o ul to him , " We a rc
a mazed at them, Messcnger of A ll nh!" I-Ie said, "S hall I not
( I)

T his is an nuthcnt ic Iw(/ee/h narrated by Imam Ahmad (21117. No. 5948).

(2)

This is an authentic //(Ideelll Ilarrated by Imam Ahmad (2/ 174 , No. 54 18).

(3)

Nnrr.llcd by AI-l3ukhari (433) and Muslim (2980).

The StolT u/Sa/elt. f/ie Pmphef 0/ T/wlI/(}()d
237
.~--~~------~~----------~'~~
~~~,

inform YOll of solllct hing more amaz ing tha n that? A man from
among you info rms YOll abou t what occurred before you and
what will be aflc r YO ll , so be stra ight and stand shou lde r-toshou lder, becau se All ah does not care aboll t yo ur puni shm ent
and a people will come who w ill no t pro tect themselves from
anything ." T he iSllad of this /wdeefh is hasall , 411 but thcy (the
comp ilers of the Authe ntic Six (2)) did not narrate it.

( I) This Iwdeefh is Iw.wm; it was narrated by Imam Ahmad (4 /227, No.
17568).
(2) The Authentic Six: [n Arabic As-Silwll As-Sit/ail; refe rs to the Imdee/II
compilations of AI-Bukhuri, M lLsli m, Abu Dawood, At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and An-Nasa 'i.

I-I e is Ibraheem, son ofTarikh, SOil of Nahoor, son ofSaroog,
son o f Raghu , son of Falagh, son of'Abi r, SOil ofShalak h, son
of Kan'an, SOil of A rfakhshad, so n of Sam, son of Nooh ~.
Thi s is the tex t of the Peop le of th e Scri pture in th eir Scripture.
I ha ve marked th e ir ages under their nam es in Indi an numera ls
from A I-Mudad (1) and we ha ve already spoken o f Noah's age
a nd so the re is no need 10 repeat it here. It was AI-Kllaleel ~
who was saved by A llah from the ev il s and mi sgui dance (of hi s
people). for Alla h gave him hi s integrity and right-conduct in hi s
carly yea rs and sent him as a Messenger and I-I e took him as a
Klwleel (Frie nd) during hi s adult years. Alla h, Most High, says,
( And ind eed We bes towed aforetime on Ibraheem (Ibraheem)
hi s (porti on 01) guidance, and We were We ll -Acqua int ed w ith
him (as to his Be lief in the On eness of Allah , etc.) ) (Soorah
AI-Allbiya' 21 :5 1) That is, he was we ll qualifi ed for that.
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And (remember) Ibra hccm whe n he
said to his people, "Wors hip Alla h (A lone), and fear Ilim. that
(I) Al-Mudad: One o rthc descendants or Nooh. who sellled in Ambia.

The SlOrr of Ibrahei'l1I ~

239

.~----~~--------------------------~
~ ~~~
' ----~,

;s belter for you if yoll did bUI know. You worship besides A llah
only idols. and you only in ve nt fa lsehood. Veril y. those whom
you worshi p besides A ll ah ha ve no power to give you pro vision ,
so see k your provision fro m A llah (A lone), and worship I-lim
(A lone), a nd be gra tcru l to I Ii Ill . To Him (A lone) you w ill be
bm ught baek. And if yo u de ny. then nations be fore you have
denied (the ir Messengers). And th e duly o f the Messenger is
on ly to co nvey (th e Message ) pla inly. See they nOI how All ah
ori gina tes creation, then repeals it. Veri ly, that is casy for Allah.
Say, "Trave l in th e la nd and see how (A llah) orig inated creation,
and the n A ll ah will brin g forth (resurrect) the c re'llion o f the
Herea fter (i.e. resurrectio n :'Ift er deat h). Veril y, All:.dl is Able 10
do a ll things." I-Ie puni shes whom li e wi ll s, a nd shows mercy
to whom l ie w ill s, and to I-lim you wi ll be re turned. And you
cannot escape in the ea rth or in the heaven. And bes ides A llah
you have ne ithe r any wa/~\y (protec tor or guardian ) nor an y
hel pe r. And those who dis be lieve in th e AyaJ of A ll ah and the
Meeti ng w ith I lim , it is th ey who have no ho pe o f My Me rcy.
and it is they who w ill (ha ve) 11 pa infu l torme nt. So noth ing
was th e answe r of (Ibrah ce m's) pco pl e except that they sa id,
"Kill him or burn him :' Th cn A llah saved him from the fire .
Veri ly. in thi s ;:Irc indeed s igns for a people who belie ve. And
( Ibrah ce m) said . " YOli have take n (for worship) ido ls instead of
Allah. and th e love be tween yo u is onl y in the life of lhi s wo rl d,
bllt on the Day of Res urrecti on. you sha ll di sown each other
and curse each Olher and your abode w iil be the Fi re; and YOII
slml l have no he lper.' So Loot (Lot) believed in him ( Ibra hccm's
Message of Islamic Monothcism). I-Ic (Ibrah cem) said, .. , wi ll
cmigrate for thc sake o f 111 y Lord . Vc ri ly. I-Ie is th e A lmi ghty,
the Mos t Wisc." A nd We bestowed on hi m ( Ibra hecm) lshaq
(Isaac) and Ya ' qoob (Jacob), and ordain ed a mon g hi s offspring
Proph cthood and th e Book (i.c. the Tawrah [Torah ] to Moosa

240
TIle SIOI :I' uf Ibraheelll ~
.---~~
~~~----------------~~----~,

- Moses), th e Il ijee/ [Gospel] to ' Eesa [Jes us], the Qur ' an
[to Muhammad 3S], all from th c orrspring of Ibraheem, and
We grantcd him his reward in this worl d, and vcri ly, in !hc
Hcrcaficr he is inllced alll ong the rightcous. ) (Soorah Al'AI/koboo! 29: 16-27)

Thcn Al lah, Most Hi gh menti oned hi s di spules with his fat her and
hi s people as we shall mention, ifAllah, Mosl Hi gh, wills. The firs t
person he ca ll ed to All ah was hi s falher, who was one oflhose who
worshi pped idols, because he was th e person with most ri ghl 10
hi s advice, HS Allah , Most Hi gh, says, ( And mcnt ion in thc Book
(the Our 'an) Ibrahecl11. Verily! li e was a man of truth. a Prophet.
When he said to his father. "0. my father! Why do you worsh ip
Ihat whi ch hcnrs not, sees not and can not ava il you in anything?
0 , my fath er! Ve rily! There has comc to mc of know ledge that
whi ch came n OI lII lIO you. So fo ll ow me. I will gu ide YOLI 10 a
Straight Path. 0, my father! Worship not 511oi/(1II (Salan). Veri ly!
S/wiflJlI has been a rebel again st the Most Benefice nt (Allah). 0,
my father! Ve ri ly! r fear lest a tormen t from the Most Benefi cent
(A lI ah) ove rtake YO Ll , so th at YOll become a com panion of 5/wirall
(in the Hellfire). (Tc!fseer ,.lI-Qllrfllhi) He (his father) said, " Do
YO ll reject my gods, 0 , Ibrahccm'! If you stop not (thi s), I will
indeed stone yOll. So get away fro m me safe ly before I pun ish
you." Ibraheem said, '·Peace be on you! I will ask Forgi veness
of my Lord for YOll. Veril y! l ie is mHO me Ever t-. lost Gracious.
And I shaH turn away from YOll and from those wh om YOLl invoke
besides All ah. And I shall ca ll an my Lord: and I hope th at I
shall not be u n bl e ~sed in my invocation to my Lord:' ) (SoO/'oll
Mmyom 19:4 r -48)
Allah, Most High, mention s the di spute and th e argum ent
between him and hi s fat her and desc ribes how he invited
his father to the trut h usi ng the kindest and most courteous
expressions and the best advice; he exp lai ned to him the
in va lidity of worship ping idols and the sin that he was

Th (' S/lJI:v oj lhrahef!1II ~

24\

.~----~~--------------------------~
~~~.~--~,

incurring by worsh ipping grave n images, which cannot hea r
th e supplications of those who worship them and ca nnot see
where th ey are. So how can they ava il them anything or do any
good fo r them, such as sustaining th em or he lpi ng them?
Then, alludi ng to th e guidance and beneficial knowledge
that Allah had given him, th ough he was younger than hi s
father, he said, ( "0 , my fat her! Veri ly! There has come to
me of know ledge that which cam c not unto you. So follow
me. I wil l gu ide you to a Strai ght Path." ) (Soorall Maq1am
19:43) That is, a straight, clear, easy and true path, which will
lead yo u to goodness in your relig ion and in your Hereafter.
But when he presented this guidance to him and gave hi m this
adv ice, he did not accept it and he did not act upon it. Instead,
he threatened him and warned him to desist, saying, ( "Do
you reject my gods. 0. lbrahcem'! II' you stop not (t his), I wi ll
indeed Slone YOUo" ) (Soorail Mm)'alll 19:46) II was sa id lhal

the Arabi c ve rb rajama used in the Verse mea ns to rev ile or
curse and it was also said that it means to stone. tl) ( "So get
away from me safely." ) (Soorall /\lfwyam 19:46) That is, sever
the relatio nship with me and prolong the se paration. Whe n he
said this, Ibraheem ~ said, ( "Peace be on yo u!" ) (SoOl'all
Mwyam 19:46) That is, nothin g unpleasant will come to yo u
from me and no hanll will be infl icted on you by me; on the
contrary, you are safe from me.
He added more kindness by saying, ( " I wi ll ask Forgiveness
of my Lord ror you. Veri ly! lie is unto mc, Evcr Mos t Gracious."
) (SoO/oail MQ/J'Q/1/ 19:47) •Abdu llah Ibn ' Abbas ~ and olhers

said it means: I-Ie is Kind 10 me, in Ihal He has guid ed me to
worship Him and sincere devotion to Him and this is why he
said, ( And I sha ll turn away from you and rrom those whom
(I)

Both meanings are linguistically valid.

242
The SlOry o/ Ihmltc:c:m +-.1.~----~~~~
' ----------------------~------~.

you in voke besides Alluh. And I shall ca ll on my Lord; and
I hope Ihal I shall nOI be unblessed in my in vocation to my
Lord." ) (Soorall MCllYOIl1 19:48) Ibrahcclll ~, had asked
Allah to forg ive him in his suppli ca ti ons, as he had promised
Ihat he woul d. BUI when it bceamc clear to him th at he was
an enemy of Allah, he declared himself innoccllI of him, as
Alla h, Mosl High, says, ( And Ibraheem's im"oki ng (of Allah)
for his fa ther 's forgive ness was onl y because of a promise he
(lbraheem) had made to him (his fath er). But when it became
clear 10 him (Ibra heem) that he (his fat her) was an enemy to
Allah, he dissociatrd himself from hi m. Verily, Ibrn hecl11 was
AI-AwII'(IIt. (It has firteell difrcrcIl t 1l1canin gs but the correct one
seems 10 be that he lIsed to invoke Allah with hu mi li ty, glorify
llim and remember Him muc h), and was forbea ring. ( T(lJ.~ee,.
III-Q"r/l/ hi) ) (SoO/'ail 111-Tmvb,,11 9: 11 4)
AI-B ukhari narrated on the authority of Abu I-Iu ra irah .;e,
from the Prophet ~ that he said, " Ibraheem wi ll meet his
father, AZa r on tht' Day of Resurrection whose face will be
dark and covered with dust (and Prophet Ibra heelll ~ wi ll say
to him), " Did I Ilot tell you Ilot to disobey me?" His fat her
wi ll reply, "Today I wi ll not disobey you." ' lbrahecl11 will say:
"0 , Illy Lord! You promised to not di sgrace me on the Day of
Resurrection; and what will be more disgraceful to me than
cursing and di shonori ng my father?" Then Allah will say (to
him), " I have fo rbiddcn Paradise fo r the di sbelieve rs." Thc n
he will be addressed, "0, Ibraheem! Look! Wha t is undemca th
your feet?" He wi ll loo k and there he wi ll sec a Dheekh (hye naor an anima l) blood-sta ined, wh ich will be caught by the legs
and thrown in the (Hell) Fire." ( 11 And this is how he narrated it
in the sial)' of Ib ra h eell1 lM..~ se pa rately.
(I)

Narnucd by AI- lJukhari (3350).

Tlte SIOI:I' of Ibralteem ~-

243

'r----~~----------------------~--~
'~
;w_~,~
' ----~,

Allah, Most Hi gh, said, ( And (remember) when Ibraheelll
said to hi s fat he r, Azar, "Do you take ido ls as alilwh (gods)?
Ve ril y, I see yo u and your peop le in manifest error." ) (Soorah
A I-An 'am 6: 74) Thi s proves that Ibrah ee m 's f~lther 's name was
Azar and the majority of" those with knowledge of genea logy,
including' Abdu ll ah Ibn ' Abbas .J;c, hold that hi s fath er 's name
was Tarikh , whi le the Peopl e of the Scripture ea ll him Tarikh .
It was said that he was nicknamed Azar, that being th e name of
an idol that he used to worship.
Allah, Most High , says, ( Thu s did we show Ibraheem the
kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he be onc of those
who ha ve faith with certainty. When the night covered him
ovc r with darkness he saw a star. li e said . "Thi s is my lord:'
But when it set, he said, " I like not those that se L" When he saw
the moon ri s ing up, he sa id, "This is my lord ." But when it set,
he sa id : "U nless my Lord guides me. I shall surely be among
the CITing pcop lc." When he saw the SUIl ri sing up. he sa id,
"Thi s is my lord. Thi s is greater." But when it se t. hc said, "0,
my peopl e ! I am indecd free from all that you j oin as partners in
worship with A \la h. Verily, I have turned my fa ce towa rds Il im
Who has c reated the heavens und the Earth J-/al1[{cm (Isl ami c
Monotheism, i.c. worshipp ing nOlle but Allah Alone) and I
am not of al-l1Iushrikoo/l . Ili s peop le di sputed with him. He
sa id, "Do yo u di spu te wi th me concerning All ah while li e
has gui ded me, and I fear not th ose whom you associate with
Allah in worsh ip. (Nothing can happen to me) except whe n my
Lord (A ll ah) will s. something. My Lord comprehends in His
Kn ow ledge all things. Will you not then remember? And how
should 1 fear those whom you associate in worship with Allah
(though they can neither benefit nor haml), whil e you fear not
th,lt yo u have j oin ed in wors hip with Allah thin gs for which
Hc has not scnt dow n to you any autho rit y. (So) whi ch of th e

244

The SIOI:I' orlh"(lheem ~

.~--~W----------------~----~.
two parties has morc right to be in securi ty? If you but knew:'
It is those who believe (in th e Onencss of Allah and worship
none bu t lIim Alont!) and confuse 1101 their belief w ith :::'111111
(wrongdoing i.c. by worshipping others besides A llah), for
tht!m (o nl y) there is security and they arc the guided. And that
was Our Proof whidl We gave Ibrahecl11 ( Ibrahcem) against
hi s people. We ra ise whom We will in degrces. Certa inly your
Lord is Most Wise, All-Knowing , (SoO/·ail AI-All 'am 6:75-83)
Thi s was the pos ition of debating w ith hi s people and an
exp lan at ion that the visibl e and lumi nous celestial bodies a rc
not deservi ng of wo rshi p bes ides All ah, the Almi gh ty, the A II Powerful , beeausc they are crcated, subj cct to A llah 's Lordsh ip,
made, controll ed, subserv ient. At times thcy ri se a nd at oth er
ti mcs they sct, so they are absent from thi s world, wh il e the
Lord is never absent from anyth ing and 110 sec rets are kept from
1-lil11 . On th e con trary, I-Ie is the Eterna l, the Eve rlast ing, Who
never di sa ppears. Nonc has the right to be wors hi pped but I-Ie
a nd there is no lord besides Him. So he fi rst of all madc c1ear to
th em that th e ce lesti al bodi es did 1101 deserve to be worshipped.

It was sa id that it was the pl anct Ven us and th en he moved
on frolll it to the 111 0011 , whi ch is bright er th an it and of morc
radiant bcauty. The n he moved ont o the sun , whi ch is morc
visiblc, brightcr and more bea uti ful. And he made clear that
they arc subse rvien t, co ntrol led, subject to Al lah 's Dcc ree and
Hi s Lordshi p, as He, Most High, says, ' A nd from among '-li s
Signs <Irc th c ni gh t ilnd the day, and the sun and th e 11100n .
Prost rate not to tht; sun, nor to Ihe 11100n, bu t prostrate to Allah,
Who created Ih clI1, if you (n..:a ll y) worsh ip I-li m. ) (SoO/'oll
FlIssi/al 4 1:37) T his is why He says, ( Whcn hc saw th e stln
ri s ing up. he sa id. "This is my lord. This is greatcr:' But when
it sc t, hc sai d, "0, my peop lc! 1,1111 indeed free from all th at you

71Ie Storr of Ih"aileell/ ~

245

.~~~~~~~~=-----------------~.~~~~--~.
j oi n as pan ncrs in wo rship wi th A lla h. Verily, I have turned my
racc tow;;lf(l Him Who has created th e hea vens and the Ea rth
Ihll1iJim (Islami c Monoth eism, i.c. worshippin g non e bu t All ah
A lone) a nd I a m not o r o/·lIIl1sllrikoon." Hi s peop le disputed
wi th hi m. I-Ie sa id. " Do YO ll di spute w ith me concern ing A ll ah
whil e li e has g uid ed me, and r reur not those whol11 you assoc iate
w ith A llah in wo rship. (Nothing can happen to 111e) excep t
whe n my Lord (A ll ah) wi ll s something. My Lord comp rehends
in Hi s Know ledge a ll things. Will you not then rc mem ber?" )
(Sool"oll A/·AI1·o1l1 6:78-80) That is, I care not about the deities
th at you wo rship besides A ll ah , beca use they do not benefi t
an yt hin g and th ey do not hear or understa nd a nything. Rather,
they arc subj ect to A ll ah 's Lordship and subsc rvient to Him,
lik e th e ce lesti al bodies, and oth er simila r things. O r they are
created and fa shioned.
He, Most Hi gh, says in S001"O" As-SajJat, C: And . ,-crily. amo ng
those who roll owcd hi s (Noa h's) way (Islami c ~ l onot h e i s ll1 )
was Ibraheem. When he Came to hi s Lord w ith a pure heart
(a tt ached to A ll ah , Alone, and none e lse, worshi ppin g none but
Alla h. Alone, true Islami c Monothe ism, pure rrom the fi lth or
polythe ism ). W hen he sa id to his rather and to hi s peop le, " What
is it that which you wo rship? Is it raise aliI/ali (gods) ot her than
All ah that you seek? T hen what do you thin k aboll t the Lord of
the 'A/ameel1?" Th en he cast a gla nce at the stars (to dece ive
th em) and he sa id, "Veril y, I am sick (w ith plague}." li e di d
thi s tric k to remai n in their tcmple or idols to destroy them and
n01 10 acco mpan y th em to the pa ga ns' fe ast. So they tlI rncd
awa y rrom hi m and depa rted (ror rear o f the d isease ). T hen
he tu rn ed to thei r alillall (gods ) and said , "Will you not ca l (of
the offering be fore you)? What is th e matte r w ith you that you
speak not?" Th en he turned upon them, striking (t he m) with
(hi s) righ t hand. Then they (the worshippers o r idols) came.

246
The Story oflhraheem ~
'~--~<~~~--------------~~--~~------"""

toward him , hastenin g. He sa id, "Worship you that wh ich you
(yourselves) carve , w hil e Allah has c reated you and what you
mak e?" They said, "Build for him a building (i t is sa id that the
building was like a furnace) and throw him into the blazing
firc!" So they plotted a plot aga inst him , but We made them the
lowest.) (Saara" As-Saffat 37:82-98)
A ll ah , Most Hi gh, informs us about Ibrahccm ~" Hi s
Klwlee/, and He tell s us that he rebuked hi s people for
worshipping idols and he scorned them in front o f thcm and
be littl ed th em, say ing, ( " What are these images. to which
you are devoted?" ) (Soo/'oll Af-Allhiyo ' 2 1:52) That is , wi th
whi ch you seclude yourselves ~lIld to whi ch you submit. Thi s
is why they said, ( "We found our fathers worshipping them."
) (Saara" AI-AI/bi)'a ' 21 :53) They had no eviden ce except the
prac tices of their fathers and their grandfathers and th e idolworship in wh ich th ey used to take part. ( He sa id, " Indeed
you and your fath l.: rs have been in man ifest error." ) (SoOl'oh
A I-A I/bi)'a '21 :54) Thi s is lik e His Words, ( When he said to his
fath er and to his peop le, "What is it that which you worshi p? Is
it fal se alilla" (gods) other than Allah thal yo u seek? Then whal
do YO ll think about th e Lord of the ;AlomeellT' ) (Sooral1 AsSaffat 37:85-87) Qaladah said that it means: What do youlh ink
that He wi ll do with you if you meet him and yo u have been
worshipping (fa lse deities) other than I-lim? He said to them,
( He said, "Do they hear you when you call (on them)? Or
do lhey benefil you or do they haml (you)?" They said, "Nay,
bu t we found ou r fathers doing so." ) (Soorah Ash-Shu 'ara '
26:72-74) They admitted to him lhat lhey (lhe ido ls) did nOl
hea r suppli cation s and that they co uld neither hann nor benefit
and that the onl y thing whi ch caused them to worship these
ido ls was the fact that th ey were following Lhe exampl e of their
ancestors and those like th em in error, such as their fa thers

247
Tlte Story oj Ibraheem ~
. ----~~--------------------------~~~~'----~.
~

and th e ignorant , which is w hy he sa id to them, ( " Do you
observe Ihal whi ch you have been worshipping, you and your
ancient fathers? Veril y! They are enemies 10 me , save the Lord
of th e 'Alollleell ) (SoO/·oll Ash-SIII/ 'ara ' 26: 75-77). This is
irrefUlabl e ev idcnce of' th e fa lseness of th e di vinity which they
claimed for th eir id ols, beca llse he dec lared himsc lf' innoccn t
of them and be littles them. If thcy had posscsscd th e powc r
to harm or affec t him, they would have done so. ( They said ,
" Ha ve you brought us the trulh , or arc you onc o f those who
pl ay about?" ) (SoO/'oil AI-A I/bi)'o . 21:55). They as ked, ' This
spcech whi ch you are say ing to us and by whi ch you beli ttl e
our gods and du e to whi ch you curse our f~lIh c r s - is it the
carnest tTwh, or arc you simpl y playing with us?' ( Ilc said,
" N'IY, your Lord is the Lord o f the heavens and the carth , Who
created them and o f that I am onc o f th e witncsses. ,. ) (So01·o11
AI-Anhiyo' 2 1:56). That is, on the contrary, I say thi s to you
ca rncst ly and truthfu lly; and your God is Allah, besides Whom
none has the ri ght to be worshi pped. He is YOUT Lord and the
Lord of all thin gs, th e Or iginator of the heavcns and the earth
and th eir Creator, in a unique manne r. So it is He Who dese rves
to be worshipped, Alone, withoul partners, and I bear witn ess
to that. He said, ( "A nd by Allah, I shall pl ot a plan (to destroy)
your idols after you ha ve gone away and turned yo ur backs."
) (SoO/'ail AI-A I/biya ' 21 :57) He swo re by Allah that he would
pial against these ido ls whi ch thcy worshipped a ftcr they had
gone away to ce lebrate one o f their paga n fes ti va ls. It has been
menti oned that he said thi s to himse lf sec retl y. 'Abdul lah Ibn
Mas'ood ~ said, "Somc of them heard h im and they had an
annllal festi va l during which they used to sac rifi ce anim als
outside the city. Hi s father ca ll cd on hi m to accompany him to
the fest iva l, but he sa id, " I am sick," as All ah, Most Hi gh, says.
( Th en he cast a glance at the stars (to dece ive them) and hc

248
The Slot}· oflhraheem ~
.~--~·4~~~~'~~------------------~~--------~.

said, "Verily, I am sick (with plague. lie did this trick to remain
in their temple of idols to des troy them and not to accompany
them to the pagans fcast)." ) (SaO/·"II !ls-SoJfar 37:88,89) He
resorted to dissimulation so Ihal he could altn in his objective,
whi ch wns to humil iate their idols and support Allah's Reli gion
of lru th, by making clem the fa lseness of lhe idol-worship Ihal
they practiced - and those idols deserved to be broken and to
be hu mi liated. So when they wcnt out to aLtend their restivai,
leaving him behind in the city, ( Then he lumed 10 their ali/mil
(gods). ) (SaO/·oll As-SafJill 37:9 1) That is, he we nt to them
hastil y and in secret and he foun d them in a great hall. In fronl
Of lhcll1, th ey had placed a variely of foods as offcrings to them.
and said in to nes of mockery and ridicule, ( Will you 110t cat (of
the offering before you)? What is the malter with yOli tl1<11 you
speak 1101?" Then he tllmed lipan them, strikin g (them) with
(his) right hand ) (Saarall !ls-SaJfar 37 :9 1-93).
He stru ck them wil h his ri ght hand beca use it was stronger,
more powerfu l, swifter and morc irresisti ble - and he broke
them with a qaddoom. (I) ( So he broke them to pieces ) . That
is, he smashed them all into rubbl e. ( So he broke thcm to
pieccs. (all) except th e biggest of them. that they might turn
to it ) . It was said thai he placcd the adz in the hands of the
large one, as an ind ication that it was envious th at any of these
smaller ido ls should be worshipped with it. When they returned
from their fes ti va l and found what had befallen the objects of
their worship, ( They said, "Who hns done this to our alihah
(gods)? li e must indeed be one of the wrongdoers." ) .
In Ihis th ere was clea r evidence for th em, if they had but
sense to realize, that if these idols which they lIsed to worshi p
( I ) QlIdoom or QlIddoom: An (lei: or(u/:e, which is a tool, used fo r smoothing
rough-cut wood In hand-woodworki ng.

111e Sun), oflbralteem 'M.

.~----~~---------------------------'~~~

-"49 •

were truly gods, they wou ld have defended th emse lves again st
anyone who wanted to harm th em. But due to their ignora nce,
their lack of understanding , their great mi sgui dance and th eir
fooli shn ess, they said, ( They sa id, " Who has done this 10 our
ali/wll (gods)? He must indeed be one of the wrongdoers."
Thcy said, "We hea rd a young ma n talkin g about them who
is ca ll ed Ibra heem." ) (500/'011 AI-Allbiyo' 21 :59,60) Tha! is,
say ing bad things about them , be litt ling them and making light
of them, so it mllst be hc who has attacked them and broken
th cm. According to ' Abdulla h Ibn Mas'ood .J;e, it means they
we re rcminded ofltis words: ( "And by Allah. I shal l plot a plan
(to destroy) yo ur idols ancr you have gone away and turned
your backs." ) (Saorall AI-A IIbiyo . 2 1:57) ( They said, "Then
bring him bcrore the eycs of the peop le, that they may testify."
) (5001'011 AI-Al1hiya' 2 1:6 1) That is to the Grand Asse mbl y,
for everyone to sec, so that th ey may bear witness to hi s words,
hear his speech and see for thcmsc lves the revenge that they
would exact on him. This was AI-Klla/eel's mai n objective to gather th e peop le and to establish the proof aga inst all of
the ido laters of the fal seness o f th eir practices, as Moosa ~
sa id to Fir'awn, ( "Yo ur appoi nted mee tin g is the day of the
festival, and let thc peop le assemb le when the sun has risen
(forenoon)." ) (500/'011 To No 20:59). T hen, when they had
asscmbled and brought him before them, as th ey had sa id, (
They sa id, "Arc you the one who has done thi s to our gods,
0, Ibra hcem?" (lbra hecm) sa id, "Nay, thi s one, the biggest of
them (idols) did it. Ask them , if they can speak!" ) (500/'011
A/-Auhiyo' 2 1:62,63) In sayi ng this, he was hop in g that they
wou ld acknow ledge that these idols could not speak and that
thi s idol wou ld not say anythin g because it was inanimate and
li ke any other inan im ate object, incapable of speec h.
( So they tum ed to thcmse lves and said, "Verily, you are thc

250

The Siory oJlbraheem 'fI!.

.~--~~'~~,~'----------------------~~--------~.
:!.alimOOl1 (wrongdoc rs).") (Soorali Af-Al1bzya ' 21 :64) That is
thcy blamed th cmselves for abandon ing them , withou t Icaving
anyone to protec t them or gua rd the m. ( Then they bent their
heads ) (Soorah Af-Al1hiya' 21 :65) As-Suddi said that it means:
Then th ey ret urned 10 thefill1ah (i.e. their di sbelicf). Based on
thi s, the mca ni ng o f th ei r words ( "Ve ril y, yo u arc the zafil110011
(wrongdoers),' ) wou ld be: You arc the wro ngdoers in your
worship of th em (the idols). Qatada h sa id, "Th e peo pl e became
con fused and bowed their heads, then they said, ( ' Indeed you
(Ibraheem) know well Ihal Ihese (idols) speak nOl") (Soorah
AI-Allbiya' 2 1:65) ThaI is, you know full we ll , Ibrahecm, Ihal
th ese idols do not speak, so how can youordcr us to as k them? At
Ihat point, AI-Klwleel ~ said to th em, (" Do you then worship
bes ides Allah things that can neither profit you, nor hann you?
Fie upon you and upon that whi ch you worship besides Allah!
Have you Ihenl10 sense?") (Soorall AI-Allhi)'a' 21 :66,67) This
is like Hi s Word s: ( Then they (the worshippers of idol s) came
loward him ,yaziffi'oll) (SOO .."" As-SaIJat 37:94) Mujah id said
that it means: hastening. I-Ie said , ( "Worship you that which
you (yourselves) carve?" ) (SoO/'ail As-SaIJat 37:95) ThaI is,
how ca n you worship idol s whi ch you yourselves have carved
from wood and stone and shaped and fashi oned as you wished?
( "WltileAl lah has created you and what you mak e!") (Soorall
As-Sajjcll 37:96) Regardless or whe ther the Arab ic word 11/(/
used in th e Ve rses is the indefinite pronoun signi fy ing a verbal
nOlin, or w hcther it mcan s " that whi ch" th e mea ning of the
words is: You arc created and th ese ido ls a rc created, so how
can one creatio n worshi p another creation like it? Your worship
of them is no more appropriate tha n their worship or you; the
fa nner is futil e a nd invalid and so is the lalter, since worship is
neith er use ful nor obligatory excep t when it is worship of the
Creator, Alone, wi thout asc ribing partne rs to I-lim. (They said,

Till. ' Storr of Ibraheem ~
251
.r--~~----------------~~~~'---~.

"Build for him a building (it is said thai the building was like
a fumace) a nd throw hi m into the blazing fire . So they ploued
a plot against him , but we made them the lowest!") (Soorah

AS-SaOell 37:97,98) They desisled fro lll arguin g and debating
whcn they were defeated and no a rgument and no sophism
remai ned avai lable to the m . AI that point, they resorted to force
in order to support their foo li shncss and tyra nny. But thc Lord.
the Almighty, th e A II -Powerful plolted aga inst the m a nd ra ised
Hi s Word, Hi s Re lig ion and His Proof, As Hc, Most High, says,

( They said, "Bum him and help your ali"a" (gods), if you
will be doing." We (A ll ah) said. "0, fire' Be you coolness and
safe ty for Ibrahecm! " And they wanted to harm him, but We
made th cm the worst lose rs) (SoOl'ali A/-Anbiya' 2 1:68-70)
Thi s was beca use they began to ga the r ki nd ling from every
place they could , to such an extent that, if a woman was sick,
she would make a vow that if she recovered she wou ld bri ng
wood to burn Ibrahecl11 ~ . Thcn th ey made a hole in the
ground and set it aflamc, and it burn cd w ith huge sparks and
im mense fla mes . Th ere had never bcen a fire like it. They put
Ibrahce m i:&i' into a mangone l, at the suggest ion of a nomadi c
Kurdish man from Persia, w hose name was Hazan and who
was Ihe firsl person to build a man gonel. All ah caused Ihe earth
to swa ltow him up, a nd he will rema in sinking into it untillhe
Day of Resurrectioll . Then they shackled him a nd li ed hi m in
the bowl of the man gone I and he was say ing, "La ilallO ilia
Allfa Slib/ulIlaka Laka/-Hamdll IVa Laka/-A;fll/ku La SllOreeka
Lak (None has the right to be worshipped but You . G lory be 10
You. A ll praise and thank s are due to You; to You belongs the
dominion; and You have no partners) . " Then, when Ibrahccm
~ was placed in bow l of the mango nel , li ed and shac kl ed
and then cast into the firc from ii, he said, "Hasbul1al/alw
IVa Ni'ma/-Wakee/ (S ufficient for mc is All ah, and He is the

252
7he SUJ/)' of Ibra hee /ll ~
.r--~
< ~~
.<~------------------~------~,
best Dis pose r of Affa irs)." Thi s is s imilar to what Al- Bukhari
recorded from 'A bdu llah Ibn 'A bba s ~ th at Ibrahecll1 ~.
said , "Sufficicnt fo r me is A ll ah and J-Ie is th e best Di sposer of
A ffairs," whe n he was thrown int o the fire. Muhammad 3:5 sa id
it whcn it was sa id 10 him , ( Those (Le. Beli evers) unto whom
th e people (hypoc ritcs) sa id, "Ve ril y, the people (paga ns) have
gathered aga inst yo u (a great army), th cre forc, fea r them ." But
it (onl y) increased the m in faith , and they said , ·'A llah (Alon e)
is Sumcient for us. and I-Ie is th e Best Disposer of a ffairs (for
us)." So thcy return ed w ith Grace and Bounty from A llah. No
harm tou ched th em; and they followed the good Pleasure o f

Allah . And Allah is the Ow ner of Great Boun ty ) (Saara" ;IIi
'/m ran 3: 173, 174) (I)
It is narrat ed on the authority of ' Abdull a h Ibn ' Abbas ~
a nd Sa'eed Ibn Juba ir that they said: The keeper (angel) of the
ra in said, "W hen wi ll I be comma ndcd to scnd rain?" But the
command of All ah was swiftcr. ( We (Allah) said , " 0 , fire! Be
you coo lness and safety for Ibrahec m!" ) (Soorah 1I1-lIl1hl)la '
2 1:69) 'A li Ib n Ab i Talib said that it means: Do not harm hi m.

' Abdu llah Ibn ' Abbas .lJ; and Abul · ' Ali ya h said: If Allah had
not said, ( " and safe ty for Ibrahecm! " ) its co ldn ess wou ld
have harmed Ibrahec lll ~ ."
AI-Buk hari na rrated on the authori ty or Sa'eed Ibn AIMu sayyib, who report cd on th c au tho rity of UI11Il1 Sharcek
that the Messenger o f A llah ~ ordered th e killing o f the hOllse
gecko and he sa id , " It bl ew (t hc fi re) on Ibrah eem ~ . " (!)
Imam A hmad narrated 0 11 the authori ty o f Sa'iba h, the freed
slave of A I-Fak ih Ibn AI- Mughccrah that she said: I vis itcd
(t)

Narrated by Al-B ukhari (4563).

(2)

Narrated by AI-Buk hari (3359).

253
nil! Sun:I' o/lbraltl!l!1II '"
.r--~~------------------------$~--~,

'A'ishah (may Allah be pleased w ith her) a nd s3w a spear
in her house and I sa id , "0, Mother of th e Faithful! What arc
you do ing w ith th is spear?" She sa id, "Thi s is for these house
geckos; we ki ll them w ith it , because the Messe nge r of Allah ~
tol d ti S th at: 'W hen Ibra h ccm :-2ii.~ was thrown int o the fire. th ere
was no c rea ture on th c earlh that did not (sec k to) ex ti nguish
the fire except the house gecko; it blew (the fire) 0 11 hi m.' So
the Messenger of A lla h ~ orde red us to kill th em." ( I)

lHeJltiolJ of the Debate Betwee" Ibraheem A I-Klmleel ~~
amI rho.\·e Who Walllel/ to Dispute With the A'ligh~) ', th e AI/PowerJil1 ill Garmellls ofGreallless am/ Robes oJArmgallce
amI So fie Claimed Lortf.'l/uiJ, Whell He JlIt,S Olle ofthe Weak
Slaves
Alla h, Most Hi gh, says, ( Il ave you not looked at him who
di sputed w ith Ibra heem abollt his Lord (A ll ah), because A llah
had g iven him the ki ngdom? Whcn Ibrahccll1 said (to him).
"My Lord (A llah ) is Ilc Who gives life and ca uses dcath," He
snid, "I givc Ii fc and ca use dcath ." Ibrahcclll said , "Verily! Alla h
ca uses the sun to risc fr0111 thc East; th en causes it you to risc
from thc West." So the di sbc li evc r was utterly de fca tcd. And
Allah gui dcs not the people, who arc ::alilllOol1 (wrongdoe rs,
CIC.) (SaO/"a" AI-Baqara" 2:258) Allah, Most High, mcntions
the deba te betwcen Hi s Kllllleel and the a rrogant tyra nt ki ng,
who claimed Lordship for himse lf; bu t AI-Kllllleel inva lida ted
hi s proof and made cl ea r how grcat was hi s ignorancc " nd th e
small ness of hi s int ell ec t and the evidence silcnced him and
illu mi nated for him thc right path.

The scholars of ta/seer and others, such as the sc hola rs of
( I)

Thi s is an authentic IllItieerlt mITT-lied by tmam Ahmad •.

254

Tile Sim:\, o/Ibmhec/JI ~

.r----~·~~~·~--------------------------------~.
lineage and those o f trad iti ons sa id that th is king wa s the ki ng
of Babylon, whose na me was Numrood, son of Kan'an, son of
Koosh, son of Sam, son ofNoo h, accord ing to Muja hid. Others
said that he was N umrood, son of Fala h, son of 'A bir, son of
Sali h, so n of A rfakhshad , son of Sam, son o f Noah ~ . This
was also reported by Muj ahid and others. I-Ie was one of the
ki ngs of the world, becau se the world was ru led by four ki ngs,
accordi ng to what ha s been narrat ed. They consisted of two
Believers and two di sbelievers; the two Bel ieve rs wcre DlllIlQarnain and Sulaim an and the two disbelievers were Numrood
and Buk htunassar. Th ey mentioned that th is king, N umrood,
remained 011 the thronc for fo ur hundred years. I-Ie had become
crue l, opp ress ive, tyran nical and nrrogan t and he had preferred
the li fe of th is world. When Ibrahee m ~ called upo n hi m to
worship Alla h, Alone, without partners, hi s ignoran ce a nd error
and hi s persona l desires caused him to de ny the Crea tor and to
dispute with Ibrahec l11 ~ about it and claimed Lordshi p for
himse lf. Whcn AI-Khaleel sa id to him, "My Lord (All ah) is
He Who gives life a nd ca uses dea th :' li e said , " I give life and
cause death." ) (Saarah AI-Baqarah 2:258) Qmadah, As-Suddi
and Muha mmad Ibn Ishag said that he mcant that whcn two men
a re brought to him and he had decided to have them ki ll cd, then
he ordered tha t one oft hem bc killcd and pardoned the othcrone,
it would be as if he had given life to one and ca used dea th to the
othe r. But thi s was no t a challenge to AI-Klwleel's statement.
Rat hel', it was a remark unrclated to the topic of di scuss io n
a nd it did not challe nge or invali date (lbrahccm 's argument);
it was simply a provocative stateme nt and a dev iation from the
truth, because AI-Klw/ee/ proved the ex istence of the Creator
by the occ urrence of these visible th ings, suc h as the granti ng
of life to creatures and the bri nging of death to thcm. For it is
not poss ible tha t they brought themse lves into ex isten ce; the re

••

I!

Th e Sto,.\, of /braheem "t=
255
.r----~------------------------~<N----~
must have been a Crea tor to brin g them into existence and 10
subjugate the m to man and to steer th e heavenl y bodies in the ir
orb its a nd to direct the winds, the cloud s and th e rain and create
these vis ible animals and then bri ng abo ut th eir death. This is
why Ibra heem """ sa id. ( "My Lord (A ll ah) is He Wh o g ives
li fe and ca uses dL!<llh ." ) (SoOl'ali AI-Baqarah 2: 258) So if by
his saying ,., bring life and I cause deat h," thi s ignora nt king
mcanllhal he was the doe r o f these visible eve nt s, th en he was
guilty of stubbornness and obs tinacy. If he meant whm was
mentioned by Qa tadah, As-Suddi a nd Ibn Ishaq, then he did
not say anythin g related 10 the wo rds of AI-Kilo/eel, since he
had not chall enged his speec h and had not he cou nt ercd the
evi dencc.

.

Si nce the defeat ort he ki ng in thi s debate mi ght be unclear to
man y of those peo pl e who att ended it and others, he me nti oned
an other proo f, whi ch made clear the existcnce of the Creator
and the fa lseness of what Num rood claimed and the open defeat
of him: ( "Ve ril y! All ah causes th e sun to rise fro m the East;
then cause it yo u to ri se from the West." ) (500/'all AI-Baqarah
2:258) Tlwt is, this sun is subjugat ed eve ry day and ca used
to ri se, in accordance with th e subjugation of the O ne Who
created it and controls and directs it and is Irres isti ble. And th at
is Allah, besi des Whom none has the ri ght to be worshipped,
the Crca wr of eve ry thing. So if you are, as you claim, the onc
who gives li fe and ca uses dea th, then ca li se this sun 10 ri se
from the West, because, He \.v11O gives life and causes death
is the One Who docs as He wills and He can llot be res isted or
ove rco me. Rather, He ove rwhelms cve rything and every thin g
submi ts to Him. So if you are as you claim, the n do this. But if
you ca nnot do it, then yo u are not as you claim. You and every
ot her person knows that you arc not ab le to do anyth ing of thi s.
Indeed, you are in ca pable and powe rl ess to crca te a mosquito

I

256
7111! SIOI ), of 111m/weill ~
.~~~·~
~.WP~--------------------~~----~,

or to he lp yo urse lf aga in st it? So he made cl ear to him his error,
hi s ignorance, the untruthfu lness of hi s c laim and the falseness
of his behav io ur and his bragg ing to the ignorant am ong hi s
people. And the re re mai ned no arg ument for him to use agai nst
Alw Khalee/ ~ . Rathe r, he was defeated and sil enced and thi s
is why Allah says, l( So th e di sbeli ever was utterly de feated.
And Allah g uides not th e peo ple, who arc =alimoo11. ) (Soorah

AI-Baqarail 2:258)

The Story ofAf-Khafeef's Migration to the Land
ofAsh-Sham, His Entry Into the Lands ofEgypt
and His Settling in the Holy Land
Allah, Most High, says, ( So Loo l (Lot) beli eved in him
(Ibrahccm's Message of Islami c Mo nothei sm). lie (Ibrahce m)
said, "I will emi gra te for the sake of my Lord . Verily, I Ie is
th e A lmigh ty, th e Most Wise." And We bestowed on him

(Ibraheem ), Ishaq (i saac) and Ya' qoob (Jacob), and ordained
amo ng hi s o ffspring Prophethood and the Book (i.e. th e Tall'rah
[Torah]) (to Moosa [Moses]), th e III)eel (Gospel ) (to ' Eesa
[J esus]), the Qur ' an (to Muh ammad :Ii), a ll from the offspring
of Ibrah eem) , and We g ranted him hi s reward in thi s world ,
and veril y, in the Il erca ftcr he is indeed amo ng the righteo us. )

(SoO/·ail AI- 'Allkaboo/ 29:26,27)
He, Most Hig h, says, ( And We rescued him a nd Loot (Lot)
to the land whi ch We have bl essed for the 'A/ameen. And We
bestowed upo n hi m Ishaq (Isaac), and (a g rand son) Ya' qoob
(Jacob). Each on e We madc ri g hteou s. And We made them
leaders, g uiding (mankind ) by Our COlllmand. and We in spired

I

-

I

711e S(OI), of I /)mheem ~

••

257

.r----~~--------------------------~yo~.w_~~
' ----~,

in them the doing of good deeds. perfo rm ing salah (iqaIllQIII.\'·
sa /aft) (praye rs), a nd the giving of =okah a nd crus (A lone) they
we re wo rshippe rs. ) (Soorah AI-A nbiya' 2 1:7 1-73) Wh en he
aba ndoned his people for Al lah's sake and mi grated from them,
his wife was barren and coul d not bear ch ildren and he had no
sons. With him was hi s neph ew, Lot ~ , so n of Haran, SOil o f
Azar. Bu t A llah, Most Hi gh, granted him nncr that righ teous
sons and gran ted Prophet hood and Reve lat ion to his progeny.

Every Prophet sent after him Wl.IS f r o l11 his offspring nnd eve ry
Scripture sent down from the heaven to a Prophet after hi m
was sent down to one of his descend ant s. This was an honor
an d a mark of esteem for him from Allah, when he abandon ed
his land, hi s ramily and his kin and migra ted to a land where
he coul d worship his Lord, th e Almighty. the All-Powerfu l
and where he could call the ma nkind to believe in Him . The
land tha t he intended to mi gra te to was the Jand of Ash-Sham
and it was this land th at Allah referred to in His Words: ( 10
the land whic h We have blessed for the ·A lameell. ) (SoO/·aII
A I-A IIbiya " 2 1:7 1) T his was sa id by Ubayy Ibn Ka ' b, Abul -

'Ali yah, Qatadah and ot hers.
Al-Bukha ri narrated on the auth ority of Ab u Hurairah ..;..
that he said: Ibrahee m ~ did not lie except for three lies; two
of the m fo r the sake of Allah when he said, ( "Veril y, I am
sick (w ilh pl ague)." ) (Soorall As-S'!!Jal 37:89) a nd he said , (
"Nay, Ihi s one, Ihe biggest o f Ihe l11 (ido ls) d id it. " ) (Soarall
AI-AI/biya' 2 1:63) Th e (Ihi rd was) Iha l w hil e Ibra hee m ;oa

and Sarah (his wife) we re going (o n a joumcy) Ihey passed by
(th e te rritory of) a tyrant. Someo ne said 10 the tyra nt, "Thi s
man (i.e. Ibrahee m ~) is accom panied by a ve ry charming
lady." So, he sent for Ibraheem ~ and as ked him about
Sarah saying. "Who is th is lady?" Ibraheel11 ~ said, "She is
my sister." Ibrahee m ... went to Sarah and sa id, "0, Sarah!

Tlte SIOIY oflhra/welll 'f'=.

.r--~~~~~~'----------------------~~--------~.

There arc no believers on th e surface of the earth except you
and I. Thi s man asked me abou t you and I ha ve told him that
you are my sis ler, so do 110t contrad ict my stutemc nt. " The
tyrant then call ed Sara h and when she went 10 him , he tri ed to
tak e hold of her with hi s hand , but (hi s hand became stifr and)
he was con fo und ed . He asked Sarah . " Prn y to All a h ror me,
and I shall not ha rm you." So Sarah nsked Allah to c ure him
and he got c ured. He tried to take ho ld o f her for th e second
lime, but (hi s hand became stiffa s or stifTe r than bc fore and)
he was more confounded. I-Ie again requcs ted Sa rah, " Pra y
to Alla h fo r me, a no I wi ll not harm yo u." Sarah ns ked Allah
again and he became al right. I-I e th en ca ll ed one o f his guard s
(who had brought her) and sai d, "You ha ve not brought me a
human being but ha ve brought me a dev il." Th e tyrant th en
gave I-Iajar as a girl -se rvant to Sa rah. Sarah came ba ck (to
Ibrah ecm ~) whi le he wa s prayin g. Ibra hee ll1 ~~ , ges turin g
with his hand , asked, " Wha t has ha ppe ned?" She re pl ied,
"A llah has spoi led th e ev il plot of th e infidel (or immoral
pe rson) and given me Haj ar for se rvice." (Abu Hurairah
th en addressed hi s li stene rs say in g, "That (Haj a r) was your
moth er, 0 , Balli Ala 'is-SwJ/(/ . (i .e. th e A ra bs, the dcsce ndan ts
of Isma'cel ~ , Haj ar 's son)." I II [t was onl y narrated by AIBukhari from thi s so urce and it is in a 1I/00vqooJ form.

'*'

Im am Ahmad narrated on the a uthority of Abu Hu rairah ~
that he sa id : The Messe nger of Allah ~ said , "Ibraheem did not
tell any li es except three and all oflh cm werc in Allah 's Cau se.
(They include) his say ing, when he wa s invited to worship
the idols o f hi s people, ( " Verily. I a m sick (w ith pl ague)."
) (Saarah As-Sarral 37:89 ), hi s say ing, ( "Nay, thi s one. the
biggest or th elll (Idols) did it." ) (Saarah A I-A I/biya . 2 1:63) and
hi s say ing regardin g Sarah , "S he is my sister." He said: Proph et
( I)

Narrated by Al· Bukhari (3358).

The Story of Ibraheem ~

259

.r~~~--~----------------~~~~~==~.

Ibrahccl11 ~~ em igratcd with Sara h and cnt ered a ci ty where
there was a ki ng or a ty rant. (The kin g) was told tha t Ibrahecm
~' had elli ered accompani ed by a woman who was on e of tile
Illost chann ing wom en. So the king sent for I bl'ahecl11 .~ . and
asked, "0, Ibrahee m! Who is thi s lady accompa nying you?"
Ibrahccm ~1 repli cd, "She is my sister." Th en Ibraheem ~.
re turned to her and sa id, " Do not contradi ct my statemcnt, for
I havc informed th em that you arc my sister. By Allah, th ere
arc no true Believers on th e ea rth excep t you and I." Then
IbraheeIll sent her 10 the king. When the kin g gOt to her, she
got lip and pe rformed ablution, prayed and sa id, " 0 , Allah ! If I
ha ve beli eved in You and Your Messenger, a nd ha ve saved my
private parts fro m everybody except my husba nd, the n pl ease
do not let thi s pa gan overpower me. " On th at, the king fell in a
mood of agita ti on and start ed mov ing hi s legs. Abu Az-Z inad
and Abu Sal amah reponed on the au thority o f Ab u Hura irah 4.
that she said , "0 , Allah! Ifh e should di e, the people will Si.ly that
I have kill ed him." The king regai ned hi s power, and proceeded
toward her but she gal up aga in and perfonned abluti on,
prayed and said , "0 , Allah! If I have beli cved in You and Your
Apostl e and have kept my pri va te parts safe from all exce pt
my husba nd, then pl ease do not let thi s pa ga n overpower me."
Th e king again fell in a mood of agitation and started mov ing
his legs. O n seeing th at state o f th e ki ng, Sarah said , " 0 , Allah!
If he should di e, the people will say that I have killed him ."
The king got either two or three att ac ks, and a fte r recove ring
from th e last a ttac k he sa id, "B y Allah! You ha ve sent a dev il
to me. Tak e her to Ibra heem and give Hajar to her." So she
came back to Ibraheel11 and sai d, "A llah hu mi lia ted the pagan
and gave liS a slave-girl for se rvice." (1) Ahm ad was alone in
narra tin g it from thi s source and it co nforms to the condi tions
(I)

This is rm authentic hadee/h narmtcd by Imam Ahmad (8988).

.
~

260
____

~
.~
~
.~~
>

711e S/Uly
....ci.,
________________________
-c-cnj"J!Jml!eem
__________

fo r accep tance de manded by an authent ic Iwc/eelli. AI-B ukha ri
also narra ted it in an abbrev iat ed fo rm on the authority of Abu
Hurairah ...~ . (I)
Some sc ho lars have c laimed that three women were granted
Prophethood : Sa rah, the mother of Moosa and Marya m, the
mother of' Eesa, - peace be upon the m all. But the majori ty of
schola rs are of the opi nion Ihat Ihey were Siddeeqal (2 ) - may
Allah be pleased with them.
T hen A/-KIlO/eel ~ returned from the land of Egypt to the
land of good omens, i. c. the Holy Land, where he had forme rly
been. With him were livestock, sla ves and a great amoun t of
wea lth. Hajar, the Egyptian Copt accompanied them. Then Loot
i:&9, following the com mand of AI-K/lOJeel '~, went to li ve in
the land of A I-Ghaw r, wh ich is more we ll -known as Ghawr
Zaghar, tak ing wit h him a portion of the afo remen ti oncd wealth.
He lOok up residence in the c it y of Sadoom (Sod am) wh ich
was the ma in city in those la nds at tha t time. It s inhabi tants
wcre wicked and shameless disbel ieve rs. Allah inspired AlKlla/eel ~ and told him to look at the landscape, north, sout h,
east and west and He gave him the glad tidings that all of th is
land woul d be for him and hi s descendan ts un til tile end of time
and that He would cause his progeny to be Ilu merous, until
they eq ua lled the nu mber of grai ns of sand on the Earth. Th ese
tid ings are connected to this Islam ic nation and they were not
comp letely fulfi ll ed except fo r it; thi s is suppo rted by the words
of the P rophet ~ , "A ll ah drew the end s orthc world near one
another for my sake. And I have see n its I.!astcrn and western
ends. The domin ion ormy Ummah wi ll reac h those ends wh ich

( 1)

Narrated by A1-0ukhari (2217).

(2) Siddceqat : Ifolle.\·( and righteous women.

or

Ti,e S'IOIY Ihmltecm ~
.~--~~-------------------w
ha ve been drawn ncar me: ' (I)

26 1

,

TIle Story of tile Birtll of [sma 'eel ~ by Hajar
The Peopl e o f the Sc ripture said that Ib nillcem ' as ked
A llah 10 gram hi m finc offspring and Ih al A llah gran tcd hi s
requ est According 10 what th ey said , when Ibrahccm ~ was
in the land o r Bai t UI-M aqd is fo r twellty yea rs, Sarah sa id to
Ibrah ec l11 ~ , "A llah has not permitted me to bear c hildren. so
tak e my slave-gi rl , and haply, Allah w ill bl ess me with a so n
from he r." Th en, when she gave hc r to him , he had int imat e
rel atio ns w ith her, as a result of whic h. she becamc prcgna nt
by him. T hey (t he Peop le of the Scriptu re) said th at whcn she
became pregnant . she bccamc flIl eci with a scnse o r her ow n
importance and she became arrogant towa rd her mist ress.
SiII·all . Sarah then became j ca lolls of her a nd complai ned of
hcr to Ibra hccm '£f.! and he sa id to hc r, " Do wi th hcr what you
wi ll." Haja r then bcca me afra id and she fled and camped nca r
a spring thc re. One of thc ange ls sai d 10 he r, "Be not afra id, for
A lla h will place goodness in th is c hil d whi c h you havc carricd. "
And hc commanded hcr to return and gave hc r th e g lad tidings
that she woul d bear a son. whom shc would ca ll Isma·cc l. He
wo uld be a powcrfulll1an , whosc authority wo uld extc nd over
all men and every man's ha nd woul d act in obedi ence to him.
He woule! rule a ll of thc lands of hi s brothers. She thank ed
All ah. the A lmi ghty. the A ll-Powerful fb I' that.
These tidin gs onl y hold tru e for hi s son (i .e. descendant )
{Vl uhalllll1ad ~ , because it was through him tha t the Arabs
ga in ed ascendancy over a ll of the lands, from East 10 West, and
( I) Naffillcd by Muslim (2889). Abu Dawood (4252). AI-Tirmidhi (2176).
Ibn Majah (3952) and Imam Ahmad (2 I 946).

A ll ah gave thcm bencA c ial knowledge and righteou s deeds, the
like of wh ich were not give n to any previous nation and thi s
was only due to the honor of their Me ss engcr ~, the bl ess ing
of hi s Message, the sllccess of his prophecies, the comp lete
manne r in which he de live red the Message and the general
nature of lli s mi ss ion , to all of the peop le of the carth.
When I-iajar returncd, she gave birth 10 Isma 'ee l iW. It is said
that she gave birth to him when Ibraheell1 ~ was eighty·six
years o ld and th at was thirteen yea rs before the birt h of Ishaq
~ . T hcy said that when Isma'ee l itiY was born, Allah inspired
in Ibraheem ~ the glad tidings oflshaq's birth from Sarah. On
hearing these glad tidings, Ibraheell1 ~ fell down to prostrate
in thanks to A llah and A ll ah sa id to him , " I have answered yo ur
supplicat ions by giving you Isma 'eel and I ha ve blessed him
and increased him and ad vanced him greatly. From hi m wi ll
be born twelve great ones and I w ill mak e him the head of
a great peop le. Thi s was also glad tidi ngs of the coming of
thi s great (Muslim) nat ion and these tw el ve great ones arc the
twelve Righteous Ca liph s of Wh0111 we were informed in the
hadeerll of 'A bdul Ma lik Ibn ' Umair, on the auth ority of Jabir
Ibn Samurah ~, who reported from th e Prophet ~ that he said,
" There w ill be twelve Commanders." Then he spoke word s
wh ich I did not unde rstand and so I asked my fath er what
he had sa id. I-I e rep lied, "A ll (twelve) of them wi ll be from
Q umis h. " T his was na rrat ed by AI·Bukhari and Musli m in
the Sallee/win. ( I) In another narration , he added, "T hi s ll1atter
wi ll cont inue." (2) And in still another narrati on, " Islam will
cont inue to be powe rful until there have been twe lve Caliphs,

( 1)

Narratcd by Al-8ukhari (7223) and Muslim ( 182 1).

(2)

Narrnted by tmamAhmad (20506). Inlhis isnad is Simak Ibn Harb. who
uscd 10 make lois of miSlakes.

The Ston.' of /bra"eem ~

~,----~~--

263

__~----------------~go~wc~>~~~.

all Oflh cll1 from Quraish."I"
These twel ve include the fOll r 111I011ls, Abu Bakr, 'Unmr,
' Uthman a nd ' Ali ~ and they a lso inc lude 'U mar Ibn 'Abd il 'Azecz and among them arc some from Banu AI -' Abbas. II
does not mean that they will be twelve ru lers in success ion,
rather, it means th ai th ey mliSI co me (as foreto ld). Ne ithe r is
the reference to the twe lve Imams believed in by the Shiites, of

whom (acco rdi ng 10 thei r claim), the first is 'Al i Ibn Ab i Talib
and the last is the awa ited /1110111, who is (supposed ly) hid in g
in a subterranea n cavern and he is Muham mad Ibn AI- Hasan
AI -' Askari , accord ing 10 the ir claim. Among those twe lve there

arc none more beneficial than ' Ali ~ und his son, AI-Hasa n Ibn
•Ali .;e, when he abando ned fighting and gave up the Cali phate
to Mu' aw iyah ...;c, thus ex ti ngu ishing the fire of c ivil strife and
sto ppin g the wars betwec n th e Muslim s. The other Imallls
(menti oned by them) had no rul e over the ( Islamic) natio n in
any malter. As fo r what is bclieved rega rding the subterrancnn
cavern, thi s is pure fantasy a nd the re is no trut h to it whatsoeve r
and no ev ide nce for it.

The StOlY of lbraheell/ :~ Migration With His
Son, ISII/a 'eel, alld His Mothel; Hajfll; to the
Mo untaills of Faran, Which is the Land of
Makkah, al/([ His Buildillg ofthe A llciellt House
AI-Bukhari narrated on the aut horit y of' Abdu ll ah Ibn' Abbas
~ th at he sa id , ' 'The fi rst lady to li se a g ird le was the mothcr
of Isma 'ee l ~ . She lI sed a girdle so that she might hi de hcr
track s from Sara h. Ibrahee l11 brought her and her son. Isma ' cel
( \)

Narrated by Muslim (182 1) and Ahmad (2042 1).

ifgJ wh ile she was suckli ng hi m, to a place near th e Ka 'bah,

unde r a tree on the spot of ZOll1w m, at Ihe highes t place in
the mosque. Du ring those days there was nobody in Makka h,
nor was there any water. So he made them s it over there and
pl aced near them a leather bag contain ing some dates, and a
small waterskill contai ning some wat er, an d set out homeward .
ISllla 'ee\ 's mother foll owed him, saying, "0, Ibra heem ! Where
are you going, leav ing us in thi s vall ey whe re there is no
person whose company we may enjoy, nor is thc re anything (to
enj oy)?" She repeated that to him many times, but he did not
look back at her. Then she as ked him, " Has All ah ordered you
to do so?" He said, " Yes." She said, "Then He will not neglec t
us," and she returned, while Ibrahcel11 ~ proceeded onwa rd,
and on reac hing the mountain where th ey cou ld not see hi m, he
fa ced the Ka 'bah, and rai sing both hands, invok ed All ah saying
the fo ll owing prayers: ( "0, our Lord! I have made some o f my
offsprin g dwell in a va ll ey withou t culti vation , by Your Sncred
House (the Ka 'bah in Makkah) in order, our Lord , that they mny
offer praye r perfectly. So fill sO llle hearts among men with love
toward th em, a nd (0 , A ll ah) provide them with fru its, so that
th ey may give than ks ." ) (SoOl'olllbl'oheem 14 .3 7) Isma'eel's
moth er we nt on suckling Isma' ee l and drin king from the water
(s he had).
When the water in th e wa terskin had all been used up, she
became thirsty a nd her child also became thirsty, she sta rted
loo kin g at him (i.e ' m a ' ee l ~) tossin g in agony; she left him,
for she could not enu ure looking at him , and fo und that the
mountain of As-Sa fa was the neares t mounta in to he r 0 11 th at
land, She stood on it and started loo king al the val ley keen ly so
that she mi ght see so mebody, but she could not see anybody.
Th en she desce nded from As-Safa and when she reached the
vall ey, she tucked li p he r robe and ran in the va ll ey like a person

The SlOrr of Ihraheel1l ~

265

.r----~~~-------------------------~
=wr~~
· ----~.

in di stress and trouble, till she crossed the va lley and reached
A I-Marwah mounta in whe re she stood and started looki ng,
expecti ng to see somebody, but she coul d no t see anybody. She
repeated that (runnin g betwee n As-Safa and AI-Ma rwa h) seven
times.
The Prophet ~ said: Thi s is the source of the tradit ion of
the walking of peopl e be lween them (i.e. As-Safa and AIMa rwah). Whe n she reached A I-Marwah (for the last li me) she
heard a vo ice and she asked herself 10 be qui et and liste ned
atten ti ve ly. She hea rd th e voice aga in a nd said, "0 , (whoever
yo u Illay be)! YOLI have made me hear your vo ice; have you
go t something to help me?" And behold! She saw an angel at
the pl ace of Zamzow, digg ing the eart h with hi s heel (or hi s
win g), ti ll water fl owed frol11 that place. She start ed to l11 ake
something like a basi n around ii, lIsi ng her ha nd in thi s way.
and started fill ing her wa te rskin with water with he r hands, and
the water was flo wing out after she had scooped some of it."
The Prophet ~ added, "May All ah bestow Me rcy on ISl11a 'eel's
moth er! I-lad she let the ZOIl1UlIII (flow wit hout trying 10 co ntrol
it) (or had she nOI scooped from that wa ler) (to fill her waterskin ), Zamzol1l woul d have bee n a stream fl owin g on the
surface of the ea rth ." The Prophet ~ furt he r added, "Then she
drank (wa te r) and suck led he r child. The angel said to he r, "Do
not be arraid or be ing neg lected, ror thi s is the House or A ll ah
whi ch will be built by this boy and hi s fa ther, a nd Allah never
neg lects Hi s peopl e." The I-Ioll se (i.e. the Ko·bol1) at tha t limc
wa s on a hi gh place resemb lin g 11 hill ock, and when torrent s
ca me, they flowed to its ri ght and left. She li ved in that way till
so me peo pl e fro m th e tri be of Jurhu m or a famil y frolll Jurhum
passed by her and her child , as they (i.e. the Jurhulll peop le)
were comi ng through the way o f Kada'. They la nded in the
lower part of Makkah, whe re th ey saw a bi rd that had the habil

266

.~----~
.,,
~~~.~
>

Thl! Stnr,>, o''/braheem
______________________

~

~-c'~'~~~~~.

of fly ing around water and not leaving it. They said , " Th is bird

must be flying around wmcr, thou gh we know that there is no
water in thi s valley." They se nt one or two messengers who
di scovered th e so urce of water, and renll11cd to infonll them of
the wnter. So, th ey a ll came (toward the water). The Prop het
~ added: [sma 'cc l's mo ther was sitting ncar th e water. They

asked he r, " Do you allow LIS to Sl ay with you?" She repli ed,
" Yes, but Y OLI wi ll have no right to possess th e water. " They
agreed to that. The Prophet It furt her sa id: Isma'ee l's mothe r

was pleased with the whol e situation as she llsed to love to
enjoy the company of people. So, they se ttl ed lhere, and late r
on they sen t for their fam ilies who came and settled with them
so that some fami lies became permanent residen ts the re. The
child (i.e. Isma" ee l :-&B.) g rew up and lea rned Arabic from them
and (his virtues) ca used thcm to love and admire him as he
grew up, and when he reached the age of puberty they made
him marry a woman fro m amongst th em.
After Isma ' eel 's mother died, Ibraheclll ~ g came afte r
Isma'ee l's marriage in o rder to see his family tha t he had left
be fore, but he did not fi nd ISl11a'ee l ~ there. When he ask ed
Isma'ee l's wife about him , she replied, " I-Ie has gone in search
of our li ve lihood." The n he asked her about th e ir way of li ving
and their cond itio n, and she replicd, "We are livi ng in m isery;
we arc liv ing in hards hip and des titut ion," com plaining to hi m.
I-Ie said, "W hen your husba nd returns, convey my salutation
10 him and tell him to change the thresho ld of the gale (o f
hi s house). " Wh en Isma 'ce l ~ came, he seemed to have felt
something unusua l, so he asked hi s wife, " Has anyon e visit ed
you?" She repl ied, "Yes, an old man of so-and-so descript ion
ca me and asked me abo ut you and I informed him , and he
asked about ou r state of li ving, and I to ld him that we we re
livi ng in hardship and pove rty." On hearing that , Isma'eel .

said, "Did he adv ise you anyt hing?" She repl ied, "Yes, he told
me to co nvey hi s salut ati on to you and to tell you to change the
th reshold of your gate." Isma'eel ~ sa id, " It was my father,
and he ha s ordered me to d ivorce yo u. Go back to yo ur fa mily."
So, Isma 'eel ~ di vorced her and marri ed another woman from
amongst th em (Le. Jurhum).
Th en Ibraheem ~ stayed away from th em for a peri od as
long as All ah wished and ca ll ed on th em again but did not
find Isma'ee l f-M.\. So he came to ISI11<1 'eel's wife and as ked
her aboul Isma'ce l &JJ. She sa id, " He ha s gone in sea rch o f
our li ve lihood." lbrabeem ~~ asked her, " I-low are you gett ing
on?" asking her about their sustenance and li vin g. She replied,
" We arc prosperous and well- off (i.e. we have everything in
abundance)." Theil she th anked Allah. lbraheem ~ sa id, " What
kind of food do you ca l?" She sa id, "Meat. " I-I e sa id, "What
do you drink?" She said, "Waler." He sa id, "0 , Allah ! Bless
th eir meat and wa ter." The Prophet ~ added, "A I that lime they
d id not ha ve gra in, and if they had grain, he wou ld have also
in voked Allah to bl ess it. " Th e Prophet :ta added, " If somcbody
ha s onl y these two thin gs as hi s sustenance , hi s hea lth and
d ispositi on wi ll be bad ly affectcd, unless he lives in Makkah."
The Proph et j?; added: Then lbraheem ~ sa id to Isma'ee l's
wife, "W hen your husband comes, give my sa lut at ions to him
and tell him that he shoul d keep firm the threshold of his gate."
When Isma'eel $h9 ca me back, he asked hi s wire, " Did an yone
call on you?" She replied , " Yes, a good-looki ng old man came
to me," so she praised him and added . " He ri sked about you ,
and I informed him , and he asked about Ollr li ve lihood and I
told him th at we were in a good condit ion." Isma ' ee l ;-@. asked
her, " Did he give you any pi ece of advice?" She sa id, " Yes,
he told me to g ive hi s salutations to you and ordered th at you
should kee p fi rm the thresho ld o f yo ur ga te." On hea ring that ,

.

268

77,£' SIOI::' ol lbraheem ~
w~----------------~~~~.

I s ma 'eel :-M.~ said, " It was my fat her, and you are the th reshold

(of the gate). I-Ie has ord ered I11 C to keep you with me."
Thcn Ibrahecm ~ stayed away from them for a pe riod as
long as Allah wished, and called on th em afterward. I-I e saw
Isma'eel ~ under a trec ncar Zam=flIll, sharpcning his arrows.
When hc saw Ibrahecm ~~ , hc rose lip to wc lco mc him (a nd
thcy greeted each other as a father does with his son or a son
docs with his father). Ibra hecm 'i& said, "Oh, Isma'eel! Allah
has given me an order." Isma'cel ~ said, "Do what your
Lord has ordered you to do." Ibrahce m ~ asked, "Will you
help me?" Isma'eel ~ said, " I will help you." Ibrahee m ~
said, "A llah has ordered mc 10 build a hOllse herc," poi ntin g
to a hill oc k higher than th e land surrounding it. The Prophet
~ added, Then they rai sed thc foundation s of thc House (i.c.
the Ka 'balt). Isma'cc l ~ brought the stones and Ibrahecl11
was building, and whcn the walls became high, Isma'cel ~
brought this stone and put it for Ibrahecl11 'f!J!, who stood ove r
it and carri ed on building, while ISl11a 'cel ~ was handi ng him
the stones, and bot h ofthcm wc rc saying, " 0, our Lord! Acccpt
(this sc rvice) from liS, Vcrily, YOli are the All-H ea ring, the AIIKnowing." The Prophet :ts: add ed: Then both of them we nt on
bui lding and going rollnd the Ka·bah. saying, L "0, our Lord !
Accept (this sClVice) from us, Veril y, You arc Ih l! A II · J-I cari ng.
th e All- Knowing." ) (Soorah AI-IJaqarah 2: 127 ). (I)
It has been confirmed in thc /tadeelh narrated by AI-Bukhari,

on the authority of Abu Hu rairah ~ that he said: The Prophct
3l saiel, " Jbraheem did his ci rcumcisio n wi th a qaddoom at th e
agc of eighty." (2) A {Joddoolll is an implcme nt (an adz). It was
also said that it was a place. The wordi ng of this !wdee,II docs
(I)

Narrated by AI-Bukhari (3364).

(2)

Narrated by AI+Bukhari (3356).

n IL' SIOI:I' ollbroltcclII

269

'

.~--~~------------------$~--~.

not negate the possibility that he was over eighty years o f age.
And Allah knows better.

The StOIJl of the Sacrificial Offering
Allah, rvlost Hi gh, says . .. And he said (after his resc ue from
th e fire). "Ve rily, I al11 goi ng to my Lord . l ie wi ll guide me! My
Lord! Gra nt me (offspring) from the rigiHcollS." So We gave
him th e glad tidi ngs o f a forb earing boy. And, whe n he (h is
son) was old enough to wa lk with him. he sa id, "0, my so n!
I have seen in a drcam tha t I am slaught cring YOll (oneri ng
you in sac ri fice to Alla h), so see what you thin k," li e said.
"0, my fath er! Do tha t \\ hich you a rc co mma nded, /11 .'illll·
AI/all (if A ll ah wi ll s), you shall find me of As-Sahireell (one
o f the patie nt ones. ctc.)." The il , when they had both sub mitted
th emselves (to th e Will o f A ll ah) an d he ha d laid him prostrate
on hi s forehead (or on the ~ ide of his forehead for slaughte ri ng),
and We call ed Ollt to hilll , "0, Ibrah ec m! YO LI ha ve fulfilled
th e drea m (v is ion)! Ve ril y! Th us do We reward the /lllIlisi l lOOI1
(t hose who do good)." Verily. that indeed was a mani fes t trial
and We ra nsomed him wi lh a grea t sac ri fice (i.e. a ram); An d
We left for him (a goodl y remembrance) among gen emtions
(to come) in late r ti mes . Sa/all/llll (peace) be upon Ibmhcell1!"
Thus indeed do We reward the MIlh... il1o(}// (those who do good),
Verily, he was one of Our believin g slaves. A nd We gave him
the glad tidin gs o f Ishaq (Isaac) , a Proph et from th e ri ght eous.
We blessed him and Isha q. and o f't he ir progeny arc (some) tha t
do ri ght . and some that plainly wrong th emse lves . . (SOOl'olr

As-SajJat 37:99- 11 3)
All ah, Most Hi gh, infonns

li S

regard ing His K/m/eel,

270
Th e S IOI JI of l hr(lheem ~
.~--~.~~~~~----------~~~~~------~.
Ibrahec m ~. that w hcn hc migrated from the lands of his
pcopl e, he as ked hi s Lord to gra m hi m a righteous son and
A ll ah gave hi m the glad tidings of a gent le boy, and that was
ISll1a 'ecl ':&f\ because he wa s Ih e fi rst child born 10 AI-Klloleel,
when hc was eighty-s ix yea rs o f age. And there is no di spute
on this point between the Peo ple of the Scri pture, because he
was hi s fi rstborn SOil.
As fo r All ah 's say ing: ( And, when he (hi s son) was old
enough to walk w ith him ) (Soarall As-Saffilf 37: I 02), it mean s
when he became a young man and began to wo rk as his fath er
did. Accordi ng to Mujahid , it means he beca mc a young man,
went on journeys and bcgan to do what hi s fa ther di d, such as
stri ving and working. At Ihat ti me, Ibra hccm ~ was shown
in a dream that he was comm anded 10 sacrifice this son of his.
In the Iwdeeth narmted on the authority o f 'A bdu llah Ibn
' Abbas ...Gc in a II1w/oo' form, he said, 'T he visions of th e
Prophets are Revelation." (I) II was a lso said by ' Ubaid Ibn
' Uma ir. m
Th is was a tes t from A llah, the Almight y, the A ll -Powerful ,
for Hi s Klmleel, that he sacrifice his beloved son, who was born
to him in his old age . T his was aft er he had been cOlll manded to
leave Isma 'ee l ~ and his mot her in a land o f povert y, w hcre
there was 110 anim als or peoplc, no culti vation and no livestock.
I-Ie obeyed All ah's Command 10 do this and le ft them there ,
Irusti ng in Alla h and dependi ng 0 11 Hi m. And A ll ah made for
th em a re li e f and a way out (o r th cir diITi clilti es) and sllsta ined
th em from whence they had not ex pec ted. T hen, a fte r a ll th at,
when Ibraheem '@o was com manded to sacri fice thi s son o f
(I )

This was also reported by AI-Tir1l1idhi in a 11111 'aI/CUI loml (3689).

(2)

Narra ted by Al-Bukhari ( 13 8) and At-Tirmidhi (3689).

271
The SWIT of Ibmheem ~'
~.~~~~~~~----------------~<~~~~--~.

hi s, whom he had le n alone, in accordance w ith the Command
of hi s Lord , when he was hi s firstbo rn son and onl y child , he
co mplied wit h that Command and haste ned 10 obey hi s Lord .
The n he subm itled Ihi s to his son, in order Ihat it should be more
acceptable 10 hi s heart and eas ier fo r him , ralher than seizing
him by force and co mpell ing him to submit 10 be ing sac rificed.
( An d. when he (his son) was old e nough to walk w ith him , he
said . " 0 , my son! I have seen in a dream that I am slaughtering
you (oITering you in sac rifice to Allah), so sec what you th ink ."
) (SOO1'O" As-So./ftu 37: I 02) Th is ge ntl e son ha stened to do
his fat her 's biddin g, say ing, ( "0, my rather! Do that which
you arc com manded, /11 sIlO ' A I/o" (if A llah w ill s), yo u shall
find me o f As-Sabireen (the patie11l ones, etc.)," ) (So01'oli AsSa./ftl/ 37: 102) Thi s repl y displays the ultimate in ri ght condu ct,
filia l piety and obed ience to the Lord of the slaves, A llah , Most
High , says, ( Then. when they had bot h submitted themse lves
(to the will o f A llah), and he had laid him prostra te on his
forehead (or on the side of his fore-head for s laughterin g)
(Soorall As-Saffat 37 :103) It was said that thi s mea ns : when
they had submitted to Allah 's Com ma nd a nd dete rmined to
eany it out, he placed hi m on hi s fa ce. It was said that when
he intended to sacrifice hi m, he placed him fac edown so that
he could slaughter him from behind, and not have to sec hi s
face at the tim e of slaughter, so that it would be eas ier fo r him.
This was said by ' Abdullah Ibn 'A bba s .te, Mujahid , Sa'eed
Ibn Jub air, Qala dah and Ad-Dahh ak. It was also said th ai he
turned him on his sidc, the way olle turn s a sacrificial animal
on its side, so th at th e side of his fo rehead was on the ground. (
Th cy had both submitt ed thcm selves ) , that is when Ibrahee m
~ had said, "Bisl1Iillalli lVallahli Akbar (i n the Name of Alla h
and All ah is Greater)" and hi s SOil had sa id, "Ashhadll An/a
i/a/w iI/aI/ali ( I bea r wit ncss tha t none bUI A llah has the right

272
;.____

The SUJI"y of /braJu:elll ~
~Y"~.~~~----------------------~~--------.

to be wo rshipped)," in preparation as for Al lah 's Saying: ( And
We called out to hi m, "0, Ibrahccm! You have fulfi llcd the
drcam (vision)!" Ve rily! Thus do We reward the A1uilsiIUUJ/1
«hose who do good) (Sooralllls-S,u!m 37: 104, 105), i< means
that the goal in this test to whi ch you have been subj ected has
been attained and you have shown yourself to be obedient and
prepared to carry ali t Allah 's Commands; just as yo u submined
your body to the fire, so you did not hesitate to submit your
son to be sacrificed and spc nd your wealth for the sake of
your gucsts. This is why Allah says, ( Verily, that indeed was
a manifest tri al ) (Soorah As·Saffilt 37: 106) That is, a clear
tcs t. As for His Saying: ( An d We ransomcd him wit h a grcal
sacrifice ) (Sooral1 As·SaJfat 37: I07), it mea ns: We made as
a ran som fo r the sacrifice of his son, that which was easy for
Allah, to be substituted for him and what has been widely
report ed fro m th e majority of scholars is th at it was a prime,
whi te ra m, with long horns, which he saw tied to an acacia tree
at Thabeer (a mountain in Makkah).
It was mentioned in the hadeetl1that it was a ram. This was

narrated by Imam Ahmad, on thc authority of Safiyyah BinI
Shaibah, who said: A woman from Banl! Saleem who waS the
midwife of most of the pcople in our household, infonncd me
thai the Messenger of Allah :i scnt for 'Uthman Ibn Talhah
~ . On one occasion she said: I asked ' Uthm3n, "Why did the
Prophet ~ call you?" He said: The Messenger of Allah j5 said
to me, "I saw the horns of the ram whcn I cntered the House
(i.e. thc Ka·bah) and I forgot to tell you to covcr them up; cover
them up, for there should not be anything in the House which
could distract the worshipper." Sufyan said, "The hams of the
ram rcmained hanging in the House unti l it was bumed, and they
were burned too." (II
( \)

Thi s is nn authenti c Iw(/ecrh narrated by Imam Ahtllnd (4/68, No. 2271).

The Story of the Birth ofIshaq WI
All ah, Most Hi g h, says, ( And We ga ve him the g lad tidings

of Ishaq (Isaac) a Prophet from the ri ghteous. We blessed him
and Ishaq (Isaac), and of th eir progeny are (some) that do ri ght,
and some that plain ly wrong themselves. ) (SoO/"all As-SaJlat
37: 11 2, 11 3) The g lad ti di ngs o r his bi rth we re brought by the
angels to Ibrahecm ~ and Sara h whe n th ey pa ssed by th em as
they we re heading for the ci ties orthe peop le ar Lot, in o rder to
infli ct destructio n o n them beca use of th eir di sbeli e f anclthe ir

wickedness and depravity, as will be ex plained in its place, if
Allah wi ll s.

A ll ah, Most High, says, ( I-las the story reached yo u or the
hono red g uests o f Ibrah ccm? Wh en Ih ey cam e in to him and
sai d, "Salam, (peace be upon you) !" He answered , "Salam
(peace be upon YO u)," and said, " You a rc a peo pl e unknown
10 me." Th en he lumed 10 his househo ld , and broughl o ul a fat
(roasted ) ca lf (a s the property of lbraheem wa s ma inly cows)
and placed it be fo re Ihem, (saying), "Wil l you nOI cat?" Then
he concei ved a fc ar of Ihcm (whell they ate not) . T hey sa id,
" Fea r no\. " And they ga ve hi m glad tidin gs of an intelli gen t
so n, hav ing k nowledgc (abo ut Al lah and I-li s Relig ion of True
Mo no th e ism). The n hi s wifc came fo rw ard wilh a lou d vo ice,
she smo te he r face and sa id, "A barrc n old woman! " They said,
" Evc n so says your Lord . Ver il y, He is the Most Wise, the AIlKnow ing." ) (SoOl·all Adll-Dllariyat 5 1:24-30) A lI ah, Most
Hi gh, te lls us th at when the ange ls - who wcre thrce in number,
Gabriel , Meckac l and Israfce l - vis ited A I-Khaleel .~, a t first
he tho ught that they were (huma n) vis itors and he trcated them

274
Tltl! SIOIT oJlbrahel!m "fa.
.r--~·~~~·~------------------~----~.

as (honored) guests and roa sted a fat cal f from the best of his
cattle for the m. BUI when he presented it 10 t h ~ m, he saw IlIm
th ey had no desire at all to ea l. This is beca use angels have no
strong need for food . He fe lt a sense of mi strust of the m ( nnd
conce ived a fenr of thelll. They sa id , " Fenr no t, we have been
sent aga inst the people of Loot (Lot)o" ) (SoO/o"II Hood 11 :70)
That is, to des troy them. Upon hea ring this, Sa rah laughed, be ing
pleased that All ah's Wrath was to be visited UpOll them . She was
stand ing wait ing on the guests, as was the custo m of the Arabs
and othe rs and when she la ughed, be ing pleased at the news,

Allah, Most Hi gh said, ( And We gave her glad tidings of lshaq
(Isaac) and after him, ofYa'qoob ) (SoO/o"II Hood I I :7 1) That
is, the angels gave her the glad tidings o f thaI. ( Th eil hi s wife
came fo rward with a loud cry ) (SoOl'oh Adh-Dlwriyat 5 1:29).
That is, giving a loud c ry of amazeme nt. ( she smote her fhce
) (Sooroh Adh-Dhariyat 51 :29) As women do whe n they arc
surprised or amazed. ( "She snid (in as tonishment w+oe unto
me! Shall I bea r a chi ld whi le I am nn o ld woma n, and here is
my husband, an old man'!" ) (SoOl'all Hood II :72) Thai is, how
can a person like me, who is advanced in yenrs and also ba rren,
give birth? ( and here is Ill y hu sband, nn old man ? ) . She was
amazed tlmt a c hild sho uld be born to he r whil e she wa s in thi s
state and that is why she said, ( Ve rily! This is a strange th ing!"
They said: '" Do YOli wonder <It the Decree of Alla h? The Mercy
o f Allah and Hi s Bless ings be on YOll , fa mily (Of Ibfi.l heem).

Surely, He (A llah) is Wonhy of all pra ise, Mo>! Glorious: o )
(Saorah Hood II :72,73) Ibmh ccm ~ was also astoni shcd, but
very happy wit h these glad tidi ngs, which strengthe ned hi m
and g laddened his heart . ( (Ibrahcem) said , " Do YOli give mc
glad tidi ngs (of a son) when old age has ove rtake n mc? O f
what then is your news?" They (the angels) said, "We givc
you glad tidings in truth . So be not of th e des pairing ones." )

(Soorall AI-I-Iijr 15:54,55) They confirmed the truth of these

glad tidin gs and informed them both ( of an in te ll igent son )
- and that wa s Ishaq &J\ the brother o f Isma ' eel ~ , a gentle
son. Th us was he descr ibed by his Lord, as being one who kept
his pro mi ses and was pat ient and forb earin g. In anoth er verse,
He says, ( But We gave her glad tidi ngs of ishaq , and after him,
of Ya 'qoob . ) (Saara" Naad 11:7 1) Muha mmacllbn Ka' b A IQu razi and others c ited th is as evidence that Isma ' eel ~ was
th e sacrifice and that it would not be poss ib le that A llah would
order Ishaq ~ to be sacri ficed after the tid ings of his bi rth and
the bi rth of Ishaq 's son, Ya ' qoob &!!l had bee n gi ven.
As fo r His Words: ( But We gave her g lad tid in gs of Ishaq ,
and ane r hi m, o f Ya ' qoob ) (Saara" Nood I I :7 1), th ey arc
ev idence th at she would be happy with the b irth of her son,
I s haq "1!J.~ and aft er him , her grand so n, Ya ' qoob ~; that is, he
would be born du ring her lifetim e and he wou ld de li ght th eir
heart s, j ust as her son had done. Ir thi s had not been written,
the re woul d ha ve bee n no benefi t in mcntioni ng Ya ' qoob ~~
and s ing li ng him out from amon g the progen y of lshaq ~ ,
And sin ce he wa s sin g led out for spec ial ment ion, it proves
that they wo uld be happy at hi s birth, just as th ey we re happy
at th e birth of hi s fa the r befo re him . A ll ah, Most High, says,
( And We bestowed upon hi m Ishaq a nd Ya ' qoob , each o f
them We guided , a nd before him We guid ed Noo h, ) (SoO/·all
AI-An 'a m 6:84)

The StOlY of the Building of the Ancient House
Alla h, Mos t High, says, ( And (remember) whe n the Lord
of Ibra hcelll (i,e, A ll ah) tri ed hi m with (ce rtai n) Commands,

276

The SWrI' oj Ihrahcem -M

.---~-W----------------------~----~,

whieh he fulfilled. He (Allah ) said (to him). ··Vori iy. I am going
to make you a leader (Prophet) of mankind," (Ibrahecm) sa id,
"A nd o r my o ns pring (w ill You I1wk c Icaders)'!" (A ll ah) sa id,
" My Covenant (Prophethood, elc.) incl udes no t =aIi1l1ooll .·' And
(remcmber) when We made the Iioli se (the Ka 'bah a t Makkah)
a place orreson for mank ind and n place ofsa fc ty? And take you
(peoplc) the Maqa1l/ (stand ing place) o f Ibrahcl!m (or th e stone
all which Ibra hcelll stood whi le hc was build ing th e Ka'bah)
as a place of prayer (for some of your prayers, i.!, g. two rak 'ahs
after the f(lwalof the Ko 'bah at Makka h), And We comma nded
Ibrah ccm and Isma 'ee l th at they sho uld purify My House (the
Ka 'bo" at Makka h) for th ose who are c ircumambulating it, or
stay ing (i ~ika/) . o r bow ing or prostra ting them selves (there.
in pmyer). A nd (reme mber) when Ibrah eem said. " My Lord.
mak e this cit y (Makka h) a placc of security and provide its
peop lc wi th fru it s. such ofthe111 as bcli eve in A ll a h and the Last
Day." l ie (A ll ah) answe red. "As ro r him who di sbe li eves. I
sha ll lea ve him in con tent ment for a while. then I sha ll co mpel
him to the puni shme nt of thc Fire, and worst indeed is that
destin atio n!" And (re member) when Ibrahec lll and (hi s son)
Isma 'cel wcre ra isin g the foundatio ns of th e Iioll se (the Ka 'bah
at Makkah). (say ing) , "Our Lo rd! Accept (this se rvicc) fro m
us. Verily ! You arc the A ll -Hea ring. thc All -Knowing. Our
Lord ! And makc us submi ss ivc un to You and o f our ofTsp ring
a nnt ion submiss ive lI lltO You . and show us our lIIanasik (all
the ceremonies o f pi lgrimage - lIajj and 'VII/ral/, c tc.). and
accept o ur rcpentan ce. Truly. Yo u arc the One Wh o accepts
repenlnnce, th e Most Merc iful. Our Lord! Se nd am ongst them
a Messcnge r o f their ow n (a nd indced Allah a nswered thei r
invoca ti on by se ndi ng Muhammad [peace be upo n him]).
who shall rec it e unto the m Your Verses and in,\truct them in
the Book (th is Our'an) a nd AI-/likmah (full kno w ledge o f the

111(' Story ul lhralieclII '1-:.
277
.r--~~~----------------------------~w
Islamic laws and jurisprudence or wisdom or Pro ph ethood,
etc.), and sanctify them. Ve ri ly ! You arc the Almight y, the
Most Wi se." ) (Soorah AI-/3aqarah 2: 124- 129). Allah, Most
Hi gh, info rm s us co ncerning I-li s sla ve, Hi s Messe nger, Hi s
Pure One a nd Hi s KIlO/eel, the Imalll of the I-1lIl1afa' fl) and
the fa ther of the Prop hets ~ . tha t he built the A nc ient House,
whi ch was the first mosque bu ilt for the genera lit y of mank ind
to worship A llah . All ah gui ded him to the location in which it
was to be built ; and wc have a lready narral ed on the au th ority
of the Com mander of the Fait hful, ' Al i Ibn Abi Talib ..;.., and
oth ers that he was guided to it by In spirati on from Allah , th e
A lmight y, the All~ P owerrLl1. We have already mcnti oned in th e
descrip ti on of the c reation o f th e heavens Ih at the Ka 'bah, is
directly below A/- Baillll-Ma'lIIoor, so that if it fell , it would
fall upon it; and the same app li es to the houses of wo rsh ip in
the scve n heavens.

,

As somc of the Salqf sa id, in every heaven there is a house
in whi ch the inhabitants worship A ll ah and they are like the
Ka'bah for the peopl e of Ihe Earlh. So Allah co mmand ed
Ibrah ec lll ~ 10 build a hOLlse for Him, whi ch wou ld be for
the inh abitants of the Earth, like those places o f praye r for the
angels o f th e heave ns. A llah gu ided him to the pla ce prepared
for the building o f the hOllse, w hich had been se lcclCd for it
since Ihe c rea ti on of the heavcn s and the Eart h, as confirmed
in the Salleell: "Ve ril y, thi s c ity was made sacrosanct by Allah
on th e day of th e creati on of the heavens and th e Ea rth and
it will remain sacred by A llah 's Command until th e Day of
Resurrection. " (2) No in for mati on has come to us frolll an
auth enti c source which would co nfirm that thc House was
(I ) }llllwfo' : Those who pro fess the tme Religion (I slamic MonOl hcism).

(2) Narrntcd by AI-l3ukhari (1587) and Muslim ( 1353) and the word ing is
fro m the hat/eel" of' Abdull ah Ibn ' A bbas ~.

bui lt before A I-Kllaleel ~. Whoeve r re li ed fbr evidence on
th e Words o f A llah : ( the sitc ofthc (Sacred) House) (Soorah
AI-Hajj 22:26), thi s is neith er conc lusive nor ev ident. Because
what is moant is th e place preord ained by All ah - a locat ion
venc rated by the Prophets from Adam ~ unt il th e time of
Ibrahee m ifl:B.
Al lah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Veril y, th e first House (of worship)
appointed for mankind was that at Bakkah (Makkah), ful l of
blessing, and a guida nce for 'A/ameen. ) (SoOl'all Ali '/1111"(111
3:96). That is, the first House appointed for th e genera lity of
mankind for bless ing and guidance was the 1·lousc whi ch was
in Bakkah; it was sa id that Bakka h mcans Makkah and it was
al so said th at Bakkah was the locati on of th e Ka 'ball. ( In it
are ma nifest s igns ) (SOOI"(dl Ali '/II/IY/n 3:97). That is, it is the
construction of Ibrahcc m ~ , the father of the Prophets who
came after hi m and the Imam of the HUlla/a ' from his sons,
who fol lowed hi s example and held fas t to hi s S/lJ1IIah. Thi s
is why I-I e says, ( th e Maqoll/ (place) of Ibraheem ) (Soorah
Ali '/11I1Y/J/ 3:97). That is, the stone 011 which he stood when
hc raised the structure above his ow n height; hi s son placed
this we ll-kn own stone fo r him to stand on, so th at he wou ld
be tall enough when th e buildi ng reached a hc ight that was
beyond hi s reach, as mentioned prev ious ly in the long hadeerh
of' Abdull ah Ibn' Abba s ~ . (1)
Thi s stone was siruat ed besid e the wa ll of the Ka 'bah in
ancient times, un til the time of ' Umar Ibn AI··Khattab ~ ; he
moved it back a litt le from th e House, so that it should not
di sturb the worshippe rs, as th ey c ircumambul ated the HOllse.
' Umar Ib n AI- Khau ab 4;:.. was fo ll owed in thi s because hi s
opinion had co in c id ed w ith the Ordai nment s of hi s Lord in
(t)

The taklll"cej orlh is Iwr/cctll has already been given a shon while ngo.

The Slon.' 0' Ibraheem 't8

279

.~~::~~"~~::~=-------------------<~~~.~>~--~.
a Ilumber of matters, such as his say ing to th e Messenge r of
Allah ~ , "Were we to lake Maqam Ibra hecm as a place of
prayer. .. " Then A ll ah revea led: ( And take you (peopl e) the
Maqo1l1 (place) of Ibrahcc lll (or the stone on which Ibrahecm
stood whil e he was bui ldi ng th e Ka ' bah) as a place o f prayer
) (Saarah AI-Baqarah 2: 125). The root prints o r AI-Klmleel
~~ had re main ed in the slone from the beg inning o f Isla m and
Abu Ta lib sa id in hi s well -known poem, "AI-Qaseedah AILomiyya/i" :

And TllOlVr Cave and he who held/ast IvilIT perseverance fa
his position,
A nd proved superior ill pie~)' in Hira .and remained there,
Alld by the H Ollse. (h e fme /-IolISe inlhe center of Makkah,
And by Allah, Iru~F. A//ah is not lIJ1l1WClre,
And by the Black SlOne, wilen rhey louch it,
When fhey slI/To/md if in fhe forelloo ll alld {he lore afternooll,
A lid Ihe place of Ibraheem is visible ill 'he wei SlOlIe,

DIhis./eel, barefool, IVilho lit shoes.
Th is mea ns that hi s nob le fe et were imp ressed in the stone,
show ing th e prints o f bare fee t, without shoes. Thi s is why
A ll ah says, ( And (remember) when Ibraheem and (h is son)
Isma'ee l we re raising th e fo undati ons o f the I-louse ) (Soorah
AI-Baqarah 2: 127) That is, at the time when th ey said, ( "Our
Lo rd! Acc ept (thi s serv ice) fro m us. Ve ri ly! Yo u arc the AIIheari ng, the A ll -Knowi ng." ) (Soorah AI-Baqaroh 2: 127) They.
were at the hi g hest leve ls of sincere dcvotion and obed ience
to A llah, the A lmi g hty, the All-Powerfu l when they asked
A llah, the All -Hearing, the A ll -Knowin g to acce pt from thcm
this great act o f obedi ence and prai seworth y endeavor. ( "Our
Lo rd ! And make us submi ss ive m llO Vou <l nd o f o ur o ffspring

a nalion submi ssive unlo You, and show liS our Mallasik (all
the cercmon ies of pi lgrimage - /-Iajj <lnd 'Umrah, e lc.), and
accept our repentance. Trul y. YOli arc the One Who acccpts
repentance, the Most MercifuL" ) (Soomh AI.·Baqamh 2: 128)
What is meant by thi s is that AI-Khaleel ~ built Ihe nobl est
of mosques in the nob lest of loca tions, in an uncultivated valley
and he supplicated on beha lf of his fam il y that they be blessed
and given sustenance from the fruits, even Ihough th ere was
little water and no trees, culti va tion or fruits. They asked Him to
make it a Sacred Place, a Sanctuary and a place of safety for nil
time . Allah accepted thei r supplication - a ll praise and thanks
be to Him - He gave AI-Khaleel ~ what he had reques ted.
Allah , Most Hi gh, says, ( Have they not seen that We havc made
(Makkah) a san ctuary secure, and that men arc be in g snatched
away from all arollnd them? ) (Soomh A /- 'A Ilkaboof 29:67) I-Ie
says, ( Have We not establi shed for th clll a secure sanctuary
(Mak kah). to w hich are brou ght frui ts of a ll kinds, a prov ision
from Ourse lves? ) (Soorah AI-Qasas 28:57) lbraheem ~
asked Allah to send to them Messengers from among them.
Tha t is, fro l11 th eir race and speaking their e loquent language,
full of since re advice and admoni shment, in order to co mplete
upon them the two blessings of the life of thi s world and the
Hereaft er. A llah accepted thi s suppl ication from him and sent
from among them a Messenger - and what a Messenger it was
that was the Seal of His Prophets and Hi s Messenge rs! He
granted him a complete Re ligion that had never been given
to anyone before him. His preaching was di rected to all of the
people of the eart h, including peop le from all races, languages
and descriptions and from all countries, c ities and times, until
th c Day of Resurrection! Thi s was one of th e spec ial attributes
an d privi leges granted to him alone among the Prop hets, due
to his innate nobil ity, the comp leteness of the Message wi th

which he was sent, the nobility of his location (i.e. Makkah),
the eloquence of his speech, th e complete solicitude that he
displayed toward his people, his kindness, his compassion, his
gene rous nature, his great birth and his fi ne beginning and end.
This is why Ibraheem, AI·K/wleel itJ.I" as th e builder of the
Ka 'bah fo r the inhabitants of th e Eart h, dese rved to ha ve
an exalted position in the highest hea ve n, ncar AI·Baifltl·
Ma'lI1oof, wh ich is the Ka'bah fo r the inhabitants of the
seventh heaven and that is a blessed house, wh ich is entered
by sevent y thousand angels every day; therein they worship,
neve r to return to it until the Day of Resurrection. We have
already mentioned in the TaJseer of SOOl'ali AI-Baqarall the
description of his buildin g of the House (of Allah) and the

stories and tradit ions wh ich contai n plenty of information, so
whoever wishes to know more should refer to the Tafseer, all
praise and thanks be to Allah.
The edifice erected by A/·Klw/eel ~ remai ned for a long
ti me, then after that, it was rebuilt by Quraish, who shorte ned
the foundations of lbraheem ~ on the northern aspect, which
faces As h·Sham (Sy ria), as it is today, In th e Sahee/will, it is
reported on the authority of' A' ishah that the MessengerofAl lah
j; said, "Do you know th at when your peo ple (Quraish) rebu ilt
the Ka 'bait. they dec reased it from its original foundation laid
by Ibrahccm?" I said, "0 , Messenger of Allah ! Why do you
not rebuild it on its original foundation laid by Ibrahcem?" He
replied, "Were it not for the fact thaI your people arc close
to the pre· Islamic Period of Ignora nce (i,e. they have recently
become Muslims) I would havc spcnt the treasure of the
Ka'bah in Allah 's Cause and I would ha ve made its doo r near
to the ground and included AI·/·/ijr in it." ( I ) It was also rebuilt
(I )

Narrated by AI-Bukhari ( 1583) and Muslim (\333).

by Ibn Az-Zuba ir - Ill ay A llah have mercy on him - duri ng hi s
time, according to what had bee n indi cated by the Messenge r
of A lIa h ~ , based on the in formation give n !O him by his au nt,
'A' ishah , the Moth er of the Be lie vers, which she relayed from
him ~. When A I-Hajjaj kill ed him in the year 73 A. H., he wrote
10 'A bdu l Malik Ibn Marw<ln , who was the Ca liph at that tim e.
T hey th ought that Ibn Az-Zubair had done it of his own accord
and so Ma rwan ordered it 10 be return ed to th e way it had been
be fore and so they demo lished the wa ll that fa ced toward AshSha m and removed At-t-f ijr frolll it, then they fi ll ed in the wa ll
and put the stones in side th e Ka 'bah, ra ised it s eastern door and
blocked the wes tern one com pl ete ly, as aile sees it today. The n,
when they were informed that Ibn Az-Zubair had only thi s
based on wll at 'A' ishah, Ihe Mother of the Be li evers, had told
him , they reg rett ed wha t th ey had done and w ished Ih at they
had left it as th ey had fOll nd it. Then during the e ra of AI -M ahdi
Ibn A I-Ma nsoor, he sought Ihe advice o f Imam Malik Ibn Anas
regard ing th e idea o r renlrll ing ilIa the way Ibn Az-Zubair had
rebuilt it, but he sa id to hi m, " I fear th at th e ru lers will take it
as a plaything." ThaI is, whenever a new mler comes to power,
he w ill rebuild acco rd ing to hi s own whim. And so it rema ined
as it was up to the present day.

Mentioll of the Praise Heaped on A llah ~\' Slave
([lid Kh([leel, fbraheem, by A II([ h ([lid His
Messenger
Allah, Most High, says, ( And (rcmcmbcr) when the Lord
of Ibrahccm (i .e_ Allah) tried him with (certain) Commands,
whieh he fulfill ed. He (Allah) sa id (to him) , "Veri ly, I am go ing
to make you a leader (Prophet) of mankind." (Ibraheem) said,

The SI01:I' of /brahecm 'ft!l-

•
"A nd o f my offsp ring (to make leaders)." (A ll ah) sa id, "My
Covenant ( Prophethood. etc.) in cludes no t the zalimooll. " )
(Soorah A I-Baqarah 2: 124). When he fulfi ll ed the obli ga tion s

enjoined 0 11 him by his Lord, He made him a leader of his
pcoplc, who fo llowed his exa mp le and his gui dan ce. Ibrahecm
~ then asked A llah to let thi s leadershi p cont inue because of

him and to let it remain within his lineage; and th is thing which
he asked for and craved was granted. Leadership was granted to
him , but excepted from acquiring it were the w ro ngdoe rs; and

those selec ted to receive it fro m his offs pring were the scholars
and those who performed right eous deeds. Allah, Most High
says, ( And indeed, We sent Noah and Ibra heclll , and placed
in the ir offspring Prophc thood and Sc ripture, and among them
there is he who is guided, but many of them arc jasiqool1
(rebel1i o us, di sobedi ent to All ah) (Soorah AI-fiadeed 57:26)
So every Scr ipture se nt down from th e heaven to o ne of the
Prophets who came after I brahee m ~ , AI-Klwleel, was sent to
one of hi s offs pring and hi s foll owers. Thi s was a n hOll or that
was unique and w ithout parall e l and a rank and status without
cqua l. From his lo ins we re born two g reat sons: Isma 'eel ~
fro lll i-Iajar and then Ishaq ~ from Sarah. From the lattcr was
born Ya ' qoob ~ , who was Isra ' cc l, from whom all of their
tribes claim descen t. Amo ng the lll were Prop hets and th ey were
ve ry nUlllcrO ll s, so much so that it is imposs ible fo r us to know
their exact number, except those w hom He sent and se lected to
receive a Message, along with hi s Prophet hood - and the last
of them was' Eesa ~~ , the son o f Mary am, who was from Bantl
Isra 'eel.
As for I s ma 'c el ~ , frolll him desce nded the Arabs , including
all of their diverse tribes, as we sha ll make c lear lat er o n, if
A llah , Most Hi gh, w ill s. And there were no Proph ets among hi s
descendants except the Seal of the Prophe ts, Muhammad Ibn

284

The S IOIT of Ihmllt-t'm

*"'"

.~----w------------------~~----~.
' Abdullah Ibn 'A bclul-Mullalib Ibn Hashim AI-Qurashi , AIHashimi, AI-Makki (Ihe Makkan), Ihen AI-Mada ni (Madin ile)
- may A ll ah 's Bless ings and Peace be upon him . From this
noble branc h there wa s onl y this one da zz ling, g litt ering a nd
splendid jewel and the ou tstandin g piece dc res ista nce, who
was the Lead er of whom Ahlul-Jal1l ' a rc proud and who l11 th e
first and Ihc last will cn vy on the Da y of Resurrecti on.

It has been authc nti ca ll y rcpon cd from him j.l in SalleelJ
Muslim that he sa id, "(On the Day of Rcsurrcct ion) I wi ll
occ upy a positi on (so eleva ted) that all of c rcmion w ill turn
to me, even Ibra heel11 ." (I) And hc praised hi s fa ther, Ibraheem
~, hi ghly in thi s context. Thi s saying of hi s pro ves that he
(Ibrahccm) is the best of crea ti on after the Prop he t ~. in the
Estimati on of the Crea tor - both in th e lifc of th is wo rld a nd in
the Hc reafter.
AI -Bu khari narra ted on th e au thority of 'A bdullah Ibn
' Abbas 4 1hat he said: The Messe nge r of All ah 3:ii: llsed to seek
Refuge wi th Allah for AI-Hasan and A I-Husain and say, " Your
fo refat her (Le. Ibra heem) used to scc k Refuge w ith Alla h for
Isma'eel and Ishaq by reciling the foll owi ng: ' 0 , Allah! I seek
Refuge w ith Your Perfect Words fro m eve ry devil and fi'om
poi sonoll s pests and from every ev il , harm fu l, e nvious eye. '" m
Allah. Mosl Iligh , says, ( And (reme mber) when Ibrahce lll
sa id, ·'My Lord! Show mc how YOli give life to the dead:' He
(A llah) said, ·'00 yo u not be lieve?" He (Ibrahcc m) sai d, "Yes
(I believe), but to be stronger in faith:' l ie said, ·T a ke four
bird s. th en cau se them to incl ine towa rd YO ll (then slau ght er
them, cut (hem into pieces). and the n put a portion of them
(I)
(2)

Narr.ucd by Muslim (820).
Narr.llcd by A\· Bukhari (3371). Abu Dawood (4737) and At-Tinnidhi
(2060).

Th /.' 5101,. of ' brahC!/.'111 "'=.~~~~~~--------------~w

285

.

on cvery hill. and ca ll them. they will come to YOli in ha ste.
And know Ihal A llah is A lmighty. Mosl Wi se." ) (Soorah A/Baqarah 2:260) Sc ho lars of Ta/s eer said thm Ihere were reasons
for Ihi s question , which we have cxplained in Ihe T(~f;'eer and
wc cSlabl ished thc m beyond doub t.
In short, we may say that Allah, th e Almighty, the AIIPowerful, answercd hi s question and ordered him 10 take
four birds - scholars di ffc red as 10 the type of birds - but the
objcctive was att ained at a ll events - and He commanded him
to slau gh ter th em, rcmovc thcir fcat hers, tear the birds 10 pieces
and mix thc pi eces together. Then he was ordcrcd 10 place parts
oflhese mix ed pi eces on four hill s. Thi s he did and thcn he was
ordcrcd to callthel11. by hi s Lord's Permi ss ion. W hcn he ca lled
them , A ll ah ca used the pieces to fl y to cac h ot her and eac h
feather went to th e body to which it be longed, until the bodies
of the birds wc re joined together once mo re and he observed
the Ability of th e One Who says, "Be!" a nd it is. They came
runni ng to him , so thaI Ihe matter should be eve n clea rer to
him than if they had come 10 him flying. It was sa id Ihat he wa s
ordered to take thcir heads in his hands and each bird came to
him to co ll ec t its head frol11 Ibrahec l11 ~ and it became fi xed
10 its body as it had been. thu s proving that none ha s the right
to be worshipped except Allah. Ibra heelll ~ had known, with
a ce rtai nty that admitted of no doubt , th e Ab ilit y of A ll ah , Most
High, 10 resurrect thc dead, but he walll ed to w itncss that for
himse lf and progress from certai n know ledge 10 eye-w itness
knowledge. So A llah agreed 10 his request and gratified hi s
ultim ate w ish.
Alla h, Most Hi gh, says, ( 0, Peop le of the Scripture (Jews
and Christians)! Why do you di spute abou t Ibrah eem, whil e
the Tall'rah (To rah) and the Il1jee/ (Gospcl) were not revealed

till after hi m? I lave YOli then no se nsc? Verily, YO li are those
who have disputed about th at of which you h<lve know ledgc.
Why do you thcn di spute concerning that whi ch YO ll have
no knowledge? It is All ah Who knows. and you know nolo
Ib ra hcem was neilhe r a Jew nor a Chri sti an, but he was a true
Muslim I/cllliflm (Islamic Monothc ism - to wo rshi p none but
A ll ah, A lone) and he was nol of al-J/I I1Shrikooll , Veri ly, among
the mankind who ha ve the best claim to Ibrah eelll are those
who followed him , and this Prop het ( Mu h ammad ~) a nd those
who have be lieved (M uslim s). And A llah is the Wali (Protecto r

and I'leiper) or the Believers, ) (SaO/'ail Ali '11IImll 3:65-68)
Allah, Mos t High, rebukes th e People of th e Scripture, Ihe Jews
and Chri stia ns, regard ing each group's c laim that Ibrah eem ~
was an adherent of the ir re ligion , He declares him innoce nt
of that and mad e clea r how igno rant th ey were and how littl e
intell ige nce they possessed in His Words : ( Whi le the Tawra;'
(Torah) and the II/jeel (Gospel) were not revea led lill after him?
Have you then no sense? ) (Saara;' Ali " l1Irall 3 :65) So bow
cou ld he have fo llowed yo ur re ligion whcn what was legislated
for you was onl y legi sla ted many long ages aft er him ? Thi s is
w hy I-Ie says, ( I-lave you the n no sense? ) - up to I-li s Words :
( Ibrahee m was nei ther a Jew nor a Chri sti an, but he was a true
Muslim Hal1ijal1 (Is lamic Monothe ism - to worship none but
Allah , A lon e) and he was nOI of al-mllshrikooll. ) (SoO/'ali Ali
'1l1Iran 3:65-67)

So I-Ie made c lear that Ibrahec l11 i:MJ fo llowcd th e true Relig ion
of Islami c Monothe ism, which is to have since re intention 10
devote oncse lfto the wors hip of A ll ah, A lone, w ithout partne rs
and to in tentionall y turn away from Iha l which is fal se, in
favor of the truth, whi c h co ntrad icts Juda ism, Chri sti an ity and
paga ni sm. Allah , Most High , says, ( And who turns away from
th e religion of Ibraheem (i. e. Islami c Monot heism) except

•"

,,

~

i

The ...,'(ory oIlhraheclII ~

.~~~~--~--------------~w

287

.

him who befools himse lf? Tru ly, We chose him in thi s world
and veril y. in th e Ilc rcafi cr he will be among the ri ghteous.
When his Lord suid 10 him , "Submi t (i.c. be a Muslim)! " He
sa id. " I have submitted myself (as a M uslim) to the Lord of
the 'Alall1eclI." And thi s (subm iss ion to Alla h. Islam) was
enj oi ned by Ibrahcclll upon his so ns and by Ya ' qoob, (saying).
"0. my sons! Allah has chose n for yo u th e (true) Re ligion,
then die not except in the faith of Islam (as Mu slims - Is lamic
Monotheism):' Or we re YOli witn esses when death approached
Ya'qoob? When he said unto his sons, "W hat will you worsh ip
alter meT' They sa id , ';Wc slwll worship yo ur //all (God - i.e.
A ll ah), th e !lall (God) of your falhers, Ibrah cc m, Isma 'ce l.
Ishaq , One /lah (God). and to Hi m we submit (in Is lam) ." That
was a nation who have passed away. Th ey shall rcceive the
rcward or what they ea rn cd and you of what you ca m . And
you w ill not be asked of w hat they used to do. And they say.
" Be Jews or Christians, thcn you will be gu ided:' Say (to
them, 0, Mu ha mmad), "Nay, (We follow) only the Re ligion of
Ibrahce m, I-Iani/all (ts lf.Unie Mo notheism, i.e. to worship none
but A ll ah. Alone), and he was not of al-l1Il1shrikooll (those who
worshipped ot he rs along wi th A ll ah." Say (0, Muslim s), "We
be lievc in Alla h and that whi ch has bee n sc nt down to us and
that wh ich has bee n sent down to Ibmhecm, Isma·ee l. Ishaq ,
Va'qoob. and to AI-lisbat (the twelve sons ofVa ' qoob [Jacob]),
and tha t which has becn give n to Moosa (Moses) and 'Eesa
(Jesus). Hnd that which has bee n given to the Prophets frol11
their Lord . We nwke no di stinction bc twec n an y of the m, and
to Ilim we have submi tt ed (in Islam) ." So if they be lieve in the
lik e or that which you be li eve, then they a re ri ght ly gu ided.
but if thl!Y turn i.l\vay. then th ey a re on ly in opposit ion. So
Allah wi ll suffi ce you against th em . And He is th e A ll-l iea ring.
the All-Know ing. (Ou r Sibghah [Re ligion] is) the Sibglwh

(Religion) or Allah (lslal11) and whi ch Sibglw" (Religion) can
be better th an A llah 's? And we arc His wO f!. hippers. (ut/seer
Ibl1 Karheer) Say (M uh am mad to the Jews and Christians),
" Dispute you with us about Allah while I-I e is our Lord and
your Lord? And we arc to be rewarded for our deeds and you
for you r deeds. And we are si ncere to I-li m in worsh ip and
obedi ence (i.c. we worshi p !lim Alone and none else, and we

obey His Orders)." Or say you that Ibrahccm, Isma'cel, Ishaq,
Ya'qoob and AI-Asbar (the twe lve sons of Ya'qoob) were Jews

or Christi ans? Say, "Do you know belter or docs Allah (knows
belle r. . . that th ey all were Muslim s)? A nd who is marc unjust

than he who concea ls Ihe tes timony (Le. 10 believe in Prophet
Muhammad ~ when he comes, written in th eir Books) he
has from All ah? And All ah is nO! unaware o f w hat you do ."
) (Soora" AI-Boqara" 2: 130- 140) So Allah, the Ahnighty, the
A ll -Powerfu l declared Hi s K/w/ee/ innocent of thei r claim, that
he was a Jew or a Christian and made clear that he was onl y
a Hanee! - a Muslim and he was not one of the polytheists,
wh ich is why He says, ( Verily, among ma nki nd who have the
best claim to Ibrahcem are th ose who fo ll owed him ) (SoO/'all
Ali '!/JIron 3:68) That is, those who followed his Reli gion and
obeyed him du ri ng his lifeti me and those who he ld fast to hi s
Religion after them ( and th is Prophet ) (SoO/'o" Ali -illlrall
3 :68), That is, Muhammad ~ , because A ll ah leg islated for him
the Hanee! Re ligion, whi ch He legislated for AI-Kilo/eel and
He completed it fo r hi m, giving to him that which He had not
give n 10 any Prophet or Messenger be fore him , as He, Most
Hi gh, says, (S ay (0, Muhammad), "Trul y, my Lord has guided
me 10 a Straight Pal h, a ri ghl re ligion , the religion o f Ibrahcclll,
HOllijall (i.e, the truc Islami c Monotheism - to be lieve in One

God [Allah i.c. to wo rshi p none but Allah, Alone]) and he was
nol o f a/-mllsl1rikool1," Say (0, Muhammad), "Veril y. my salah

I

,

The
StOlY of________________________
Ihmh eem ~
____

.~

~

289
__

~
uo~mr~
'
~

~,

(prayer), my sac rifi ce, my li ving and my dyin g arc for All ah,
the Lord orlhe A/ameen. l ie has no partner. A nd of th is I have
bee n comm anded and I <l llllhc first o rl he Mus lims." ) (SoOl"oli
A I-An '0111 6 : 16 1- 163)
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( Veril y, Ibrahec l11 was an VII/mall (a
leader having a ll the good ri ghteous qua liti es), or a nation,

obedi ent to All ah, H al1i/all (i.e. to worship none but Allah),
an d he was no t one or lhase who were a l-1I1I1shrikooll . (I-Ie was)
Iha llkfu l fo r Hi s (A ll ah 's) G races. He (A ll ah) c hose hi m and

guided him to a Stra ight Path (Islam ic Monotheism, neither
Judaism no r Christian ity). And We gave hi m good in thi s world,
and in the Hereafte r he sha ll be ort he ri ght eous. Then, We have
inspired you (0, Muh am mad, say ing), " Follow the Re li gion o r
Ibrahccm fianjftm (Isla mi c Monothc ism - to worship nonc but
A ll ah) and he was not o r the mllshrikoo ll ) (Soorah An-NoM
16: 120- 123).
I

I

A I-B ukhari narrated on the authority or ' Abd ull ah Ibn ' Abbas
~ that whe n thc Prophet ~ saw the pi ctures in the I-louse (or
A ll ah), he would not e nte r it unti l he had ordercd th em to be
erased ; and he saw (pictures of) Ibrah cem ~ and Isma' ce l
~ . holdin g divining a rrows ill the ir ha nd s. He sa id, " May
A ll ah ki ll the m ! By All ah, they never cast lots w ith d ivini ng
arrows."(I ) It was not narrated by Muslim and in one or A IBukhari's wo rd ings, it was writt en th at he :Jt said , " May A ll ah
kill them ! T hey knew full well that our S ha ikh (i. c. Ibrahccm
~) never cast lots w ith them." (2 )
As ror His saying: ( an UU/m oh ) , a ro le mode l, a n Imam,
ri ghtl y-gui ded, a ca ll er to goodness and one who should be
followed, ( obedi ent to I\lIah ) . That is, subm iss ive to Him in
( I)

Narrated by Al-Bukhari (3352).

(2)

Narrnted by AI-Bukhari ( 160 1).

290

The S/f)lY of /hraJwem ~

•

•

a ll hi s affa irs and all hi s doi ngs. ( }-IOllijclll ) mea ns sincere ly

devoted, whil e being informed . ( And he was not one orlhase
who were al-l1Il1sJrrikool1. (I-Ie was) thankful fo r Hi s (A llah 's)

Graces ) (SoO/·ail AII-Nald 16: 120, 12 1). That is, he expressed
hi s gratit ude to All ah w ith all of hi s bod ily orga ns, incl ud ing
his heart, hi s longuc and the ac ti ons of hi s limbs. ( li e (A llah)
chose him ) . T haI is, All ah chose him for Him se lf, se lected him
to be a Messe nge r and took hi m as 1-1 is Klw!eel. He combi ned for

him the good ness orlhe life of this wo rl d and orlhe Hereafter.
And He, Most High, says, ( And who ca n be better in religion
than one who submits his face (himself) \0 Alla h (i.c. fo llows
Allah 's Relig io n of Islamic Monothe ism) ; and he is a A/lIhs ill
(one who does good). And follows the Relig io n of Ibrahcclll
lIal1iftm. And All ah did ta ke Ibraheem (Ibrahcl.!m) as a Kha/ee/
(an intimat e fri end) ) (500mll AI/-Nisa' 4: 125) . A ll ah , Most
High , encourages li S to obcy Ibrahecm ~\ beca use hc was
lI pon the correc t Re li gion and the Straight Pat h and he fulfill cd
all that was enj oined upon him by his Lord a nd He, Mos t High
pra ised him in I-li s Word s: ( A nd of Ibrahccm who fulfilled (or
conveyed) all that (what All ah ordered him to do or convey) )
(SoO/'all All -Nojill 53:37). T his is why A ll ah lOok him as His
Kilo/eel. And klllll/all (from which the wo rd kho /eel is de ri ved)
mea ns grea t love, as someone sa id,
}Oll have permeated (tokhalla/ta) mJI SO Il/.
Alld tllis is wily fhe klloleel is called kilo/eel.

Likew ise, thc Seal of the Prophets an d the Master o f thc
Messe ngcrs, Muhamm ad ~ a lso anaincd th is hi gh rank,
as confirmcd in thc Soheehoill and in ot her co ll ect ions, in
th e /wdeefli of Jund ub AI-Bajal ;, 'A bd ull ah Ibn 'AmI' and
' Abdullah Ibn Mas' ood, who rcported from th e Messenger of

291
rile Siorr of Ihm/welll ~
.~----~~---------------------------<:~~~.~--~.

A ll ah ~ that he said , "0, people! Veril y, A ll ah has taken me as
a Klloleel, jusl as I-Ie too k Ibrahecm as a Klloleel." ( 1) A nd he
a lso said in the last sermo n tha i he gavc: "0 , people! If I were
10 lake a Kilo/eel from among th e people o f the Ea rth , I would
have take n Abu Bakr as a Klwleel, but ( I,) your Companion,
am A ll ah 's Klloleel." (2) They bot h narrated it from the Iwdeelh
of Abu Sa'eed A I -Khud ri ~.
AI-H aki m narrated in hi s j\lfllsrodrak, on the authority of
Qa tadah , w ho reported on the authori ty of ' Ik rimah, who in
turn reported on the authority o f ' Abdu lla h Ibn ' Abbas ~ Ihat
he said , "Do you reject thaI AI-KII/f/loh shou ld have been for
Ibraheel11 ;,,;g, Ihal A/-Ka/alll (A lla h's Speec h) shou ld have
been for Moosa ~ and the vision for Muhammad ~?" ill
Allah mentioned him in many places in the Qur'a n, praising
him and lauding him ; it was sa id that he was menti o ned in thirtyfi ve places, including fift een me nli ons in 500rah AI-Boqamh
a lone. He is one Ih e fi ve UIIII- 'AZIII, (4) whose names ha ve been
specified from amo ng th e Proph ets in two Verses in 500rah
AI-Allzob and Soora" Ash-Slloom; and th ey arc the Words
of A llah , Most Hi gh: ( And (remember) whe n We took from
the Prophets their covcnant. and from yo u (0. Muhammad),
and from Nooh. Ibrahecm. Moosa and 'Ecsa, so n of Ma ryam
(Mary). We took from them a strong covenant ) (Soomh AIAhzab 33:7) and Hi s Word s: ( li e (A lla h) h,1S o rdained for you
the same Relig ion ( Islam) which I-Ie ordained for Nooh. and
(1 ) Narr.l!ed by Muslim (532. no. 2383). A1-T imlidh i (3655), Ibn Majah (9])
and Ah mad (41 to),

(2) Narmtcd by AI- 8 ukha ri (3654) and tvluslim (2382).
(3) This is an aU1hCIl1ic hadeelh, I1tlrr.11cd by A I-Hakim in Al·Mustadrnk

( 11133).
(4) UIIII- '..1:111: The Five Greatest Prophets: Noah. lbraheem. Moosa. 'Eesa
and Muhammad (peace be upon (hem all).

292
"/11(' SlOn' oj"Jhrtllll'l'lIl ~
.~---~----------------~~--~.
that wh ich We have insp ired in yo u (0. Muhammad), and th at
which We ordained lor Ibrahcclll, Moos<l and' Ecsa sayi ng you
should establ ish the Rel igion (i.e, to do what it orders YOll to
do pract ica lly) and make no di visions in it (th e Re lig ion) (i.e.
var iolls relig ious sec ts). ) (Soora l1 Ash-Shoora 42: 13) I-Ie is
also the noblest of Ullfl- 'AzlII after Muhamm<ld :;I:( a nd it is he
whom he mct in thc seventh heave n, resting his back ag<linst
AI-Baitul-Ma'l11oor, wh ich is ente red by sevent y thollS<lnd
angels every day, after whic h they never renlnl to it again.

It is reported on the <.Iulh ority orAbl! I-Iurairah .-t;o that he sa id:
Someone sa id, "0 , Messenger of All ah! Who is the nob lest of
people?" He said , "The 1110st piolls and God-reari ng of YOll ,"
J-Ie (the questioner) sa id, " It is nOI about thi s that we ask you,"
'-Ie sa id, "Thell it is Yoosuf, the Prop het of Alla h, and the son
of a Prophet of A lIah , the son o f a Prophet of A lI ah, the son of
All ah's Khaleel." They sa id, " It is not about this that we ask
YOll." He sa id, 'Then you are asking about the descent of the
Ara bs. Th ose who were the best in the pre-Islamic period of
ignorance wi ll be Ihe best in Islam provided th ey co mprehend
the re ligious know ledge." I L)
AI-B ukha ri narratcd on thc aut hority of' Abdullah Ibn' Umar
~ th at the Prophet ~ sa id, ''The honorab le, the son o f the
honorable, the son the honorab le, the SOil of is Yoosuf, the son
o f Ya ' qoob, the son or Ishaq , th e son of Ibraheclll," (2 )
All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( And of lbrahccm w ho rulfilled (o r
co nvcyed) a l1l ha t (w ha t A ll ah ordercd him to do or co nvey) .)
(Sool'Clh AII-Najlll 53:37) T hcy sc ho la rs said tha t hc fulfil led
all th at he was co mmanded 10 do a nd practiced all e lemcnts
and bran c hes of fait h and he did not allow th e pursuit of
(t)

Narrated by At-Buklmri (3353).

(2)

Narratl'd by AI-Bukhari (3390).

293
.r~~~------------------w--~,
711(' SUII:\' o/lIwalw('1II ~

hi ghly important ma tte rs to ca usc th c m to neg lec t mi nor
matters, a nd und ertak ing grea t ob liga tio ns did not cause him
to forget small o nes .
•Abdur-Razzaq report ed on the a uthority of •Abdu ll ah Ibn
. Abba s ~ that he sa id regarding the Words of A lla h, Mostl-l igh:
( And (remem ber) when th e Lord of Ibrahecll1 (i,e, A llah) tri ed
him wi th (ce rtai n) Com mands, whi c h he fulfill ed .) (SoorolllllBo({orall 2: 124), "A ll ah tri ed him with (act s o f) purification:
five (acts) in th e head and fi ve in the body, As for th ose in the
head, they we re: trim ming th e mous tache, rins ing the mouth ,
the shmk, (I) snimng water into the nose and parting the hai r;
and in the body they were: c lippin g th e nail s, sha ving the pu bic
region , c irc um c ision, plu ckin g the annpit hair and washing
away the traces o f feces <111(1 urine wit h wa ter," Ibn Abi Hatim
narrated it. (21
I say: And in the Soiree/will it is re port ed on the autho ri ty of
Abu Hurairah ~~ that he said. " Fi ve practi ces arc c hara cte risti cs
of thefitrall: c ircumc ision, sha vin g the pubic regio n. c lipping
the nails, c utting thc mOllstac he short and plucking the hair
from the armpits:' III

His Palace ill Paradise
A/-Hafi:: Abu Bakr A I-Bazza r said: It was reported on the
auth ority of Abu I-I urairah ...;., that he said: The Messenger
of Allah ~ sa id, "Verily, in Parad ise the re is a palace," The
(l)

Siwak: A naluml loOlhbmsh made from the roo t of the arak Iree,

(2)

Nan-dted by tbn r\bi 1-I;lIim ill the 1iifw!('" ( t/359),

(3)

Narrated by AI-I3t1khari (58R9) and Muslim (257).

294

.~~n~~~,~------

The Simy oj Ihraheem ~
______~~-~~~~.

narrator said, " I think that he said it is made from pearl." I-Ie
said: " In it th ere is no cfrlck in it and no weakness. Allah ha s
preparcd it fo r Hi s Klloleel, Ibra h eclll ~ , to enjoy." A I- Bazzar
sa id, "And Ah mad Ibn Jamee l AI -Marwazi told us that AnNad r Ibn Shul1lail told him that Hamad Ibn Salamah sa id th at
he repo rted it on th e authority of Simak, who reported it on
the authority of ' Ikrimah, who reported it on the authori ty of
Abu I-Iurairah 4 ." And he sa id, "We are unaware of anyon e
narrating thi s hadeetll on the authority of I-Iamad Ibn Salamah
except Yazeed Ibn Haroon, An-Nad r Ibn Shu mail and others
and he narrated it in a mOlVqooj fonn. I say that were it not
for th is defec t, it would be in accordance w ith the conditions
requ ired of an authentic hadeeth. Bu t th e compilers of the
Saheeh did not narratc it.

The Description of Ibraheem ~
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Jabi r Ibn ' Abdu ll ah
~ from the Messenge r of Allah :li that he said , "The Prophets
were shown 10 me and I saw that Moosa was a lll an like the
men of the tribe of Shanoo'a h. I saw ' Eesa, th e son of Mary am,
and observed that the person he most close ly resembled was
' Urwa h Ibn Mas' ood. I saw Ibraheem and I obse rved that the
person he mos t close ly rese mbled was your Compani on (i .e.
the Prop het ~ him self). I saw Gabriel ~ a nd I observed that
Ihe person he most closely resembled was Dihyah." (I) Imam
Ahmad was a lone in narrati ng it from thi s source and with this
wordi ng.

(I)

This is an authentic Iwdeeth narmtcd by Imam Ahmad (J 4179).

295
Tlte SrolJ' of lhraheem ~
.r--~~------------------------~
~~
. ~--~.
Imam A hmad a lso narratcd on thc autho rity of ' Abdullah Ibn
'A bbas ~ that he sa id: Thc Mcsscnger of Allah ~ sa id , " I saw
'Eesa, the so n of Mary am, Moosa and Ibraheclll. As for 'Ecsa,
he had a reddish complcxion and curly hair and a broad c hcst.
As for Moosa, he was a large ma n." They asked him, "And
(what about) Ibrah ec m?" I-Ie said , " Look at your Compani on
(mcaning himsclf)." 0)
A I-Bukhari narratcd that Muja hid said that whcn the peop le
mcntioncd th e Da))al before Ibn ' Abbas and said that he wou ld
have the word Kerfi,., (i.e. di sbeliever) or the le tters ka/, fa',
ra' (t he roo t of the Arabi c vc rb to di sbe lieve) w ritten Oil hi s
forehead, he said, " I heard Ibn ' Abbas sayi ng, ' I did not hear
this, but the Proph et 315 said , If you wan t to see Ibraheelll, thcn
look at your Compan ion (i.c. the Proph et him se lf) but Moosa
was a curl y-haired, brown ma n (who lI sed to ride) a red ca mel ,
the reins of which were made of date-pa lm fibers. It is as if I
we re now looking down a va lley." (2)

Mention of Ibraheem Al- Khaleel's Death And
What is Said Regarding His Age
Ibn ' Asakir narrated numcrous reports on the authority of
more th an one orthe Salaf, rega rdi ng the trad it ions ortile People
of the Sc ripture descri bin g how th e Angel of Dea th came to
lbraheem ~, and A llah knows best abo ut their authenti c ity.
It was said that he died sudden ly and that Dawood ~ and
Sui aima n ~ also d ied sudd enly, but what has been said by
the Peopl e of the Scripture and others contradic ts thi s. Th ey
(I) Thi s is <Ill authelltic hmleerh narmtcd by Irn<l1l1 Ahmad (2692).

(2) Narrated by At-lJukh;lri (3355).

.
~

296
__

~
z,~
.~~
~

The Story of Ihmheem
______________________
______ -e.=..
~~

~.

said th at Ibraheem lfJl beca me ill and d ied whe n he was aged
a hundred and seven ty -five years, It was al so said th at he was
aged ninety years at the lime o f hi s dea th and that he was buri ed
in the cavern which was in the Hitt ite reg ion of I-lebron, near
to his wife, Sarah, who was buri ed in the fi eld of ' Afro on AIHaith. Hi s sons, Isma 'eel ~ and I s aac ~ , undertook the ta sk
of burying him. There is also a report lhat prov ides evidence
th at he lived for two hundred years, according to Ibn A I-Ka lbi.
Ab u Hati m rbn Hibban reporled in his Salleeh on th e aut hority
of Abu Hurairah ~ that hc said, " lbraheclll circ umcised him self
with a qoddoom (adz) when he was hundred and twen ty yea rs
old - and he li vcd for cighty years after th ut. " ( I )
Th en Ibn Hibban said , "Men ti on of the rcfut at ion of the claim
of th ose who asse rted that lhi s tradit ion is not 11100foo', We
wcre infonnecl by Muhammad Ibn ' Abd ull ah Ibn AI-Juna id
thai he said: We were told Qutnibah Ibn Sa'eed tha t he sa id:
We were told by AI-La ith, who reported on the au th ority of Ibn
'Ajlan, who in turn reported on the authority ofhi5 fa th er, who
reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah . from the Prophe t
:i that hc said, " Ibraheem circumci sed himself when he was
hundred and twenty years old an d he lived for eighty years
aner that ; a nd he circ umcised himse lfwi th a qaddoom (adz)." (2)
I say: That which is in the Salleeh states that he eirclIlllcised
him self whcn he had reachcd the age of eighty years, and in
another nurration , . 'l CIl he wa s eighty yea rs old. And there is
no cont radi cti on in thcm rega rding how long he li ved aflerwa rd
(I) This is an authentic Iweleel" narmtcd by Ibn Hibban in his S(lIIee" ( 14/84.
No. 6204).
(2) Its chain ofnarmtors is authentic. according to the conditions for acceptance stipulated by Muslim. It was narrated by Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh
( 14/86. No. 6250).

297
The 5/01'.1' o/'hroh('('/ll ~
.r----~~------------------------~'"'~~
, ~
' --~.

- and A llah knows belter.

Mention of the Sons of Ibralteem, A I-Khaleel,
(May the Choicest Prayers and Blessings of
Allah Be Upon Them)
The first SOil born to him was Isma ' eel ~ , w ho was born
o f Hajar, the Egyptia n Cop I. Then Ishag ~ was born to him
from Sarah , who was the daughter of hi s paterna l uncle. Then

afte r her, he married th e Q'.lIltoora th e daughter of Yaq tuna
AI-Kan 'a ni ya h. She bore him six children: Zamfa ll , Yashan ,
Madyan. ishbak , and Shu ah. Th e sixth was no t llillll Cd . Arter
her, he marri ed Hajoon. the daughte r of Ameen, who bore him
fi ve children: Kai san. Sooraj, Uma im, Loota n and Nan s. This
is how Abu l-Qas im As-Suhaili rc pon ed it in hi s book 'AlTa 'reef Wa/-/ 'lam'.

That Occurred Duri ng the Lifetime of Ihraheem W , AlKlwlee l is the Story of tile People ofLot ~ .lnd the Ge neral
Punishment T h'lt Befell T hem
Loot
ha d parted company with his ullc le, A/- Kha /ee/ ~ .
by his comma nd and hi s pe rmi ss io n and settled in the cit y of
Sadoom (Sodo m), in the land ofG hawr Z ug har. It was the main
cit y in the area and it con ta incd land , work sho ps and vi llage s
which were attached to it. It s pcopl e inc luded some of the most
sinful and di sbeli ev ing people, harboring ev il thoug hts and
wicked ideas. They practi ced hi ghway robbery and had ill ici t
sex in the ir mee ting places. Th ere was no sin len that they di d
not indulge in . Th ey comm itted sin s which no man before th em
had comm itt ed, includi ng: men having sex ual re latio ns w it h
oth er men; aba nd oning the wo men whom A ll ah had created
for Hi s righteo us s laves . Loo t ~ called upo n them to worship
Allah , Mosl Hi gh , A lone, wi tho ut ascribing pa rtn ers 10 Him
and forba de the m from indul gin g in th ese unlawful deeds
and vil e, shame less acts. But they persisted in the ir eITor and
Y

Among lite Greal EI'ellfs

299

.~--~------------------=-~~=---~~~~---.
transgression and continucd in the ir debauchery and di sbeli ef
and so Allah ordained a punishment for them which cou ld not
be resc inded, the li ke of which they had never im agin ed or
expec ted. He made th em an ex ample to all of mankind and a
warn ing to all men of intelligence. This is why All ah, Most
Hi gh, mentioned the ir slOry ill a Ilumberofp laccs in Hi s Book,
such as '-li s Word s in Sool'all AI-A 'raj ( And (remember) Loot,
when he said to hi s people, " Do you comm it the worst sin such
as none preceding you has cOlllllli llcd in the 'Alameen? Veri ly,
yo u practi ce your lusts on men inslead of women. Nay, but
yo u are a people tran sgress ing beyond bounds (by cOlllm itting
great sins)." And the answer o f his peop le was onl y Ihal they
said, " Drive them out o f your lawn, these are indeed men
who want 10 be pure (from sins)!" Th en We saved him and
his 1:1I1li ly, except hi s wife; she was of those who remained
behind (in the pun ishment ). And We ra ined down on them a
rain (of stones). Then sec what was the end o f thc l1Iujrimoon
(crim ina ls, polyth eists, sinners, etc.) ) (Soorah AI-A 'raf7:8084)
He, Most Hi gh, says ill SOO/'Cill I-I ood, ( And ve rily, thcre
ca me Our Messenge rs 10 Ibra hcem with g lad ti din gs. They
said, Salam (gree tin gs or peace) !" '-Ie an swered, "Salam
(greeti ngs or peace) !" And he hastened to enterta in them with
a roa stcd calf. But when he saw their hands went not towa rd
it (the mea l), he felt somc mi strust of them, and conce ived a
fear o f them. Th ey said, " Fcar not, we ha ve been sent aga inst
the people of Loot:' And his wi fe was stand ing (th ere) and she
laughed (either, because thc Messc ngers did not eat their food
or for being g lad for thc des truction of the people o f Loot. But
We gave her glad tidin gs of lshaq and aner him, of Ya' qoob.
She sai d (in astoni shment), " woe un to me! Shall I bear a chi ld
wh ile I am an old wom'-1n , and here is my husband, an o ld man?

300

Among fhe Gr(,{11 !;1't: 1If.1

.~~~
. ~~--------------~------~,
Verily ! This is iI strange th ing!" They sa id, "no yo u wonder at
the Decree o l' Al lah? The Mercy of All ah and Ilis l3Iessin£s be
on YOII, O. family (o f Ib ra heem). Surely, li e (Al lah) is Mos t
Pra isewort hy, Most Glori ous." Then when the fear had gone
away from (the mind of) Ibrahcel11 and th e g lad tid ings had
reached him, he began to plead with Us (Our Messengers)
for the people of Lool. Verily, Ibrahcel11 wns , without doubt.
forbeari ng, used to invok e Allah wit h hll111ilit y, and was
repentant (to A Ilah al l the time, aga in and nga in). "0, Ibraheel11!
Forsake thi s. Indeed. the CommandmeTlt o r your Lord has gOlle
forth. Ve ri ly, there will co me a torment lor th em which canno t
be turned back." And when Our Messenger:-. came to Loot. he
was gri eved on their account .md felt hil1l 'jelr straitcned for
them (lest the lownpeoplc should approach them to co mmit
sodomy wi th them). He said. "This is a di stressful day." And
hi s people ca me rushi ng toward him, and since aforc ti me they
used to commit crimes (sodomy. etc.). he said, "0, my people!
Here arc my daughu.: rs (Le. th e daught ers of my nation). they
arc pure r fur you (if you marry thcm lawfu lly). So fear Allah
and dcgrade mc not as rcgards my guests! [s there not among
you a single right-minded man'!" They said. "Surdy you know
that we ha ve ncither any desire nor arc we in nced of yo ur
daughters, and indeed you know well what we want!" lie
sa id, "Wou ld that I had strength (men) to overpowcr you. or
that I could betake myself to so me powerful support (to resist
you}." They (the Messengers) sa id. "0. Loot! Verily, we arc
the Messenge rs from your Lord! They shall not reach you! So
travel with you r fami ly in a part or the ni gh t and lei no t any
of you look back, but your wife (w ill rcmain bchind), verily.
th e pun ishment whieh will amiCi them will amiCI her. Indeed.
morning is their appointed tim e. Is not the morning ncar'!"
So when Our Commandme nt came, We lurned (the tow ns or

Ali/mIg 1111' Great HI'I.}IIf.\
JO I
.~
. ~~-------------------'~~~~,

Sodom tn Pa lesti ne) upside down. and rained on th em ston es of
baked c lay, pi led up: marked fro m yo ur Lord. and they arc no t
eve r fill' from the =alil1lool1. ) (SOO/'Cdl Hood 11 :69·83)

l'le, Most High, says in Soorah An-Nand, ( And (remember)
Loot! When hc sa id to his peop le, " Do you com mi t o/:/it/lishah
(cvil , g reat sin, evclY ki nd of unlawfu l sexua l intercourse,
sodomy, etc,) whi le you sec (one another doi ng evil w itho ut any
scree n, etc.)? Do you approac h mcn in your lusts rather than
worncn? Nay. bu t yOll arc a peop le who behavc sense less ly. "
T hcrc was no o thcr answcr gi vcn by his peo pl e exccpt that
they sa id , " Dri ve out the fami ly of Loot fro m yo ur c ity. Vcril y.
these afe mcn who wan t to be clcan and pure!" So We saved
him and his famil y, except hi s wi fe. We desti ncd her 10 be of
thosc who remai ned behind. And We ra illed do wn on them a
ra in (o f stones). So evi l was the ra in of those who were wa med"
(Saara" AIl-NaIll/27:54-58)
He, Most High , says in Soorah Adh-Dlwriyat, after re la ti ng
the story of the g uests of Ibraheem ~ and how they ga ve hi m
the glad tidings of a son, ( (Ibra heem) sa id , ;'Then for what
purpose have YOLi comc, 0, Messengers?" T hey said . "We have
bce n sent io a peopl c who are I1l11jrillloull (po lythei sts, s inne rs.
cri m ina ls, di sbe li evers in All ah), io send dow n upon them
sto nes of baked clay, marked by your Lord f'o r the I/lIIsrij()01/
(pol ytheists, c rimi na ls, s inn crs those who trespass Alla h's set
lim it s in e vil· do ing by com m itti ng grea t sin s)." So We brou ght
o ut fro m tlH.:rc in the Bel ieve rs. Bu t We f'oun d no t there any
ho use hold o f the Muslims except one (i .c. Loo t and hi s two
da ug hte rs) . And We have len there a sig n (i.c. th c place or the
Dead Sea , we ll-k nown in Pa lestin c) f'o r those who fcar the
pa ini'ul lOrmc ll t. ) (Soorah Adh·Dhariyat 5 1:3 1·37)
In SoO/'ah AI-Qal1]ar, He says, ( The peo pl c of Loot be li ed

the warnings. Verily, We sent against them a violent sta nn of
ston es (which destroyed th em all ), except the famil y o f Loot,
whol11 We saved in th e last hour o f th e ni ght. as a Pavor from
Us, thus do We reward him wh o gives th ank s (by obey ing Us).
And he (Loot) indeed had warn ed them of Our Grasp, but th ey
did doubt th e warn in gs ! And they indeed sought to shame his
guests (by ask ing the m to comm it sodomy with th em). So
We bli nded their eyes, "Th en taste yo u My To rment and My
Warnings." And veri ly, an abiding tonnent seized th em ea rl y
in th e morn ing . "Then ta ste you My Puni shme nt and My
Warn ings." And indeed, We havc made th l! Qur'an easy to
undcrstand a nd rcmember, thcn is th ere any that will remember
(or receive admoniti on)? ) (Soorall A'~ Qoll1a/" 54:33-40)
When Loot ~ ca ll ed upon hi s peop le to worship Allah,
Alone, without asc ri bing partners to Him J lld forbad e them
from committi ng the sins whi ch Alla h has described, they did
not respond posi ti ve ly to hi s ca ll , and not a single man fro m
among them believed in him. Nor did they give up the sins
that they had been forbidden from COl11lllilling; instead , they
continued as they had been, refusing to desis t from their error
and tran sgrcss ion and attempting to ex pel thei r Messenger
from th eir midst. Their response to hi s address to them proved
that they were a people without sense: ( There was no othe r
a nswer g iven by hi s peop le cxceptthat th ey said , " Drive Oll t the
famil y of Lool from your city. Vc ril y, th ese are men who wa nt
to be cl ean and pure!" ) (SoO/·oll AI1~N(lm' 27:56) Thus they
deemed th e Illost comme ndab le behavior to be blameworthy
and requiring exp ul sion. Nothing compcll ed th cm to say thi s
except their obdura cy and stubbornncss. Alla h kept him and all
of his fa mi ly pure, except for hi s wife and He evacuated thcm
from th e city with the bes t evacuat ion and He left the rest of
them to re main th cre. But anc r He had afflicted them with a

Among tile Great EI'ellts

303

.~--~----~~--~--------------~~~--~,
stinki ng, fetid body of wate r, whi ch had waves, but in rea lity, it
was a b lazing fire upon the m and a burning hea t and its water
was sa lty and bitter. Thi s was the repayment for Ihe enormity
and abom ination which th ey had cOl11 mi ll ed, which no peopl e
in thi s wo rld had co mmitt ed be fore the m. Thi s is why they we re
made an exa mple and a warn ing 10 th e people of the world.
In add ition 10 Ihi s, th ey used to practice highway robbery and
betray the ir frie nds and they would utt er and com mit all sorts
of ev il word s anci deeds in thei r meet in g pl aces, to such an
ex tent tha t it was said that Ih ey used to break w ind in front of
their compan ion s in the meeti ng pl ace and th ey would fee l no
shame or em barra ssment toward th elll . It was a lso sa id that th ey
used to cOlll mit the most shamefu l deeds in th e ir gatherings
and would not di sda in 10 do so, nor d id they pay heed to any
warn ings or advice given 10 them by those who possessed good
se nse. In th e!. places and oth ers, they were lik e animal s, or
even more a s tr~ y. They re fused to desist fro m wha t they were
do ing and they had no regrets for w hat they had do ne in the
past. Nor did they show any desire to change in the future. So
All ah se ized them w ith a ca lami tous se izu re. Amo ng the th ings
that they said to Loot ~ was, ( " Bring A ll ah 's Puni shment
upon li S if you are onc of the truthfu L" ) (So oralt A/- 'A llkaboor
29:29) So they requested of him the infl iction of the pai nful
punishment of wh ich he had warned them. At that poin t, the ir
nob le Prophet ~ invoked Allah again st thcm and asked the
Lord of th c \Vo rlds and th e flail (God) of the Messengers that
He he lp him aga inst the depra ved people. So A ll ah was Jealolls
for his jealousness and Ang ry for his anger and Hc answe red
his suppli ca ti on and sent I-lis nob le Messenge rs, His Mi ghty
angels and they visited A/-Klla/eel, Ibra heem ~ . and gave
him the glad ti di ngs o f the birth o f an int ell ige nt son and they
a lso inform ed him of the purpose for which they had come:

J04
limo ll.!'; rhe Crear El'el1/s
.~--~~ ~~=---------------~~~~~~~.

« Ibrah ecm) sa id, "Then lo r what pu rpose you have comc,
0, Messengers?" They sai d, "We have been sent to a people
who a rc IJIlljril11ool1 to send down upon them stones of baked
clay, marked by your Lord for the JJ1l1srt{ooll." ) (SoOJ·all AdhDilar!vat 51:31 -34)
He, Most High, says, ( Then, when the fear had gone away
from (the mind of) Ibrah eem a nd th e g lad tidings had reached
him , he bega n to plead with Us (Our Messengers) for the peopl e
of Loot ) (SoQl'ail Hood II :74). Thi s was because he hoped
that they would repent to Allah, sub mit to Hi rn and des ist from
their sin ful ways.
Thi s is why All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Ve rily, Ibrahecll1 was,
without dou bt. forbearing, lI sed to in voke Allah with humility.
and was re pen tant (to Allah ,ii i the timc. agClin and aga in). "0.
Ibraheem! Forsake this. Indeed, the Com mandmcnt of your
Lord has gone forth . Veril y, there will co m..: a punishment for
them which cannot be turn ed back." ) (Soora" Hood I I :75,76)
That is, desist fro m thi s and spea k of something else, beca use
their fa te ha s been dec ided and th eir punishment , destru ction
and anni hilation are inev itab le. ( " Indeed, the Commandment
o f your Lord has go ne lo rl h." ) . Th at is, He Whose Command
ca nno t be rescinded, Whose Pun ishment cannot be tumed back
and Whose Judgement cann ot be questioned, has given His
Command: ( "Verily, th ere wi ll co me a punishmen t ror th em
whi ch cann ot be turned back." ) (SoOl·all 1·lood I I :76)
The scholars o f laf'ieer sa id that whcl1th e angels, i.e. Gabriel,
Meeka'ecl a nd Israfee l, departed from Ibra heem's presence,
they conti nued until they reached the land of Sadoom (Sodom),
where they assumed the form of handsome men, as a test from
All ah , Most High, for the peop le of Loot ~ and in order to
estab lish the evid ence aga inst them. They sought hospita lity

with Loot ~ and thi s was just before sunset. Loot ~ feared
that if he did not offe r them hospita lity, some other person
from among hi s peopl e wo uld do so and he be li eved them
to be hu man bein gs. ( He was grieved on their acco unt and
fe lt him se lf strait ened for th em (lest the town speople shou ld
approach them to co mmit sodomy with them) . He said , "This is
a distress ftil dayo" ) (SoO/ooil Hood II :77) 'Abdullah Ibn ' Abbas
.:;c, Mujahid, Qatadah and Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said th at it
means a day of seve re trial and tribulation. Thi s was because he
knew that he mi ght not be ab le 10 defend th em when nigh t fe ll
from what had befa ll en others at his peopl es' hands. They had
ordered him not 10 grant hospila lity to anyone, but co nsidered
that it was unavo idab le.
Qatadah stated that they arri ved while he was working on the
land and they sought hospi tality from him. He was embarrassed
before them and tri ed to pe rsuade Ih cm to Icave thi s town and
seek shelter in another. He sa id to the m, "0, peopl e! I know
not of any people on the fa ce of the earth wickeder than the
peo pl e of thi s city. " Th en he wa lked a littl e way, and th en he
repeated these words fOllr tim es. !-Ie (Qatadah) said that they
(the ange ls) had been commanded (by A ll ah) not to destroy
them until the ir Prophet had borne witness to that effect.
As-S uddi sa id: The a nge ls dcpm1cd from Ibrahee m's presence
and headed for the people of Loot ~ and they arrived there
in the middl e of the day. W hen th ey reac hed the Ri ve r Sodom,
they mel th e daughter of Loot ~ , who was draw ing water for
her fa mil y. He had two daughters, the e lder of whom was named
Areetha, wh ile the younger was named Daghooth a. They sa id
to her, " 0 , young gir l! Do you know of any place where we can
find accolllmodat ion?" She sa id , " Rema in here! Do not ente r
(the city) until I come to YOll." She feared tha i some ill might

306

AoulIlj! rhe Gn!(/( E\'ellfs

.~----~~~>----------------------------------~.

befall them at the hands of her people and so she went to her
father and said to hi m, "0, my fat her! Some young men arc
asking for you at the gates of th e city; , have nevcr seen marc
handso me faces of any men than theirs, Let not yo ur people
take them and dishonor them." His people had forbidden him
from giving hospitality to any man, but he took them in secret
and no one knew of th eir presence except his family. BlIt his
wife went out and informcd his people of thcm, saying, "'n
Loot's hOllse there are me n, the like of whose beautiful faces
I have never seen." Then his people came hastening angrily
to him . Alla h says, ( and since aforetime they lIsed to commit
crimes (sodomy, etc.) (Soorah Hood II :78) That is, Ihi s was
in addi tio n to the many major sins they had comm ined. ( 0 ,
my people! Ilere .Ire my daughters (i.e. the dau ghters of my
nation), th ey arc purer for you (if you marry them lawfu ll y) )
(Sool'Clh Hood II :78) J-Ie forbade th em from committi ng sllch
indece nt acts and bore witness that there was not a single ri ghtminded .md intell ige nt ma n among them, nor any good person;
on the contrary, he averred that all of thcm were foolish ,
terribly debauched, an-ogant disbelievers. This was just what
th e ange ls wanted to hear fro m him before Ihey asked him
about it. I-lis people - may Allah's Curse be upon them - said,
in answer to what their Prophet ~ had ordered them to do, (
"They said: Surely you know tha t we have ncither any desire
nor are we in need of your daughters, anJ indeed you kno\\'
well what we wrlllt! " ) (Soora" Hood I) :79) They said - may
Allah's Curse be on them "0, Loo t! You know that we have
no desi re for women and verily, you know full wel l wha t we
desire (Le, men)." They addressed these wicked words to their
nob le Messenger and they did not fea r the infliction of Allah's
painfu l punis hmen t. This is why Lool ~ said, ( "Would Ihm
I had streng th (men) to overpower you, or Ihat I cou ld betake

Amollg the Crem El'ellf.\"
307
.~--~---=~~------------~~----~
.~~~--~.

myself' to some powe rful support (to resist yo u)." ) (Sooral1
Hood II :80) He w ished that he had the strcngth to overco me
them or the abil ity to res ist them and kin to hclp him aga inst
them, in orde r to infl ict all thcm the pu nishment they deserved
fo r these words they had spoken. It is reported on the authority
of Abu J-Iurai rah ~ in a /11{{//00' fonn that he said, " \\fe are
more liable to be in doub t than Ibrahec l11 when he sa id , (
" My Lord! Show me how You give lifc to the dead ." . '-Ie (Le.
A ll ah) sa id, " Don' t yo u bcli cve then?" He (i.e. Ibra hce m) sa id ,
"Yes, but (I ask) in order to be stronge r in raith ," ) (SoO/'oil
AI-/3aqarall 2:260) May A lla h send His Mercy on Loo t' He
w ished to have a powerfu l support. If I we re to stay in prison
for stich a lon g ti mc, as Yoosuf did, I would ha ve accept cd the
o rYer (of fre edom w itholl t insisting on having my guilt lessness
decla red)." It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah ~
that he sa id, " May A ll ah have mercy on Lot; he w ished that he
could bctake himself to some powerful support (to resist them).
(Mea ning A lla h, the A lmighty. the A II-Powerful), Allah did not
se nd a Prophet al1er him except that he was from the wealt hy
alllong his peo ple." (1)
All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( And the inhabitants o f the city
came rejo icing (at the news of th e young me n's arri val ). ( Loot)
sa id, "Vc ril y! Th ese arc my guests, so shame me not. And
fea r All ah and di sgrace me 110 1. " They (the pcop le of the c ity)
sai d, " Did we no t forbid YO LII O enl ertain (or protect) any o f th e
'A lomeell (pcopl e, fore igncrs, stra ngers, etc. from us)'!" (Loot)
sa id. "Th ese (the g irl s o i" lh c nation) are my daughtcrs (to marry
la w full y), iryo u mu st act (so)," ) (SoO/'"II AI-Nijl' 15:67-7 1)
He ordered them to have sex ua l re lations wil h the ir wo me n
lawfully a nd warned the m aga inst conti nu ing on the path Ihey
( \)

This is all authentic //{Idee'" narrated by tmam Ahmad (21332. No. ~76 1 ).

J08

, Imfll/g Ihe Ul'l!o( H1'ell/.\

.r----~~--------------------------~.
were follo w ing and the s in s they were commi tti ng, But they
did not cease a nd di srega rded hi s words, Instead, the more he
forbad e them , the more strenuous became th e ir effo rts to reac h
the guests and the more exci ted Lhey became, But they did not
know the fat c that had been decreed for them and to w hich they
were head ing, Thi s is why All ah, Most Hi gh, says, swearing
by the life of Hi s Prophet, Muha mm ad ( Vordy, by your life (0,
Muhammad), in the ir wild intoxil:lItion. they were wande ring
blindl y , (SoO/"ail AI-Nijr 15:72) He, Most High, says, ( And
he (Loot) indct.!d had warnl.!d them of Ou r IJrasp. but they did
doubt the warni ngs! And Ihey indeed sought to shame his guests
(by ask in g to commit sodomy with them). So We blinded the ir
eyes. "Then taste you My Torlllt.!111 and My Warnings." And
verily. an abiding punislun..:nt sc i/cd thel11 ..:arly in the morning
) (SoO/"oil A I-Qolllor 54:36-38)

Scholars of tafreel' and others have said th at the Pro phet of
All ah, Loot ~, tried to prevent hi s people fro m entering and
res isted the m; the door was loc ked and they were tryi ng to
open it and en te r th rough il. Loot :i!t9 warn ed them to desist and
forbade the m fro m behind the door, whi le they tried to forc e
entry from outside. When the s ituation became stra itened for
hi m, he sa id , ( " Would that I had strength (men) to overpower
YO ll . ur lhall coul d betake myself to some powerful su pport (to
res isl you):' ) (SoOl-all "Iood II :80) That is, I wo uld inflic t th e
puni shment on you. The angels sa id, ( "0. Loo t! Ve ril y. we arc
the Messengers from your Lord! They sha ll n OI rl.!<lc h yo u!"
(SoO/"ail Nood 11 :8 1)

The scho lars) sai d that Gabrie l ~ attacked them and
struck their faces with the edge o f hi s w ing and their sight
was removed , Indeed, it was even sai d that th eir eyes we re
comple te ly e fTaced, leav ing no trace. They retu med to the ir

. / IJIO lIg (h('____________________
Gn'o( E"elll;o,

.~~~

309

~
~c~~
.

homes, feeling the walls and threatening th e Messe nge r orA llah
~ and say ing, " In thc mornin g, wc will dea l with him." All ah.
Most High, says, " An d they indeed sought to shame his guests
(by ask in g to commi t sodomy with them). So We bli nded their
eyes. "Thc n taste you My Pun ishment and My Warnings." And
vcri Iy, an ab iding punishment se ized the m carl y in the morn ing .
) (Soorall AI-Qal11ar 54:37,38) Th is wns a fter the ange ls had
approached Loot ~ and commanded him 10 travel in th e latte r
pan of the night with hi s family and th ey comma nded them
that none should look back, i.e. when they heard the sound of
the punishm ent be ing inflicted on Loo t's people. As for His
Words: ( except you r wire ) (Soorah I-load 11: 8 1) if the word
fo r " wi fe" is read in A rabi c as illlra 'a/ak, then it is possibl e that
th e meani ng is that hi s wife was cxccp ted from the comma nd:
( "SO tra vel wit h your famil y in a part o r the nigh!." ) (Soorall
/-load I I :8 1), as if it was bein g sa id, "cxcep t your wife, do not
make the j ourney by night with her." It is also pl1ssib lc that it
is from His Words: I' and let not an y of you look bac k, except
your wife ) (SoOl'oll /-load I I :8 1) That is, shc will ccrtain ly
look back and th at whi ch will affli ct them wil l affl ict her al so.
This interp retation is stre ngthened by the rec itati on of lhe word
" wire" in Ara bi c as imra 'otak. However, the formcr is more
apparen t in meani ng. And All ah knows better.
As ror His Words: ( and \Ve rai ned on thc m ston es or ba ked
clay, piled up ) (Soorah I-load II :82) The word sijjeel is an
Arabi cisecl Pe rsian word and it mean s forceful . hard and
strong. ( Pi led .up ) that is, falling one upon ano ther upon them
from the sky. ( Ma rked ) that is, the sto nes were marked and
sealed, all of them having th e names o r their victims writte n
on them, as He, Most Hi gh, says, ( Marked by your Lord
for the IIl1ls r{(ooll (pol yth eists, crimina ls, sinn ers those who
trespass All a h's set limi ts in ev il -doings by commilling great

310

•

Amo11g lite Greal EI'ellls

~~>~~~=-=-=-=-~~~=-=-=-~
-•

sins) ) (SoO/'ah Adh-Dhariym 51 :34) and as He, Most Hi gh,
says, ( And We rai ned on them a rai n (of punishment). And
how evil was the rai n of those who had been wanted ) (Soorab
Ash-SIIII'ara' 26: 173) And He, Most High, says, ( And He
destroyed the ove rthrown cit ies (of Sodam to which Prophet
Loot was scnt). So there covered them tha t which did cove r
) (Soomh An-Najm 53:53,54) Thai is, he in ve rt ed th em and
dropped them face down and then covered them wi th a deluge
of stones from sWeet, whi ch followed one upon another, each
one of thcm marked wi th the name of the perso ll among those
present in the city upon whom it wo uld fa ll and al so upon those
who were abse nt on journeys, those in di stant land s and those
who were isola ted from it. It was said that th e wife of Loot ~
remai ned with her people and it was also said that she set out
wi th her husband and her two daughters, but when she heard
the shout and the falling of the city, she tUllled round toward
her people, disobey ing the COlllmand of her Lord ilnd said,
"0, my people!" Then a rock fell on her and crushed her and
she joined her people, since she fo llowed their relig ion and
she spied for them on the gues ts who stayed with Loot ifiY.
Al lah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Allah sets forth an example for those
who disbelieve, the wife of Noah and the wife of Lool. They
were und er two of our righteous slaves, but they bOl h betrayed
(their husbands) so they (Noah and Loot) benefited them (th eir
respective wives) not, aga inst Allah, and It was said, " Enter
the Fire along with those who enler!" ) (Soorah At-Tahreem
66: I0). That is, betray them by not following their Reli gion; it
docs not mean that they llsec\ to co mmit adultery - Allah forbid
that! Never! For Allah wou ld not ordain for His Prophet that
his wife should commit ad ultery, as 'Abdullah Ibn 'Abbas
and othe r Imams among earlier and the later scholars said, "No

'*"

Among lhe Greal E"ellls

•

311

•

wife of a Prophet ever comm itt ed adultery." (2) And whoever

claimed otherwise has committed a grave error.

Allah made th e location of this city into a pu trid sea, whose
wa ter provides no benefi t and neither do the lands surrounding
ii, due to th eir ruin, their bad ness and poor qua li ty. Thus they
beca me a lesson, a warn ing and a sign of All ah 's Omnipotence,
His Greatness and His Powe r in inn ic lin g retribution 011 those

who di sobey I-li s COll1mand, belie His Messenge rs and follow
th eir own lusts. These verses arc also" proof of Hi s Mercy
towards Hi s bel ievi ng slaves, in lh at He saved th em from being
among those who wcre destroyed and '-Ie brought them QUI
from darkness into li ght , as I-Ie, Most Hi gh, says, ( Verily, in
thi s is a n Ayah (proof or sign), yet most of them (polythe ists,
pagans. etc., who do not believe in the Resurrec ti on) arc not
believers. And ve rily, your Lord! He is tru ly th e Almi ghty, th e
Most Merciful ) (Saarah Ash-Slllt 'ara '26:8,9)
And I-Ie, Most High, says, ( So As-Sailwh (punishment aw ful cry, etc.) overtook them at the lime of su nri se; and We
turned them (t he towns of Sodom in Pa les tine) upside down
and rained down on them stones of baked clay. Surely! In this
arc signs, for th ose who see (or understand or lea rn the lessons
from the Signs of A ll ah). And ve rily, they (the citi es) were right
on the hi ghroad (from Makkah to Syria i.e. the pJace where
the Dead Sea is now) . Surely! Therein is indeed a sign for
the Believers ) (Saarah AI-/-lijr J 5:73-77) Tha t is, those who
look with a keen and in tuiti ve eye at them , ca n see how Allah
changed that land and its people and how \-I e destroyed it and
flooded it, after it had been popul ated and made prosperous, as
(2) Narrated by Ibn ' Asakir(14/636). on the authority of Ashras AI-Khurasani.
in a IIImfo o' fonn. though in Ad-DIIIT III-Mall/floor (6/245), As-Su}'ooti
ascribed it to Ibn AI-Mundhir and said that il is mnll'qooj. being 11 saying
of' Abdullah Ibn 'Abba s ~ .

312

AIIIVllg fhe Creal Evc/ l ts

.~--~~~~?,~------------------~--------~.
narrated by At-Tirmidh i and others in a mw/oo' form: "Fear

th e keen eye of the Believer, for verily, it looks wi th the Light
of Allah," Then he reci ted, "( In this are signs, for those who
see (o r understand or learn th e lessons fro m the Signs of Allah)
) (Soora" AI-Hijr 15:75)." ())
As for I-lis Saying: ( And verily, they (t he cities) we re right
on the hi ghroad (from Makka h to Syria i.e, the place where
the Dead Sea is now) ) (Som'ah AI-l-Iijr 15:76) it means they
were on a road that is broad and we ll travelled and it is so until
now, as He, Most High, says, ( Ve ri ly, you pass by them in the
morn ing and at ni ght; will you not then re n~c t ? ) (Sool'(lh AsSagilf 37: 13 7, 138)
Allah, Most High, says, ( So We brought ou t from there in
the Believers, But We found 1101 there any household of th e
Muslims exce pt olle (i,e, Loo t and his two da ughters), And
We have leli there a sign (i ,e_the place of the Dead Sea, we llknown in Palestine) ror those who fear the pai nful pun ishment )
(Saarah Adh-Dlulf'iyat 5 1:35-37), Tha t is, We left it as a lesson
and a wa rn ing for those who are afra id of the Pu nishment or
the Hereafter; who fear the Most Merciful unsee n and also fea r
the ti me when they will stand before their Lord (all the Day of
Resurrecti on); who restra in the ir souls from evil desires and
lus ts, he ld back from committing those dee-ds which Allah has
made unlawfu l, abandoned acts of disobedience and fcared to
resemble the people or Loot ~ , "Whoever im itates a people,
he is onc orthem," (4) as someone said (in A.I-Bahr lII-Taweel):
Though you may not be the peo ple of Loot themselves, still ,
the people of Loot arc not tha t difTerent from you,
(3) This is a weak Imdcel" narrated by At-Tinnidhi (3127), on the authority
or Abu Sa'ecd A I - Khlldri ~.
(oJ) This 'wt/eel" is Im_I'lIl/-sa"ee": it was narrated by Abu Dawood 0 11 the

aU lhority or 'Abdullah Ibn ' Umar -4;.,

Among Ihe Greal En!l1H

.~---=----~-------------------------'~~~

313

-

The di scernin g and inte lli ge nt pe rson, who fems hi s Lord
fulfills wha t All ah, the A lmi ghty, the A ll-Powerful hlls enj oined
upon hi m and he accepts that to wh ich the Messenger of A llah
has guided him , suc h as lawful sexual rela ti ons w ith wives and
slave-girls who possess belluty. He should bewllre of follow ing
every rebe llious devil , for then he wi ll merit pu ni shm en t and
he will be included in the Words or A llah, Most Hi gh: ( and
they arc not eve r fa r from the =alimooll (polythe ists, ev il-doers,
etc.) ) (Soora" Hood II :83)

3 14

Jlmmtg /he Grelll El'enls

.~~.~~
~ ~------------~----~.

Allah, Most Hi gh, says in 500rall A/-A 'raJ, a fter re lati ng the
story of the peopl e of Loot , ( And to (the people of) Madyan
(M idia n), (We sent) their brother Shu 'a ib. He sa id, "0, my
peop le ! Worsh ip All ah! You have no other ilah (god) but
I-lim (La illlha iIIaflah [none has the right to be worshipped
but All ah]). Veri ly, a clear proof (s ign) from your Lord has
co me unto you; so g ive fu ll mcasure and full we ight and wrong
not men in their things, and do not co mmit mi sch ief on the
earth after it has been set in order, that will be better for yo u,
if you arc Believers. And sit not on every road , th reatening,
and hinderin g fro m the Path of All ah those who be lieve in
Hi m and seek ing to make it crooked. And remember whcn you
were but fcw, and He mu ltiplied you. And see what was the

Among the Grc(l/ El'ellls

•

~

.

315

end of the mufsidoon (m isch ief-make rs, corrupt people, liars).

And if there is a party oryoll who believe in tha t with wh ich
I have been sent and a party who do not believe, be patient
until All ah judges between us, and li e is the Best of j udges."
The chiefs orlhase w ho were a n '! 3 nt among his people said.
" We shall certainly drive )
0, Shu'aib and those who
have bel ieved with you fro m our [Own, or e lse you (all) shall
return to our reli gion." lie sai d, "Even though we hatc it ! We

shoul d have invented a lie against Allah if we ret urned to your
re ligion. afler Allah has rescued us from it. And it is not fo r
us to return to It un less A lla h, our Lord. should wi ll. OUT Lord

comprehends all things in His Knowledge. In Allah (A lone) we
put Oli T trust. Our Lord! Judge between us a nd our peop le in
truth . for You are the Best of those who give jUdgment." The
chiefs ofthase who disbe lieved among his people said (to their
peopl e). " If you fo llow Shu 'aib, be sure th en yo u wi ll be the
losers !" So the earthq uake seized them and they lay (dead).
prostrate in the ir homes. Those who belied Shu'aib became
as if they had never dwe ll there (in their homes). T hose who
belied Sh u'a ih, they were the losers. T hen he (S hu'aib) turned
fro m them and sa id, "0, my people! I have indeed conveyed
my Lord's Messages unto you and I haye given yOli good
advice. Then how can I sorrow for the disbelieving people's
(destruction).") (SaO/·oil AI-A ',-0/7:85-93)
He, Most Hi gh, says in Soorol1 Ash-Shu 'ora', aft er re lating
their story, ( The dwellers of AI-Aikoh (near Madyan) bel ied
the Messengers. W hen Shu'aib sa id to them. "Wi ll you nOI fea r
All ah (a nd obey I-lim ),? I a m a tru stworthy Messenger to YOll.
So fear A llah. keep your duty to I lim, and obey mc. No rewa rd
do I ask of you for it (my Mcss<!ge of Islamic Monotheism).
my reward is on ly from the Lord of the 'A/ameen. Give full
measure, a nd cause no loss (to ot hers). And we igh with a true

31 6

A lll ong Ih l! Grear En!llls

.~--~~-----------------~----~,
and straight balance. And ddi':lud not peoplt:' by reduc ing their
things, nor do e vil, mak ing corruptio n and mi sc hi e f in the lan(1.
And fea r I lim Who created YOLl and the generat ion s of the mc n
of old." They sa id, " You arc only on c ofth osc bcw it ched! You
arc bu t a hu man be ing likc us and veri ly. we think that you
are one of the li ars! So cau se a pi ece of the hea ve n to fnll on
LI S. if you are o f th e tru thful! " He said. "~ I y Lo rd is th e Best
Knowe r of wha t you do ." But they be lied him, so the tOllnent
of the day oCshadow (a g loo my cl oud) ~e ize d Ih em, indecd
that was Ih e tonnelll oCa Great Day, Veri ly. in Ihis is indced a
sign, yc t most oft hcm are not bel ievers. And veril y! Yo ur Lord.
!-I e is indeed the A lmight y, the Most Me rc iful ) (SoO/'ah Ash·
Shu 'am' 26: 176-191).
The peop le of Madyan wcre Arab people and they dwe ll ed
in the ci ty of Madyan , whic h was in the land of Mu ' an , on the
border of Ash-Sham, nea r to the rcg ion o f I-lijaz, and not far
from the lake of' Ihe peopl e of Loot ~ - and they li ved not
long aftcr thc m, Madyan was a tribe a fter whom the c ity was
named . They wcre from the tribe o f Madyan , son of Madyaan ,
son of Ibrahce m A/-KI/CI/ee/ ~~ and Shu'aib ~ was the ir
Prophe t; he was the son or Meckce l Ibn Yashjan (Jokshan),
accord ing to Ibn Ishaq. He said , " In the Syriac language he
was ca ll cd Bathroon." Bu t th ere is some doubt about thi s. It
was also said that he was Shu ' nib Ibn Yas hjan Ibn Lawai (Lev i)
Ibn Ya 'qoob (Jacob). It was al so sa id that he was Shu 'ai b Ibn
Thuwaib Ibn 'A bqa Ibn Madyan Ibn Ibrah ec m (Ibrahee m).
And it was sa id that hc was Shu ' aib Ib n 'S aifoor Ibn ' Abqa Ibn
Tltabi t Ibn Madyall Ibn Ibrahccll1. Ot he r ge neal ogies ha ve a lso
been given for him.
In the Iwdeelll of Abu Oharr ~, whie h is in the Selheel! of
Ibn I-li bba n, in the Chaptcr on Prophe ts a nd Messe ngers, the

Allum!! liJt' Greal HI'l'lIh

3 17

.~--~--------------------------~
-wi~,----~,
Prophet :lIS sa id, "A bu Dharr, four (of the Prophets) were from
the Arabs: I-load, Sa leh, Shu 'a ib and your Proph el." (~l Some of
the Sa/aJ re ferred to Shu' aib :-Ml as the "O rator of the Prophets",
due to hi s eloquence, grandeur of speec h and powerful rheto ri c,
when ca lling upon hi s people to be lieve in hi s Message.
It is reported on the authority of' Abdullah Ibn ' Abbas ~ that
he said: Whe ncve r the Messenger o f Al lah !11 mcntio ned Shu 'n ib
~ , he wou ld say, "That was the Orator of th e Prophcts." (6)
The people of Madyan were disbel ieve rs, w ho pracliced
highway robbery; Ihey used to terrori ze wayfa rers a nd they
worshipped A/-A ikalJ, whi ch means a tree surrounded by tangled
woods. They wcre the wo rst o f peop le in their dealings with
others, giving short we ight and measure, while demanding more
than their due fro m ot he rs. So A ll ah sent to th em a man fro l11
among them and thaI was Ih e Messenger of"A ll ah , S hu ' a i b ~ ;
he ca lled on them 10 worship Allah, Alone, withou l ascribi ng
partners to Him and he forbad e them from e ngag ing in the
aforementioned s inful pmct ices, such as chea ting the peop le
out of their right s and te rrorizin g them when th ey were on thc
road. Some o f them be lieved, but most ofth cm di sbe lieved and
so All ah inflicted on them a severe punishmenl. And He is the
lVali (Helper, Supporter, Protector, etc.), Worthy of all Pra ise.
He, Most Hi gh , says, ( And to (the peop le o f) MOlly"'" (We
se nt ) thei r brother Shu 'a ib. li e sai d, "0, my peopl e! Worship
A ll ah! YOLI Im vc no olhcr i/a" (god) but Him. (La i/lIlw illAllah l none has the ri ght to be worshipped but A ll ah]). Veril y,
(5) This /wdeelh , which was narratcd in ;\s ent irety by Ibn Hibban in hi s Saheeh (2177. No. 36 1) is extremcly wctlk.
(6) This Imdeeth WtlS narr.lIcd by At-llakim in AI-Nakim (407 t ). Adh-Dhahtlbi did nOl comment o n il in At-Talkhees. but in its chain ofnarr.lIors is
onc Saillmah Ibn AI-F:ldhl , who has been declared wcak by more than one
schol3T.

3 18

AlIl(llIg 'he Grea' EI'ems

.r----~Y?~,~~~--------------------------------~.
a clear sign from your Lord has comc unto you," ) (SoOt'ali
Al-A 'ra/7:85) Th at is, a proo f, a clea r a rgumcnt and irre Futab le
evidence of the truth of what I have brought to you, ( "So give
fu ll mea sure and full wei ght and wrong not men in th eir things,
and do not mi sch ief on the earth afte r it has been set in order,"
) (Soorah AI-A 'raJ7:85) I-Ie commanded them to be fair and
forbade thcm to co mmi t injustice and he wa med thcm aga in st
di sobcy ing him in this, saying, ( "That w ill be bc ttcr for you,
if you are Be lievers, And sit not on CVl! ry path," ) (SoO/'ali AlA '1'0/7:85,86) That is, on every road " thrciJ tc ning", " , That is,
thrcatening to take the peop lc's money by cxacting taxes and
such like from the traders who entered the city and terrorizing
the wayfarers,
As -Suddi sa id in hi s Ta/seer on the authori ty of the
Compa ni ons, ( " And sit not on every path , thrcatening" )
(Soorah Al-A 'raj 7:86) means that they used to exac t ti thes
from the mo ney of the wayfarers,
It is reported on th e authority o f 'Abdu ll ah Ibn 'A bbas .:;..
that he sa id, " They we re a people who exceeded all limits
and comm ittcd outrages; they would sit .H the sidc of the road
and ex act tit hes from th e peopl e's money - and they wc re the
first peopl e to practi ce that. " ( "A nd hindering frol11 the Path
of A llah those who be licve in Hi m and secking to make it
crooked, " ) (SoOt 'all AI-A 'raJ7:86) So he fo rbade them 10 cut
o ff the phys ical road in th e life of thi s wo rld and th e spiritu al,
religious road: ( "And rcmember when you were but fe w, and
l ie multipli ed you, And see wha t W;lS the end uf the JI1uj."idooll ,"

) (SoOl'oh AI-A 'raJ7:8 6) He reminded them of the blessings
that All ah , Most Hi gh, had bestowed on them , by increasin g
their numbers, aft cr they had fomlcri y been only a few and he
warn ed them of A ll ah 's Vengca nce being visited upon them, if

t

•
,i

I

AIIIOII~ the Grea{ EWIlI'i

3 19

.~--~---------------------w----~,
they disobeyed the guidance th ai he brought 10 th em, as Allah
sa id to th em in anot her aCCOUIll , (" and give not short mea sure
or weight, I sec you in prosperity; <I nd veri ly I fear for yo u the
Punishment of a Day encompassing." ) (SoO/'all Noad 11 :84),
That is, do no t (furth e r) com mit those s ins that you arc c urrent ly

engaging in and do not conti nue 10 transgress in this way, for
if you do, Allah wi ll remove the blessing that is in your hands
and He will cause you to become impoverished and remove the
means by whi ch you have become rich. This was in addi ti on
to the punishment of the Hercafier. A person upon whol11 both

punis hm en ts arc co mbined has acqu ired for himself the wo rst
of bargai ns. So he for bade th em from cngagi ng in un accepta bl e
practices, such as giv ing short measure to ot hers, whil e taking
more than o ne's due frolll them (tat/eel). He wa rned them that
they woul d losc th e ben efits that Allah had bestowcd on them
in thi s earthly life and of the painful pu ni shm ent tha t awaitcd
the m in th e Hcrcafier, and he reprimanded them in th e harshest
ma nner. Then after rebuki ng the m, he commanded th em, say ing,
( "A nd O. Illy people! Give fullmcasure a nd weight in justi ce
nnd reduce not th e things Ihal are due to the peop le, and do not
commit mischief in th e land, causing corrupti o n. ThaI wh ich
is left by A llah for you (aOer g iving the rights of Ihe peop le)
is beller for you, if you arc Believers. A nd I am not set over

you as a guardian." ) (Soorah Hood 11 :85,86) 'A bdullah Ibn
'A bbas 4 and AI-Hasan A I-Basri sa id that ( "That whi ch is left
by Alla h fo r YOli (afte r giving Ihe rights or th e peop le) is bellcr
for you" ) means that the sustenance whic h A ll ah bestows o n
yo u is bc tter th an the money th at you tak e from the people by
mea ns of tat/eel. The Messenger of All ah ~ sa id, "Veril y, riba
(i nterest, usury, e lc.), though it may multipl y, the end resu il of
it is less." (7) That is, lillie. The Messenge r of"Allah ~ a lso sa id,
(7) This is an authentic 'mtiecll' ll arTatcd by tmam Ahmad. on the authority of

320

Among Ihe Grem Evell/s

~.~~~~~~N~~~~~~~~~~-=~==~.

"The se ll er and Ihe buyer have the right 10 keep or return goods
as long as they ha ve not parted or ti ll they part; and if both the
part ies spoke th e truth a nd desc ribed the defec ts and qual ities
(o f the goods), then th ey wou ld be blessed in thei r transact ion ,
and if they told lies or hi d something , the n the bless in gs of th eir
transacti on woul d be losl." (8)
What is meant is that there is a blessing in lawful profi t, eve n
though it may be littl e, wh ile the un law fu l docs not accrue any
bless ings, even though the profi t from it may be great. Thi s is
why th e Prophet of Allah, Shu 'a ib, said, ( "That whi ch is left
by All ah for you (aner givin g the ri ghts o f the peopl e) is better
ror yo u, ir you are Believe rs." ) (SaO/'a" Hood II :86) As ror
hi s say ing: ( "A nd I am not set over yo u as a guardian. " )
(SoOl·al1 Hood 11 :86), it means: Do what I command you to
do, seeking th ereby A ll ah 's Countenance a nd hoping for Hi s
Rewa rd, not in order tha t I or any other may see you. ( They
said , "0 , Shu ' aib! Docs your salah (prayer) command tha t we
leave 0 0 ' wha t our fathe rs L1sed 10 worship , or that we leave
o fT doing whal we like with ollr property? Veri ly, you arc th e
fo rbearin g, right-minded! " ) They said these last words ill order
to mock him , belittl e hi m and ri dicul e him. That is, do these
prayers whi ch you offer command you to forb id us to worship
any deity except your God and order us to abandon that whic h
our forefa thers used to worship? Or do they command you to
order LI S not to do business dea lin gs except in the manne r whi ch
pl eases you and to abandon those deal ings which you forb id,
even though th ey please us? ( " Ve rily, you arc the forbearing,
ri ghi-minded! " ) (Saara" Hood II :87)
'Abdu llah Ibn Mas'ood .. (3745).
(8) Narr.llcd by AI-Ilukhari (2079), Muslim (1532), Abu Dawood (3459),
At-Timlidhi ( 1246), An-Nasa' i (4457), Ahmad (14890) and Ad-Darimi
(2548), on the authority of Hakccm Ibn Hizum ..:o.

I

Amollg Ihe Grem EI'(! I11.1
321
.~--~~--~~~--------------------~
~~~,~'----~.

' Abdu ll ah Ibn 'Abba s ~, Ma imoon Ibn Mihran, Ibn Ju ra ij ,
la id Ibn Aslam and Ibn Ja reer said that th ey - th e enem ies
of All ah - said these words in to nes of mockery. ( li e sa id,
"0, my peopl e! Teilme, if I ha ve a cl ear proo f from my Lord.
and li e has given me a good sustenancc from IIil1l5clf (s hall
I co rru pt it by mi xi ng it with the un lawfu ll y ea rned money).
I wish not, in con trad iction 10 you. to do that whi ch I forbid
you. I onl y desi re rCrOnll so far as I a m ablc, to the best of my
power. And my gui da nce cannot come exccp t from A ll ah, in
Il im I tru st and unto Him I rcpcn!. ·· ) (SoO/'all Hood 11 :88) He
spoke to them us ing courleous and polil e words and he called
them to the tmth wi th the cl earest guidance. He sai d to th em,
" Do you cons ider, den iers ( " if I have a clear evidence from
my Lord . . ." ) (Saara" !-Iaad II :88). That is, if I a m fo ll ow ing
a clear co mmand from All ah, which is that He sent me to you
( and li t! has g iven me a good sustcnance from Himself ) mea ning Prophet hood and Messengership. That is to say, and
know ledge of that was co ncea led from YOll, then wha t ca n I do
wilh yo u?

°

All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Enjo in you al-hirr (pie ty and
righteousness and each and eve ry act o f obedi ence to All ah) on
the people and yo u forgel (to pra cti ce it) yourse lves, whil e you
recite the Sc ript ure (Ih e Tawrah [Tora h])? '·Iave you th en no
sense? ) (Saarah AI-Baqarah 2:44). In the ''!/.i'eer o f this Verse,
it was authenti call y reported from the Messenger of A ll ah 3i
that he said, "A man will be brought on the Day of Resurrec ti on
and thrown in th e Fire, so th at hi s intestines will come ou t and
he will go around lik e a donkey goes around a mi ll stone. The
people of the Fire wi ll gather around hi m and say, ' 0 , so-andso! What is wrong with you? Did you not use 10 order us to do
good deeds and fo rbid us to do bad deeds?' I-I e wi ll rep ly, 'Yes,
I used to order you to do good deeds, but I did not do them

.~

322
____

~
· m~
.~~.~
'

__________

~~

__

Amollg llt c Grem E !'eJllS
~~

__ ____________•
~

myself, and I used to forbid yo u 10 do bad deeds, yet I used \0
do them myself. '" (9) Thi s is the descriptio n of those adulterers
and sinners and those who oppose the Prop hets. W hi le as for
th e superior and in telli gent leaders from a mong the scholars
who fear the ir Lord un seen, their situation is as described by
the Prop het of Alla h, Shu' aib: ( I wish not , in contradi ction to
YOll . to do that whi ch I fo rbid yo u. I onl y des ire re form so far
as I am abl e, to Ih e bes l of my power.") (SOO,.ol1 I-Iood II :88)
That is, in all o f my commands, I des ire naught but 10 exert
my utmost efforts and abili ti es toward reformi ng your deed s
and you r words. ( And my guidance ca nnot come ) . That is, in
all of my affairs. ( Except fro m A llah . in Him I tru sl and unto
Him I repent ) (Saarah !-Iaod 11 :88). T ha i is, I place my trust
in Him in a!lmatters, 10 I-lim I will ret urn and my dest iny is in
H is Hands. T his is a stance of (Iwgheeb) (1 0) to do good_
Then he embarked on a fo rm of tarheeb, (II) say in g, ( "A nd
my people ! Let not my shiqoq cause you to suiTer the fate
simi la r to th at of tile peop le of Noah or o fl-Iood or of Salih, and
the peop le of Loot are nOI far ofT from you !" ) (SoOl-ol1 Hood
II :89) That is, do nOI leI your opposi ti on to mc and your hatr ed
of that whi ch I havc broug ht to you cause YOll to co nlinue in
your error and ignoran ce, fo r if you do, A llah w ill infli ct upon
yo u a simil ar pu nis hm ent 10 that whic h He infl icted on those
who were li ke you among the peop les ofNooh i-Ml, Hood ~
and Saleh ~ , who belied and opposed their Proph ets_
As for Shu'a ib 's say ing: ( "and Ih e peopl e of Loot arc not
far ofT from you." ) (SoOl-al1 !-Iood II :89), il is sa id thai its
meanin g is that they were not far offfrom them in time; Qatadah
(9)

Narratcd by AI-Bukhari (3267) and Muslim (2989).

(10) Tmgheeb: Incitelllcnt and encouragemcnt.

(! !) Tarheeb: To frightcn, alann or threaten.

Among the Greal El 'CIIH
323
.~~~----------------~
~~-=.

said , "This means th at they wcre on ly destroyed before you
yesterday," It ha s also bcen said that it rcfers to place. But in
actua l fact, the Verse carri cs bot h meani ngs, It wa s also said
that it mcans that th ey were simil ar to them in characteri stics
and repugnant deeds, such as highway robbery and taking
money fro m the peop le both openly and in secret, th rough
all kinds o f tricks and sophisms, It is poss ible to reconcile to
all of these opin ions, bccausc they were not far from them in
ti me, di stance or characteristi cs. Then he mix ed wrheeb with
farg heeb, saying, ( "And ask fo rgiveness of your Lord and tum
un to Him in repenta nce, Veril y, my Lord is Most Merciful. Most
Loving." ) (SoO/'all I-Iood II :90) That is, abandon the sins you
are engaged in and tu rn in repenta nce 10 you r Lord, th e Most
Merc iful, Most Lovi ng, because if anyone turns in repentance
10 Him, He is Merciful toward Hi s slaves- more merciful th an
a mother toward her chi ld. ( "Most Loving" ) means, even ifit
is after He has accepted the repentance of his slave and cvcn if
the slave had repented of major s ins, ( They said. "0, Shu 'aib!
We do not understand much of what you SHy. and we co nsider
you a wcak person (it is said that he WHS a bli nd man) among
lIS,'- ) (SoO/-ail I-Iood 11 :9 1)
As for their saying: ( "Wcre it not for your fami ly, we should
ccrtainly have stoncd you ; and you arc not powc rful against
us" ) (Soorah Hood 11 :91 ), this was due to their profou nd
disbe lief and the ir di sgraceful obstinacy, as they said, ( They
said, "0, Shu'aib! We do not understand much of what you
say," ) (SoO/'ail H ood II :9 1) That is, we do not undcrstand
it, nor do wc co mprehend it, because wc do no t li kc it and
we do not wa nt it, so we have no eagerness for it and wc will
not fo ll ow it. And thi s is li ke thc saying of the disbelievers of
Quraish to the Messenger of Allah : ( And they say, "O ur hearts
arc under co verings (sc reencd) from Ihat to whi ch you in vite

Amllng file Greal EI'ellls
324
<~--~,$~----------------------~.

us, and in ali I' cars is dea rn css, and bctwcc n us and yo u is a
sc reen, so work yo u (on your way): veril y, we arc work in g (on
o ur way)." ) (Soorah F'ussilar 41 :5) As for the ir say ing: ( "a nd
we consider you a weak person (it is sa id that hc was a blind
ma n) among us ." ) (SOOtY'" /-Iood 11 :9 1), it mea ns despi sed and
aba ndoned. ( "Werc it no t for your fiun il y .,. " ) . means, your
tribe and your kin sfolk a lllong us. ( "We should certa inly have
sto ned you; and you arc not powc rfu l against us '" He sa id. "0,
my peopl e! Is then my linnily of mo re weight with you than
Allah'!" ) (Soorall Hood II :9 1,92), Tha I is, do you fear my tri be
and my kinsfolk and hes itate to harm me because o f Ihem, ye t
you do no t fear All ah 's Anger or hes it ate to harm me because
I am a Messenge r of All ah? That mea ns th at YOli consider my
tribe more powerful tha n A ll ah! ( And yo u ha ve cast Him away
behind your backs ) (SoO/'oli i-iood II :92), ThaI is, yo u have
pla ced fea r of All ah behind your back s. ( " Verily, my Lord is
surrou nding all that YO ll do : ' ) (Sooralt /-Io od II :92). That is,
He is fu ll y Aware of what you do and He encompasses all of
that and He w ill recompense you for it all the Day when yo u are
return ed to Him. ( And 0, my people! Act according to your
abi lity and way. and I am ac tin g (on my way) . You will comc
to know who it is all whom descend s thc punis hment th at will
covc r him wi th ignomi ny, and w ho is a liar! And watch you!
Vcri ly, I too am wa tc hing with yo u." ) (Soora" Hood 11:93)
Th is is a stcrn th rcal and a pos iti ve warn ing, lha t if they shoul d
continue on th eir path and in thei r (w icked) ways, they would
co me to know o n whol11 All ah's Pu nishment wo uld be infli cted
and upon whom would destruct ion and anni hilation be vis ited.
In an ea rli er Ve rse in th is SoO/·ct/" he said, ( "and all whom w ill
fa ll a lasti ng puni shment." ) (Saara" I-Iood 11 :39) ( " and who
is a liar!" ) (Soora" Hood II :93) That is, wh ich of us is the lia r
in the information , the glad ti dings and the wtImings he gave,

Among Ille Crelll EI'('tIf"
J -'-)
.r---------------------------w~--~,

you or I. ( "And watch you! Veri ly, I too am watching with
yo u."' ) (SoO/·aII Hood II :93). Th is is like the Words or A ll ah: (
" And if there is a party of yo u who be lieves in that wi th whi ch
I have bee n sent and II part y who do not bd ievc, so be patient
until All ah judges between us, and l ie is the Bes t o f j ud ges."
Th e ch iefs of those who wcre nrrognnt among hi s people sn id.
"Wc shall ccrtn inly dri\' c you out, 0 , Shu ' aib. !'lnt! those who
have believed wit h you from our town. or else you (all) shall
relUrn to our rel igion." li e sa id. "Even tho ugh we hate it! We
should have in ve nted a li e again st Alla h if we returned 10 your
religion. ancr A llah has resclied us from it. And it is not for
us 10 relurn 10 it unl ess A llah. our Lord, should w ill . Q UI' Lord
comprehends all things in 1-1 is Knowledge , In A llah (Alone) we
put our trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and our peopl e in
truth . for You are the Best of thc/Oliheell," ) (SoOl'ali AI-A 'ra/
7:87-89)
They demanded that th ose who had bel ieved in Shu' a ib 's
Message reI urn \0 their reli gion and so Shu 'a ib ~\ d isputed
w ith th em on behalf of hi s peop le, say ing, ( "Even though \w
hate it ! ) (Soorall AI-A 'rqf7:88) That is, these peop le (who
ha ve be lieved) wi ll not retu rn vo luntari ly to yo u; if they re turn ,
they wi ll onl y do so unde r comp ulsion and that is because
oncc th e joy of fa ith has pervaded the heart, none w ill be
d iscontented w ith it and none wi ll reject it, a nd no olle can
avoid that. Thi s is why he said , ( We shou ld have invent ed a
lie against A llah if we retu rned to you r reli gion. a fter A ll ah
ha s resc lled liS from it. And it is no\ for us to return to it un less
Allah , our Lo rd, should w ill. Our Lord comprehends alilhin gs
in Ili s Knowledge . In Allah (A lone) we put our trust ) (SoO/'ali
AI-A 'raf 7:89) Th at is, He is Sufficie nt for tiS, He is our
Protector and we takc refugee w ith Him in a ll of ou r affa irs.
Then he sought j ud gment from A ll ah aga in st his peop le and

asked his Lord to hasten the infliction of the punishment that
they deserved upon them, saying, ("Our Lord! Judge between
liS and our people in tmth, for You are the Best oftheJofiheen ."
) (Sooro" III-A 'raf7:89) That is, of those who give j udgment.

So he in voked Allah aga inst them - and Allah does not reject
the invoca tions of His Messenge rs when they seek help from
Him aga inst those who reject Hi m, disbelieve in Him and His
Messengers. and oppose them. But in spite of this, they remained
determined to persist in what they we re doing (Le. disbelief,
sins, ctc.). ( The chiefs of those who disbelieved among his
people said (to their people), "If you follow Shu'aib, be sure
then you will be the losers!" ) (SoO/'a" A/-A 'ro(7:90) All ah,

Most High, says, ( So the ea rthq uake seized them. and they lay
(dead), prostrate in their homcs, ) (Saara" A/-A 'raf7:78) All ah
me ntioned (earl ier) in SOOl'oli AI-A 'raJ that the earthquake

seized them (i.e. the people of Thamood); that is to say, the
earlh upon which they stood shook severely and caused their
souls to be taken out from their bodies, while the an imals in
their land became like sto ne and their (i.e. the people's) bodies
became corpses, without sOllls, un llloving and senseless. Allah
had combined upon th em a varie ty of punishmenIS, lesso ns and
affli ctions and this was because of thei r wicked characteristics.
Allah infl icted on them a severe earthquake, which stilled all
movement and a great Shollt ex tinguished their voices and He
sent a shadow or cloud upon them which emitted fire and sparks
from all sides and all dircctions. But I-Ie, Most High, infonned
us about them in every SOOl-ali in whi ch mention of thcm was
appropriate. And in the course of the narrative in Soorah AlA 'raJ, I-Ie mentioned that they spread fa lse stori es about the
Prop het of Allah ~ and his companions and threatened them
with exp ulsion from their town, if they did not return to their
fonner religion. Allah says, ( So the earthquake seized them,

Among file Grear EI'ellfs

327

.~--~--~~~----------------~~~.~~.~~.
and they lay (dead), prost rate in the ir homes, ) (SOOl'O" A/A 'raJ 7:78) A llah responded to the ir spread in g of fa lsehoods
(iljafJ with the ea rthquake (raj/air) (12) and th e ir intimidati on
(ik/wfilh) with te rror (klreeJall), ( 11) which was Illost appropria te
in this contex t.
As f'or th e narrat ive in SOO1'ali Hood, He mention ed th aI Ihe
Shout seized them and they became li fe less in their homes,
Thi s was beca use th ey said 10 th e Proph et of A ll ah in ton es of
deris ion , mockery and belittl ement, ( Docs yo ur salah (prayer)
command that we leave olTwhat our fat hers ll sed to worship, or
that we leave 01T doing what we like wit h our property? Ve rily,
you are the fo rbearin g, ri ght -minded! ") (SoOl'ali Hood II :87)
So it was appropriate thaI He mentioned here the Shout, which
was li ke a harsh rebuk e for engag ing in this wicked speec h
whi ch they addressed to thi s nobl e, fa ith fu l and e loq ue nt
Messenger and so there ca me 10 th em the Shout, whi ch, a long
wi th the earthquake, silenced them,
As f'or Alla h's Word s in SoO/'all Ash-Shu 'ora ', He me nti oned
that a puni shment se ized them on th e Day of Shadow, A nd that
was a respon se to th eir request and somet hing ap proxim ating
what they asked for, for they sa id , ( ';YOll arc only one or th ose
bew itched ! YOli are but a hu ma n be in g like us and , ve rily, wc
think th at you arc oll c ofthe liars! So cause a pi ece or th e ht!Jven
to fa ll on us, if you are of the tnlthful! " He said, " My Lord
is thc Bes t Knowe r o f wha t you do, " ) (Soorah Ash·S/l/I·aro·
26 : 185-1 88)
A llah, Most Hi gh - Who is th e All-H ea ring, the All·Seeing
- says, ( But they be lied him, so the torment of the Day o f
(12) hjajand rajfah are bOlh from the salllc rOOI verb rajaja ,
( 13) Ikfwfttl, and Kheeftllt are bOlh from the same rool verb kfWftl,

328
Amollg the Great El'ellls
.~--~~
~-~~~~----------------~------~.
Shadow (a gloomy cloud) seized Ih em; indeed that was th e
plI ll ishme lll o r a G reat Day. ) (Saara" As"-S/Il/ 'ara '26: 189)
Then All ah mentioncd the sa mc crit icism regarding the
Companions of th e Aykal/ that He had made of the people of
Madyan, wh ich was that they used to cheat in their we igh ts
and measures and thi s proves tha t they were the one people,
who were destroyed by a vari ety of punishmcnts. Regarding
All ah 's Words: ( But th ey be licd him. so the torm ent o f the
Day o f Shad ow (a gloomy cl oud) seized thel11 , indeed that
was th e punishment of a Grea t Day) (SoOf'ail Ash-SIIlI 'ara '
26: 189). scho lars have sa id that th ey we re affli eted by an
intense heat and All ah sent aga inst them a fie rce wind, which
blew for seven days and neith er water nor shade, nor entering
tunnels avai led them aga inst it. They fl ed from their homes into
the cOllnt rys ide, where they were cove red by a cloud. They
ga th ered beneath it. in order to seek shade fro m it, but when
they had all gathered under it, Allah caused it 10 cnst sparks
and flames offire on them, while the earth shook beneath them
and the Shou t came to them frol11 the heaven and their sou ls
we re ex tracted from them and des troyed. ( So the earthquak e
se ized th em and they lay (dead). prostra te in their homes.
Those wh o belied Shu ' aib beca me as if they had never dwe lt
th ere (in their homes). Those who belied Shu 'aib, they were
the losers. ) (Saara" A/-A 'ra/7:9 1,92) So Allah saved Shu'aib
jfi9 and the be lievers who were with him , as I-Ie, Most High,
says, and He is II'" Most Tnlthfu l of Speakers, ( And when
Our Com ma ndment came, We saved Shu' aib il nd those who
believed with him by " Mercy rrom Us. ) (Saara l! Hood I I :94)
He, Mos t High, says, ( So th e earthquake se ized them and they
lay (d ead). prostrate in their homes. Those wh o belied Shu ' aib
beca me as if they had never dwe lt there (in th eir homes). Those
who belied Shu' aib, they were the losers. ) (SoOl-ali AI-A 'raj

AIIJ(JIIg 'he Crelll EI'elll,\

329

.~-----------------------------------<~;w0~'~---,
7:9 1,92) This was in response to their sayi ng: ( " If you foHO\\'
Shu ' aib, be sure the n you will be th e losers," ) (So omh AlA 'ra/7: 90) . Then A ll ah, Mos t Hi gh, menti oned regarding Hi s
Proph ct ;' that he rcproac hed th em and rebuk ed the m, as
All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Theil he (S hu' aib) tu rned from thc m
and sa id, "0. my peop le ! I have indeed co nvcyed my Lord's
Messages unto you and I have g ive n you good advice. Then
how can I sorrow fo r the disbel iev in g peop le's (destructi on)'- '
) (5001'011 AI-A ''-0/7:93) Th at is, he turned away from their
placc after they had been dest royed, sayi ng, ( " I ha ve indeed
co nveyed to yo u the Message o f my Lord. and ha ve give n yo u
good ad vice." ) (Saarah AI-A 'ra/7:79). Th aI is, I have ful fi ll ed
what was incu mben t upon mc, by co nvey ing tOYOli the Message
in full and giving you the comp lete advice and I have striven
to gui de you to the ut most of my ab ili ty and wilh all of the
mea ns at my di sposal. But tha t has not benefi ted YOll, because
Allah does not gui de those who will full y go astray and they
have no ne to help them. So I do not regret w hat has befa ll en
you after all that , because yo u d id not accept th e advice and
you did not fear th e hum iliation, Thi s is why he said , ( " Theil
how can [ sorrow... '!" ) (SoO/"oll AI-A 'raf7: 93) Th at is, how
can I be sad for a di sbe lievi ng peopl e, i,e, a peop le who do not
acce pt the truth and do not rct urn to it or even look toward it.
So Allah infl ic ts His Punishment upon the m - a puni shmcnt
which ca nnot be resc inded, nor can it be prevented or avoided
by anyone for w hom it is intended?

We shall embark at (hi s point on a detailed di scuss ion
regardi ng the progeny o f Ibra heem ~ , becau se Allah placed
Prophets among hi s offspring and reveal ed Sc riptures to them;
so every Prophet who ca me ancr him was from his progeny.

Men/ion of Isma 'eel ~\
All ah, Most Hi gh , pra ises hi m and describes him as being
gentl e and patient , and the one who fulfi ll ed hi s pro mi ses and
offered hi s prayers regularl y and ordered hi s famil y to do
likewi se, in ord er 10 protect them from Allah's Pu nishment ,
along with those olhcr acls o f worship of thc Lord o f lords to
which he call ed, as He, Mos t High, says , ( So We gave hillll he
g lad ti dings o f a forbe'l ri ng boy. And, when he (hi s so n) \yas

Melllirm a/ fhe Progel/Y a/ lbralteem

331

.~~~~~~~~~~=-~~~~~~.~~.

old e nough to wa lk with him , he said, "0, my son! I ha ve seen
in a dream that I am s laught ering you (offe ring you in sac rifice
to A ll ah) , so look what you think !" He sa id, "0, my father! Do
that which you are comman ded. III sha 'Allah (if Al1ah wi ll s),
you sha ll find me of As-SabireclI (the pa ti cnt ones, etc. )." )
(Saara" As-Saffat 37: 10 1, I 02) So he obeyed his fa the r in that
matIeI' and he promi sed hi m that he wo ul d be pat ient and he
ful fi lled th at promi se and was pa ti cnt.
A ll ah, Most High, says, ( And ment ion in the Book (the
Qur ' an) Isma'eel ( Ishmae l), Verily! He was true to what he
prom ised, and he \Vas a Messe nger, (and) a Proph et. And
he used to enjo in on hi s fa mily and hi s people a.\·-soloh (the
praye rs) and ::akah, and his Lord was plensed with hi m )
(Soarah MCllyalll 19:54,55)
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And remc mbcr O ur slaves, Ibmh ecm,
Ishaq , and Ya'qoob, (a ll ) owners of stre ngth (in wo rship ping
Us) and (also) of relig ious understa nd ing. Ve ri ly, We did choose
th em by gra nting them (a good thing, i.e.) the re mcmbra nce of
the home (in the Hereafter and they lIsed to make the people
remember it. and also they used to in vite the peo ple to obey
All ah and to do good deeds for the Herea fte r) . And they are
with Us, veri ly, of the chosen and the bcst! And re mcmbe r
Ism a' eel (Ishmael) , AI-Yasa'. (E lisha) . and Dhu l-KiA (Isa iah),
all are among the best. ) (Saara" Sad 38:45-48)
He, Most High, says, ( And (rcmember) Isma 'eel, and Idrees
(Enoch) and Dhul-Kifl. all were from among As-Sabiree11.
And We admitted them to O ur Mercy. Vcri ly, they were of the
righteous. ) (Saarah AI-Anbi),a' 2 1:85,86)
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( Ve ri ly. We havc inspi red you (0,
Muhammad) as We inspired Noah and the Prophets nfte r

332
,\/elllivlI oflhe 1'1'01;('11.1' o/'hmheelll ~
.~----~~~,--------~~~~~~~~--~~~.
him: We (a lso) in spircd Ibrahcem, Isma 'ee l (lsma'cel ). Ishaq.
Ya'qoob, and AI-As/)at (the twe lve sons ofYa'qoob), ) (Soora"

An-Nisa' 4: 163)
He, Most High, says, ( Say (Musl ims), "We bcl ieve in All ah
and thm which has becn scn t down to us and that whic h has
been senI down to lbrahcem , lsma'cel. Ishaq, Ya'qoob, and to
A/-Ashtlf (the twe lve son s of' Ya'qoob).) (Soorah A/-Baqarah
2: 136) So methin g similar was re lated in another SoO/'al1, ( I~ )
He, Most High, says, ( Or say you that Ibraheem, Isma'ce l,
Ishaq, Ya'qoob and AI-As/wI (the twe lve sons of Ya'qoob)
wc re Jcws or Christians? Say, " Do you know better or docs
All ah (know bett er. ,. thaI Ihey all were Muslims)? ) (SoO/'ali
AI-Baqarah 2: 140), So All ah ha s descri bed him as possessin g a
ve ry fi ne qua lity and He made him a Prophet and a Messe nger
and decl ared him innocent of all th at the ignoran t people have
attributed to him. He comm anded His be lievi ng slaves to
be li eve in what was revea led 10 him .
A I-'Umawi reported on the auth ori ty of' Ali Ibn AI-H usa in,
who reported on the auth ority o f his fa ther (Le. ' Al i Ibn Ab i
Ta lib ..te), from the Prophet ~ that he sa id , "Th e first person
to speak cl ear Arabi c was Isma'eel, when hc was fo urtee n
yea rs o ld. " (I~) Yoon us sa id to hi m (i.e, the narrato r), "Yo u have
spokcn the truth , Abu Yasa r! II was narrated to me in th e same
way by Abu Jurayy," He married an A ma lek ite woman whe n
he was a young man, bu t hi s father ordered him 10 separa te
from her, AI-' Um awi sa id , " Her name was ' Umarah Bint Sa'd
Ibn Usama h Ibn Akee l, the Ama le kite. Then he married another
(14) Sec: SuurahAIi '/1111'(1113:84 .
( IS) At- Hafiz Ibn haj ar allribulcd it in Fmh A/-llari (6/488, No. 3365) to AzZubair tbn Bakkar in the book AII-Nasab, on the authority of' Ali .to and
he declared its iSllad to be hason.

Mel/rio/l (?frhe Progeny (!/Ibm/i('em
333
<~------~----~~~-----------------<=
~~
~~
> ----~,

woman and hi s fath er ordered him to keep he r with him and he
did so. Her name was As-Sayy idah Bint Muduad Ibn ' Amr AIJurh umi. It was al so sa id that she was hi s third wife a nd that
she bore him twel ve sons. And Muhamm ad Ibn Ishaq - may
A ll ah have me rcy on him - nam ed them."
Isma'ee l, the Prophet o f A ll a h ~, was buri ed with hi s mother
in Al-H ijr and hi s age on the day o flli s death was one hundred
and thirty -seven years.

Mention of !shaq ;,r,;§I, SOli oflbraheem ;,r,;§\, the
Noble, SOli ofa Noble
All ah, Most Hi gh, says, \ And We gave him the glad tidings
of Ishaq , a Prophe t from the righteous. We blessed him and
Ishaq, and of their progeny arc (some) that do ri ght , and
some tha t plain ly wrong th cmse lves. ) (SoO/·alr As-Sqffat
37: 11 2, 11 3) A ll ah praised him in a number o f Ve rses in His
Nob le Book and we have prev iously menti oned in the hadeelh
of Abu Hurairah ~ from th e Messe nger o f All ah ~ that he sai d,
"Veril y, the nobl e, son of the nobl c, son of th e noble, son of the
noble is Yoosuf (Joscph), son ofYa' qoob, son o f Ishaq. so n of
Ibrahee m. " (16)
The People of the Scripture sai d th at when Ishaq &.9 marri ed
Ri fq a, daughte r ofThabwa 'eel, duri ng the Ii fetime o f hi s fath er
(lbrahecm ~ ) , he was forty years of age and she was barren.
So he in voked A Hah on her behal f and she gave birth to twin
boys . The elde r of the m th ey named ' Eesli and it is he who is
known by the Arabs as Al-'Ees and he is held to be the father
of Rome. The second ca me out holdin g onto the hee l o f hi s
(\6) The takhreej of th is Imdeeth has nlrcady beell givclI.

334

Mel1liol1 ojlJte ProgellY of liJrahccm ~

.~--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

brOl her and so they called hi m Ya' qoob. ( 11) He is also known
as Ism'eel an d the Children of Ism' eel claim descent fro m him.
They (the People of the Scripture) said tha t Ishaq loved Ecsu
more than Ya'qoob, beca use he was his firstborn and that his
wife, Rifqa loved Ya'qoob more, because he was the younger
of the two.

Melltioll oftile Amazillg Evellts Tllat Took Place
Durillg tile Life of Isra'eel, Ineluding tile Story
of Yoosuf, SOli of Ralleel
Allah reveal ed details of his life and his affairs in a Som'alr
of the Our'an, in order that we mi ght reflect on the wisdoms,
wa mi ngs and manners therein. I seek refuge with Allah from
the accursed Satan (l8) ( Altf Lam Ra. (These letters arc one of
the miracles of the Our'a n and none but Allah (A lone) knows
their meanings). These afe the Verses of the Clear Boo k (the
Our 'nn lha! makes clea r the legal and illcgallhings. legal laws,
a guid ance and a blessing). Verily, We have sent it down as an
Arabic Qur'an in order th at YOlll11 ay un derstand. We rclate unto
you (M uhammad) the best of stori es through Our Revelations
lIIlIO YOli. oflhis Qur'an. And be fore th is (i.e. before the co ming
of Divine Inspi ration to you), YO ll were among those who knew
nOlhing "boul il (Ihe Q ue' , n) ) (SoO/'ali )'00511/ 12: 1-3)

In summ ary, we may say lilat He, Mosl High, praises His
Noble Book , which He se nt dow n to His slave and noble
Messenger, in eloquent and clea r Arabic language, whieh can
([7) The word ror heel is '(ll/i/), which is rrom the rOOI verb 'tlqal)(l, meaning
10 rollow: and it is rrom this Ihnt the name Ya'qoob is derived.
( 18) This is rec ited berore commencing the recilalion or,he Qur'an .

MI'IIfIOI/ offht' Progeny of Ihmltl'l'lII

335

.~------------~~------------------~.~~~'~--~,

be understood by every rat ional and illl cilige nt person and it
is the 1110st emi nent Boo k sent down frolll the hea ven to the
most eminent of mank ind in an y time or place. Whe ther He
is speaking of past e vents or contemporary on es, it mention s
the bes t of th em a nd th e clearest of thc m and makes the tru th
nppa rent in mattc rs in w hic h people have di ffered. while
refuting. invnl idati llg and rcjcc ting th,lI which is fn lsc. Whcn
it dea ls with commands and prohib itions, it is the most just
of legislati ons, the clcarest of programs, fi ll ed w it h the mos t
obviolls wisdom a nd thc fa irest o f judgments . As A ll ah , Mos t
Hi gh, says, ( And th e Word o f your Lord has been fulfill ed
in truth and in justi ce. ) (Soo r cd1 AI-All 'am 6 : 115) That is,
trut h in the information givcn a nd justi ce in th e commands
and proh ibi ti ons; and thi s is w hy A ll ah, Most High, says , (
We re latc unto you (Mu hnIl11l1nd) the best o f stori es through
Our Revc lati ons unto YOll , of thi s Qur 'a n. And be fore this,
YO ll were a mong those who kncw nothing about it. ) (So01-ah
rooslI! 12: 3) That is, ignorant regarding what was revea lcd to
you therein , as He, Most High, says , ( And thus Wc ha ve sent
to you (0. Muh alllmnd) Roohan (a n Inspi rati on and n Mercy)
of Our Comman d. You knew not what is th e Book, nor what
is Faith. But We hnve made it (thi s Qur ' an) a li ght whe rcwith
We gu ide whosoever of Our slaves We w ill. And veril y, yo u
(0, Muh a mm ~ d ) a re indeed gui ding (mankind) to the Strai ght
Pnth (i .e. AlIah 's re li gion of Islmn ic Monothei sm), the Path of
All ah, to Wh om bel ongs a ll Ihm is in th e heave ns and all th at
is in th e Earth . Veri ly, all th e matters at the end go to A llnh (for
decision). ) (SoOl'ah Ash-Shoom 42 :52,53 )
And He, Most High, says, ( Thu s We re late to yo u (0,
Muhammad) some information rega rd ing wl1m ha ppened
bcrore. And indeed We have give n you from Us a Re minder
(thi s Qur ' an). Whoever turn s away from it (i.e. thi s Qur'a n:

336

AlelllivlI of ,he Progeny vf l!Jmhecm ~

.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--~~.

that is. docs not be li eve in it or act on its orders), ver il y. they
will bear a heavy burd en (of sins) on the Day o f Resu rrec tion,
They wil l abi de in that (s tatc in th e Fire ofi-lel l), and ev il indeed
wi ll il be thaI load for Ihcm on the Day of Resu rrec tion. )
(SoOl'al1 UI flo 20:99-10 I) T hat is, whoever rej ects thi s Qur 'an
and foll ows a nother book w ill have thi s th reat fulfill ed upon
hi m, as reported in the hadeeth narrated in Imam Ahmad 's
Musl1ad and in the Slll1al1 of At-Tirm idhi , on the authority of
the Commander of th e Fa ithful, ' Ali ~ , in a mm/oo' [onn and
al so in a mawqoof fOfm : "Whoever look s for gu idance from
some source other than it (i,e. the Qur 'an), A ll ah will cause
him to go (further) astray. " (19)
Imam A hmad narrated on the authori ty of Jabir Ibn ' Abdill ah
~ that 'Ulllar Ibn AI- Khatt ab ~ came to the Prophet fi w ilh

a book wh ich he had obta ined fro m one of the People of the
Scripture and he read it to the Prop bet ii. The Prophet ~
beca me angly and said , "0 , Ibn Al-Kh att ab, arc we goin g lO
play in re ligion? By A ll ah, I have come to you with a pure
Re li gion. Do not ask them abou t anythin g, for they may say
somethin g true and you do not be li eve what th ey say or they
may say someth ing false and you believe it. By Allah, IfMoo sa
was ali ve he wo uld not have done anything but follow mc." Its
chain of narrators is aut henti c. (20)
All ah, Most Hi gh, says, « (Rcmcmbo..!r) whe n Yoosufsa icl to
( 19) Narrated by Imam Ahmad (706) and At-Tinnidhi (2906) and its chains of
narralors is weak.
(20) Narroted by Imam Ahmad (14 736) and declared aUlhentic by Ihe author
(i.e. Ibn Kalheer). Bul I say: In its chain o r narrators is one Mujalid Ibn
S:l'ced (who is weak, accord ing 10 AI- l3ukhari , who said in AI-Tal'eekll
As-Sagheer, " Ibn AI-Qal\an said he is weak and Ibn AI-Mahdi would not
narrote from him, while Yahya Ibn Ma 'ccn, Ibn Hibban and Abu Hmilll
said tlmt his !todeelll cannol be cited as evidence :md he is weak .")

Melllioll 01' fhe PI"O{Jellol' Oo( I hrahecm

337

~.-=~~"----~'~__~~-=~~~=-~~XO~oW~Y"~---.
hi s father, " 0, my fath er! Ve rily, I saw (in a dream) e leven stars
and the S UIl and the moon ; I saw them prostra ti ng the mse lves
to me ," I-Ie (hi s fath er) said. "0, Ill y so n! Re late not your
vision to you r brothers, lest th ey arran ge a plot against YO ll .
Veril y! Slwifafl is to man an open enemy ! Thus w ill your Lord
choose you and leach yo u th e interpretat ion of d rea ms (a nd
ot her th ings) and pe rfect Hi s Favor Oil you a nd oOlhc o ffspring
of Ya ' qoob. as He perfec ted it o n your fa th ers, Ibra hccm and
Ishaq aforct imc! Verily. your Lord is A ll -know ing, Most Wise: '
) (SoO/ooil YOOS II! 12 :4-6)
Ya ' qoob i:2iY had twe lve sons and all of th e twe lve tri bes of
the C hildren of Isra ' ee l ascribe the ir ances try to them. The
nobl est, th e most revered and the greatest of the m was Yoosuf
~ . A group of scholars has stated the opinion that none was
a Prophet except him and th at hi s brothers did not rece ive any
reve lat ion. It is apparent fr0111 the ir acti o ns and th eir words
in th is story that thi s view is correct. Those who cl a imed that
they were Proph ets c ited as ev idence the Words of All ah ,
Most Hi gh : ( Say (Muslims), 'olVe beli eve in A ll a h and that
wh ich ha s been sent down to LIS and th at w hich has been sen!
down to Ibraheem, Isma' eel, Ishag. Ya'goob, and to AI-Asbal.
) (SoO/ooil AI-Boqarail 2: 136) They clai m ed that these (th e
brothers ofYa'qoob ~) are AI-Asbat, but the ev idence for this
is not strong, because what is meant by AI-Asbat is th e tribes
of the Children of Isra 'eel and none of th em was Prophet 10
whom Reve lation was se nt down fro l11 the heaven . And A ll ah
knows better.
W hat supports the cl a im Ih at on ly Yoosuf ~ was alone
se lec ted fro m a mong hi s brothers to be a Messenger and
Prophet is the fac t th aI hi s Prophethood and th e rece ipt o f
Reve lation are attested to in seve ral Verses in the Qur ' an and

338

,r----~
'-~~~~
·

Mellfioll (!f ____
lhe ProgellY
________________
~

()lIbnlhl'elll .~,
_"_c_____________

there is no evidence anywhere in th e Qur'an (hat any of them
except Yoosuf ~ was a Prophct wh ich proves what we said.
But onc must take into considera tion the narration of Imam
Ahmad, on the authority of Abdu llah Ibn ' Umar 4-, in which
he reported that the Messenger of Allah ~ said, "Veril y, the
noble, son of the noble, son of thc noble, son of the noblc is
Yoosuf, son ofYa'qoob, son of lshaq, son of Jbrahecm." (2 1)
I

The sc holars of laj~·eer and others said th aI when Yoosuf :-MJ
was a boy - before hc rcached pubcrty - he saw in a dream as
if ( clcven sHirs ) - this is a rcference to his brothers - ( and
the sun and the 11100n ) - and this is a refe rencc to his pa rents prostra ti ng to him. His fa Lher understood that this meant that he
would ac hievc a high rank and elevatcd status in thc life of this
world and in th e Herenf1er, since his parents and his brothcrs
submi ttcd to him in his dream. So he ordered hi m to keep it
secret and not to relate it to his brothers, in case thcy became
afflicted wit h envy and devise sOl11e plot to harm him. This
proves what we ha ve said (i.e. that they we re not Prophets).
This is why it has been reported in SOllle traditions: "Seek hel p
in att aining yo ur needs by concealmcnt of thel11, because every
recip ient of blessings is envied." (22)
( Thus ),our Lord will choose you. ) (Soorall )'oos I/ 12:6)

That is, as He showcd you this grem vision, if you keep it
secret, ( yo ur Lord will choose you ) . That is, I-Ie will favo r
you with all manne of kindn ess and mercy ( and leach you
the in terpre tati on of speech ) _ That is, He will make yo u
comprehend th e mea nings of specch and the interpretation of
dreams, whi ch non e but you wi ll undersla nd ( and perfect His
(2 1) The wkhreej of this IUIl/cetll has ulrcady bccn given.
(22) This is authentic, and iI was also said that it is JIlI.felll. due to supporting
narr:ltions. (t was 1l1lrTllled by At-Tabaran i in AI-K(/IJc/!/" (20/94, No. 183).
on the authority of Mu' ndh Ibn Jabal ~.

"'ell/iUII oj Ih" PlVgellY o/ Ibralteelll

339

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~.

Favor 0 11 YOLI ) . That is, w ith Revelation to you ( and on the
fam ily ofYa ' qoob ) . T hat is, because oryou, and thro ugh YOll ,
they wi ll attain the best of the life of thi s worl d and of the
Hereafter ( as He pe rfccted it on your fat he rs, IbraheeJ11 and
Ishaq aforetim e! ) (50omh Yoosllf 12 :6). That is, He bCSLOWS
Hi s Bless ings on YOll and favors you with Prophethood, just as
He gave it to your father, Ya ' qoob if:i:B, your grandfat her, Ishaq
~ and your grea t-grandfa ther, fbrahec lll , AI-Khaleel. ( Veril y,
your Lord is A ll -Knowing, Most Wise ) (Soorah Yoast!! 12:6),
as He, Most Hi gh, says, ( A ll ah Knows best w it h whom to
place Hi s Message ) (Soora" AI-All 'am 6: 124).
Thi s is why, when the Messe nge r of A ll ah 3:i was asked wh ich
of the pcop le was noblest, hc said, " Yoosuf is the Prophet of
Allah, son of the Prophet of All ah, th e son of the Prophet of
A ll ah , the son of A llah 's Klta/eel." (23)
A llah, Most Hi gh, says, ( Veri ly, in Yoosufand hi s bret hren,
thcre were Ay af (proofs, evidences, Verses, lesson s, signs,
re ve hlli on s, etc.) fo r those who ask. Whe n th ey sa id : "Truly,
Yoosuf and hi s broth er Bin ya mcen (B cnj amin) are loved more
by our fath er than we, but we are 'Ilsbah (a strong group) .
Reall y, ou r Huhcr is in pl ain crror. Kill Yoosuf or cast him out
to some (other) land , so thm th e fav or o f your fat her may be
give n 10 you alone. and after that you wi ll be rightcous folk (by
intendi ng re pentance beforc committi ng th e sin)." On e from
among them snid , " Kill not Yoosllr, but if you lllUSt do it , throw
him down to th e bO ll om ora we ll , he will be picked up by some
carava n o f tra ve le rs." ) (Soorah Yoosllf 12:7- 10)
Alla h, Most Hi gh, draws our atte nti on to the s igns, wisdo ms,
proofs, warn ings and indi sputable evide nces contained in thi s
(23) Narrated by AI- Bukhari (3374), Muslim (337 t) and Imam Ahmad (9284),

on the authority of Abu I-I urairah ~.

340
J\ le/lfioJl of ,lte Pmgl'II)' of l11mlll'l'm ~
.~----w------~~~~~~~~~,
story, The n He me l1lions th e e nvy fe lt by Yoosuf's brothers
towards him , beca use of the fact that his father loved him and
hi s brothe r Binya mccll morc than them . (Yoosuf ~ and hi s
brot hc r, Bi nya lll ee n were bo th born to thc sa mc moth er, wh il e
the ot hers were born of another mot her). They said, " We have
more right to his love than these two. " ( '·Rea ll y. ou r Huher is in
pl ain crror." ) (SoOl'al1 Yooslif I2:8) That is, by lov ing them more
tha n us. Then they consulted one another regardin g th e idea of
killing him or expelling him to a land from whi ch he wou ld not
return , so that th cy would be left alone w ith thcir fathe r, th at
his love wo uld be devo ted sole ly 10 them and woul d suffice
thcm. They harbored within th em the intenti on of repen tin g to
Allah after that. So w hen they dccided on the ir pl an a nd agrced
on it ( One from a mong thc m said ) (So oral1 Yooslif 12: I 0) Mujah id said that the on e referrcd to was Sham' oon. As-Suddi
said that it was Yahooza. Qatadah and Muhammad Ibn Ishaq
asscrted Ihal it was the oldest o f them, Roobeel. ( One from
a mong them sa id. "Ki ll nol Yoosuf (Joseph). but ifYO llll1U SI do
it, throw him down 10 the bollom ora we ll , he will be picked up
by so ml.! caravan of tra ve lers." ) (Soora/z Yooslif 12: 10) That is,
some passing caravan of travc lers. ( "bu t ifYOlllllllst do it," ) .
mea ns, if you must do what you have mentioned , then do w hat
J have suggcsted, rather than ki lling him or bani shi ng him . So
they agreed on the ir dccision to do th is, a t wh ich po int they
said, ( Thcy sa id. "0. our !iuher! Why do you 110t IruSlliS wi th
Yoosuf, when we <Ire indeed hi s well-wishers'! Send him wi Lh
us IOmorrow 10 enjoy himsclf'a nd play, and ve ril y, we will take
care of him ." He (Ya'qoob) sa id , ''Truly, it saddens me that you
should tnke him away. I fea r les t a wo lf should devour him,
w h il~ you arc ca re less o r him." Th cy sa id. "If a wo lf devou rs
him. wh ile we arc '/ls/wlt (a strong group) (to guard him), then
surely. we arc the losers." ) (Sooml1 Yoo.'ilif 12: 11-14)

\h'lIfioll oj Iht! PmgeIH' oj'Jlm,hl'/!m

341

.r------------------------------~~~--~.
They asked the ir fa ther to send them with their brother,
Yoosuf 'A!.' . and th ey cla im th at th ey inte nd ed 10 ta ke good care
o f him and to play wi th hi m an d give him a good tim e. while
in fac t, th ey harbored fee lin gs toward him o f whi ch A ll ah was
full y Aware, The o ld ma n - may Alla h's c ho icest prayers and
bless ings be upon him - answered them, saying, "0, my sons!
It gri eves me 10 be pa rted from him for even an hour o f the day,
and in additi on 10 thi s, I fear that you w ill be busy w ith your
games a nd you will not ta ke care of him and that awo l f may
come and de vour him , a nd he will be un able to de fend himse lf
aga in st it , due to hi s youth fuln ess and yo ur neg lect of him,"
( Th ey sa id, " I f a wolf devours him , while we are 'lIsba" (to
guard him), then su rel y, we are th e losers," ) (SoOl'ali YOOSII!
12: 14). That is, if a wo lfa ll acks him and cats him whil e he
is among us, or we a re di st rncted from him and a llow thi s to
happen, the n we mus t be a powe rl ess gr0u p, and we w ill be
dest royed (then surely, we arc the losers),
A ll ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( So. when they took him away. th ey
all agreed to thro w him dow n to th e bOllom of the well. and
We inspircd in him. " Indeed. you sha ll (one day) inform them
of thi s affa ir of thei rs. whe n they know (you) no\. '· A nd they
cmnc to their father in the earl y part of the ni gh t weepi ng. They
said. "0. our fat h er~ We we nl racing with one a nothe r. and left
Yoosuf by our belongings und n wolf devoured him: bUI you
will neve r beli eve us eve n whe n we speak lh e truth:' And they
brou ght hi s shin stain ed with fa lse blood. l ie sai d. "Nay. bu t
yOli yourse lves ha ve made lip a ta lc. So (for me) pati cnce is
most fitling , And it is Alhlh (Alone) Whose help can be sought
against that whi ch you assert," ) (Soorah Yoos /if 12: 15- 18)
They continued to press th e ir fathe r, until he sent Yoos uf ~'
wi lh them. But no soone r were they OUI o f hi s sight th an they

342
Mention oJthe Progeny ojlbmheem ~
.~--~.~~~
> ----------~~~~~;;~~~~~~~.

began to revile hi m and insult him by wo rds and deeds. They
agreed to cast hi m into the depths of a well and Lhey left him
on the slOne whi ch projects fro m the middle of it, 0 11 whi ch a
person who descends into the well to fill his bucket wo uld sit,
when the water level is low. Whe n they cast him int o the we ll,
Allah inspired him, by infonll ing him that he would certai nl y
be saved fro m this calam ity into which he had fallen and that
he would certa inly infonn his brothers of th is deed of theirs,
wh ile he was in a position of powe r and they were in need of
him and feared him ( "when they know (you) not." ) (Soora"
YooslI/12:15)

Then, when they had placed him in the well and left him
th ere, they took his shirt and stained it with blood and returned
to their father at night and they were weep ing, i.e. for their
brother. This is why one of the Sala/sa id, "Be not dece ived by
th e weeping of one who comp lains of having been wronged,
because he may be a wrongdoer, though he weeps," and he
mentioned the story of Yoosuf ffi:B and how th ey came to
their fa ther al ni ght and they werc weepi ng. They wep Lin the
darkncss of ni ght, in order 10 hi de their treachery (Le. believing
tha t their faces wou ld not betray them in the poo r light).
Allah, Most High, says, ( They said, "0, our father! We went
racing wi th one another, and left Yoosuf by our belongings."
) (SoO/'a" YooslI/12: 17). That is, we left him by our clothes,
( "and a wolf devoured him." ) (Som'all }oo.nif 12: 17). That
is, while we were absent, rac ing wi th each other. They said, (
"but you will never believe us even when we speak the truth."
) (SoO/'all Yoo.\·lif 12: 17). ThaI is, you will not believe what
we arc telling you regard ing the wolf hav ing devoured Yoosuf,
even if you consider us truthfu l. So what about when you
suspect that we are not trut hful, especiall y since yo u feared that

Mel/lioll o/ fhe Progeny o/Ihraheem
343
.~----~----~~~--------------~<~
~~~.~--~.

the wo lf mi ght devour Yoosufand we guara nt eed 10 you that he
woul d be sa fe, due to our numbers around him and so we have
co me to be co ns idered untrustworthy by you. So we do not
blam e you for not be lieving us in these circllmstances. ( And
they brought his shirt stained with fa lse bl ood ) . That is, with
fabr icated evidence; they had laken a baby goat and slaught ered
it, then they look it s blood a nd smeared it on hi s shi rt , in order
to lend c redence to their claim that a wo lf had eaten hil11. It
was sai d th at th ey forgot to tear th e shirt - and the ruin of lying
is forget fu lness. When the signs o f doubt became apparent in
them, their deed did not surprise th eir fa th er, because he knew
of their enmity toward Yoosuf ittB and the envy they harbored
toward him , because of the fa ct tha t he loved him more than
them, due to the nob le and venerab le attributes he di spl ayed
in his c hildhood - allributes which Alla h had bestowed on
him , as He had dest ined Prophethood for him. Once they had
persuaded him to let them take their brother, no sooner had
they taken him , de pri ved him of him and removed him from
hi s sight , than they returned, weep ing over what they had done
aga in st hi m and claim ing that th ey had been help less to save
him. This is why Ya ' qoo b ~ sa id, ( "Nay, but you yo urse lves
have made up a tal c. So (for me) pati ence is most fittin g . And it
is All ah (A lone) Whose help ca n be sought again st th at whi ch
YO LI asse rt o" ) (SoO/ooil

)oosll( 12: 18)

A ll ah , Most Hi gh, says, ( An d th ere came a caravan; they
sent their water-drawe r, and he let dow n hi s bucke t (into the
well). He said, " What good news! Here is a boy." So they hid
him as merchand ise. And All ah was the All- Knowing regarding
what they did . And they so ld him for a low pri ce - fo r a few
dirhams (i.e. for a few silver coin s). And they we re of those
who regarded him as in signifi cant. ) (SoO/'all YODSlif 12: 19,20)

344
1\ f('/IliOIl of the Progeny of fbmheem ~
.~--~'~~~~
' --------------~~~~~~--------~.

Allah, Most High, informs Ihal Yoosuf ~, when he was cast
into the well, sal wai ling for Allah 10 de li ve r him and bestow
Ki ndn ess on him. ( And there came a ca ra va n ) . means, a pany
of lTavelers. ( He said, "What good news! ) That is, whal good
fortune forme ! ( "Here is a boy." So they hid him as merchandise
) . That is, thcy pretended that he was wilh thcm and Ihal he was
one of the slaves that made up their merchandise. ( And Alla h
\\ns theA ll-Knowing regarding what they did ) . That is, He was
full y acquainted with the pial th at his brot hers had conspired
aga inst him and the way those who fou nd him hid hi m amongst
th ei r merchandise. BlII He did not intervene due 10 His Greal
Wisdom, His All-Enco mpassing Omnipotence and the Mercy
whic h woul d be bestowed on the people of Egypt at the hands
of this young boy, who entered Ihe land in the form ofa capti ve
slave, and after that, he came to hold the reins of powe r in his
hands and Allah benefited them th rough him, in the life of this
world and the Hereafte r in ways 100 numerous to menti on or
desc ri be. When Yoosuf's brot hers rea lized that the caravan had
taken him, they overtook them and said, "Thi s is our slave who
has run away from li S," and they (th e people of Ihe caravan)
purchased him from Ihem fo r a low pri ce. ( J] few dirhams (i.e.
for a few sil ver coi ns). And they were of those who regarded
hi m as insignifi ca nt ) (SoO/'all Yoosly l 2: 19)
Allah, Most High, says, ( And he (t he Illan) from Egypt who
bought him, said to his wife. "Make his stay comfortab le." ) .
ThaI is, be kind to him ( "may be he will profi t us or we shall
adopt him as a son. " ) (SoO/'all rooslI! 12:2 1) This was from
Allah 's Kindness, Mercy and BCllcnce nce toward him, as it
was His Will that He should make him fee l at home ancl give
hillll he goodness of this life and the goodness of the Herea fter.
Scholars said that the person who bought him was an Egyptian
and his title was AI- 'Azeez; he was the min ister in charge of the

Melllioll ojlhe Pmgell.\' oj I/)raheem
345
.~--~--~~~--------~
~
~.~~.

treasury. Ibn Ishaq sa id, "1-1 is name was' A t feer, so n of Ruh aib."
He sa id, "The Fir'awn of Egypt at that time was Ar-Rayya n,
son of AI-Wa leed and the name of the wife of AI- 'Azee= was
Ra'ce l, da ughter of Ru'aee l." Oth ers sa id that her name was
Zula ikha; but it wo uld appea r th at that was he r ni ckname.
Ibn Ishaq sa id, " II was report ed on the authority of ' Abdullah
Ibn Mas ' ood ..;:0 that he said, 'The nobles t of peopl e are three:
The' Azeez ofEgyp l, when he said to hi s wife, ( " Make hi s stay
comfo rtab le." ) , the woman who sa id to her fath er, regarding
Moosa, ( " 0 , my fa the r! I-li re him! Veri ly, the best of men for
YO ll to hi re is the stro ng, the tru stworth y. " ) (Soorah AI-Qasas
28:26). and Ab u Bah As-Siddeeq .:;o, when he a ppoint ed 'U mar
Ibn AI-Khattab .:Go as hi s sllccessor." (24)
Allah, Most High , says, ( Thus did \Vc establi sh Yoosuf in
th e land ) (Soorah Yoosu! 12: 2 1) That is,j ust as We ordained
th at AI- 'Azeez and hi s wife shou ld trea t Yoosllf ~ kindly and
take ca re of him , so did We estab lish him in the land of Egyp t
( that We mi glll teach hi m th e interpre tation o f events. ) Tha t
is, the understanding of them; and the interpretation of dreams
is a part of th at. ( And All ah has full powe r and control ove r
Hi s Affa irs ) . That is, when A ll ah wills a thin g, He orda in s the
causes of it. Thi s is why He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And he (th e
ma n) from Egypt who bought him, said to hi s wife, " Make
hi s stay comfortab le, that maybe he will profi t us or we shall
adopt hi m as 3. son." Thus di d We es tab li sh Yoosuf in the land ,
that We mightt cach him th e interpretati on of c vents. And Allah
has full power and cont ro l ove r I-lis A ffairs, hut 1110st of men
know nolo And wh en he (Yoosul) attained hi s full ma nhood,
We gave him wisdom and know ledge (the Prophethood)_ thus
(24) Narmted by AI-Hakim (2/345) and it is authentic, due to supporting nafrmions, or it is hasan, due to supporting narrations. And Allah knows betIcr. Sec: AI-Majltla' ( 10/368).

346
A/cmiol1 of/he Progeny of lbralzeem ~
.r--~·~9WF
~~·--~----------~~--~~~~----~-.

We reward the MllhsillOOIl (doers of good deeds) ) (Soorah
Yoos,,! 12:21 ,22)
He, Most High, says, ( And she, in whose hOll se he was,
sought to seduce him (to do an ev il act), she closed the doors
and said, "Come on, yo u." He said, " I seek refuge in Allah
(or Allah forbid)! Tru ly, he (yo ur husband) is my master!
I-I e made my stay agreeable ! (So I will never betray him).
Verily, the =alimooll (w rongdoers and ev il-doers) will never
be succcssful." And indeed she did desi re him and he would
have inclined to her desi re, had he not seen th e evidence of his
Lord. Thus it was, that We mi ght tum away from him evil and
illegal sexual intercourse. Surely, he was one of Our chosen.
guided slaves. So they raced with one another to the door, and
she tore his sh irt from the back. They both found her lord (i. e.
her husband) at the door. She sa id, " What is the recompense
(punishment) for him who intended an evil design agai nst your
wife, exce pt that he be pu t in prison or a painful torment?" He
(Yoosut) said. ';It was she that sough t to sedu ce me," - and a
witness of her house hold bore witness (sayi ng), " If il be tha t
hi s shirt is torn from the front, then her laic is true and he is
a liar! But if it be that hi s shirt is tom from th e back, Ihen
she has told a li e and he is speaking the truth! " So when he
(her husband) saw hi s (Yoos uf's) shirt torn at the back, he (her
husband) said, "Su rely. it is a plol of you women! Certai nly
mighty is your plol! 0 , Yoosuf! Turn J\vay from thi s! (0 .
woman !) Ask forg iveness for your sin. Verily, you we re of the
si nfuL" ) (SoO/·aII YOOS II! 12:23-29)
Allah, Most Hi gh, informs us abollt Af- 'Azeez's wife 's
att empl to seduce Yoosuf lfJJ. and her demand for him to do
that whi ch was inappropriate to hi s situation and sta tion ; she
was a woma n of great beau ty, possess ing wea lth, hi gh ran k

Alel/liol/ o/the Progen)' o/Ibraileem

347

.~=-~~~~~~~~~~~
.~~--~.

and youthfulness. He desc ribes how she loc ked the doors on
him and herself, then prepared herse lf for him , hmv she made
herself up and donned her fin est and most splendid garm ents,
in spite of th e fact that she was the wife of AI- ·Azeez. Ibn Ishaq
sa id, "She was the niece of Ar-Rayya n Ibn AI-Waleed, the king
and rul er of Egypt. In addition to all of this, Yoosu f was an
ex tremely handsome, youn g man ; howeve r, he was a Prophet,
descended from a line of Prophets and his Lord pro tected him
from co mmitting ev il deeds and from the pl ots of women; he
was the master o f the seven nobl e and God-fearing masters,
ment ioned in th e authen tic hadeel", on the authority of the Seal
of the Prophets, who reported the Words o f the Lord o f the
heave ns and the Earth: "Allah wi ll give shade, to seve n, on the
day when there will be no shade but Hi s. (These seven perso ns
are) a j ust ru ler, a youth who has been brought up in th e worship
of Allah (i. e. wors hips Allah sincerely fr0111 chi ldh ood), a
man whose heart is attached to th e mosques (i. c. to pray ing
the compulsory prayers in the mosque in congrega ti on), two
persons who love each other onl y for All ah's sake and they
meet and part in Allah's cause onl y, a man who refuses the call
of a charmi ng woman o f nobl e birth for illi cit intercourse with
her and says: ' I am afraid of Allah,' a man who gives charitab le
gifts so sec retl y that hi s left hand does not know what hi s righ t
hand has given (i.e. nobody kn ows how much he ha s give n in
chari ty) , and a person who remembers All ah in sec lus ion and
his eyes are th en flooded with tears." OS)
Wha t is meant is that she ca ll ed him to her (i.e. she tried to
seduce him) and she coveted that greatly; but he said, (" I seek
refuge in All ah (or All ah forbid)! Truly, he is my master!" )
(Sooralt Yoosuf 12 :23) That is, her husband was th e owner o f
the house and hi s master. (" li e made my stay agreeable !" )
(25) Narr;lIcd by Al-Bukhari (660) and Muslim (1031).

348

Melllioll olllte Proge/~\, (~FI!Jra"(!(!/Il ~

.~--~~~----------------~~------~.
That is, he has bec n kind and hospita bl c to me. ( Veril y, the
=alimool1 will ncver be sll ccess ful. ) And we havc discussed
previou sly I-li s Words : ( And indt:cd she d id des ire him and he
wou ld have inclin ed to her des ire had he no t seen th e evidence
of hi s Lord . ) (Soorah Yooslif 12 :24) - in a manner whic h is
suffic ient and co nvincing in the Tt~rs eer.
Most of the sayings of the scho lars here are tak en from the
books of the Peo ple of the Scrip ture, but is more appropri ate
fo r us 10 avo id th eln . Wha t is inc um bent upon us is to beli eve
that AJl ah , Most Hi gh, pro tected hi m and declared him
innoce nt o f co mmitting an y wrongdoin g and I-I e guarded hi m
and preserved him from it. Thi s is wh y He, Most High, says, (
Thus it was, that We m ighl tu rn away from him ev il and ill ega l
sex ual imcrcoll rsc. Sure ly, he was one o f QUI' choscn, gu ided
slaves. So they raced wi th one anot her 10 the door ) (Soora"
Yoos III 12:24 ,25) That is, he ran from her, see king to open the
door and fl ee frol11 the roo m and she chased a fter him. ( T hey
both fo und he r lord. ) T hat is, her husband ( at the door ) an d
she has tened to speak to her husband be fore Yoosll f ~ could
do so, and in c ited him aga inst him : ( She said , "What is th e
recompense (punishment) for him who in tended an ev il design
aga inst your wife, excc pt thm he be pu t in pri son or a pa infu l
torment?'" ) (50orah YOOS1!! 12:25 ). She accllscd him, whil e in
fac t, shc wa s Ihe guilt y onc an d she prOi ec ted her reputation and
acqu itted herse lf of any blame. T his is why Yoos u f ~ said, (
He (Yoos uf) sa id. " It was she Ihal sough t 10 seduce me ." ) . II
was necessary for him to speak the truth and defend him self,
due to the need to protect hi s own honor. ( And a witness of
her household bore w itncss. ) It was sai d tha I he was a child
in his crib ; thi s was the op ini on o f ' Abdull ah Ibn ' Abbas ?
Ibn Jareer At-Taba ri pre fe rred thi s say ing and he narrated an
auth ent ic hadeelh to thaI e ffec t, on th e auth ority of ' Abdul lah

,\ f{,lIliml flllfll! PIYJK"IlY 01 filralt(!('111

349

.~----------------------------------~~~----~.
Ibn' Abbas ~ . Olhers claimed Ihat the narration could on ly
be asc ribed 10 'A bdullah Ibn ' Abbas .i;o (Ihal is, Ih ey did nOI
ascribe it 10 th c Prophet ~), ( 26) It was al so said tha t he wa s a
man of approxima tcly the same age as 'A tfee r, her hu sband.
And it was also said that his age was close to that of Zulai kha.
Among those who said th ai he was a man were' Abdullah Ibn
'Abbas 4:. ' Ikrimah, Mujhaid, AI· Hasan AI-Bas ri , Qmadah,
As-S uddi , Mu hammad Ibn Ishaq and Za id Ibn As lam. Th e
wi lness said, ( "Ifit be that hi s shirt is 10m fromlhe frollt. then
her tal c is truc and he is a liar! ) (SoO/'ali }ooslljI2:26) That is,
beca use it will mca n that he tried to sedu ce her and she de fended
herse lf, lea ring the front of his shirt. ( "But ifil be that hi s shirt
is lOrn from Ih e back. then she has told a li l! and he is spe'lking
thc lruth! " ) (Soorah }oosllj I2:27) Thai is because, ifh e had
fled from her and she had chased after him and grabbed him
from behi nd, his shirt woul d be torn from the back - and sueh
proved to be the case, which is why All ah , Most High, says, (
So wh en he (her husband) saw hi s (Yoosuf"s) shirt tom at the
back , he (h er husband) said , "Surel y, it is a plot Of YOll wom en!
Certain ly mighty is your pial! " ) (Soorall }oosl({ 12:28 ). That
is, this is from you women's plolli ng: you seduced him against
his wi ll, and then yo u fa lsely acc used him. Then her hu sba nd
{umcd away and said, ( O. Yoosuf! Turn away from thi s! )
(Soorah Yoosllf 12:27). Tha i is, do not mention it to anyone,
beca use keeping sllch matters sec ret is more approprialc and
superior. He ordered his wi fe to seek forgi ve ness forthe s in that
she had commi tt ed and tllm in repentance to her Lord. This is
beca use when a slave repents to Allah, Allah forgi ves him. And
(26) Ibn Jareer At-Tabari narrated il in a 111l111'qoof ronn (i.c. as a narration or
'Abdullah Ibn 'Abbas ~) in his Tafseer ( 121 193) and he also narrated it
in a marroo' ronn (i.e. as a narnltion rrom the Prophc1ll) in his uifseer
( 121194),

whil e the people o f Egypt used to worship idol s, they knew
that the On e Who forg ives sin s and pu nishes the perpetrator
of them is Allah , A lone, and I-Ie has no partn ers in that. Thi s is
why her hu sband spoke to her thus and pardoned he r in so me
respects, becau se she had see n something that it was diffi cult to
remain pati ent over. However, he wa s a virtuou s and honorable
man and so he said, ( "Ask fo rgi veness fo r your s in. Verily, you

we re of the sin ful.") (SoO/'ail Yoosl!f I2:29)
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And wom en in the c it y said , "Th e
wife of AI- 'A=ee= is see king to sedu ce her (s la ve ) young man.
ind eed she loves him vio lently; veri ly we see ht:: f in plai n error. "
So w hen she heard of thei r accu satio n, she sent for them and
prepared a banquet for th em; she gave each one o f them a knife
(to cut the foodstuff with), and she sa id (to Yoosuf). "Co me out
before them ." Then, when they saw him , th ey exalt ed him (at
his beauty) and (in their astonishment) Cllt their hands. They
sa id , " How perfect is A llah (or Allah forbid)1 No man is thi s!
This is none oth er th an a noble angel! " She said , "T his is he (the
young man) about whom you did blame me (for hi s love), and
I did see k to seduce him , but he refused. And now ifh e refuses
to obey my order, he shall certa inly be cast into prison, and
wi ll be one o f those who are disgraccd. " I-I e said , " 0 , my Lord!
Prison is marc to my liking tha n that to whic h they invite me.
Unless You turn away the ir plot from me. I w ill feel incl ined
toward them and be one (of those w ho commit s in and deserve
blame or those who do deeds) of the ignora nt fo lk." So his
Lord answe red hi s invocation and turned away fro m him their
plOL Verily, I-I e is the A II-Hearing, the A ll-Kn owing) (SoOl'ol1

Yoosuf I2: 30-34)
Allah in fonn s liS about th e action s of th e women of the city,
the wives of the princes andlh e dau ghters oflhe powerful and

•

351
.r------~----~~~----------------~
~~F
. ----~.

,

influential , how they cri ti c ized, denounced a nd rev iled the w ife
of 111- 'Azeez regard ing her atte mpt ed seducti on of her slave

l

,\ fell/ioll oj fhr.! Pmgl'IIY (~r Ibralteelll

and he r ex treme love fo r him; meaning thm he was not worthy
oril , sin ce he wa s a slave, and nor, they said, did any olher like
him deserve it. This is why they sa id, ( " verily we see her in
plain error," ) (SoOl'all Yoosuj 12:30) That is, by pl aci ng a thi ng
(i.e. her affec ti on) in a place that was unbcfltting . ( So when
she heard of thei r acc usation. ) That is, their denun ciation
and be liltlin g o f he r, their pointi ng accusing fing ers al her and
their ce nsure of her for lovin g her slave and hav ing passionate
fee li ngs for hi m. They displayed the ir co nde mn ati on of her,
but at th e sa me ti me, there was some excuse for he r. For thi s
reason, she wanted to make pl ai n to (hem that there was indeed,
some exc use for her a nd to show (he m that this young man
was not as they th ought, nor was he like th eir s laves. So she
sent th em an in vitat ion, gath ered them in her house and treatcd
the m with due hospita lity_ Amo ng the thi ngs that she presented
th em was somcthing that needed to be cut w ith a kn ife, li ke
ci tron and the li ke. ( She gave eac h oll e of th em a kni fe (to cut
the foodSl lt fTw ith) ) (Soora" )00su( 12 :3 1) She had prepared
Yoos llf ~ , dress ing him in the fines t clothes - w ho was at the
peak of hi s you th and beauty - and she orde red hi m to come
out to th em whil e dressed thu s. So he ca me out to th em and he
was, w ith out doubt, more beau tiful than a full 11100n. ( Th en,
when they saw him . they exa lted him (a t hi s beauty) ) (SoO/-ol1
}'oo.wf 12:3 1) T hat is, they exto lled him , re ve red hi m a nd they
cut their hands w ith the kni ves due to the ir distract ion, and
th ey did not notice the ir wo unds. ( Th ey sa id, " How perfect is
A ll ah (or A ll ah fo rbid)! N o man is this! T hi s is none other than
a noble ange l! " ) (SoO/-all Yoosuf 12:3 1) II was related in the
Iwdeeth of AI-Isra' th at the Messe nger of A Hah ;IIi sa id , "Th en

352
Mell/ioll oflhe Pmge/~I ' 0/ Ibmheelll ~
.~--~~~.~~--------------~----~~~--------~.

I passed by Yoosufand he had been given ha lfofall beauty." (27)
Ail ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( She said , "Thi s is he (the youn g
man) abou t whom you did bl amc mc ( fa r hi s love)." ) (Sooralt
Yoosu! 12:32) Then she pra ised him for his pe rfect chastity,
say ing, ( and I did see k to seduce him, but he resisted the
te mpta tion ) (Saara" YaaslI! 12:32) That is, he refused. ( ··And
now, if he refuses to obey my order, he shall ce rtai nly be cast
those who nre di sgraced." )
into pri son and he w ill be one
(SoO/'all Yoosu! 12:32) The other wo men incited him to henr
nnd obey his mi stress, but he vehementl y re fused and remain ed
aloo f, beca use he was frol11 the stock of Pro ph ets; he invoked
the Lord of th e worl ds, say ing in his supplicat ion, ( 0 , my
Lord ! Prison is more to my liking tha n that to whic h they
in vit e me. Unless YOli tum away thcir plot from me, I w ill reel
inclincd toward [h cm and be one (of those who co mmit sin
and deserve blame or those who do deeds) of the ignorant. " )
(Saara" YOOSII! 12:33) That is, if You leave me to depend on
myse lf, I will be weak and unab le to resist. I possess not the
ability to benefit or haml, except as All ah wi ll s, because I am
weak, unless You strengt hen 111e, protect me and presc rve me
with Your Powe r and Your Strength . T his is why A ll ah , Most
High, says, ( So hi s Lord answered hi s in voca tion and tLirned
away from him their plot. Verily, li e is the A II -Hcaring, theA l! Kno wing. ) (Soorall Yooslif 12:34)

or

He, Most High, says, ( Thcn it appea red 10 thcm, aficr th ey
had scen th e proofs (of hi s innocence) to impri son him fo r a
timc. And there entcrcd wi lh him lwo young me n in th e prison.
On e of thcm sa id , ··Ve ril y. I saw myse lf (in a drea m) press ing
wi ne." Th e other said, "Verily, I saw mysdf (in a drcam)
carry ing bread on my hend and birds werc eating thereof':'
(27) Narrated by Muslim (162).

.\/ellliull orrlle Progel1Y ojlbmht,t:1II
353
.~----~----~~~--------------~~
~~~----~.

(Thcy sai d), "Inform us of the intcrpreta tion of th is. Veri ly,
we think YO ll arc one o f th e M lflisil1ool1 (doe rs o f good)." li e
sa id. "No food will come to you (i n wa kcfuln css or in drea m)
as yo ur prov ision, but I wi ll inform (in wakefulness) of its
interpretati on beforc it (Ihe food) comcs. Thi s is o f th at whi ch
my Lord has taught I11 C. Vcril y. I have abandoncd the reli gion
ofa pcopl e that belicvc not in A ll ah and arc disbelicvcrs in the
Ilcreaftcr (i.e. thc K(II1'al1~)"()()1/ of Egypt who wc re po lyt heists
and used to worship th e sun and othe r fal sc dciti es). And I have
foll owed the Rel ig ion of my fat hers. - Ibra hcc m. Ishaq and
Ya' qoob, and neve r co ul d we <.l uri but e any pa rtne rs whatsoevc r
to Allah. Thi s is from th e Gra ce o f Allah to us ancilO mankind .
but mosl Illcn than k nol (i.e. they neilher beli evc in Allah, nor
wors hip Ili m). O. two co mpan ions of the pri son~ Are many
difTe rent lords (gods) better, or All ah, th e O ne, the Irresistible?
You do not worship besidcs I lim but onl y names whic h YO ll
have named (forgcd), you and your fat hers. for whic h A ll ah
has sent down no au th ority. The command (or the j udgment)
is fo r nonc but All ah. /-I e has commandcd th at YOll wors hi p
nonc but I lim (i.e. Il is Monoth eism), that is th c (tru e) strai ght
Relig ion, blll most men know no\. O. two companions of th e
priso n! As fo r onc of you. he (as a scn'a nl ) wi ll pou r out wine
for hi s lord (kin g or maslcr) to drin k; and as for the Dlher, he
will bc c ru cified and bi rds will ea l from hi s hcad. Th us is the
cascjudgcd conccrn ing whic h you bo th did inqui re." ) (Som'ali
YoosI1 12:35 -41 )

Allah, Most Hi gh, tell s us that after it beca me obvious to thcm
th at Yoosuf ~ was innoce nt , AI- 'Azeez and his w ifc decided
to imprison him until suc h time as th c gossip abolH him and
AI- 'Azeez s wife di cd away. AI- 'Azeez suppressed the facts, in
order to make it appear thai it was Yoosuf ifiB who had tri ed 10
seducc her against her will and so he was imprisoncd because

354
,\Ielllioll olllte Pm!:clty of Ihraheell1 ~
.~--~.~~~
. ------------~--~~~----~.

of it. So he was wrongfully and unjustly im prisoned. T his was
a part o f what A ll ah had orda ined for him and it was the mcans
by whi ch Hc protectcd hi m, for Hc removed hi m from their
co mpan y and the need to assoc iate w ith th elll. It was based on
thi s that some Sufi s c lnimed, accord ing to what Ash-S hafi ' i has
repo rted from them , that a part of chasti ty is to re move oneself
from tcmptation.
Allah, Most Hi gh, says, And there e nte red with him two
young men in the pri so n. (Saora" Yoosl!f 12:36) It was sa id
that one of them was the king 's cup bea rer, and it has bccn said
that hi s namc was Banll. The oth er was the king's baker, i. e.
the onc who prepared hi s food, and is known to the Turk s as
Jasha nkir, and accordi ng to what has been said, hi s name was
Mujallath. Bot h of them had been accused of so me thing by
the king, who had them thrown in ja il. Whe n they saw Yoosuf
~ in jail, they werc amazed by hi s characte r, his dignified
demea nor, his Fai th, hi s words and actions, his freque nt acts of
wo rship and his good condllcl lOward his fe ll ow-m an. Each of
the m had a dream appropriate to hi m.
The schola rs of tafseer sa id thaI they both had thei r dreams
on the same night. As for the cup-bearer, he saw three branches
from a grape-vin e, which had produced leaves a nd ri pe grapes
and he took them and squeezed Ihem into the king's cup and
then he gave it to him to drink . The baker sa w th ree baskets of
bread on his head and three birds of prey eati ng from the top
baske t. They both related thei r dream s to Yoo su f ~ and asked
him to interpret th em for th em, say in g, ( " Ve ril y, we thi nk yo u
;:Ire one of the MllhsillOOIl (doers o f good ):' ) (Som'all YoosuJ
12:36) He infomled them tha t he was know ledgeab le regardi ng
the interpretation of their dreams and sk illed in sll ch maile rs.
He sa id, ( "No fo od will come to you (i n wakefulness or in

355
Melllioll {if,he j}/ngcIIY of Ihrahecm
.~--~--~~~----------~,~~>--~.

dream} as your pro vis io n. but I wi ll inform (in wakefulness)
its intcrpretation before it (th e food) comes to yo u: ' ) (Soorah
YOOSII! 12:37) It was said that th c meaning is: no matter what
visio ns you sec, I will interpret them for you befo re it happens;
and it will be as I sa id. It was also sa id that it mean s: I w ill
inform you of w ha t food w iI1 come to yo u before it arrives,
whether it be sweet or bitter, as ' Eesa i:&Y said , ( "A nd I info rm
YO LI of what you eat, a nd wha t you store in your hOllses." )
(Soorah Ali '/111/'011 3:49) I-Ie sa id to them , "Thi s is fro m the
thin gs that A llah ha s ta ug ht to me, beca use I believe in Him ,
affirm Hi s O neness and adhere to th e Re lig io n of my noble
fat hers, Ibrahee m , AI-Khaleel 'h9, Ishaq ~ and Ya ' qoob. "
( "And never could we attribu te an y partners what soevcr \0
AI1ah. Thi s is from the Grace of A llah to us." ) That is, th at He
has g uidcd li S to thi s. ( " And to mankind ." ) That is, that He
has commanded us to ca ll the m to I-lim , g uid e th em and direct
th cm to Him . He (i.e. bel ief in Hi m) is firml y em bedd ed in
the ir innate nalures and impl anted in the ir natural disposit ions.
( "B ut most me n thank not (i .c . they neither be lieve in Allah ,
no r worsh ip Il il11), " ) (SoO/'ail YOOSII! 12:38)
Then he ca ll ed upon them to beli eve in A ll ah's O neness
and he ce nsured the worshi p o f' anyone other than A llah and
bel itt led and exp ressed sco rn f'or the wors hip of' ido ls. He sa id ,
( "0. YOll two companions o f th e pr iso n! Are many diOc rent
(god s) better. or Allah, the One. the Irres istible? You do not
worship besides Him but o nl y name s wh ic h YOll have named
( forg ed) , yo u and your fath e rs, for which A llah ha s sent down
no authority. The command (or the judgment) is fo r non e but
Al lah." ) (SoO/'ail )00.1'11[12:39 ,40), Tha t is, He is the Di sposer
of (t he afTairs of) His creat io n and He is the Doe r of what He
w ill s, Who g uides who m He w ill s and in creases in error whom
I-Ie w ill s. ( " l ie has commandcd th at YO ll worship nonc but

.~

356

Mel/lioll oflhe

of Ihmheem -:>c.

PmrrclI,I'
____~
.~
~~~~~
> ______________~____~
O
~~__________
>

Him (i.c. His Monotheism):' (SoO/'ali Yooslif I 2:40) . Thai is,
A lo ne, witho ut ascribing partners 10 Hi m. ( "That is the st rai g ht
Religion ," ) (SoO/'o" YOOSII! 12:40), That is, the true Reli gion
and the Straight Pat h. ( " But most mell kn ow not.'· ) (Soorall
roo.wf 12:40). That is, they will not be guided 10 it, in spite o f
it s clarity and ils obviousness. Hi s preachin g to them both in
th is s ituati on was or th e utmos t perfection, because thei r hea rts
exto lled hi m and were rcady 10 accept what he sa id. T herefore it
was appropriate to ca ll the m to Iha l which was more beneficial
to the m than abo llt that w hich they asked and requ ested from

him . Then he undertook th at whi ch was in cumbent upon him
and guided to that to whi ch he had been gu ided, saying, ( "0.
you two compan ions or the prison! As ror one or you. he (as
a serva nt) wi ll pour out wi ne ror his lo rd (ki ng or master) 10
dri nk." ) (So01'a" Yooslif I2:4 1). The sc holars sa id that he was
the cup-bea rer. ( "A nd as ror the ot her. he will be cmcified
a nd birds will em from his head," ) (SoO/'ail YOOSII! 12:4 1)
The scholars sa id th at he was th e baker. " Thus is the case
judged concerni ng whi ch YO li bo th did inquire," ) (Soom h
YOO.\· I!( 12:4 1). T hat is, thi s will happen, and it is inevitab le,
no matter what. Thi s is why it was sa id in a IlOdeet", " A vision
nutt ers over a man as long as it is not int erprcted, bu t whc n it
is interpreted, it happens." (2 8)

<

A ll ah, Most High, says. And he sa id to the one whol11 hc
knew to be saved . "!\ Icntion me to your lord (i.e. your king, so
as to ge t mc out o r the priso n}." But Slmitall made him ro rgct
to mcmion it 10 his lord. So he (Yoosul) stayed in prison a few
(mo re ) years. ) (Sooro" YOOS I{( 12:42)

(28) This is .HI authentic Ilt/deelll namllcd by Abu OawOO£i (5020). At-Tirmidhi (22 79), tbn Majah (3914). Ahmad ( 15749) and i\d-Oarimi (2148), on
the authority of Laqect Ibn Sabirnh ~ .

1\ /ell l;OIl of/he Progeny of Ibrahecm

•

•

Allah, Most High, informs us thal Yoosuf ~ said to the one
whom he knew would be saved, w hic h was the cup-bearer,
( " Menti on me to yo ur lord." ) , That is, mention my case

and th e situation that I am in to your king; I am imprisoned,
without ha ving committed any crim e. Thi s is ev idence of the
pe rmi ss ibi lity of taking the necessary steps to achieve one's
objec ti ve and this is not in consistent with trusting in the Lord
of lords (taIVakkuf). As for the saying of Him, Most Hi gh: (
But S/wilall made him forget to mention ilIa his lord ) (SoOl'oII
Yoosuf 12:42). ThaI is, Satan caused the man who was saved to

forget to mention what Yoo s llr ~ had entrusted to him.
He, Most High , says, ( And th e kin g (of Egypt) said , "Veril y,
I saw (i n a dream) seven fal cows, whom se ven lea n ones were
devouring - a nd o f seven grcen ears of eorn, and (sevcn) others
dry, 0, notables! Ex pla in to me my dream, if it be that you can
interpret dreams," T hey sai d, "M ixed up false dream s and we
arc not ski lled in the in terpreta ti on of dreams," Th en the man
who was re leased (one of th e two who we re in pri son), now at
le ngth remembered a nd sa id , " [ wi[ 1 tell YOll its inte rpreta tion,
so send me forth ," (I-Ie sa id), "0, Yoosuf, the man of truth !
Ex plai n to LI S (the dream) o f seven fat cows whom seven [can
ones were devouring, and of seven green ea rs of com, and
(seven) othe rs dry, that I may retu rn to the peop le, and that
th ey may know," (Yoos uf) said, " For seven consecuti ve years,
you shall sow as usua l and that (th e ha rvest) w hich you reap
yo u sha ll leave in cars, (a ll ) - except a litt le of it w hic h yo u
may eat. The n will com e an er that , seven hard (years), which
will devour what you have laid by in advan ce for th em, (a ll)
except a litt le of tha t which you have guarded (stored), Theil
the rea ft er w ill come a yea r in wh ich people will have abundant
ra in and in which they w ill press (w i,l}e and o il)," ) (SoO/'oll
Yoosu! 12:43-49)

358

Menlion of lite Progeny of /braheem ~

.~~~%'~AAr*~------~~~~~~~~~~~.

This was one of the means by which Yoosuf &JJ obtained
hi s release from prison, with honor and respect. To wit, thi s
vision was seen by th e king of Egypt, who was Ar~Riyyan Ibn
AI -Waleed Ibn Tharwan, Ibn Arashah Ibn Faran Ibn 'A mr Ibn
' Imlaq Ibn Lawuz Ibn Sam (Shem) Ibn Noo h ~ .
The People of th e Scripture sa id that he saw in the dream that
he was on the edge of a river and seven fat cows had emerged
from it and they began to graze in a meado w there; then seven
lean, weak cows emerged fro m that ri ver and they began to
graze along with th e first seven. Then they tumed upon them
and devoured them. Th en he awoke in a stal e of alarm. Then he
slep t again and saw seve n green ears of wheat on a single stalk
and suddenl y, seven thin , withered ears ate them. Then the
king awoke in a state of alann. When he informed his counci l
of elders and hi s peopl e about what he had seen, there was
no one among th em who was sk ill ed in the in terpretation of
dreams. Indeed , ("Mixed up rai se drea ms." ) (SoO/'a" Yoosuf
12:44). That is, these are a mixtu re oflhe drea ms that you had
durin g the ni ghl and it may be that there is no mean ing to them;
in addition to thi s, we have no expertise in thi s field. This is
why they sai d, ( and we are not skilled in the interpretation pf
dreams ) (Soorah Yoos/if 12:44). At this momen t, the one who
had been freed from jail remembered the trust with which he
had been charged by Yoosuf ~.
This is why All ah, Mos t High, says, ( Then th e man who was
released (one of the two who were in prison), now at length
remembered and said . ) (Soorall Yoo,nif 12:45) That is, he
remembered the tmst after a few years had passed, He sa id to
hi s peop le and to the king, ( "I wi ll tell yo u its interpretation ,
so send me forth ." ) (SoO/'ail Yoos/if 12:45) That is, se nd me to
Yoosuf; and he went to him and sa id, ( (I-Ie said), "0, Yoosuf,

359
II felli ioll of Ihe /-'mgen)' of Ibraheem
.~--~--~~~----------~·~w~~.

the mall of truth! Ex pl ain to liS (th e dream ) of seven fat cows
whom seve n lean ones were devourin g, and o f seve n green
ears o f com, and (seven) oth ers dry, that I ma y return to the
peop le, and th at th ey Illay kno w." ) (50omli YOOSIU" I 2:46) He
in terpreted for them from the dreams of the king th at which
showed that seven yea rs of abundance wou ld bc foll owed by
seven yea rs of drought. ( "Then therea fter will come a yea r in
whi ch people will have nbund ant rain." ) (SoO/'ali Yaoslif I2:49).
That is, they will ex perience rain, abundance and comfort (
"a nd in which they will press." ) (Saara" Yaosl~r 12:49). That
is, th ey wi ll press or juiee the things that th ey common ly lI sed
to press, such as suga r cane, grapes, oli ves, sesame seeds and
ot her things. He interpreted the dreams for them and guided
them as to wha t they should do during the years o f pl ent y and
the years of fa mi ne and how they should store the grai n they
had harvested duri ng th e seven years of plenty, i.e. in its ears,
except for what they set aside fo r the ir li se (i.e. 10 be eaten).
He also told them to keep onl y a minimum of seeds during
the seve n lean years, sin ce it was most lik ely th at the seeds
wou ld not produce any return. This proves how compl ete was
Yoosuf's knowledge, perce ption and understandi ng.
He, Most High, says, ( And the king said , " Bring him to me."
But when the messenger cam e to him, (Yoosuf) said , "Return
to your lord and ask him , " What happened to the wo men who
cut their hands'? Surely, my Lord (A llah) is Well -Aware of their
plot." (The king) said (to the wo men), "W hat was your a fTair
when you did seek to seduce Yoosuf!" The women s.lid, "A llah
fo rbid! No evil know we agai nst hi m!" Th e wife ofA/~ 'Azeez
sa id, "Now the truth is manifes t (to all ), it was I who sought to
seduce him , and he is surely o f th e trmhfu!. " l Ie sa id, " It was in
order that he (;1/- 'A::ee=) may know that I betrayed him not in
sec ret. And, ve rily! Allah guides not the pl ot o fth c bctra yers.

360

•

I\ lel/lioll of/he Pn lgellY of Ibraheem .~

•

And I free not mysc lf (fro m th e blame). Veril y, th e (huma n) self
is incl ined to evil, except when my Lord bestows I lis Mc rcy
(upon who m He will s). Veri ly, my Lo nJ is On-Forg ivin g,
Most Merci fu l." ) (SoO/-oil Yoosllj I2: 50-53)_ When 'he king

rea lised th e compl eteness of Yoosuf's know ledge, the perfect
na ture of his intellect, his acute powers of perception and his
understa nd ing, he ordered th at he be brought in hi s prese nce,
so th at he mi ght become a member of hi s in ner circle. When
th e king's messenger came to hi m w ith Ihis informatio n, he
preferred not to leave until it had become clear to everyone
that he had been wrongly and unj ustly impri soned and that he
was totally innocen t of the crim e th ey had false ly ascribed to
him. ( [Yoosuf] said, Retu rn to your lord ) , that is, the ki ng.
( "and ask him, " What happened to the women who cut th eir
hands? Surel y, my Lord (All ah) is Well-Aware o f thei r plot."
) (SoO/'ail Yoosllj I 2:50) It was said that it means: Verily,
my master, AI- 'Azeez knows that I am innocent of what was
attributed to me; i.e, so te lllh e king to ask them how I strongly
rejected their advances, when they attempted to seduce me
and encourage them to tell the truth about thi s matter, which is
neither hon orab le nor ri ght. So when they were asked about it,
they acknowledged what had actually happened and confimled
Yoos uf's pra iseworthy conduct. ( Th c wo mcn said, " Allah
forbid! No evil know we against him! " ) (SoO/'ah YooslIf I2:5 1).
At this point, ( th e wife of A/· 'Azeez said ) , That is, Zu lai kha.
( " Now the truth has hasha.w ." ) (Soorah Yoosuf 12:5 1). That
is, now the truth has become man ifest to all; and the tnuh
has a greater right to be heeded (than fa lsehood)_ ( " It was I
who sought to seduce hi m, and he is surely of the truth fuL" )
(SoO/'all YOOSlI! 12:51). Th at is regardi ng hi s cl aim that he is
inn ocent, that he did not attempt to seduce me and that he was
wrongfull y and unj ustly imprisoned, based on fa lse testimony.

Melllioll of/he ProgellY of Ibraheem
361
.~----~--~~~------------~~~v~~,

And He, Most High, says, ( He sa id, " It wa s in order that he
(111- A=ee=) may know that I be trayed him not in secret. And,
veril y! Allah guides not th e plot o f the betrayers." ) (SoOl'all
YooslI! 12:52). 1i was sa id Ih allhis was Ihe saying ofYoosuf Wl;
i.e. I only requested thi s invest igati on in order that AI-'Azeez
should know that I did not betray him in hi s absence. It was
also said that it was the concl us ion of the speec h of Zul aik ha,
i.e. I only acknow ledged thi s (s in) ill order that my hu sband ,
AI-' Azeez should know that I di d not aclually belray him in
this matter (by committing adultery). It was only an attempted
sedu cti on, and it did not res ult in unl awfu l sex ual interco urse.
This interpretation was supported by a great number of the
later scholars and others. But Ibn Jareer and Ibn Abi I-Iatim
only related the first interpreta tion.
( "A nd I free not myse lf( frol11 lhe blame). Verily, Ihe (human)
sclfis incli ncd to evi l. exccp t whe n my Lord bestows His Mcrcy
(upon whom He wills). Verily, my Lord is On-Forgiving, Most
Mcrcifnl." ) (SoO/'ail YOOS II! 12:53) It was sa id that this was
from th e speech of Yoosuf ~ and it was also said that from
the speech of Zulaikha; the view that it is a continuati on of
the speech of Zulai kh a is more apparent, more appropriate and
stronger. And All ah knows better.
And He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And th e king sa id, " Bring him to
me tha i I may attac h him to my perso n." Th en, when he spoke
to him. he said. "Vcril y, thi s day, you arc wilh us hi gh in rank
and full y lniSled." (Yoosu f) said , "Sel mc ove r the storehouses
of the la nd; I am ind eed /wfeez and ·a/eell/ ." (as Minister o f
Financc in Egypt, in place of AI- 'A=ee: who was dead at that
time). Thus did We g ive full authority to Yoosuf in the land. to
take possession therein, as when or whe re he lik es. We beslow
of Our Me rcy on whom We please, and We make n OI to be lost

362
.-- --'''.
'''W?t

Melliioll oflhe Progeny oj lbmlJecm ~

•

the reward of AI- Mllhsinooll. ) (Soorah YOOSII/ 12:54-57)
When Yoosuf's spotl ess character and his in nocence of the
accusati on they had leve led aga in st him bcc<lme appa rent to
the king, he sa id, ( Bring hi m to me that I may allach him
to my person." ) That is, I wi ll make him one of my inner
circl e members , a prominent member of my governm ent and

an eminent personage in my entourage. When he had spoken
to him and heard his words and his situation had become clear
to hi m, ( I-Ie said, " Verily, this day, you arc with li S high in
rank and full y trusted." ) (SoO/'all Yoosllf 12:54) That is a
perso n occupying a posit ion of aut hority and tru stworthi ness.
( [YoosufJ sa id, "Set me o ve r the storehoLl ses ort he l<l ncl ; 1 am
indeed IIqfee:: and 'aleem." ) (500roll }oos/if 12:55) He as ked
the king to appoi nt him to ove rsee the g ra in stores, because
of the ex pec ted depletio n in the amount of gra in stored a ft er
seven years of plenty, as he wo uld then be in a position to
manage the si tuati on in a manner that was pleasing to Allah, by
making provisions fo r thcm and treating them w ith kindn ess.
He in fo rmed the kin g that he was ( "lwJeez" ) . That is, strong
in preserving what was in his hands and hc could be tru sted
not to deal with it in any d ishonest way. He a lso said that he
was ( .. 'aleem" ) , That is, possessing full k nowledge of thin gs
and of the best way to dea l with the grain stores, In th is, there
is ev idence of the pcnni ss ibili ty of seekin g a n appo intment for
the o ne who kn ows himse lf to be tru stwort hy and ca pab le,
All ah, Most Hi g h, says, ( Thus did We g ive full aut hority
to Yoosuf in the land, to take possess io n the rein , as, when
and whe re he liked. ) (SoO/'all YODs/if 12:56) T ha t is, after
imprisonment , hardsh ip and confine ment came fre edom to do
as he pleased w ithin the land s o f Egypt, ( 10 take possess io n
there in. as , whe n and w here he li ked. ) T hat is, wha t's oever he

1\ lellfiull of fhe Pmgell)' of Ibl'llileem

•

........ I t'!' ..
.. Ir."

363
"

wished was made lawful for hi m; thus did Allah hono r hi m,
bestow on him an e nviable rcwa rd and exa lt him. ( We bestow
of Our Mercy on whom We pleJse, and We make not to be
lost the rcward of AI-A'fuhsil1oo11 (those who do good deeds)
) (Soomil Yoos.if 12:56) That is, all of thi s is a part of A ll ah's
Recompense and Rewa rd fo r the Bel ieve r, in addi ti on to the
abundance of goodness and handsome reward th at have been
stored for him ill the Hereafter. This is why All ah, Most Hi gh,
says, ( And veril y, the reward of'the Herea fter is better for
those who believe and used to fear A ll ah and keep their duty to
Him (by abslaining from all kinds of sins and evil deeds and by
performing all kinds of righl eo us good deeds» (Soorah )'oosu!
12:57) It was said that 'A lfee r di ed and th e king appo inted
Yoosuf in his place and married his widow, Zul aikha, to him ,
and he was an honest and trustworthy mini ste r.
Allah, Most Hi gh,says, ( A nd Yoosuf's brethren came and they
entered unto him. and he recognized them , but they recogni zed
him not. And when he furni shed th em forth with provisions
(according to their need), he sa id, " Bring me n brother ofyollrs
from your fllth er; (he meant Binyameen). Sec yo u not lh al J
give full measure, a nd that I a m the best o f the hosts? But if
you bring him not to me, th ere shall be no measure for you with
me, nor shall you come nea r me," They said , " We shall try to
gel permiss ion (for him) fro lll his fath er, and ve ril y, we shall
do it." And he (Yoosuf) told hi s servants to put their money
(w ith which th ey h'ld bought the corn) into their bags, so that
they mi ght know it w hen th ey go baek to th eir peopl e, in order
that they might come back. ) (SoO/'oil Yoos.if 12:58-62) A ll ah,
Most High, infomls us about the arriva l of Yoosuf's brothers
in the lands of Egypt, whe re they had COllle to purcha se food
(grai n, etc.) after th e years o f drought had spread throughout
the lands surrounding Egypt. At th at time, Yoosuf ~ was in

364

A/emioll oJlhe Progeny oj"lbra/teellJ ~

.~--~~~~~~~~~~~~~--~~~---------,

charge of both sccular and rcli gious affa irs in Egypt and when
they entered in hi s presence, he recogni zed them, but they did
not recognize him, for they could not have drea med of the rise
to high slatu s and greatness that had come to Yoos uf ~ ; thi s is
why he recognized them, but they did nOI recognize him.
Allah, Most High, says, ( And when he fu rn ished them
forth with provisio ns (accordi ng to their nced) ) . That is,
he had given them the foodstuffs (grain etc.) which were
in acco rdance with his custom, o f giving to every person
a ca mel-load and not more, ( he said " Bring me a brot her
of you rs from your fat her." ) Thi s was after he had as ked
them about their situation and how many they were, and
they had replied, " We we re twe lvc men, but one of us d ied
and his full brot her rema in ed with our father." He then said,
" If yo u come back next year, bring him to me." ( "Sec you not
that 1 give fu ll mcasure, and tha I 1 am Ihe best o f the hosts?"
) That is, I have treated you hospitably and entertained you
wc ll. Thus did he encourage them to return to him with their
half-brother (Binyameen). In case they entertain ed the idea of
not returning to him, he sa id, ( " But if you bring him nol to
me, there shall be no measure fo r you wit h me, nor shall you
come ncar me." ) . That is, I wil l not give you any suppli es and
I wi ll not allow you to comc to me at all. This was in contrast
to the ki ndness thaI he had ex tended to them on their arriva l.
So he strove to ens ure that they wou ld bring Binyameen with
them, in order to satisfy his des ire to SCI! him, by employ ing
a carrot-and-s ti ck-approach. ( Th ey said. " We sha ll try to get
permiss ion (for him) from hi s fat hcr." ) (8oom ft Yoostif12:6 1).
That is, we will try our utmos t to arrange that he accompan ies
us and to bring hi m to you. ( " And ve rily, we shall do il."
) (SoO/'aft Yoostif 12:6 1). That is, and certai nl y, we are able
to accomplish th at. The n he ordered his servants to place the

A
felltioll c-____
of the PlVgellY
of I hrahce/ll
______
______________________

.
~

~

365

-"~
~~
~~C*~.-~~
.

merchandi se they had brought w ith th em to exchange for food
in their sadd le-bags, withou t them rea li z ing it. ( So when th ey
return ed to th eir fath er, they sa id , "0, our father! No more
measure o f gra in shall we ge l. So send ou r broth er w ith liS,
and we shall get our measure and trul y we w ill guard hi m." He
sa id, " Ca n 1e ntrust him to YOll ex cept as I e ntru sted hi s brother
(Yoosuf) to you af'orctimc? But All a h is the Best to gua rd, and
Il c is the Most Merc iful o r those w ho show mc rcy." A nd when
they opened the ir bags, th ey found the ir merc handi se had been
retu rn ed to them . They said. "0 , our fa the r! W hat (mo re) ca n
we des ire? Thi s, our mcrcha ndise has been returned to us, so
we shall gct food fo r our famil y. and we shall guard Oll r brother
and add one marc mea sure ora ca mel's load . Thi s qu ant ity is
easy." I-Ie (Ya ' qoob) sa id, " I will not send hi m wit h you lIm il
YOll swca r a solemn oat h to mc in A ll ah's Na mc, that you will
bring him back to mc unl css you arc yoursc lves surroun ded
(by cne mi es. etc.)." And when th ey had swo rn the ir solemn
oat h, he sa id , '"A ll ah is the Witn ess ovc r w hat wc havc sa id."
And he sa id, " 0 , my sons! Do not cn tc r by onc gatc, but enter
by differe nt gat es, and I ca nnot ava il yo u agai nst A ll ah at all .
Veril y! The deci sion resls onl y w ith All ah . [n him , I put my
trusl and leI all th ose that trllst, put the ir trust in Him." And
when they ente red accordin g to thei r fa ther 's ad vice, it did not
avail th em in th e least aga inst (thc Wi ll of) All ah , it was but a
need ofYa'qoob 's in ncr-sc lf' wh ich he di sc harged . And verily,
he was endowed w it h kn ow ledge because We had tau ght him,
but mos t men know not. ) (Soomh Yoosllf 12:63-68) Allah ,
Most Hi gh, relates what happened to thcm aftcr they returned
to th eir fat her and how they said to hi m, ( "No 1110re mcasure
of gra in shall we gct." ) Tha t is, after thi s year, unl ess you
send our brother (B inyamcen) w ith us; if you send him w ith
us , we wi ll not be prevented from rece iving gra in. ( And when

366
,' fellfioll o/file PIVJ:l!IIY 0/ Ibroheem ~
.~---~·~
~wr~>~----------~~--~~------~.

they opened their bags, they found th eir merchandise had been
returned to them. They said. "0. our father! What (more) can
we desire? This, our merchandise has been return ed to li S: ' ) .
That is, what else can you wish for, now that our merchandise
has been returned to us? ( "so we shall get food fo r our famil y."
) . That is, we will be ab le to provide for thl.!m and bring them
that which is beneficial to the m this year and which will
reli ve the drought they are faci ng. ( "And wc shall gua rd our
brothc l' and add." ) . That is, beca use of his presence, ( "one
more measure of a camcl's load." ) . Allah. Most High, says,
( 'This qu antity is easy," ) . That is, in return for his other son
going wi th th em. Ya'qoob ~ was very close indeed to his son,
Binyamcc n, beca use he could smell in him thc sccnt ofYoosuf
~ and he fo und consolat ion in hi m for the loss of Yoosuf
~. This is why he said, ( '" will not send him with you until
you swenr a solemll oath to me in Allah's Na me, that you wi ll
bring him back to me unless you are yourselves surrounded (by
ene mies, etc.)." ) . That is, unless you are all prevented from
bringi ng him back. ( And whcn they had sworn their solcmn
oath, he sai d, "Allah is thc Wit ncss over what we have said."
) . He co nfinned their oaths and va lidated their covenants and
took preca utions to enSure the safety of his son (Binyamcen);
but caution cannot avail agai nst that whi ch has been Di vi nely
ordained. Had it not been for his need and the need of his
people for supp lies, he wo uld not ha ve sent his beloved son.
But Al lah 's Divine Ordain ment has its own ru les; and the Lord,
Most High, ordai ns wha t He Wills, chooscs what He Wants
and decides what He wills. And He is the Most Wise, the AIIKnow ing. Then he ordered them not to en ter the city through
one ga te; but to enter it through difTerent ga tes. It was said that
he des ired that nOlle should amict them with th e evil eye of
jealousy; this was due to the fac t that they we re all handsome

Menlion o/Iile Progeny o/Ibmileem

,
~

367

____________~~~~__~~~~~~~
~4W~
r~
~~~~.

men of stron g form . Thi s was said by 'Abdulla h Ibn ' Abbas
..;." Mujahid , Mu hammad Ibn Ka'b , Qatadah, As-S uddi and
Ad-Dahhak . It was also sai d that he wa nt ed thc m to separate ,
that haply, they mi ght find some trace ofYoos llf ~ . Thi s was
said by Ibrahee m An-Nakha ' i. But the fi rst opinion ap pears
more correct, whi ch is why he said , ( "and I ca nnot avail YOll
agai nst A ll ah at all ." ) . All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( And when
they entered accordin g to their fa ther 's advice, it did not avail
the m in th e least aga inst (the Wi ll of) A ll a h, it was but a need
of Ya'qoob 's inne r-se lf whi ch he di sc harged. A nd , ve rily, he
was end owed with know ledge beca use We had taught him , but
most men kn ow not. ) (SoO/'all )'ooSI!f 12:68)
He, Most High, says, ( And whe n they went in before
Yoos uf. he betook his brot her (Bin ya meen ) to him self and
said , " Veril y ! I Hm yo ur brother, so gri eve not for wha t th ey
lIsed to do." So when he had furni shed the m fo rt h with their
provis ions, he put the bow l into hi s brother 's bag, then a crier
ca ll ed out, "0, YOll (ill) the cara van! Surely, YOll arc thi eves !"
They, turnin g towa rd the m, said. " What is it that you ha ve
mi ssed?" They said. "We have mi ssed the bowl of the king
and for him who prod uces it is (th e reward of) a camel load; I
wiil be bound by it." They said, " By All ah! Indeed you know
th at we ca me not to make mischie f in the land, and we a rc no
thi eves !" They (Yoosuf's men) said, " Wha t th en shall be the
penalty of him. if YOll are (proved to be) liars?" Th ey (Yoosuf's
broth ers) sai d. "The penalty shou ld be that he in whose bag it
is found should be held for the puni shment (of the crime). Thus
we puni sh the ::al;lIIool1 (wrongdoers elc.)!" So he (Yoos uf)
bega n (the search) in their bags be rore the bag of his brother.
Then he brought il out o f hi s brothe r 's bag . Th us did We plan
fo r Yoosuf. He co uld not take hi s brothe r by the law of the king
(as a slave). except that All ah will ed it. (So All ah eaused the

368

1\lelllioll oflhe Progell.I' oJlbrllheem ~

.~~~.~~~,~~----------~~~~~------~.

brothcrs to bind thcmsclvcs with their WHy of " punishmc nt ,
i. e. the enslavement ofa Ihief.'·) We rai se to degrees whom We
please, but ove r all those endowed with know ledge is the AII Knowin g (A llah). They (Yoosuf's brothers ) said, " If he steals,
th ere was a brother o f hi s (Yoosuf) who did steal before (him)."
But these th ings did Yoosuf keep in hi mself, revea ling not th e
sec rets to thcm. I-I e said (within himsel f), " You arc in the worst
case. and All ah knows best thc tru th of what you assert! " Thcy
said, "0, rule r of the land! Ve ri ly, he has an old father (who will
gri eve lor him); so take a ile o rus in his place. Indeed we think
that you are one o f the MuhsinooH (those who do good)." I-Ie
said, " Alla h forbid th at we shoul d take anyone but him with
whom we found our property. Indeed (if we d id so), we should
be =alilllooll (wrongdoe rs)." ) (SoO/·ail YOOSII! 12:69-79)
Allah relates what happened to them when they entered with
their brother, Binya meen, th e presence of his full brother,
Yoosuf ~. and how he rece ived him and in formed him in sec ret
that he was his brother, ordering hi m to keep thi s knowledge
to him se l f and no t to share it with them. Then he ordered hi s
servants to place the bow l fro m which he drank and whi ch he
used as a measure for the people during those times of drought
among Bi nyameell 's be longings. Then he told th em tha t they
(h is brothers) had stolen the ki ng's measuring bow l. And he
promised them (th e se rva nts) th at if it was return ed to him , he
would reward the fi nder wi th a ca mel-l oad of food. The ca ller
guaranteed thi s to them. They (t he brothers) approached the
one wh o had acc used th em and th ey rebuked him and strongly
censured him for what he had sa id to them. ( Th ey said , " By
All ah! Indeed yo u know Iha l we came not to make mischief
in the lund, and we are no th ieves!" ) . That is, you know of
us what cont radi cts the acc usati on of th eft that you have madc
against liS. ( They (Yoosuf's I11cn) said, " Whall hen sha ll be the

Melliioll .ojlite PlVgell), ojlbraheem

369

.~------~----~~~----~~~~--~~.~~~~--~.

pena lt y of him, if you are (pro ved to be) liars'!" Th ey (Yoosuf's
brothers) said , "The penalt y should be that he in whose bag
it is rOllnd should be hcld for the puni shm cnt (o f the cri mc).
Thus we punish the =alillloCH/ (wrongdocrs etc.)'" ) . Thi s was
their law, th at the thi ef should be given up to th e victi m of th e
theft, which is why they said, ( "Thus we punish the =a/imooll
(wrongdoers. etc.)!" )
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( So he (Yoosul) began (t he search)
in thcir bags befo rc the bag or hi s brothcr. Th en he brought
it out of hi s brother's bag ) (SoOl'all YOOS lIJ 12: 76) This was
in order to avo id suspi cion and to perfec t the p lot. Then He,
Most Hi gh, says, ( Thus did We plan lor Yoosur (Joseph). He
co uld not take hi s broth er by the law of the ki ng (as u sla ve),
) (Sa ara" Yaasu! 12:76) Th at is, had th ey not acknow ledged
th at the punishment ror one in whose lu ggage the bowl was
found was that he be handed over to the victim of the theft ,
Yousuf ~ would not have been ab le to take him, according to
Egypti an law. ( Except tha t Allah wi ll ed it. (So Allah caused
th e brothers to bind th emse lves with their way of" punishment ,
i.e. th e enslave men t ofa Ih iee") We ra ise to degrees whom We
pl ease ) , that is, in knowledge , ( but over all th ose endowed
wi th knowledge is the All-K nowi ng (Alla h). ) This is because
Yoosuf ~ was more know ledgeable and more perceptive
th an hi s brothers and he possessed a stronge r w ill and fi nner
resoluti on th an they did. He onl y did what he did in accordance
with Allah 's Command to do so. This was because o f the great
benefit that resulted from it - and that was the coming o f hi s
father and hi s people to him and their approaching him in a
delegation. When th ey saw the bowl bein g brought out from the
baggage or Binyamee n, ( They (Yoosurs brothers) said , " Ir he
steals, there was a broth er of his who did stea l beforc (h im)."
) (Soorah Yoosu! 12:77). Th ey were referring to Yoosuf ffa'.. It

370

j\ felllioll oj ,ItI.' PlVge/~I' oj Ihraheem ~

<r--~YO~.~~--------------~----~~~----~,

was said that he had stol en th e idol of his maternal grandfath er
and destroyed it. It was also said that hi s paternal aunt had ti ed
a belt belo ng ing to Ishaq ~ around him , under hi s clothin g,
when he was an infant; then they discove red it unde r his
cl othing a nd he (being a small child) was un aware of what she
had done. And she had onl y done thi s because she wa nted him
10 be in her carc, bccausc she loved him.
I-Ie, Most High, says, ( " You are in th e worst case, and Allah
kn ows bes t the truth o f'wha t you asse rt !" ) . He a nswered the m
silen tly, in low voice - and his words were words of clemency
and kindness, forgiveness, and pardon; th ey also spoke with
kindness and gentl eness, (though aloud) saying, ( " 0, rul e r
of the land! Veril y, he has an old fat her (who will gri eve fb I'
hi m); so tak e ail e o f us in hi s place. Ind eed we th in k that you
are one of th e Mullsinooll (those w ho do good)." I-Ie sa id.
"A llah fb rb id that we should ta ke a nyon e but him with whom
we fbund ollr prope rt y. Ind eed (if we did so), we shoul d be
ZolilllOOIl (wrongdoers):' ) (SoO/'oll )'oosl!f' 12:78). That is, if
we let the acc used go free and took an innocenl person. Thi s is
somethin g lilal we would not do and we woul d not penni! it to
be done. We will only take the perso n in whose possess ion we
found our prope rty.
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( So, when th ey des paircd o f him , th ey
held a con fe rence in priva te. The eldest among them said.
" Know you not that you r fath er did ta ke an oath fro l11 you in
Alla h 's Name, and before thi s you did fa il in your duty with
Yoos ur? There fb re I will not lea ve thi s b nd until my fat her
permits me, or Allah dec ides Illy case and He is the 8 est o f
the judges. Return 10 your fath er and say, "0, our father!
Ve ril y, yo ur son (8in ymncc n) has stole n, and we tes ti fy 110t
except according to whal we know, and we cou ld nO! know

,

371
.~------------~---------------------'~~~'----~.
the unseen! A nd ask (the peopl e of) the town whe re we have
been, and the cara V<l 11 in whi ch we returned. and indeed we arc
tell ing the trut h." I-I e (Va 'qoob) sa id , " Nay, b ut yo ur oW llsc lves
Melllioll oflhe ProgellY of Ibraheem

ha ve beg uil ed you into so mething. So patience is most fitt ing
(for me). May be Allah wi ll b: ing the m all (back) 10 111e. Truly.

,

He, only J-Ie is A ll- Knowin g, Most Wise." A nd he turned away
from them a nd sai d , " A las, my gri e f for Yoosur l !" A nd he lost
his sight because or th e sorrow he was supp ressing. Th ey sa id.
" By A ll ah! You wi ll never cease remembering Ycosuf until you
become weak w ith o ld age, or until yo u be of the dead ." He

sai d, "1 onl y co mpl ain of my grief and sorrow to Allah , and I
know from A ll ah th aI whi ch YOLI know no t. "0, my so ns ! Go
you and inquire a boul Yoosuf and hi s brolhe r, a nd neve r give
up hope o r A ll ah's Mercy, Certai nly no one despai rs o f A ll ah's
Mercy, except the people who di sbeli eve." ) (Som"all Yoosllf
12:80-87)

•

A llah, Mosl High, infonn s us about them, saying that whe n
they despaired of taking Bi ll yameell from Yoosuf ~ , they
bega n to wh isper to one anot her in pri va te. ( Th e e ldest among
them said , ) - that was Roobeel ( "K now you no t that your
fath er di d ta ke an oalh from you in A lla h's Na me " ," ) . T hat is,
you have broken your oath to him a nd you have been negli gent
with him (i.e. Binymnee n) as you were fo nnerly negligent with
hi s brother, Yoosuf. Now I C11 nnot face him . ("There fore I w ill
not leave thi s land .,, " ) . Th at is, ) wi ll contin ue to stay here
( " until my fa th er permits l11e . , .. · ) , That is, to come 10 him
( "or A llah dec ides my case ., ," ) . That is, )-Ie e nables me to
sec ure my brother's relUrn to my father. ( A nd He is th e Bes t
of the j udges. Return to your father and say. " 0 , our fa ther!
Verily, your son (Bcnj am in) has stole n.,.
T hat is, infonll
him of what you ha ve seen orlhe matter with your own cyes. (
"A nd we testify no t except acco rd ing 10 what we know, and we
' J

)

.

could not know the ull seen! And as k (the peo ple of) th e tow n
where wc have bee n, and the ca ravan in whic h we returned." ) .
That is, what we have told you about them sc izing our brother
because he had cOlllmitted an act of th eft is a matter which has
become wide ly known in Egyp t and the peopl e of the ca ravan
in which we returned know about it, because they we re th ere.
( "A nd indeed we arc tell ing the truth. " !-I e (Ya' qoob) said ,
"Nay, but yo ur oWllselvcs have begu ilcd you into so mcth ing.
So pa tience is most fi lling." ) . That is, the matte r is not as you
have described; he did not stea l, because it is IlOt in hi s nature
to do so. It is onl y your own se lves th at ha ve sed uced you into
believ in g so mething (that is not true) , so pat ienee is the most
filling thing for me.
Then he said , ( "May be All ah wi ll bring them all (back)
to me." ) . ThaI is, Yoosuf :'Ml, Bin yameen and Roobee!. (
''Tru ly, l Ie, only l Ie is All-know ing." ) . That is, rega rding my
situation and the separa ti on that I am endur ing from my loved
ones. ( " Most Wise." ) . That is, in all lh at He ordains and all
that He does; and I-li s is th e most far-reaching Wi sdom and
the irrefutable evidence. ( And he turned away from them ) .
That is, Ya ' qoob ~ turned away from hi s sons. ( And said,
"Alas, my grief fo r Yoosuf1" ) This new grief reminded him of
hi s fonner grief and resurfaced that wh ich had been lat.ent, as
someone said,
Let YOllr heart rOLlI. 1 wherever YOlt wish j ar the sake oj love,
But (true) love is only jar the first love.

And someone else sa id,
My companion censured me Jar weeping at tile graves,
For the tears tho/welled lip Qnd spilt/orlll,

1

or

MellfirJII
tile Progel/y (~r Ihl'alleell/
373
~.----~----~~~--------------~<~4W?~>~--~,

And he said, "Do YOII weep for evel), gra ve Ihal YO II see?
For a grave which consists of layers afsand?"
I said fa him. "flerily. grief evokes grief so leave me,
For al/ of rhis is fh e grave of Malik. ,.

I

He, Most High, says, ( And hi s eyes became whi te because
of the so rrow. ) That is, he beca me bl ind due to excess ive
weeping ( that he was suppressing. ) That is, the extreme grief,
sorrow and long ing that he was feelin g for Yoo s uf ~ . Whe n
his sons observed the e motiona l upset and the pain of be ing
paned (from Yoosuf and Binya mccn) th at he was sufferin g, (
they sa id ) 10 hi m in tones o f compass ion, pi ty and cOllcem for
hi m, ( "By All ah! YOll will never ce<lse rl.!!11embcring Yoosuf
until YOll becom e weak w ith old age. or unti l YOll be o f the
dead." ) T hat is, YO ll wi ll cont inu c 10 re me mber him until your
body bccomes wenk and your strength de parts, so if you take
care o r yourse lf, il will be beller for you. ( He sa id. " I on ly
complain of my grief and sorrow 10 Alla h. and I know frol11
Allah that which you know not.·· ) (SOOl'"'' Yoos uf I2:86). Th at
is, I do not complai n to you or to an yon e among the peop le
about my s ituation ; I only co mpl ain 10 Allah, the A lmi ghty, the
A ll-Powe rful , and I know th at He w ill make a release and an
escape fo r me fro m the situati on that I am in. I also know that
Yoosuf's vision Illu st be fulfill cd and th at yo u and I wi ll find no
a lternat ive to prostrating to him , as he saw. Thi s is why he said ,
( "and I know from A llah that which you know not." Then he
sa id to th em, in order to inci te them 10 find Yoos uf ~ and his
brother, th at they should go and inquire about th e matte r: ( "0.
my sons! Go you and inquire about Yoos ufand his brother. and
never give lip hope of Allah's Mercy. Certainly no one despairs
of Allah '5 Mercy, except th e people who disbel ieve:' ) (Soorab
Yoosuj' 12:87 ). That is, do not dcs pair o f attai ning re li ef after
hard ship, beca usc no one despairs o f A ll ah's Mercy rand Relief

374
,\ felllioll of fhe Pro~eJl.l' of fhmheem ....c=.
.r----~·~~~----------------~----~~~------~.

and the release frol11 adversit y th at I-Ie ca n ordain, excep t the
disbel iev ing peopl e_

I-Ie, Mo st High, says, ( Then, when they entered unto him
(Yoosuf), thcy s<li d. "0. ru ler ofl he land! A hard ti me has hit li S
and our fam ily. nnd we have brought bu t poor capi tal. so pay li S
ful l mcasure and bc charitable to us. Trul y, Allah docs reward
the charitable." l ie sa id, " Do YOll know what YO li did with
Yoos uf and his brother, when YOli were ignora nt?" T hey sa id,
"Are you indeed Yoosur?" li e said, ';\ am Yoosuf, and thi s is
my brother (Binyall1ccn). A ll ah has indced bee n Grac iolls to us.
Vcrily, he who fea rs All ah with obed ience to Him (by abstaining
from sins and ev il deeds, and by performin g ri ght eous good
deeds), and is pUlien!. then surely, Alla h makes not th e rcward
of the tlflfhsillOOIl (those who do good) to be lost." They sa id.
"By Allah! Indeed All ah has preferred YOll above li S, and wc
certainl y havc been sinners." He sa id, "No reproac h on yo u
th is day. may All ah fo rgive you, and He is th e Most Merciful
o f those who show mercy ! Go wit h Ihis shirt o f mine, and casl
it over the fa ce of my fath er, he will beco me clear-sighted. and
bring to 111 0 all your fa mily," ) (SoO/'ail }'<:>0511[ 12:88-93)
Allah, Most High, informs us abou t the return of yoosuf's
brothers to hi m, their visit to him and their desire for hi s gra in
and for him 10 show charity toward th em by returnin g th eir
brother, Bin yamcen to the ln. ( Th en, whell they cntcreel unto
hi m (Yoos uf), Ihey sa id, "0, rule r of the land! A hard tim e has
hit us and our fa mil y." ) . That is, drought and straite ned times,
in addition to a large famil y ( "and we ha ve brought but poo r
capi tal. . ."' ) . That is, we ha ve brought mo ney for th e food
we want to buy, but it is not substanti al. Ii was sa id Ihat th ey
brought a mean S lllll of dirhams . II was also said thaI they were
goods ofliltle:~xch a nge va lue, ex.ccpt by the one who wou ld be

MelllioJ} (d'ihe I'mgel/)' (!f IhJ't/lteell/
375
.r-------------------------------------~ ~

,

kind cnough to ovcrlook thi s. It was also sa id that th ey brought
pine nu ts, tereb inth seeds (29) and such. It was rcportcd on th e
authority of 'Abdull ah Ibn ' Abbas ,*, that they we re types of
straw sac ks, ropes a nd thc like. ( "So pay us full measure and
bc charitable to us. Trul y, Allah docs reward the charitable."
) . It was said by As-Sliddi th ai itl11cans by accepting what wc
have brought. It was also said that it mcans by retuming our
brothe r to li S. Thi s was th e opinion of Ibn Jura ij .
I-Ie saw the situation they wc re in and the pit iful paymcnt
that they brought and hc felt co mpassion for them and made
hi mself known to them, info rm ing thcm about the COlllmand
of hi s Lord and their Lord. When he had revea led his ide ntity
to them, ( l ie said, " Do you know what you did with Yoosuf'
(Jose ph) and hi s broth er. whcn yo u were ignorant? They said" ) .
They wcre abso lutely amazed to know hi s identity. fo r they had
visited hi m numerous ti mes a nd they had not re('ogni sed him.
( "A rc you indeed Yoosufr I lc said , " I am YooslIf, a nd this is
111y brother (Binyamccn)" ) . That is, I a m Yoosufw ith w hom
you dealt as you did and whol11 you abandoned aforetimes. (
" And thi s is my bro ther (Binya mccn) .·· ) I-Ie said thi s in order
to co nfirm th e truth o f what he had to ld thc m a nd to ma ke clcar
to th em the c nvy that they had harbored toward them and the
dece itful stratagems th ey had emp loyed agai nst the m, wh ich
is why he sa id, ( "A lI nh hn s indeed bec n Gra cious to li S." )
That is, by the ki ndn ess and cha rity He ha s shown to us and
by gatherin g us together afte r having bec n separa ted . This was
the result of our obedi ence to Him and the paticnce wc ha ve
shown in the fac e o f the tria ls that have beset us, in additi on to
the obed ience and fi lin l piety we have shown towa rd our fath er
and his great love a nd affc cti on for us. ( "Verily, he w ho fl!af!.;
(29) Terebi nth : Pistacia vera , a small tree which is grown for its edible seeds
(akin to pistachio nuts).

376

II/ell/ioll o/Ihe ProgellY 0/ liJralieem ~

.r----~·"'~W~~~--------------~----~~~--------.

Allah with obedi ence to Him (by abstaini ng from s ins and ev il
deeds, and by per forming right eous good deeds), and is pat ient ,
then surely, Allah makes not the rewa rd of the Mllilsillooll
(those who do good) to be lost. " Th ey sa id. "By Allah ! Indeed
Allah has prefe rred yo u above us." ) That is, He ha s fa vored
you over us and given yo u th <lt wh ich !-I e has not given to us
(Le. Prophet hood) . ( "And we certainl y have bee n sinners'"
) . ThaI is, in what we ha ve done to you; and now here we are
before you. ( He sa id, "No reproach all you Ihi s da y." ) ThaI
is, I will not rebuke you for what you did to me after thi s day.
The n he went furth er, saying to them, ( "may All ah forgive
YOll, and He is the Most Merciful of th ose who show mcrcy!" )
Thcn he ordered them to go wi th hi s shirt, which he wore next
to his skin, and he told them to pl ace it ove r their fathe r's eyes
and he told the m th at his sight would be restored as a result, by
A ll ah 's Penniss ion , after he had lost it. This was an amazing
phenomenon, proo f of his Prophethood and a major mi racle.
Then he ordered th em to bring all of th eir fami lies to the lands
of Egypt, to enjoy goodness, abundant provision and uni ty,
after separation, in the most complete manner. ( And when the
caravan departed, their falh el" sa id. " I do indeed feel the smell
ofVoosuf, ifonly you think me not a dotard (a person who ha s
weak ness of mind because of old age)." They sa id, " By Allah!
Certai nl y, YO ll arc in YOllr old error." Th en. when the bearer
of the glad tidings arri ved , he cas t it (t he shirt) over his face
and he became clear-sighted. I-Ie sa id, "D id I not say 10 you
that I know rrom Allah that whic h you know not?" They sa id,
"0, ollr fa the r! Ask ror rorgiveness ( rrom Alla h) for our sins.
indeed we have been sinn ers." He sa id , " I will ask my Lord for
forgiveness ror you, ve ril y, I-Ie, only li e is the Oft-Forgi vi ng.
th e Most Mereifu l." ) (Saara" Yaasuf I2:94-98)
'A bd ur-Razzaq narrated on the 3U1hori lY of 'Abdullah Ibn

I

I

Meillioll (l/IIie PmgellJ' o/Ibl'lllteem
377
.r----~--~~~~------------~~*?
~.~~C£~--~,

' Abbas ~ that he said regard in g the Words of Allah, Most
High: ( And when th e cara van dcparled ) , " Whe n the caravan
departed, a wind sprang up and it carried the smell ofYoosuf's
shirt to Ya'qoob ~ and he said, ( I do indeed feel th e smell
o fYoosuf, if onl y you think me not a dotard (a person who has
weak ness of mind beca use of o ld age). ) " Ibn ' Abbas ,*" sa id,
" I-Ie picked up his scent from a di stan ce of eight days' (travel)
away!" Ath-Thawri also narrated it thus, as did Shu 'bah an d
others, on the authori ty of Abu Sinan. AI-H asan AI-Basri and
Ibn Juraij Al-Makki sa id that th e distance betwcen th em was
eighty filrsakhs (30) and th at he had been parted from him for
eighty yea rs. ( " If onl y you thin k me not a dotard (a persa ll
who ha s wea kness of mi nd beca use of old age)." ) That is, you
say that I have on ly sa id thi s beca use I have become old and
seni le. 'Abdu llah Ibn 'Abbas <Ge, ' Ata' , Mujahid, Sa'ced Ibn
Jubair and Qaladah sa id that it mea ns: "yo u think me fooli sh."
Mujahid also said - as did AI-Hasan Al-B asri - that it mean s
"you think me senile and decrepil." ( They said , '· By Allah!
Ce rtainl y, you arc in your old error.'· ) Qatadah and As-Suddi
said that they spoke harsh word s 10 him . Allah, Mos t Hi gh,
says, ( "When the bea rer of the glad tidi ngs arrived. he cas t it
(the shirt) over hi s face and he beca me clear-s ight ed." ) Tha i
is, as soon as he arrived with the shirt, he put it ove r Ya ' qoob 's
face and immedia tely, his sight returned, after having been
bli nd. When thi s happened, he said to hi s sons, ( '·Did I not
say to yo u that I know from All ah that which you know notT
) That is, I know that Allah wi ll reunite me with Yoos uf ~,
th at my eyes wi ll be deli ghted by (seei ng) him and th ai He
will show me th at which will please me regardi ng hi s situ ation.
At this point, ( They said. "'0, our father! Ask for forgiveness
(from Allah) for our sins, indeed we have been s inners." ) They
(30) Fa,..wkl,: A parasang, whieh is an ancient Persi an unit of d ist:lI1ec.

378

A/ell/ioll of/he PnlgellY of Ihmlleem ~

.~--~.~~~--------------~----~~~--------~,

req uested from him that he ask A ll ah, the Almi ght y, th e A IIPowe rful to forgi ve them for what they had done, what they
had inflic ted on hi m and his son a nd what they had resolved
to do against him (i. e. Yoosuf :-MJ). And beca use they had
made the intention 10 repeI1l before cOlllmi ning the deed , Allah
ca used them to sec k fo rgivcness after they had com mitted it.
Thei r father agreed to do what they asked. ( l ie said, " 1 will
ask my Lord for forg iveness for you. Verily, He, only He is the
On-Forgiving, the Most MercifuL")
A ll ah , Most Hi gh, says, ( Theil, when they e nt ered unto
Yoosu f, he betook hi s parents to himse lf and said, "Enter
Egy pt, if Allah will s, in sec urity." And he rai sed hi s parents to
th e throne and they fell down before him in prostrat ion. And
he said , "0, my fath er! Th is is the interpretation of Ill y dream
aforetimc! My Lord has made it come true! He WliS indeed
good to me, whe n He took mc out of the prison and brought
YOll (all here) oul of the Bedouin life, aner SIW;/(I11 had sown
enmity between me and my broth ers. Certai nly, my Lord is
the Most Courteous and Kind unto whom He Wi ll s. Truly, He,
On ly li e is the A ll -Know ing. th e Most Wise. My Lord! You
have ind eed bcstowed on me of the sovereignty, and taught me
the int erpretation of dreams; The (only) Creator of th c heavens
and the Earth ! You arc my lVali (Protector, l-Iclpc r, Supportcr,
Guardian, etc.) in this world and in the I rereaficr; cause me 10
die as a Muslim (t he one submi lling to Your Wi ll), and join me
wit h th e righteous." ) (500roll Yoos /if 12 : 99~ I 01)
The People of the Scripture cla im that Yoos u f ~ was absent
fro lll hi s fa ther for forty years; but the course of event s related
in the story is a fairl y reli able guide to the length o f hi s absence,
because th e woman att cmpted to seduce him whcn he was a
you ng boy of seve nteen, accord ing to what has been related by

Mellfioll of Ihe PmgcIIY of IbraheclI/
379
.~~--~~--~~~~----------------~
~~.~~~.

a numbcr of repo rters, but he refused. Then he was in pri son for
a few years (seven, acco rdi ng to ' Ik rimah and ot hers). Then he
was re leased and thc seven yea rs of abundance occurred , the n,
when the peopl e were sufferin g from the effccts of the drought
in the second year of the seven years, hi s bro thers came,
see ki ng foo d supp li es in th c first yea r. Then in th c second ycar,
they brought hi s brot her, Bin yamec n wilh them. In th e third
yea r, he revea led himse lf to them and ordered the m to bring all
of their fami li es with them and all o f thcm came. ( Th cn, when
they en tered unto Yoosur. he betook his parents to himself ) .
That is, he met with them alone, withou t his bro thers ( "and
sa id, " Enter Egypt, if Allah will s, in security." ) It was said
tha t this mean s that he to ld them to enter and then he betook
thcm to himsc lf. This was desc ribed as weak by Ibn Jarcc r
At-Tabari; bu t he is excused ( for that). It was al so said that
he met the m and be took thcm to himse lf in a te nt (outside the
city) and that when they approached the gate o f Egypt, he sai d
( " Enter Egypt, if Allah wi ll s, in securi ty." ) Th is was sa id by
As-S uddi . But if we sa id that the matter does not requi re this
(exp lanation) and it is imp licit in the wo rd ( "Ent cr. .. " ) that
means rcside in Egypt ("if Alla h wi ll s, in security." ) (SoO/·all
YOOS II/ 12:99) - it wo uld be co rrect and also mo re appropriate.
Allah, Most Hi gh, says, ( and they fell down before him
in prostration ) . That is, hi s parents and hi s cleven brothers
prostrated before hi m, in order to venerate and ho nor him
and this was leg islated for them (by Allah) and it conti nued
to be acted upon in all of the Di vine Legislations until it was
made un lawful in the Reve la ti on given to Muhammad. ( And
he said, "0, my father! This is the interpret<l ti on of my dream
aforcti me!") That is, this is the in terpretation of the dream that
I re lated to you, in whi ch eleven planets and the sun and 11100n,
which prostrated before me when I saw them; and you told me

380
.\fell/ioll of'''e l)m~l'/~I' oj Ihmhel'III 'i:tO:
.~----~.~
. ~~
. ~>--------------~----~~~----------.

to keep it sccret and you promised me tha t which you prom ised
l11e at that time. ( " My Lord has made it come true! I-I e was
ind eed good 10 me, w hen l ie took me uut of the pri son," ) That
is, alier the a ffli ction and hardship, I-Ie hus made me a govern or
and a pe rson whose words are heeded and impl ement ed in th e
lands of Egypt, wherever I wish ( "a nd brought YO ll (a ll here)
a lit o f the Bedouin life." ) Th at is, from the desert , for they li ved
in the region o f the Arabs, in the I<mds of A/-Klia/eel. ( "After
S/lOirllll had sown enm ity between me and my brothers." )
Th is refe rs to the envy and ma lice wh ich Satan inspi red in their
hea rts, which ca used the m to do what they did to Yoosuf ~,
whi ch we have a lrcndy descri bed. Then he sai d, ( " Ce rtainl y,
my Lord is the Most Courteolls and Ki nd unt o whom l ie
w ill s." ) That is, when A ll ah Wills something, I-Ie prepares the
ca uses that w ill bring it abou t a nd makes them casy in ways
of whic h the slaves are unaware. Indeed. He ordai ns them and
faci litates them, as a Kin dness from Him, by Hi s Su preme
Omnipotence. ( "Trul y. lI e, Onl y lie is the A ll-Know in g" ).
That is, He possesses (com plete and pe rfec t) Know ledge of all
a mlirs. ( " Th e Most Wi se." ) . T hat is, rega rdin g Hi s creati on ,
Hi s Legislatio n and Hi s Di vin e Predestin ati on.
T hen, when Yoosuf 'f:,:B saw that his b lessing was comp lete
and all of his family had been ga the red, he realized th is
(earthly) abode wi ll not remai n and tha t everything in it and on
it is tra nsitory. He saw thaI there is no thing after com pl eteness
except defi c iency. As he realized a ll Ih is, he praised hi s Lord
in OJ manne r Ihat bcfitt cd Hi m and he ac know ledged His G reat
Kindn ess and Grace and asked Him - and He is the Best of
those who are asked - to gra nt that whe n death came to him ,
he mi ght die as a Muslim and be join ed w ith Hi s righteous
slaves. T hus it is said in the words of the suppli cation: "0,
Allah! Calise liS to live as Muslims and to die as Musli ms."

381
Melllioll oflhe l'mgeflY olJhraheelll
.~----~----~~~--------------~~
~~~----~,

Thil t is, w hen You bring death to us. It is poss ib le that he asked
th is w he n dea th a pproached hi m, as the Prop he t 3'i: asked, w hen
deat h approac hed hi m , that A ll ah ra ise h is so u l to the heave nl y
host and the ri g hteous companions from amo ng th e Prophets
and the Messe nge rs; he sa id three times, "0, A ll ah! Let me be
wit h the h ighest compan ions," and then he d ied. (1)
As fo r ou r Isla mi c Law, it pro hib its us fro m supp li cati ng
for dea th , exce pt w here we fea r jill/ali, 1m as in the /wdeelh
o f M u'az ~ . describ ing the sup plicat ion of dea th , w hi ch
was narrated by A hmad, " II' You are go ing 10 send Jill/ah to a
peop le, th en cau se us to di e and co me to Yo u w itho ut be in g put
to tri al. '· (H) In anot he r hadeelli. it is sa id : "Son o f Ada m ! Death
is bell cr fo r you than Jil/wh." (l~)
Ma ry:uTI (peace be upo n her) sa id , ( ';Wo u ld tha t I had d ied
before th is. and had been forgo tt en and ou l of s ight !" ) (5001'0h
M W}'C11Il 19:23). 'A li Ib n A b i Talib ~ w ished for death when
th e s ituati o n became g rave, th e di scords and tria ls becamc
o ppressive, thc fig hting increased in inte nsity and ru mor,
goss ip and hea rsay beca me wides pread. Ab u ' Abdu ll ah A IBuk hari , the co mpiler of th e famo us 5alleeh w ished for it w hen
c ircums ta nces became diffic ult f'or him and he cncou n!c red
those w ho op posed him.
However, in circlllllstances of comfort and case, it was namlled
by AI-Bukhari and Muslim in their authentic comp ilations. on
the authority o r Anas Ibn Ma li k ~ that he said: ''The Messenger
(3 1) Narrated by A I· l3ukhari (H 37). h luslim (2444). At·Tirmidhi (3496).
Imam Ahmad (24253) and tmam Malik (562).
(32) Fillmh: Temptation. tria t. discord. strife ete.

(3 3) This is an lmlhcntie Im(/n'fh narral.;d by [ma1l1 t\l unad ( 15066); sce the
COl1l1l1cll!:lry of A I·A lbani on A I·/l r/ab AI·J\fIlJrad (69 9).
(34) Th is is an authentic imdecfh narrated by Imam Ahmad (2311 3).

382

Mellfioll oflhe Progeny of Ihraheem ~

.~~~
.~~------------~--~~~----~.

of Allah :J:S said, "None of you shou ld wish for death due to some
hann that has bef:1l1en hi m, bu t if he has to wish ror death, he
should say, '0, Allah! Keep me ali ve as long as li re is beUer ror
me, and let me die if death is better for me. '"~ t35) What is intended
by the word harm (dIllT) here is illness and the li ke, not hal111 in
his religious affairs.

(35) Narrated by AI· Bukhari (5671) and r.,'luslim (2680).

Ibn Ishaq said, " He was a man rrom Rome and hi s name was
Ayyoob, SOil of Moos, so n of Razaah, son of AI-'Ees, son of
Ishaq. son of Ibrahee m, A/-Klla/eel." Others said Ihal he was
Ayyoob (Job), son of Moos, son of Raghwee l, son of AI- ' Ees,
SOil of Ishaq , son ofYa ' qoob, And other genea log ies have been
given for him ,

All ah, Most Hi gh, says, ( And (remember) Ayyoob (Job),
when he cri cd 10 hi s Lord, "Ve rily, distress has se ized me, and
You are the Most Merciful of all those who show mercy." So
We answe red his ca li , and We removed the di slress Ihal was on
him, and We reslOred hi s fa mil y 10 hi m (that he had lost), and
the like Ihereof along wilh them, as a me rcy from Ourse lves
and a Rc mind er fo r all who worshi p Us.) (SoOl'all A /-AlIhiya'
21:83,84)
In Soorall Sad, !-I e, Mos t High, says, ( And rCITI!'llbcr Our
sla ve Ayyoo b, when he in voked his Lord (say ing) , "Vcrily!
SImi/Gil has touc hed mc with d islress (by losing my health) and
torment (by losing my wealth)!" (Allah sa id to him). "S trike the
ground with your foor: This is a spring of wate r 10 wash, cool
and a (refreshi ng) drink," And We gave him (back) his fam ily,

and along with them the like Ih e reo f~ as a Mercy from Us, and a
Re minder for those who understa nd . "A nd tak e in your hand a
bu ndle o f thin grass and strike therew ith (your w i Fe), and break
110 1 you r oa th.'"Truly! We fo und him pa li enl. How excell ent (a)
slave! Veri ly, he was eve r oil-returnin g in repentan ce (to Us)!
) (SoO/·"iI Sad 38:41-44)
Scholars of ta/seer and history, and others have sa id that
Ayyoob ~ (Job) was a man o f great wea lth, consis ting of
grazing stock, sla ves, ca tt le and vast lan ds in Batheniyyah ,
w hich is located in I-Ioora n.
Ibn ' Asakir re lated that Ayyoob ~ had all of th is and he
al so had many children and a large family, but a ll o f this was
taken from him and he was affi icted in hi s body by a vari ety
of ill nesses; and it has been aut hentica ll y reported that the
Messenger of All ah :ti: said, "The peop le who are tested the
most severe ly a re the Prophets, then the ri ght eous, th en the
next best an d the nex t bes t. A man is tried in accordance wi th
his fai th ; ifhi s faith is finn , then his affl ict ion is hard and if his
fa ith is weak, then his affii ction is li ght." (3 6) But all of thi s onl y
increased Ayyoob ~ in pati ence, hope of Allah's Reward and
praise and thanks for Him - to sllch an ex ten t that his namc
has become a bywo rd for pati ence; and it has a lso become a
byword fo r tribu lat ion, due 10 thc many tria ls that he endured.
Ib n Abi Hal im and Ibn Jareer narrated on the authority of
Anas Ibn Mali k ..~ ' hal the Prophel :IS said, "Allah's Prophet,
Ayyoob, suffered lor e ighteen years from hi s affl iction a nd
was shunned by re latives and strangers a like, besides two men
who were the cl osest of his brothers to him. They used to visi t
(36) The mcaning of this can be found in the Sall ee/will and it was narrated
with an authcntic chain ofnarmtors by Imam Ahmad, on the authority of
Sa' d Ibn Abi Waqqas .:;;. (1484).

him every morning a nd every eveni ng. One o f them said to
hi s companion , 'You know, by Allah, that Ayyoob committed
a great sin wh ich nobody in the world eve r committed. ' Hi s
compani on said , ' Why are you saying that?' I-I e sa id, 'For
e ightee n years he has bee n suffering and A lla h has not had
Mercy on him and re lieve hi s suffering.' When he went to him
the nex t morn ing, the (second) man could no t wait to te ll this
to Ayyoob. Ayyoob sa id , ' I do not know what you are ta lking
about , but A ll ah knows that if I passed by two men who were
arguing a nd they mentioncd the Namc of A llah , I wou ld go
back home and offer cxp iati o n lest they had mentioned the
Name of A lla h in an imprope r manner.' W henever he went out
to answer th e ca ll of naturc, w hen he fin ished, hi s wife wou ld
take hi s hand unt il he came back homc. One day he took a long
time, and Allah had revea led to Ayyoob, ( Strike with your
foot. Thi s is (a spring of) wa ter to wa sh, coo l and a (re freshing)
drink ) (SoO/"oil Sad 38:42) She thought that he had taken too
lo ng, so she turned to look at him, and saw that A llah had taken
away the afflicti ons he had been suffering, and he looked better
th an he had ever looked. When she saw him , she sa id , " May
A ll ah bless you! Have you see n Allah 's Prophet, the one who
is sore ly tested By A llah? I have ncver seen a man who looks
more likc him than you , if he were healthy." I-I e said, " I am
he." He had two threshing floors, o ne for wheat and one fo r
barley. All ah sent two c louds, and whe n o ne of them reached
the threshing floor of the whea t, it rained go ld until it was fu ll.
The o ther rained gold onlh c th reshing fl oor oft hc barley until
it was full. " 437)
Ibn Abi Hatim narra ted on the aut hority of Ab u Hura irah
.t;e, from the Prophet 3i$ that he said , " Whcn Allah restored to
hea lth , Ayyoob ~ He rained golden locusts down on him and
(37) Narrated by Ibn Jnrccr in his Ta/seer (23 / 167).

386

rhe Story ojAy)'ooh (Joh) ~

.~----~.~
~W-~~
> --------------------~~~~~--~~.

he began to gathe r them up wi th his han ds a nd place them in
hi s ga rme nt. It was sa id to him , ' 0 , Ayyoob! Do you not have
suffi cient ?' He sa id, ' 0 , my Lord! Who can ever have suffi cient
o f Your Mercy?' (3S) It was also narrat ed by Ibn Hi bban in hi s
Sahee" , 09) but non e of the compi lers o f the (six authentic)
boo ks narrated it, though it confo rm s to the criteria rcquircd for
a hadeefh to be accept ed as authenti c. And Allah knows bcltcr.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authori ty o f Abu I-Iu rai rah ..#f,
th at he said : The Messe nger of All ah ;l'; said, " Wh ile Ayyoob
~ was bat hing nak ed, loc usts of gold fe ll upon him. Ayyoob,
peace bc upon hi m, began ga theri ng them in his ga nnenl. Th en
hi s Lord call ed to him , ' 0 , Ayyoob, have I not made you so
ri ch that you have no necd of what you sec?' I-I e said, ' Yes,
Lord ! Bu t I cannot do without Your Blessi ng' !" This was also
na rrated by AI-Bukhari,on Ihe au thorityo f ' Abdur-Razzaq ...;e. (40)
All ah's Sayi ng: ( Stri ke wi th your foot ) mean s: strike the
ground with you r foot; and he did as he wa s commanded to
do, upon whi ch, All ah ca used a spring, whose water was co ld,
to gush fo rth for him . Th en All ah co mma nded him to wash in
it and to drink from it; he did so, and Allah re moved th ereby
all of the pa in, di sfi guremcnt and ill ness that had affi icted his
body, both outside and inside. I-Ie replaced hi s former ill-hea lth
with good hea lth, bestowing on him perfec t beauty and great
wea lt h, to such an extcnt that I-I e rained down a shower of
golden loc llsts upo n hi m and He returned hi s famil y to him, as
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( and We restored his I~uni ly to him (th at
he had lost), and the lik e thereof along with the m. ) (Soorah
(38) Narrntcd by Imam Ahmad (10260).
(39) This is an authentic /wdeellt narr.ltcd by Ibn Hibban in his Saltcelt ( 141122,
No. 6230).
(40) Narr.ltcd by im;llll Ahm;ld (27376).

AI-Anbiya' 21 :84) It was sa id th at He resto red the selfsame
fam ily to li fe. It was also said th at He rewarded him for those
he had losl and recompensed him in the li fe o f thi s worl d wit h
othe rs, and th at He re unit ed him with all of the m in the life o f
the He rea fter.
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( as a Mercy from O urselves. ) (Soorah
AI-Anbiya' 2 1:84) Th at is, We reli eved him of his hardship. (
and We removed th e di stress that was on him. ) (Soorah AIAllbiya ' 2 1:84) - as a Mercy from Us 10 him and a Kindness and
Benefi cence ( and il reminder for th e worshippers. ) (Soorah
AI-Anbiya ' 2 1:84) Tha t is, a re mi nde r for those who a re tested
in their bodies, th eir wea lth or their childre n, for th ey have an
ex ampl e in the Prophet o f Allah, Ayyoob e , who was tested
by All ah with a test greater than that and he bore it pat ientl y,
hoping for A lla h's Reward , unt il He relieved him of it.
He, Most Hi gh, says , ( And take in your hand a bund le of thi n
grass and strike therew ith (your wife), and break not your oath.
Trul y! We found him pati ent. I-low excelle nt (a) slave! Veri ly,
he was eve r o ft -retuming in repentance (to Us)! ) (Soorah Sad
38 :44) Thi s is a lice nse from All ah, Most Hi gh, to Hi s slave
and I-li s Me ssenger, Ayyoob ~ . beca use of the oath he had
made to beat hi s wife with a hundred slripes. II was said Ihal
he mad e an oat h to do this becau se she had sold he r braids.
It was also said that Satan appeared to her in a pleasan t form
and he desc ribed to he r how to prepare a cure for Ayyoob .~
and so she prepared it and informed Ayyoob ~ o f what had
happened. He reali zed immedi ately that it was Satan and he
swore an oath that he woul d beat her with a hun dred stripes.
When All ah, the Almi ghty, the All- Powerful cured him , He
command ed hi m to tak e a hundred stems of thin grass a nd
strike her with the m once; an d thi s wo ul d be equi va lent to a

388
Tile Story ofAXl'Ooh (Job) ~'
.~----~
~~~>--------------------~~~~~--~~>

hund red stripes. Thus he had fulfilled hi s oat h a nd not broken
it. This is a release and a way out for the one who fears Allah
and obeys Him, espec iall y with regard to the rig ht of a pati ent
wife, who hopes for All ah 's Reward , who is long-suffering.
honest, duti ful and rightl y gui ded - may Allah be pleased with
her. Thi s is why Allah gra nted this license and ex plai ned it in
His Words: ( Tru ly! We fo und hi m pmi ell t. Ilow excell ent (a)
s lave ! Verily. he was ever ofl-returni ng in repenta nce (to Us)!
) (SoO/"ail Sad 38:44)

Who, According to SOllie People, Was the Son 0/
Ayvoob ~\

A ll ah , Most High , says, after re lating th e SIOI)' of Ayyoob
~ in SoO/'ali AI-Anhiya', ( And (remember) Isma'eel. and

Idri s (Enoc h) and Dhlll-Kffl ( Isaia h), all we re li'om among ...1 .... Sahircell (th e patient Dil es, cIC.). A nd We admitted th em to QUI'
Me rcy. Veril y, they were orlh e ri ght eous. ) (Soorah AI-Allbiya '

21 :85,86)
Also afte r relat ing the story of Ayyoob :i!::9 in 500mh Sad, He,
Most Hig h, says, ( And remembe r Our slaves. [bra hccm, Ishaq .

and Ya 'qoob. (all) oWllers of strength (in worshipping Us) and
(a lso) of rcl igious und erstandin g. Ver il y, We did choose the m by
grantin g [helll (a good thi ng, i.c.) the remembran ce of th e hom e
( in th e Hereafter and Ihey used to make th e people remember
it, and a lso th ey used to in vit e the peop le 10 obey Allah and 10
do good deeds for the Il e rcaficr). A nd Ih cy arc wi th Us , verily,
o rlh e c hosen and the bes t! And rcme mber Isma 'eel (l sma 'cc!).
AI-Va sa"a (Eli sha ), an d DII/{I-K[fl (I sa iah) , all arc alllong the
best ) (SoO/·ali Sad 38 :45 -48).

390

Tile 5101)1oj DIII/I-Kifl ~

<~--~~~~~~----------------------~~----~~.

Ibn Jareer and Ibn Abi Naj eeh narrated on the aUl hority of
Muj ahid that he wa s not a Prophet, but th at he was a right eo us
ma n, who was appointed to act on beha lf o f the Prophet se nt
to hi s people and to carry out his responsibiliti es toward s them
and to judge betwcen them with fairness; as a result, he was
known as Dh ul-Kift. ( J [)
And Ibn Abi Hatim sai d: It is reported on the au thori ty of
Kina nah Ibn AI-Ak hnas th at hc said: I heard Al-A sh' ari (Lc.
Abu Moosa) when he was at the pulpit, sayin g, "D hul -Kin
wa s not a Prophet; but thcre was a righteous man alllong the
Children of Isra ' ce l, who used to ofTer a hundred prayers evel) '
day. He di ed and DIIIII-Kif/ too k hi s place, o fTering a hundred
praye rs e very day. For thi s reason, he was call ed Dhul-Kifl ." (J 2)

Mention of Communities That Were Completely
Eradicated
T hi s was before the revelati on of th e Torah , based on th e
ev idence in the Word s o f A ll ah, Mos t Hi gh: ( And indeed We
gave Moosa (Moses), afie r We had destroyed thc gencrations
of old, th e Scripture (the rtlll'rlIII [Tora h]) ) (SoO/·all AI-Qastls
28:43). Likewi se, Ibn Jarec r At-Tabari, Ibn Abi Hatim and
A I- Bazzar narrated on the au thorit y o f Abu Sa'eed AI -Khudri
~ that he said, "A ll ah did not destroy any peoplc on the fa ce
o f th e Earth with a pun ishme nt frolll the heaven or from the
Ea rt h aficr the Tawrah had been revealed, cxccpt fo r Ihe villa ge
(4 1) Thi s is because the word kifl is derived rrom Ihe verb kaJala, meani ng to
be res ponsible.
(42) See Ad-DI/n· Al-Mallll/oor (5/664). A I-Hafiz Ibn Katheer said in his · Tal.~l!er' (311 92), ·· It is IIII/m/tlli" (broken) between Q:lIl1dah and Abu Moosa

....

The S(OI:I' oj" Dhllf-K iff ~
391
.~----~------~------------------~k"~,~~
r'~--~,

whose peop le we re tra ns fonn ed into apes. Do you not see tha t
Allah, Most Hi gh, says, ( And indeed We gavc Moosa, 'I fler
We had destroyed th e generatio ns o f old, the Scripture (the
1'(111'1"011» (So oralt AI-Qasas 28:43) (4J) In one vers ion narra ted
by AI-Bazza r, he described it as 1/101/00 '. BU I it appears most
like ly that il is IIUlII'qoof(i.e. th at it may be atlribU led to Abu
Sa'eed Al- Khudri , and not to the Messenge r of Alla h ~). In any
case, it proves that every nati on Iha t was comp lc tely destroyed
was before Moosa ~\ . Among them were Ihe dwe ll ers o f ArRass, of whom All ah, Most High, says, ( And (a lso) •Ad and
Thulllood, a nd the dwe lle rs of Ar- Rass, a nd ma ny generati ons
in be twee n. And for eac h of them We put fo rward examp les
(as proof') and lessons, etc.), and each (of th cm) We brough t to
ulle r ruin (beca use of thei r disbe lie f alld ev il deeds» (Soorab
AI·FlIrqaI1 25:38,39)
He, Most Hi Gh, says in Sooralt Qaf, ( Dc ni ed be fore the m
(Le. these pagans of Makkah who de ni ed YOll, 0, Muhammad)
the peop le of Nooh. fi nd th e dwe ll ers o f Ar-Rass, and Thamood.
And ·Ad, and Fir'awn (Pharaoh), and the brethren of Loo t. And
the dwe lle rs o rtha t wood. an d the peopl e o fTub ba' Everyone
of them den ied (thei r) Messengers. so My Th reat took effec t.
) (SoO/'ail QaJ50: 12.14), The context of these Soorails proves
that they were destroyed, eradicated and ann ih ilated. And thi s
refutes the preferred opinion oflbn Jarcer At-Tabari, whi ch was
that they were th e Peopl e of the Ditch, who were mentioned in
SOOl·ah AI-Burooj, because these peopl e ca me aft er the Masech
~ , according to Ibn Ishaq and a number of ot hers. And thi s
(4 3) Narr:ltcd by Ibn Jarccr At-Tabari in his Tafteer (2 0/80). In AI- J\lajlllll'. AIJ-Iai lhami amihUled it to AI- Bazzar in both 1//{/\l"(lo<ifand II/ar/oo' forms.
while in At/·/JII"" i11-MUll/hoor (5/ 129). As·Suyooti ascribed it to Ibn Abi
lI alitn. And Al-Haitharni said. ·· ... :lnd it s rijal (men) arc all narrators of
authentic (llllIdeelh."

392
The SIOfJ' oj DIIIII-Kifl ~
.r--~Y'~~~~------------------~~----~~.

claim also requires careful investi ga tion.
Ibn Jareer At-Tabari narrated on the aut hori ty of 'Abdulla h
Ibn ' Abbas 4:0 that he said: "The dwe llers of Ar-Rass were the
inhabitants of one of the villages ofThamood." And at the start
of his Tareekh, when describing th e buildi ng of Damascus,
AI-Hafiz Abul-Qasim Ibn 'Asakir related from the 7llreekh of
Abul-Qasim ' Ubaidullah Ibn ' Abdull ah Ibn Khurdazbah and
from other sources th at the dwellers of Ar-Rass were in !-Iadoor
(44) and A Ilah sent a Prophet to Ihem whose name was l-Ianzalah
Ibn Safwan, but they rejected hi m and kill ed him . So ' Ad, son
of' Aws, son of Iram, son of Sam, son of Nooh ~ led his
children from Ar-Rass and sett led in AI-Ahqaf and thcy spread
out through the land of Ycmen and through out all the lands,
until Jairoon, son ofSa 'd, son of ' Ad, son of ' Aws, son of Iral11,
son of Sam, son of Noah settled in Damasl.:us and built the city,
ca ll ing it Jairoon and that is Iram of the Pillars. (4~) And there
is no place with marc stonc pillars than Damascus. Allah sent
Hood, son of 'Abdullah Ibn Rabah, son of Khal id, son of AIKhu lood, son of 'Ad to the descendants of ' Ad at AI-A hqaf, but
th ey rejected him and so A\l ah, th e Almighty, the All-Powerful
destroyed them. This means th at the dwellers of Ar-Rass li ved
a vcl)' long time before 'Ad. And Allah knows better.
Ibn Abi Hatim narrated on the authority of 'Abdullah Ibn
' Abbas ~ tha t he said, UAr-Rass is a well in Azerbaijan." AthThawri narra ted 0 11 the aut hority of Abu Buka ir, who reported
on the aut hority of ' Ikrima h that hc said, "Ar-Rass is a we ll in
wh ich they buried their PropheL" (46 ) Ibn Juraij sai d, " Ikrimah
(44) Iladoor: A town in Yemen.
(45) See: Soorllit AI-Fajr 89:7.
(46) This is said to be deri ved from the Arabie verb rassa, which mcans to
bury.

said that the dwelle rs of Ar-Rass were the dwe llers of the town
me nti oned in Soomh }il Seen, according to what ' Ikrimah ha s
claimed, who were co mpl etely annihil ated. All ah, Most high ,
says regard in g them, ( It was but one Sailwll (s hout, etc.) and
lo! They (all ) were silent (dead - des troyed). ) (Soorah Ya Seen
36:29) And we shall relate their story after these people's story,
though it wou ld appear that they were another people (i.e. not
the people referred to in Sool'all Ya Seen); and they were also
destroyed and eradi cated. At all events, it contradicts what Ibn
Jarcer said.

Who Were the Dwellers a/the Town

Allah, Most High, says, ( And put forward to them a similitude;
the (Slory of the) dwe ll ers of th e town, when there came

Messengers 10 them. When We sent to th em two Messengers.
they belied them both , so We reinforced th em w ith a third . and

Jhcy sa id, " Verily! We ha ve been sent 10 you as Messe ngers."
They (people o f th e tow n) sa id , "YOLI arc only human beings

like ourselves, and the Mos t Beneficent (Allah) has revealed
nothing, YO LI arc onl y telling lies." They sa id, "Our Lord knows
that we have bee n sent as Messengers 10 yo u. And our dUly is
only to convey plainl y." They (the people) said , " Fo r liS, we sec
an evi l omen from you, if YOli cease not , we wi ll su rely stone
you, ,mel a painfultonllcnt will touch yo u from us:' They (t he
Messcngers) sa id, "You r cvi l omens be with you! (Do you ca ll
it an evil omen) because you are adm onished? Nay, btu YO ll arc
a people IIIl1srifoOI1 (transgress ing a ll bounds by cOll1mittin g
a ll kinds of g reat sins, and by disobeying Allah). And therc
came running from the fanhcst pan of the town. a man, say ing.
"0, my peoplc! Obey the Messc ngers: obey those w ho ask no

Th e S{OI)' of /h e People of YaSecll

395

wages of you (fo r themselves), and who are rightl y guided. And
why shou ld I not wors hip Him (Alla h, Alone) Who has created
me and to Whom YOll shall be returned. Shall I take besides
Him a/ilia" (gods), (whe n) if the Most Beneficent (Allah)
intend s me any hann, the ir intercess ion will be of no use for me
whatsoever ~ and nor can they save mc? Th en veril y, I shoul d
be in plain error. Ve rily! I have bel ieved in your Lord, so li sten
to me!" It was sai d (to hi m when lhe di sbe li evers killcd him),
"E nter Parad ise." He said, "Would that my people knew! That
my Lord (A llah) has forgiv en me, and made me of the honored
ones!" And We sent not aga inst hi s peop le after him a host from
heaven , nor do We send (suc h a thing). It was bu t one Sailwh
(shout, etc.) and lo! They (all) were si len t (dead - destroyed). )
(Saarali Ya Seell 36: 13-29)
It has been widel y reported from many of the Salcif and the
later scho lars that th is town was Ant ioch (Antakiyah). This
was narrated by Ibn Ishaq , who reported it on the authority
of 'Abdullah Ibn ' Abba s ~, Ka ' b AI-Ahbar and Wahb Ibn
Munabbih. It was lik ew ise narrated on the authority ofBuraidah
Ibn Al-Husaib, ' Ikrimah, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri and others.

But this say ing is very weak , because when the Maseeh ~
sent three of the Disc ipl es 10 the peopl e of Anti oc h (A nt akiyah).
they were the fi rst city to believe in th e Masceh ~\ at that time.
For thi s reason , it was one or the four citi es in which th ere
were Chri stian Patriarchs; and they were An ti och, Jerusa lem.
Alex andria and Rome . Arter them , Constan tinopl e became
a Patriarchal cily, but none of them was destroyed, wh ile
the inhabitants of thi s village mentioned in the Qur ' an wcre
destroyed, as All ah says at the end of their stOlY, after they
had kill ed the one who be lieved in the Messengers. ( And pu t
forward to them a similitude; the (story of the) dwellers of the

396

U,e S,ory (~I 'he People OflCISl'l'1l

.r----~~r
. .~--------------~~----~~--~.

(SoOl'ol1 }'O Seen
36: I 3) But if (it was said that) the Ihree Messengers menti oned
in the Qur'an were sent to the peop le or Anti och in the di stant
past and they rej ec ted thc m and Allah des troyed them. The city
was then rebu ilt a ftcr th at and thcn whc n it was thc limc of the
Masech ~, Ihey beli eved in the messengers he sent to the m,
Ihi s cannot be rul ed out. And Alla h knows better.

10\\ Il . whell th ere camc Messcngcrs 10 Ihe lll )

He, Most High, says, And pUI forward to Ihem a simil itude.
) T hat is for you r peop le, Muhammad . ( th e (story o f the)
dwe ll ers of the tow n ) , That is, the city, ( whell there cam c
Messenge rs to them. Wh en We se lll 10 the m lwO Messe nge rs.
they belied th em both, so Wt.: reinforced Ihem w ith <l thi rd .
) (SoO/·ail Yo Seell 36: 13, 14) That is, We supported th em by
send in g a third perso n to de li ver the Message. They sa id.
"Our Lord knows that we have been sent as Messe ngers 10
you .. · ) (SoO/·oil Yo Seell 36: 16). But they answered them by
say ing th at they were on ly human be ings, li ke them, as (all ) Ihe
disbeli ev ing nations said to the ir Messengers, deem ing the idea
Ihat All ah wou ld send a huma n Messenger to be farfetched. The
Messe ngers replied Ihat A ll ah knew that Ih ey were Messcngers
sent 10 them and that ir they were lyi ng about Him, He wou ld
have pu nished them and exac ted condign Retr ibut ion on lhem.
"And our duty is on ly to convey pla inly." ) (SoOl'al1 }'c1 Seen
36: 17) T hat is, the only ob li gation upon liS is to convcy 10 you
Ih e Message with which A ll ah has sent us to you; it is A ll ah
Who guides whom He will s and increases in misguidance
whomsoever He will s, ( Thcy (Ih e people) said, " Fo r us, wc
sec an t.:v il olllc n rrom you ," ) That is, we see an ev il omen in
tha t whi ch you have brought. ( .. .. . if you cease not, we will
surdy stone you," ) . That is, we w ill rev ile you verba ll y. It was
also sa id that it means we wi ll physica ll y stone you, Bu t the
first ex pl anation is supported by His Word s: ( "and a pa inful

rite StOlT oj llt(' People oj' )(ISeell

397

.~------------------------------~~~----~.
torment will touc h you from LIS." ) _ So they threaten ed them
wi th dea th and vc rba l abusc. ( Th ey (the Messengers) said.
"Your evil omens be wi th you~" ) Th at is, they arc th rown back
upon YOll. ( "(Do you cu ll it .• an ev il olll en" ) beca use you are
admoni shcd?" ) That is, bccause of the gu idan ce 10 whic h we
have ca ll cd you, woul d you thrcate n us wi th dea th and verba l
abuse? ( "Nay_ but you arc a people mllsrijiJOJI (tra nsgrcssing
all bounds by com mitting all kinds of great s ins, and by
di sobeyin g All ah)," ) That is, you do not accept the tmth,
no r do you desire it. And He, Most Hi gh, ( And th erc ca me
runn ing from the fa rthest part of the town , a man . ) Thm is, 10
support the two Messenge rs and to open ly decl are hi s bclief
in th em ( say ing, "0, my peopl e! Obey the Messc nge rs; those
who ask no wages of yo u (for themse lves), and who are ri ghtl y
gui ded." ) (Soorall Ya Seell 36:20,2 1). That is, th ey ca ll you to
Ihe pu re trut h, without reecivi ng or expecting any payment or
.my reco mpense, Then he ca lled upon them 10 wJrship All ah,
Alone, withou t ascrib ing partners to him and he forbade them
to wo rship any ot her de ity besides I-li m, whi ch ca n offer th em
no benefit in thi s world or in the Hereaft er. ( "Then vcril y, I
should be in plain error." ) (SOOl'OIr Yo Seen 36:24). ThaI is, if I
aba ndoned the worship of A Il ah and worshipped others besi des
Him. Then he sa id, address ing the Messengers, ( "Veril y! I
have bel ieved in yo ur Lord, so liste n to me!" ) (Soorah )'t1 Seen
36:25). It was said that it means: Listen ( 0 Ill y wo rds a nd bear
witness fo r me to them before your Lord. It was also said tha t it
mea ns: Hear, 0, my people, my open testimony of beli ef in the
Messenge rs of Allah. Upon hea ring thi s, they kill ed him; it was
said tha t they stoned hi m. It was also said th at they tort ured
him to death. A nd it was also sa id that they leapt upon him
as one man a nd ki ll ed him. Ib n Ishaq related from one of hi s
compan ions, who repo rted on the authority of •Abdullah Ibn

The SUNY of 'he People of )'aSeel1

398

•

•

Mas'ood ~ that he sa id, "They stamped o n him un til they had
spilled hi s entra il s."

'A bdullah Ibn 'Ab bas ~ said, " I-I e advised his people whil e
he li ved: ( " 0 , my people! O bey the Messengers." ) (SoO/'oll
Ya Seen 36:20) ~ and after hi s dea th: ( He sa id, "Would that
my people knew ! That my Lord (A ll ah) has forg iven me, a nd
made Ille of the honored ones!") (SoO/'oll Ya Seen 36:26,27)
This was narrated by Ibn Ab i Ha tim. Qatadah said: "You will
never find a be liever but he is since re and is neve r insincere.
Whe n he saw with hi s own eyes how A llah had honored hi m.
He said, ( ' Wou ld that my people knew! T hat my Lord (A llah)
has forgivc lll11c, and made I11Co rthe honored o nes!' ) (Soomh
Ya Seen 36:26,27). He wished tha t hi s peop le could know abo lit
what he was see ing with hi s own eyes of the honor of All ah,"
Qa tadah added, "A nd no, by A ll ah! All ah did no t censure hi s
peop le after they had kill ed him." ( It was but o ne Saihah and
lo ! They (a ll) were si lent (dead - destroyed ). ) (SoO/'oil Yo Seen
36:29)

And He, Most I-Iigh, says, ( And We sent not aga inst his
people afte r him a host from heaven, nor do We send (such a
thing) . ) (Soorall Yo Seen 36:28) That is, We di d not need to

send down an army from th e heaven in order to exact retribut ion
upon them . Th is was the meanin g narrated by Ibn Ishaq, who
o ne o f his co mpanions, who in
report ed on the aut hority
tum reported on th e authority of' Abd ullah Ibn Mas'ood 4i>.
Mujahid and Qatadah sa id, that Hi s not se ndin g upon the m a

or

host mea ns: I-Ie did not send down to them another Message.
But Ibn Jareer At-Tahari said, " But the fir st exp lanat ion is more

appropriate. "
I say th at it is a lso stronger, which is why A llah says, ( nor
do We send (s uch a thing). ) (SoOl-aII Ya Seell 36:28) That is,

The SlOr..!' of the People of }hSee"

399
.~-----------------------------------'~JWi~
> ----~>
We did not need to do thi s in order to exac t ret ribution, whe n
they be lied Q ur Messengers and ki ll ed Qu r /Va/i. ( It WllS but
aile Sailwh and 10! They (all) were si lent (dead - destroyed). )

(SoOl·all )'Cl Seen 36:29)
The scho lars of ta!'ieer said tha t All ah sen t Jibrace l ~ to
them and he seized the posts of the gates 10 their city, then he
unlcashed a single shout upon them ( and lo! They (a ll ) were
silent (dead - destroyed) ) (SoO/'oil Yo See" 36:29). That is, their
voices were silenced and their movemcnts were stilled , so that
not even an eye move ment remai ned amo ng them. All of thi s
proves that thi s village was not Ant akiyak (Antioch), because
th ese people were destroyed beca use of their rejec ti on of the
Messengers w hom Al lah sent 10 them , whil e the inhab itants of
Ant ioch bel ieved and obeyed th e messengers of the Ma seeh
~~ from a mong the di sc iples whom he se nt to them . For thi s
reason it was said that Anti och was the first city 10 be lie ve in
the Masech ~ .

A ll ah , Most Hi g h, says in SOOl"all YOOI1I1S , ( Was th ere any
town (comm unity) thai believed (after see ing th e puni shment) ,
and it s fa ith (at that moment) saved it (from th e pun ishment)?
(The an swer is none,) - except the people of Yo onus (Jonah);
when they be li evcd, We rcmoved from them the torment or
disgrace in the life of the (prese nt ) wo rld , and permitted them
to enjoy for a wh ile . ) (Saarall Yaol/lls 10:98)
He, Most High, says in 500/'011 AI-IInhiya', ( And (remember)
DlulI1-Noon (Jonah) . when he went ofT ill ange r, and imag ined
that We shall not puni sh him (i.e. the ca lamiti es which had
befa ll en him) ! But he cried through the darkness (say ing).
"La iloIlO ilia lima (no ne has the right to be worshipped but
YOli [0, Allah]), Glorified (a nd Ex alted) are YO li (a bove all

71w Slo/)' of l 'OOllllS ( JUI/ah) ~
40 I
.~--------~~~~-------------------'~~~~
' ----~,

that [evil] they associa te wi th You). Tmly, I have been of the
wrong-doers .. · So We answered his ca li , and de li vercd him
fro m the di stress. And thus We do deliver the Be li evers (who
be li eve in th e O neness of All ah , abs ta in from ev il <.lnd work
ri ghteousness). ) (Saara" 1I1-lIlIb;yo' 2 1:87,88)
He, Most Hi gh, says in SoO/·all As-SaJJal, ( And , ve ril y,
YOOIlUS was one of th e Messenge rs. When he ran 10 the laden
ship, He (agreed to) cast lots, and he was among the losers.
Then a (big) fi sh swa ll owed him and he had done an act worthy
ofb lalll c. Had he no t been of the m who glorify A ll ah, he wou ld
have indced re mained insidc its (the fish) bell y till the Day of
Resurrec ti on. But We cast him fo rth on the naked shore while
he was sick. And We caused a plant of gourd to grow ovcr hi m.
And We se lll hill1lO a hu ndred thousand (peop le) o r even more.
And they believed; so We gave th em enjoyme nt for a whil e. )
(Saara" As-SajJor 37: 139-148)
He, Most High, says in SoO/·all Noon (i.e. SoO/·oll AI-Qafolll),
( So wa it with pati ence for the Dec ision of you r Lord, and be
not like the Companio n of the Fish, when he c ried out (to Us)
wh ile he was in deep so rrow. (Sec th e Qur ' an, Verse 21:87).
Il ad not a Grace from hi s Lord reac hed him , he would indeed
have been (left in the stomach of the fish, but We forgave
him) , so he was cast oITo n the naked shore, whil e he was to be
blamed. But hi s Lord c hose him and made him of the ri ghteoll s.
) (Soa,.a" AI-Qalalll 68:48-50)
Th e sc holars of la/seer said that All ah se nt YOOIlUS ~ to
the peopl e of Neenawa , in the land of A I-Maws il (Mosu l);
he ca ll ed them to Allah , the A lmi ghty, the A ll-PowerFul , but
they rejected him a nd arrogantl y persisted in their di sbeli ef
and wi ll fu l rejec ti on of lhe truth . When this sta te of affairs had
gone on for a long time, he departed from them and threatened

402

The SIOl:V O/YOOll ItS (.Io lla") ~

~.~~~~~~,~
' ------------------~~----~----~--.

them wi th the desce nt of All ah's Punishment upon them after
th ree days.
' Abdull ah Ibn Mas' ood 4 , Mujahi d. Sa'eed Ibn Jubai r,
Qatada h and more than on e of the ea rlier and the later
generations said tha t when he depa rted from among them and
they becam e convinced of the imminent descent of Allah's
Punishment upon them, All ah cast repentance and re morse into
their hearts and they felt a sense of regret for the way they had
treated the ir Prophet.
Th is is why Alla h, Most High, says, ( Was there any town
(com munity) that believed (afte r seei ng the punishment), and
its faith (at that moment) saved it (from th e punishment)?
) That is, was there any tow n in past ti mes whose whole
popu lation be li eved? Thi s (rhetori cal questio n) ind icates that
th is did not happen. Indeed, as Allah, Most Hi gh, says, ( And
We did not send a wamer to a tow nship, but those who were
given the wo rl dly wea lth and luxuri es among thcm said, "We
believc not in the (Message) with which you have been sen\."
) (SaO/"ail Saba" 34:34)" Then He, Most High, says, ( except
the people of Yoonu s; when they be lieved, We removed frol11
them the torment of di sgrace in the life o f the (p rescnt) world,
and pcnnittcd them to enj oy for a while. ) (Soo rah YOOI1 US
10 :98) That is, all of the m be li eved. Scholars of tafseer ha ve
di sagreed as to whc ther or not their belief wou ld benefilthem
in the Afte rl ife and save them from th e Punishment of the
Herea fter, as it saved them fro m Pu nishment in the li fe of thi s
world . The most appare nt answe r, acco rdin g to the con text, is
yes. And A ll ah knows better. As He, Most High, says, ( when
they believed. ) (Soorah }'OOI1I1S 10:98) And I-Ie, Mos t High,
says, ( And We sen t him to a hundred thousand (peop le) or
even more. And they bel icved; so We gave them enjoyment

The
SIO')' of )'OOl1l1S ( .Jol/ah) 'tl±J
___________________________________

.~

UO~~~~
·

403
____

~.

ror a whi le. ) (SoO/'ail As-Sa/Jat 37: 147, 148) This enjoyment
for a while docs not negate the possibility that there is another
rewa rd with it, that bei ng the liftin g of the Pu ni shment of the
Hereafter. And Allah knows better.
He, Most Hi gh, says, ( And \~nl y, Voonus was on e of the
Messe ngers. When he mn to the Iilden ship, he (agreed to) cast
lots, and he was among the losers. Then a (big) fi sh swall owed
hi m as he had done an act worthy o f blame. ) (5oorah AsSa/Ja! 37: 139-1 41). That is to say, when he was the loser
when they drew lots, he was cast overboa rd into th e sea and
Allah , the Almighty. the All-Powe rful sent a grea t fi sh fro m
the Medi terranean Sea and it devoured him ; Al lah, Most Hi gh,
commanded it not to cat hi s fl esh or break hi s bones, beca use he
was not food for it. So it took him and swa m throu gh all o f the
seas. It was said that Ihi s fi sh was swa llowed by another, even
large r fi sh. They sa id that when he had stayed for some lime in
the fi sh belly, he thought that he had died ; th en he moved hi s
limbs and saw that he was ali ve. He fell down in prostration
befo re All ah in the bell y of th e fi sh, and he said, "0 , Lord! I
have taken as a place of wo rship to You a place whi ch no oth er
person has reac hed." They differed as to how long he spellt in
the belly of the fi sh. Some said th ree days; thi s was the view
ofQatadah. Some said seven days; thi s was the view of la'far
As-Sadiq, may Allah be pleased wi th hi m. Some sa id forty
days; thi s was the view o f Abu Malik. Mujahid said , narrating
from Ash- Sha'bi, " It swa ll owed him in thc morning and cast
him forth in thc eve ning." This is supported by thc pOClry of
Umayya h Ibn Ab i As-S alt

And }{J II , by a Grace/rom YOtl , saved YOO lI llS.
And lIe remained in the belly of the fish for a night.
What is mcant is that when the fish began to swim with him

404

71le SIOIY of }ho/lll\' (./{JlllIh) ~•

.~----~'~-~~'------------------~~----------~~.
in the deep seas, and hurtl ed with him through the salty waves,
he heard the sound o f the fi sh praising the Most Bene fic ent
and he cven hea rd the prai ses of the pebbl es for Ihe Splitter of
secds and (fruit) stones (47) and th e Lord of the seve n heavens
and the seven earlh s and all thaI li es be tween them an d Ih at
whi ch is benea th the soil. O n hearing Ihcse praises, he began to
beseech All ah, sil e ntl y a nd in word s, as Alla h has info nncd LIS,
th e Ow ner o f Mi ght and Maj esty, Who kn ows the secrets and
co nfi dential ta lks and Who a lleviates harm and affl ict ion , Who
hears a ll vo ices, even though they may be weak. Who knows
th e unseen th ings, even though they may be mi nu te and Who
a nswers the supplicat ions o rl hose who arc in great distress. as
I-Ie says in His Book, which was revea led to Hi s trustworthy
Messenge r - and He is the Mos l Trut hfu l of Speakers, the
Lord o f the World s and the God of the Messengers - ( And
(remember) DlulII-NoOI1 (Jonah) , whe n he went o ffi n anger, and
imagined th at We shall not pun ish him (i.e. the ca lamites whi ch
had be fa lle n him )! But he c ri ed through the darkness (say ing),
"La ilaha ilia Anta (none has the ri ghl to be worshipped but
You [0 , A ll ah]) , G lorifi ed (and Exa lted) a rc YOll (above a ll
that [ev il] they associate w ith You). Trul y, I have been of the
wrong-doers." So We answe red his ca ll , and deli ve red him
from the distress. And thus We do de li ver the be lievers (who
bel ieve in the One ness of All ah, absta in from evil and work
righteousness). ) (Soorah A I~Allbi)'(t' 2 1:87,88)
As fo r Hi s Say ing: ( and (he) imag ined that We shall no t
puni sh him (i .e. th e ca lami tes whic h had be fa ll en hi m) ! )
(Soorah A f~All biya' 2 1:87), it means: We wo uld not constrain
him . It was a lso sa id th at it mea ns: We woul d not ord ain for
him ; and Ihi s is linguisti ca ll y we ll-kn ow n, as the poet says (in

'AI-Bahr A t~ Taweel),
(<17) Sec Soorah AI-All '11111 6:95.

711(' 5(01")' oj )rWIIIIS ( ./01l0h) ~

405

.r--------------------------~
· ~~--~,
71u!re is 110 relllm jiw 111m lime 1I'IIi('II lias gO/Ie.

/JIe.<;sed ore )011 - rlull whicll )'Uu ordain l\'ill he.
Aml l he II/alter i.'i all ill )'(JIIr I/auel,·.

As fo r Hi s Sayi ng: ( But he cried through the dark ness )
(SoOl",,1I AI-AI/biy,, " 21 :87), ' Abdu ll ah Ibn Mas' ood ,.,g,
•Abd ull ah Ibn •Abbas .,;;" ' Am r Ibn Ma imoon, Sa' eed Ibn
Juba ir, Muhammad Ibn Ka ' b , A I-Hasa n AI-Basri, Qatadah
and Ad-Dahhak sa id that it means the darkness of the fis h,
the darkn ess of the sea a nd the dark ness of the night. As for
His say ing: ( Ilad he no t bee n of those who g lorify A lla h. He
would ha ve indeed rema incd inside it s bc It y (t he fi sh) til l the
Day of RCSlIITCc<ioll ) (SoOl",,1I As-S"JJ,,' 37: 143, 144), it was
sa id tha t it means: Were it not for the fa cl that he had praised
A ll ah when he was in that si tu ation, a nd spoke n those wo rds
am nlli ng All ah 's sole right 10 be worshipped, glorifyi ng Him,
acknowledgi ng Him with humi lity and repentance to Him a nd
resort in g 10 Him (in hi s hour of need), he wo uld ha ve rcmained
there until the establ ishmc nt of the Day of Res urrcc tion - and
he wo uld have been se nt fo rth from the be ll y orl hal fi sh.
Thi s is suppo rted by the na rrati on of Imam A hmad and some
of the comp ilers of the Swum, on the a uthority of ' Abdullah
Ibn 'A bbas ~ . who sa id: The Messenger o f A ll ah ~ sa id to
me, "0, boy! I will teach YOll some words: Re member A llah
a nd He w ill rem ember YO li. Remember A ll ah and you wi ll find
I-lim before YOli . Reme mbe r A ll ah in ti mes of ease and He wi ll
re member you in times of hardship." (~ 8)
He, Most I-I igh , says, ( But We threw him ) (Soorah As-Set/fat
37: 145). That is, We cast him forth ( on 01- '(lm' ) (Soorah
(48) This is an authentic hadeelll naml1cd by Im.un Ahmlld (2800) and AtTinllidhi (25 16).

As-Saffat 37: 145). That is, in a deserted place, in w hich there
are no trees; rather, it is ba re o r the m. ( Wh ile he was sick )
(Soorafl1ls-SaJJaI 37: 145). That is, phys ica ll y weak . 'Abdu ll ah
Ibn Mas'ood
said, " Like the body of a chi cken w ithout
feathers on it." (~ 9) 'Abdullah Ibn 'Abbas
As-Suddi and Ibn
Zaid said that hi s body was like the body of a chi ld when it is
born, swo llen and wi thout anythin g on it. ( And We ca used a
gourd plailt to grow over him ) (Soorah As-Saffat 37: 146).

"*'

'*',

Imam Ahmad narrated on the aut hority of Sa ' d Ibn Abi
Waqqas ~ that he sa id: I passed by ' Uthman Ibn 'A fTan ~ in the
mosque and I greeted him w ith sa lutati ons of peace; he looked
at me, but he did no t return my sa lutation s of peace. So I went
to 'U mar Ibn A I-Khattab ~ and sa id, " 0 , Commander of the
Fa ithful ! Has anything happened in Islam?" Twice I repeated
thi s, but he repli ed, "No. Why do yo u ask?" I sa id, " Only
beca use I passed by 'U thman Ibn ' Arran a short whi le ago in
the mosque and I greeted him with saluta tion s of peace and
he saw me clearl y. But he d id not answe r my salutations." He
said: So 'U mar ~ senI ror 'U thman ~ and said to him, " What
prevented you from rep lying to your brother 's salutation ?" He
sa id , " 1 did not (ignore his sa lutations)." Sa'd -*' sa id, " Yes
(you did)." They cont inued to contradi ct eac h other until they
bo th swore th at they were te lling the truth. He said: Then
'U thm an .:t:t> remembered and he said, " Yes (I re member now).
I ask A ll ah's Forgiveness and I turn to Him in repentance . You
passed by me a while ago and I was preoccupied with thought s
ofa ~aying whi ch I hea rd fro m the Messe nger of A ll ah jS which
I never think of except that a ve il co mes down over my eyes
and my heart. " Sa' d sa id: And I wi ll tell you w hat it was. The
Messe nger of A llah told us the fi rst part of the supp licat ion
(49) Narrated by Ibn Abi Shaibah in AI-Mllsollluif (6/338, No. 31866) as part
ofa lengthy narration.

Tlte S/()/)' of }bOIlIf.l" ( Jonah) ~

407

~--~------~----------w--~.
then a Bedou in ca me and kep t him busy, the n the Messe nger of
A ll ah 3i got up a nd I fo llowed him. When I fe lt worri ed th at he
would ent er his hOll se, I sta mped my fee t on the ground ancl the
Messe nger o f Allah ~ tu rn ed toward me and sa id , " Who is this.
Abu Ishaq?" he sa id, " I rcplied, "(W hat is the mall cr) I said,
yes,O Messenger of All ah . he sai d: "keep silent" "Nothing, by
All ah, except that you told us the fi rst pa rt of the supplication.
then th is Bedou in ca mc and kept you busy." I-Ie said, " Yes, the
supp li ca ti on of DlulII-Nooll when he was in the be lly of the
fi sh: ( "None has the right to be worshipped but You. Glorified
be You! Tnily, I ha ve been of the wrongdoe rs." ) (SoO/-ct/111/Al1b~J""a ' 2 1:87). No Mu slim ever suppl icat es to his Lord wilh
these wOlds for an ythi ng, bu t Hc will answcr his praye r. (SO)
I

(50) This is an authentic Iwc/eefll narrated b~ Imam A~mad (~~~5). At-Timl;dh; (3505) and An-Nasa'; in 'AI-Kubra (61168, No. 104
w

I,

M"'tuH~£ Virt,,~
/'tHNUtS ~\

Allah, Most High, says, ( And, verily, Yoonus was one of the
Messe ngers ) (Soorah As-SafJot 37: 139). A\l ah, Most High,
ment ioned him as being among the Noble Prophets in Soorah
An-Nisa' and Soorah AI-A nbiya ' - may the choi cest prayers
and blessings from Allah be upon them all.

Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of 'Abdullah ~ that
he said: The Messenger of All ah ~ said, "No slave should say
that I am better than Yoonus, son of Matta." (5 1)

AI-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah ~ that
he report ed from the Prophel <!'l lhat he said, "No slave should
say that I am better th an Yoonus, son of Matta." (.S2)

(5 1) Narralcd by Imam Ahmad (3695) and AI-Bukhari (4603).
(52) Narrated by Al-Bukhari (34 16).

Sunniconnect.com
1

Life and Times of the
Messengers
(Stories of Moosa, Samuel, Zakariyya, Yahya, Eesa, Dhu'l
Qarnayn, Luqman, the Children of Israa'eel, Divine Scriptures
and Past Nations) – Peace be Upon Them All
Taken from

Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah
By: Ibn Katheer
Translation & Researched By: Darussalam Research Center
Copyright: Darussalam Publishers & Distributers

Sunniconnect.com
2

Downloaded from sunniconnect.com
This book is uploaded and shared online fi sabi lilaah for the
muslims who can’t access Authentic Islamic knowledge due to
various reasons. At Present, on one side, the muslim world is
shattered and filled with wars, poverty, unemployment, shirki
deviant methodologies and misguided scholars and rulers and on
other side all types of immorality is prevalent and easy to access.
So, we sunniconnect.com do our best to make this heavenly
knowledge accessible to all those who want to taste islam and want
to find the solutions to the problems we have today. If you have
money and access, please do buy ‘Original’ copy of this book and
support the author, editor, publisher, distributor, reseller and
retailer.

Sunniconnect.com
3

Contents
Preface to the Revision ..............................................................11
The Plan of Action for This Book: ..........................................13
Publisher’s Preface ....................................................................17
Mention of the Story of Moosa, Al-Kaleem (Peace be upon
him).............................................................................................19
Section: ....................................................................................59
The Story of the Destruction of Fir‘awn and His Armies ......77
Chapter Regarding the Events Surrounding the Children of
Isra’eel After the Destruction of Fir‘awn ................................87
Chapter Concerning the Children of Isra’eel’s Wandering in the
Wilderness ...............................................................................94
The Request to See Allah ......................................................100
The Story of Their Worship of the Calf During the Absence of
Allah’s Kaleem From Them ...................................................106
The Story of the Cow of the Children of Isra’eel .................119
The Story of Moosa and Al-Khidr .........................................122
The Story of the Building of the Tabernacle of Time ...........126
The Story of Qaroon with Moosa ..........................................127
Description of the Virtues, Good Qualities and Characteristics
of Moosa and His Death..........................................................132
Sunniconnect.com
4

Mention of the Pilgrimage of Moosa to the Ancient House and
the Description of It ..............................................................136
Description of Moosa's Death ...............................................137
The Story of Yoosha' ...............................................................140
Prophethood and His Undertaking of the Burdens of the
Children of Isra’eel After the Deaths of Moosa and Haroon 140
Mention of the Stories of Al-Khidr and Ilyas (Elias) (Peace be
upon them) ...............................................................................143
As For Ilyas …(Elias)............................................................150
Mention of a Number of Prophets From Banu Isra’eel After
Moosa .......................................................................................151
The Story of Hizqeel (Ezekiel ) – Peace be upon him ..........152
The Story of Al-Yasa‘a (Elisha) – Peace be upon him..........155
The Story of Shamweel (Samuel) – Peace be upon him .......156
The Story of Dawood (David) – Peace be upon him.............162
A Description of Dawood's Death .........................................169
The Story of Sulaiman (Solomon), Son of Dawood – Peace be
upon him ...............................................................................170
A Description of His Death ...................................................188
Mention of a Number of Prophets from Banu Isra’eel after
Dawood and Sulaiman and before Zakriyya and Yahya.....190
A Description of the Destruction of Bait Al-Maqdis ............192
Sunniconnect.com
5

Some Details About Danyal (Daniel) – Peace be upon him .195
An Account of the Reconstruction of Bait Al-Maqdis ..........196
The Story of 'Uzair (Ezra) – Peace be upon him ...................197
Conclusion ................................................................................200
The Story of Zakariyya and Yahya (Peace be upon them) ..202
Explanation of the Cause of Yahya’s Killing ........................211
The Story of ‘Eesa, Son of Maryam (Peace be upon them) ..213
The Description of the Birth of ‘Eesa – Peace be upon him .223
Chapter on Declaration that Allah, Most High, Has no Son
...................................................................................................236
Explanation of the Revelation of Four Scriptures and the
Times of Their Revelation ......................................................244
The Story of the Table Spread ...............................................251
Section ...................................................................................254
A Description of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) .........................266
Eesa’s Ascension to the Heaven, to the Protection of His Lord
and Exposition of the Lies of the Jews and Christians, Who
Claimed That He Was Crucified ...........................................266
A Description of ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), His Character and
His Virtues ............................................................................270
The Differing of the Companions of Al-Maseeh (Peace be upon
him) (the Messiah) ................................................................275
Sunniconnect.com
6

Description of the Building of Baitlaham (Bethlehem) and AlQumamah ..............................................................................276
The Book of the Stories of the People of the Past .................278
The Story of Dhul-Qarnain....................................................278
A Description of Dhul-Qarnain’s Quest For the Spring of Life
...............................................................................................282
Mention of the Nations of Ya’jooj and Ma’jooj, a Description
of Them, What Has Been Related Regarding Them and a
Description ...............................................................................286
The Story of the Companions of the Cave.............................292
The Story of the Two Men: The Believer and the Disbeliever
...............................................................................................303
The Story of the Companions of the Garden .........................308
The Story of the People of Ailah, Who Transgressed the Laws
of Their Sabbath......................................................................311
The Story of Luqman – Peace be upon him ..........................314
The Story of the Companions of the Ditch ............................321
Chapter Regarding the Permissibility of Narrating and
Speaking About the Stories of the Children of Isra’eel .......325
The Story of Juraij, One of the Slaves of Banu Isra’eel ........327
The Story of Barseesa............................................................329
The Story of the Three Who Took Refuge in the Cave ........330
Sunniconnect.com
7

The Story of the Three Men: the Blind, the Leper and the Bald
...................................................................................................332
The Hadeeth of the Man Who Borrowed a Thousand Dinars
From His Companion and Repaid It .....................................334
Another Story Similar to This Story, Regarding Truth and
Trustworthiness .....................................................................335
Another Story ........................................................................335
The Story of the two Repentant Kings ..................................338
Section: ..................................................................................346
Mention of the Alterations and Substitutions Made by the
People of the Scripture in their Religion .............................348
Comprehensive Book of the Stories of Previous Prophets...354
Information Regarding the Arabs .........................................360
The Story of Saba’.................................................................362
The Story of Rabee‘ah Ibn Nasr Ibn Abi Harithah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn
‘Amir .....................................................................................367
The Story of Tubba‘ ..............................................................368
The Cause of Abrahah’s Determination to Destroy the Ka'bah
With an Elephant ....................................................................371
The Story of the Persian Involvement in Yemen ..................379
The Story of As-Satiroon, Owner of Al-Hadhr .....................382
The Story of the Kings of At-Tawa’if ...................................383
Sunniconnect.com
8

The Story of Khuza‘ah and ‘Amr Ibn Luhayy and His Worship
of the Idols in the Land of the Arabs189 ..............................383
The Story of ‘Adnan, the Father of the Arabs of Al-Hijaz ....389
What Has Been Said Regarding the Lineage of Quraish, Its
Origins and Its Virtues – and They Are Banu An-Nadr ibn
Kinanah .................................................................................391
The Story of Qusayy Ibn Kilab .............................................394
Section ...................................................................................396
Chapter: Mention of a Group Who Were Renowned in the
Jahiliyyah .................................................................................397
The Story of Khalid Ibn Sinan Al-‘Absi Who Lived During the
Era of Al-Fatrah ....................................................................397
Mention of the Story of Hatim At-Ta’i, One of the Generous
Folk in the Jahiliyyah ............................................................399
Mention of Something of the Story of ‘Abdullah ibn Jud‘an 403
Mention of Imru’ul-Qais Ibn Hujr Al-Kindi, the Author of One
of Al-Mu‘allaqat....................................................................405
Mention of Something of the Story of Umayyah Ibn Abis-Salt
Ath-Thaqafi, Who Was One of the Poets of the Jahiliyyah and
Who Lived During the Era of Islam ......................................406
Mention of Zaid Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufail (May Allah be pleased
with him) ...............................................................................419
The Story of the Re-Excavation of Zamzam .........................423

Sunniconnect.com
9

The Story of ‘Abdul-Muttalib’s Vow to Sacrifice One of His
Sons .......................................................................................424
The Story of ‘Abdullah’s Giving of His Son, ‘Abdullah in
Marriage to Aminah Bint Wahb AzZuhriyyah .....................426

Sunniconnect.com
10

In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

Preface to the Revision
All praise and thanks be to Allah (SWT), Who revived knowledge
of His religion and caused it to blossom forth after it had all but
disappeared, and Who demolished the false conjectures of the
apostates. I praise Him and I seek refuge with Him from the sins
which weigh upon the backs of mankind. I worship Him and seek
His aid in removing hindrances and difficulties in the practice of
my religion. I bear witness that none has the right to be worshipped
except Allah, Alone, without partners and I bear witness that
Muhammad – who, by Allah’s leave, brought about the dawn of
faith to the darkness and misguidance which existed in the hearts
of mankind – is the slave and Messenger of Allah. May the
Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon him in perpetuity.
O, Allah! We seek Your favor and through You we seek to ward
off affliction. We ask You to protect us and to grant us mercy. Our
Lord! Make not our hearts deviate after You have already guided
us. Make it easy for us to perform our deeds in the way that You
have taught us. Make us grateful for what You have given us and
make plain a path for us which leads to You. Open up the doors
between us and You by which we may arrive before You. To You
belong the keys to the heavens and the Earth and You are Most
Able to do all things. To proceed:
Among the blessings which Allah has bestowed upon us, the
community of Muslims is that He has made it easy for us to follow
the path of guidance, and He has opened the doors of knowledge
by making available to us these new publications, which present to
us the writings of the early scholars and reveal to us what they said
regarding legal verdicts, history, events, information and lessons.
These scholars opened a clear beacon of light for all those Muslims
seeking guidance and they set up for us a signpost in which there is
neither deviation nor crookedness. Whoever follows it will arrive
Sunniconnect.com
11

safely at his desired destination and whoever diverts from it will be
lost forever. They have written these books and treatises and made
clear to us therein events, information and virtues. Among such
books is this unique work, Al-Bidayah Wan-Nihayah, by the Imam,
the Hafiz, the master scholar of hadeeth, ‘Imaduddeen Isma‘eel Ibn
Katheer
Al-Qurashi – may Allah have mercy on him. This book was greeted
with approval by the vast majority of
Muslims. No Islamic library would be complete without it. In it, the
author has recorded what Allah, Most High has made easy for him
about the history of mankind, from the beginning of creation,
starting with the creation of the Throne and the Kursi (Footstool),
the heavens and the Earth and all that they contain and all that lies
between them, such as the angels, the jinn and the devils. He also
described how Adam (Peace be upon him) was created, and told
the stories of the prophets up to the days of the Children of Isra’eel
and the Days of Ignorance (Jahiliyyah), until the advent of Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), which
heralded the end of Prophethood. He then recorded his Seerah.
Then he recorded the events which took place up to his own time.
He also spoke of the trials and battles, the signs of the approach of
the Hour, then the sending forth of mankind and the terrors of the
Resurrection, which he described in detail. He then described the
Hell-fire, with all its horrors, and
Paradise and all the good things contained therein. He called this
particular volume of his book: AnNihayah Fil-Fitan Wal-Malahim
(The Ending in Trials and Battles). As for the book which is in our
hands today, it is Al-Bidayah.
By Allah’s Grace, I came to know brother Abdul Malik Mujahid,
the general manager of Darussalam Publishing in Riyadh. He
visited me in my humble office in Damascus and suggested to me
the idea of creating a summarised version of this wonderful book.
I prayed for Allah’s Guidance in the matter and sought help from
Him in completing the project. Allah enabled me to make the
acquaintance of a number of people of knowledge and experience
Sunniconnect.com
12

in this field and a plan of action for the work was written. It
consisted of ten principal points and we then started the task,
seeking help from the Lord of the heavens and the Earth. All of us
exerted our utmost efforts in this task, making repeated revisions
and corrections, until we reached the point where, by Allah’s
Permission, we completed it and it was published in the form which
is in your hands today.

The Plan of Action for This Book:
1. Summarization of the text. This was achieved by concentrating
on the most important events narrated in the book. In doing so,
we took care not to leave out any important details which would
cause loss of meaning or import.
2. We relied on a number of printed and handwritten copies of the
book and in cases where any contradiction or omission was
found, we succeeded in establishing the most accurate and
authentic text.
3. We left out the ahadeeth which proved to be baseless or weak
and confined ourselves to the ahadeeth which are authentic or
hasan and those which are acceptable due to the existence of
other supporting narrations. On rare occasions, when it was
found that there were no other ahadeeth in the chapter, we
included some weak ahadeeth whose weakness was not of an
extreme nature.
4. We performed takhreej of the ahadeeth with ascription of the
number of the section and the page, the number of the hadeeth
and in many cases, the precise location of the hadeeth in the
original source, then the ruling on its authenticity, if it was not
from the Saheehain, because the ahadeeth therein do not require
any ruling on their authenticity and they have been widely
accepted by the Muslim Ummah. As for the ahadeeth in this
book, we have relied on the opinions of the Imams and scholars
Sunniconnect.com
13

of hadeeth – including the earlier scholars, the later scholars and
those of the present day. On some occasions, we have recorded
the weak ahadeeth, while making it plain that they are not
authentic. We have not omitted them because the author has
included them in order to warn the people against them due to
their widespread popularity amongst the Muslims in general. In
such cases, we desired not to oppose the author in this effort
and so we left them, at the same time making the scholars’
ruling on them clear, so as to warn the people against them.
5. We summarized the asaneed present in the book, in most cases
mentioning only the Companion who narrated the hadeeth, or
the person who reported it from him.
6. We omitted many of the Isra’eeliyyat found in this book which
the author referred to in the preface, where he said: “We do not
record the Isra’eeliyyat except those which the Lawgiver has
permitted, i.e., those which do not contradict the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him). These are stories which are neither believed nor
belied and they have been recorded because they provide details
of unclarified narratives that we have, or they provide names
for people and places that have only been mentioned in passing
in our Revelation, due to there being no benefit in specifying
them for us. Thus we have reported them in order to provide
extra detail and not with the intention of citing them as evidence
or placing any reliance on them. Only the Book of Allah and
the authentic Sunnah of His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) may be relied and depended upon. It is from
Allah that we seek help and it is He in Whom we place our trust;
there is no help and no power except in Allah, the All-Powerful,
the Most Wise, the Most High, the Almighty.
7. In some instances, we have referred back to the original
manuscript in order to verify the wording of a hadeeth from its
source. In some cases, the author has combined two narrations
Sunniconnect.com
14

of the same hadeeth together and so where this has occurred,
we have noted it and separated the two narrations, placing our
own words between brackets, i.e., (and in another narration…)
and we have also identified the source of the addition in the
footnotes.
8. We have written the Qur’anic Verses in the Uthmani script, in
conformity with the copy of the Qur’an published by AlMadinah Al-Munawwarah Printing Complex.
9. We vowelised the words of many of the ahadeeth in the book
and, in addition, the poetic verses, wherever possible.
10. We mentioned the meters of the poetic verses between
parentheses.
11. We explained the meanings of some difficult or obscure words,
relying on dictionaries, books containing ghareeb ahadeeth and
narrations and other sources.
12. We furnished a brief biography of the author, Hafiz Ibn Katheer
though in reality, he requires no introduction and no
description.
Finally, I ask Allah, Most High, to accept this humble work from
us and to acknowledge it as having been done purely and sincerely
with the aim of pleasing Him and to grant us and our brothers, who
assisted us in the production of this book, pardon and forgiveness
in religious and secular matters. In addition, we ask Him that He
include this work in the weight of our good deeds on the Day of
Resurrection – a Day on which neither wealth nor sons will benefit
anyone – except for those whom Allah has blessed with pure hearts.
And our final declaration is that all praise and thanks are due to
Allah (SWT), and we invoke blessings and peace upon Prophet
Sunniconnect.com
15

Muhammad and upon all his righteous family and Companions
until the Day of Reckoning.
Yoosuf Al-Hajj Ahmad,
The humble slave of Allah.
Damascus, Ash-Sham
(Syria). 2nd of DhulHijjah, 1428 A.H.

Sunniconnect.com
16

Publisher’s Preface
Verily, all praise and thanks are due to Allah (SWT). We seek His
aid and we ask forgiveness of Him. We seek refuge with Allah from
the wickedness in ourselves. Whomsoever Allah guides, there is
none who can misguide him and whomsoever He sends astray,
there is none who can guide him. I bear witness that none is worthy
of worship except Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and His
Messenger. He sent him with guidance and the true Religion and
with the light (of truth), the admonition and wisdom, at a time when
no Messengers were sent for a long period, when there was little
religious knowledge and the people had gone astray, when the Hour
was drawing nearer. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger has
followed the right course, while whoever disobeys Allah and His
Messenger erred from it and gone far astray. To proceed:
The book Al-Bidayah (The Beginning) by the Hafiz, the Imam, the
scholarly critic, Ibn Katheer is an incomparable work regarding the
study of the events and their chronological order, the knowledge of
which he strove hard to acquire. He began by describing the start
of creation – from the creation of the Throne and the Kursi and the
heavens and the Earth and all that is in them and all that lies
between them, such as the angels, the jinn and the devils and he
described the manner of Adam’s creation (Peace be upon him). He
recounted the stories of the Prophets and the events that took place
therein, up to the times of the Children of Isra’eel and the Days of
Ignorance, which ended with the advent of the final Prophet,
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Then he
gave a detailed description of his life and what happened after that,
up to the time in which he, lived. He then wrote a separate volume
called An-Nihayah Fil – Fitan Wal-Malahim (The Ending With
Trials and Great Battles).
Furthermore, Allah inspired us to undertake the noble task of
making this book easily accessible to both the students and the
Sunniconnect.com
17

scholars and then to translate it into several languages, by Allah’s
Permission.
I suggested to my brother, Yoosuf Al-Hajj, the necessity of
summarizing this book in a suitable manner, through the omission
of unbeneficial repetition, weak ahadeeth, lengthy poems, etc. I am
thankful to brother Yoosuf for assembling a team that consisted of
Abdul Malik Wadih, Abu Muslim Al-Jaza’iri, Muwaffeq Khaleel
Hammad, and himself. Darussalam funded the entire project,
paying each team member for his contribution and work. After they
completed their portion of the project, the work then went through
numerous people in the Research Division of Darussalam, who
meticulously went through the work, adding and subtracting
materials. After this, the project went through another round of
editing of the Arabic material before it was sent to the translation
department. The translation was then checked for accuracy and
then sent for editing, resulting in the final project that you see
before you. All praise and thanks be to Allah for allowing us to
produce such a classical work for the first time in the English
language.
O Allah! We ask that You bless us with sincerity and success and
that You spread goodness through our hands.
‘Abdul Malik Mujahid.
Jumadal-Oola 1431 A.H.

Sunniconnect.com
18

Mention of the Story of Moosa, Al-Kaleem
(Peace be upon him)
He was Moosa, son of ‘Imran, son of Qahith, son of ‘Azir, son of
Lowi, son of Ya‘qoob, son of Ishaq, son of Ibraheem (peace be
upon them). Allah, Most High, says, "And mention in the Book
(this Qur’an) Moosa. Verily! He was chosen and he was a
Messenger (and) a Prophet. And We called him from the right side
of the Mount, and made him draw near to Us for a talk with him
(Moosa). And We bestowed on him his brother Haroon (Aaron),
(also) a Prophet, out of Our Mercy." (Soorah Maryam 19:51-53)
Allah mentions him at different places in the Qur’an and He
mentions his story at several places, both in brief as well as in
detail. We have spoken about this at relevant places in the Tafseer
and we shall set forth his life story here from the beginning to the
end, as related in the Qur’an and the Sunnah. We shall also mention
what has been related in the traditions that have been transmitted
from Isra’eeliyyat – those which were mentioned by the Salaf and
those mentioned by others – if Allah wills; and in Him we place
our trust and on Him we depend.
He, Most High, says, "Ta- Seen- Meem. (These letters are one of
the miracles of the Qur’an, and none but Allah, Alone, knows their
meanings). These are Verses of the Book (that makes clear truth
from falsehood, good from evil, etc.). We recite to you some of the
news of Moosa and Fir‘awn in truth, for a people who believe
(those who believe in Qur’an, and in the Oneness of Allah). Verily,
Fir‘awn exalted himself in the land and made its people sects,
weakening a group among them, killing their sons, and letting their
females live. Verily, he was of the mufsidoon (i.e. those who
commit great sins and crimes, oppressors, tyrants, etc.). And We
wished to do a favor to those who were weak (and oppressed) in
the land, and to make them rulers and to make them the inheritors,
And to establish them in the land, and We let Fir’awn and Haman
Sunniconnect.com
19

and their hosts receive from them that which they feared." (Soorah
Al-Qasas 28:16)
Allah, Most High, mentions the story in brief and then He explains
it in detail after that. He mentions that
He is relating to His Prophet (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)) the story of Moosa (Peace be upon him) and
Fir‘awn in truth; that is, the true facts which were heard and
witnessed by those who were present at the time."Verily, Fir‘awn
exalted himself in the land and made its people sects. " (Soorah AlQasas 28:4) That is, he behaved tyrannically, was insolent,
exceeded all limits, committed outrages, preferred the life of this
world (to the life of the Hereafter) and refused to obey his Lord,
Most High, "and made its people sects" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:4).
That is, he divided his subjects into groups and classes, "weakening
a group among them" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:4). The group referred
to is the tribe of Banu Isra’eel, who were from the offspring of
Prophet Ya‘qoob, son of Ishaq, son of Ibraheem, Allah’s Khaleel,
peace be upon them all, who were at that time, the best people on
Earth. This unjust, tyrannical, disbelieving, iniquitous king had
gained mastery over them, enslaved them and used them to perform
vilest, the meanest and the lowest of tasks, in addition to which, he
was "killing their sons, and letting their females live. Verily, he was
of the mufsidoon." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:4) His justification for
doing these wicked things was that the Children of Isra’eel used to
study the religious texts that were in their possession, which they
had transmitted from Ibraheem (Peace be upon him); these texts
claimed that from his progeny a baby boy would be born at whose
hands the king of Egypt would be destroyed. It was said – and Allah
knows best the truth of this – that this was revealed to Ibraheem
(Peace be upon him) at the time when the king of Egypt attempted
to carry out his evil desires with Sarah, the wife of Al-Khaleel
(Peace be upon him), and Allah protected her from him. These
tidings were wellknown to the Children of Isra’eel and the Copts
spoke of them among themselves until news of them was
Sunniconnect.com
20

communicated to Fir‘awn by his governors and nobles when they
would sit and talk with him in the evenings. Upon hearing this, he
ordered that the sons of Banu Isra’eel be killed, in order to prevent
that prophesied child from being born, but no precaution can
circumvent what has been ordained by Allah (SWT).
It means that Fir‘awn took every possible precaution to prevent
Moosa from growing up to fulfill the prophecy, to such an extent
that he appointed men and midwives, whose duty it was to visit the
houses of the pregnant women and to find out their expected
delivery dates. Then, whenever a woman would give birth to a boy,
those slaughterers would kill him at once. According to the People
of the Scripture, he ordered the killing of the males in order to
weaken the power of the Children of Isra’eel, so that they could not
resist them if they fought them. But this claim is doubtful; indeed,
it is false, because this order to kill their sons was only given after
Moosa (Peace be upon him) was sent, as He, Most High, says,
"Then, when he brought them the Truth from Us, they said, 'Kill
the sons of those who believe with him and let their women live'.”
(Soorah Ghafir 40:25) This was because the Children of Isra’eel
said to Moosa (Peace be upon him) “We (the Children of Isra’eel)
have suffered troubles before you came to us, and since you have
come to us.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:129) So the truth is that Fir‘awn
only ordered the killing of their sons at first as a precaution, in order
to prevent the coming of Moosa (Peace be upon him). He did all
this, but the Fate said, “O, you tyrannical king, who is deceived by
his large army, his great power and his extensive authority! The
Greatest (i.e. Allah) – Whom none can defeat and none can resist,
Whose Ordainments cannot be contradicted, has decreed that this
child against whom you seek to guard yourself, due to which you
have killed untold number of innocent souls, will be brought up in
none other than your own house and upon your own bed and he
will not partake of any food or drink but yours, which is served in
your home. It is you who will raise him and educate him, while you
are his enemy; yet you will not discover the significance of all this,
and then your destruction in this world and in the Hereafter will be
Sunniconnect.com
21

at his hands, because of your opposition to the clear truth that he
brings and your rejection of the Revelation given to him. This is in
order that you and all of the mankind may know that the Lord of
the heavens and the Earth is the Doer of what He wills and that He
is the All-Powerful, the Stern, Owner of Strength and Power and
Will which cannot be opposed.
Allah, Most High, says, "And We inspired the mother of Moosa,
(saying), 'Suckle him (Moosa), but when you fear for him, then cast
him into the river and fear not, nor grieve. Verily! We shall bring
him back to you, and shall make him one of (Our) Messengers.'
Then the household of Fir‘awn picked him up, that he might
become for them an enemy and a (cause of) grief. Verily! Fir‘awn,
Haman and their hosts were sinners. And the wife of Fir‘awn said,
'A comfort of the eye for me and for you. Kill him not, perhaps he
may be of benefit to us, or we may adopt him as a son.' And they
perceived not (the result of that)." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:7-9) This
Revelation was an inspiration and spiritual guidance, as He, Most
High, says, "And your Lord inspired the bee, saying, 'Take you
habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect.
Then, eat of all fruits, and follow the ways of your Lord made easy
(for you)'.” (Soorah An-Nahl 16:68,69) This was not the Revelation
of Prophethood, as Ibn Hazm and more than one from among the
rationalists claimed. The correct interpretation is the first, as
reported by Abul-Hasan AlAsh‘ari from the madhab of AhlusSunnah Wal-Jama‘ah.
Allah placed in her heart and her soul that she should not fear and
she should not grieve, because if he went away from her, Allah
would return him to her and He would make him a Prophet and
Messenger, whose word would be raised high in this life and in the
Hereafter. So she did as she was commanded to do and she placed
him in a basket in the river, but she neglected to secure the end of
the rope to the shore and so the Nile carried him away and the
basket passed by the abode of Fir‘awn. "Then they picked him up."
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:8) He, Most High, says, "that he might
Sunniconnect.com
22

become for them an enemy and a (cause of) grief." (Soorah AlQasas 28:8). Some said that the letter lam used in the Verse is lam
al-‘aqibah. And it would appear to be so, although it pertains to the
preceding words: "Then the household of Fir‘awn picked him up."
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:8) But if it is understood to relate to the
meaning of the words, which is that the family of Fir‘awn were
predestined to find him, so that he should become an enemy to them
and a (cause of) grief, then the lam will be for justification or
explanation, and Allah knows better.
This second supposition is strengthened by the Words of Allah:
"Verily! Fir‘awn, Haman" (Soorah AlQasas 28:8) Haman was
Fir‘awn’s wicked Wazeer "and their hosts" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:8)
That is, those who followed them both "were sinners" (Soorah AlQasas 28:8) It means, they followed what was contrary to the truth,
and so they deserved this punishment and pain.
The scholars of tafseer mentioned that the servants picked him up
from the water and he was in a closed box, but they did not venture
to open it until they had placed it in the hands of Fir‘awn’s wife,