one. Then I went away and collected some more. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) moved to Al-Madinah, then I came to him and said: I see
that you do not eat (food given in) charity; this is a gift with
which I wish to honor you. The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ate some of it and told
his Companions to eat too. I said to myself: This is two. Then
I came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) when he was in Baqee‘ Al-Gharqad,
where he had attended the funeral of one of his Companions
and he was wearing two shawls and was sitting among his
Companions. I greeted him with salutations of peace and then
I moved behind him, trying to look at his back to see the Seal
that my companion had described to me. When the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saw me
going behind him, he realized that I was trying to find
confirmation of something that had been described to me, so
he let his rida’ drop from his back, and I saw the Seal and
recognized it. Then I embraced him, kissing (the Seal) and
weeping, and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said to me: “Turn around.” So I turned
around and I told him my story as I have told it to you, O, Ibn
‘Abbas. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) wanted his companions to hear that. Then
Salman was kept busy with the work of a slave, saying he had
missed attending the battles of Badr and Uhud with the
62

Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). He said, Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me, Draw up a
contract of manumission, O, Salman. So I drew up a contract
of manumission with my master in return for three hundred
palm trees which I would plant for him, and forty uqiyyahs.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said to his Companions: Help your brother. So they
helped me with the palm trees, one man gave thirty small trees
and another gave twenty, and another gave fifteen, and
another gave ten, i.e., each man gave according to what he
had, until they had collected three hundred small trees for me.
Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said to me, Go, O, Salman and dig the holes
where they are to be planted. When you have finished, come
to me and I will plant them with my own hand. So I dug the
holes for them, and my companions helped me, then, when I
finished, I came to him and told him. The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came out with me
and we started to bring the trees close and the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) planted
them with his own hand. By Him in Whose Hand is the soul
of Salman, not one single tree among them died. So I had paid
off the trees but there still remained the money. A piece of
gold the size of an egg was brought to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) from one of his
Campaigns. He said, what happened to the Persian who had a
contract of manumission? I was summoned to him and he
said, take this and pay off what you owe, O, Salman. I said,
how could this pay off everything I owe, O, Messenger of
Allah? He said, take it, and Allah will help you to pay off what
you owe. So I took it and weighed it for them, and by Him in
Whose Hand is the soul of Salman, it was forty uqiqyahs, so
I paid them their dues and I was set free. I was present with
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) at the Battle of Al-Khandaq, and after that I did not miss
any major event with him.”
63

The Story of ‘Amr Ibn Murrah Al-Juhani
At-Tabarani narrated on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Murrah AlJuhani (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “I set
out to perform Hajj with a group of my people during the
Jahiliyyah and I saw in a dream while I was in Makkah a
brilliant light emanating from the Ka‘bah and reaching to
Mount Yathrib and Ash‘ar Juhainah; and I heard a voice
coming from the light and it was saying, 'Islam has appeared,
the idols have been broken and the ties of kinship have been
joined.' I awoke from the dream in a state of fear and I said to
my people, 'By Allah, something is happening to this tribe
from Quraish, ‘ and I informed them of what I had seen. Then,
when we returned to our land, news came to me that a man
called Ahmad had been sent and so I went to him and
informed him of what I had seen and he said, 'O, ‘Amr Ibn
Murrah! I am the Prophet who has been sent to all of the
slaves, to call them to Islam and to order them to cease
bloodshed, maintain the ties of kinship, worship Allah, reject
idols, perform Hajj to the House (of Allah) and to fast the
month of Ramadan from among the twelve months. If anyone
accepts all this, he will attain Paradise, but if anyone rejects
it, he will be recompensed with the Fire. So believe, O, ‘Amr,
and Allah will protect you from the 'Awfulness of the
Hellfire.' I said, 'I bear witness that none is worthy of worship
except Allah, and that you are the Messenger of Allah. I
believe in what you have brought pertaining to what is lawful
and what is unlawful, even though many people may reject it.'
Then I recited to him some poetic verses which I had
composed when I heard of him. We had an idol and my father
had been its custodian and so I had stood before it and broken
it, then I went to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and recited to him,
I bear witness that Allah is true and that,
I am the first to abandon the stone idols,
64

And I rolled up my izar to migrate to you,
Traversing the desert, after crossing the flatlands,
To accompany the best of mankind in soul and lineage,
A Messenger to the kings of mankind, above the stars.
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
'Welcome to you, O, ‘Amr Ibn Murrah.' I said, 'O, Messenger
of Allah! Send me to my people; haply, Allah may bless them
through me, just as He has blessed me through you.' So he
sent me to them and he said, 'it is incumbent upon you to be
kind and speak the truth, and do not be uncivil or arrogant,
and do not be envious.' Then he related that he went to his
people and called them to that to which the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had called
him, and all of them embraced Islam, except one man from
among them. He went with them in a delegation to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), who welcomed them and greeted them warmly and he
had a letter written for them, which stated, 'In the Name of
Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful: This is a
missive from Allah, from the lips of His Messenger (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). It is a truthful writing
and true speech, in the hands of ‘Amr Ibn Murrah Al-Juhani,
for Juhainah Ibn Zaid: Verily, to you belong the valleys and
the flatlands, and the banks of the rivers and their beds. You
may grow crops and drink their pure waters, on the
understanding that you agree to Al-khums, to offer the five
daily prayers, to remain obedient … and there is no charity
incumbent upon those who have only sufficient provisions for
themselves. Those Muslims present bear witness on our
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to the
writing of Qais Ibn Shammas'.”

65

And Al-Hafiz Abu Nu‘aim narrated in Dala’il An-Nubuwwah
on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with
him) that he said, “The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was asked, 'When was the Prophethood made
incumbent on you?' He replied, 'Between the creation of
Adam and the breathing of the spirit into him.' This is how it
was narrated by At-Tirmidhi by way of Al-Waleed Ibn
Muslim and he said, 'It is hasan-ghareeb from Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him) and we do not know it
except from this source'.”
Carrying the same meaning is the Hadith narrated by Imam
Ahmad on the authority of Al-‘Irbad Ibn Sariyah, who said,
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, 'The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Verily, I was with
Allah the Seal of the Prophets when Adam was still only clay
and I shall inform you of the start of that: It was the
supplication of my father, Ibrahim, the glad tidings of ‘Eesa
regarding me and the vision which my mother saw, as indeed
did all of the mothers of the Prophets'.”
And Al-Hafiz Abu Nu‘aim narrated in Dala’il An-Nubuwwah
on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with
him), who reported from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) that he said regarding the Saying of Allah,
Most High: "And (remember) when We took from the
Prophets their covenant." (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:7), “I was the
first of the Prophets in creation and the last of them to be
sent.”
And it was reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) in the Hadith whose authenticity
is agreed upon by Al-Bukhari and Muslim: “We who are the
last shall be the first on the Day of Resurrection, except that
every nation was given the Book before us and we were given
it after them.”
66

And Allah, Most High, says, [ And (remember) when Allah
took the Covenant of the Prophets, saying, “Take whatever I
gave you from the Book and Hikmah (understanding of the
Laws of Allah, etc.), and afterward there will come to you a
Messenger (Muhammad) confirming what is with you; you
must, then, believe in him and help him.” Allah said, “Do you
agree (to it) and will you take up My Covenant (which I
conclude with you)?” They said, “We agree.” He said, “Then
bear witness; and I am with you among the witnesses (for
this).” Then whoever turns away after this, they are the
Fasiqoon (rebellious: those who turn away from obedience to
Allah)." (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:81,82)
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (May Allah be pleased with him) and
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said,
“Allah did not send any Prophet except that He took from him
a Covenant to the effect that if Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was sent while he was alive,
he would certainly believe in him, and support him and He
commanded him to accept the Covenant on behalf of his
people, if he was sent while they were alive, that they would
certainly believe in him and support him.”
This is an allusion to, and an indication of the distinction
bestowed on him and his superiority in all of the religions and
in the words of all of the Prophets. It is also a notification to
them and from them, that he will be sent as a Messenger at the
end of time and that he is the noblest of the Messengers and
the Seal of the Prophets. And Ibrahim, Al-Khaleel (Peace be
upon him), explained his affair, revealed the information
about him and his secret. He also disclosed details of his
nobility and honor, his birth and his land, in his saying, when
he had completed the construction of the House (of Allah):
“Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their own
(and indeed Allah answered their invocation by sending
Muhammad), who shall recite unto them Your Verses and
instruct them in the Book (this Qur’an) and AlHikmah (full
67

knowledge of the Islamic laws and jurisprudence or wisdom
or Prophethood, etc.), and sanctify them. Verily! You are the
Almighty, the Most Wise.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:129). So
the first elucidation of the truth of his affair among the people
of the Earth was on the lips of Ibrahim, Al-Khaleel, the
noblest of the Prophets with Allah, after Muhammad – may
the blessings and peace of Allah be upon them both and upon
all of the Prophets. Due to this, Imam Ahmad narrated on the
authority of Luqman Ibn ‘Amir that he said, “I heard Abu
Umamah (May Allah be pleased with him) say, I said, 'O,
Prophet of Allah! What was the start of your Prophethood?'
He said, 'I am the supplication of my father, Ibrahim and the
glad tidings of ‘Eesa, and my mother saw a vision in which a
light was being emitted from her which illuminated the
palaces of Ash-Sham'.” Imam Ahmad was alone in narrating
this, and none of the compilers of the six Sunan narrated it.
Allah, Most High, says, "Those who follow the Messenger,
the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad)
whom they find written with them in the Tawrah (Deut. xviii,
15) and the Injeel (John xiv, 16) – he commands them to do
Al-Ma‘roof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam has
ordained), and forbids them from committing Al-Munkar (i.e.
disbelief, polytheism of all kinds, and all that Islam has
forbidden); he allows them as lawful At-Tayyibat ([i.e. all
good and lawful] as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons,
foods, etc.) and prohibits them as unlawful Al-Khaba’ith (i.e.
all evil and unlawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons,
foods, etc.), he releases them from their heavy burdens (of
Allah’s Covenant) and from the fetters (bindings) that were
upon them. So those who believe in him (Muhammad), honor
him, help him and follow the light (the Qur’an) which has
been sent down with him, it is they who will be successful."
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:157)
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Sakhr Al‘Uqaili that he said, “A Bedouin man said to me, 'I brought
68

some trade goods to Al-Madinah and when I finished selling
them, I said, I will certainly meet this man and hear what he
has to say. He said, 'I encountered him in the company of Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar and they were walking, so I followed them
until they came to a Jewish man who was reciting the Tawrah
and consoling himself thereby for the death of a son of his, as
the best and most handsome of young men.' On hearing this,
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, 'I implore you by Him Who revealed the Tawrah,
do you find in this Book of yours a description of me and of
my appearance?' He replied in the negative by shaking his
head. But his (dead) son said, 'yes, by Him Who revealed the
Tawrah, we find your description in our Book and of your
appearance and I bear witness that none is worthy of worship
except Allah and that you are the Messenger of Allah.' The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, 'Lift up your brother from this Jew.' Then he
delegated some people to shroud his body and to pray over
him.” The isnad of this Hadith is good and it has supporting
narrations in the Saheeh, on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik
(May Allah be pleased with him).
And it is confirmed in the Saheeh that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed by the
place where the Jews studied their Scripture and he said, “O,
company of Jews! Embrace Islam, for by Him in Whose Hand
is my soul, you certainly find my description in your Book.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Ata’ Ibn Yasar that
he said, “I met ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al‘As and I said,
'Inform me about the descriptions of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the Tawrah.'
He replied, 'Certainly; by Allah, he is described in the Tawrah
just as he is described in the Qur’an: O, Prophet! Verily, We
have sent you as a witness, as a bringer of glad tidings, as a
warner and as a sanctuary for the unlettered. You are My slave
and My Messenger. I have named you Al-Mutawakkil; He is
69

without coarseness and he is not harsh, nor does he act
boisterously in the market places, nor return evil for evil.
Instead, he pardons and forgives. And Allah will not take him
unto Him until they (the Muslims) straighten the crooked
religion, so that they (its adherents) say, 'None is worthy of
worship except Allah.' Allah will open up the eyes of the
blind, the ears of the deaf and the hearts that are wrapped.”
And the fact that he is mentioned in the books of the People
of the Scripture is undeniable; this is proved by numerous
Verses in the Qur’an, which we have discussed in the relevant
place, all praise and thanks be to Allah. Such verses include
the Words of Him, Most High: "Those to whom We gave the
Scripture (i.e. the Tawrah and the Injeel, etc.) before it – they
believe in it (the Qur’an). And when it is recited to them, they
say, 'We believe in it. Verily, it is the Truth from our Lord.
Indeed even before it, we have been from those who submit
themselves to Allah in Islam as Muslims.” (like ‘Abdullah Ibn
Salam and Salman AlFarisi, etc.) (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:52,53). And He, Most High, says, "Those to whom We
gave the Scripture (Jews and Christians) recognize him
(Muhammad or the Ka‘bah in Makkah) as they recognize
their sons. But verily, a party of them conceals the truth while
they know it – (i.e. the qualities of Muhammad, which are
written in the Tawrah and the Injeel." (Soorah Al-Baqarah
2:146) And He, Most High, says, "Say (O, Muhammad, to
them), 'Believe in it (the Qur’an) or do not believe (in it).
Verily! Those who were given knowledge before it (the Jews
and the Christians like ‘Abdullah Ibn Salam and Salman AlFarisi), when it is recited to them, fall down on their faces in
humble prostration.' And they say, 'Glory be to our Lord!
Truly, the Promise of our Lord must be fulfilled'.” (Soorah
Al-Isra 17:107,108) That is, if our Lord has promised us that
Muhammad will come and that he will bring a Message, then
it will certainly happen without any doubt; glory be to the AllPowerful, Who is Able to do as He wills and Whom nothing
can hinder. And He, Most High, says, regarding the
70

Christians, "And when they (who call themselves Christians)
listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger
(Muhammad, you see their eyes overflowing with tears
because of the Truth they have recognized. They say, 'Our
Lord! We believe; so write us down among the witnesses'.”
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:83). And in the story of the Negus (of
Abyssinia), Salman Al-Farisi, ‘Abdullah Ibn Salam and
others, as we shall see, there are several testimonies to this.
All praise and thanks be to Allah, from Whom proceeds all
Grace.

Regarding the Communications of the Jinns:
Being the Words They Placed On the Lips of
the Soothsayers and Which They Caused to
Be Heard From Within the Idols
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar
that he said, “I never heard ‘Umar say about something, 'I
believe it is like this, ‘ except that it turned out that he was
right. Once, while ‘Umar was sitting, a handsome man passed
by him. ‘Umar said, 'If I am not wrong, this person is still
following the religion that he followed in the Jahiliyyah or he
was their foreteller. Call the man to me.' When the man was
called to him, he told him of his thought. The man said, 'I have
never seen such a day on which a Muslim is faced with such
an accusation.' ‘Umar said, 'I am determined that you should
tell me the truth.'
He said, 'I was a foreteller in the Jahiliyyah.' Then ‘Umar said,
'Tell me the most astonishing thing that your female jinni has
told you.' He said, 'One day while I was in the market, she
came to me scared and said,
Haven’t you seen the jinn and their despair,
And they were overthrown after their defeat (and prevented
from listening to the news of the heaven),
71

So that they (stopped going to the sky),
And kept following camel-riders (i.e. ‘Arabs)?
‘Umar said, 'He is right, ‘ and added, 'One day while I was
near their idols, there came a man with a calf and slaughtered
it as a sacrifice (for the idols). An (unseen) creature shouted
at him, and I have never heard a harsher voice than his. He
was crying, 'O, you bold evildoer! A matter of success! An
eloquent man is saying, 'None has the right to be worshipped
except You (O, Allah).' On that, the people fled, but I said, 'I
shall not go away till I know what is behind this.' Then the cry
came again: 'O, you bold evildoer! A matter of success! An
eloquent man is saying, 'None has the right to be worshipped
except Allah.' I then went away and a few days later it was
said that a Prophet had appeared.” Al-Bukhari was alone in
narrating this.
This man (with whom ‘Umar spoke) was Sawad Ibn Qarib AlAzdi, or it was said, As-Sadusi, from the people of As-Sarat,
from the mountains of Al-Balqa’. He met the Prophet, Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him, and was treated with
respect. Abu Hatim and Ibn Mandah said that Sa‘eed Ibn
Jubair and Abu Ja‘afar Ibn ‘Ali narrated from him and AlBukhari said, “He is regarded as a Companion (having met
the Prophet, Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
And Al-Khara’iti said, “It was reported on the authority of Al‘Abbas Ibn Mirdas that he said that he saw a white ostrich
ridden by a man in white garments, the color of milk and he
said,
'O, ‘Abbas Ibn Mirdas! Do you not see that the heaven’s
guardians have prevented the jinn from approaching it?
That war has gulped in its breath,
That the saddles have been placed on the horses,
72

That he who brought piety and fear of Allah has arrived,
On Monday/Tuesday night, the owner of the she-camel
named Al-Qaswa?'
On hearing this, I returned in a state of fear, for what I had
seen and heard had frightened me. On arriving home, I went
to an idol named Ad-Dimar, which we used to worship, and
to which we used to speak and I swept around it, then I stroked
it and kissed it, but as I did so, a cry came from within it,
saying (Al-Bahr ul-Kamil),
'Say to the all of the tribes of Sulaim that,
Ad-Dimar is dead and the people of the Mosque have
triumphed,
Ad-Dimar is dead and it used to be worshipped,
Before prayer with Prophet Muhammad came,
Verily, he who has inherited Prophethood and guidance,
After the son of Maryam, is from Quraish and he is rightlyguided'
On hearing this, I departed in fear and went on until I came to
my people and I told them the story of what I had seen and
heard. Then I set out at the head of three hundred men of my
tribe, Banu Harithah, and went to the Messenger of Allah,
Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him, who was in
Madinah, and we entered the Mosque. When the Messenger
of Allah, Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him, saw me,
he said to me, 'O, ‘Abbas! How did you come to embrace
Islam?' So I told him the story and it pleased him, and I and
my people embraced Islam.”

73

Al-Hafiz Abul Qasim Ibn ‘Asakir narrated in his Tareekh, in
the biography Al-Harith Ibn Hani’ Ibn AlMudlij Ibn AlMiqdad Ibn Zamil Ibn ‘Amr Al-‘Udhri, who reported on the
authority of his father, who in turn reported on the authority
of his grandfather, who likewise reported on the authority of
his father, who reported on the authority of Zamil Ibn ‘Amr
Al-‘Udhri that he said, “Banu ‘Udhrah had an idol which they
called Hamam and they used to venerate it. It was with Banu
Hind Ibn Haram Ibn Dinnah Ibn ‘Abd Ibn Katheer Ibn
‘Udhrah and its custodian was a man named Tariq. They used
to remove their clothes in its presence; then, when the
Messenger of Allah, Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him, appeared, we heard a voice saying, 'O Banu Hind Ibn
Haram! The Truth has prevailed and Islam has repelled
idolatry.' He said, 'We were terrified when we heard this and
we remained there for a number of days. Then we heard a
voice saying, 'O Tariq! O, Tariq! The truthful Prophet has
been sent and he speaks Words of Revelation. A conqueror
has conquered the land of Tihamah for the supporters of
Islam, while those who turn away from it will have cause to
regret. This is farewell from me until the Day of Resurrection.'
Zamil said, 'Then the idol fell on its face. So I saddled my
camel and rode with some of my people until I reached the
Prophet, Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him, and when
I met him, I recited these poetic verses to him (Al-Bahr AtTaweel):
'To you, Messenger of Allah, I composed it,
And I crossed valleys and sandy declivities,
In order to support the best of mankind,
And to make common cause with you,
And I bear witness that there is nothing except Allah,
74

To Whom I pledge allegiance as long as I live.'
He said, 'Then I embraced Islam and pledged my allegiance
to him and we informed him of what we had heard, on which
he said: 'That was the speech of the Jinn.' Then he said: 'O
assembly of Arabs! I am the Messenger of Allah, sent to you
and to all mankind. I call upon you to the worship of Allah,
Alone, and to acknowledge that I am His Messenger and His
Slave; to perform Hajj to the House (of Allah); to fast one of
the twelve months (in a year), that is, Ramadan. Whoever
accepts my call will have Paradise as his abode, while those
who disobey me, the Fire will be his end.'
Zamil said, 'So we embraced Islam and he formed us into a
brigade (in case of war) and wrote a document for us, the text
of which was: In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the
Most Merciful, from Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, to
Zamil Ibn ‘Amr and those who have embraced Islam with him
only.
I have sent him to all of his people, so whoever embraces
Islam, he is in the Party of Allah and His Messenger. But if
anyone refuses, he will be granted safety for two months.
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and Muhammad Ibn Maslamah Al-Ansari
bear witness to what I say'." Ibn ‘Asakir commented that this
is extremely ghareeb.

75

Chapter on How the Revelation
Began to Come to the Messenger of
Allah And Mention of the First
Thing Revealed to Him From the
Qur’an
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah, may Allah
be pleased with her, that she said, “The commencement of the
Divine Inspiration to Allah’s Messenger, Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him, was in the form of good dreams which
came true like broad daylight, and then the love of seclusion
was bestowed upon him. He used to go in seclusion to the
Cave of Hira’ where he used to worship (Allah, the Almighty,
Alone) continuously for many days before his desire to see
his family overcame him. He used to take food with him on
the journey, for the stay and then would come back to (his
wife) Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her, to take more
food supplies, until suddenly the Truth descended upon him
while he was in the Cave of Hira’.
The angel came to him and asked him to read. He replied: 'I
do not know how to read.' The Prophet said: 'The angel caught
me (forcefully) and pressed me so hard that I could not bear
it anymore. He then released me and again asked me to read
and I replied: 'I am not a literate.' Thereupon he caught me
again and pressed me a second time until I could not bear it
anymore. He then released me and again asked me to read but
again I replied: 'I am not a literate.'
Thereupon he caught me for the third time and pressed me;
then he released me and said: 'Read in the Name of your Lord,
who has created (all that exists) has created man from a clot.
Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous who has taught
(the writing) by the pen. He has taught man that which he
know not'.' (Soorah Al-‘Alaq 96:1-5)
76

Then the Messenger of Allah, Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him, returned with the Inspiration and with his heart
pounding. He went to Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid, may Allah
be pleased with her, and said: 'Cover me! Cover me!' They
covered him till his fear was over and after that he told her
everything that had happened and said: “I fear that something
may happen to me.”
Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her, replied, 'Never!
By Allah, Allah will never disgrace you. You keep good
relations with your kith and kin, serve your guests generously,
assist the weak, benefit those who have nothing and support
people afflicted by calamity.' Khadeejah then took him to her
cousin Waraqah Ibn Nawfal Ibn Asad Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza,
who, during the pre-Islamic period had become a Christian
and used to write Hebrew. He would write from the Gospel in
Hebrew as much as Allah, the Almighty, wished him to write.
He was an old man and had lost his eyesight.
Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her, said to Waraqah,
'Listen to the story of your nephew, O my cousin!' Waraqah
asked, 'O my nephew! What have you seen?' The Messenger
of Allah, Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him, described
what he had seen. Waraqah said, 'This is the same one who
keeps the secrets (the Angel Jibraeel, peace be upon him)
whom Allah sent to Moosa. I wish I were young and I wish
that I could live up to the time when your people will drive
you out.' The Messenger of Allah, Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him, asked: 'Will they drive me out?' Waraqah
replied, 'Yes. All those who have brought something similar
to what you brought were treated with disdain and hostility;
and if I should remain alive till the day when you will be
turned out, then I would support you strongly.'
Waraqah did not remain (alive); he died, and the Divine
Inspiration also paused for a while; and the Prophet, Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him, became so sad, as we
77

have heard, that he intended several times to throw himself
from the tops of high mountains, and every time he went up
the top of a mountain in order to throw himself down, Jibraeel,
may Allah be plead with him, would appear before him and
say, 'O Muhammad! You are indeed the Messenger of Allah
in truth, ‘ whereupon his heart would become quiet and he
would calm down and return home. And whenever the period
of the coming of the inspiration used to become long, he
would do as before, but when he reached the top of a
mountain, Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) would appear before
him and say to him what he had said before.”
The Mother of the Believers, ‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased
with her, said, 'The commencement of the Divine Inspiration
to Allah’s Messenger, Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him, was in the form of good dreams which came true like
bright daylight'." This strengthens the narration related by
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Yasar on the authority of ‘Ubaid
Ibn ‘Umar Al-Laithi, in which it was stated that the Prophet,
Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Jibraeel
came to me with a rug of silk brocade on which there was
writing, while I was sleeping, and he said: “Read!” I asked:
“What shall I read?” Then he pressed me until I felt that I was
dying, then he released me.”

Mention of His Age at the Time When He
Was Sent and the History of It
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Amir Ash-Sha‘bi
that the Prophethood came on the Messenger of Allah, Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him, when he was forty years
old. For three years, Angel Israfeel (Peace be upon him) was
entrusted with his Prophethood and he taught him words and
things, but the Qur’an was not revealed. Then, after three
years, Angel Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) was entrusted with
his Prophethood and the Qur’an was revealed over a period of
twenty years in Makkah and three years in Madinah. He died
78

when he was sixty-three years old. This chain of narrators is
authentic up to Ash-Sha‘bi. This necessitates that Israfeel
(Peace be upon him) was entrusted with his Prophethood for
three years after he reached the age of forty years and then
Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) came to him.
Abu Shamah said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to witness miraculous
things before the start of his Prophethood, including that
which has been narrated in Saheeh Muslim, on the authority
of Jabir Ibn Samurah, may Allah be pleased with him, who
said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said: 'I know a stone in Makkah which used to
greet me with salutations of peace before I was sent as a
Prophet; indeed, I know it now'.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace be upon him) only liked
seclusion and solitude from his people because of the clear
error in which he saw them, i.e., the worship of idols and
prostration to graven images. His love of solitude increased
as the time approached when Allah, the Almighty, began
sending down the Revelation to him – Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him. Muhammad Ibn Ishaq reported on the
authority of ‘Abdul Malik Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu Sufyan Ibn
Al-‘Ala' Ibn Jariyah that he said, “It was preserved from one
of the scholars that he said, 'The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to make a sojourn
to the Cave of Hira’ every year for a month, during which time
he would devote himself to Allah, the Almighty. One of the
practices of Quraish during the Jahiliyyah was that they used
to feed any poor person who came to them and after finishing
their hospitality, they would not enter their homes until they
performed circumambulation of the Ka‘bah'." This is how it
was narrated on the authority of Wahb Ibn Kaisan, who said
that he heard ‘Ubaid Ibn ‘Umair telling ‘Abdullah Ibn
AzZubair something like this. This proves that it was the
custom of the worshippers from Quraish to remain in the
79

vicinity of Hira’ for the purpose of worship, which is why Abu
Talib said in his famous Qasidah (Ode) (Al-Bahr At-Taweel):
By Thawr and Him Who anchored Thabeer in its place,
And one who ascended to Hira’ and descended from it.
And the saying in the Hadith (in Saheeh Muslim): “Tahannuth
is worship…” is an explanation of the meaning, but the literal
meaning of Tahannuth is to reach the age of mental and
physical maturity, according to As-Suhaili. But I have heard
a few expressions in language which indicate that its meaning
is to abandon sin and refrain from evildoing, while Tahajjud
means to forsake Al-Hujood, i.e. sleep, in order to pray; and
Tanajjus (to do something that removes one from a state of
impurity) and Taqadhdhur (meaning to deem something
impure or sinful). These meanings were cited by Abu
Shamah. Ibn AlA‘rabi was asked about Tahannuth meaning
worship and he said, “I do not know this; I only know it as
being from the Hanifiyyah, the Religion of Ibrahim (Peace be
upon him).” Ibn Hisham said, “The Arabs say 'At-Tahannuth'
and 'At-Tahannuf'; they replace the letter Tha’ with the letter
Fa’.”
As for the words: “…until the Truth came upon him suddenly,
while he was in Hira’ Cave,” the meaning is that it came upon
him unexpectedly, as Allah, Most High, says, "And you were
not expecting that the Book (this Qur’an) would be sent down
to you, but it is a Mercy from your Lord." (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:86) The opening Verses of this Soorah: "Read! In the
Name of your Lord, Who has created (all that exists), has
created man from a clot (a piece of thick coagulated blood).
Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous, Who has taught
(the writing) by the pen (the first person to write was Prophet
Idrees, peace be upon him), has taught man that which he
knew not" – were the first Verses revealed to him, as we
confirmed in the Tafseer. And we shall also show that they
80

were revealed on a Monday, as it was confirmed thus in
Saheeh Muslim, on the authority of Abu Qatadah, may Allah
be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was asked about fasting on
Mondays and he said: “That is the day on which I was born
and the day on which the Qur’an was revealed to me.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Wathilah Ibn AlAsqa‘, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “The
Scriptures of Ibrahim were revealed on the first night of
Ramadan, the Tawrah was revealed on the sixth day of
Ramadan, the Injeel was revealed on the thirteenth night of
Ramadan and the Qur’an was revealed on the twenty-fourth
day of Ramadan.”
As for the saying of Jibraeel, may Allah be pleased with him,
“Read!” and the Prophet’s response: “I am not a literate,” the
correct interpretation is that it is a negation, i.e., “I am not one
of those who excel at reading.” Among those who favored this
meaning were An-Nawawi and before him, Shaikh Abu
Shamah. As for those who said that it is a question, it is
unlikely, because the letter "Ba’ " used in the Verse is not
added excepted in negative statements. The former
interpretation is also supported by the narration of Abu
Nu‘aim from the Hadith of Al-Mu‘tamir Ibn Sulaiman, who
reported on the authority of his father that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), who was in a state of fear and trembling, said: 'I have
never read a book, I do not excel at it and I can neither read
nor write.' Then Jibraeel seized him and pressed him hard,
then released him and said to him, “Read!” And Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “I do not
see anything to read and I do not read or write.” It was also
narrated as: ( َّ‫ )غط‬as in the Saheehain.” And it was narrated
ّ ‫ ) )غ‬i.e. “he throttled me.” – “until I was
as:‫ت ّّني ووققدد‬
exhausted.” And he did this three times.
81

Abu Sulaiman Al-Khattabi said, “He only did this in order to
test his patience, to improve his selfdiscipline and to train him
to bear the burdens of Prophethood with which he had been
entrusted. This is why he was afflicted with the feeling similar
to that of a feverish person, i.e., shaking and sweating.
As for the words “then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) returned with it (the
Inspiration) to Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her,
with his heart pounding,” in another version, it was stated:
“his ‘Bawadir’,” which is the plural of ‘Badirah’. Abu
‘Ubaidah said, “the flesh between the shoulder and the neck.”
As for Khadeejah’s saying, “Never! By Allah, Allah will
never disgrace you,” it was said that it means by causing him
to be dishonored and it was also said that it means by causing
him sorrow. And this was due to her knowledge of the fine
attributes which Allah, the Almighty, had bestowed on him,
and that anyone possessing such qualities would not be
disgraced in the life of this world or in the Hereafter. And her
saying, “…assist the weak,” means that he used to give those
who were responsible for feeding and maintaining their
families the wherewithal to carry out those responsibilities.
“…benefit those who have nothing,” i.e., you hasten to do
good deeds by giving to the poor and you gain the reward of
it before others. And a poor person is called ‘Ma‘doom’
because his life is deficient and it is the same to him whether
he lives or dies.
Al-Khattabi said, “The correct interpretation of: “…and you
benefit those who have nothing” by clothing them or giving
them money with which to purchase the necessities of life.”
Shaikh Abul Hajjaj Al-Mizzi said that the meaning preferred
by him regarding "Al-Ma‘doom" here is: the money that is
given. That is, he gives the money to those who have none.
As for anyone who claims that what is meant is: You benefit
by giving the leftover money from your trade, or by giving a
82

little of that which is valuable, he has gone far astray and
attempted to explain a matter of which he has no knowledge,
for such a person is not deserving of praise in most cases. This
opinion was declared weak by Al-Qadi Iyad, An-Nawawi and
others. And Allah knows best.
“You serve your guests generously,” means: You are
generous in the hospitality that you offer to them and you
provide good accommodation for them. “…And support
people afflicted by calamity.” That is, when calamity strikes
a person, causing him to lose something good, you help him
in it and you stand by the one so afflicted until he finds the
means to live.
Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her, then took him to
her cousin Waraqah. He was an old man and had lost his
eyesight. Khadeejah said to Waraqah, “Listen to the story of
your nephew, O my cousin!” Waraqah asked, “O my nephew!
What have you seen?” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) described what he had seen.
Waraqah said, “This is the same one who keeps the secrets
(the Angel Jibraeel, peace be upon him) whom Allah sent to
Moosa.”
He did not mention ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), even though
he came after Moosa (Peace be upon him), because the Law
given to the former was a completion and a perfection of that
given to the latter (may the blessings and peace of Allah be
upon them both) and some of it was abrogated, according to
the correct opinion of the scholars, as He, Most High, says,
“…and to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to
you.” (Soorah Al ‘Imran 3:50).
And this saying of Waraqah Ibn Nawfal is like the saying of
the Jinn: They said, “O our people! Verily! We have heard a
Book (this Qur’an) sent down after Moosa, confirming what
83

came before it, it guides to the truth and to a Straight Path (i.e.
Islam).” (Soorah Al-Ahqaf 46:30).
Then Waraqah said, “I wish I were young…” i.e., I wish that
I was a young man today, firm of faith and possessing
beneficial knowledge and able to perform righteous deeds.
And his saying, “…and I wish that I could live up to the time
when your people will drive you out...” – means so that I
might depart with you and support you.
When he said this, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “Will they drive me
out?” As-Suhaili said, “He only said this because leaving
one’s homeland is a great hardship for human beings.
Waraqah then replied, “Yes. All those who brought
something similar to what you have brought were treated with
hostility; and if I should remain alive till the day when you
will be turned out, then I would support you strongly.” That
is, I would support you to the utmost of my ability, always.
Then ‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, added, “But
Waraqah, did not remain, but died.” That is, he only lived for
a few days after hearing this story, after which he died – may
Allah have mercy on him and may He be pleased with him –
for words such as those that emanated from him prove that he
believed what he heard, had faith in the Revelation about
which he was informed and had a righteous intention to
support him in the future.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah, may
Allah be pleased with her, that Khadeejah, may Allah be
pleased with her, asked the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) about Waraqah and he said:
“I saw him and he was wearing white garments; and I think
that if he had been one of the inhabitants of the Fire, he would
not have been wearing white garments.”

84

Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar narrated on the authority of
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that she said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Do not malign Waraqah, for I have seen one or
two Gardens for him.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “I was told by ‘Abdul Malik Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
Abi Sufyan Ibn Al-‘Ala’ Ibn Jariyah AthThaqafi, who
reported from one of the scholars, that when Allah, the
Almighty, willed to honor the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and to commence the
Prophethood, whenever he went out to answer the call of
nature, he would go far away, until the houses were hidden
from his sight and he would proceed to the ravines of Makkah
and the bottoms of its valleys and whenever he passed by a
rock or a tree, it would say, “May Allah’s peace be upon you,
O Messenger of Allah!” The narrator said, “And he would
look around him, to the right and to the left and behind him,
but would see nothing but trees and rocks. He continued to
see and hear for as long as Allah, the Almighty, willed, then
Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) came to him with the Revelation
with which Allah, the Almighty, had honored him while he
was in Hira’, in the month of Ramadan.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “I was told by Wahb Ibn Kaisan, the freed
slave of the family of Az-Zubair: “I heard ‘Abdullah Ibn AzZubair, may Allah be pleased with him, say to ‘Ubaid Ibn
‘Umair Ibn Qatadah AlLaithi, 'O ‘Ubaid! Tell us show
Prophethood began for the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) when Jibraeel (Peace be
upon him) came to him.' He (Wahb) said, ‘ ‘Ubaid said to
‘Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair and those people who were with
him, while I was present, The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to remain in Hira’ for
one month of every year, performing Tahannuth and this was
something held to be obligatory by Quraish in the Jahiliyyah.
Tahannuth means to perform acts of devotion and piety and
85

the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) used to spend that month every year in feeding the poor
and needy who came to him. When he finished his sojourn in
that month, the first thing that he would do was to go to the
Ka‘bah before entering his house and he would
circumambulate it seven times or as many as Allah, the
Almighty, willed. Then he would return to his house and he
continued this practice until the year when Allah, the
Almighty, willed to ennoble him by bestowing Prophethood
on him.
That month was the month of Ramadan, when he set out for
Hira’, just as he did every year. His family was with him until
the night when Allah, the Almighty, ennobled him with the
Message and bestowed Mercy on the slaves through him.
Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) came to him with the
Commandment of Allah, the Almighty. The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) came to me while I was
sleeping, with a rug of silk brocade on which there was
writing, and he said: 'Read!' I asked: 'What shall I read?' Then
he pressed me until I felt that I was dying, then he released
me. He said again: 'Read!' And I said: 'What shall I read?'
Then he pressed me until I felt that I was dying, then he
released me. He said again: 'Read!' I said: 'What shall I read?'
I only said this because I feared that he would do the same
thing to me again. Then he said: 'Read in the name of your
Lord, who has created (all that exists) has created man from a
clot. Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous. Who has
taught (the writing) by the pen. He has taught the manurial
which he know not'." (Soorah Al-‘Alaq 96:1-5).”
He said: “So I recited it and then he desisted and left me and
I got up from my bed and it was as if he had written something
in my heart.”
86

He added: “Then I departed and when I was halfway down the
mountain, I heard a voice from the sky saying, 'O
Muhammad! You are the Messenger of Allah and I am
Jibraeel'.”
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said:
“I raised my head to the sky to look and I saw Jibraeel in the
form of a man whose feet were on the horizon. He said: 'O
Muhammad! You are the Messenger of Allah and I am
Jibraeel.' I stopped and looked at him. His sight distracted my
attention from what I had intended to do. I stood in my place
transfixed. I tried to shift my eyes away from him, but he was
in every direction I looked at. I stopped in my place without
any movement until Khadeejah sent someone to look for me.
He went down to Makkah and came back while I was standing
in the same place. Jibraeel then departed and I went back
home.
I found Khadeejah at home, so I sat very close to her. She said,
'O Abul-Qasim! Where have you been? I sent someone to
look for you. He went to Makkah and returned to me.' I told
her of what I had seen. She replied, 'Be of good cheer, O my
cousin and be strong. For by Him in Whose Hand is my soul,
I hope that you will be a Prophet for this nation'.”
Then she stood up and went to Waraqah and informed him.
Waraqah said, “By Him in Whose Hand is the soul of
Waraqah, if you have told me the truth, O Khadeejah, he has
received the same great Namoos who was sent to Moosa. He
is the Prophet of this nation. Tell him to be strong.”
She returned to him and told him of Waraqah’s words. When
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) finished his sojourn and had done what he always did:
he began by circumambulating the Ka‘bah, where he was met
by Waraqah, who was also circumambulating the Ka‘bah, and
he said to him, “O my nephew! Inform me of what you saw
87

and heard.” So the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) did so and he said, “By Him in Whose Hand is my
soul, you are the Prophet of this nation and you have received
the same great Namoos who was sent to Moosa. And they will
certainly belie you, harm you, expel you and fight you. If I
live to see that day, I would certainly help in Allah’s Cause to
the utmost of my ability.” Then he lowered his head to him
and kissed the crown of his head. Then the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) departed
and returned to his house.”
Imam Muslim narrated in his Saheeh on the authority of Jabir
Ibn Samurah, may Allah be pleased with him, that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “I know a rock in Makkah that used to give
salutations of peace to me before I was sent (as a Messenger);
I know it even now.”
Al-Bukhari said in the narration which we mentioned earlier,
“…and the Divine Inspiration was also paused for a while;
and the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
became so sad, as we have heard, that he intended several
times to throw himself from the top of high mountains and
every time he went up the top of a mountain in order to throw
himself down, Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) would appear
before him and say, “O Muhammad! You are indeed the
Messenger of Allah in truth,” whereupon his heart would
become quiet and he would calm down and return home. And
whenever the period of the coming of the Inspiration used to
become long, he would do as before, but when he reached the
top of a mountain, Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) would appear
before him and say to him what he had said before.”
And it was reported in the Saheehain on the authority of Jabir
Ibn ‘Abdullah that he said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) describe the
period of pause of the Divine Inspiration, and in his
88

description he said: 'While I was walking I heard a voice from
the sky. I looked up toward the sky, and behold! I saw the
same angel who came to me in the Cave of Hira’, sitting on a
chair between the sky and the Earth. I was so terrified by him
that I fell down on the ground. Then I went to my wife and
said: 'Wrap me in garments! Wrap me in garments!' They
wrapped me, and then Allah revealed: 'O you (Muhammad),
enveloped (in garments)! Arise and warn! And your Lord
(Allah) magnify! And your garments purify! And keep away
from Ar-Rujz (the idols)!' (Soorah Al-Muddaththir 74:1-5).
After that, the Divine Inspiration started coming more
frequently and regularly.”
So this was the first thing revealed from the Qur’an after the
pause in Revelation, not the very first thing to be revealed
from the Qur’an; that was: "Read! In the Name of your Lord,
Who has created (all that exists) " (Soorah Al-‘Alaq 96:1).
And it has been confirmed on the authority of Jabir, may Allah
be pleased with him, that the first thing revealed was: "O you
(Muhammad), enveloped (in garments)!" (Soorah AlMuddaththir 74:1). And what is most befitting is to
understand his words in the light of what we have said,
because in the context of his words is that which indicates that
when the angel came to him on the second occasion, he
recognized him due to him being in the same form as when he
saw him on the first occasion. And his saying: “…describing
the period of pause of the Divine Inspiration,” is a proof that
Inspiration had come to him before this Revelation.
It has been confirmed in the Saheehain – by Al-Bukhari, on
the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Al-Mubarak and by Muslim and AlAwza‘i, on the authority of Yahya Ibn Abi Katheer – that he
said, “I asked Abu Salamah Ibn ‘Abdur Rahman what part of
the Qur’an was revealed first, and he said, "O you
(Muhammad), enveloped (in garments)!" (Soorah AlMuddaththir 74:1).” I said, “What about: Read! In the Name
of your Lord, Who has created (all that exists)" (Soorah Al89

‘Alaq 96:1) He replied, “I asked Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah, 'which
part of the Qur’an was revealed first?' And he said, 'O you
(Muhammad), enveloped (in garments)!' (Soorah AlMuddaththir 74:1) I asked, what about: 'Read! In the Name of
your Lord, Who has created (all that exists)'." (Soorah Al‘Alaq 96:1) he said, 'The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: I stayed in Hira’ for one
month and when my sojourn was completed, I came down and
went into the heart of the valley. Somebody called me aloud.
I looked in front of me, from behind me, on the right of my
side and on my left, but I did not see anybody. I was again
called and I looked about but saw nothing. I was called again
and raised my head, and there he was, on a throne, in the air.
He, i.e. Jibraeel was sitting. I began to tremble on account of
fear. I came to Khadeejah and said, wrap me up. They
wrapped me up and threw water on me and Allah, the Exalted
and Glorious, sent down this: Then, O, you (Muhammad),
enveloped (in garments)! ) – up to His Words: And your
garments purify ) (Soorah Al-Muddaththir 74:1-4) was
revealed.”
In another narration he said: “The angel who came to me in
Hira’ was sitting on a throne between the heaven and the Earth
and I was terrified of him.”
This is a clear proof that the angel had already come to him
and brought down Revelation to him from Allah, the
Almighty. And Allah knows best. Some claim that the first
thing revealed to him after the pause in Revelation was: "By
the forenoon (after sunrise); and by the night when it is still
(or darkens); your Lord (O, Muhammad) has neither forsaken
you nor hated you" (Soorah Ad-Duha 93:1-3) – up to the end
of the Soorah. This was the opinion of Muhammad Ibn Ishaq.
Some say that this is why the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) made Takbeer at the
beginning of it, due to his happiness and this is a very strange
90

opinion that is rejected by the authentic narration of a
Companion which we have already mentioned. This narration
states that the first thing from the Qur’an to be revealed after
the pause in Revelation was: "O, you (Muhammad),
enveloped (in garments)! Arise and warn!" (Soorah AlMuddaththir 74:1,2), but Soorah Ad-Duha was revealed after
another pause, which lasted for a few nights, as confirmed in
the Saheehain and other collections of Ahadeeth, on the
authority of Al-Aswad Ibn Qais, who reported on the
authority of Jundub Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Bajali that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) fell ill and did not offer the prayers for one, two or three
nights and a woman (the wife of Abu Lahab) came to him and
said, “O, Muhammad! I do not see but that your devil has left
you.” Then Allah, the Almighty, revealed: "By the forenoon
(after sunrise); and by the night when it is still (or darkens);
your Lord (O, Muhammad) has neither forsaken you nor
hated you." (Soorah Ad-Duha 93:1-3)
In this way, the aim of sending of the Message to the people
was achieved and before it began the Prophethood. Some say
that the period of the pause was around two and a half years.
And it would appear – and Allah knows best – that it was the
period when Mika’el (Michael) was associated with him, as
AshSha‘bi and others said. And this does not contradict the
fact that Jibraeel brought to him first: "Read! In the Name of
your Lord, Who has created (all that exists)." (Soorah Al‘Alaq 96:1). Then Jibraeel became associated with him after
the revelation of: "O, you (Muhammad), enveloped (in
garments)! And your Lord (Allah) magnify! And your
garments purify! And keep away from Ar-Rujz (the idols)!"
(Soorah AlMuddaththir 74:1-5)
Then the Revelation increased in frequency after that and
continued without interruption; and then the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) began to
disseminate the Message in the most complete manner,
91

exerting himself to the utmost in calling upon all of mankind
– including his close kith and kin and those more distant from
him, the slaves and freemen. All those of understanding and
those of superior character believed, while all those who were
stubborn oppressors continued to disobey him and oppose
him. The first of the freemen to hasten to affirm his belief was
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq. The first of the young boys was ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib; the first of the women to embrace Islam was
Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid, the wife of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him); and the first of the freed
slaves to embrace Islam was his freed slave, Zaid Ibn Harithah
Al-Kalbi – may Allah be pleased with all of them and may He
please them. We have already spoken about the faith of
Waraqah Ibn Nawfal because of the Revelation imparted to
him; but he died during the pause in Revelation, may Allah be
pleased with him.

Section Regarding the Prevention of the Jinn
and the Repelling of the Shayatin (devils)
from Eavesdropping When the Qur’an Was
Revealed
It was from the Mercy of Allah, the Almighty, His Grace and
His Kindness toward His creation that he screened them from
the heavens, as He, Most High, says regarding them in His
Words: “And we have sought to reach the heavens; but found
it filled with stern guards and flaming fires. And, verily, we
used to sit there in stations, to (steal) a hearing, but anyone
who listens now will find a flaming fire waiting for him in
ambush. And we know not whether evil is intended for those
on Earth, or whether their Lord intends for them a Right Path."
(Soorah Al-Jinn 72:8-10).
And He, Most High, says, "And it is not the Shayatin (devils)
who have brought it (this Qur’an) down. Neither would it suit
them, nor can they (produce it). Verily, they have been
92

removed far from hearing it." (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:110112)
And Abu ‘Awanah reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) set out along with a group of his companions toward
‘Ukaz Market. At that time something intervened between the
devils and the news of the heavens, and flames were sent
down upon them, so the devils returned. Their fellow devils
said, 'What is wrong with you?' They said, 'Something has
intervened between us and the news of the heavens, and fires
(flames) have been shot at us.' Their fellow devils said,
'Nothing has intervened between you and the news of the
heavens, but an important event has happened. Therefore,
travel all over the world, East and West, and try to find out
what has happened.' And so they set out and traveled all over
the world, East and West, looking for that thing which had
intervened between them and the news of the heavens.
Those of the devils who had set out toward Tihamah, went to
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) at Nakhlah (a place between Makkah and Ta’if) while
he was on his way to ‘Ukaz Market. (They encountered him)
while he was offering the Fajr (Dawn) prayer with his
Companions. When they heard the Holy Qur’an being recited
(by the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him)), they listened to it and said (to each other), 'This
is the thing which has intervened between you and the news
of the heavens.' Then they returned to their people and said,
'O our people! We have really heard a wonderful recital (the
Qur’an). It gives guidance to the right, and we have believed
therein. We shall not join in worship anybody with our Lord'.”
(Soorah Al-Jinn 72.1-2)
Then Allah, the Almighty, revealed to His Prophet (Soorah
Al-Jinn): "Say (O, Muhammad), 'It has been revealed to me
93

that a group (from three to ten in number) of Jinn listened (to
this Qur’an)." (Soorah AlJinn 72:1). This was narrated in the
Saheehain.
Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Shaibah reported on the authority of Sa‘eed
Ibn Jubair, who reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas that he said, “Every tribe of the Jinn had listening
posts and when any Revelation was sent down, the angels
would hear a sound like a piece of iron striking a smooth
stone.” He added, “Whenever the angels heard it, they would
fall down in prostration and they would not raise their heads
until it had come down; then, when it had come down, they
would say to one another, “What did your Lord say?” And if
it was something pertaining to the heavens, they would say,
“The truth; and He is the Most High, the Great.” But if it was
something pertaining to the Earth, whether regarding the
unseen, or a death or something else concerning the Earth,
they would speak about it and say, “It is such-andsuch.” The
Jinn would hear this and convey it to their clients (the
soothsayers, fortunetellers, etc.).
But when the revelation was sent to Prophet Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), they were
dispersed by having meteorites hurled at them. The first
people to notice them were Thaqeef. An owner of sheep
among them would go out to his sheep and each day he would
sacrifice a sheep, while an owner of camels would sacrifice a
camel each day. And the people hastened to spend their
money. But some of them said to the others, “Do not do this,
for either they are the stars by which people are guided or else
something has happened." So they looked and saw that the
stars by which they were guided were unchanged. Hence, they
desisted, and Allah, the Almighty, turned away the Jinn; and
then they heard the Qur’an. When they came to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and heard him
reciting, they said, “Listen.” Then the devils went to Iblees
and informed him about it and he said, “This is an event which
94

has occurred on Earth, so bring me some dust from every part
of the Earth.” They did so and when they brought him the
earth of Tihamah, he said, “Here is where the event occurred.”
Al-Baihaqi and Al-Hakim narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, “The lowest heaven was
not guarded during the period between ‘Eesa and Muhammad
(may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon them both).”
But it is likely that what is meant by those who rejected that,
is that it was not strictly guarded. And it must be understood
in this way because of what has been confirmed in the Hadith
on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas, who said, “While
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was sitting with some of his Companions, may Allah be
pleased with them, a star (i.e., a meteorite) was hurled and it
illuminated the sky, upon which he said: “What did you used
to say when the like of this was hurled?” They said, “We used
to say, 'Some great person has died, ‘ or, 'Some great person
has been born.' He said: 'No, but'…” and he mentioned the
Hadith, as we said earlier.

Section Regarding How the Revelation Came
to the Messenger of Allah
It was reported on the authority of ‘A’ishah, may Allah be
pleased with her, that Al-Harith Ibn Hisham asked the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), “O Messenger of Allah! How does the Revelation come
to you?” He said: “Sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing
of a bell; this form of Inspiration is the hardest of all and then
this state passes off after I have grasped what is inspired.
Sometimes the angel comes in the form of a man and talks to
me and I grasp whatever he says.” ‘A’ishah, may Allah be
pleased with her, added, “Verily, I saw the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) being inspired Divinely on a
very cold day and noticed the sweat dripping from his
forehead (as the Inspiration ended).” This was narrated by Al95

Bukhari and Muslim in the Saheehain from the Hadith of
Malik.
And in Saheeh Muslim and other collections of Ahadeeth it
was reported on the authority of Al-Hasan, who reported on
the authority of Hittan Ibn ‘Abdullah Ar-Raqashi, who in turn
reported on the authority of ‘Ubadah Ibn As-Samit, may Allah
be pleased with them, that he said, “When Revelation came
down to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), it was burdensome to him and his face
would take on a dark red expression.” And in another
narration, “...his eyes became dark and we recognized that
from him.”
And in the Saheehain is the Hadith of Zaid Ibn Thabit (May
Allah be pleased with him), who said that when "Not equal
are those of the Believers who sit (at home)" (Soorah AnNisa’ 4:95) was revealed, Ibn Umm Maktoom (May Allah be
pleased with him) complained of his blindness, following
which "…except those who are disabled (by injury or are
blind or lame, etc.) was revealed (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:95) and,
“the thigh of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was against my thigh and I was writing,
but when the Revelation came down, his thigh almost broke
my thigh.”
And in Saheeh Muslim, it was reported on the authority of
Ya‘la Ibn Umayyah, may Allah be pleased with him, that he
said, “ ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) said to me,
‘Would it please you to see the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when Revelation is
descending on him'? Then he lifted a corner of the cloth and
the Revelation was descending upon him at Al-Ji‘ranah; I saw
that his face was red and he was snorting like a camel.”
And it was confirmed in the Saheehain in the Hadith of
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that Sawdah, may
96

Allah be pleased with her, the wife of the Prophet, Peace and
Blessings on Allah be upon him) went out to answer the call
of nature after it was made obligatory (for all the Muslim
women) to observe the veil. She was a large, overweight lady,
and everybody who knew her before could recognize her. So
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him) saw
her and said, “O Sawdah! By Allah, you cannot hide yourself
from us, so think of a way by which you should not be
recognized on going out.” Sawdah, may Allah be pleased with
her, returned while the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was in my house taking his
supper and a bone covered with meat was in his hand. She
entered and said, “O, Messenger of Allah! I went out to
answer the call of nature and ‘Umar said to me such-andsuch.” Then Allah, the Almighty, inspired him (the Prophet)
and when the state of Inspiration was over – and the bone was
still in his hand, as he had not put in down – he said (to
Sawdah, may Allah be pleased with her): “You (women) have
been allowed to go out for your needs.” This proves that the
Revelation did not cause him to completely lose his senses,
because he was sitting and also, the bone did not fall from his
hand – may Allah’s Blessings and Peace be upon him in
perpetuity.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Asma’ Bint
Yazeed, may Allah be pleased with her, that she said, “I was
holding the reins of Al-‘Adba’, the she-camel of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) when the whole of Soorah Al-Ma’idah was revealed to
him. Due to the burden of it on him, the upper leg of the shecamel was bruised.”
It has also been confirmed in the Saheehain that the sending
down of Soorah Al-Fat'h to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) occurred when he was
returning from Al-Hudaybiyyah, while he was on his riding
97

beast and it came down to him little by little, according to the
circumstances. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Allah, Most High, says, "Move not your tongue concerning
(the Qur’an, O, Muhammad) to make haste therewith. It is for
Us to collect it and to give you (O, Muhammad) the ability to
recite it (the Qur’an), And when We have recited it to you (O,
Muhammad, through Jibraeel), then follow you its (the
Qur’an’s) recital. Then it is for Us (Allah) to make it clear to
you." (Soorah Al-Qiyamah 75:16-19)
Then High above all be Allah, the True King, said: "And be
not in haste (O, Muhammad) with the Qur’an before its
revelation is completed to you, and say, 'My Lord! Increase
me in knowledge'.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:114).
This was at the beginning, when the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to take great
pains to memorize the Revelation brought to him by Jibraeel
from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful, by reciting it
rapidly, in order to keep pace with the angel’s recitation. So
Allah, Most High, commanded him to listen to the angel until
he had completed the Revelation. And He guaranteed for him
that He would preserve it in his heart and make it easy for him
to recite and convey (to others) and that He would make clear
its meanings to him. This is why He, Most High, says, "And
be not in haste (O, Muhammad) with the Qur’an before its
revelation is completed to you, and say, 'My Lord! Increase
me in knowledge'." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:114).
And He says, "Move not your tongue to make haste therewith.
It is for Us to collect it" (Soorah AlQiyamah 75:16-17) means
in your heart, "…and to give you (O, Muhammad) the ability
to recite it (the Qur’an)" (Soorah Al-Qiyamah 75:17) means
the angel recites it to you, that you may recite it, "…then
follow you its (the Qur’an’s) recital." (Soorah Al-Qiyamah
75:18). It means to listen to it and reflect on it. "Then it is for
98

Us (Allah) to make it clear to you." (Soorah Al-Qiyamah
75:19). This is the same as His Saying: "…and say, “My Lord!
Increase me in knowledge.”(Soorah Ta Ha 20:114)
And in the Saheehain it was reported on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that
he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) used to bear the Revelation with great
trouble and used to move his lips (quickly) with the
Inspiration.” Ibn ‘Abbas moved his lips saying, “I am moving
my lips in front of you as the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to move his.” Sa‘eed
moved his lips saying, “I am moving my lips, as I saw Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) moving his.” Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) added, “So Allah,
the Almighty, revealed, "Move not your tongue to make haste
therewith. It is for Us to collect it and to give you (O,
Muhammad) the ability to recite it (the Qur’an)." (Soorah
AlQiyamah 75:16, 17) which means that Allah, the Almighty,
will make him (the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him)) remember the portion of the Qur’an which was
revealed at that time by heart and recite it.
The Statement of Allah, the Almighty: "And when We have
recited it to you (O, Muhammad, through Jibraeel), then
follow you its..." (the Qur’an’s) recital means listen to it and
be silent. "Then it is for Us (Allah) to make it clear to you"
(Soorah Al-Qiyamah 75:19) means "then it is (for Allah, the
Almighty,) to make you recite it (and its meaning will be clear
by itself through your tongue)." Whenever Jibraeel came, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) used to lower his head to his chest and listen in silence
to him and after his departure he would recite it just as Allah,
the Almighty, the All-Powerful had promised him.
Ibn Ishaq said, “Then the Revelation to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) continued
99

and he believed in what came to him. He accepted it
completely and he conveyed it to the slaves, regardless of
whether it pleased them or displeased them; and Prophethood
entails heavy burdens which none can bear and none can
understand except those Messengers who are strong and
determined, whom Allah, the Almighty, helps and to whom
He grants success, because of what they encounter from their
people and the rejection of the Message they bring from
Allah, the Almighty, to which they are subjected. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) continued to do what Allah, the Almighty, had
commanded him to do, in spite of the opposition and harm he
encountered from his people.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid, may Allah be
pleased with her, had faith and believed in what he brought
from Allah, the Almighty, and she supported him in the
propagation of the Religion. She was the first person to
believe in Allah, the Almighty, and His Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and in the Message that he
brought from Allah, the Almighty. In this way, Allah, the
Almighty, made things easier for His Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him): whenever he heard
something that he disliked from those who opposed him or
they belied him, it would make him feel sad, and Allah, the
Almighty, would grant him solace through her when he
returned to her, for she would strengthen his resolve and
lighten the burden for him by her belief in him, and her
minimizing of the enmity and opposition shown to him by the
people. May Allah be pleased with her.”
Ibn Ishaq said, “I was told by Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah, who
reported on the authority of his father, who in turn reported
on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib that
he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said: 'I was commanded to give
Khadeejah the glad tidings of a house made of pearl in which
100

there is no noise or clamor and no fatigue'.” And this Hadith
has been reported in the Saheehain. Ibn Hisham said, “Qasab
(the word used in the Hadith) here means ‘hollowed-out
pearl’.”

Section Regarding the First People to
Embrace Islam, Then Mention of the
Earliest Companions to Embrace Islam
Ibn Ishaq said, “Then ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (May Allah be
pleased with him) came a day after that and found them both
praying. On seeing them, ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with
him) said, 'O Muhammad! What is this?' He replied: 'It is the
religion of Allah, which He Himself has chosen and with
which He sent His Messengers. So I call you to Allah, Alone,
Who has no partners and (I call upon you) to worship Him
and to reject Al-Lat and Al-‘Uzza.' ‘Ali (May Allah be
pleased with him) replied, 'This is something of which I had
not heard before today, so I cannot judge in the matter until I
have consulted Abu Talib with regard to it.' The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) disliked
to divulge his secret to him before his affair was made known,
so he said to him: 'O ‘Ali! If you will not embrace Islam, then
be silent.' So ‘Ali stayed that night and then Allah, the
Almighty, placed submission (i.e., Islam) in his heart, and in
the morning, he came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said, 'What do you
propose that I do, O, Muhammad?' The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: 'Bear
witness that none is worthy of worship except Allah, Alone,
without partners, reject Al-Lat and Al-‘Uzza and absolve
yourself of (belief in) the (false) partners.' ‘Ali (May Allah be
pleased with him) did so and became a Muslim and he
continued to come to him, though fearful of Abu Talib. He
concealed his Islam and did not disclose it to anyone. Zaid Ibn
Harithah (May Allah be pleased with him) also embraced
101

Islam and they continued for about a month to conceal their
Islam, with ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, coming
frequently to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) during that time. Among the blessings that
Allah, the Almighty, bestowed on ‘Ali was that he used to be
in the abode of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) before Islam.”
And it was reported on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Ishaq
that ‘Afeef said, “I was a merchant and I arrived in Mina
during the Hajj period. Al-‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdil Muttalib, may
Allah be pleased with him, was also a merchant and so I went
to him to trade with him. While we were thus engaged, a man
came out from a hair tent and stood and prayed toward the
Ka‘bah. Then a woman came out and stood and prayed and a
young boy came out and prayed with him. I said, “O ‘Abbas!
What is this religion? We do not know what this religion is.”
Al-‘Abbas replied, “This is Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). He claims that Allah,
the Almighty, has sent him and that the treasures of Kisra and
Qaisar will be given to him. The woman is his wife,
Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid, may Allah be pleased with her,
and she has believed in him. This boy is his cousin, ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib, who has also believed in him.” ‘Afeef said, “Would
that I had embraced Islam on that day, in order that I might
have been the second (man) to embrace Islam!” Ibrahim Ibn
Sa‘d said in his version of the Hadith, which he narrated on
the authority of Ibn Ishaq “…when a man came out of a hair
tent near to him and he looked up to the heaven; and when he
saw that the sun had passed its zenith, he prayed.” Then he
mentioned that Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her,
stood up to pray behind him.
Ibn Jareer said, “I was told by ‘Eesa Ibn Sawadah Ibn AbulJa‘d, that he was told by Muhammad Ibn AlMunkadir,
Rabee‘ah Ibn Abu-‘Abdur Rahman and Abu Hazim Al-Kalbi,
“‘Ali was the first to embrace Islam.” Al-Kalbi added, “He
102

embraced Islam when he was nine years old.” And it was
reported on the authority of Ibn Ishaq that he said, “The first
male to have faith in the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), pray with him and believe
him was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and that was when he was ten
years old. He used to live in the house of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) before
Islam.”
Others said that the first person from this nation to embrace
Islam was Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with
him. It is possible to reconcile these statements by saying that
Khadeejah, may Allah be pleased with her, was the first
woman to embrace Islam, according to the clear wording of
the narrations. It was also said that she was the very first
person, male or female, to embrace Islam. The first of the
freed slaves to embrace Islam was Zaid Ibn Harithah and the
first young boy to embrace Islam was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, for
he was a child, having not yet attained puberty, according to
what is widely reported. These people were thus Ahl ul-Bait.
The first of the freemen to embrace Islam was Abu Bakr AsSiddiq – and his Islam was more beneficial than that of those
who had preceded him, for he was a leader among the people,
an important man and one of the chiefs of Quraish; he was
held in high esteem and was a wealthy man. He became a
caller to Islam and he was greatly loved due to his spending
of his wealth in obedience to Allah, the Almighty, and His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), as we
shall see.
Ibn Ishaq said, “I was told by Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdur Rahman
Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Husain At-Tameemi that the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said: “I
did not call anyone to Islam except that he had some
uncertainty and doubt – aside from Abu Bakr. He did not
waver or hesitate when I told him about it (Islam).” This is
what Ibn Ishaq reported, but it can neither be confirmed nor
103

rejected. Ibn Ishaq and others mentioned that he was a
companion of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) prior to the start of his mission and that
he knew how truthful and trustworthy he was and how fine
and noble his character was. These attributes prevented him
from being untruthful regarding people, so how could he be
untruthful regarding Allah, the Almighty? For this reason,
simply because of what was mentioned to him, he hastened to
believe him and he did not hesitate or waver.
And it has been confirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari on the
authority of Abu Ad-Darda’, may Allah be pleased with him,
regarding a disagreement between Abu Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with him, and ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,
that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “Allah sent me (as a Prophet) to you (people)
but you said (to me), 'You are telling a lie, ‘ while Abu Bakr
said, 'He has said the truth, ‘ and consoled me with himself
and his money.” He then said twice: 'Will you not then give
up harming my companion?' After that nobody harmed Abu
Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him,.”
And in Saheeh Al-Bukhari it was reported on the authority of
‘Ammar Ibn Yasir, may Allah be pleased with him, that he
said, “I saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and there was none with him but five
slaves, two women and Abu Bakr (i.e. those were the only
converts to Islam then).”
And it is reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood,
may Allah be pleased with him, that he said, “The first to
reveal that they had embraced Islam were seven: the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), Abu Bakr, ‘Ammar, his mother, Sumayyah, Suhaib,
Bilal and AlMiqdad. As for the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), Allah, the Almighty,
protected him through his uncle, while as for Abu Bakr, Allah,
104

the Almighty, protected him through his people. As for the
rest of them, the pagans took them and forced them to wear
iron jackets and made them lie under the sun, but there was
not a single one of them but submitted to do what they wanted
them to do, aside from Bilal, who refused. And so, they took
him and gave him to the children who ran through the
alleyways of Makkah with him, while he was saying, '(Allah
is) One, One'.”
Abu Hanifah, may Allah have mercy upon him, reconciled
these opinions by saying that the first person to embrace Islam
from among the freemen was Abu Bakr; from among the
women, it was Khadeejah; from among the freed slaves, it
was Zaid Ibn Harithah; and from among the young boys, it
was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with them all.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “When Abu Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with him, embraced Islam and disclosed his Islam, he
called upon the people to Allah, the Almighty, the AllPowerful. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, was
well-known to his people, approachable and loved by them.
He knew more about the good and bad of Quraish than any
other person. He was a merchant of high moral character and
renowned for his kindness. His people used to come to him
and discuss many things with him, because of his knowledge,
his experience as a merchant and his sociable nature. He
began by calling to Islam those among his people whom he
trusted, who used to visit him and sit with him. Those who
accepted Islam at his hands, according to what has been
conveyed to me were: Az-Zubair Ibn Al‘Awwam, ‘Uthman
Ibn ‘Affan, Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaidullah, Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas and
‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, may Allah be pleased with them
all.
They hastened with Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with
him, to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and he explained Islam to them, reciting the
105

Qur’an to them and informing them of the truth of Islam, upon
which they believed. These eight individuals were the earliest
converts to Islam, who believed the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and believed in
the Message he brought from Allah.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) asked Allah, the Almighty, to guide either ‘Umar
Ibn Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, or Abu Jahl
Ibn Hisham to Islam. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) supplicated Allah, the
Almighty, on a Wednesday and ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased
with him, embraced Islam on Thursday, on which the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Ahl ul-Bait
openly and loudly recited, “Allahu
Akbar (Allah is Greatest)!” It was said that their voices were
heard in the heights of Makkah. AbulArqam – who was a blind disbeliever – came out and he was
saying, “O Allah! Forgive Banu ‘Ubaid AlArqam, for they
have disbelieved.” ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,
then got up and said, “O Messenger of Allah! Why do we
conceal our religion, when we are following the Truth, while
they practice their religion openly, and they are following that
which is false?” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) replied: “O ‘Umar! We are few, and you have
seen what we have encountered.” ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him, said, “Then by Him Who sent you with the
Truth, I will go to every meeting place where I sat when I was
a disbeliever and I will proclaim my faith in them.”
Then he left and circumambulated the Ka‘bah, after which he
visited Quraish, who were waiting for him, and Abu Jahl Ibn
Hisham said, “So-and-so claims that you have abandoned
your religion!” ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said,
“Ash-hadu an-la ilaha ill-Allahu Wahdahu la Shareeka Lahu
wa anna Muhammadan ‘Abduhu wa Rasooluhu (I bear
witness that none is worthy of worship except Allah, Alone,
106

without partners and that Muhammad is His Slave and His
Messenger).” Upon hearing this, the pagans rushed upon him;
in response, he pounced on ‘Utbah and poked his fingers in
his eyes, causing him to scream. The people then stayed back
and ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, got up and
departed and none dared to approach him.
He then visited all of the meeting places that he had formerly
frequented as a disbeliever and informed them that he had
embraced Islam. Then he went to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said, “May my mother
and father be ransomed for you, I have not neglected a single
meeting place in which I used to sit when I was a disbeliever;
I have been to them all and proclaimed my Islam to them,
without fear or hesitation.” Then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went out and
‘Umar and Hamzah Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib, may Allah be
pleased with them both, walked in front of him until they
reached the Holy House, where he performed Tawaf and then
offered the Dhuhr (afternoon) prayer in safety. Then he went
to the house known as Dar Al-Arqam accompanied by ‘Umar,
may Allah be pleased with him,. After a while, ‘Umar
departed and later, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) departed alone.
It has been authentically reported that ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him, only embraced Islam after the Muhajiroon
(emigrants) had departed for Abyssinia, which was in the
sixth year after the start of the Prophetic Mission, as we shall
show in the relevant place, if Allah wills. We have dealt in
more detail with the story of how Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with them, embraced Islam in the book
dealing with their biographies and we have spoken at great
length there on this topic, all praise and thanks be to Allah,
the Almighty.

107

It has been confirmed in Saheeh Muslim on the authority of
‘Amr Ibn ‘Abasah As-Sulami, may Allah be pleased with
him, that he said, “I went to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) at the start of his
Prophetic Mission when he was in Makkah. The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was at
that time hiding as his people had made life hard for him. I
adopted a friendly attitude (toward the Makkans and thus
managed) to enter Makkah and go to him (the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) and I said to him, "What
are you?” He said: “I am a Prophet (of Allah).” I again said,
“What is a Prophet?” He said: “A Messenger of Allah.” I said,
“Has Allah, the Almighty, sent you?” He replied: “Yes.” I
then asked him, “With what (Message) have you been sent?”
He said: “That you worship Allah, Alone, without partners,
that you break the idols and join ties of kinship.” I said, "This
is a fine thing with which you have been sent! Who is with
you in this (in these beliefs and practices)?” He said: “A free
man and a slave. [He (the narrator) said, “He was referring to
Abu Bakr and Bilal, may Allah be pleased with them both.]”
‘Amr then said, “You have seen me and I am one-fourth of
Islam.” He said, “Then I embraced Islam and I said, 'I intend
to follow you.' But he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said: “No. You better go back to your people and when
you are informed that I have departed, you may follow me.”
And in Saheeh Al-Bukhari, it was reported on the authority of
Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyib that he said, “I heard Sa‘d Ibn Abi
Waqqas, may Allah be pleased with him, say, “No one
embraced Islam on the day on which I embraced Islam and I
remained for seven days, being one-third of the then extant
Muslims.”
As for his saying: “No one embraced Islam on the day on
which I embraced Islam…” it is easily understood. But it was
also narrated that he said, “…except on the day on which I
embraced Islam.” And this is dubious; for it would necessitate
108

that no one embraced Islam before him. But it is well-known
that As-Siddiq, ‘Ali, Khadeejah and Zaid Ibn Harithah, may
Allah be pleased with them all, embraced Islam before him,
according to the consensus of the scholars, who affirmed that
no one embraced Islam before these four. Those scholars
included: Ibn Al-Katheer and Abu Hanifah, may Allah have
mercy upon them, determined that these four embraced Islam
before any of their fellow tribesmen. And Allah knows best.
As for his saying, “…and I remained for seven days, being
one third of the then extant Muslims,” it is also problematic;
and I do not know how it may be explained, unless he was
speaking according to his knowledge. And Allah knows best.
And Abu Dawood At-Taialisi narrated on the authority of
‘Abdullah (i.e. Ibn Mas‘ood, may Allah be pleased with him)
that he said, “I was an adolescent boy and I used to tend sheep
for ‘'Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu‘ait in Makkah. One day, the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, came to
me, having fled from the pagans and he (or they) said, 'O boy!
Do you have any milk that you can give us to drink?' I said, 'I
am entrusted with the cattle and I cannot give you anything to
drink.' He then asked, 'Then do you have a young ewe that has
not yet been mated with a male?' I said, 'Yes.' Then I brought
it to them and Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him,
hobbled it and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) took hold of its udder and supplicated
Allah, the Almighty, upon which its udder became filled with
milk. Then Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, came
to him with a hollowed out rock and the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) milked the udder
into it and then he and Abu Bakr drank from it. After that,
they gave me to drink from it and then he said to the udder:
'Contract!' Upon which it contracted. Later, I went to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and said to him, 'Teach me this fine speech (i.e. the
109

Qur’an).' He said: 'You are a boy who has been taught.' And I
took from his lips seventy Soorahs (Chapters) in which no one
can contend with me.”
Al-Baihaqi said, “It was reported on the authority of
Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Uthman that he
said, “Khalid Ibn Sa‘eed Ibn Al-‘As embraced Islam in early
stages, and he was the first of his brothers to do so. The start
of his Islam was when he saw in a dream that he was being
held at the edge of the Fire and he described its vastness in a
manner about which Allah knows best. He saw in his dream
that someone came to him and he was pushing him into it and
he also saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) holding him by his hips in order to prevent
him from falling into it. He awoke in a state of alarm from his
sleep and said, 'I swear by Allah that this vision is true.' Then
he met Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, and he
related to him what he had seen. Abu Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with him, said to him, 'I want that you should have
the goodness of this Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), so obey him; for you will follow him
and enter Islam with him, and Islam will protect you from
entering it (the Fire), while your father will fall into it.' So he
met the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) while he was at Ajyad and said to him, 'O
Messenger of Allah! O, Muhammad! To what do you call?'
He said: 'I call you to (believe in) Allah, Alone, without
partners and that Muhammad is His Slave and His Messenger,
and to abandon the worship of stones that you practice –
stones that do not hear, do not harm, do not see, do not benefit
and are unaware of who worships them or does not worship
them.' Khalid said, 'Then I bear witness that none is worthy of
worship and that you are the Messenger of Allah.' May Allah
be pleased with him.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) was pleased with his conversion to Islam. Khalid,
110

may Allah be pleased with him, stayed away from home and
his father came to know that he had embraced Islam; he sent
someone to search for him and he brought him to him. His
father rebuked him and beat him with a piece of wood that he
held in his hand until he broke it on his head. He said, 'By
Allah, I will starve you.' Khalid, may Allah be pleased with
him, replied, 'Even if you prevent me from eating, Allah will
give me what I need to live on.' Then he went to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and he treated him hospitably and he remained with
him.”

The Story of How Hamzah Ibn ‘Abdul
Muttalib, the Paternal Uncle of the Prophet,
Embraced Islam
Yoonus Ibn Bukair narrated on the authority of Muhammad
Ibn Ishaq that he said, “I was told by a man from among those
who had embraced Islam – and he had a reliable memory –
that Abu Jahl accosted the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) at As-Safa and he injured
him, reviled him and maligned his religion. Hamzah Ibn
‘Abdul Muttalib was informed of this and so he went to Abu
Jahl and stood over his head, raised his bow and struck him
with it, seriously wounding him. The men of Banu
Makhzoom, one of the tribes of Quraish, got up and advanced
on Hamzah, intending to help Abu Jahl against him. They
said, 'We believe that you have apostatized, O, Hamzah!'
Hamzah said, 'And who will prevent me, when it has become
clear to me? I bear witness that he is the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and that what he
says is the Truth. And by Allah, I will not retract this, so
prevent me, if you are truthful.' Abu Jahl said, 'Leave Abu
‘Umarah, for by Allah, I did revile his nephew shamefully.'
111

Once Hamzah had embraced Islam, the Quraish realizsed that
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had grown stronger and they refrained from their
persecution of him. Hamzah, may Allah be pleased with him,
recited some poetic verses in regard to this incident.”

112

The Story of How Abu Dharr
Embraced Islam
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas,
may Allah be pleased with him, that he said, “When news of
the sending of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was conveyed to Abu Dharr, may Allah
be pleased with him, he said to his brother, “Ride to this valley
and bring me the news of this man (i.e., the Prophet Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) who claims to be a Prophet
receiving information from the heavens. Listen to him and
then come to me.” His brother set out till he met the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and listened to
his speech and returned to Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased
with him, and said to him, “I have seen him exhorting people
to virtues and his speech was not like poetry.” Abu Dharr,
may Allah be pleased with him, said, “You have not satisfied
me as to what I wanted.”
So he packed some provisions for the journey and filled a
water skin full of water, then he set out till he reached
Makkah, where he went to the Mosque looking for the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), whom
he did not know and about whom he was unwilling to ask
anyone. After a portion of the night had passed, ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, saw him and realized that he was
a stranger. Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him,
followed him (to his house), but neither of them asked the
other about anything till it was morning, when he carried his
water skin and food and went to the Mosque. He spent that
day without being observed by the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) till it was night, when he
returned to his sleeping place.
‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, again passed by him and
said, “Has not the man (i.e., Abu Dharr) recognized his
dwelling place yet?” So, ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him,
113

let him get up and took him (to his house), but neither of them
asked the other about anything, till it was the third day when
‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, had the same experience
with him and Abu Dharr again stayed with him. ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, then asked, “Will you not you tell
me what has brought you here?” He replied, “If you give me
a promise and a covenant that you will guide me, then I will
tell you.” When ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, had
done so, Abu Dharr informed him (of his purpose). ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, said, “It is the Truth, and he (i.e.
Muhammad) is the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). So when the morning comes, follow
me, and if I should perceive any danger threatening you, I will
give you a hint by pretending to go to the water closet. But if
I carry on walking, follow me till you enter the place that I
will enter.” Abu Dharr agreed and followed ‘Ali, may Allah
be pleased with him, till he entered the place of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Abu Dharr
entered with him. He then listened to the speech of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and embraced
Islam on the spot. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said to him: “Go back to your people and inform
them (of this religion) till you receive my (further) orders.”
Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, “By Him in
Whose Hand is my soul, I will proclaim my conversion to
Islam publicly amongst them (i.e., the disbelievers).”
He went out till he reached the Mosque and announced as
loudly as possible, “I testify that none has the right to be
worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allah.” The people then got up and beat him till they
knocked him down. Al-‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with
him, came and threw himself over him (to protect him),
saying, “Woe to you! Don’t you know that he is from Ghifar
and there is the route (road) to your merchants toward AshSham (i.e., through the place where this tribe dwells)?” Thus
he saved him from them. Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased
114

with him, did the same on the next day and the people beat
him again and Al-‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him,
threw himself over him (to save him as before).” This is the
wording of Al-Bukhari, but the story of how he embraced
Islam has also been described at length in Saheeh Muslim and
in other sources.

The Story of How Dimad Embraced
Islam
Imam Muslim narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas that he said, “Dimad arrived in Makkah – and he
belonged to the tribe of Azd Shanoo‘ah and was skilled in
exorcising Jinn from those who were possessed. He heard the
foolish people of Makkah saying that Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was possessed. Upon this he
said, “If 1 were to come across this man, Allah, the Almighty,
might cure him at my hand.” He met him and said, “O,
Muhammad, I can exorcise, and Allah, the Almighty, cures
whomever He wills at my hand. Do you desire (this)?” Upon
this, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “Praise be to Allah, we praise Him, ask His
Help; and he whom Allah guides aright there is none to lead
him astray, and he who is led astray there is none to guide
him, and I bear witness to the fact that none is worthy of
worship but Allah, He is One, having no partner with Him,
and that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger.”
After this, he (Dimad) said, “Repeat these words of yours
before me,” and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) repeated them to him three times; and
he said, “I have heard the words of soothsayers and the words
of magicians, and the words of poets, but I have never heard
such words as yours, and they reach the depths (of the ocean
of eloquence); bring forth your hand so that I should take an
115

oath of fealty to you on Islam.” So he took an oath of
allegiance to him.
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said: “Is it (this allegiance of yours) on behalf of
your people too?” He said, “It is on behalf of my people too.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) sent an expedition and the flying column passed by
his people. The leader of the flying column said to the
detachment, “Did you find anything from these people?” One
of the people said, “I found a utensil for water.” Upon this he
(the commander) said, “Return it, for he is one of the people
of Dimad.”
Ibn Ishaq related the names of the earliest of the Companions,
may Allah be pleased with them, to embrace Islam, saying,
“Then Abu ‘Ubaidah, Abu Salmah Al-Arqam Ibn Abil
Arqam, ‘Uthman Ibn Madh‘oon, ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Harith,
Sa‘eed Ibn Zaid and his wife, Fatimah Bint Al-Khattab,
Asma’ Bint Abu Bakr, ‘A’ishah Bint Abu Bakr, who was still
young, Qudamah Ibn Maz‘oon, ‘Abdullah Ibn Maz‘oon,
Khabbab Ibn Al-Aratt, embraced Islam, ‘Umair Ibn Abi
Waqqas, ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood, Mas‘ood Ibn Al-Qari,
Saleet Ibn ‘Amr, ‘Ayyash Ibn Abi Rabee‘ah and his wife,
Asma’ Bint Salamah Ibn Makhramah At-Taimi, Khunais Ibn
Hudhafah, ‘Amir Ibn Rabee‘ah, ‘Abdullah Ibn Jahsh, Abu
Ahmad Ibn Jahsh, Ja‘afar Ibn Abu Talib and his wife, Asma’
Bint ‘Umais, Hatib Ibn Al-Harith, his wife, Fatimah Bint AlMujallal and his brother, Hattab Ibn Al-Harith and his wife,
Fukaihah Bint Yasar, Ma‘mar Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Ma‘mar AlJumahi, As-Sa’ib Ibn ‘Uthman Ibn Maz‘oon, Al-Muttalib Ibn
Azhar Ibn ‘Abd ‘Awf and his wife, Ramlah Bint Abu ‘Awf
Ibn Subairah Ibn Su‘aid Ibn Sa‘d Ibn Sahm, An-Nahham,
whose name was Nu‘aim Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Aseed, ‘Amir Ibn
Fuhairah, the freed slave of Abu Bakr, Khalid Ibn Sa‘eed,
Umainah Bint Khalaf Ibn As‘ad Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Bayadah from
Khuza‘ah, Hatib Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Abd Shams, Abu Hudhaifah
116

Ibn ‘Utbah Ibn Rabee‘ah, Waqid Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abd
Manaf Ibn ‘Areen Ibn Tha‘labah At-Tameemi, the ally of
Banu ‘Adiyy, Khalid Ibn Al-Bukair, ‘Amir Ibn AlBukair,
‘Aqil Ibn Al-Bukair (his name was Ghafil [unmindful] and so
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) named him ‘Aqil [discerning]), Iyas Ibn Al-Bukair Ibn
‘Abd Yaleel Ibn Nashib Ibn Ghiyarah Ibn Sa‘d Ibn Laith (they
were the allies of Banu ‘Adiyy Ibn Ka‘b), ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir
and Suhaib Ibn Sinan. Then the people entered Islam in
groups, from among the men and women, until the religion of
Islam became widespread in Makkah and widely discussed.
Ibn Ishaq said, “Then three years after the start of his
Prophethood, Allah, the Almighty, commanded His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to
preach the message of Islam openly and to patiently bear the
harm inflicted on him by the pagans.” He added, “When the
Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, prayed, they
would go to the ravines and offer their prayers in secret,
hidden from their people. One day, while Sa‘d Ibn Abi
Waqqas, may Allah be pleased with him, was praying with
some others in the ravines of Makkah, some of the pagans
came upon them and rebuked and denounced what they were
doing, until eventually, they fought with them and Sa‘d, may
Allah be pleased with him, struck one of the pagans with the
jawbone of a camel and fractured his skull. This was the first
blood spilt (by the Muslims) in Islam."
The command of Allah (SWT) to His Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) regarding the conveyance of
the message privately and publicly and His command to him
to exercise patience, perseverance and to turn away from the
ignorant lying adversaries after establishing the proofs against
them and the sending of the greatest Messenger to them as
well as a reminder of what he and his Companions confronted
of enmity.
117

Allah (SWT) says: “And warn your tribe (O, Muhammad) of
near kindred. And be kind and humble to the believers who
follow you. Then if they disobey you, say: 'I am innocent of
what you do.' And put your trust in the Almighty, the Most
Merciful, Who sees you (O, Muhammad) when you stand up
(alone at night for Tahajjud prayers). And your movements
among those who fall in prostration (along with you to
Allah in the five compulsory congregational prayers), verily,
He only He, is the All-Hearer, the AllKnower.” (Ash-Shu‘ara'
26:214-220)
Allah, Most High, also says: “And verily, this (the Qur’an) is
indeed a Reminder for you (O, Muhammad) and your people
(Quraish people, or your followers), and you will be
questioned (about it).” (Az-Zukhruf 43:44)
Allah (SWT) says: “Verily, He Who has given you (O,
Muhammad) the Qur’an (i.e. ordered you to act on its laws
and to preach it to others) will surely bring you back to the
Ma‘ad (place of return, either to Makkah or to Paradise after
your death, etc.).” (Al-Qasas 28:85)
It means that the One Who ordained and enjoined you the
conveyance of the message will return you to Home of the
Hereafter, which is the Ma‘ad, and then He will ask you
regarding it (i.e. the conveyance of the message).
Allah, Most High, says: “Then surely, We shall question those
(people) to whom it (the Book) was sent and verily, We shall
question the Messengers.” (Al-A‘raf 7:6)
Verses and Ahadeeth regarding this issue are considerable.
We have explored the issue in our book of AtTafseer and
therein we extensively discussed it while explaining the
statement of Allah in Soorat AshShu‘ara’:
“And warn your tribe (O, Muhammad) of near kindred.”
(Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:214)
118

And we cited copious Ahadeeth on that. From the Ahadeeth
we cited is what is related by Imam Ahmad: From Ibn ‘Abbas
who said: “When the Verse: “And warn your tribe (O,
Muhammad) of near kindred” was revealed, the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, came to the Hill of
Safa, climbed it and then called out: “Ya Sabahahu!” The
people gathered up to him. Those who could not come sent
messengers to find out what has happened. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, then
addressed them thus:
“O Banu Abdul-Muttalib! O Banu Fihr! O Banu Ka‘b! What
would you say if I told you that there is a band of horsemen
in the valley wanting to attack you, would you believe me?”
They all replied in the affirmative so he said to them: “Well,
I am warning you of an imminent severe punishment!” Abu
Lahab, (an uncle of the Prophet), Allah’s curse be on him,
retorted: “May you be miserable for the rest of the day! Is this
why you called us?!”
Then Allah revealed: “Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab,
and perish he!” (Al-Masad 111:1)
A similar narration is reported from the Hadith of Al-A’mash.
Imam Ahmad also related from Abu Hurairah that: “When the
Verse: 'And warn your tribe (O Muhammad) of near kindred'
was revealed, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, called all of the tribe of Quraish and
addressed them thus:
“O, assembly of the Quraish! save yourself from the Fire! O,
assembly of Banu Ka‘b! save yourself from the Fire! O,
assembly of Banu Hashim! save yourself from the Fire! O,
assembly of Banu AbdulMuttalib! save yourself from the
Fire! O, Fatimah, daughter of Muhammad, save yourself from

119

the Fire! For by Allah, I will not avail you in any way before
Allah but you have ties of kinship which I wish to uphold.”
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said: “When the
Verse: 'And warn your tribe (O, Muhammad) of near kindred'
was revealed, Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him) rose and said: ‘O, Fatimah Bint
Muhammad! O, Safiyyah Bint Abdul-Muttalib! O, Banu
Abdul-Muttalib! I cannot avail you in the presence of Allah
(if you disobey Him). So, ask whatever you wish from my
property.”
The purpose was so that the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, could persist in calling to Allah night and
day, privately and publicly without being distracted or
deterred by obstacles; without being dissuaded or hindered by
any hindrance. He would approach the people at their private
and public assemblies; at their ceremonies and festivals and
at points of Hajj rites. He kept calling those whom he met,
both freeborn and slaves; weak and strong, rich and poor. In
his perception, all of the creatures were equal in that regard.
They transgressed against him and those who dared to follow
him from among the weak echelon of the society. Severe
torment came from the powerful aristocratic polytheists of
Quraish, both in the form of statements and actions. The most
severe of them (in opposition) was his uncle Abu Lahab
whose real name was Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Abdul-Muttalib and
his wife, Umm Jameel ‘Arwa Bint Harb Ibn Umayyah, Abu
Sufyan’s sister.
Conversely however, his uncle, Abu Talib, differed
considerably from Abu Lahab in the treatment of the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was the most
beloved to him. Naturally, he would be compassionate and
nice to him. He would stave off harm and protect him. He
opposed his people in that regard even though he was upon
120

their religion and their ways. Allah filled his heart with the
love of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
which was derived from natural feelings rather from Shari‘ah
obligation. His persistence on the religion of his people is
from the wisdom of Allah. If Abu Talib had accepted Islam
he would not have enjoyed such position of distinction and
high opinion. They would not have held him in awe and high
esteem. Rather, they would have transgressed against him and
extended their evil hands and tongues to harm him.
“And your Lord creates whatsoever He wills and chooses."
(Al-Qasas 28:68)
Allah has divided His creatures into different kinds and
species. These are two polytheist uncles – Abu Talib and Abu
Lahab, yet, on the Day of Resurrection, one will be in shoal
of Fire while the other will be in its lowest depth. Allah has
revealed a chapter thereof in His Book about Abu Lahab,
which is recited on mimbars (pulpits) and read in sermons and
speeches saying:
“He will be burned in a Fire of blazing flames! And his wife
too, who carries wood (thorns of Sadan which she used to
put on the way of the Prophet, or use to slander him).” (AlMasad 111:3, 4)
Imam Ahmad related from Rabee‘ah Ibn ‘Ibad of Banu AdDeel who was a polytheist but later accepted Islam. He said:
“During the period of Jahiliyyah, I saw Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in the market of
Dhul-Majaz saying: “O people! Say la ilaha ill-Allah (there is
no deity worthy of worship but Allah) so that you may be
successful” while the people were gathered before him.
Standing behind him was a clean-shaved man with squinted
eye and with pony-tail hair who kept trailing him everywhere
he went while retorting: “He is a childish liar.” I inquired from
121

the people about his identity and they identified him as his
uncle Abu Lahab.
As for Abu Talib, he was essentially affectionate and
sympathetic by his nature as shall be gleaned from his actions,
clemency and resoluteness in defending Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and his
Companions, may Allah be pleased with them.
‘Aqeel Ibn Abi Talib said: “The Quraish approached Abu
Talib and said to him: ‘Your nephew has harmed our
assemblies and places of worship, warn him to desist!’ Abu
Talib said: 'O 'Aqeel! Go and bring me Muhammad.' So I set
off to search for him and I found him at Kabs (or he said:
Hafsh). So I brought him under extreme heat of the midday.
When he arrived at their presence, Abu Talib said to him:
‘This group of your uncles has alleged that you are disturbing
them at their assemblies and places of worship, so desist from
disturbing them.’ Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) lifted his gaze to the sky and said: 'Do you
see this sun?' They replied in the affirmative, so he said: 'I am
not more able than you to abandon (this mission) even if upon
the threat of a fireband.' Abu Talib said: 'My nephew has
never lied before, so return!'
Ya’qoob Ibn Utbah Ibn Mugheerah Ibn Al-Akhnas narrated
that he was informed that when the Quraish told Abu Talib
their grievance, he sent for Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) and said to him: “My nephew,
your people have approached me with such-and-such
complaints, so please spare me and yourself (from their
trouble) do not place on me what neither me nor you is able
to bear. Desist from such of your statements which are
detestable to them.”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
thought that his uncle had changed his mind, withdrawn his
122

protection from him and was helpless to defend him. So he
said: “O Uncle! By Allah, if they put the sun in my right hand
and the moon in my left so that I might give up this matter
until Allah causes it to prevail or I die in its quest. I shall never
do so.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, then wept and then turned to leave. When he saw
the turn of event, Abu Talib called him: “My nephew!” When
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, came back, he said: “Go and continue in your affair and
say whatever you wish. By Allah, I shall never hand you over
in return for anything.”
Ibn Ishaq said: “In that regard, Abu Talib recited this poem:
(from a long rendition)
By Allah, they will never reach you with all their numbers
Until I am buried and sealed in the earth
Continue in your matter and no drawback shall reach you
A good news let that be for you and a comfort of your eyes
You invited me and I know you were only an adviser
You have spoken well and you have for a long time been
trustworthy
You have presented a religion which I have known to be
One of the
best
religions
ever
123

practiced
by mankind
But for
reproach
and my
fear of
blame
You would have found me manifestly tolerant to that
Imam Ahmad also related that Ibn ‘Abbas said: Abu Jahl said,
“If I see Muhammad praying at the Ka‘bah, I will trample on
his neck.” When the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, heard of that, he said, “If he does so, the angels will
snatch him away.”
Ibn ‘Abbas also reported that Abu Jahl once passed by the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, while he
was praying, so he said: ‘‘Have I not forbidden you from
praying, O, Muhammad? You well know that there is no man
who has a greater number of supporters than me." The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
reprimanded him. Jibraeel then came down with a revelation:
“Then, let him call upon his council (of helpers), We will call
the guards of Hell (to deal with him)!” (Soorah Al‘Alaq
96:17-18) By Allah, if he had called his supporters, he would
have been held by severe punishment from the angels.
Ibn ‘Abbas also narrated that Abu Jahl said: “If I see
Muhammad praying at the Ka‘bah, I will tread on his neck.”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said,
“If he does so, the angels will snatch him away.”
124

Ibn Jareer related from Abu Hurairah that Abu Jahl asked (the
people) whether they had seen Muhammad placed his face on
the ground (in prayer) in their presence. They all responded,
“Yes.” So he said: “By AlLat and Al-‘Uzza if I see him pray,
I will trample on his neck and I will daub his face with dust.”
He came to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, while he was engaged in prayer, with the intention of
trampling on his neck, (and the people say) that he came near
him but turned upon his heels and tried to repulse something
with his hands. It was said to him: ‘‘What is the matter with
you?’' He said: ‘‘There is between me and him a ditch of fire
and terror and wings.'’ Thereupon, Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “If he were to come
near me, the angels would have torn him to pieces.” Then
Allah, the Exalted and Glorious, revealed this Verse. (The
narrator) said: I do not know whether it is the Hadith
transmitted by Abu Hurairah or not: “Nay! Verily, man does
transgress all bounds (in disbelief and evil deed, etc.).
Because he considers himself self-sufficient.” (Soorah Al‘Alaq 96:6, 7) to the end of the Soorah.
Imam Ahmad also related that ‘Abdullah said: “I never saw
Allah’s Messenger curse the Quraish except one day. He was
engaged in prayer while a band of the ruffians from the
Quraish was sitting in a gathering. Nearby was an intestine of
a slaughtered camel. Some of them said: “Who would bring
this intestine and place it on his back (while in prostration)?”
‘Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu’ait said: “I will do it.” So he took the
intestine and dropped it on the back of Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. The Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, remained in prostration
until Fatimah came and removed them from his back.
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“O, Allah take revenge on this company of the Quraish. ‘O,
Allah! Take revenge on ‘Utba Ibn Rabee‘ah, Shaibah Ibn
Rabee‘ah, Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham, ‘Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu’ait, Al125

Waleed Ibn ‘Utbah, Ubayy Ibn Khalaf or Umayyah Ibn
Khalaf.” (The sub-narrator Shu‘bah, is not sure of the last
name.) ‘Abdullah added, “I saw all of them killed on the battle
field on the day of Badr and they were dragged and thrown
into the Qaleeb (a well) at Badr except Ubayy Ibn Khalaf or
Umayyah Ibn Khalaf for he was a fat man and he had been
dismembered.” AlBukhari and Muslim have also related it
from various chains.

The Story of Al-Irashi and the Quraish’s
Attempt at Harming the Prophet
Narrated Muhammad Ibn Ishaq that Abdul Malik Ibn Abi
Sufyan Ath-Thaqafi narrated to us that a man from Irash
arrived in Makkah with his camel. Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham
bought the camel from him and refused to pay its price. The
man went away until he came across an assembly of Quraish.
Meanwhile, the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him, was sitting at a section of the Mosque. The man called
out: “O, Quraish, is there any man who could aid me against
Abul-Hakam Ibn Hisham for I am a stranger and a wayfarer
and he has usurped my rights?”
The attendees of the assembly said to him: “Do you see that
man?” hoping to make jest of Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, since they knew the enmity
existing between him and Abu Jahl. “Go to him, he will aid
you against him.” They said. The man from Irash went toward
the Messenger of Allah and narrated his ordeal to him. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, rose in his
aid. When they saw the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him, stood, they sent one of them to follow him. They
said: “Follow him so that we may see what he intends to do.”
The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, then
left for Abu Jahl’s residence. He knocked at his door. “Who
is there?” Abu Jahl asked. “This is Muhammad, come out!”
126

the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said.
Abu Jahl came out without any bloodshot face (of anger). The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“Give this man his right.” Astonishingly, Abu Jahl said,
“Right away while you are still present I will give him what
belongs to him.” So he went in and restored the man’s right.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, went back and said to the Irashi, “here is your right.” The
Irashi went away and came upon the initial gathering of men
and said: “May Allah reward him, I have received my right.”
Soon afterward, the man whom they had sent with him (and
had witnessed the incident) arrived. "Woe betide you, what
did you witness?” “One of the most astonishing things,” the
man began. “He did nothing other than knock at his door and
he came out and he said to him, ‘Give this man his right’ and
he said, ‘Right away while you are still present, I will give
him what belongs to him.’ He then went in and brought to him
his right.”
Shortly thereafter, Abu Jahl himself came to the gathering and
they asked him: “Woe be to you! Whatever happened to you?!
We never saw anything like what you did (today).” Abu Jahl
replied, “Woe betide you all! There was nothing other than
that he knocked at my door and when I heard his voice I was
filled with fright. Then I came out to see that above his head
was a ferocious looking bull camel with fiery shoulders and
canines the type of which I have never seen before. By Allah,
if I had refused, it would have devoured me up.”
Al-Bukhari related: ‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair reported: "I asked
Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas, 'Inform me of the worst thing which
the pagans did to the Prophet.' He said, 'While the Prophet was
praying in the Hijr of the Ka‘bah ‘Uqba Ibn Abi Mu’ait came
and put his garment around the Prophet’s neck and throttled
127

him violently. Abu Bakr came and held him by his shoulder
and pushed him away from the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, and said, “Would you kill a man
because he says: My Lord is Allah, and he has come to you
with clear signs (proofs) from your Lord?” (Soorah Al-Ghafir
40:28)
Imam Ahmad also related from Anas who narrated that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “I was harmed for the sake of Allah in a manner never
experienced by any man. And I was intimidated in an
unprecedented manner. I witnessed thirty days and nights
without any food except what can be contained in Bilal’s
armpit (due to its meagerness).”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said that Abu Talib, the uncle of the
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
was compassionate to him. He stood in his defense and staved
off any harm from him. Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, proceeded upon the command
of Allah elucidating His religion undaunted. When the
Quraish saw that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, will not cease in the least from what they
found loathsome in his division of their ranks and castigation
of their gods; they also realized that his uncle, Abu Talib had
become sympathetic to and protective of him and has
tenaciously refused them all access to (harm) him, so a group
of the noblemen of Quraish approached Abu Talib. (They
were), ‘Utbah and Shaibah, the two sons of Rabee‘ah Ibn Abd
Shams Ibn Abd Manaf Ibn Qusayy, Abu Sufyan Sakhra Ibn
Harb Ibn Umayyah Ibn Abd Shams, Abul-Bakhtari whose
actual name was Al-‘Aas Ibn Hisham Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Asad
Ibn Abdul-Uzza Ibn Qusayy, Al-Aswad Ibn Al-Muttalib Ibn
Asad Ibn Abdul- Uzza, Abu Jahl whose real name was Amr
Ibn Hisham Ibn Al-Mugheerah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn
Makhzoom, Al-Waleed Ibn Al-Mugheerah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar Ibn Makhzoom Ibn Yaqzah Ibn Murrah Ibn Ka‘b Ibn
128

Luwayy, Nubaih and Munabbih, the two sons of Al-Hajjaj Ibn
Amir Ibn Hudhaifah Ibn Su’aid Ibn Sahm Ibn Amr Ibn Husais
Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Luwayy, ‘Al-Aas Ibn Wa’il Ibn Su’aid Ibn
Sahm.
Ibn Ishaq narrated further: “All or many of them went to Abu
Talib and said: ‘O Aba Talib, your nephew has blasphemed
our gods and criticized our religion. He has belittled our ideals
and accused our ancestors of having gone astray. Either you
restrain him from us or let us deal with him. You are one of
us, for you disagree with his views.’ Abu Talib spoke nicely
to them and rejected their proposal in a gentle manner. So they
went away.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
continued with his da‘wah elucidating the religion of Allah
and inviting people to it. Soon, relations between him and the
Quraish reached low ebb such that he became the theme of
their talks and plots. Once again they went to Abu Talib and
said: “O Abu Talib, we respect you because of your age and
nobility among us. We had requested you to restrain your
nephew but you declined. By Allah, we shall not be tolerant
of this abuse of our ancestors, desecration of our customs and
blasphemy of our gods. So either you restrain him from us or
we shall fight you both over the matter until one side perishes
in that course.” Thereafter, they left. Abu Talib became
extremely worried by the thoughts of separation and enmity
from his people yet he did not also feel comfortable at handing
over Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, to them.
Ibn Ishaq continued: Ya‘qoob Ibn Al-Mugheerah Ibn AlAkhnas narrated to me that he was informed that when the
Quraish said these words to Abu Talib, he sent a message to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
saying: “O my nephew! Your people have approached me
saying suchand-such (narrating what they said to him). Look
129

after yourself and me and do not burden me with what I am
unable to bear.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, thought that his uncle had changed his
mind, withdrawn his protection from him and was helpless to
defend him. So he said: “O uncle, by Allah, if they put the sun
in my right hand and the moon in my left so that I might give
up this matter until Allah causes it to prevail or I die in the
process, I shall not give it up.”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
wept and soon got up. However, when he turned to leave his
uncle called him and said: “Go my nephew and say whatever
you wish, I shall never hand you over for anything.”

Heightened Persecution of Weak Muslims
Ibn Ishaq said: Then the Quraish became poised to persecute
those belonging to their own clans from the Companions of
Allah’s Messenger. They pounced upon them, torturing and
extremely trying them with a view to making them recant
their religion. Allah, however, prevented them from doing any
harm to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, with the presence of his uncle, Abu Talib. Abu
Talib had stood his ground when he saw what the Quraish had
done regarding Banu Hashim and Banu Abdul-Muttalib. So
he invited them (Banu Hashim and Banu Abdul-Muttalib) to
join him in defending Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him. All of them responded positively to his
call with the exception of Abu Lahab, the enemy of Allah
(SWT).
From the objections of the polytheists against the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and their
harshness to him is their questioning and requests for different
signs and extraordinary occurrences emanating from their
obstinacy rather than genuine quest for guidance and right
consciousness. Consequently, many of their requests and
130

desires were not acceded to owing to the knowledge of Allah
that if they had witnessed what they wanted still they would
have persisted in their blind inordinateness. And that they
would have continued to wallow in their vain gloriousness
and waver in their misguidance.
Allah (SWT) says: “And they swear their strongest oaths by
Allah, that if there came to them a sign, they would surely
believe therein. Say: 'Signs are but with Allah and what will
make you (Muslims) perceive that (even) if it (the sign) came,
they will not believe?' And We shall turn their hearts and their
eyes away (from guidance), as they refused to believe therein
for the first time, and We shall leave them in their trespass to
wander blindly. And even if We had sent down unto them
angels, and the dead had spoken unto them, and We had
gathered together all things before their very eyes, they would
not have believed, unless Allah willed, but most of them
behave ignorantly.” (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:109-111)
Allah, Most High, also says: “Truly! Those, against whom the
Word (Wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not
believe. Even if every sign should come to them, ‑ until they
see the painful torment.” (Soorah Yoonus 10:96,97)
Allah, the Almighty, says: “And nothing stops Us from
sending the Ayat (proofs, evidences and Signs) but that the
people of old denied them. And We sent the she-camel to
Thamud as a clear sign, but they did her wrong. And We sent
not the signs except to warn, and to make them afraid (of
destruction).” (Soorah Al-Isra 17:59)
Allah (SWT) says: “And they say: 'We shall not believe in
you (O, Muhammad), until you cause a spring to gush forth
from the earth for us; Or you have a garden of date-palms and
grapes, and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst
abundantly; Or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces,
as you have pretended, or you bring Allah and the angels
131

before (us) face to face; Or you have a house of adorable
materials (like silver and pure gold, etc.), or you ascend up
into the sky, and even then we will put no faith in your
ascension until you bring down for us a Book that we would
read.' Say (O, Muhammad): 'Glorified (and Exalted) be my
Lord (Allah) above all that evil they (polytheists) associate
with Him! Am I anything but a man, sent as a Messenger'?”
(Soorah Al-Isra 17:90-93)
Imam Ahmad related from Ibn ‘Abbas who narrated that the
people of Makkah asked the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, to turn Mount Safa into gold
and to obliterate a mountain so that they might cultivate in its
place. It was said to him: "if you wish, be patient with them
and if you wish you bring them what they request but if they
disbelieve thereafter, they will be destroyed as nations before
them were destroyed." Allah’s Messenger responded:
“Rather, I will be patient with them.”
Thus, Allah, Most High, revealed: “And nothing stops Us
from sending the Ayat but that the people of old denied them.
And We sent the she-camel to Thamud as a clear sign, but
they did her wrong. And We sent not the signs except to warn,
and to make them afraid (of destruction).” (Soorah Al-Isra
17:59)
Imam Ahmad also related from Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “The
Quraish once said to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him: ‘pray to your Lord, on our behalf, to turn Mount
Safa into gold so that we may believe in you.' Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked,
'Will you really do that?!'. 'Yes, ‘ they responded. The Prophet
supplicated and Jibraeel came to him and said: 'Your Lord is
sending His greetings and He is saying to you: If you wish,
Mount Safa will be turned into gold for them overnight but
whoever amongst them disbelieves thereafter I will punish
him with a punishment the severity of which I have not meted
132

out to anyone else before. Or if you wish I open for them the
door of mercy and repentance.’ Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, responded, ‘rather, I prefer
mercy and repentance,.”
Imam Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi also related from Abu
Umamah from the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, that he said: “My Lord offered to turn the valley of
Makkah into gold for me and I declined saying: ‘No! My
Lord, rather, let me be satisfied one day and go hungry the
other (or something similar to that) such that when I go
hungry, I supplicate (to You) and remember You and when I
am filled, I thank You and demonstrate gratitude to You'.”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq related from Ibn Abbas that: “The
Quraish sent An-Nadr Ibn Al-Harith and 'Uqbah Ibn Abu
Mu’ait to the high priests of the Jews in Madinah charging
them both with the following instruction: 'Ask them about
Muhammad, describe to them his attributes and narrate to
them some of what he says, for they are the people who first
received revelation and they also possess knowledge that is
not found with us regarding the prophets.'
Both of them set out until they arrived at Madinah and they
asked the high priests of the Jews about Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, describing to them
his affair and some of what he says. They said: “You are the
custodian of the Tawrah, we have come to you to inform us
regarding one of us (who claims propethood).” The Jewish
priests responded to their request saying: “Ask him about
issues we will recommend shortly, if he answers them
correctly, then he is truly a Prophet that has been sent,
otherwise he is a man deserving to be killed. Ask him
regarding the affairs of the youths of the earlier generation for
there is a strange story about them.

133

Ask him about the story of the man who went round the East
and the West of the Earth, and finally, ask him about the soul.
If he informs you of all their answers correctly then he is a
Prophet, so follow him. If he is unable to answer you correctly
then he is a man deserving to be killed. So you may act in a
manner you deem fit.
So, Nadr and 'Uqbah returned to Makkah and met with the
Quraish. They both said: “O Quraish, we have come to you
with a criterion between you and Muhammad. The Jewish
high priests have instructed us to ask him a couple of
questions.” They mentioned the questions and gleefully they
sent for Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him. When he arrived, they presented the questions of
the Jewish priests to him. Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him, said: “I shall inform you of the
answers to the questions tomorrow” forgetting to say
insha’Allah (if Allah wishes).
They departed and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, waited for fifteen nights without receiving
revelation regarding the questions and Jibraeel did not come
until the people of Makkah began to taunt him. They said:
“Muhammad promised to respond to our queries tomorrow
and we have witnessed the fifteenth night without him telling
us anything about what we asked him.” While it lasted,
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
also was extremely grieved over the suspense and extremely
disturbed by what the people of Makkah began to say.
Thereafter, Jibraeel, peace be on him, came to him bearing
from Allah, the revelation of Soorah Al-Kahf containing a
subtle reproach, a dispelling of his worry and answers to the
questions put to him regarding the affairs of the youths and
the man who traversed (between the East and West). Allah,
Most High, also says regarding the question of the nature of
human soul:
134

“And they ask you (O, Muhammad) concerning the Rooh (the
Spirit); Say: 'The Rooh: it is one of the things, the knowledge
of which is only with my Lord. And of knowledge, you
(mankind) have been given only a little.” (Al-Isra 17: 85) We
have spoken about all of that at length in the Tafseer. Whoever
wishes may refer to it.
Allah also revealed: “Do you think that the people of the Cave
and the Inscription (the news or the names of the people of the
Cave) were a wonder among Our Signs?” (Al-Kahf 18:9)
Then Allah began to elaborate on their story and then He
interrupted it with a lesson for the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, on the saying of insha’Allah
in His words: “And never say of anything, 'I shall do suchand-such thing tomorrow. Except (with the saying), If Allah
will!' And remember your Lord when you forget and say: It
may be that my Lord guides me unto a nearer way of truth
than this'.” (Al-Kahf 18:
23, 24)
Then Allah (SWT) mentions the story of Moosa with an
addendum of the story of Al-Khidr and then that of DhulQarnain. Allah says: “And they ask you about Dhul-Qarnain.
Say: 'I shall recite to you something of his story'.” (Al-Kahf
18: 83) Then He elaborates on his issue and narrates his story.
Allah (SWT) says in the Soorah Subhan (Al-Isra): “And they
ask you (O Muhammad) concerning the Rooh (the Spirit);
Say: 'The Rooh: it is one of the things, the knowledge of
which is only with my Lord'.” (Al-Isra 17: 85) that is, it is one
of the most enigmatic creatures of Allah and one of His Signs.
Allah merely said to it: "Be" and it was. Man does not have
total comprehension of all that Allah has created and inquest
into its reality (i.e. the soul) will be extremely difficult
juxtaposed against the Power and Wisdom of Allah. Thus,
Allah, Most High, says: “And of knowledge, you (mankind)
have been given only a little.” (Al-Isra’ 17: 85)
135

It is recorded in the Saheehain that the Jews asked these
questions from the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, of Allah at Madinah and he recited this
Verse to them. It is either that the Verse was revealed twice
or that the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
merely recalled it as a fitting answer to their questions though
it had been previously revealed.
The opinion that: It was revealed at Madinah and that the
Verse of istithna’ (the saying of insha’Allah) belongs to the
Soorah of Subhan is, however, debatable. And Allah (SWT)
knows best.
Ibn Ishaq said: Then they turned in enmity to those who
accepted Islam and followed the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, from among his
Companions. Each clan pounced on the Muslims belonging
to their clan. They would incarcerate and torture them with
beatings, hunger and thirst as well as with the burning sand of
the hot Makkan desert. They tortured the weak ones amongst
them so that that they may recant their faith. There were some
who were broken by the severity of the torture and there were
others who were hardened until eventually, Allah (SWT)
saved them.
Bilal was a freed slave of Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased
with him. Some members of Banu Jumah had some slaves and
Bilal Ibn Rabah was one of them. His mother’s name was
Hamamah. Bilal was a sincere believer with a pure soul.
Umayyah Ibn Khalaf used to bring him out in the excruciating
heat and he would order that a heavy stone be placed on his
chest and he would say: “we will not cease doing this until
you either die or disbelieve in Muhammad and worship AlLat and Al-Uzza.” Inspite of the nervewrecking pain Bilal
would repeat: “Ahad! Ahad!!” (One, One).

136

Ibn Ishaq then mentioned the passing by of Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him, while Bilal, may Allah be pleased
with him, was being tortured and he offered to buy him from
Umayyah with another black slave of his. Then Abu Bakr,
may Allah be pleased with him, freed Bilal and gave him
succor from the punishment. Ibn Ishaq also mentioned others
whom he purchased among male and female slaves who had
accepted Islam. Among them were Bilal, Amir Ibn Fuhairah,
Umm Ubais and Zinneerah, the one who lost her sight but
Allah restored it for her. May Allah be pleased with them all.
The list also includes Nahdiyyah and her daughter who were
purchased from the Banu Abdud-Dar. Her mistress sent them
to grind flour for her. He once overheard her saying: “By
Allah, I will never free you both.” Then Abu Bakr, may Allah
be pleased with him, said “withdraw your oath, O Umm
Fulan.” She said: “Withdraw it? You spoiled them so you free
them.” “How much is their freedom worth?” Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him, asked and she answered: “suchand-such amount of money.” Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased
with him, said: “I have bought and freed them both. Return
her flour to her.” They both said: “Shouldn’t we finish with
the grinding first and then return it to her?” “That is your
choice.” Abu Bakr replied. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased
with him, also bought a slave girl of Banu Mu’ammal from
Banu Adiyy' whom ‘Umar used to beat for her acceptance of
Islam.
Ibn Ishaq also related: Abu Quhafah once said to his son, Abu
Bakr: ‘‘I see that you prefer to buy the freedom of weak slaves
but wouldn’t it be better if you bought strong men instead,
who would assist and defend you?” Abu Bakr responded:
“My father, this is what I prefer.” He related that the following
Verses were revealed about him and what his father told him:
“As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to
Allah and fears Him, And believes in Al-Husna, We will
137

make smooth for him the path of ease (goodness).” (Soorah
Al-Lail 92: 5-7) till the end of the chapter.
Ibn Ishaq said: Banu Makhzoom used to bring ‘Ammar Ibn
Yasir along with his father and mother in the scorching heat
and theirs was an entire household of Islam. They would be
tortured with the searing sand of Makkan desert. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, would
pass by and he would say to them: “Be patient, O family of
Yasir, your rendezvous is in Paradise.”
Imam Ahmad said that Wakee’ informed me from Sufyan
from Mansoor from Mujahid who said: “The first martyr ever
recorded in Islam was the martyrdom of Umm ‘Ammar,
Sumayyah, may Allah be pleased with her. Abu Jahl stabbed
her with a spear in her private parts.” This report is mursal.
Ibn Ishaq said that Hakeem Ibn Jubair related to me from
Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair who said: “I once asked Ibn ‘Abbas: ‘Were
the polytheists so much severe in their torture of the
Companions of Allah’s Messenger to such an extent that they
would be excused if they recanted from their faith?' He
responded: 'Yes, by Allah! One of them would be tortured
with deprivation of food and water to an extent that he would
not be able to sit up due to the severity of the torment meted
to him until he acceded to their demand. They would say to
him: Do you accept Al-Lat and Al-Uzza instead of Allah?' and
he would reply in affirmation as a ransom from their severe
torture'.”
It is regarding something like this that Allah revealed:
“Whoever disbelieved in Allah after his belief, except him
who is forced thereto and whose heart is at rest with Faith but
such as open their breasts to disbelief, on them is wrath from
Allah, and theirs will be a great torment.” (Soorah An-Nahl
16:106)
138

This sort of people is excused because of what they have
experienced of indignity and extreme suffering.
Allah (SWT) informed us of that with His Wisdom and
Power.
Imam Ahmad also related that Khabbab Ibn Al-Aratt said:
“During the pre-Islamic period, I was a blacksmith and Al‘Aas Ibn Wa’il owed me a debt.” So Khabbab went to him to
demand the debt. He said, “I will not give you (your due) till
you disbelieve in Muhammad.” Khabbab said, “By Allah, I
shall not disbelieve in Muhammad till Allah makes you die
and then resurrects you.” Al-‘Aas said, “So leave me till I die
and then be resurrected, for I will be given wealth and children
whereupon I will pay you your debt.” Then Allah revealed
this Verse: “Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our Ayat
(this Qur’an and Muhammad) and (yet) says: 'I shall certainly
be given wealth and children [if I will be alive (again)], ‘
(Soorah Maryam 19:77) till the statement of Allah: “And We
shall inherit from him (at his death) all that he talks of (i.e.
wealth and children which We have bestowed upon him in
this world), and he shall come to Us alone.” (Soorah Maryam
19:80)
It is also related in the Saheehain and other than both through
‘A’mash. In the wordings of Al-Bukhari, Al-Khabbab said: “I
was a blacksmith in Makkah. I did a job for Al-‘Aas Ibn Wa’il
and then came for the payment” and then he mentioned the
remainder of the Hadith.
Imam Al-Bukhari also related that Al-Khabbab said: “I came
to complain to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, (about the severity of our suffering at the
hands of the polytheists) while he was leaning against his
sheet cloak in the shade of the Ka‘bah. I said, “O Messenger
of Allah, shouldn’t you supplicate to Allah on our behalf?"
He sat down while his face turned red and he said, “Among
those who were before you, a (believer) used to be seized and
139

his flesh might be combed with iron combs and removed from
his bones and that did not cause him to revert from his
religion. Then a saw used to be brought and put on his head
which would be split into two halves. Still that did not cause
him to recant his religion. Allah will complete this matter
(Islam) till a rider (traveler) goes from San‘a (the capital of
Yemen) to Hadramawt fearing nobody except Allah.” Bayan
added: “..and the wolf lest it should trouble his sheep.”

The polytheists’ disputation of the
Messenger of Allah and his establishing an
irrefutable proof on them and their
acknowledgement of the Truth
Ishaq Ibn Rahuyah reported from Ibn ‘Abbas that Al-Waleed
Ibn Al-Mugheerah once came to Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, who recited the Qur’an
to him. What he heard had a visible effect on him, and he went
away with softened heart. When the news of this incident got
to Abu Jahl, he came to him and said:
“O my uncle! Your people wish to gather wealth for you."
"why?" Al-Waleed asked. Abu Jahl said: "Because you
approached Muhammad so as to benefit from what comes
from him." Al-Waleed said: "The entire Quraish well know
that I am one of the wealthiest of them.” Then Abu Jahl said:
“Then say something (against Muhammad) so that the people
will know that you are against him and hate (his message).”
Al-Waleed replied, "and what can I say? For I swear by Allah,
there is none amongst you who knows poetry as well as I do,
nor can anyone compete with me in composition or rhetoric not even in the poetry of Jinns! And yet, I swear by Allah,
Muhammad’s speech (meaning the Qur’an) does not bear any
similarity to anything I know, and I swear by Allah, the
speech that he says is very sweet, and is adorned with beauty
and charm. Its first part is fruitful and its last part is abundant
140

(meaning that it is full of deep meanings), and it conquers (all
other speech), and remains unconquered! It shatters and
destroys all that has come before it (of poetry, because of its
eloquence)!”
Abu Jahl insisted, "Your people will not be satisfied until you
speak against him!" Al-Waleed therefore requested Abu Jahl,
"Leave me so that I may think about it." Then he said: "This
(the Qur’an) is a type of magic that has an effect on its
listeners."
In response to this, Allah revealed: “Leave Me Alone (to deal)
with whom I created Alone (without any means, i.e. AlWaleed Ibn Al-Mugheerah Al-Makhzumi)! And then granted
him resources in abundance. And children to be by his side!”
(Soorah Al-Muddaththir 74:11-13) This is how Al-Baihaqi
related it from Al-Hakim from ‘Abdullah Ibn Muhammad AsSana’ni in Makkah from Ishaq.
Hammad Ibn Zaid has also reported from Ayyub from
‘Ikrimah in a mursal form which includes that he recited to
him the following Verse: “Verily, Allah enjoins Al-Adl (i.e.
justice and worshipping none but Allah Alone - Islamic
Monotheism) and Al-Ihsan [i.e. to be patient in performing
your duties to Allah, totally for Allah’s sake and in
accordance with the Sunnah (legal ways) of the Prophet in a
perfect manner], and giving (help) to kith and kin (i.e. all that
Allah has ordered you to give them, e.g., wealth, visiting,
looking after them, or any other kind of help, etc.): and forbids
Al-Fahsha’ (i.e all evil deeds, e.g. illegal sexual acts,
disobedience of parents, polytheism, to tell lies, to give false
witness, to kill a life without right, etc.), and Al-Munkar (i.e
all that is prohibited by Islamic law: polytheism of every kind,
disbelief and every kind of evil deeds, etc.), and Al-Baghy'
(i.e. all kinds of oppression), He admonishes you, that you
may take heed.” (Soorah An-Nahl 16: 90)
141

I say: Regarding that, Allah says, by way of informing (us) of
their ignorance and paucity of their intellect. “Nay, they say:
'These (revelations of the Qur’an which are inspired to
Muhammad) are mixed up false dreams! Nay, he has invented
it! Nay, he is a poet! Let him then bring us an Ayah (sign as a
proof) like the ones (Prophets) that were sent before (with
signs)'!” (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:5)
Consider what they say. Everything they say is false for
whatever the one who is far removed from the truth says will
always be faulty. Allah, Most High, says: “See what examples
they have put forward for you. So they have gone astray, and
never can they find a way.” (Soorah Al-Isra 17:48)
Imam Ahmad related from ‘Abd Ibn Humayd in his Musnad:
From Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah who said: "The Quraish assembled
one day and said ‘check who is the most knowledgeable of
you in magic, soothsaying and poetry so that he may approach
this man who has divided our ranks, shattered our affairs and
criticized our religion so tha he may speak with and respond
to him.' They all said: 'we know no one better than ‘Utbah Ibn
Rabee‘ah.' So they unanimously said: 'We appoint you, O
Abul-Waleed.'
‘Utbah went to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, and said: 'O Muhammad! Who is better
between you and ‘Abdullah (your father)? Who is better
between you and Abdul-Muttalib (your grandfather)?' Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
remained silent. ‘Utbah continued: 'If you think that these
individuals are better than you are, then be aware that they
worshipped the god that you reject. If you think that you are
better than them, then speak so that we may hear your speech.
By Allah, we have seen no other son who has brought so great
a calamity to his people as you have done. You have created
strife among us, shattered our affairs, rejected our religion and
caused us disgrace among the Arabs in such a way that it has
142

become widespread among them that there is a magician
among the Quraish and that a soothsayer exists among the
Quraish. If you have a need for wealth, we will join together
to give you greater riches than any man of Quraish. If you are
impelled by a desire for women, choose any woman of your
liking and we shall marry ten of them to you.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: 'Have you said all you have to say?' and ‘Utbah said
‘yes.’ Then Allah’s Messenger began: 'In the Name of Allah,
the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. Ha-Mim. [These
letters are one of the miracles of the Qur’an, and none but
Allah (Alone) knows their meanings]; a revelation from
Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful; a Book
whereof the Verses are explained in detail; a Qur’an in Arabic
for people who know' up to the statement of Allah: 'But if they
turn away, then say (O Muhammad): I have warned you of a
Sa’iqah (a destructive awful cry, torment, hit, a thunderbolt)
like the Sa’iqah which overtook ‘Ad and Thamud (people).'
(Soorah AlFussilat 41:1-13)
'Do you have other than this?' Utbah asked and the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: ‘No.’ Then
he returned to the Quraish and they asked him: 'What
transpired?' and he said: 'I have never heard words similar to
those ones he recited.' Then they enquired: 'Did he respond to
you?' He said ‘Yes, ‘ and then said ‘No. By Him Who built
the Ka‘bah, I did not understand anything from what he said
except that I warn you of a thunderbolt similar to that of the
Ad and Thamud.' Indignantly, they said, 'Woe betide you,
someone spoke to you in Arabic and you did not understand
anything from what he said?' and he responded: 'By Allah, I
did not understand anything other than the mentioning of
thunderbolt'."
Al-Baihaqi related that Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah said: “The
first day I knew Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
143

Allah be upon him, was when I was walking along with Abu
Jahl in an alleyway of Makkah and we met Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and he
said to Abu Jahl, 'O Abul-Hakam, come on to Allah and His
Messenger, I am inviting you to Allah.' Abu Jahl said, 'O
Muhammad, won’t you desist from slandering our gods? Do
you desire anything other than that we witness that you
delivered (the message) and we have witnessed to that? By
Allah, if I knew that what you are saying is true I would have
followed you.' Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, went away and Abu Jahl turned to me
and said:
'By Allah, I know that what he says is the truth but something
is hindering me. Banu Qusayy would boast: 'among us is AlHijabah (enrobing the Ka‘bah)' and we would concur; then
they would say ‘among us is As-Siqayah’ (providing water
for pilgrims) and still we would concur; then they would say,
‘among us is An-Nadwah (the meeting place of the Quraish)
and we would say yes; they would say, 'among us is AlLiwa’
(the flag of the Arabs) and we would say yes. And then they
score and we also score until when I am about to take the rein
and they would say again, among us is a Prophet. By Allah, I
shall not accede to that.”
Imam Ahmad related that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “The following
Verses were revealed while the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, was still in Makkah:
“And offer your salat (prayer) neither aloud nor in a low
voice.” He said, “Whenever Allah’s Messenger led his
Companions in salat, he would raise his voice in reciting the
Qur’an, so when the polytheists heard it they would abuse the
Qur’an and abuse Who revealed it and abuse who brought it.”
Ibn ‘Abbas said further, “then Allah says to His Prophet
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him): “And offer your
salat (prayer) neither aloud,” (Soorah Al-Isra 17:110) That is,
with your recitation of the Qur’an and the polytheists would
144

hear and therefore abuse the Qur’an. “… nor in a low voice.”
(Soorah Al-Isra 17:110) i.e. do not make too low for your
Companions to hear you recite the Qur’an so that they might
learn from you, “but follow a way between.” (Soorah Al-Isra
17:110)

Hijrah of those who migrated among the
Companions of Allah’s Messenger from
Makkah to Abyssinia
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq related that Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, saw the tribulation that
has afflicted his Companions, may Allah be pleased with
them, and his own relative wellbeing engendered from Allah
(SWT) and occasioned by his uncle, Abu Talib, against the
backdrop of his inability to avert from them their persecution.
Thus, he said to them, “Shouldn’t you migrate to Abyssinia?
There is a king there under whose authority no one is
tyrannized. It is a land of truth. Remain there until Allah
provides you a relief from your situation."
Thus, a number of Muslims from the Companions of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
migrated to Abyssinia for fear of persecution and in flight
toward Allah (SWT) with their religion. That incident marked
the first migration in Islam. The first to emigrate among the
Muslims was ‘Uthman Ibn Affan and his wife, Ruqayyah,
daughter of Allah’s Messenger.
Ibn Ishaq also enumerated the other emigrants: “…and Abu
Hudhaifah Ibn ‘Utbah, Az-Zubair Ibn Al‘Awwam, Mus‘ab
Ibn ‘Umair, ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, Abu Salamah Ibn
‘Abdul-Asad and his wife Umm Salamah Bint Abu Umayyah
Ibn Al-Mugheerah (and she bore Zainab for him there).
Others were ‘Uthman Ibn Maz’oon, ‘Amir Ibn Rabee‘ah an
ally of the family of Khattab from the clan of Banu ‘Anz Ibn
Wa’il and his wife Layla Bint Abi Hathma, Abu Sabrah Ibn
145

Abi Ruhm Al-Amiri and his wife, Umm Kulthoom Bint
Suhail Ibn ‘Amr. It is said that it was Hatib Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Abd
Shams Ibn ‘Abd Wudd Ibn Nasr Ibn Malik Ibn Hisl Ibn Amir
who first arrived in Abyssinia along with Suhail Ibn Baida.
These ten people were the first to migrate among the Muslims
to Abyssinia based on the information that reached me.
Ibn Hisham said: the one who led the emigrant was ‘Uthman
Ibn Maz’oon as mentioned by some people of knowledge.
Ibn Ishaq related: Thereafter, Ja‘afar Ibn Abu Talib and his
wife, Asma’ Bint ‘Umais also emigrated and she gave birth to
‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘afar there. Then other Muslims also began
to follow one after the other until they became a sizable
congregation in Abyssinia.
Ibn Ishaq also said: The aggregate of those who migrated and
stayed in Abyssinia from among the Muslims (aside from the
children who migrated with their parents and those given birth
to there) was eighty-three men if ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir is counted
among them and that is doubtful.
Imam Ahmad related that Ibn Mas‘ood said: Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent us
to Najashi, we numbered about eighty men among who were
‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood, Ja‘afar, ‘Abdullah Ibn Urfutah,
‘Uthman Ibn Maz’oon and Abu Moosa.
We went to Najashi and the Quraish sent ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas
and ‘Umarah Ibn Al-Waleed with great presents to ferret our
extradition from Abyssinia. When they both arrived at the
court of Najashi, they prostrated before him and then they
inundate him left and right with other courtesies. Thereafter,
they began to say: “A group of our cousins have arrived in
your domain and they have reneged from us and our religion.”
“Where are they?” Najashi asked. “They are right here in your
land.” The Quraish emissary replied. “Send for them,”
146

Najashi ordered. When the Muslims gathered at the court of
the king, Ja‘afar offered to speak on their behalf. They greeted
the king without prostrating before him. “Why didn’t you
prostrate before the king?” they asked and Ja’far replied: “We
do not prostrate before anyone other than Allah (SWT) and
He has ordered us to offer prayer, pay the compulsory
charity.” ‘Amr interjected, "they also differ with you
regarding ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam!” “What is your opinion
of ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam?” the king asked. Ja‘afar said:
“Regarding him, we only say what Allah has revealed to our
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. He said:
he (‘Eesa) is the servant of Allah and His Messenger; His
Spirit and His Word which He cast into Maryam, the Virgin.”
Najashi picked up a small stick from the floor and said: “O
people of Abyssinia, priests and rabbis, by Allah, ‘Eesa, the
son of Maryam, was no less than what you have said by the
width of this stick. Welcome to you and what you have come
with. I bear witness that he is truly a Messenger of Allah and
that he is the one the description of whom we found in the
Injeel. He is the Messenger the tiding of whom Jesus, the son
of Maryam, had given previously. Reside wherever you wish,
if not for the burden of kingship which I am saddled with, I
would have come to him so that I become the one to carry his
shoes for him.” Then he commanded that the gifts the Quraish
emissaries brought to bribe him be returned. This chain of
narrations is good. Then Ibn Mas‘ood accelerated to the time
of the Battle of Badr.
This is how Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi also related it in Ad-Dala’il
through Abu ‘Ali Al-Hasan Ibn Sallam AsSawwaq from
‘Ubaidullaah Ibn Moosa and he mentioned with his own chain
of narrations that: “…then he ordered that food and clothing
be provided to us.”

147

He said: this chain of narrations is Saheeh and it is apparent
from the narration that Abu Moosa was in Makkah and that
he migrated along with Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib to Abyssinia.
It is authentically related from Buraid Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi
Burdah from his grandfather, Abu Burdah from Abu Moosa
that: We received the news of the departure of the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, (to Madinah) while
we were in Yemen. So we went on board a ship but our ship
took us away to Najashi in Abyssinia. There we met Ja‘afar
and stayed with him till we came (to Madinah) by the time the
Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, had
conquered Khaibar. The Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said, “O you people of the ship! You will
have (the reward of) two migrations.”
The news of the migration of the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, (from Makkah to Madinah) reached
them while they were in Yemen. So they set out as emigrants
toward him. They were over fifty men. They got on board a
boat and the boat took them to Najashi in Abyssinia. There
they met Ja‘far and stayed with him. Then they came (to
Madinah) and met the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, at the time of the conquest of Khaibar. He also
said: Abu Moosa witnessed what transpired between Ja‘afar
and Najashi and thus he narrated about. He also said: perhaps
the narrator was confused when he said: "Allah’s Messenger
ordered us to proceed." And Allah knows best.
Al-Bukhari also related a similar narration in the chapter of
the "Emigration to Abyssinia" from Abu Moosa who said:
“We received the news of the departure of the Prophet, peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him, (to Madinah) while we
were in Yemen. So we went on board a ship but our ship took
us away to Najashi in Ethiopia. There we met Ja‘afar Ibn Abi
Talib and stayed with him till we came (to Madinah) by the
time when the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
148

him, had conquered Khaibar. The Prophet said, “O you people
of the ship! You will have (the reward of) two migrations.”
As for the incident of Ja‘afar’s encounter with Najashi, AlHafiz Ibn ‘Asakir related from ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘afar from his
father who said: “The Quraish sent ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas and
Umarah Ibn Al-Waleed with presents from Abu Sufyan to
Najashi. They said to him while we were present: “There is a
group of foolish persons from among our youths who have
sneaked into your kingdom, return them to us.”
“No! Until I hear their own story,” Najashi said. Then they
sent for us and asked, “What do you have to say?” We said:
“These are people devoted to the worship of idols but Allah
sent to us a Messenger and we believed and considered him
truthful.” Then Najashi said to the Quraish emissaries: “Are
these people your slaves?” They replied in the negative. “Are
they indebted you?” Najashi further asked, and the emissaries
replied, “No.” Najashi said: “Then leave them alone.” Then
we left the court of the king.
Undaunted by the initial setback, ‘Amr again said: “These
people say about ‘Eesa something contrary to what you say.”
Najashi said: “If they don’t say something similar to what we
believe regarding ‘Eesa, then I shall not allow them to remain
in my domain an hour more of the day.” Again they sent for
us and the second summon was even harder on us than the
first. “What does your companion (i.e. the Prophet) say about
‘Eesa Ibn Maryam?” Najashi asked. We said: “He (‘Eesa) is
the Spirit of of Allah and His Word which He cast into
Maryam the Virgin.” Najashi ordered: “Call such-and-such
priest, call such-andsuch rabbi." When they had gathered, he
asked: "what do you say regarding ‘Eesa Ibn Maryam?” They
said: “You are more knowledgeable than us, what do you
say?” Then Najashi picked up something from the floor and
said: “‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, was no less than what you
have said by the width of this thing.” Then he asked: “Has
149

anyone harmed you?” they replied, "Yes." Then a caller
announced that whoever harms anyone of them shall be fined
four dirhams. “Is that sufficient for you?” he asked and we
said, "No," and he multiplied the penalty.
However, when the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, migrated to Madinah and triumphed
there, we said to Najashi: “Allah’s Messenger has become
victorious and he has migrated to Madinah and those about
whom we told you have been killed. We wish to relocate to
him so please make provision for us.” He furnished us with
riding animals and provisions and then said: “Inform your
companion about my treatment of you and this is my
companion, I am sending him with you. Also ‘I bear witness
that none deserves to be worshipped other Allah and that he
is a Messenger of Allah.' And ask him to seek forgiveness for
me.” Ja‘afar said: Then we set out until we reached Madinah
and I met Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and he embraced me and then said: “I do not know
which fills me with more happiness, the conquest of Khaibar
or the coming of Ja‘afar.” Then he sat and the messenger of
Najashi said: "This is Ja‘afar, ask him how our companion
treated him.” “Yes," Ja‘afar began to say, "he did such-andsuch to us, he furnished us with riding animals and provisions
and he testifies that none deserves to be worshipped in truth
other than Allah and that you are a Messenger of Allah. And
he asked me to request you to seek forgiveness for him. Then
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
stood up, performed ablution and he supplicated: “O Allah,
forgive Najashi,” three times while the Muslims said
"ameen." Ja‘afar further narrated: Then I said to the
messenger (of Najashi) "proceed and inform your companion
about what you have witnessed from Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him. Ibn Asakir said it is
hasan ghareeb.

150

Moosa Ibn 'Uqbah said: Najashi’s father used to be the king
of Abyssinia. He died while Najashi was a small child. He
bequeathed authority to his brother to hold until Najashi
comes of age. The brother usurped the authority and sold
Najashi to some traders. The uncle died one night and the
authority of Habashah (Abyssinia) was restored to Najashi
and they placed a crown on his head. This is how he
mentioned it in a summary form.
It is recorded in the Saheehain from a Hadith of Abu Hurairah
who reported: "The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, announced the news of the death of
Najashi, the ruler of Abyssinia, on the day he died and he took
them out to the place of prayer and observed four takbeers.”
Jabir narrated that when Najashi died, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said,
“Today a pious man has died. So get up and offer the
funeral prayer for your brother Ashamah.”
Some scholars said: He offered the prayer on him because he
kept his faith secret from his people and there was none with
him the day he died who could pray on him. So this is why
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
offered a janazah (funeral) prayer on him.
According to these scholars, if a dead Muslim has been prayed
over in his location of death, it is not legislated to pray in
absentia over the same corpse in other locations. This is why
the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, did not
offer funeral prayers in Madinah for those who died in
Makkah and other places. Similarly, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar,
‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased with them, did not do it nor
other than them from among the Companions, may Allah be
pleased with them. It is not reported that he ever offered

151

funeral prayer over anyone of them other than the one offered
for him in the land of his death. And Allah knows best.
I say: The fact that Abu Hurairah witnessed the Prophet’s
offering of funeral prayer on Najashi is an indication that his
death must have occurred after the Conquest of Khaibar in the
same year the remainder of the emigrants arrived at Madinah.
This is why it is reported that he said: “I do not know which
fills me with more happiness, the Conquest of Khaibar or the
coming of Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Talib.” They arrived with large
gifts and presents from Najashi, may Allah be pleased with
him, to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
Accompanying them were the people of the boat from
Yemen, the companions of Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari, may
Allah be pleased with him. Accompanying Ja‘afar and the gift
was also a nephew of Najashi, Dhu Mukhbir or Dhu
Mukhmir, whom he sent to serve the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, in place of his uncle. May
Allah be pleased with them both and may they also find
pleasure.
As-Suhaili said that Najashi died in the month of Rajab, 9th
year of Hijrah, though this is disputable. And Allah knows
best. Imam Al-Baihaqi said that when ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas came
back from Abyssinia, he remained in his house and did not go
out. They wondered: “Why is he not coming out?” ‘Amr said:
“Ashama thinks that your companion is truly a Prophet.”
Ibn Ishaq said that when ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas and ‘Abdullah Ibn
Rabee‘ah came back to the Quraish from their fruitless quest
of extraditing the Companions of Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, from Abyssinia and
Najashi responded to them with what is most hateful to them;
to add to their injury, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab accepted Islam.
He was a very stubborn man. The Companions of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, did not
feel a sense of protection in any man other ‘Umar and Hamzah
152

until they eventually routed the Quraish. ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘ood used to say: “We were not able to pray at the Ka‘bah
until ‘Umar accepted Islam. When he became a Muslim, he
fought his way against the Quraish until he was able to pray
at the Ka‘bah and we prayed along with him.”
I say: It is also recorded in the Saheeh Al-Bukhari from Ibn
Mas‘ood that he said: “we never ceased to be honored since
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab accepted Islam.”
Ibn Ishaq said: ‘Umar’s acceptance of Islam occurred after
those who emigrated to Abyssinia from the Companions of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
had done so. ‘Abdur Rahman Ibn Al-Harith Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
Iyyash Ibn Abi Rabee‘ah narrated from ‘Abdul-Aziz Ibn
‘Abdullah from ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Rabee‘ah from his
mother, Umm ‘Abdullah Bint Abi Hathmah, who said: “By
Allah, we were migrating to Abyssinia, ‘Amir had gone to
attend to some of our needs, when ‘Umar approached. He
stopped by me. At this time, he was still a polytheist and we
used to experience harmful persecution and severity from him
so he said: ‘perhaps you are migrating, O Umm ‘Abdullah.' I
replied in affirmation: 'Yes, by Allah, we shall emigrate in the
land of Allah until He provides for us a way out due to your
harm and coercion.' ‘Umar said: 'May Allah accompany you.'
I saw in him a tenderness the like of which I had never seen
him demonstrate before. Then he went away. I see that our
emigration must have caused him great sorrow.”
She further narrated: “When ‘Amir returned from his
attendance of some of our needs I said to him: 'O Abu
‘Abdullah, I wish you had seen ‘Umar just now and his
tenderheartedness and grief over us.' He said: 'Do you have a
strong hope of him becoming a Muslim?' I replied, 'Yes, ‘ and
he said: 'He will not accept Islam, in my opinion, until the
donkey of Al-Khattab accepts first'.” (Expressing a rarity of
153

occurrence of such an incident as the conversion of ‘Umar to
Islam) due to his roughness and cruelty against Islam.
I say: This is a refutation to those who think that he is the
fortieth Muslim because the emigrants to Abyssinia were well
over eighty. Except if it is said that: He is the fortieth after the
emigration of the migrants and this is reinforced by what Ibn
Ishaq narrated here about the story of ‘Umar’s conversion.
May Allah be pleased with him.
Imam Baihaqi related from Ibn Ishaq who said that thereafter,
about twenty Christian men came to meet Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, when his news had
become widespread in Abyssinia. They found him in an
assembly. They requested his audience and asked him
questions while some men of Quraish were engrossed in their
ceremony around the Ka‘bah. When they concluded their
questioning of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, he invited them to Allah, the Mighty and
Majestic. He recited a portion of the Qur’an to them and upon
listening to it, their eyes welled up with tears. They responded
positively to his invitation, believed in him, acknowledged his
truthfulness and recognized in him what had been described
to them in their Books regarding him. When they rose from
his presence, Abu Jahl and a group of Quraish accosted them
and said: “May Allah frustrate you, you were sent by those
whom you left behind among the people of your religion to
seek his information and you were not satisfied with your
audience with him until you abandoned your religion. We do
not know of any rider more dim-witted than you,” or they said
something similar.
The Christian delegates responded calmly: “Peace be unto
you. We shall not behave to you ignorantly, we are
responsible for our own actions and you are responsible for
yours.” Some said that the group was from the Christians of
Najran. And Allah knows best that which is correct. It is said,
154

and Allah knows best, that the following Verses of the Qur’an
were revealed regarding them:
“Those to whom We gave the Scripture (i.e. the Tawrah
and the Injeel, etc.) before it, - they believe in it
(the Qur’an). And when it is recited to them, they say: We
believe in it. Verily, it is the Truth from our
Lord. Indeed, even before it we have been from those who
submit themselves to Allah in Islam as Muslims
(like ‘Abdullah Ibn Salam and Salman Al-Farisi, etc.). These
will be given their reward twice over, because they are
patient, and repel evil with good, and spend (in charity) out
of what We have provided them. And when they hear AlLaghw (dirty, false, evil vain talk), they withdraw from it
and say: “To us our deeds, and to you your deeds. Peace be
to you. We seek not the ignorant.” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:5255)
Imam Al-Baihaqi says in Ad-Dala'il from Ibn Ishaq, who said:
In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a
letter from Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) to Najashi Asham, the sovereign of Abyssinia,
peace be on to those who follow the right guidance. (I urge
you to) believe in Allah and His Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, and that you bear witness that
none deserves to be worshipped in truth except Allah, Alone.
He has no associate and He did not chose for Himself a
companion or son and that Muhammad is His servant and
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. I call
upon you with the invitation of Allah for I am His Messenger.
Accept Islam and you will remain in peace. “Say (O
Muhammad): 'O people of the Scripture (Jews and
Christians): Come to a word that is just between us and you,
that we worship none but Allah, and that we associate no
partners with Him, and that none of us shall take others as
lords besides Allah. Then, if they turn away, say: 'Bear
witness that we are Muslims'.” (Soorah Al ‘Imran 3: 64) If
155

you refuse, upon you is the sin of all the Christians among
your people.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said: Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, sent ‘Amr Ibn Umayyah AdDamri with a letter to Najashi on the issue of Ja‘afar Ibn Abi
Talib and his compatriots. (In the letter, he wrote): In the
Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. From
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah to Najashi Al-Asham,
the king of Abyssinia, peace be unto you. I commend Allah
(to you), the King, the Holy, the Giver of security, the
Watcher over His creatures. I also bear witness that ‘Eesa is
the Spirit of Allah and His Word, (“Be!” - and he was) which
He bestowed on Maryam, the virgin, the virtuous, the good
and she conceived ‘Eesa who has been created from His Spirit
and His Blowing just as He created Adam with His Hands and
His Blowing. I am inviting you unto Allah beside Whom there
is no partner and patron to obey Him as well as to follow and
believe in me and what I have come with for I am a Messenger
of Allah and I have sent to you my cousin, Ja’far, and with
him is a group of Muslims. When they arrive, show them
hospitality and avoid haughtiness. I invite you and your army
unto Allah. I have delivered the message and I have advised
you so heed my advice. Peace be unto those who follow the
right guidance.”
Najashi also wrote in reply to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him: “In the Name of Allah, the
Beneficent the Merciful. To Muhammad, the Messenger of
Allah, from Najashi AlAsham Ibn Abjar, peace be unto you
Prophet of Allah. Your letter has reached me, O Messenger of
Allah. Regarding what you mentioned about ‘Eesa, by the
Lord of the heaven and the Earth, ‘Eesa was no more than
what you mentioned (about him). We have acknowledged
what you have sent to us and have provided hospitality to your
cousin and his compatriots. I bear witness that you are a
Messenger of Allah, truthful and trustworthy. I pledged
156

allegiance to you. I have pledged allegiance to your cousin
and I have accepted Islam at his hands for the sake of the Lord
of the Worlds. I have equally sent to you, O Prophet of Allah,
Ba’reeha Ibn Al-Asham Ibn Abjar. I have no control except
over myself and if you wish that I come to you myself, I shall
do that, O Messenger of Allah. I bear witness that all I have
said is true.”
Moosa Ibn 'Uqbah narrated from Az-Zuhri: Thereafter, the
polytheists became even more severe against the Muslims
than ever before till the persecution became even more
precarious for them. The Quraish also became unanimous in
their open plot to kill Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him. When Abu Talib saw the action of the
people, he assembled the clan of Abdul-Muttalib and ordered
them to admit Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, into their midst and to prevent anyone who
might attempt to kill him. They were unanimous in that cause,
the Muslims and the non-Muslims alike. Among them were
those who were committed to the cause out of clannish
enthusiasm and there were others whose commitment was
borne out of faith and certainty.
When the Quraish realized that his people were consentient in
their protection of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, the polytheists of Quraish reached an
accord not to admit the entire clan of Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in to their
assembly. They also agreed not to trade with them and not to
enter their houses until they surrender Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, for execution. In
their blind deceit, they entered into a formal pact and covenant
which they wrote on a parchment: “There shall never be
reconciliation with the Banu Hashim and no clemency shall
be tolerated regarding them until they surrender him for
execution.”
157

Banu Hashim remained excommunicated in their valley for
three years. Their adversity intensified such that all economic
relations with them was severed and no foreign trade caravan
arrived Makkah except that the polytheists hastened to buy
them all to prevent the Muslims and their sympathizers’
access to even basic necessities all in the bid to spill the blood
of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him.
Whenever people retired to their beds, Abu Talib would order
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
to also retire to his bed so that people who might have sinister
motives may not see him. However, when everyone would go
to sleep, he would order one of his sons or cousins to
exchange bed with Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him.
When it was exactly three years after the commencement of
the boycott, some men from Banu Abd Manaf, from Banu
Qusayy and selected individuals among the Quraish with
marital ties with Banu Hashim began to trade blames for
acceding to an agreement which tantamount to breaking off
ties of kinship as well as disparaging the truth.
Same night, they met and reached an understanding to nullify
the pact of the boycott and to dissociate themselves from it.
Allah sent worms upon their written pact of boycott and they
ate up everything therein concerning the pact. It is also said
that the written parchment was hanged on the roof the Ka‘bah
and the worm did not leave the Name of Allah written on the
parchment except that it ate it out leaving only what it
contained of shirk (associating partner with Allah), injustice
and severance of kinship ties.
Then Allah (SWT) informed the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, what fate has befallen
their parchment. So he mentioned that to Abu Talib. Abu
158

Talib said: “By the star, you have never lied to me!” So he
proceeded along with some of his company among Banu
Abdul-Muttalib until they got to the House (Ka‘bah) which
was filled with the Quraish. The Quraish thought that, finally,
their excruciating travails have harried them into surrendering
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
for execution. Abu Talib spoke first. He said: “A number of
events have transpired between us and it is needless
recounting them. Bring out your parchment upon which you
have agreed perhaps there might be some reconciliation
between us.” He said this for the fear that they might open the
parchment before bringing it out.
They brought out their parchment with much admiration.
They were sure Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, would be turned over to them. So they
placed the parchment before them. They said, “It is high time
you concede and return to that which will engender unity of
your people. Only one man has driven this wedge between us
and you allowed him to push your people to the precipice of
destruction.” Abu Talib said: “I have come to you to offer you
a 50:50 chance of reconciliation. My nephew has informed
me, and he has never lied to me, that Allah dissociates
Himself from the pact contained in the parchment in your
possession and has erased all His names from it and left only
your severance of ties of kinship, your perpetration of
injustice on us. If what my nephew has said is true, then by
Allah, we shall never surrender him to you until we all perish
to the last man. However, if what he said is found to be
inconsistent with the truth, we shall surrender him to you right
away and you may either kill him or let him live.” The
Quraish responded: “We are pleased with what you have
said.” When they opened the parchment, they found him to be
truthful and trustworthy. When the Quraish saw that the
matter is as Abu Talib has presented, they said: “This is
nothing but sorcery of your companion.” So they reneged on
their earlier promise. They returned to the status quo in their
159

vile disbelief and severity on the Muslims and their
sympathizers.
Ibn Ishaq said: They remained excommunicated for two or
three years and all supplies debarred from them except what
was smuggled to them secretly by those who preferred
reconciliation with them among the Quraish. It has been
mentioned that Abu Jahl once met Hakeem Ibn Hizam Ibn
Khuwailid Ibn Asad with him was his boy carrying some
wheat meant for his aunt Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid who was
with Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, in the mountain pass. Abu Jahl held him and said: “Are
you going to supply Banu Hashim with food? By Allah, you
will not go with that food to Banu Hashim till I expose you to
the entire Makkah.” Then came Abul-Bakhtari Ibn Hisham
Ibn AlHarith Ibn Asad and he asked: “what has transpired
between both of you?” Abu Jahl, hoping for support, said:
“He is supplying food to the Banu Hashim.” Abu Bakhtari
said to him: “The food belongs to his aunt. Would you prevent
him from taking her food to her? Let the man off!” Abu Jahl
refused, Allah’s curse be on him. Abul-Bakhtari took the
jawbone of a camel and smashed the head of Abu Jahl and
also kicked him violently. Hamzah Ibn Abdul-Muttalib was
nearby watching this incident and they disliked that news of
such incident should get to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. Meanwhile, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
persisted in calling his people night and day, secretly and
openly inviting them by the command of Allah without
fearing anyone. When they saw the futility of their attempt at
physically terminating the Prophet’s life due to his protection
by his uncle and his people from Banu Hashim and Banu
Abdul-Muttalib who stood solidly in his defense, the Quraish
resorted to taunting and making jests of him. All this
happened while the Qur’an was being revealed detailing their
misdeeds. Among them were those whom revelation merely
mentioned their enmities to him and amongst them are those
160

whose names were mentioned directly. There were yet others
whom the Qur’an mentioned along with the other polytheists.
Ibn Ishaq mentioned Abu Lahab and the revelation of the
Qur’an concerning him and Umayyah Ibn Khalaf. The
revelation “Woe to every slanderer and backbiter” (Soorah
Al-Humazah 104:1) and an entire chapter was revealed about
him.
As for Al-‘Aas Ibn Wa’il and the revelation about him: “Have
you seen him who disbelieved in Our Ayat (this Qur’an and
Muhammad) and (yet) says: 'I shall certainly be given wealth
and children [if I will be alive (again)]',” (Soorah Maryam
19:77) was revealed about him. We have mentioned
something about that in the previous pages. Regarding Abu
Jahl and his statement to the Prophet, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him: “You either desist from insulting our gods
or we shall insult your God in retaliation,” revelation of the
Words of Allah about that goes thus: “And insult not those
whom they (disbelievers) worship besides Allah, lest they
insult Allah wrongfully without knowledge.” (Soorah AlAn‘am 6:108)
An-Nadr Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Kaldah Ibn Alqamah and there are
those who consider him to be ‘Alqamah Ibn Kaldah. AsSuhaili narrated something about his manner of sitting
wherever the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, had sat to recite the Qur’an and invite people to Allah,
and he (i.e. AnNadr) would recount to the people instead
some of the stories of Rustum and Asfandyar and what great
battles that were fought between them during the reign of the
Persians and then he would also say: “By Allah, Muhammad
is no better than me in speech and his words are nothing but
fables of old which he has written down just as I have also
written down.” Then Allah revealed concerning that: “And
they say: 'Tales of the ancients, which he has written down,
and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon'.” (Soorah
161

Al-Furqan 25:5 and also, “Woe to every sinful liar.” (Soorah
Al-Jathiyah 45:7)
Ibn Ishaq said that a report that reached me said that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was
sitting one day with Al-Waleed Ibn Al-Mugheerah in the
Mosque (Ka‘bah) and An-Nadr Ibn Al-Harith came and sat
with them. In the sitting were a number of other Quraish men.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
continued his address but An-Nadr interrupted him. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, spoke to
him until he was dumbfounded and then he recited the Qur’an
to him: “Certainly! You (disbelievers) and that which you are
worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell!
(Surely), you will enter it. Had these (idols, etc.) been aliha
(gods), they would not have entered there (Hell), and all of
them will abide therein. Therein breathing out with deep sighs
and roaring will be their portion, and therein they will hear
not.” (Soorah Al-Anbiya' 21:98100) Then Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, rose and went
away.
Soon afterward, ‘Abdullah Ibn Az-Ziba’ra As-Sahmi came
and sat in the gathering. Then Al-Waleed said to him: “Not
long ago, An-Nadhr neither stood up to Ibn Abdul-Muttalib
nor did he stand down. Muhammad had claimed that we and
all the gods we worship will be fuel for the Fire.” ‘Abdullah
Ibn AzZiba’ra said: “By Allah, if I had met him I would have
argued with him. Ask Muhammad: ‘will everything we
worship besides Allah become fuel for Hellfire along with
their worshippers? We worship angels; the Jews worship
‘Uzair and the Christian worship 'Eesa, peace be on both of
them.” Al-Waleed and those with him were astonished by the
words of Ibn Az-Ziba’ra and they considered that he had
given fitting response and a challenge (to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him).
162

When that was mentioned to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, he said: “Everyone who loves
to be worshipped besides Allah, he along with his
worshippers shall dwell in Hellfire. As for them, rather, they
are worshipping shayatin (devils) for they (i.e. the angels,
‘Uzair and 'Eesa) did not order them to worship them.” Then
Allah revealed: “Verily those for whom the good has
preceded from Us, they will be removed far there from (Hell)
[e.g. ‘Eesa, son of Maryam; ‘Uzair (Ezra), etc.]. They shall
not hear the slightest sound of it (Hell), while they abide in
that which their ownselves desire.” (Soorah Al-Anbiya'
21:101,102) It means that ‘Eesa and ‘Uzair and those who
were worshipped among monks and rabbis were themselves
righteous worshippers of Allah (SWT), Most High.
Allah (SWT) also revealed concerning those who worship the
angels and considered them the daughters of Allah: “And they
say: 'The Most Beneficent (Allah) has begotten a son (or
children)'. Glory to Him! They [those whom they call children
of Allah i.e. the angels, ‘Eesa, son of Maryam, ‘Uzair, etc.],
are but honored slaves.” (Soorah Al-Anbiya' 21:26) as well as
Verses following it. Allah also revealed concerning the
astonishment of the polytheist at the statement of Ibn AzZiba’ra: “And when the son of Maryam is quoted as an
example [i.e. ‘Eesa is worshipped like their idols), behold!
Your people cry aloud (laugh out at the example). And say:
'Are our aliha (gods) better or is he ‘Eesa'?” They quoted not
the above example except for argument. Nay! But they are a
quarrelsome people. [(See VV. 21:97-101) - The Qur’an.]
(Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:57, 58)
These argumentations embarked upon by the polytheists were
all frivolous and they were quite aware of that for they were
Arabs and even in their language it makes no sense. Thus,
when Allah says: “Certainly! You (disbelievers) and that
which you are worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel
for Hell! (Surely), you will enter it.” (Soorah Al-Anbiya'
163

21:98) He meant what they use to worship of stones which
they have fashioned into idols and it is not applicable to the
angels which they thought they were worshipping in these
forms; not the Christ, not ‘Uzair or even any of the righteous
men. This is because the Verse is not applicable to them
whether in wording or meaning. They knew quite well that
the similitude they tried to draw from ‘Eesa Ibn Maryam is a
futile argument just as Allah points out: “… They quoted not
the above example except for argument. Nay! But they are a
quarrelsome people.” (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:58) and then
He says: “He (‘Eesa) was not more than a slave We granted
Our Favor to him.” (Soorah Al-Zukhruf 43:59) i.e. with Our
prophethood. “…and We made him an example to the
Children of Israel (i.e. his creation without a father).” (Soorah
Az-Zukhruf 43:59) i.e. a proof of the perfection of Our Power
over whatever We wish since We created him from a female
without the intervention of a male. We had created Hawwa’
from a male without a female intervention and We created
Adam without the intervention of either sex and We created
the rest of mankind through the intervention of a male and
female as Allah mentions in other Verses: “And (We wish) to
appoint him as a sign to mankind,” (Soorah Maryam 19:21)
i.e. a token and a proof of Our magnificent Power “…and a
mercy from Us (Allah),” with which We treat whom We wish.
Ibn Ishaq mentioned about Al-Akhnas Ibn Shareeq and the
revelation of the Verse of Allah, Most High, concerning him:
“And obey not everyone who swears much, and is considered
worthless.” (Soorah AlQalam 68:10). He also mentioned AlWaleed Ibn Al-Mugheerah when he said: "Should the
revelation come down to Muhammad excluding us, I am also
the chief of the Quraish and its leader and also excluding Abu
Mas‘ood ‘Amr Ibn ‘Amr Ath-Thaqafi, the leader of Thaqeef,
and we are the masters of the two cities. Then Allah revealed:
“And they say: 'Why is not this Qur’an sent down to some
great man of the two towns (Makkah and Ta’if)'?” (Soorah
Az-Zukhruf 43:31) and subsequent Verses.
164

He also mentioned Ubayy Ibn Khalaf when he said to 'Uqbah
Ibn Abi Mu’ait: “Has it not reached me that you had audience
with Muhammad and you listened to him? My face and yours
have become forbidden and I shall not speak to you again if
you sit with him or you give him audience except you spit in
his face.” And the enemy of Allah, 'Uqbah, did exactly that.
May Allah's curse be on him! Then Allah revealed: “And
(remember) the day when the Zalim (wrongdoer, oppressor,
and polytheist, etc.) will bite at his hands, he will say: 'Oh!
Would that I had taken a path with the Messenger
(Muhammad). Ah! Woe to me! Would that I had never taken
so-and-so as a friend'!” (Soorah Al-Furqan 25:27,28) and
subsequent Verses.
He also related that Ubayy Ibn Khalaf once went to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, with a
decomposed bone and he said: “O Muhammad! You claim
that Allah will resurrect this after it has decomposed?” He
then squeezed the bone in his hand and blew its dust in the
direction of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him. Then Allah revealed: “And he puts forth for Us
a parable, and forgets his own creation. He says: 'Who will
give life to these bones when they have rotted away and
became dust?' Say: (O Muhammad) 'He will give life to them
Who created them for the first time! And He is the AllKnower of every creation'!” (Soorah Ya Seen 36:78,79) till
the end of the Soorah.
While Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, was circumambulating the Ka‘bah, he was
accosted by Al-Aswad Ibn Al-Muttalib, Al-Waleed Ibn AlMugheerah, Umayyah Ibn Khalaf and Al-‘Aas Ibn Wa’il all
of them being the chiefs of their people. They said to him: “O
Muhammad come; let’s worship what you worship (for a
while) and you also worship what we worship (for a while).
We and you shall enter into partnership concerning the
matter.” Then Allah (SWT) revealed concerning them: “Say
165

(O Muhammad) to these Mushrikoon and Kafiroon): 'O AlKafiroon (disbelievers in Allah, in His Oneness, in His
Angels, in His Books, in His Messengers, in the Day of
Resurrection, and in Al-Qadar, etc.)! I worship not that which
you worship'ah …” (SoorAl-Kafiroon 109:1, 2) till the end of
the Soorah.
When Abu Jahl heard of the tree of Zaqqoom he said in
derison: "Do you know what Zaqqoom is? It is a type of date
fruit beaten in butter. Come let’s savor some Zaqqoom!” Then
Allah revealed: “Verily, the tree of Zaqqoom will be the food
of the sinners.” (Soorah Ad-Dukhan 44:43, 44)
Al-Waleed once stopped to have audience with Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
spoke to him about Islam and he was hopeful of his
conversion. Just then Ibn Umm Maktoom, Atikah Bint
‘Abullah Ibn ‘Ankathah, the blind, came and requested to be
taught the Qur’an. His interruption became unbearable for the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, that he
annoyed him. This is because he was distracted from his
discussion with Al-Waleed and the hope of his acceptance of
Islam. When it was unbearable for him, Ibn Umm Maktoom
went away downcast. Then Allah revealed: “(The Prophet)
frowned and turned away, because there came to him the blind
man (i.e. ‘Abdullah Ibn Umm Maktoom, who came to the
Prophet while he was preaching to one or some of the Quraish
chiefs).” (Soorah ‘Abasa 80:1,2) It is also said that the person
with whom Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, was discussing when Ibn Umm Maktoom came
was Umayyah Ibn Khalaf. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Ibn Ishaq also mentioned that those who returned from Hijrah
to Abyssinia came after the news reached them that entire
people of Makkah have accepted Islam. A false report,
however, with an underlining reason, which is what is
166

recorded in the Saheeh and others that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was once sitting
with the polytheists and Allah revealed to him: “By the star
when it goes down, (or vanishes). Your Companion
(Muhammad) has neither gone astray nor has erred” (Soorah
An-Najm 53:1,2) and he recited it to them till the end and he
prostrated and everyone present also prostrated among the
Muslims, polytheists, Jinns and men. That is the sababunNuzool (reason for revelation) adduced by many scholars of
Tafseer on the statement of Allah: “Never did We send a
Messenger or a Prophet before you, but; when he did recite
the revelation or narrated or spoke, Shaitan (Satan) threw
(some falsehood) in it. But Allah abolishes that which Shaitan
(Satan) throws in. Then Allah establishes His Revelations.
And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise.” (Soorah Al-Hajj 22:52)
He also mentioned the story of Al-Gharaneeq. We had wished
to avoid mentioning it lest no one who will accord it its
rightful status hear it. Instead I relate only the story recorded
in the Saheeh. Imam Al-Bukhari related from Ibn ‘Abbas,
who said: “The Prophet performed a prostration when he
finished reciting Soorah An-Najm, and all the Muslims and
pagans and Jinns and human beings prostration along with
him.”
However, when the bearers of the news saw the pagans
prostrated just like Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), they thought they had accepted Islam
and reconciled with him and that there exist no more strife
between them. The news flew swiftly and wide until it
reached the emigrants in Abyssinia. Believing its authenticity,
some of them returned with aspirations. However, some
others remained and both groups were sincere and correct in
their individual judgment.
Imam Al-Bukhari related from ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood who
said: “We used to greet the Messenger of Allah while he was
167

engaged in prayer and he would respond to our greeting. But
when we returned from the Najashi we greeted him and he did
not respond to us; so we said: "Messenger of Allah, we used
to greet you when you were engaged in prayer and you would
respond to us." He replied: "Prayer demands whole attention."
Ibn Ishaq said that among those who entered into a pact of
protection with them, based on those who were mentioned to
us, included ‘Uthman Ibn Maz’oon who was under the
protection of Al-Waleed, Abu Salamah Ibn Abdul-Asad was
under the protection of his maternal uncle, Abu Talib, for his
mother was Barrah Bint Abdul-Muttalib.
Salih Ibn Ibrahim Ibn ‘Abdur Rahmaan Ibn ‘Awf narrated to
me what he was told about ‘Uthman. He said: When ‘Uthman
Ibn Maz’oon observed what tribulation the Companions of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
were going through and his own relative ease and comfort
which he was enjoying under the protection of Al-Waleed, he
said: "By Allah, the ease and comfort that I enjoy under the
protection of a man from among the pagans while my
compatriots and co-religionists languish in tribulation and
harm for the sake of Allah from which I am protected is a
great minus for me." So he went to Al-Waleed and said to
him: “O Abu ‘Abd Shams, you have fulfilled your pact of
protection. However, I am repudiating that pact with you.”
“Why, my nephew? Perhaps someone from my people has
hurt you?” Al-Waleed asked. “No,” ‘Uthman responded, “I
am rather pleased with the protection of Allah, the Majestic. I
do not wish to enter into any security pact with anyone other
than Him.” Al-Waleed said: “Then proceed to the Ka‘bah so
that I may retract my protection of you in public just as we
entered into it publicly.”
So they both went out to the Ka‘bah. Then Al-Waleed
announced: “This is ‘Uthman, he has come to repudiate my
protection of him!” ‘Uthman said: “Yes, he has spoken the
168

truth. I have found him to be a noble protector. However, I
have decided not to seek the protection of anyone other than
that of Allah. So I have repudiated his protection of me.” Then
‘Uthman, May Allah be pleased with him, went away and
came upon a gathering where Labeed Ibn Rabee‘ah Ibn Malik
Ibn Ja‘afar Ibn Kilab was delivering a poetic rhyme. ‘Uthman
sat with them. Labeed said (in a long rendition):
Everything besides Allah is null and void
‘Uthman interjected: “You have said the truth”
Labeed again said:
All comfort shall inevitably become transient
Again, ‘Uthman interjected: “You have lied, the comfort of
Paradise is not transient.”
Labeed said: “O Quraish, nothing used to disturb your
assembly, when did this commenced among you?!” A man
from the audience said: “This is one of the foolish ones who
have abandoned our religion so don’t be bothered by his
statement.” ‘Uthman also responded to him until the
altercation became heated between both of them. The man
rose up to ‘Uthman and slapped him in the eye in such a way
that it became bloodshot. Meanwhile, Al-Waleed was nearby
watching what has befallen ‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased
with him. He then said to him: “By Allah, O my nephew, what
happened to your eye was avoidable. You were in a protective
pact.” ‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased wtih him, responded:
“By Allah, the other good eye would have craved for the fate
that befell its twin eye in the cause of Allah. I am under the
protection of the One Who is far Mightier and more Powerful
than you are, O Abu ‘Abd Shams.” Al-Waleed again
implored: “Come on, O my nephew, restore your pact of
protection (with me).” “No!” ‘Uthman said emphatically.
169

Ibn Ishaq said: Concerning Abu Salamah Ibn Abdul-Asad,
Abu Ishaq Ibn Yasar narrated to me from Salamah Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Abu Salamah that he informed him
that when Abu Salamah entered into a protective
understanding with his uncle, Abu Talib, a number of men
from Banu Makhzoom went to Abu Talib and said: “O Abu
Talib, you protect from us, your nephew, Muhammad, how
come you are also protecting our own man from us?” Abu
Talib replied: “He has sought my protection and he is my
sister’s son and if I unable to protect my sister’s son I should
not be able to protect my brother’s son.” Abu Lahab got up
angrily and said: “You have been too lenient with this old
man! Will you not cease to dote on this man while he persists
in the protection of his people? You will desist otherwise we
shall stand up against him wherever he goes until the matter
reaches the point of his desire.”

A Mention of (Abu Bakr) As-Siddiq’s
Resolve to Migrate to Abyssinia
Ibn Ishaq said that from what was narrated to me by
Muhammad Ibn Muslim Az-Zuhri from ‘Urwah from
‘A’ishah is that when Makkah became constricted for Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq and he suffered harm as well as the
relentless harassment on Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, he sought the permission of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, to migrate to Abyssinia and he permitted him. Abu
Bakr set out on his Hijrah to Abyssinia. After a journey of a
day or two from Makkah he met Ibn Ad-Daghinah the
brother of Banu Al-Harith Ibn Bakr Ibn ‘Abd Manat Ibn
Kinanah and at that time he was the chief of the Al-Ahabish.
“Where are you going, O Abu Bakr?” he asked. “My people
have forced me out. They have harmed me and made life
straightened for me.” Abu Bakr replied. Ibn Daghinah said:
“For what reason?! By Allah you have been graceful to
kinsfolk and you have done so much good and you have
170

provided for those in want. Return for you shall henceforth
be under my protection.” Then Abu Bakr returned with him
until they entered Makkah. Ibn Daghinah stood up with Abu
Bakr and said: “O Quraish! I have protected Ibn Abi
Quhafah so no one should accost him except for good.” So
the pagans backed off from him.
‘A’ishah continued: “Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with
him) had a mosque by the doorstep of his house in Bani
Jum‘ah where he usually prayed. He was an emotional person,
so anytime he recited the Qur’an he would weep. Children,
slaves and women would gather round him in utter
amazement concerning what they are seeing of his mien.
Some Quraish men went to Ibn Daghinah and said to him: “O
Ibn Daghinah, won’t you stop this man from disturbing us. He
is an emotional man, whenever he prays and recites what
Muhammad has come with, he would weep and he has such a
mien which we fear could be a source of trial for our children,
women and the weak among us. So approach him and order
him to enter his house and do whatever he likes therein.”
‘A’ishah continued: Ibn Daghinah went to Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him, and said: “O Abu Bakr, I did not
offer you protection so that you disturb your people. They
have objected to your praying at your current location. So
enter your house and do whatever you wish therein.” Abu
Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, replied: “Perhaps I
should repudiate your protection of me and prefer the
protection of Allah instead?” Ibn Daghinah said: “Then do
so!” Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “I have
repudiated it.” Then Ibn Daghinah stood and announced: “O
Quraish! Ibn Abi Quhafah has repudiated my protection of
him so you may do as you wish with your companion.”

171

The Mentioning of the Annulment of the
Pact of Boycott
Ibn Ishaq said that the Banu Hashim and Banu ‘AbdulMuttalib still remained in their valley excommunicated by a
pact which they had written on a parchment with the Quraish.
Then a number of Quraish men rose with the intention of
nullifying the pact of the boycott. The first person to make a
successful attempt was Hisham Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Rabee‘ah AlHarith Ibn Hubayyib Ibn Nasr Ibn Jadhimah Ibn Malik Ibn
Hisl Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Lu’ayy who was very upset at the plight
of his relatives. This is because he was a cousin of Nadlah Ibn
Hashim Ibn ‘Abd Manaf from the mother’s side. Thus,
Hisham shared some connection with the Banu Hashim. He
was a noble person among his people, and according to what
has reached me, while Banu Hashim and Banu ‘AbdulMuttalib were in their valley, he would come with a camel
load of food. At the mouth of the valley, he would loosen the
rein of the animal from its head and then he would goad it
from its side until the animal entered the valley so that the
Banu Hashim and Banu ‘Abdul-Muttalib might find it and eat
the food. Again, he would come with a camel laden with
wheat and he would behave in a similar manner as before.
Then he went to Zuhair Ibn Abi Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah
Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Makhzoom whose mother was
Atikah Bint ‘Abdul-Muttalib. He said: “O Zuhair, are you
pleased that you eat food comfortably, adorn yourself with
cloth and sleep with women while your maternal uncles are,
as you have well- known, neither able to buy nor anyone
buying from them; and neither are they being married nor are
they being married to?
"As for me, I swear by Allah, if it was the maternal uncles of
Al-Hakam Ibn Hisham (i.e. Abu Jahl) that were involved, and
you invited him to the cause which he had invited you against
your own maternal uncles, he would never have responded to
172

you.” He said: “Woe be unto you, O Hisham! What could I
do? I am just a single person. By Allah, if I had one other
person with me (in that cause) I will rise for the nullification
of that boycott.” Zuhair said: “You have found that other
person.” “And who is that?” Hisham asked. “Myself,” Zuhair
said and he added: “Find a third person for us.”
So he went to Al-Mut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy' and said to him: “Are
you pleased that your fellow tribesmen from Banu ‘Abd
Manaf are exterminated while you are a witness over that
consenting with the Quraish on that?! By Allah, if you allow
them to do that, you will find them quicker to do the same to
you!” He replied: “Woe be to you! What can I do? I am just a
lone person!” He said: “I have found a second person for
you.” “Who is that?” Al-Mut‘im asked. “Myself,” he
answered. “Let’s search for the third person.” Al-Mut‘im said.
“I have done that,” he replied. “And who is that?” Al-Mut‘im
asked. “Zuhair Ibn Abi Umayyah,” he replied. “Then let’s
search for the fourth.” He went to Abul-Bakhtari Ibn Hisham
and said something similar to what he said to Al-Mut‘im Ibn
‘Adiyy'. He replied: “Do you have anyone to lend support on
that?” He replied in affirmative. “Who is that?” he asked.
“Zuhair Ibn Abi Umayyah, AlMut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy' and I am
also with you.” He said. “Find a fifth person for us.”
He went to Zam‘ah Ibn Al-Aswad Ibn Al-Muttalib Ibn Asad
and spoke to him mentioning their blood relation. Zam‘ah
asked, “Is there any helper on this cause?” “Yes,” and he
named the others. In the night, they climbed the mountain of
Khatm Al-Hajoom, at the upper part of Makkah where they
assembled and pledged to do their best to destroy the
parchment. Zuhair volunteered to make the first move.
So the next morning when the clans have gathered in their
various meeting places, Zuhair arrived at the Ka‘bah,
circumambulated it, and then turned to the people and
shouted: “O People of Makkah! Shall we eat food and wear
173

clothes while Banu Hisham are left to perish, and no one
buying from them or selling to them? By Allah, I shall not sit
down until that unjust pact is destroyed!” Abu Jahl said, “You
are a liar! By Allah, it will not be destroyed!” Zam‘ah
interjected, “It is you who is a liar. By Allah, we have not been
pleased with it since it was written!” Abul-Bakhtari also said:
“By Allah, Zam‘ah is telling the truth. We are not pleased
with what is written in it.” Al-Mut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy' also lent
his voice: “You are both right and anybody who says
otherwise is a liar.” Hisham Ibn ‘Amr also said something
similar. Then Abu Jahl said: “This conspiracy was hatched
last night!” Meanwhile, Abu Talib was at a section of the
Mosque nearby watching the proceedings.
Al-Mut‘im moved toward the parchment to tear it up, but
found that the worms had already eaten it except the words:
“In Your Name, O Allah.” The person who wrote the pact was
Mansoor Ibn ‘Ikrimah and his hand had become paralyzed as
they claimed.
Ibn Hisham said some people of knowledge said that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, once
said to Abu Talib: “O my uncle! Allah has sent worms to
ravage the parchment of the Quraish and they left untouched
any name belonging to Allah while they ate out all words
indicative of injustice, breaking ties (of kinship) and
calumny.” Abu Talib asked, “Did your Lord inform you of
this?” “Yes,” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, replied. “By Allah, no one shall enter upon
you.” Then he went out to the Quraish and said to them: “O
people of Quraish! My nephew has informed me that suchand-such has happened to your parchment. Go and fetch your
parchment. If it is as he has said, then cease from
excommunicating us and stand down from it. If he is proved
to be false, I shall surrender my nephew to you.” The Quraish
said: “We are pleased with that (arrangement).” When they
looked into the parchment, they found it as Allah’s
174

Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had
related. However, that rather enhanced their enmity.
Consequently, a group of men from the Quraish did what they
did in nullifying the pact.
I say: In the same year, after their return, Abu Talib died and
then his Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid soon afterward. May
Allah be pleased with her. Details of that will be narrated
shortly insha'Allah.
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq, Allah have Mercy on him, after the
cancellation of the boycott pact, narrated many stories
involving the enmity of the Quraish against the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and their
scaring away of Arabs who have arrived in Makkah for Hajj
and ‘Umrah or some other purposes. The stories also include
the miracles that Allah performed at the hands of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, a pointer to his truthfulness concerning what he has
brought to them of clear proof, correct guidance and a
refutation of what they have charged him of transgression,
enmity, deceit and chicanery. They also accused him of
insanity, magic, sorcery and fabrication of lies. And Allah has
full Power and Control over His Affairs. He also mentioned
the story of At-Tufail Ibn ‘Amr Ad-Dawsi who was a leader
that is obeyed and a nobleman of the tribe of Daws.
Imam Ahmad related from Abu Hurairah, who said: “When
At-Tufail and his companions came to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, he said: 'the tribe
of Daws has disbelieved and has belied you, ‘ whereupon he
(Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him)) said: 'O Allah guide aright the tribe of Daws and direct
them to me'.”
Imam Ahmad related on the authority of Jabir that Tufail, son
of ‘Amr Ad-Dawsi, came to the Allah’s Messenger, peace and
175

blessings of Allah be upon him, and said: “Do you need
strong, fortified protection? The tribe of Daws had a fort in
the pre-Islamic days.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, declined this offer, since it
(the privilege of protecting the Holy Prophet) had already
been reserved for the Ansar. When the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, migrated to
Madinah, Tufail Ibn ‘Amr also migrated to that place, and
there also migrated along with him a man of his tribe. But the
climate of Madinah did not suit him, and he fell sick. He felt
very uneasy. So he took hold of the iron head of an arrow and
cut his finger joints. The blood gushed forth from his hands,
till he died. Tufail Ibn ‘Amr saw him in a dream. His state was
good and he saw him with his hands wrapped. He (Tufail) said
to him: “What treatment did your Lord accord to you?” He
replied. “Allah granted me pardon for my migration to the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him.” He (Tufail) again said: “Why do I see you wrapping up
your hands?” He replied: “I was told (by Allah): ‘We would
not set right anything of yours which you damaged yourself'.”
Tufail narrated this (dream) to the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him. Upon this he prayed: “O
Allah! Grant pardon even to his hands.”
If it is said how do we reconcile between this Hadith and what
is established in the Saheehain from the path of Al-Hasan Ibn
Jundab who narrated that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Amongst the nations
before you there was a man who got a wound, and growing
impatient (with its pain), he took a knife and cut his hand with
it and the blood did not stop till he died. Allah said, ‘My Slave
hurriedly brought death upon himself so I have forbidden him
(to enter) Paradise’.”
Response to this is multifaceted: It could be that it is because
one was a non-Muslim while the other was a Muslim. It is
possible that his suicide action is independent of his
176

admittance into Hellfire, rather, it was his polytheism and
Allah merely mentioned his suicide so that his people might
take lesson from it.
It is possible that one was knowledgeable of the prohibition
of suicide while the other was ignorant of it due to his
accepting Islam recently.
It is possible that one did it due to his permitting what Allah
has prohibited while the other did not permit it but did it in
error.
It is possible that one did it with a clear intention of suicide
but the other may not have intended suicide when he did what
he did.
It is possible that one has a paucity of righteous deeds so his
few righteous deeds were insufficient to cancel his great sin.
Meanwhile, the other person had many righteous deeds which
saved him from entering the Fire and consequently Allah
forgave him because of his migration to the Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him. However, a blemish
remained only on his hand and his remaining condition was
good. Thus that blemish was covered for him. When At-Tufail
Ibn ‘Amr saw it covered, he asked him: “what happened to
you?!” and he said: “It was said to me: ‘We would not set
right anything of yours which you damaged yourself.’ When
At-Tufail narrated his dream to Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, he prayed for him saying: “O
Allah! Grant pardon even to his hands.” i.e. correct what has
been damaged from him. It is undoubted that Allah accepted
the supplication of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, for the companion of At-Tufail Ibn Amr.

177

The Story of ‘A’sha Banu Qais Ibn
Tha‘labah
Ibn Hisham said: ‘A’sha Banu Qais Ibn Tha‘labah Ibn
‘Ukabah Ibn Sa’b Ibn Ali Ibn Bakr Ibn Wa’il went to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, with
the intention of accepting Islam.
Ibn Hisham said: When he got to Makkah or nearby, some of
the pagans of Quraish accosted him and they asked him about
his affairs and he informed them that he came to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to
accept Islam. They said to him: “O Abu Baseer, he forbids
adultery” Al-‘A’sha responded: “By Allah, that is exactly the
issue I desire from him.” Again they said: “O Abu Baseer, he
also forbids intoxicant.” Al-‘A’sha replied: “concerning that,
by Allah, I have never considered intoxicant a necessity. I am
abandoning it this year.” Then he came to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and accepted
Islam. He went away and died the same year and he never
returned to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him. This is how Ibn Hisham has related the story here and he
criticizes Muhammad Ibn Ishaq a lot, may Allah be pleased
with him. This is one of the places where Ibn Hisham, may
Allah have Mercy on him, has criticized him because
intoxication was prohibited in Madinah after the incident of
Banu Nadeer as shall be explained shortly. The decision of
Al‘A’sha to proceed to accept Islam occurred after the Hijrah
and his poem is indicative of that when he said:
O you asking me to where I am headed
With the people of Yathrib I have a date
The proper flow according to Ibn Hisham is to delay the
mentioning of the story till after the Hijrah rather than
mentioning it here now. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
178

The Story of the Wrestling of Rukanah and
How He Sees the Tree Which the Prophet
Called and It Returned
Ibn Ishaq said: Abu Ishaq Ibn Yasar narrated to me that
Rukanah Ibn Abd Yazeed Ibn Hashim Ibn AlMuttalib Ibn
‘Abd Manaf was the strongest man of the Quraish. One day,
he met Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, in one of the pathways of Makkah and the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to him: “O
Rukanah, shouldn’t you fear Allah and accept what I am
inviting you to?” He replied, “If I knew that what you are
saying is the truth, I would have followed you.” Then Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. said to
him: “If I am able to beat you in a wrestling match would you
believe that what I am saying is the truth?” “Yes,” Rukanah
said confidently. “Okay, stand up for a duel.”
Rukanah rose to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, and they had a wrestling bout. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, felled him
helplessly. He said: “Let’s do it again, O Muhammad.” Then
they had another round and again, the Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, threw him down. He said: “O
Muhammad, this is surprising! You threw me?!” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“There is something more astonishing than that. I will show
you if you would fear Allah (SWT) and obey my orders.”
“What is that?” Rukanah asked. “I will call, for you, this tree
you are seeing and it will come to me.” Then Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, called
the tree and then it approached until it stood in front of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, and he said to it: “Return to your position.” Then the tree
returned to its position.

179

He continued: Then Rukanah went to his people and said: “O
Banu ‘Abd Manaf, by Allah, I have never seen a person
having a greater knowledge of magic than him
(Muhammad).” Then he narrated to them what he had seen
and what he (the Prophet) had done. This is how Ibn Ishaq has
related this story in a mursal form with this wording. Abu
Dawood and At-Tirmidhi have reported from the Hadith of
AbulHasan Al-Asqalani from Abu Ja‘afar Ibn Muhammad
Ibn Rukanah from his father that Rukanah wrestled with the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, threw him
down. Then Imam At-Tirmidhi said: “That Hadith is ghareeb
(strange). We do not know Abu Al-Hasan or Ibn Rukanah."
I say: Abu Bakr ash-Shafi‘i has narrated with a good chain
from Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that Yazeed
Ibn Rukanah wrestled with the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, and the Prophet threw him down thrice,
each time upon a bet of one hundred goats. Upon throwing
him down the third time, he said: “O Muhammad, no one had
ever pinned my back to the ground before you and no one had
been more hateful to me than you; now. I bear witness that
none deserves to be worshipped (in Truth) but Allah and that
you are a Messenger of Allah.” The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, stood up from him
and returned his goats.
Ibn Ishaq said: Whenever Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, sat at the Ka‘bah, some of the
weak ones from his Companions – Khabbab, ‘Ammar, Abu
Fukaihah, Yasar the freed slave of Safwan Ibn Umayyah,
Suhaib and some others among the Muslims, may Allah be
pleased with them, would sit with him, and the Quraish would
poke fun at them. They would say to one another, “As you
have seen, these are his Companions. Are they the ones, of all
of us, upon whom Allah has bestowed the favor of guidance
and true religion? If what Muhammad came with is of any
180

good, none would have preceded us to it and Allah would not
have preferred them above us for it.” Then Allah revealed
concerning them: “And turn not away those who invoke their
Lord, morning and afternoon seeking His Face. You are
accountable for them in nothing, and they are accountable for
you in nothing, that you may turn them away, and thus
become of the Zalimun (unjust). Thus We have tried some of
them with others, that they might say: 'Is it these (poor
Believers) that Allah has favored from among us?' Does not
Allah know best those who are grateful? When those who
believe in Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, Verses, lessons, Signs
and revelations, etc.) come to you, say: 'Salamun ‘Alaikum'
(peace be on you); your Lord has written Mercy for Himself,
so that, if any of you does evil in ignorance, and thereafter
repents and does righteous good deeds (by obeying Allah),
then surely, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (Soorah AlAn‘am 6:52-54)
He continued: Most of the times, Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, would sit at the Marwah
hillock by the sales point of a Christian boy called, Jabr, a
slave of the Banu Al-Hadrami. The Quraish would say: “By
Allah, no one taught Muhammad much of what he came with
except Jabr. Thus, Allah revealed concerning their
insinuations: “And indeed We know that they (polytheists and
pagans) say: 'It is only a human being who teaches him
(Muhammad).' The tongue of the man they refer to is foreign,
while this (the Qur’an) is a clear Arabic tongue.” (Soorah AnNahl 16:103)
Then he mentioned the revelation of Soorah Al-Kawthar
concerning ‘Aas Ibn Wa’il when he said regarding the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, that he is "Abtar" i.e. bereft of a successor such that when
he dies, remembrance of him will also cease. Thus Allah says:
“For he who makes you angry (O Muhammad), - he will be
cut off (from every good thing in this world and in the
181

Hereafter).” (Soorah Al-Kawthar 108:3) i.e. his remembrance
will be cut after him even if he is succeeded by large
offsprings and descendants. Good reputation and truthful
tongue (in praise) is not a function of large children, progenies
and successors. We have spoken about this Soorah in the
Tafseer; to Allah belongs all praise.
Thereafter, he mentioned the revelation of the statement:
“And they say: 'Why has not an angel been sent down to him?'
Had We sent down an angel, the matter would have been
judged at once.” (Soorah AlAn‘am 6:8) This is as a result of
the statement of Ubayy Ibn Khalaf, Zam‘ah Ibn Al-Aswad,
Al-‘Aas Ibn Wa’il and An-Nadr Ibn Al-Harith; that "why has
not an angel been sent down to you speaking on your behalf?”
Ibn Ishaq said: According the report reaching us, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, once
met Al-Waleed, Umayyah Ibn Khalaf and Abu Jahl. They
incited and made fun of him. The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, was infuriated and Allah
revealed: “And indeed (many) Messengers were mocked
before you, but their scoffers were surrounded by the very
thing that they used to mock at.” (Soorah Al-An‘am 6: 10)
I say: Allah says: “Verily, (many) Messengers were rejected
before you (O Muhammad), but with patience they bore the
rejection, and they were hurt, till Our Help reached them, and
none can alter the Words (Decisions) of Allah. Surely there
has reached you the information (news) about the Messengers
(before you).” (Soorah Al-An‘am 6: 34)
Allah, Most High, also says: “Truly! We will suffice you
against the scoffers.” (Soorah Al-Hijr 15:95)
Ibn Ishaq said: The chiefs of the mockers were five, as
narrated to me by Yazeed Ibn Rooman from ‘Urwah Ibn AzZubair. They were elderly and noble men of their people.
182

They were: Al-Aswad Ibn AlMuttalib, Abu Zam‘ah whom
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
cursed thus, “O Allah! Take his sight and try him with his
child.” Others were Al-Aswad Ibn ‘Abd Yaghooth,
AlWaleed, Al-‘Aas Ibn Wa’il and Al-Harith Ibn At-Tulatilah.
He also related that Allah revealed this Verse concerning
them: “Therefore proclaim openly (Allah’s Message Islamic
Monotheism) that which you are commanded, and turn away
from Al-Mushrikoon (polytheists, idolaters, and disbelievers,
etc.). Truly! We will suffice you against the scoffers. Who set
up along with Allah another ilah (god), they will come to
know.” (Soorah Al-Hijr 15:94-96)
At this point, Imam Al-Baihaqi mentioned the curse of
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
on the Quraish when they defied him that they should be
afflicted with seven years of famine and starvation similar to
that of Yoosuf. Then he cited what is related by the Sheikhain
in the Saheehain from Ibn Mas‘ood. He said: “Five (great
events) have passed: the constant Punishment, the (victory of
the) Romans, the (Enveloping) by the Smoke, the Mighty
grasp and the splitting of the moon.”
In another narration from Ibn Mas‘ood, he said: When the
Quraish became defiant of Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him, and they tarried in their
acceptance of Islam, he said: “O Allah, afflict them with seven
years of famine similar to that of Yoosuf.” Then they were
afflicted with famine for a year until everything became
desolate till they ate carcass until they would see something
like smoke between the sky and the Earth (because of severe
hunger). Then he prayed and Allah relieved them of it. Then
‘Abdullah recited this Verse: “Verily, We shall remove the
torment for a while. Verily! You will revert.” (Soorah AdDukhan 44:15) Thereafter, they reverted and disbelieved and
it (the punishment) was delayed for them till the Day of
Resurrection or they said: the Battle of Badr. It is also related
183

through ‘Abdur-Razzaq from Ma‘mar from Ayyoob from
‘Ikrimah from Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “Abu Sufyan came to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
to seek his assistance due to severe hunger for they had found
nothing (to eat) until they ate dyed wool.”
Then Allah revealed: “And indeed We seized them with
punishment, but they humbled not themselves to their Lord,
nor did they invoke (Allah) with submission to Him.” (Soorah
Al-Mu’minoon 23:76) (He continued:) “Then Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
supplicated until Allah relieved them.”
Then, Al-Baihaqi cited the story of Persia and the Romans and
the revelation of the statement of Allah: “Alif-Lam-Mim.
[These letters are one of the miracles of the Qur’an, and none
but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings]. The Romans have
been defeated. In the nearer land (Syria, Iraq, Jordan, and
Palestine), and they, after their defeat, will be victorious.
Within three to nine years. The decision of the matter, before
and after (these events) is only with Allah, (before the defeat
of Romans by the Persians, and after, i.e. the defeat of the
Persians by the Romans). And on that Day, the believers (i.e.
Muslims) will rejoice (at the victory given by Allah to the
Romans against the Persians), With the help of Allah, He
helps whom He wills, and He is the Almighty, the Most
Merciful.” (Soorah Ar-Room 30:1-5)
Then it is also narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said: The
Muslims desired that the Romans should vanquish the
Persians for they were the People of the Book while the
pagans desired that the Persians vanquish the Romans for they
were idol worshippers (like them). The Muslims mentioned
this to Abu Bakr who, in turn, mentioned it to the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. The Prophet, peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him, said: “They (the Romans)
shall certainly be victorious.” Abu Bakr mentioned that to the
184

pagans and they said: “Let there be a (bet for a) period (of
time) between us and you, if they (the Romans) win, such and
such shall be yours and if we are victorious, such and such
shall be ours.” Abu Bakr mentioned that too to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, and he
said: “Why don’t you make it less than ten years?” He said:
In less than ten years, the Romans were eventually victorious
thereafter.

The Journey by Night of Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
from Makkah to Jerusalem and then his
ascension there from to the heavens
Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Shaibah related from ‘Uthman from Sa‘eed
Ibn Meena from Jabir and Ibn ‘Abbas both of whom said:
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
was born in the year of the elephant on Tuesday, 12th day of
Rabee‘ ul- Awwal. He was raised a Prophet in Rabee‘ ulAwwal, in the same month, he was taken to the heaven same
month, he died in the same month, migrated same month, died
same month and in the same revelation ceased. This is the
preference of Al-Hafiz Abdul-Ghani Ibn Suroor Al-Maqdisi
in his Seerah. He cited a Hadith with inauthentic chain of
narrations which we mentioned in "the virtues of the month
of Rabee‘ ul-Awwal" that Al-Isra Wal-Mi‘raj occurred in the
27th night of Rajab. And Allah knows best. There are those
who claim that Al-Isra occurred in the first night of Jumu‘ah
in the month of Rajab. It is the night of Ragha’ib in which the
popular Salat is established; however, there is no basis for
that. And Allah knows best.
We have mentioned the Ahadeeth cited concerning that
during the study of the statement of Allah: Glorified (and
Exalted) be He (Allah) [above all that (evil) they associate
with Him]. Who took His slave (Muhammad) for a journey
185

by night from Al-Masjid-Al-Haram (at Makkah) to the
farthest mosque (in Jerusalem), the neighborhood whereof
We have blessed, in order that We might show him
(Muhammad) of Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, lessons, signs,
etc.). Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer. (Soorah AlIsra 17:1)
We shall mention briefly what Ibn Ishaq said, Allah have
Mercy on him. He said, after all he mentioned in the previous
sections: “Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, was taken by night from Al-Masjid AlHaram to the Masjid Al-Aqsa at Bait Al-Maqdis in
Jeruasalem. The news of Islam had spread among the Quraish
in Makkah and all the tribes. (He continued), from what has
reached me about his journey was related from Ibn Mas‘ood,
Abu Sa‘eed, ‘A’ishah, Mu‘awiyyah, Umm Hani Bint Abu
Talib, Allah be pleased with them all; and Al-Hasan Ibn AbulHasan, Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri, Qatadah and others from among
the people of knowledge all of them narrating from him some
of what I have been informed of about him.
His journey and what has been related to me about it, of some
tests and tribulations, some of the commands of Allah, (the
Greatness of His) Power and His Authority and a lesson for
the men of understanding. He was taken by night in manner
that Allah wished and in a manner that He chose to let him
see what He wished from some of His Signs in such a way
that he made him view some of the ordainments of Allah, His
Magnificent Authority and His Power with which He does
whatever He wills. Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood, from what reached
me, said: “Al-Buraq, was brought for Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him. Al-Buraq is an
animal on which the Messengers of Allah rode. Each stride of
the animal reaches the furthest point of its sight. The Prophet,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, was carried on it
and set out along with his companion to see some of the signs
between the heaven and the Earth until they got to Bait Al186

Maqdis. There, he found Ibrahim, Moosa and ‘Eesa among a
group of Prophets that have gathered to welcome him. He led
them in Salat and then he was brought three vessels each
containing milk, an intoxicant and water. It was mentioned
that the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
drank from the vessel of water and Jibraeel said to him: “You
were guided and your nation will also be guided.”
Ibn Ishaq related, from the information that reached him from
Umm Hani that she said: “The Messenger of Allah was not
taken by night (Isra) from anywhere other than my house. He
slept in my house that night after he had offered the late night
prayer (Isha’). When it neared the time of Fajr (daybreak), he
woke us. When he rose, he offered the morning (Subh)
prayers and we offered it with him then he said: “O Umm
Hani’! I had prayed the late night prayer (Isha’) with you in
this valley then I was taken to Bait Al-Maqdis and I prayed
there and now I just offered the morning prayer with you as
you have observed.” Then he stood up to leave, I held the edge
of his cloth and I said: "O Prophet of Allah, do not narrate this
to people so that they may not belie you and insult you.” He
said: “By Allah, I am going to narrate it to them.” So he
informed them and they belied him. He said to them: “The
proof of that is that I met the caravan of such-and- such clan
in such-and-such valley. I startled them and a camel bolted
away and I directed them to it while I was on my way to AshSham. Then I retuned until I reached Dajnan (a mountain
located in the direction of Tihamah), I met the caravan of
such- and-such clan and I found the people in it asleep. There
was a vessel containing water which they covered with
something. I lifted the lid of the container and drank its
content and I replaced the cover as it was. The evidence of
that is that their caravan is desceding right now from the
mountain path of Tan‘eem at its vanguard is an ash-colored
camel. On its back are two wooden containers, one of them
black in color and the other a mixture of white and black
color.” The people hastened toward the mountain pass and the
187

camel that they first met was not the one described to them.
They asked them about the water container and the camel and
they were informed about them just as Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, had told them.
Ibn Ishaq said: It is narrated to me that Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri
said: I heard Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him, say: “When I finished with what transpired at
Bait Al-Maqdis, I was taken on Mi‘raj (ascension to the
heaven) and I did not see anything more beautiful. This is the
same place to which your dead soar at the point of death. My
companion raised me onto it until we ended up at one of the
gates of heaven called ‘Bab ul-Hafazah’ under the charge of
an angel called Isma’eel. Under him are twelve thousand
angels and under each of those twelve thousand angels were
another twelve thousand angels.
He continued: Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him, would say when he narrates this Hadith: “And
none can know the hosts of your Lord but He.” (Soorah AlMuddaththir 74:31) Then he related the remainder of the
Hadith completely which is an extremely long one with his
chain of narrations and wordings in his Tafseer. We discussed
it at length for it is one of the ghareeb (strange) Ahadeeth and
there is a weakness in its chain of narrations. This is also same
in the Hadith of Umm Hani. The well-established version is
the one in the Saheehain from the narration of Shareek Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn Abi Namir from Anas that the Night Journey
was from the Masjid Al-Haram at the Hijr (Isma‘eel). There
are some oddities in its wordings from some angles. From the
strangeness in this report is his statement: “That (the journey)
took place before revelation was sent to him.” The response
is that the first time they came was before revelation was sent
to him and in that night nothing really happened. Then the
angels came once again on another night and he said nothing
concerning that. That was prior to the revelation (of the
Qur’an) to him. Rather, he came to him after revelation had
188

commenced. The Isra occurred either a little after (the
commencement of) Inspiration as claimed by some or much
after with about ten years as claimed by others and this is the
most popular view. The washing of his chest that night before
the Isra was the second or third, according to an opinion. This
is because his attention is required at the sublime company
and the presence of Allah. Then he rode Al-Buraq as a
measure of elevation, esteem and honor for him. When he got
to Bait Al-Maqdis he tethered it to a loop which previous
Prophets had also tethered it.
Then he entered the Bait Al-Maqdis and offered Salat in its
Qiblah as (tahiyyah) greeting for mosque. Hudhaifah, Allah
be pleased with him, objects to (the report) that he entered
Bait Al-Maqdis and the tethering of the animal and his Salat
therein, saying that this is odd and an affirming evidence is
preferred over a negating one.
They also disagree on the timing of his congregating with the
Prophets and his leading them in prayer whether that occurred
before his ascension to the heaven as pointed out by all that
came before or after his descension from the heaven as
indicated by some of the versions which appears to be a more
logical transition as we shall mention shortly. Two opinions
can be gleaned on this. And Allah knows best.
When he concluded the affairs of the Bait Al-Maqdis, a
stairway was set up for him. He climbed it till he reached the
heavens. The ascension was not on the Buraq as mistakenly
supposed by some people. Rather, Al-Buraq had been
tethered at the entrance of the Mosque of Bait Al-Maqdis so
that he may ride it on his return journey back to Makkah.
He climbed from one heaven to another in his ascension until
he passed the fourth. Each time he got to a heaven, he met its
companions and those residing there among the senior angels
and Prophets. He mentioned the specific Prophets he met such
189

as Adam in the heaven closest to the Earth; Yahya and ‘Eesa
in the second heaven; Idrees in the fourth; Moosa in the sixth
based on what is more authentic; he met Ibrahim in the
seventh heaven reclining his back against Bait Al-Ma‘mur in
which 70,000 angels enter everyday to offer Salat and
circumambulate in the worship (of Allah). Each 70,000 will
not return to it until the Day of Resurrection. He passed by the
rank-and-file of the angels until he got to a level where he
heard the sound of pens, writing. Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him, was raised to the Sidrat
Al-Muntaha which is a tree, the size of its leave measuring the
ear of an elephant and the dimension of its Nabk fruit is like
that of the clay jugs of Hajar (i.e. a town in Arabia). It is
shrouded in resplendent and magnificent colors. The angels
climb it like crows owing to their numbers. Its floor is of gold
and it is enveloped in the radiance of Allah’s Light. He saw
there Jibraeel, peace be upon him, with 600 wings and the
distance between two of his wings is like the distance between
the heaven and the Earth.
This is what Allah mentioned (in the Qur’an): “And indeed he
(Muhammad) saw him (Jibraeel) at a second descent (i.e.
another time). Near Sidrat ul-Muntaha [lote-tree of the utmost
boundary (beyond which none can pass)]. Near it is the
Paradise of Abode. When that covered the lote-tree which did
cover it! The sight (of Prophet Muhammad) turned not aside
(right or left), nor it transgressed beyond (the) limit (ordained
for it). Indeed he (Muhammad) did see, of the Greatest Signs,
of his Lord (Allah).” (Soorah AnNajm 53:13-17)
That is, he neither turned right nor left and he did not raise
his gaze beyond the limit set for him. This is a great
approval for him and a noble manner. This marks the second
time he would see Jibraeel in the actual form in which Allah
has created him as reported by Ibn Mas‘ood, Abu Hurairah,
Abu Dharr and ‘A’ishah. Allah be pleased with them all.
190

The first time is indicated by the statement of Allah: “He has
been taught (this Qur’an) by one mighty in power (Jibraeel).
Dhu Mirrah (free from any defect in body and mind), Fastawa
[then he (Jibraeel) rose and became stable]. While he
(Jibraeel) was in the highest part of the horizon, Then he
(Jibraeel) approached and came closer, And was at a distance
of two bows’ length or (even) nearer, So did (Allah) convey
the Inspiration to His slave (Muhammad through Jibraeel).”
(Soorah An-Najm [53]:5-10)
That was when he saw him on the horizon when Jibraeel
approached Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him, in his gargantuan creation spanning the space
between the heaven and the Earth. He came close to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, till the
distance between them was no more than the span of two
bows or even closer. This is the more authentic tafseer as
indicated by the words of senior Companions whose names
had been mentioned previously. May Allah be pleased with
them all.
However, concerning the statement of Shareek reported from
Anas on the Hadith of Al-Isra: “then the Omnipotent Lord of
Honor came close and was at a distance of two bows’ length
or (even) nearer,” it is possible that this is the understanding
of the narrator and he interpolated it into the Hadith. And
Allah knows best. Even though it is preserved yet it is not the
tafseer of the Verse; rather it is something else not indicated
by the Verse. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
That night, Allah (SWT) made obligatory on His servant,
Muhammad, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, and on
his Ummah, Salawat (prayers) to be offered 50 times every
day and night. Then he did not cease going back and forth
between Moosa and Allah, the Lord Almighty, until Allah
reduced them to five; to Him belong gratitude and grace. And
191

He (Allah) said: “It is five (but they shall equal) fifty (in
reward). Good deeds are multiplied ten fold.”
That night, he also obtained the honor of being spoken to
directly by Allah Almighty. The Imams of Sunnah are
categorical concerning that. However, they disagree on the
sighting (of Allah). Did Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him, see his Lord on the night of
ascension? Some of them said he saw Him with his heart
twice. This is the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas and a group (of
scholars). Ibn ‘Abbas and others were categorical about the
seeing of the Almighty. Among those who were also
categorical about the Prophet’s seeing of Allah were Abu
Hurairah, Ahmad Ibn Hambal, may Allah be pleased with
both of them. There are those who declare that the seeing was
with the two eyes. This is the preferred opinion of Ibn Jareer
and he went to the extreme in it. Others also followed him
among the later scholars. From those recorded to hold the
opinion of seeing with the physical eyes was Sheikh
AbulHasan Al-Ash‘ari from what was related from him by
As-Suhaili. This is also the preferred opinion of Shaikh Abu
Zakariyya An-Nawawi in his fatawa.
Another group argues that that (i.e. the physical seeing) did
not happen based on the Hadith of Abu Dharr in Saheeh
Muslim: “I asked the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him: ‘Did you see your Lord?’ He said: ‘He
is a Light, how could I see Him'?” In yet another version: “I
saw Light.”
They argued further: It is not a seeing with the mortal eyes.
This is why Allah said to Moosa, according to what is related
in some Divine books: “O Moosa, no living person shall see
Me except that he dies and no dry thing except that it is
pulverized.” The divergence (of opinion) on this matter is
well-known among the predecessors and the successors. And
Allah knows best.
192

Thereafter, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him, descended to Bait Al-Maqdis. A popular view is
that the Prophets descended with him on his return from the
presence of Allah as a mark of honor and esteem as is
customary of delegates. He did not meet any one of them
before his invitation to the heaven. That is why whenever he
met any one of the Prophets, Jibraeel would say to him when
that person approached to offer Salam (greeting): "This is soand-so, say Salam to him." If he had met them prior to his
ascension, there would have been no need for introducing
them to him the second time. From what is indicative of that
is his statement that: “When it was time for prayers, I led
them.”
He witnessed that night, scenes from the Signs of Allah, that
if someone other than him were to see a part of it, he would
wake up dazed or in a giddy mental state. However, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, woke
up in a calm state fearful that if he informed his people about
what he saw, they would hasten to call him a liar. Cautiously,
he first told them that he went to Bait Al-Maqdis same night.
It is related that Abu Jahl, may Allah’s curse be upon him,
saw Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, in the Masjid Al-Haram sitting quietly. He said to him:
“Do you have any news?” The Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, of Allah replied: “Yes.”
“What is the news?” Abu Jahl asked. “I was taken by night to
Bait Al-Maqdis,” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, told him. “Bait Al-Maqdis?!” Abu Jahl
asked in astonishment. “Yes,” the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, replied calmly. Abu Jahl
asked him, “If I gather your people so that you may inform
them, would you repeat what you have just told me?” Again,
the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
answered: “Yes.” Abu Jahl intended to gather the Quraish so
that they may hear that from him and Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, also wanted them to
193

gather so as to inform them of same and to deliver the message
to them. So Abu Jahl said loudly: “Come around, O men of
Quraish!” When they gathered into an assembly, he said to
the Prophet, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him: “Tell
them what you have just told me.” Then Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, narrated to them
the story of what he saw and that he went to Bait Al-Maqdis
that night and prayed therein. Some of them clapped in
bewilderment and others hissed indicating the remoteness of
the truth of what he said.
The news of the story went round Makkah and some people
came to Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, and
informed him that Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, said such-andsuch. He said, “You are telling lie
against him.” They said: “By Allah, he actually said so.” Then
Abu Bakr said: “If he really said that, then he has told the
truth.”
Then he came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, while the pagans of Quraish were
surrounding him. He asked him about the story and he
informed him. He sought from him the description of Bait AlMaqdis so that the pagans may hear it and thereby see the truth
of his claim. However, it is recorded in the Saheeh that it is
the pagans who asked Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, that. The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I kept informing
them of the description and certain things became unclear to
me and then Allah showed me the picture of Bait Al-Maqdis
till I was looking at it as if it was just less farther than the
house of ‘Aqeel. So I described it to them.” They said: “As
for the description, it is correct.”
Ibn ‘Abbas said: It is a physical seeing which Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, was
made to see. This is the opinion of the majority among the
194

predecessors and the successors that the Isra was in body and
soul as pointed out by the literal narration of his riding and
climbing in his ascension. Thus, Allah says: “Glorified (and
Exalted) be He (Allah) [above all that (evil) they associate
with Him]. Who took His slave (Muhammad) for a journey
by night from Al-Masjid-Al-Haram (at Makkah) to the
farthest mosque (in Jerusalem).” (Soorah Al-Isra 17:1)
Glorification is done at the occurrence of a great supernatural
sign. That is an indication that the journey occurred in body
and soul and the "slave" is an expression of both. Also, if it
had been in dream, the pagans of Quraish would not have
hastened to deny and reject it since there is nothing really
spectacular about it i.e. traveling in dream. This indicates that
it was in a wakeful state and not in his sleep.
Ibn Ishaq narrated: Some of the family of Abu Bakr narrated
to me from ‘A’ishah, the Mother of the Believers, that she
used to say: “The body of Allah’s Messenger was not missed
but Allah took him by the soul (on the journey).”
In the morning of the night of Isra, Jibraeel came to him at the
time of the declension of the midday sun and explained to him
the manner of prayer and its timing. Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, commanded that his
Companions should gather and Jibraeel led him (in the
prayers of) that day till the next and the Companions follow
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, while
he in turn followed Jibraeel as cited in the Hadith narrated
from Ibn ‘Abbas and Jabir: “Jibraeel led me in prayer at the
House (i.e. the Ka‘bah) twice.” He also explained to him the
two timings (of each Salat) the beginning and the end times.
Both times and the time in between are the timing of each
Salat but he did not mention any intervening timing for the
Maghreb prayer. This has been established in the Hadith of
Abu Moosa, Buraidah and ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr, all which is
related in Saheeh Muslim.
195

As regards what is recorded in Saheeh Al-Bukhari from
‘A’ishah that she said: “The prayer was prescribed as
consisting of two rak‘ahs, (both) when one was resident and
when traveling. The prayer while traveling was left according
to the original prescription and the prayer of the one who was
resident was increased.”
Awza’i also narrated a similar thing from Az-Zuhri and AshSha‘bi from Masrooq.
There is somewhat ambiguity for the fact that ‘A’ishah used
to offer her prayer in full while on a journey; same goes for
‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan. We have spoken on that when discussing
the statement of Allah:
“And when you (Muslims) travel in the land, there is no sin
on you if you shorten your Salat (prayer) if you fear that the
disbelievers may attack you, verily, the disbelievers are ever
unto you open enemies.” (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:101)
Imam Al-Baihaqi said: Al-Hasan Al-Basri holds the opinion
that in the prayer of a resident the first to be made obligatory
was four rak‘ahs as mentioned in mursal form concerning his
prayer the morning of the night of ascension. Zuhr was
ordained four (rak‘ahs); so also was ‘Asr. As for Maghreb,
three rak‘ahs were ordained with a loud recitation in the first
two. Isha’ is four with a loud recitation in the first two rak‘ahs
and two rak‘ahs were ordained for Subh and recitation in both
is loud.
I say: Perhaps ‘A’ishah intended that the prayer used to be
offered in two rak‘ahs before the ascension. Thereafter, when
the five daily prayers were ordained, the prayer of a resident
was left according to the original prescription while a
concession was given that the prayer on a journey be offered
in two rak‘ahs as it were in the early time. Against the

196

backdrop of this, all ambiguities are dispelled. And Allah
knows best.

The Splitting of the Moon in the Time of the
Prophet, Peace and Blessings of Allah be
Upon Him
Allah, Most High, says: The Hour has drawn near, and the
moon has been cleft asunder (the people of Makkah requested
Prophet Muhammad to show them a miracle, so he showed
them the splitting of the moon). And if they see a sign, they
turn away, and say: “This is continuous magic.” They belied
(the Verses of Allah, this Qur’an), and followed their own
lusts. And every matter will be settled [according to the kind
of deeds (for the doer of good deeds, his deeds will take him
to Paradise, and similarly evil deeds will take their doers to
Hell)]. (Soorah Al-Qamar 54:1-3)
The Muslims are agreed upon the occurrence of that during
his time. A number of Ahadeeth have been reported
concurrently concerning that from various routes in such a
way that they denote decisiveness in the view of the one who
comprehends that and reflects on it. We shall mention as
much as possible, if Allah wills.
Anas reported (that): “The people of Makkah demanded that
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be upon him,
show them (some) signs (miracles) and he splitted the moon
in Makkah twice.” He recited: “The Hour has drawn near, and
the moon has been cleft asunder.” (Soorah Al-Qamar 54:1)
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: “The moon was split into two parts
during the lifetime of the Prophet.” Related by Al-Bukhari
and Muslim.
Al-Hafiz Abu Nu‘aim reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said
concerning the Verse: “The Hour has drawn near, and the
197

moon has been cleft asunder” that “the polytheists gathered in
the presence of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. Among them were Al-Waleed Ibn AlMugheerah, Abu Jahl, Al-‘As Ibn Wa’il, Al-‘As Ibn Hisham,
Al-Aswad Ibn ‘Abd Yaghooth, Al-‘As Ibn Al-Muttalib,
Zam‘ah Ibn Al-Aswad, Nadhr Ibn Al-Harith and their
cohorts. They said to the Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him: “If indeed you are truthful, then split the
moon into two halves for us; one half over Abu Qubays and
the other half above Qu’ayqi’an.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said to them: “If I do so will
you believe?” they replied in affirmative. It was on a night of
a full moon and Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, asked Allah to grant him what they had
requested. The moon splitted into two halves; one half on Abu
Qubays and the other on Qu’ayqi’an. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, called out: “O Aba
Salamah Ibn ‘Abd Al-Asad and Al-Arqam Ibn Al-Arqam bear
witness (to this)!”

The Death of Abu Talib, the uncle of Allah’s
Messenger and soon after, Khadeejah Bint
Khuwaiylid, the wife of Allah’s Messenger
Ibn Ishaq said: Then Khadeejah and Abu Talib died the same
year. With the death of Khadeejah, calamities befell Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in
quick succession. She had been to him a solace to which he
took recourse in times of trial. Coupled with that was the death
of his uncle, Abu Talib. He had been to him a prop and a
fortress in his affairs, a protection and a helper against his
people. These deaths occurred three years before his
migration to Madinah. When Abu Talib died, the Quraish
were able to inflict such harm on Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, which they were not able
198

in the lifetime of Abu Talib. One of the foolish ones among
the Quraish once stood in his way and threw dust on his head.
Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah narrated to me from his father who said:
“Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, returned to his house with sand on his head. One of his
daughters rose to wash it while she wept. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, said: “Do not weep
my daughter for Allah will protect your father.” Meanwhile,
he was also saying as well: “The Quraish were not able to
inflict anything detestable to me until Abu Talib died.”
Ibn Ishaq related that Ibn ‘Abbas said: when some noblemen
of the Quraish went to Abu Talib, among whom were ‘Utbah
Ibn Rabee‘ah, Shaibah Ibn Rabee‘ah, Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham,
Umayyah Ibn Khalaf, Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb, they said to him:
“O Abu Talib! You know your position among us and now in
your current situation, we are deeply concerned about you.
You know the problems between us and your nephew.
Summon him and let us make a bargain that he will leave us
alone and we will leave him alone; let him have his religion
and we will have ours.”
When he came, Abu Talib said: “O my nephew, here are
notables of your people who have gathered so as to give and
take from you.” “Yes,” he began, “let you (all) give me one
word by which you can rule the Arabs and subject the nonArabs to you.” “Yes, by your father, and ten words,” Abu Jahl
said. “Say none deserves to be worshipped except Allah and
renounce what you worship besides Him.” They clapped their
hands in disbelief and said: “Do you want to make all the gods
into one, O Muhammad? That is an extraordinary matter!”
Then they said to one another: “This man will not give you
anything that you want, so go and be with the religion of your
ancestors until Allah judges between you and him.” So they
left.
199

Abu Talib said to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him: “By Allah, O nephew, I do not think you have
asked them something too much.” On hearing this, the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, wished that he would embrace Islam, and he said at once,
“O uncle, say it, and I shall ask (my Lord) to make it lawful
(for me) because of it to intercede for you on the Day of
Resurrection.” Seeing the Prophet’s enthusiasm, he said:
“Were it not that I am afraid that you and your family would
be disgraced after my death and that the Quraish would think
that I had only said it in fear of death, I would say it. I am not
saying it but for pleasing you with it.” As his death was
approaching, Al-‘Abbas found Abu Talib moving his lips, so
he put his ear close to him and said, “O nephew, by Allah, my
brother has spoken the word you ordered him to say.” The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “I did not hear it.”
Allah (SWT) revealed concerning the group (of Quraish
noblemen) that met Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him: “Saad [These letters (sad, etc.) are one of
the miracles of the Qur'an, and none but Allah (Alone) Knows
their meanings]. By the Qur'an full of reminding
(explanations and honor for the one who believes in it). Nay,
those who disbeliever are in false pride and opposition.”
(Soorah Saad 88:1-2)

Concerning the death of Khadeejah and a
mention of some of her excellence and
virtues
Certainly He has done that with the declaration of the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, when he gave her
the tiding of a house in Paradise made of jewel in which there
is neither tumult nor fatigue. Al-Baihaqi said: It reached me
that Khadeejah died three days after Abu Talib. Abu
200

‘Abdullah Ibn Mandah mentioned this in his book AlMa‘rifah as well as our Sheikh, Abu ‘Abdullah Al-Hafiz.
Imam Al-Bukhari related that Abu Hurairah narrated that
Jibraeel came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him, and said: “O Allah’s Messenger! This is
Khadeejah coming to you with a dish having Idam or some
food or drink. When she reaches you, greet her on behalf of
her Lord (i.e. Allah) and on my behalf, and give her the glad
tidings of having a Qasab palace in Paradise wherein there
will be neither any noise nor any fatigue (trouble).” Imam
Muslim also related it.
Imam Al-Bukhari also related that Isma‘eel reported: "I said
to ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi ‘Awfa: 'Did Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him, give glad tidings of
Paradise to Khadeejah?' He said: 'Yes. He did give glad
tidings to her of a palace of jewels in Paradise wherein there
would be no noise and no fatigue'.”
Narrated ‘A’ishah, Allah be pleased with her: “I never felt so
jealous of any wife of the Prophet as I did of Khadeejah
because Allah’s Messenger used to remember and praise her
too often and because it was revealed to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, that he should give
her (Khadeejah) the glad tidings of her having a palace of
Qasab in Paradise and whenever he slaughtered a sheep, he
would send some part to the women friends of Khadeejah.”
This is Al-Bukhari’s wordings.
‘A’ishah reported that Halah Bint Khuwailid (sister of
Khadeejah) sought permission from Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to see him and he
was reminded of Khadeejah’s (manner of) asking leave to
enter and (was overwhelmed) with emotions thereby and said:
‘O Allah, it is Halah, ‘ and I felt jealous and said: ‘Why do
you remember one of those old women of the Quraish with
201

gums red and who is long dead while Allah has given you a
better one in her stead'?”
There is a clear affirmation that ‘A’ishah is more pre-eminent
over Khadeejah either in virtues or in intimacy since he
neither objected to her statement nor refuted her as is evident
in the wordings of AlBukhari, Allah have Mercy on him.

The Prophet’s Marriage to ‘A’ishah Bint
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq and Sawdah Bint
Zam‘ah
The more authentic opinion is that he married ‘A’ishah first
as shall be mentioned shortly. Al-Bukhari related in the
chapter of "The marriage of ‘A’ishah" from ‘A’ishah that the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to
her: “You were shown to me twice (in my dream). I saw you
in a silken piece of cloth, and I said to him, ‘Uncover (her), ‘
and behold, it was you. I said (to myself), ‘If this is from
Allah, then it must happen'.”
Al-Bukhari related from ‘A’ishah that she said: “I said, 'O
Allah’s Messenger! Suppose you landed in a valley where
there is a tree of which something has been eaten and then you
found trees of which nothing has been eaten, of which tree
would you let your camel graze?' He said, '(I will let my camel
graze) of the one of which nothing has been eaten before'.”
(The sub-narrator added: ‘A’ishah meant that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had not
married a virgin besides herself.) AlBukhari exclusively
related it.
Al-Bukhari related from ‘Urwah that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked Abu Bakr
for ‘A’ishah’s hand in marriage. Abu Bakr said “But I am
your brother.” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
202

upon him, said, “You are my brother in Allah’s Religion and
His Book, but she (‘A’ishah) is lawful for me to marry.”
Al-Bukhari related from Hisham Ibn ‘Urwah who reported
from his father that: Khadeejah died three year before the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, departed
to Madinah. He stayed there for two years or so and then he
married ‘A’ishah when she was a girl of six years of age, and
he consummated that marriage when she was nine years old.
Al-Bukhari related that ‘A’ishah narrated: “The Prophet
married me when I was a girl of six (years). We went to
Madinah and stayed at the home of Bani Al-Harith Ibn
Khazraj. Then I got ill and my hair fell off. Later on, my hair
grew (again) and my mother, Umm Rooman, came to me
while I was playing in a swing with some of my girlfriends.
She called me, and I went to her, not knowing what she
wanted to do to me. She caught me by the hand and made me
stand at the door of the house. I was breathless then, and when
my breathing became alright, she took some water and rubbed
my face and head with it. Then she took me into the house.
There in the house I saw some Ansari women who said, “Best
wishes and Allah’s Blessing and a good luck.” Then she
entrusted me to them and they prepared me (for the marriage).
Unexpectedly Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, came to me in the forenoon and my
mother handed me over to him, and at that time I was a girl of
nine years of age.”
Imam Ahmad related from ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, made
marriage proposal to a woman from his people called Sawdah.
She had been bereaved. She had five girls (or six) from her
dead husband. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said to her: “What prevents you from
(marrying) me?” she said: “By Allah, nothing prevents me
from marrying you and you becoming the most beloved
203

person to me except that I honor you above being disturbed
by the noise of these girls morning and night.” “Is anything
other than this preventing you (from marrying) me?” The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, asked and she replied: “None else, by Allah.” Then
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “Allah have Mercy on you. The best women are the
riders of the camels and the righteous among the women of
Quraish. They are the kindest women to their children in their
childhood and the more careful women of the property of their
husbands.”

Allah’s Messenger Goes to the People of AtTa’if to Invite Them to Allah and to the Aid
of His Religion and They Reject Him
Ibn Ishaq said: “After Abu Talib died, the Quraish were able
to inflict such harm on Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, that they were unable to do
in the lifetime of his uncle, Abu Talib. Thus, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, went
to At-Ta’if in search of aid and protection from Thaqeef. He
also nursed the hope that they would accept what he has
brought to them from Allah. He went to them alone. Yazeed
Ibn Abi Ziyad reported from Muhammad Ibn Kab AlQurazi
who said: 'When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, arrived in AtTa’if, he proceeded to certain
personalities of the Thaqeef who were their chiefs and
notables. They were three brothers, ‘Abd Yaleel, Mas‘ood
and Habeeb the sons of ‘Amr Ibn ‘Umair Ibn 'Awf Ibn ‘Uqdah
Ibn Ghiyarah Ibn 'Awf Ibn Thaqeef. One of them was married
to a Quraishi woman from Banu Jumah. Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sat with them,
called them to believe in Allah and requested their support
against his adversaries among his people. One of them said: I
will tear the cloth of the Ka‘bah if Allah has indeed sent you
204

as a Messenger! Another said: Did not Allah find anyone
other than you to send? The third person said: I swear by Allah
that I will never have any discussion with you. If you are truly
a Messenger from Allah, then you are the most dangerous
person to reply to his words; and if you are lying against
Allah, I feel it is imperative not to speak with you.”
Then the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, rose from their presence after he had lost hope of
any good from Thaqeef. It has also reached me that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to
them: “Seeing that you have acted as you have, please keep
the matter secret” for Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, had detested that his people would get
wind of it and thus will increase in their acts against him. They
reneged on that and stirred their rifrafs and slaves to abuse and
ridicule him until they gathered a mob against him. He took
shelter and rested against the wall of a vineyard of an orchard
belonging to ‘Utbah Ibn Rabee‘ah and his brother Shaibah
who were there at the time. They drove back the rifrafs of
Thaqeef who were pursuing him. He proceeded to the shade
of a grape vineyard and sat in there while the two sons of
Rabee‘ah beheld what has befallen him from the rifrafs of the
people of At-Ta’if. According to what I was informed, the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, met a
woman of Banu Jumah and said to her: “What has befallen us
from the people of your husband!”
I was informed that when Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, felt safe, he said:
“O Allah! To You I complain of my weakness, of my
helplessness and my insignificance before men. O Most
Merciful of the merciful, You are the Lord of helpless and
You are my Lord! Into whose hands would You entrust me?
Into the hands of a remote person who would scowl at me, or
to an enemy whom You have given control over my affairs?
205

If You are not angry with me, I do not care; but Your
clemency is more spacious for me. I seek refuge with the
Light of Your Countenance, whereby all darkness is
illuminated, and of which all affairs are ordered in this world
as well as in the Hereafter, from (any possibility) that You
should send down Your anger or that I should incur Your
wrath. It is for me to return to You until You are well satisfied!
There is no wisdom nor might except with You.”
Ibn Ishaq related: When the two sons of Rabee‘ah, ‘Utbah and
Shaibah, saw his travail, they felt compassion for him and
they sent to him a young Christian slave called ‘Addas saying
to him: “Take a bunch of grapes, place it on a plate and then
take it to that man and ask him to eat from it.” Addas did so.
He went to him with the plate and placed it before him asking
him to eat. When Allah’s Messenger put his hand into it, he
said: “In the Name of Allah” and then he ate from it. Addas
looked at his face and said: “By Allah, the people in this land
do not say these words.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, asked: “Then which country
are you from, O Addas, and what is your religion?” he replied:
“I am a Christian from Neenaw.” Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “From the town of
a righteous man Yoonus Ibn Matta,” Addas said: “How did
you know about Yoonus Ibn Matta?” Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, replied: “He is my
brother; he was a Prophet and so am I.” Addas bent over him
to kiss his head, hands and feet.
The sons of Rabee‘ah said to each other: “He has corrupted
him for you.” When Addas returned to them, they asked him:
“Woe be unto you, O Addas, why were you kissing the head,
hands and feet of that man?” He responded: “My master, there
is nothing better on the surface of the Earth than that man. He
has informed me of things that only a Prophet could know.”
They said: “Be careful, Addas. Do not let him seduce you
from your religion, for yours is better than his.”
206

It is recorded in the Saheehain that ‘A’ishah said to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him: “Have
you encountered a day harder than the day of the Battle of
Uhud?” The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, replied, “Your tribes have troubled me a lot, and the
worse trouble was the trouble on the Day of ‘Aqabah when I
presented myself to Ibn ‘Abd Yaleel Ibn ‘Abd Kulal and he
did not respond to my demand. So I departed, overwhelmed
with excessive sorrow, and proceeded on, and could not relax
till I found myself at Qarnath-Tha‘alib where I lifted my head
toward the sky to see a cloud shading me unexpectedly. I
looked up and saw Jibraeel in it, peace be upon him. He called
me saying, ‘Allah has heard your people’s saying to you, and
what they have replied back to you, Allah has sent the Angel
of the Mountains to you so that you may order him to do
whatever you wish to these people.’ The Angel of the
Mountains called and greeted me, and then said, “O
Muhammad! Order what you wish. If you like, I will let AlAkhshabain (i.e. two mountains) fall on them.” The Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said, “No but I
hope that Allah will let them beget children who will worship
Allah, Alone, and will worship None besides Him.”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq reported the hearing of the recitation of
the Qur’an by some Jinns on his way back from At-Ta’if when
he stayed overnight in Nakhlah. The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, offered the Subh prayer with
his Companions and the Jinns who were attracted to him
heard his recitation of the Qur’an there. Ibn Ishaq said there
were seven of them (from the Jinns of the people of
Naseebeen) and Allah revealed concerning them:
“And (remember) when We sent toward you (Muhammad)
Nafran (three to ten persons) of the Jinns, (quietly) listening
to the Qur’an, when they stood in the presence thereof, they
said: 'Listen in silence!' And when it was finished, they
207

returned to their people, as warners.” (Soorah Al-Ahqaf
46:29)
Al-Umawi has mentioned in his Maghazi that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Urraiqit to Al-Akhnas Ibn Shareeq requesting
him to guard him in Makkah. He said in response: “An ally of
the Quraish does not stand guard for one of its own.” Then the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, sent him
to Suhail Ibn Amr to guard him and he also said in response:
“The descendant of Banu ‘Amir Ibn Lu’ayy do not stand
guard for Banu Ka‘b Ibn Lu’ayy.” Then he sent him to AlMut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy to guard him and he said: “Yes, tell him
to come.” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him, went and spent the night with him. In the morning,
he went with him along with his six or seven children, all of
them bearing swords. They entered the Masjid Al-Haram and
he said to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him: “Circumambulate.” And they hung the scabbard of
their swords in the tawaf arena. Then Abu Sufyan came to
Mut‘im and asked: “Are you guard or follower?” he replied,
“No, guard.” “Then there will be no contravention,” Abu
Sufyan said. So he sat with him until Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, finished his tawaf.
When he left, they also left along with him and Abu Sufyan
went to his meeting place.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
remained for a few days afterward and then he was granted
the permission to migrate. When he migrated to Madinah,
Mut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy died shortly afterward.
I say: This is why the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, said concerning the war prisoners of Badr: “Had
Al-Mut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy been alive and interceded with me for
these mean people, I would have freed them for his sake.”
208

Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
used to present himself to the Arab tribes during the Hajj
season so that they may protect, aid and defend him against
those who belie and oppose him but none of them would
respond owing to the great honor Allah held in stock for him
with the Ansar, may Allah be pleased with them all.
Ibn Ishaq said: Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, returned to Makkah to meet an even
greater opposition and rejection of his religion from his
people except for a few weak ones among those who believed
in him. During the season of the pilgrimage, Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, would
present himself to the Arab tribes to invite them to believe in
Allah and that he was a Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, that had been sent (by Allah). He would request
them to protect him until Allah makes his Message prevail.
Imam Ahmad related from Rabee‘ah Ibn ‘Ibad of Banu AdDil who was a polytheist but accepted Islam. He said: “During
the period of Jahiliyyah, I saw Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, in the market of Dhul Majaz
saying: “O people! Say La ilaha ill-Allah (there is no deity
worthy of worship but Allah) so that you may be successful”
while the people were gathered before him. Standing behind
him was a clean-shaven man with squinted-eye and with
pony-tail hair, who kept trailing him everywhere he went and
he would taunt: “He is a childish liar.” I inquired from the
people about his identity and they identified him as his uncle
Abu Lahab.
Imam Al-Baihaqi also related from a man from Kinanah who
narrated: “I saw Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, at the marketplace of Dhul Majaz while
he was saying: “O people! Say La ilaha ill-Allah (there is no
deity worthy of worship but Allah) so that you may be
successful” and behind him was a man throwing dust at him
209

and behold, it was Abu Jahl. He used to interrupt Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, saying:
“O people! Do not let this man seduce you from your religion.
He merely wants you to abandon your worship of Al-Lat and
Al-Uzza.”
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah narrated from Az-Zuhri that: In those
years, Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, would present himself to Arab tribes at all seasons.
He would speak to all the nobles of each tribe requesting from
them nothing but to protect and defend him. He would say: “I
will not begrudge anyone of you over anything. Whoever is
pleased among you with what I am inviting to, then, let him
accept and whoever is averse to it, I will not begrudge him.
All I want is your protection from the plot to kill me until I
convey the message of my Lord and till Allah dispose my
affair and that of my Companion as He wishes.” None of them
responded positively to his request. He did not approach any
of those tribes except that they said: “a man’s people have a
better knowledge of him. Do you consider that a man will be
good to us while he has corrupted his own people and they
have also rejected him?” All of these occurred due to what has
been kept in stock for him from the Ansar with which he will
be honored.
Al-Hafiz Abu Nu‘aim related from Ibn ‘Abbas from ‘Abbas
who said: “Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, said to me: ‘I do not think that you or your
brother can defend me and would you come with me
tomorrow to the marketplace to show me the residences of the
tribes. The Arabs had gathered for Hajj.’ I said to him: ‘This
is Kindah and its relatives. They are the best of the people of
Yemen who come for Hajj. And this is the residence of Bakr
Ibn Wa’il, this is the residence of Banu ‘Amir Ibn Sa’sa’ah,
so make your choice'."

210

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, began
with the Kindah. He went to them and asked, “where are you
from?” “From the people of Yemen,” they responded. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked,
“Which part of Yemen?” They said: “From Kindah.” Again
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, asked,
“Which branch of Kindah?” They replied,
“From Banu ‘Amr Ibn Mu‘awiyah.” Then Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Do you have
a need for something good?” They said: “What is that?” The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said: “Bear witness that none deserves to be worshipped
other than Allah, establish Salat and believe in what has come
from Allah.”
Abdullah Ibn Al-Ajlah narrated: My father narrated to me
from an old man of his people that the clan of Kindah said to
him: “If you triumph, shall we have authority after you?”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “Authority belongs to Allah and He disposes it wherever
he wishes.” They said in response: “We do not have any need
of what you have come with.” Al-Kalbi said: “Have you come
to turn us away from our gods and set us against the Arabs?
Go back to your people, we do not have any need of you.”
Imam Ahmad related that Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah narrated:
“Allah’s Messenger would offer himself to the people at each
station of pilgrimage. He would say: 'Is there anyone who
would take me with him to his people for the Quraish have
objected that I convey the words of my Lord.' A man from
Hamdan came to him and he asked him: 'From where are
you?' and the man replied, 'From Hamdan.' Allah’s
Messenger then asked him: 'Do you have any protection for
me with your people?' The man replied in the affirmative.
Then he became afraid that his people might despise him so
he came to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, and said to him: 'I will go and inform them then
211

I will come to you next year'." The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, agreed. In the month of Rajab,
a delegation of the Ansar came. The four authors of As-Sunan
have also related same through different paths from Isra’il.
Imam Tirmidhi graded it hasan Saheeh.

Arrival of the Delegates of the Ansar Year
After Year Till They Pledge Allegiance One
After the Other
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Yassar related that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
continued in this way, each time the people gathered during
the season of pilgrimage, he would come to them and invite
them to Allah and Islam. He would also present himself and
his message of guidance and mercy. He did not hear of the
arrival in Makkah of any Arab of note and nobility except that
he went to him and invited him to Allah and presented to him
his message.
Ibn Ishaq related that ‘Asim Ibn Qatadah narrated from an
elder of his people that Suwaid Ibn As-Samit, the brother of
Banu Amr Ibn ‘Awf, arrived in Makkah on Haj or ‘Umrah
(pilgrimage or lesser pilgrimage). Suwaid was known among
his people as "the perfect" owing to the beauty of his skin and
hair as well as his nobility and ancestry.
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
went to him when he heard of his arrival. He invited him to
Allah and Islam. Suwaid said: “Perhaps you have something
similar to what I have.” “And what is with you?” the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, asked. He said: “The scroll of Luqman (i.e. the wisdom
of Luqman).” Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “Show it to me.” When he showed
it, the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: “These are good words but what I have is better than this
212

– the Qur’an revealed to me by Allah which is a Guidance and
a Light.” The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, then recited the Qur’an to him and invited
him to accepted Islam. The man did not refuse but said,
“These are good words.” Then he went away. When he
returned to his people in Madinah he was soon killed by the
Khazraj. Some of his people said: “We think that he had been
a Muslim when he was killed.” He was killed prior to the
Battle of Bu’ath.

Iyas Ibn Mu‘adh’s Acceptance of Islam
Ibn Ishaq related from Mahmood Ibn Labeed who narrated:
Abul-Haisar Anas Ibn Rafi‘ arrived in Makkah with
youngsters from Banu ‘Abdul-Ashhal. Among them was Iyas
Ibn Mu‘adh seeking alliance from the Quraish against their
people from the Khazraj. When Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, heard of them, he approached
them and sat to discuss with them. He said: “Do you wish for
something better than what brought you?” “What is that?”
they asked. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “I am a Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, to His servants. I invite
them to worship Allah and not to associate any partner with
Him. And He has revealed to me the Qur’an.” He explained
Islam to them and recited the Qur’an to them.
The narrator continued: Then Iyas Ibn Mu‘adh, a young boy,
rose and said: “O people, by Allah, this is better than what
brought you here in the first place.” Abul-Haisar Anas Ibn
Rafi‘ took a handful of dust and threw it at the face of Iyas
Ibn Mu‘adh. He said: “Leave us alone. By my order, we have
come for other than this.” Then Iyas kept quiet and the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, rose to leave and they also returned to Madinah. Then
the war of Bu’ath broke out between the Aws and Khazraj. It
was not long thereafter before Iyas died. Mahmood Ibn
213

Labeed said: I was informed by those who came to me from
people that they never ceased to hear him say: La ilaha illAllah (there no deity worthy of worship besides Allah);
Allahu Akbar (Allah is Greatest); Alhamdulillah (praise
belongs to Allah) and Subhanallah (glory be to Allah) until he
died. They did not have a doubt that he died a Muslim. Since
he heard what he heard from Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, at that sitting, he had
developed the consciousness of Islam.
I say: That was in the Battle of Bu’ath and Bu’ath is a place
in Madinah where the battle took place in which a large
number of the noblemen and elite among the Aws and
Khazraj were killed leaving only very few older men.
Imam Al-Bukhari related in his Saheeh that ‘A’ishah, may
Allah be pleased with her, said: “The day of Bu’ath (i.e. day
of fighting between the two tribes of the Ansar, the Aws and
Khazraj) was brought about by Allah for the good of His
Messenger so that when he reached (Madinah), the tribes of
Madinah had already been divided and their chiefs had been
killed.”
Abu Zur‘ah Ar-Razi said in his Book Dala’il An-Nubuwwah:
It is narrated from Mu‘adh Ibn Rifa‘ah Ibn Rafi‘ from his
father from his grandfather that he went out along with the
son of his maternal aunt, Mu‘adh Ibn ‘Afra’ until they arrived
in Makkah. When they descended from Thaniyyah, they saw
a man sitting under a tree. This was before the departure of
the six individuals from the Ansar.
He continued: When we saw him, we decided to speak to him.
We said, let us approach this man so that we may put our
camels in his charge till we finish circumambulating the
Ka‘bah. We went to him and greeted in the manner of the time
of ignorance and he returned our greeting in the manner of
Islam. And we had heard something about the Prophet, peace
214

and blessings of Allah be upon him. We immediately
abhorred it. We asked: “Who are you?” he said, “alight.” We
alighted and asked him: “Where is that man who claims what
he has claimed and said what he has said?” he said, “I am the
one.” We said: “Let’s hear you present Islam.” He began
presenting Islam by asking: “Who created the heavens, the
Earth and the mountain?” “Allah created them,” we said.
“Who created you?” he asked again. “Allah,” we replied.
“Who fashioned these effigies that you worship?” he asked
and we replied, “We.” He asked again: “Is the Creator more
deserving of being worshipped or the created being?” We
responded: “The Creator.” “Then you are more deserving of
being worshipped than what you have fashioned and Allah is
more deserving of being worshipped than anything you have
fashioned. I am inviting you to the worship of Allah and to
testify that none deserves to be worshipped in truth except
Allah and that I am a Messenger of Allah and to connect ties
of kinship and to abandon wrongdoing even though that
infuriates the people.” We said: “Even if what you are inviting
to is falsehood still it is one of the loftiest matters and
meritorious manners.” He took hold of our riding animals and
we proceeded until we reached the Ka‘bah. Mu‘adh Ibn
‘Afra’ sat with him.
(He continued): I circumambulated the Ka‘bah and I
dedicated one of the seven arrows to him. I faced the Ka‘bah
and hit the arrow against it. I said: “O Allah if what
Muhammad is calling to is true then let his arrow come out
seven times.” When I hit it, it came out seven times. I cried
out loud: "I bear witness that none is worthy of worship except
Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah!" People
gather around me. They said: “You are insane and a juvenile.”
I said, “Rather, I am a Muslim.” Then I came to the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, at the upper part of
Makkah. When Mu‘adh saw me he said: “Rafi‘ has returned
with a (radiance in his) face different from the one he went
with.” I came and I accepted Islam. The Messenger of Allah,
215

peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, taught us Soorah
Yoosuf and “Read! In the Name of your Lord, Who has
created (all that exists).” (Soorah Al‘Alaq 96:1) Then we
returned to Madinah. When we got to ‘Aqeeq, Mu‘adh said:
“I do not like that we proceed in the night, so let us spend the
night till morning before we proceed.” I said: “Spend the night
with the goodness that I have acquired? I shall not do that.”
Usually, whenever Rafi‘ returned from a journey, he would
give his people gifts.” Its text and chain are hasan.

The Dawn of Islam Among the Ansar
Ibn Ishaq related: When Allah wanted to manifest His
religion, empower His Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, fulfill His promise to him, Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, used to go out in
the Hajj season and would meet the groups of the Ansar.
Again he would go to offer himself to the Arab tribes as he
would do every year. When he was at Al-‘Aqabah, he met a
group of the Khazraj for whom Allah intended good.
‘Asim Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Qatadah narrated to me from some
elders of his people. They said: When Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, met them, he said:
“Who are you?” we said, “A group of the Khazraj.” He asked
again: “From the allies of the Jews?” we replied in the
affirmation. He said: “Would you like to sit for a while so that
I may speak with you?” They agreed. They sat and he invited
them to Allah, presented Islam to them and recited the Qur’an
to them. Allah had paved the way for Islam in that they were
living adjacent to the Jews who were from the People of the
Book and had knowledge while they were from the
polytheists and idol worshippers. The Jews had been
suppressed in their land. However, anytime there was a
dispute between them, the Jews would say: “A Prophet will
be raised and his coming is nigh. When he comes, we shall
216

pledge allegiance to him and along with him, we shall kill you
similar to the killing of Aad and Iram.”
When Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, spoke to that group and invited them to believe in
Allah, they said to one another: “O people, beware, by Allah,
this is the same Prophet that the Jew has promised you so do
not let them precede you in accepting him.” Thus, they
responded positively to what they were invited to. They
accepted him and believed in the truthfulness of Islam. They
said to him: “We have left our people back at home and there
is no people who have a greater enmity and evil running
between them than we. Perhaps, Allah shall unite them
through you. We shall approach them and invite them to your
matter. We shall also present and invite them to the religion
which we have accepted. If Allah unites them through you, no
man will be more powerful than you.” Thereafter, they left
and returned to their country after they had believed and
accepted the truth of Islam.
Ibn Ishaq said: According to what I was informed, there were
six of them, all from the Khazraj.
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah, according to what he narrated from AzZuhri and Urwah Ibn Zubair, said that in their first meeting
with him they numbered eight all whom accepted Islam and
promised him to return the following year. So they returned
to their people and they invited them to Islam. They sent
Mu‘adh Ibn ‘Afra and Rafi‘ Ibn Malik to Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, requesting him to
send to them a man who would teach them (the religion).
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
sent Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair to them. He arrived in Madinah and
stayed with Asad Ibn Zurarah. Then he mentioned the story
in full as shall be presented by Ibn Ishaq shortly in a more
complete form than that of Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah. And Allah
knows best.
217

Ibn Ishaq said, when the group got to their people in Madinah,
they mentioned about Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, to them and invited them to Islam so
much so that it spread amongst them. There was no house
from the quarters of the Ansars except that there was the talk
about the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him. The following year, twelve individuals of the
Ansars gathered on the occasion of Hajj pilgrimage. These
twelve individuals witnessed the pilgrimage of that year and
they decided upon meeting with the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. They met him at
Al-‘Aqabah and they gave him a pledge there similar to that
of the women. That was the first ‘Aqabah.
Ibn Ishaq related that ‘Ubadah Ibn Samit said: “I was among
those who witnessed the first ‘Aqabah and we were twelve
men. We gave Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, our pledge (similar to that) of women, i.e.
before fighting was obligated, that we shall not associate any
partner with Allah, we shall not steal, we shall not commit
adultery, we shall not kill our children, we shall not utter
slander, intentionally forging falsehood and that we shall not
disobey him in righteousness.” The Prophet, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said in response: “Whoever
fulfills this will enter Paradise; and whoever commits these
sins, his affair rests with Allah who may either punish him or
forgive him.” AlBukhari and Muslim have reported similar
Hadith.
Ibn Ishaq said that Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri related from
‘A’idhullah Abi Idrees Al-Khawlani that ‘Ubadah Ibn AsSamit narrated to him: “We gave our pledge to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, on the
night of the first ‘Aqabah that we will not worship anything
besides Allah, we will not steal, we will not commit illegal
sexual intercourse, we will not kill our children, we will not
utter slander, invented by ourself, and we will not disobey him
218

if he ordered us to do something good.” (The Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him, responded): “Whoever among you
respects and fulfills this pledge, will be rewarded by Allah.
And if anyone of you commits any of these sins and is
punished in this world then that will be his expiation for it,
and if anyone of you commits any of these sins and Allah
hides his sin, then his matter will rest with Allah: If He wills,
He punishes him and if He wills He forgives him.” This
Hadith has been collected in the Saheehain and other than
them.
Ibn Ishaq related that ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Malik
said: I used to be a guide for my father when he became blind.
Whenever I went out with him for the Jumu‘ah prayer and he
heard the call to prayer, he would supplicate for Abu Umamah
Asad Ibn Zurarah. He continued doing that for a while,
supplicating for him upon hearing the call to prayer. Then I
said to myself: “By Allah, this is a deficiency on my part,
shouldn’t I ask him (why)?” so I said to him, “May father,
why is it that whenever you hear the call to the prayer of
Jumu‘ah you supplicate and ask Allah’s forgiveness for Abu
Umamah?” He said: “My son, this is because he held the
Friday prayer for the first time for us at Hazmun-Nabeet of
Harrah belonging to Banu Bayadah in Baqee‘, called Naqee‘
Al-Khadimat.” I asked him: “How many were you at the
time?” He said: “Forty men.” Abu Dawood and Ibn Majah
have related this Hadith through Muhammad Ibn Ishaq, may
Allah have Mercy on him.
Ibn Ishaq said: ‘Ubaidullah Ibn Al-Mugheerah Ibn Mu‘aiqeeb
and ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi Bakr Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Amr Ibn
Hazm narrated to me that Asad Ibn Zurarah went back with
Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair toward the residences of Banu ‘AbdulAshhal and Banu Zafar. Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh was the son of the
maternal aunt of Asad Ibn Zurarah. So they entered behind a
wall from the walls of Banu Zafar enclosing a well called Birr
Maraq. They both sat in the enclosure and a couple of people
219

from those who had accepted Islam gathered. At the time,
Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh and Usaid Ibn Al-Hudair were the chiefs of
their people from Banu ‘Abdul-Ashhal and both of them were
pagans upon the religion of their people. When they got wind
of them, Sa‘d said to Usaid: “Woe be unto you, go to those
two men who have come into our residences to beguile the
weak ones amongst us, reprimand them and forbid them from
coming into our residences again. I would have dealt with
them myself but for relationship of Asad Ibn Zurarah with me,
whom, as you have known, is the son of my maternal aunt and
I do not have over him any precedence.” Usaid Ibn Hudair
took hold of his spear and headed toward the two men. When
Asad Ibn Zurarah saw him coming he said to Mus‘ab: “This
is one of the chiefs of his people coming to you.” Musab said:
“If he would sit for a while, I will speak with him.” When he
came to them he addressed then insultingly: “Why have you
two come to beguile our weak ones? Leave us alone if you
have any need for your lives.”
Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah added that a young boy said to him, “you
came to us in our residences with this fellow who is a stranger
and a fugitive so that he might delude our weak ones with
falsehood and inviting them to it?”
Ibn Ishaq said that Mus‘ab replied: “Why don’t you sit for a
while and listen. If you are pleased with the message you
accept otherwise I will desist from what you have found
loathsome.” “You have offered a fair deal,” he said driving
his spear into the sand and then he sat down. Mus‘ab spoke to
him about Islam and recited the Qur’an to him as well.
(The narrator continued): They said, from what was narrated
to me: “By Allah, we could recognize Islam on his face even
before he said a word in response from its radiance and
receptiveness.” Finally, he said: “Nothing is better and more
beautiful than this. What do you do when you want to enter
into the fold of this religion?” They replied: “Take a bath to
220

purify yourself and purify your cloth, then bear the witness of
truth, and then offer prayer.” He got up and took a bath and
purified his cloth and then gave the testimony of the truth.
Then he offered two units of prayer and then said to both of
them: “I left behind a man, if he followed you; none of his
people will do otherwise. I will send Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh to you
right away.” He took hold of his spear and went away toward
Sa‘d and his people while they were seated in their assembly.
When Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh saw him coming, he said: “I swear by
Allah, Usaid has returned to you with a face different from the
one he went with. When he got to the assembly, Sa‘d said to
him: “What did you do?” he said: “I spoke to two individuals
and I did not find any fault in them. However, I have warned
them and they offered to do as I want. I have spoken that Banu
Harithah have gone toward Asad Ibn Zurarah in order to kill
him and this is because they knew that he is the son of your
maternal aunt in order to betray your covenant.
(The narrator continues): Angered by what he had just heard
about Banu Harithah, Sa‘d got up at once, took hold of his
spear in his hand and headed toward them both. When they
saw him, they remained calm realizing that Usaid wanted him
to hear from them too. When he got to them, he was abusive.
He said to Asad Ibn Zurarah: “O Abu Umamah, I swear by
Allah, if not for the relationship between you and I, I would
have hit this one. You came into our midst to delude us with
what is loathsome to us?” Meanwhile, Asad had said to
Mus‘ab: “Coming to you is a man whom his people follow. If
he follows you, no other person will contradict you amongst
them.” Mus‘ab said to Sa‘d: “Why don’t you sit for a while
and listen. If you are pleased with the message you accept
otherwise I will desist from what you have found loathsome.”
Sa‘d said: “You have offered a fair deal.” He drove his spear
into the sand and sat down. They explained Islam to him and
recited the Qur’an to him as well. Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah added
that: Mus‘ab read to him the first part of Soorah Az-Zukhruf.
“By Allah, we could recognize Islam on his face even before
221

he said a word in response from its radiance and
receptiveness.” Finally, he said: “Nothing is better and more
beautiful than this. What do you do when you want to enter
into the fold of this religion?”
They replied: “Take a bath to purify yourself and purify
cloths, then bear witness to truth, and then offer prayer.” He
got up, took a bath and purified his cloths and then gave the
testimony of the truth. Then he offered two units of prayer and
then he took hold of his spear went away toward his people’s
assembly with Usaid Ibn Hudair. When his people saw him,
they said: “By Allah, Sa‘d has returned to you with a face
different from the one he went with.” When he got to the
assembly, Sa‘d said: "O Bani ‘AbdulAshhal, what is my
position in your midst?" and they all replied, "our leader in
nobility and our right hand chief." "Verily, the words of your
men and women concerning me would be haram unless you
believe in Allah and His Messenger."
He (the narrator) also said: “By Allah no one remained in the
households of Banu ‘Abdul-Ashhal, neither amongst the men
nor of the women, except that they all accepted Islam before
nightfall.
Imam Ahmad related from Anas Ibn Malik that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, visited
a man from the Ansar. He said to him: “O maternal uncle, say
La ilaha ill-Allah (there is none worthy of worship except
Allah).” The man said: “Maternal uncle or paternal uncle?”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
said, “Paternal uncle rather.” The man said: “Do you prefer
that I say ‘la ilaha ill-Allah’ and Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “Yes.”

The Story of the Second Pledge of ‘Aqabah
Imam Ahmad related from Jabir that Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, remained in
222

Makkah for ten years approaching people in their residences,
Ukaz, Majannah and at Mina during the pilgrimage season
saying: “Who would give me refuge? Who would aid me till
I deliver the message of my Lord so that he may earn Paradise
in return?” No one offered to accommodate him or aid him to
the extent that a man would proceed from Yemen or Mudar
and his people would advise him: “beware of the young man
of Quraish so that he may not afflict you.” They would go
before his riding animal and would point to him (as a
warning). This was the case until Allah sent people from
Yathrib who offered to accommodate him and accepted him
such that a man would proceed from us and he would believe
in him and Qur’an would be recited to him and he would
return to his people and they would believe as he has done.
Thereafter, they made ‘Umrah en masse and we said: “Till
when shall we leave Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, to perform tawaf and they banishing
him in the hills of Makkah and they scaring him?” Seventy
people among us traveled to him. We met him at one of the
Hajj sites and gave him a promise at the mountain pass of
‘Aqabah. We gathered one after the other and in pairs until
we were complete. We said: “Upon what should we give our
pledge?” he replied, “Give me your pledge upon listening to
and obeying my orders in active and inactive state and to
spend (in the way of Allah) both in straits and ease and upon
commanding the good and forbidding the evil and to speak
for the sake of Allah not minding the blame of the blamers
and upon helping me and protecting me, when I come to you,
from all that you would protect yourself, your wives and your
children from and yours will be Paradise as a reward.” We
rose to give him our pledge. Asad Ibn Zurarah held his hand
and he was the youngest of them. In the narration of AlBaihaqi, he was the youngest of the 70 besides me.
He said: “Take it easy, O people of Yathrib, we are not giving
him the innermost part of a camel except that we recognize
him as the Messenger of Allah and verily, his emanation today
223

will bring us into conflict with the entire Arabs and the death
of your choice ones and swords will bite you. If you are
people who are capable of exercising patience upon all that,
then take him and your reward lies with Allah. But if you fear
for yourself, then let him be and you will be excused in the
sight of Allah.” They all responded: “Move away from us, O
Asad, for by Allah, we shall never abandon this pledge
forever and we shall never betray it.” Then we rose to give
him our pledge and he took it upon the reward of Paradise.
Then Ibn Ishaq related from Ma‘bad from ‘Abdullah from his
father Ka‘b Ibn Malik who said: “We spent that night in our
camps until a third of the night passed, and then we went from
our camps to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, at the appointed place. We went stealthily
in the manner of a tomcat until we gathered at the mountain
pass at ‘Aqabah. We were seventy-three men in all and with
us were two women, Nusaybah Bint Ka‘b, the mother of
‘Ummarah, one of the women of Banu Mazin Ibn An-Najjar,
and Asma’ Bint ‘Amr Ibn ‘Adiyy Ibn Nabi, one of the women
of Banu Salamah, and she was the mother of Manee’. Ibn
Ishaq has clearly mentioned their names and lineage in the
narration of Yoonus Ibn Bukair.
I say that concerning what has been related in some of the
Ahadeeth that they were seventy, (this is because) the Arabs
most of the times delete fractions (of numbers). ‘Urwah Ibn
Az-Zubair and Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah said, they were seventy
men and a woman. There were forty of them from their elders
and thirty from the younger ones. The youngest of them was
Abu Mas‘ood and Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah. The report of
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq that they were seventy-five is more
established. And Allah knows best.
Ka‘b Ibn Malik narrated that after we had gathered at the
mountain pass, we waited for Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, until he came along with
224

‘Abbas Ibn ‘AbdulMuttalib who was still upon the religion of
his people but present there with a view to managing the affair
of his nephew and to consolidate it for him. When he sat
down, the first to speak was ‘Abbas Ibn ‘AbdulMuttalib. He
said: “O company of Al-Khazraj, verily you know the
standing of Muhammad among us. We have protected him
from (the harm of) our people. In our midst, he is held in
honor among his people and in protection in his land.
However, he has insisted on aligning himself with you and to
join you. If you know that you will fulfill what you are
inviting him to and that you will protect him from his
oppositions, then you are free to bear that burden. However,
if you know that you will hand him over (to be killed) and
betray him after he has moved over to you, let him be right
now for he is in honor and protection from his people and his
land.” We said: “We have heard your words. Speak, O
Messenger of Allah. Take on behalf of yourself and your Lord
what you wish.” The Messenger spoke, recited the Qur’an and
invited the congregation to Allah and aroused their keenness
for Islam. Then he said: “Do you give your pledge upon
protecting me from what you would protect yourselves and
your children?” AlBara’ Ibn Ma’roor held his hand and then
said: “Yes, by the One Who sent you with the Truth, we shall
protect you from what we would protect our loincloth. So we
give our pledge, O Messenger of Allah, for we are men of
war.” Abu Al-Haytham Ibn Al-Tayyihan interjected. He said:
“O Messenger of Allah, between us and some men is an
armistice which we intend to nullify, i.e. (with) the Jews. Will
you be offended if we do that? Moreover, if Allah grants you
victory, would you return to your people and abandon us?”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
smiled and then said: “Rather, your blood is my blood and my
grave and residence will be where yours are. I am from you
and you are from me. I will fight with whom you fight and
will be at peace with whom you have peace.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, had
told them: “Appoint for me twelve leaders to manage the
225

affairs of their people.” So they appointed twelve leaders –
nine from the Khazraj and three from the Aws.
Ibn Ishaq said: Abdullah Ibn Abi Bakr Ibn Hazm narrated to
me that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said to the appointed leaders: “You are in charge
of the people and you are their guarantor just like the disciples
of ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, and I am the guarantor of my
entire followers.” They all agreed.
Narrated ‘Ubadah Ibn As-Samit: “We gave our pledge to
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
that we would listen and obey in times of plenty and times of
scarcity, to spend (for Allah’s sake) in difficult and times of
ease, to command what is good and forbid what is evil and
that we would say the truth for the sake of Allah, not minding
the blame of the blamers. That we will aid the Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, of Allah when he
comes over to us in Yathrib against whatever danger from
which we would protect ourselves, our wives and our children
and our reward for doing all that shall be Paradise. This is the
pledge we gave to Allah’s Messenger.” This chain of
narrations is good and strong.
Ibn Ishaq related from Ma‘bad Ibn Ka‘b from his brother
‘Abdullah Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Malik that when we had given our
pledge to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, Shaitan yelled from the top of Al-‘Aqabah in a
most piercing voice we ever heard: "O people of Al-Jubajib
(the name of a residential area), do you want to allow these
miscreants and renegades who are with him and who have
gathered in order to wage war against you?” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“This is the Azabb of Al-‘Aqabah, this is the son of Azyab.”
Then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, told them to return to their camps.
226

Al-‘Abbas Ibn ‘Ubadah Ibn Nadlah said: “O Messenger of
Allah, by the One Who sent you with the Truth, if you wish,
we will fight the people of Mina tomorrow with our swords.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, replied: “We have not been commanded to do that, return
to your camps.”
(The narrator continued): We returned to our beds and we
spent the night there. At the daybreak, a group Quraish elders
came to our dwellings and said to us: “O people of Khazraj!
We have been informed that you came to take Muhammad
away from our midst in order to make a pledge with him to
fight us. By Allah, of all the Arabs, there is none whom we
hate to be at war with than you.” Immediately, the polytheists
among our people swore that nothing of such ever happened.
They were true for they knew nothing about it. We just looked
at each other.
Ibn Ishaq related: A group of people from Mina investigated
the information and found it to be true. So after that they went
after our people until they caught up with Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah
at Adhakhir, close to Makkah, as well as Al-Mundhir Ibn
‘Amr, the brother of Banu Sa‘idah Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Al-Khazraj,
both of whom were among the leaders. Al-Mundhir managed
to escape but they caught Sa‘d, tied his hands to his neck with
thongs of his girth and brought him back to Makkah. On the
way, they beat him and dragged him by his hair and he was a
man with thick hair.
Sa‘d narrated: “By Allah, I was in their captivity when we
came upon a group of Quraish among whom was a tall, white,
handsome and pleasant looking man. I said to myself that if
any good would come from these people, then it would be
from this man. But when he approached, he raised his hand
and gave me a violent blow in the face. Again I said to myself:
No good would come from them after this. Since I was in their
hands as they dragged me along, a man from among them felt
227

pity over my plight and said to me, “Don’t you have any right
to protection from any of the Quraish?” “Yes,” I said. “I used
to secure the merchandise of the merchants of Jubair Ibn
Mut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy from the harm they might be exposed to
in my country. I also used to do the same for Al-Harith Ibn
Harb Ibn Umayyah Ibn ‘Abd Shams.” “Good, then shout their
names showing the ties you have with them.” I did as I was
told and the man went to the two men and found both of them
in the Ka‘bah. He said to them: “A man of the Khazraj is being
beaten in the valley and he is calling you for help.” “Who is
the man?” They both asked and the man said, “Sa‘d Ibn
‘Ubadah.” “Yes, he is speaking the truth, he used to secure the
commerce of our merchants and protect them from the harm
they might be exposed to in his land.” So they both came to
him and freed Sa‘d from the clutches and he went away. The
one who hit Sa‘d in the face was Suhail Ibn ‘Amr.
Ibn Ishaq related: When the Ansar who gave pledge to Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, on the
night of the second (pledge of) ‘Aqabah and returned to
Madinah, they propagated Islam. Among their people, some
of their chiefs remained upon their religion of polytheism
among whom were ‘Amr Ibn Al-Jamooh Ibn Zaid Ibn Haram
Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Ghanm Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Salimah. His son, Mu‘adh
Ibn ‘Amr was among those who witnessed the ‘Aqabah and
gave pledge to Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him. ‘Amr Ibn Jamuh was among the leaders
of Banu Salamah and the noblest among them. He had a
wooden idol in his house called Manat. It was the practice of
the noblemen to choose a family god which they would
venerate, clean and perfume. When the two sons of Banu
Salimah, his son, Mu‘adh and Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal accepted
Islam, they would sneak by night to ‘Amr’s idol, carry it
outside and turn it upside down in one of the cesspits of Banu
Salamah. In the morning, ‘Amr would cry out: “Woe unto
you, who assaulted our god tonight?!” After searching
frantically for it, he would find it upside down in the cesspit.
228

He would remove it, wash it, perfume and then make it clean
again. Then he would say, addressing his idol: “If I knew who
did this to you I will make him sorrowful.” Again, ‘Amr spent
the night while the same fate befell his wooden deity. Again,
he searched and found it in the same cesspit. He washed it and
restored it to its place in the house.
When the "transgression" against his god became unceasing,
one day, after he had rescued the idol from the cesspit, washed
it, perfume it, ‘Amr brought a sword and hung it on the neck
of the idol and then addressed it thus: “By Allah, I do not
know who is doing this to you, if you have any good (you can
do for yourself), here is a sword with you, defend yourself
against him.” In the night, ‘Amr slept while the twosome
attacked his idol once again. They removed the sword from
the idol’s neck, tied it with a rope to the carcass of a dog and
threw ‘Amr’s god into one of the cesspits of Banu Salamah.
In the morning, ‘Amr Ibn Jamooh did not find the idol in its
place. He later found it tied to a dead dog in a cesspit. When
he beheld his god in such a despicable situation, he realized
his folly. The Muslims among his people spoke to him and he
too accepted Islam by Allah’s Mercy and became a committed
Muslim. When he realized his folly and became a Muslim he
thanked Allah for saving him from blindness and
misguidance.

Commencement of the Migration to
Madinah
Az-Zuhri narrated from ‘Urwah Ibn Zubair that ‘A’ishah said:
Allah’s Messenger said to the Muslims and at that time when
he was in Makkah: “I have been shown the land of your
migration. I saw a virgin land sufficed with date-palm trees
between the two mountains.” Those who migrated went
toward Madinah when Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, said that. Some of the
229

Muslims who had migrated to Abyssinia also returned to
Madinah." Related by Al-Bukhari.
Abu Moosa also narrated that the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, said: “I saw in a dream that I was
migrating from Makkah to a land where there were date-palm
trees. I thought that it might be the land of Al-Yamamah or
Hajar, but behold, it turned out to be the city of Yathrib (i.e.
Madinah).”
Ibn Ishaq related: when Allah, the Most High, permitted
fighting in the following Verse: “Permission to fight is given
to those (i.e. Believers against disbelievers), who are fighting
them, (and) because they (Believers) have been wronged, and
surely, Allah is Able to give them (Believers) victory. Those
who have been expelled from their homes unjustly only
because they said: 'Our Lord is Allah'.” (Soorah AlHajj 22:
30, 40)
With this permission from Allah to fight and the pledge given
by the delegates of the Ansar to uphold Islam and aid him and
those who follow him and to accommodate those who come
to them among the Muslims, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, ordered his Companions
among the Muhajiroon of his people and those who were with
him in Makkah among the Muslims to depart for Madinah and
to migrate and meet their brothers among the Ansar. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“Allah has made for you brothers and a land in which you will
live in security.” They departed in throngs one after the other
while Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, remained in Makkah awaiting the permission of his
Lord to also to leave Makkah and migrate to Madinah.
The first of those who migrated to Madinah, among the
Companions of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, from the Muhajiroon of the Quraish, were
230

Abu Salamah ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abdul-Asad Ibn Hilal Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn Umar Ibn Makhzoom from Banu Makhzoom.
His migration took place a year before the pledge of ‘Aqabah
when the Quraish tyrannized him upon his return from his
initial migration to Abyssinia. He decided to return to
Abyssinia when he heard that there are some brothers in
Madinah so he changed his course to Madinah.
Ibn Ishaq related said that thereafter, among the Muhajiroon,
the person who arrived Madinah after Abu Salamah was
‘Amir Ibn Rabee‘ah, an ally of Banu ‘Adiyy, along with his
wife, Laila Bint Abi Hathmah Al-Adawiyyah. After ‘Amir,
‘Abdullah Ibn Jahsh Ibn Riyab Ibn Ya’mar Ibn Sabirah Ibn
Murrah Ibn Katheer Ibn Ghanm Ibn Doodan Ibn Asad Ibn
Khuzaimah, an ally of Banu Umayyah Ibn ‘Abd Shams also
followed along with his family and brother, ‘Abd Abu
Ahmad. His name was ‘Abd as mentioned by Ibn Ishaq. It also
said that his name was Thumamah. As-Suhailee said: the first
opinion is more correct.
Abu Ahmad was a blind man but he would tour both the upper
and lower part of Makkah without a guide. He was also a poet.
His wife was Al-Fari‘ah Bint Abi Sufyan Ibn Harb. His
mother was Umaimah Bint ‘Abdul-Muttalib Ibn Hashim. So
the entire house of Banu Jahsh became desolate and bolted
due to the migration. Once, ‘Utbah Ibn Rabee‘ah, Al-‘Abbas
Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib and Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham passed by the
house while they were climbing toward the upper section of
Makkah. ‘Utbah checked the doors of the house and found it
desolate. At this, ‘Utbah sighed heavily.
Ibn Ishaq related: Thereafter, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab and
‘Ayyash Ibn Abi Rabee‘ah set out (in migration) until they
arrived Madinah. Nafi‘ narrated to me from ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar that his father said: “When I wanted to migrate to
Madinah, I, ‘Ayyash Ibn Rabee‘ah and Hisham Ibn Al-‘As
made a mutual agreement to meet at the water drain of Banu
231

Ghifar. We said: 'Whoever of us is not by the place in the
morning will be considered to have been detained by his
people. So the rest should proceed.' Myself and ‘Ayyash met
at the agreed spot the next morning and Hisham was detained
and was severely tortured to abandon his religion.
When we arrived at Madinah, we stayed with the Banu ‘Amr
Ibn ‘Awf at Quba. Meanwhile, Abu Jahl and Al-Harith Ibn
Hisham also set out for Madinah in trail for ‘Ayyash who was
their cousin and their brother from the mother's side. Both of
them arrived at Madinah and all the while Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was still in
Makkah. They met him and addressed him thus: “Your
mother has made a vow not to comb her hair until she sees
you. She has also vowed not seek shade from the sun until she
sees you, so have mercy on her.” I said to him: “By Allah,
these people merely want to deceive you from your religion,
beware of them. If lice afflict your mother, by Allah she will
comb her hair and if the heat of Makkah becomes unbearable
for her, she will seek shade.” He said: “I will redeem my
mother’s oath and I will take my wealth which I left behind.”
I said to him: “By Allah, you know that I am one of the richest
of the Quraish, I will give you half of my wealth, so do not go
with them.” He insisted on going with them. When I saw his
insistence, I said to him: “If you are bent on your decision,
here, take my camel, it is excellent and obedient, adhere to its
back, if you feel suspicious of these people, escape on its
back.” So he departed on the camel with the other two men
until they traveled over a distance, then Abu Jahl said to him:
“My brother, by Allah, I have exhausted my camel, do you
mind me riding behind you on your camel?” ‘Ayyash said:
“Why not.” So he goaded the camel to sit so that he may climb
its back. When the camel lowered itself, they attacked him
and bound him with a string and they entered Makkah in this
manner. They tortured him so much that he was forced to
recant his faith.
232

‘Umar said: “We used to say that: ‘Allah will not accept the
repentance of those who were forced to recant their faith and
they also used to say that about themselves until Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, arrived
in Madinah and Allah revealed: “Say: 'O ‘Ibadi (My slaves)
who have transgressed against themselves (by committing
evil deeds and sins)! Despair not of the Mercy of Allah
(SWT), verily Allah forgives all sins. Truly, He is OftForgiving, Most Merciful. And turn in repentance and in
obedience with true Faith (Islamic Monotheism) to your Lord
and submit to Him, (in Islam), before the torment comes upon
you, then you will not be helped. And follow the best of that
which is sent down to you from your Lord (i.e. this Qur’an,
do what it orders you to do and keep away from what it
forbids), before the torment comes on you suddenly while you
perceive not'!” (Soorah AzZumar 39:53-55)
‘Umar added: I wrote these Verses (in a letter) and sent it to
Hisham Ibn Al-‘As. Hisham said: “when the letter reached
me, I kept reading it at Dhu Tuwa (a valley close to Makkah).
I ascended and descended yet I did not understand the import
of the Verses. Finally, I prayed: “O Allah grant me its
understanding.” Then Allah made it occurred to my mind that
that it was revealed concerning us and concerning what we
used to say about ourselves and what people say about us. I
returned to my camel, sat on it and I went to meet Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in
Madinah.
Ibn Hisham mentioned that it was Al-Waleed Ibn AlMugheerah who brought Hisham Ibn Al-‘As and ‘Ayyash Ibn
Abu Rabee‘ah to Madinah. He kidnapped them from Makkah
and he arrived in Madinah carrying them on his camel while
he was walking along with them.

233

Al-Bukhari related from Al-Bara’ that the first person to come
to us (in Madinah) was Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair and Ibn Umm
Maktoom and thereafter came ‘Ammar and Bilal.
Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib narrated: Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair and Ibn
Umm Maktoom were the first to arrive in Madinah and they
used to teach people the Qur’an. Then there came Bilal, Sa‘d
and ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir. Thereafter, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
came along with twenty other Companions of the Messenger
of Allah. Later on, the Messenger of Allah himself came (to
Madinah) and I had never seen the people of Madinah so
joyful as they were on the arrival of Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, for even the slave girls
were saying, “Allah’s Messenger has arrived!” And before his
arrival I had read the Soorah starting with: “Glorify the Name
of your Lord, the Most High” (Soorah Al-A‘la 87:1) together
with other Soorahs of Al-Mufassal.
Ibn Ishaq related: Thereafter, the Muhajiroon followed one
after the other. May Allah be pleased with them all. Talhah
Ibn ‘Ubaidullah and Suhaib Ibn Sinan stayed with Khubaib
Ibn ’Isaf, the brother of BalHarith Ibn Al-Khazraj at a place
called Sunah. It is also claimed that Talhah stayed with Asad
Ibn Zurarah.
Ibn Hisham related: it was narrated to me that Abu ‘Uthman
An-Nahdi said: it reached me that when Suhaib intended to
migrate, the polytheists of the Quraish said to him: “you came
to our midst while you were poor and wretched and your
wealth grew while you were with us and you attained such
status that you have attained and then you want to leave us
with all your wealth? By Allah, that will never happen!”
Suhaib asked them: “If I hand over to you all my wealth,
would you let me go?” They replied in affirmation. Suhaib
said: “I have given you all of my wealth.” When news of
Suhaib’s action reached the Messenger of Allah, he said:
“Suhaib has profited! Suhaib has profited!!”
234

Circumstances Leading to the Migration of
Allah’s Messenger
Allah says: “And say (O Muhammad): My Lord! Let my entry
(to the city of Madinah) be good, and likewise my exit (from
the city of Makkah) be good. And grant me from You an
authority to help me (or a firm sign or a proof).” (Soorah AlIsra 17:80)
Allah guided and inspired the Messenger of Allah peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, to supplicate with these words
to make for him ease in the nearest future and a speedy wayout. Thus, Allah granted him permission to migrate to
Madinah, the city of the Prophet, wherein waited, for him,
helpers and beloved; and which eventually became his
residence and final resting place.
Ibn Ishaq related: After his Companions among the
Muhajiroon had left, Allah’s Messenger peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, remained in Makkah waiting for the
permission to migrate. No one remained with him aside from
those who were detained and those who were tortured into
submission except ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and Abu Bakr Ibn Abi
Quhafah, may Allah be pleased with them both. Abu Bakr
persistently requested the permission of Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, to make Hijrah and
he would say to him: “Don’t be in haste, perhaps Allah will
grant you a companion.” Abu Bakr wished it would be the
Prophet himself.
Now that it became clear to the Quraish that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, has a
faction and Companions not just outside their tribe but outside
their land as well, they became worried. Moreover, what
made the Quraish more worrisome was the continuous
migration of his Companions among the Muhajiroon to
Madinah where they have found a new home and protection.
235

Thus, they feared that the Messenger of Allah would also
migrate to join them for they knew that they will eventually
fight them.
In order to stymy this, the Quraish gathered in DarunNadwah, a house belonging to Qusayy Ibn Kilab where they
used to make important decisions concerning them. They
gathered to discuss the issue of the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, and the strong position
he posed to their collective existence.
Ibn Ishaq related that I was informed that ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas said: So they agreed to meet in the Darun-Nadwah to
deliberate on the issue of Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. On the appointed day which
is known as the day of Zam‘ah (crowd), Iblees (Shaitan), may
Allah’s curse be on him, came in the form of a handsome old
man wearing a mantle and stood at the door. When they saw
him standing by the door, they asked: “From where is the old
man?” He said: “An old man from the people of Najd; I heard
about what you are deliberating upon and I chose to attend the
meeting with you so that I may listen to your deliberation and
help you reach a sound decision.” They said to him: “Come
in, then.” Shaitan entered the room wherein were gathered the
nobles of the Quraish: ‘Utbah, Shaibah, Abu Sufyan,
Tu’aimah Ibn ‘Adiyy, Jubair Ibn Mut‘im Ibn ‘Adiyy, AlHarith Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Nawfal, Nadr Ibn Al-Harith, AbulBakhtari Ibn Hisham, Zam‘ah Ibn Al-Aswad, Hakeem Ibn
Hizam, Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham, Nubaih and Munabbih, the two
sons of Al-Hajjaj and Umayyah Ibn Khalaf, respectively,
among several others that cannot be mentioned among the
Quraish.
They said to one another: “The matter of this man has reached
a proportion which all of you are not oblivious to. By Allah,
we should not allow him to pounce upon us with his followers
outside our tribe. So give the matter a consideration.” In the
236

course of the deliberation, one of them (some said it was
AbuBakhtari Ibn Hisham) suggested: “Why not we put him
in iron shackles and lock him away behind bars to await death
in a similar manner to what happened to the poets that came
before him like Zuhair and Nabighah.” The "old man" of Najd
said: “No, by Allah, this suggestion is not good enough. If you
enshackle him as you said, the news of his fate will filter out
from behind bars to his Companions and without a doubt, they
will pounce upon you and they will snatch him away from
you. Thereafter, they will reinforce themselves and then
vanquish you. So this is not a good proposal.”
After further deliberation, one of them suggested: “We should
expel him from our land. Once he is out of our domain, we
will be less concerned about where he goes. When we are
relieved of his trouble, we will rectify our affairs and we will
return to our good old days.” Again, the "old man" of Najd
said: “This is not a good opinion either. Haven’t you observed
the beauty of his speech and the sweetness of his logic and the
manner he overwhelms men with his message? By Allah, if
you apply this suggestion, he would win the Bedouin Arabs
over to him with his speech and sweet rendition and they
would follow him. Then they would take away your affairs
from your hands and then do whatever they like with you.
Think of a course of action better than this.”
Finally, Abu Jahl said: “By Allah, I have an idea after which
a better one will not occur to you.” “What is the idea, O AbulHakam?” They asked. He said: “I suggest that we choose from
the different clans each a young and strong man of high
descent and noble status among us. Then we will give each
youth a sharp sword to attack him; each dealing him a
simultaneous fatal blow and then we can be relieved of him.
If we do this, the responsibility for his blood will be borne by
all the clans and the Banu ‘Abd Manaf will be incapable of
fighting against the clans altogether. They would be forced to
accept whatever blood money paid to them by the entire
237

clans.” The "old man" of Najd said: “This is the real proposal,
there is no better idea than this.” After they reached a firm
decision, the meeting ended with a firm determination to
implement the plan.
Jibraeel came to the Messenger of Allah saying: “Do not sleep
in your bed tonight.” When it became dark, they gathered at
his door keeping a vigil waiting for him to go to sleep before
they attack him. When Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, saw through their nasty
intensions, he said to ‘Ali, “Sleep on my bed and cover
yourself with my green Hadrami mantle. Use it when sleeping
and nothing you dislike will reach you from them.” Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, usually
slept in that same mantle.
Ibn Ishaq related that Yazeed Ibn Abi Ziyad narrated to me
from Muhammad Ibn Ka‘b Al-Qurazi that: When they
gathered with their evil designs at his door, Abu Jahl, who
was among them, said to them in mockery: “Muhammad
claims that if you followed him, you will be kings over the
Arabs and non-Arabs. Then you will be resurrected after you
die and you will be granted (as a reward) a garden like that of
Jordan and if you fail to follow him, you will be slaughtered
and when you are resurrected after you die, a fire will be made
for you in which you will be burned.”
Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
came out, took a handful of dust and said: “Truly, I said so
and you will be among them.” Then Allah blinded their sight
and they did not see him and he began to cast dust on their
heads while reciting these Verses: “Ya Seen. [These letters
are one of the miracles of the Qur’an, and none but Allah
(Alone) knows their meanings.] By the Qur’an, full of
wisdom (i.e. full of laws, evidences, and proofs), Truly, you
(O Muhammad) are one of the Messengers, On a Straight Path
(i.e. on Allah’s religion of Islamic Monotheism). (This is) a
238

Revelation sent down by the Almighty, the Most Merciful.”
(Soorah Ya Seen 36:1-5)
Up to the Verse: “And We have put a barrier before them,
and a barrier behind them, and We have covered them up,
so that they cannot see.” (Soorah Ya Seen 36:9)
There was none of them that the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, did not cast dust on his
head and then he went his way. Then someone who had not
been there with them all the while came and said: “What are
you waiting here for?” “Muhammad.” They chorused. He
said: “May Allah turn you down, I swear by Allah,
Muhammad came out, put dust on the head of each of you and
then went his way. Don’t you see what has occurred to you?”
Each man touched his head and found dust on it. They looked
inside the room and found ‘Ali in bed sleeping under the
mantle of the Messenger of Allah so they said: “That is
Muhammad sleeping under his mantle.” Thus, they remained
in their places until daybreak. Then ‘Ali woke up from the bed
and when the reality dawned on them, they exclaimed:
“The one who informed us spoke the truth.”

Migration of Allah’s Messenger from
Makkah to Madinah along with Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq
Al-Bukhari related from Ibn ‘Abbas that: Allah’s Messenger
started receiving the Divine Revelation at the age of forty.
Then he stayed in Makkah for thirteen years, receiving the
Divine Revelation. Then he was ordered to migrate and he
lived as an Emigrant for ten years and then died at the age of
sixty-three
(years).”
Ibn Ishaq related that when Abu Bakr requested the
permission of Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of
239

Allah be upon him, to migrate, he told him: “Don’t be in haste,
perhaps Allah will grant you a companion.” Abu Bakr hoped
the Messenger of Allah was referring to himself. So he bought
two camels, tied them in his house and fed them in preparation
for that purpose.
Ibn Ishaq related that it has been narrated to me from ‘Urwah
Ibn Az-Zubair that ‘A’ishah, the Mother of the Believers,
said: Allah’s Messenger never used to come to the house of
Abu Bakr at any time of the day except at its two edges – in
the early morning and evening times. However, on the day
Allah permitted him to migrate and leave Makkah, Allah’s
Messenger came to us at an hour he never used to come.
She continued: When Abu Bakr saw him, he said: "Whatever
has brought Allah’s Messenger at this time of the day must be
an urgent occurrence." When the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, entered, Abu Bakr
offered him his seat and the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, sat down. There was no one
with Abu Bakr other than myself and my sister, Asma’ Bint
Abu Bakr. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, said: “Let everyone with you in the house
go out.” “O Allah’s Messenger, may my mother and father be
sacrificed for you, there are no one other than my two
daughters. What has happened?” Abu Bakr asked. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said:
“Allah has permitted me to leave and migrate.”
‘A’ishah continued: Abu Bakr asked him: “May I accompany
you, O Messenger of Allah?” “Yes, you will accompany me.”
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, said. ‘A’ishah said: Prior to that day, I never realize that
anyone would weep out of extreme joy until I saw Abu Bakr
weep that day. Then he said: “O Prophet of Allah, here are
two camels. I have been preparing them for this (journey).”
They hired ‘Abdullah Ibn Arqat (as a guide on the way).
240

Ibn Hisham related that he is also referred to as ‘Abdullah Ibn
Uraiqit, a polytheist from Banu Ad-Deel Ibn Bakr. His mother
was from Banu Sahm Ibn ‘Amr. They gave the camels to him
to tend until the appointed date.
Abu Nu‘aim narrated through Ibrahim Ibn Sa‘d from
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq, who said: It reached me that Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, made
the following supplication when he left Makkah and migrated
to Madinah: “Praise be to Allah Who created me though I was
nothing. O Allah, help me bear the might of the word, the
vicissitudes of time and the calamities of the night and days.
O Allah, accompany me on my journey and replace me in my
family and bless me in what You have provided me. To You
I am humble and in my good character, keep me steadfast.
Make me, O Lord, beloved to Yourself, do not leave me to the
people. You are the Lord of the oppressed and my Lord. I seek
refuge in Your Noble Countenance by which the heavens and
the Earth were illuminated, by which the darkness was
dispelled, and on which the affairs of the first and the last (of
the mankind) were put in order. I seek refuge from your anger
befalling me and Your displeasure overtaking me. I seek
refuge in You from the withdrawal of Your bounty and the
suddenness of Your vengeance, from the removal of
Your blessing and the coming of Your wrath. And there is no
power or might except in You.”
Then they proceeded to the Cave of Thawr, a mountain at the
lower end of Makkah and both of them entered it. Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq ordered his son, ‘Abdullah, to eavesdrop on what
the people say about both of them in the daytime and report
to them during the night whatever news he had garnered that
day. He also ordered ‘Amir Ibn Fuhairah, his freed slave, to
graze his sheep in the daytime and drive them toward them
both in the cave toward the end of the day. ‘Abdullah Ibn Abu
Bakr would stay among the Quraish during the day
eavesdropping on whatever they might say about Allah’s
241

Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and
Abu Bakr, and then would bring the news to them.
Ibn Ishaq related: Asma’ Bint Abu Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with her, would bring food to them both, when it was
dark. Asma’ narrated: When Allah’s Messenger and Abu
Bakr left, a group of the Quraish came to us among whom
were Abu Jahl. They stood at Abu Bakr’s door and I came out
to meet them. They asked: “Where is Abu Bakr, O daughter
of Abu Bakr?” I said to them: “I do not know where my father
is.” Then Abu Jahl raised his hand and gave me a slap so
violently that my earring fell off and then they left.
Al-Baihaqi related: Muhammad Ibn Seereen narrated to me
that some men remiscised during the time of ‘Umar and it
appeared that they preferred ‘Umar over Abu Bakr. When that
reached ‘Umar he said: “By Allah, a night of Abu Bakr is
better than the entire nights of the family of ‘Umar. One day
of Abu Bakr is better than the entire days of the family of
‘Umar. Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, had set out on the night departed for the Cave of
Thawr. On the way, Abu Bakr would walk in front of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and at
another time he would walk behind him until it became
noticeable to the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and he said: “O Abu Bakr, why do you
walk at one time behind me and in my front at another?” Abu
Bakr said: “O Messenger of Allah, the thought of a trailing
scout occurred to me, so I walk behind you and then, when
the thought of an ambush occurs to me, I switch to your front.”
Then the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, said: “O Abu Bakr, if there was a dangerous
occurrence would you have preferred that you were afflicted
other than me?” “Yes, I swear by the One Who sent you with
the Truth, no calamity would befall except that I would prefer
to be its recipient rather than you.” When we got to the cave,
Abu Bakr said: “Stay where you are, O Messenger of Allah,
242

so that I may check that the cave is free (of danger).” So Abu
Bakr entered and searched the cave. When he got to its
pinnacle, he told him, “You have not checked the burrow.”
Again Abu Bakr said: “Stay in your place, O Messenger of
Allah, till I check the burrow.” He checked it and then said:
“You may descend into it now, O Messenger of Allah. Then
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, went
in. ‘Umar then added: “I swear by Him in Whose Hands is my
soul, that single night of Abu Bakr is far better than that of the
family of ‘Umar.”
Imam Ahmad related that Ibn ‘Abbas said concerning the
statement of Allah: “And (remember) when the disbelievers
plotted against you (O Muhammad) to imprison you, or to kill
you, or to get you out (from your home, i.e. Makkah); they
were plotting and Allah too was planning, and Allah is the
Best of the planners.” (Soorah Al-Anfal 8:30)
One night, during the deliberation of the Quraish in Makkah,
one of them said: “In the morning, we should enshackle him
(i.e. the Prophet).” Another person suggested: “Rather, we
should kill him.” A third person said: “We should expel him.”
Allah revealed their plot to His Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, so ‘Ali slept in the bed of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, that
night. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, left the house and sometime later he entered the
cave. The Quraish spent the night keeping watch over ‘Ali
thinking that it was the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him. In the morning, they swarmed in on him and
found ‘Ali instead. Thus, Allah frustrated their plots. They
barked at ‘Ali: “Where is your Companion?!” “I do not
know,” ‘Ali said. They traced his track till it led them to the
mountain and they became confused. They climbed the
mountain. When they passed by the cave they saw spider web
at its entrance.
243

They said: “Had anybody entered through here, there
wouldn’t be spider web at the entrance of the cave.” They (the
Messenger of Allah and Abu Bakr) remained there for three
nights. The chain of this narrations is hasan and it is the best
of what is related concerning the story of the spider web at the
entrance of the cave. This is also from Allah’s protection for
His Messenger.
Allah, Most High, says: “If you help him (Muhammad) not (it
does not matter), for Allah did indeed help him when the
disbelievers drove him out, the second of two, when they
(Muhammad and Abu Bakr) were in the cave, and he said to
his Companion (Abu Bakr): 'Be not sad (or afraid), surely
Allah is with us'.” Then Allah sent down His Sakinah
(calmness, tranquility, help and peace, etc.) upon him, and
strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not, and
made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while
it was the Word of Allah that became the uppermost, and
Allah is Almighty, AllWise.” (Soorah At-Tawbah 9:40)
Allah (SWT) says about upraiding those who lagged behind
from joining the Messenger of Allah in Jihad: “If you help
him (Muhammad) not,” Allah (SWT) will help him,
strengthen him and make him triumph as He has done before:
'when the disbelievers drove him out, ‘when the people of
Makkah were arrayed in war against him while there was no
one with him other than his Companion, Abu Bakr. Thus
Allah says: “The second of two,” that is, when they escaped
to the cave and remained there three days so as to douse the
quest for them. When the polytheists could not find both of
them, they set out in their trail in every direction promising
one hundred camels for whoever is able to bring them back.
They followed their trails until it became confusing to them.
The one who followed their trail on behalf of the Quraish was
Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘tham. They climbed the mountain
of Thawr and they kept going back and forth the entrance of
244

the cave next to their feet but they did not see them. This is a
protection from Allah for both of them as related by Imam
Ahmad from Anas Ibn Malik that Abu Bakr narrated to him:
“I said to the Messenger of Allah while we were in the cave,
‘if anyone of them were to look toward his feet, (he would
discover us).’ He replied: ‘O Aba Bakr, what do you think
about two people whose third is Allah (SWT)?”
Al-Bukhari related that ‘A’ishah, the wife of the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said: “I do not
remember my parents believing in any religion other than the
Religion (of Islam), and our being visited by Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, in the
morning and in the evening. When the Muslims were put to
test (i.e. troubled by the pagans), Abu Bakr set out migrating
to the land of Ethiopia, and when he reached Bark AlGhimad, Ibn Ad-Daghinah, the wife of the chief of the tribe
of Qarah, mentioned how he caused Abu Bakr’s return to
Makkah and his offer to protect him as we have mentioned in
the section of the migration to Abyssinia up to when Abu Bakr
said: “I am repudiating your protection. I am pleased with the
protection of Allah (SWT).”
She continued: At that time, Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, was still in Makkah. The
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said to the
Muslims: “I have been shown the land of your migration. It is
a land suffused with date-palms located between two volcanic
mountains.” The two mountains are basalt rocks. Some
people migrated toward Madinah and some of those who had
migrated toward Abyssinia also returned to Madinah. Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said
(to Abu Bakr): “Take it easy for I also hope that I will be given
permission.” Abu Bakr said: "May my father be sacrificed for
you, do you really hope for that?” The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, replied: “Yes.” So,
Abu Bakr restrained himself with the hope that he would
245

accompany him. He fed the two camels with him (in readiness
the impending journey) on the leaves of As-Samur tree
regularly for four months. Some mentioned that he fed them
for six months.
Ibn Shihab related: Abdur Rahman Ibn Malik Al-Mudliji who
was a nephew of Suraqah narrated to me that his father
informed him that he heard Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘thum
saying: “The messengers of the polytheists of Quraish came
to us announcing that they had assigned for the persons who
would kill or arrest Allah’s Messenger and Abu Bakr, a
reward equal to their blood money. While I was sitting in one
of the gatherings of my tribe, Bani Mudlij, a man from them
came to us and stood up while we were sitting, and said, “O
Suraqah! Verily, I have just seen some people far away on the
seashore, and I think they are Muhammad and his
Companions.” Suraqah added, “I too realized that it must have
been them. But I said ‘No, it is not them, but you have seen
so-and-so, and so-and-so whom we saw when they set out.’
"I remained in the gathering for a while and then got up and
left for my home. I ordered my slave-girl to get my horse
which was behind a hillock, and keep it ready for me. Then I
took my spear and left by the back door of my house dragging
the lower end of the spear on the ground and keeping it low.
Then I reached my horse, mounted it and made it gallop.
"When I approached them (i.e. Muhammad and Abu Bakr),
my horse stumbled and I fell down from it. Then I stood up,
got hold of my quiver and took out the divining arrows and
drew lots as to whether I should harm them (i.e. Muhammad
and Abu Bakr) or not, and the lot which I disliked came out.
But I mounted my horse again and let it gallop, giving no
importance to the divining arrows. When I heard the recitation
of the Qur'an by Allah’s Messenger who did not look hither
and thither while Abu Bakr was doing it often, suddenly the
forelegs of my horse sank into the ground up to the knees, and
246

I fell down from it. Then I rebuked it and it got up but could
hardly take out its forelegs from the ground, and when it stood
up straight again, its forelegs caused dust to rise up in the sky
like smoke.
Then again I drew lots with the divining arrows, and the lot
which I disliked came out. So I called upon them to feel
secure. They stopped, and I mounted my horse once again and
went to them. When I saw how I had been hampered from
harming them, it came to my mind that the cause of Allah’s
Messenger (i.e. Islam) will become victorious. So I said to
him, “Your people have assigned a reward equal to the blood
money for your head.” Then I told them all the plans the
people of Makkah had made concerning them. Then I offered
them some food and goods for the journey but they refused to
take anything and did not ask for anything except that they
said, “Do not tell others about us.” Then I requested him to
write for me a statement of security and peace. He ordered
‘Amir Ibn Fuhairah who wrote it for me on a parchment, and
then Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, proceeded."
When Suraqah turned away from them, he kept turning back
everyone who was in the trail of Allah’s Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, and his Companion. He
would say to them: “You don’t need to check this route.”
When it became clear that Allah’s Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, had arrived in Madinah,
Suraqah began to recount to people the story of his encounter
with the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him,
and his kind treatment of him. This story became so popular
that the leaders of the Quraish were apprehensive that it would
cause many people to accept Islam. Meanwhile, Suraqah was
the leader and chief of Banu Mudlij, so Abu Jahl, may Allah’s
curse be upon him, wrote to him a verse of poem:
O Banu Mudlij, I fear that you may be deluded
247

By Suraqah who is bent upon aiding Muhammad
Beware of him so that he may not dismember your ranks
And then you become disunited sequel to your having
authority and dominance
Suraqah also composed a poem in response to Abu Jahl’s:
O Abu Hakam, by Allah, if you had witnessed
The spectacle of my steed as its shanks sank
You will marvel and you will have no doubt that Muhammad
Is a Messenger and a proof and whoever can withstand him?
You may dissuade the people from (accepting) him but I
Imagine a day when his milestone shall become manifest
Al-Bukhari related with his chain of narrations linking up to
Ibn Shihab (who said) ‘Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair narrated to me
that Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, met Az-Zubair in a caravan of Muslim merchants who
were returning from Sham. Az-Zubair provided Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and
Abu Bakr with white clothes to wear. When the Muslims of
Madinah heard the news of the departure of Allah’s
Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, from
Makkah (toward Madinah), they started going to the Harrah
every morning. They would wait for him till the heat of the
noon forced them to return. One day, after waiting for a long
while, they returned home, and when they went into their
houses, a Jew climbed up the roof of one of the forts of his
people to look for something, and he saw Allah’s Messenger,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and his
248

companions dressed in white clothes emerging out of the
desert mirage.
The Jew could not help shouting at the top of his voice, “O
Arabs! Here is your great man whom you have been waiting
for!” So all the Muslims rushed to their arms and received
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
on the summit of Harra. The Prophet (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) turned with them to the right and alighted
at the quarters of Bani Amr Ibn 'Awf, and this was on Monday
in the month of Rabee ul-Awwal. Abu Bakr stood up,
receiving the people while Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) sat down and kept silent.
Some of the Ansar who came and had not seen Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) before,
began to greet Abu Bakr, but when the sunshine fell on
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
and Abu Bakr came forward and shaded him with his sheet
only then did the people came to know Allah’s Messenger
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him). The Prophet
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) stayed with Bani
Amr Ibn 'Awf for ten nights and established the mosque
(mosque of Quba’) which was founded on piety. Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) prayed
in it and then mounted his she-camel and proceeded,
accompanied by the people till his she-camel knelt down at
(the place of) the Mosque of Allah’s Messenger at Madinah.
Some Muslims used to pray there in those days, and that place
was a yard for drying dates belonging to Suhail and Sahl, the
orphan boys who were under the guardianship of As’ad Ibn
Zurarah.
When his she-camel knelt down, Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) said, “This place, Allah
willing, will be our abiding place.” Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) then called the two boys
249

and told them to suggest a price for that yard so that he might
take it as a mosque. The two boys said, “No, but we will give
it as a gift, O Allah’s Messenger!” Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) then built a mosque there.
The Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
himself started carrying unburnt bricks for its building and
while doing so, he was saying:
This load is better than the load of Khaibar, for it is more pious
in the Sight of Allah and purer and better rewardable
He was also saying, “O Allah! The actual reward is the reward
of the Hereafter, so bestow Your Mercy on the Ansar and the
Muhajiroon.” Thus the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him) recited (by way of proverb) the poem of some
Muslim poet whose name is unknown to me. Ibn Shibab said:
“In the Hadiths it does not occur that Allah’s Messenger
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) recited a complete
poetic verse other than this one.” This is Al-Bukhari’s
wordings and he alone related to the exclusion of Muslim. The
Hadith also has corroborations from other paths without the
story of Umm Ma‘bad Al-Khuza‘iyyah.
Imam Ahmad related that Al-Bara’ narrated: Abu Bakr
purchased a saddle from me for thirteen dirhams from A'Azib.
Abu Bakr said to A'Azib: ‘Ask Al-Bara’ to carry this saddle
to my residence’ and he said, “No, until you narrate to me
what you both did on the night when you set out on a journey
along with Allah’s Messenger. Abu Bakr then said: We set
out during the night and went on walking until it was noon,
and the path was lonely and so none passed by that (until)
there appeared prominently before us a large rock. It had its
shade and the rays of the sun did not reach that place. So we
alighted at that place. I then went to the rock and leveled the
ground with my hands at the place where the Messenger of
Allah would take rest under its shade. I then set the bedding
250

and said: ‘Allah’s Messenger, go to sleep.’ He went to sleep
and I kept watch against possible scouts.
Then I saw a shepherd moving toward that rock with his flock
and he intended what we intended (I. e. taking rest). I met him
and said to him: ‘Young boy, to whom do you belong?’ He
said: ‘to a man from the Quraish.’ He mentioned his name and
I recognized him. I said, is there any milk in the udders of
your sheep and goats? He said: Yes. He took hold of a goat,
and I said to him: Clean the udder well so that it should be
free from dust and impurity.
He dusted his hands on my order and he milked the goat for
me into a container I had with me. I mixed some water in the
milk to make it cool and then came to Allah’s Messenger with
it. I found that he had already awakened, so I said to him:
‘drink, O Allah’s Messenger.” He drank it till I was delighted
and I said: “Is now not the time to move on?” so we proceeded
while they were still pursuing us. No one caught up with us
except Suraqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘shum who was trailing us on
his horse. I said: “O Allah’s Messenger, a scout has caught up
with us.” Thereupon he said: “Do not worry, verily, Allah is
with us.”
When Suraqah came close such that there was only a distance
of the length of one, two or three spears, again I said: “O
Allah’s Messenger, a scout has caught up with us.” Then I
wept. Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) asked: “Why are you crying?” and I replied: “By
Allah it is not the fear for myself that caused my weeping
rather I am weeping because of you.” Then Allah’s
Messenger supplicated against him saying: “O Allah suffice
us with anything You wish.” Then the legs of his horse sank
into quicksand up to its belly and he jumped off it. He said:
“O Muhammad, I know that this is your handiwork but please
supplicate to Allah to save me from my predicament and I
take an oath that I shall turn away everyone who would come
251

in search of you. Here is my quiver, pick an arrow out of it.
You will come by my goats at such and such place; you may
take from it as will satisfy your need.
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
said to him: “No, I do not have any need for it.” So he (Allah’s
Messenger) supplicated to Allah and he was rescued and he
went back to his companions.
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
proceeded until we reached Madinah and people came out on
rooftops on his pathways to welcome him. The servants and
children scattered into the streets while they were saying:
“Allah is Great! Allah’s Messenger has arrived.” The people
began to contend as to where Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) should reside. Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “I
will encamp with the tribe of Najjar, the maternal uncles of
Abdul-Muttalib as a mark of honor for them.” In the morning,
he then went to where he was commanded.
Al-Bara’ Ibn 'Azib narrated: Mus’ab Ibn Umair, the brother
of Banu Abdud-Dar and Ibn Umm Maktoom, the blind, a
member of Banu Fihr were the first emigrants to come to us.
Then there came Umar Ibn AlKhattab along with twenty other
Companions of the Messenger of Allah. We asked: “What
happened to Allah’s Messenger?” “He is coming after me,”
he answered. Later on the Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) himself arrived (at Madinah)
along with Abu Bakr. Al-Bara’ added: Before his arrival I had
read a Soorah from the Mufassal.” It is related in the two
saheehs from the Hadith of Isra’eel without the statement of
Al-Bara’: “The first of those who came to us” till the end.
Ibn Ishaq related: Then they set off. Abu Bakr took with him
Amir Ibn Fuhairah, his freed slave, to serve them on the way.
Asma’Bint Abi Bakr narrated: “When the Messenger of Allah
252

(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) and Abu Bakr had
departed, Abu Jahl came to us with a group of Quraish…” and
she narrated how he struck her on her cheek so violently that
her earring fell off her ear as mentioned previously. She
added: We remained for three nights without any news of the
whereabout of Allah’s Messenger until a man from the Jinn
came from the lower part of Makkah chanting some verses of
Arab poems. People followed him to listen to his voice even
without seeing him until he exited through the upper part of
Makkah saying:
May the Lord of Mankind grant the best of His rewards
To the two Companions
who rested in the two tents
of Umm Ma’bad They both
alighted with righteous
intent
And they set off by nightfall. May Muhammad’s Companion
prosper
May the place of Banu Ka’b’s woman bring them luck
For she was a watch for the Muslims
Asma’ continued: When we heard his voice, we knew that
Allah’s Messenger was heading toward Madinah.
There were four of them: Allah’s Messenger, Abu Bakr, Amir
Ibn Fuhairah, the freed slave of Abu Bakr and Abdullah Ibn
Arqad as related by Ibn Ishaq. However, the last person is
popularly referred to as Abdullah Ibn Uraiqit Ad-Du'ili AdDawlee and at that time he was a polytheist.
253

It has been previously mentioned from Ibn Abbas that Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
departed from Makkah on Monday and entered Madinah on
Monday. The dominant view is that there were fifteen days
between his departure from Makkah and his entrance of
Madinah because he stayed in the cave of Thawr for three
days and thereafter took to the route along the seashore which
is the longest of the roads leading to Madinah. They passed
through the place of Umm Ma’bad Bint Ka’b from Banu Ka’b
Ibn Khuza’ah.

The Story of Umm Ma’bad Al-Khuzaa’iyyah
Yoonus related from Ibn Ishaq (that): Allah’s Messenger
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) alighted at the tent
of Umm Ma’bad whose full name was Atikah Bint Khalaf Ibn
Ma’bad Ibn Rabee’ah Ibn Asram, expecting a hospitable
reception. However Umm Ma’bad said: “By Allah, we neither
have food nor even anything to present to you. None of our
goats is pregnant (so as to produce milk).” Then Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) called
for one of her goats and he rubbed its udder with his hands
and supplicated to Allah. The goat produced such a large
quantity of milk which filled a large container. The
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) said: “Drink O Umm Ma’bad.” She said: “No, you drink
for you have more right to it.” Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) insisted and she drank to her
fill. Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) called for another goat and did as before and it also
produced milk and he drank from it. He called for another goat
and repeated as the previous two and he gave its milk to his
guide. For the fourth time, he called for another goat, rubbed
its udder and supplicated and milk flowed and he gave that to
Amir. Then he relaxed.

254

The Quraish trailed the Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) till they reached Umm Ma’bad
and they asked her concerning him: “Did you see Muhammad
with such and such description?” They described his features
to her. She said: “I do not know what you are talking about,
but I have been visited by one who milk non-pregnant goat.”
The Quraish said: “That is the same person we are looking
for.”
At this juncture, Abu Nu‘aim mentioned the story of Abdullah
Ibn Mas’ood: I was tending the sheep of ‘'Uqbah Ibn Abi
Mu`ait when The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) and Abu Bakr met me after they had fled
from the polytheists and they said, “O boy! Do you have any
(any sheep with) milk?” I replied: “Yes, but I have been
entrusted with it (i.e. it is not mine).” Then he said, “Do you
have any young sheep that has not mate?” So I brought to him
the sheep and he massaged its udders and milk flowed from it
and he collected it into a bowl and drank it and Abu Bakr also
quenched his thirst. Then he said to the udders of the sheep:
“Cease!” and it ceased. Thereafter, I came to him and said: O
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him), teach me these pure words (i.e. the Qur’an).” Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said:
“You are a wellmannered boy.” I took directly from his mouth
seventy chapters and no one can contend with me concerning
them. However, his statement that ‘they had fled from the
polytheists, ‘ is not about the time of hijrah, rather, it is about
some incidents that had occurred before the hijrah. Another
reason is that Ibn Mas’ood was among those who had
accepted Islam long time earlier, made hijrah to Abyssinia
and returned to Makkah as indicated earlier. Nevertheless,
this story of his is saheeh and recorded in the Book of saheehs
and others. And Allah knows best.
Imam Ahmad related from Faaid the freed slave of ‘Ubaadil:
I went out with Ibrahim Ibn AbdurRahmaan Ibn Sa’d till we
255

were at the stopover, then Ibn Sa’d came. Sa’d was the one
who guided the mount of Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) on the way. Ibrahim said:
“(inform me) what your Father narrated to you?” Ibn Sa’d
said: My Father narrated to me that Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) came to them along with
Abu Bakr and Abu Bakr had a daughter in fosterage with us.
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
was seeking a short route to Madinah. Sa’d said to him:
“Close by is Al-Ghair (a mountain in Madinah) by mount
where there are two highway robbers from Aslam called AlMuhaanaan (the two who are despised), if you wish, we will
go through them.” Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) said: “Take us along to them.”
Sa’d continued: then we set off until we came close to them.
One of them said to the other: “Here are the Yemenis.”
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
invited both of them and presented Islam to them and they
became Muslims. Then he inquired about their names and
they said: “We are Al-Muhaanaan.” The Messenger of Allah
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “Rather, you
should bear Al-Mukaramaan (the two noble ones).” Then he
asked them to lead the way to Madinah. We set out till we got
to the outskirts of Quba and Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf welcomed
him. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) asked them: “Where is Abu Umamah As’ad Ibn
Zurarah?” Sa’d Ibn Haythamah replied: “He is on his way,
shouldn’t I inform him of that, O Allah’s Messenger?” Then
the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) proceeded until he came by a palm groove with its
cistern filled. He turned to Abu Bakr and said: “This is the
destination. It was shown to me (in my dream) that I alighted
at a cistern like that of Banu Mudlij.” Ahmad related this story
exclusively.

256

Prophet Muhammad’s Entry into Madinah,
where He Established His Residence, and
Related Issues
Al-Bukhari related from Az-Zuhri from Urwah that the
Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) entered
Madinah in the mid-day.
I said that perhaps his arrival was after the midday because of
what is established in the two saheehs from the Hadith of
Isra’eel from Ishaq from Al-Bara’ Ibn 'Azib from Abu Bakr
concerning the Hadith of the Hijrah. He said: We arrived in
the night and the people began to contend as to with whom
the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) should reside. Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) said: “I will encamp with the tribe of
Najjar, the maternal uncles of Abdul Muttalib as a mark of
honor for them.”
This, Allah knows best, perhaps occurred on the day of his
arrival at Quba. Thus, it means that his arrival close to
Madinah was in the heat of the midday and stayed under the
shade of that palm tree. Then he proceeded with the Muslims
and alighted at Quba that night.
Al-Bukhari related through Az-Zuhri from Urwah that
Allah’s Messenger stayed with Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf at Quba
for about ten nights. He founded a mosque at Quba within
those days and then the people rode with him until his camel
knelt at the spot where his mosque (in Madinah) was
eventually built. At the time, the spot was used as a drying
place for dates and it belonged to orphan boys, Sahl and
Suhail. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him) bought it from them and turned it into a mosque.
All the while he was at the residence of Banu Najjar, Allah be
pleased with them.
257

Imam Ahmad related from Anas Ibn Malik that: I was among
the young children yelling: “Muhammad has come!” I ran but
saw nothing. Then they shouted: “Muhammad has come!” I
ran but still I did not see anything.
He continued: until Allah’s Messenger and his Companion
came and we went to hide behind one of the volcanic rocks of
Madinah. Thereafter, they sent two men from the desert tribes
to announce their arrival to the Ansar. About five hundred
Ansars came to meet them and they said: “Proceed (both of
you) in security and in being obeyed.” The Messenger of
Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) and his
Companion came to meet them. The people of Madinah came
out en masse in such a way that even the maidens above
rooftops struggled to catch a glimpse of him saying: “Which
one of them is him?” We never saw a similitude of the
spectacle of that day. Anas Ibn Malik said: “I saw him the day
he came to us and the day he was taken (in death) and I never
saw anything similar to the two days.”
It is related in the two saheehs that Abu Bakr narrated
concerning the Hadith of Hijrah that: The people trooped out
en masse when they both (Allah’s Messenger and Abu Bakr)
arrived at Madinah and lined the streets while young boys and
slaves perched on rooftops yelling: “Allahu Akbar, Allah’s
Messenger has arrived! Allahu Akbar Muhammad has come!!
Allahu Akbar Muhammad has come!!!” in the morning, they
proceeded and he went to where he was commanded.”
Ibn Ishaq related: Ali remained in Makkah for three days and
night returning the deposits which the Prophet (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) had been entrusted with. Then
he joined the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) and lived with Kulthoom Ibn Al-Hidm. Ali had also
stopped over in Quba for one or two days. He used to say:
There was a Muslim woman at Quba who had no husband. I
used to see a man come to her in the middle of night, knock
258

at her door and when she comes out, he would give her
something he has brought and she would take it from him. I
became suspicious of her so I said to her: “O female servant
of Allah, who is this man that always knock at your door every
night and you would come out and who would give you
something I do not know? And you are a Muslim woman who
has no husband?” she replied: “The man who comes to me is
Sahl Ibn Hunaif. He was aware of my predicament as a lonely
woman, in the night, he would attack the idols of his people,
break them into pieces and the he would bring them to me
saying: ‘use this as your firewood, ‘ Ali recounted this exploit
of Sahl Ibn Hunaif after he died in Iraq while he was with him.
Ibn Ishaq related: Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) witnessed the day of Jumu’ah while he
was with the Banu Salim Ibn 'Awf and he offered it in a
mosque in the middle of the valley of Ranoonaa. That was the
first Jumu’ah ever established in Madinah. Then Uthman Ibn
Malik and Abbas Ibn Ubadah Ibn Nadlah led others from the
Banu Salim to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him). They said to him: “O Messenger of Allah,
stay with us for we are (great numbers) of men, material and
efficient protection.” Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) said: “Let it go (i.e. his camel) for it is
under (Divine) command.” So let the camel go and it
proceeded until it was parallel to the quarters of Banu
Bayadah. Ziyad Ibn Labeed and Farwah Ibn Amr among
some of men from the Banu Bayadah met him and said: “O
Messenger of Allah, come and benefit from our (great
numbers) of men, material and efficient protection.” Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said:
“Let it go (i.e. his camel) for it is under (Divine) command.”
They did so and the camel went further until it got to the
residence of Banu Harith Ibn Khazraj when Sa’d Ibn arRabee’, Kharijah Ibn Zaid and Abdullah Ibn Rawahah among
their tribesmen interrupted its course and invited him saying:
“O Messenger of Allah, come and benefit from our (great
259

numbers) of men, material and efficient protection.” Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said:
“Let it go (i.e. his camel) for it is under (Divine) command.”
They did so and the camel went ahead until it passed by the
residence of Adiyy Ibn An-Najjar who were the Messenger of
Allah’s maternal relatives as the mother of Abdul-Muttalib,
Salma Bint Amr was one of their women. Saleet Ibn Qais,
Abu Saleet, Usairah Ibn Abi Kharijah among men of their
tribes interrupted the course of the camel and made a similar
appeal as the other clans inviting the Messenger of Allah to
stay with them. They said: “O Messenger of Allah, come over
to your maternal relatives to enjoy our (great numbers) of
men, material and efficient protection.” Allah’s Messenger
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “Let it go (i.e.
his camel) for it is under (divine) command.” They did so.
The camel continued in its course until it got to the residence
of Banu Malik Ibn An-Najjar, then it knelt down at the spot
where the door of his mosque is located today. At the time,
the land belonged to the two orphan boys – Sahl and Suhail,
the two sons of Amr who were in the quarter of Mu’adh Ibn
Afra’.
Moosa Ibn ‘'Uqbah said: Before Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) rode from Banu Amr Ibn
'Awf, the Ansar had gathered swarming round the Messenger
of Allah’s camel each person contending with the others to
hold the rein of the camel as a mark of honor and esteem for
the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him). Each time it passed by a house of the Ansar, their
occupants would invite him to stay with them and he would
say to them repeatedly: “Let it go (i.e. his camel) for it is under
(divine) command. I will stay where Allah wants me to stay.”
When it got to the house of Abu Ayyoob Al-Ansari, the camel
knelt down at his door. So he alighted and stayed in his house
until his mosque and residence was built.

260

Al-Baihaqi related from Anas that: Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) passed by a group of Bani
Najar and beating drum while saying:
We are neighbors from Banu An-Najjar
Supporters of Muhammad from among his neighbor
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
said: “Allah knows that I love you with my heart.” It is related
by Ibn Majah from Hisham Ibn Ammar from Eesa Ibn
Yoonus.
In saheeh Al-Bukhari, Anas Ibn Malik said: The Prophet
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) saw the women
and children (of the Ansar) coming forward. (The subnarrator said), “I think that Anas said, ‘they were returning
from a wedding party.” The Prophet (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) stood up and said thrice, “By Allah! You
are from the most beloved people to me.”
Imam Ahmad related that Anas Ibn Malik said: Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) came
to Madinah while Abu Bakr was riding behind him. Abu Bakr
was well known (among the Arab tribes) while the Messenger
of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) was not.
A man met Abu Bakr and said to him: “O Abu Bakr, who is
this man in your front?” Abu Bakr responded: “This is the
man guiding me.” One would think that Abu Bakr meant
someone showing him the way (on his journey) not knowing
that Abu Bakr meant someone guiding him to path of
goodness. Abu Bakr turned and he saw a horseman who had
caught up with them. He said: “O Prophet of Allah, a
horseman has caught up with us.” Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) turn to look and then
prayed: “O Allah throw him.” Then his horse tripped and
threw him off. It neighed and got up again. Seeing his fate,
261

the man said: “O Prophet of Allah, give me your command as
you may wish.” The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) said, “Remain where you are and
prevent anyone from catching up with us.” The man started
out the day warring against Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) and ended up becoming his
reconnoiter.
He continued: Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) alighted by a volcanic field and then sent
for the Ansar. They came, greeted him and said: “Ride on in
security and in being obeyed.” Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) and Abu Bakr rode on while
they scattered around him with their weapons.
It is also said that this incident occurred in Madinah. The
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) came and the people raised their glance to look at him
saying: “The Prophet of Allah has come!” He proceeded
slightly till he alighted beside Abu Ayyoob’s house. While the
Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) was
speaking with the family members of Abu Ayyoob, ‘Abdullah
Ibn Salam heard the news of his arrival while he himself was
picking the dates for his family from his family garden. He
hurried to the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) carrying the dates which he had collected for his family
from the garden. He listened to Allah’s Prophet (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) and then went home.
The Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) asked:
“Whose house is the closest?” Abu Ayyoob said: “Mine, O
Prophet of Allah. This is my house and this is my door.” He
said: “Go ahead and prepare for us an accommodation.” He
went and prepared a place for both of them and then he
returned and said: “O Messenger of Allah, I have prepared for
both of you an accommodation.
262

It is also narrated that when the Prophet (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) arrived, Abdullah Ibn Salam came to
him and declared: “I bear witness that you are truly a Prophet
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) of Allah and that
you have come with the truth. The Jews are well aware that I
am their leader and son of their leader, the most
knowledgeable of them and the son of the most
knowledgeable amongst them invite and ask them about my
status amongst them. When the Jews came, the Messenger of
Allah said to them: “O Jews, woe to you, fear Allah for by
Allah beside Whom there no other god, you know that I am
truly a Messenger of Allah and that I have with the truth so
accept Islam.” They responded, “We do not know him.”
thrice.
Al-Baihaqi related from Abu Ayyoob that Allah’s Messenger
had alighted in his house and he occupied the lower storey,
whereas Abu Ayyoob Ansari lived in the upper storey. One
night, Abu Ayyoob Ansari got up and said (to himself): (How
unfortunate it is) that we walk above the head of Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him), so they
went aside and spent the night in a corner and then told
Allah’s Messenger about it whereupon Allah’s Messenger
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “The lower
storey is more comfortable (for us).” However, he (Abu
Ayyoob Al-Ansari) insisted: “We (would not live) over the
roof under which you live.” So Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) shifted to the upper storey,
while Abu Ayyoob Al-Ansari shifted to the lower storey; and
he (Abu Ayyoob Ansari) used to prepare food for Allah’s
Messenger; and when it was brought (back) to him he would
ask (to be shown) the part, where the Prophet’s fingers had
touched (on the food), and he followed his fingers on that part
where his fingers (those of the Prophet) had touched. (One
day) he prepared food which contained garlic, and when it
was returned to him he asked (to be shown) the part which the
fingers of Allah’s Messenger had touched. It was said to him
263

that he had not eaten (the food). He (Abu Ayyoob Al-Ansari)
was distressed and went up to him (to the Prophet) and said:
“Is it forbidden?” Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) said: “No, (it is not forbidden), but I do
not like it,” and he (Abu Ayyoob Al-Ansari) said: “I also do
not like what you do not like or which you did not like.” He
(Abu Ayyoob Al-Ansari) said: (The Prophet did not eat
garlic) as Allah’s Messenger was visited (by angels) and
brought him the message of Allah.”
It is recorded in the Saheehain from Anas Ibn Malik that
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
said: “The worthiest clans of the Ansar are Banu Najjar,
thereafter Banu Abdul-Ashhal; thereafter Banul-Harith Ibn
Al-Khazraj; thereafter Banu Sa’idah and there is goodness in
all clans of the Ansar.” Sa’d Ibn Ubadah said: “I see that he
(the Prophet) has placed others above us.” It was said to (him):
“He has placed you above many others.” This is Bukhaari’s
wordings.
Rather, honor and eminence have been confirmed for all of
those who accepted Islam from the people of Madinah who
are the Ansar. Allah says:
“And the first to embrace Islam of the Muhajirooon (those
who migrated from Makkah to Madinah) and the Ansar (the
citizens of Madinah who helped and gave aid to the
Muhajiroon) and also those who followed them exactly (in
Faith). Allah is well-pleased with them as they are wellpleased with Him. He has prepared for them Gardens under
which rivers flow (Paradise), to dwell therein forever. That is
the supreme success.” (Soorah At-Tawbah [9]:100)
Allah (SWT) also says:
“And those who, before them, had homes (in Madinah) and
had adopted the Faith, love those who emigrate to them,
264

and have no jealousy in their breasts for that which they
have been given (from the
booty of Bani An-Nadir), and give them (emigrants)
preference over themselves, even though they were in need
of that. And whosoever is saved from his own covetousness,
such are they who will be the successful.” (Al-Hashr [59]:9)
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
said: “But for the emigration, I would have been one of the
Ansar: and if the people took their way in a valley (or a
mountain pass), I would take the
Ansar’s valley or the mountain pass. The Ansar are my Karsh
and my ‘Aibah.”
Al-Bukhari related that Al-Bara’ Ibn 'Azib narrated: I heard
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
(or he said): “None loves the Ansar but a believer, and none
hates them but a hypocrite. So Allah will love him who loves
them, and He will hate him who hates them.”
Al-Bukhari also related that Anas Ibn Malik narrated from the
Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) that: “
Love for the Ansar is a sign of faith and hatred for the Ansar
is a sign of hypocrisy.”
The city of Madinah was also honored with the migration of
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him).
It became a haven for the friends of Allah and his righteous
servants, a bastion, a stronghold and a fortress for the
believers and a centre of guidance for the entire world.
Ahadeeth enumerating the excellence of Madinah are quite
numerous. There is another section in which we shall
enumerate some of them insha’Allah.
It is recorded in the Saheehain that Abu Hurairah said:
"Certainly, Belief returns and goes back to Madinah as a
snake returns and goes back to its hole (when in danger).”
265

In the two saheehs also, from the Hadith of Sa’eed Ibn Yasar
who narrated that he heard from Abu Hurairah that Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “I
was ordered to migrate to a town which will swallow
(conquer) other towns and is called Yathrib and that is
Madinah, and it turns out (bad) persons as a furnace removes
the impurities of iron.”
Al-Baihaqi also related that Abu Hurairah narrated that
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
said: “O Allah, You brought me out from the most beloved
city to me so grant me residence in the most beloved city to
You.” So Allah granted him residence in Madinah. This
Hadith is extremely odd (ghareeb).
The popular report from the majority (of scholar) is that
Makkah is preferred over Madinah in excellence except for
the fact that the soil of Madinah encloses the dead body of
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him).
The majority of scholars have argued this out with evidences
too long to mention all of them here. The proper place is in
the Book of the Rulings of Pilgrimage, insha’Allah. The most
prominent of their evidences is what is related by Imam
Ahmad from Abu Salamah Ibn Abdur Rahman that Abdullah
Ibn Adiyy Ibn Al-Hamara’ informed him that he heard the
Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) saying
while he was standing at Hazwarah in a Market in Makkah:
“By Allah, I know you are the best place on Allah’s earth and
the most beloved of it to Allah. If not that your inhabitants
expelled me from you I would not have left.”

Notable events and occurrences of the first
year of the hijrah of the Prophet
The Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all, agreed
in the 16th, 17th or 18th year (of hijrah) during the reign of
Umar to begin the history of Islam from the year of Hijrah.
266

This was when the Commander of the faithful, Umar Ibn AlKhattab received from Yemen a draft for some money
between two men which was due in Sha'aban. Umar asked:
“Which Sha’ban? Is it the Sha’ban of this year, of the previous
or of the coming year?” So Umar convened an assembly of
the Companions to seek their advice on establishing a
calendar system by which the due dates of loans and other
events shall be calculated.
Someone suggested that the Persian calendar should be
adopted. After discussion, he disliked the proposal because
the Roman calendar is based on the epochs of their kings, one
after the other.
It was next considered whether the Roman calendar might be
adopted. The Roman calendar was based on the epoch of King
Alexander Ibn Feelibbus Al-Maqdooni. Again, Umar detested
this idea. Someone suggested that the era should begin from
the date of the birth of the Prophet (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him). Some suggested that it should begin from
his death. Another suggested that it should begin from the date
the Muslims migrated from Makkah to Al-Madinah while
another suggestion prefers the date Allah’s Messenger died.
After much discussion, Umar tended toward the choice of the
date of the Hijrah of Allah’s Messenger because of its
popularity and fame and they all agreed with him on that.
Al-Bukhari related in his saheeh that Sahl Ibn Sa’d said: “The
Prophet’s Companions did not take as a starting date for the
Muslim calendar, the day, the Prophet (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) had been sent as a Messenger or the day
of his death, but the day of his arrival at Al-Madinah.”
Ibn Jareer related that Uthman Ibn Mihsan narrated that Ibn
Abbas used to say concerning the statement of Allah: “By the

267

dawn; By the ten nights (i.e. the first ten days of the month of
Dhul-Hijjah)” “That is Al-Muharram, the outset of the year.
It is also related from Ubaid Ibn Umair that he said: Muharram
is the month of Allah and it is the beginning of the year in
which the House (Ka’bah) is draped and by which the people
know the date…” meaning that they begin Islamic date from
the year of Hijrah and they made the first month of the year
to be Muharram according to what is more popular among
them. This is the opinion of the majority of Imams.
Suhaili and others also reported that Imam Malik said: “The
first month of the Islamic year is the month of Rabee’ ulAwwal for it is the month in which Allah’s Messenger
migrated. "In another place, Suhaili adduced as evidence the
statement of Allah: “mosque whose foundation was laid from
the first day on piety…” (At-Tawbah [9]:108) i.e. on the first
day Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) appeared in Madinah which is the first day of the Islamic
calendar as agreed upon by the Companions that the first
calendar year is the year of Hijrah. No doubt, this is more
fitting in the opinion of Imam Malik, Allah have mercy on
him. However, implementation runs contrary to his opinion
because the first of the months of Arab was Muharram so it
was made the year of the Hijrah the first year of Islam and
they made Muharram its first month as is well known so that
the order may not be confused. And Allah knows best.
We say, from Allah is the source of help, the year of the
blessed Hijrah commenced while Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) was resident in Makkah
and the Ansar had given their second pledge of Aqabah and
the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) had permitted the Muslims to migrate to Madinah.
Subsequently, many of the Companions migrated to Madinah
until no one who is capable of migrating remained except
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
268

and Abu Bakr waited so as to accompany him on the way as
we mentioned earlier. Then he left in the manner we had
extensively described earlier on while Ali Ibn Abi Talib
stayed behind after the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him) on his order to restore to their owners the
property left in his care then he caught up with them at Quba.
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
arrived on Monday close to the time the sun declined from the
zenith of the midday.
When the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
arrived Al-Madinah, the first place he stayed was the
residence of Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf at Quba as mentioned earlier.
He stayed there according to a more popular opinion, for more
than twenty nights and eighteen nights according to another
opinion. Yet another opinion puts his stay at about ten nights.
Moosa Ibn 'Uqbah said: he stayed for three nights. The most
popular view according to Ibn Ishaq and others is that Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) stayed
with them at Quba from Monday till Friday. Within these
different periods, he established the Mosque of Quba. Suhaili
claimed that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) established it on the first day of his arrival
at Quba and based his claim on the statement of Allah:
“Verily, the mosque whose foundation was laid from the first
day on piety.” (At-Tawbah [9]:108)
From the analysis of the statement, it is clear that what was
established on the first day is the same honorable and
praiseworthy mosque about which Allah revealed:
“Never stand you therein. Verily, the mosque whose
foundation was laid from the first day on piety is more worthy
that you stand therein (to pray). In it are men who love to clean
and to purify themselves. And Allah loves those who make
themselves clean and pure (i.e. who cleaned their private parts
269

with dust [i.e. to be considered as soap) and water from urine
and stools, after answering the call of nature].”
(AtTawbah[9]:108) As we have repeatedly mentioned in the
Tafseer. We also mentioned the Hadith that is recorded in
Saheeh Muslim that the mosque in question is rather the
Mosque in Al-Madinah and the response to it.
We also mentioned the Hadith which is related by Imam
Ahmad from Uwaim Ibn Sa’idah that the Messenger of Allah
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) came to them in
the Mosque of Quba and said: “Allah has commended you
with a most beautiful praise concerning the purification in
your mosque. So what is this purification to which you are
used?” They responded: “By Allah, O Messenger of Allah,
we do not know any other reason except that we noticed that
our Jewish neighbors used to wash their backside after the call
of nature and we washed our own backsides as they did.”

Abdullah Ibn Salam Accepts Islam
Abdullah Ibn Salam narrated: “When the Prophet arrived AlMadinah, the people scurried to him and I was among those
who scurried to him. When I saw him I immediately knew
that his face is not that of a liar. The first thing I heard him
say was: ‘O people, spread the greetings of peace (amongst
yourselves), feed the people, join the ties of kinship and stand
in prayer in the night, while the (rest of the) people are asleep,
you will enter Paradise in peace.”
In the wordings of Al-Bukhari through Abdul-Azeez from
Anas who narrated: When the Prophet (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) arrived (Al-Madinah) Abdullah Ibn
Salam came and said “I testify that you (i.e. Muhammad) are
Messenger of Allah and that you have come with the Truth.
The Jews know well that I am their chief and the son of their
chief and the most learned amongst them and the son of the
most learned amongst them. So send for them (i.e. Jews) and
270

ask them about me before they know that I have embraced
Islam, for if they know that they will say about me things
which are not correct.”
So Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) sent for them, and they came and entered. Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said to
them, “O (the group of) Jews! Woe to you: be afraid of Allah.
By Allah beside Whom none has the right to be worshipped,
you people know for certain, that I am a Messenger of Allah
and that I have come to you with the Truth, so embrace
Islam.” The Jews replied, “We do not know this.” So they said
this to the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
and he repeated it thrice. Then he said, “What sort of a man is
Abdullah Ibn Salam amongst you?” They said, “He is our
chief and the son of our chief and the most learned man, and
the son of the most learned amongst us.” He said, “What
would you say if he should embrace Islam?” They said,
“Allah forbid! He cannot embrace Islam.” He said, “What
would you think if he should embrace Islam?” They said,
“Allah forbid! He cannot embrace Islam.” He said, “What
would you think if he should embrace Islam?” They said,
“Allah forbid! He cannot embrace Islam.” He said, “O Ibn
Salam! Come out to them.” He came out and said, “O (the
group of) Jews! Fear Allah beside Whom none has the right
to be worshipped. You know for certain that he is a Messenger
of Allah and that he has brought a True Religion!’ They said,
“You tell a lie.” On that, Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) turned them out.
When the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) was ready to leave Quba on his camel, Al-Qaswa’,
on Friday, it was at the time of midday. At that time he was in
the residence of Banu Salim Ibn 'Awf so he lead the Muslims
in the Jumu’ah prayers there in a valley called Ranoona. That
was the first Jumu’ah prayer ever established by the
Messenger of Allah at Al-Madinah or even ever at any place.
271

This is because he and his Companions were not able to settle
in Makkah such that they could gather and offer the Jumu’ah
prayer with a Khutbah and public admonition. That was
occasioned by the severity of the opposition from the
polytheists as well as their harm of him and Allah knows best.

Khutbah of the Messenger of Allah on that
Day
Ibn Jareer related from Sa’eed Ibn Abdur-Rahmaan AlJumahi that it reached him that the Prophet’s Khutbah in the
first Jumu’ah which he led at Madinah in the quarters of Banu
Salim Ibn Amr Ibn 'Awf, Allah be pleased with him was:
“All praise is due to Allah. I thank Him and seek His aid. I ask
His forgiveness, and seek His guidance. I believe in Him and
do not deny Him. I am the enemy of those who reject belief
in Him. I bear witness that there is no one worthy of worship,
other than Allah, Him alone, without partner; and that
Muhammad is His servant and messenger whom He sent with
guidance, true religion, light, and advice after a long gap of
time when no messengers were sent, knowledge was little,
people were misguided, and time appeared to have stopped as
the Day of Judgment approached.
Whoever obeys Allah (SWT) and His messenger is wise and
whoever disobeys them is astray, wasted, and has lost his way
far from the true path. I advise you to fear Allah (SWT) and
be conscious of Him. Be conscious of what Allah warned you
of Himself. There is no better advice than that or a better
reminder. It is a shield for those who follow this advice
carefully and cautiously and it is an aid, and the truth that will
get you what you aspire for on the Day of Judgment.
Whosoever establishes a good relationship between him and
Allah, secretly and openly, only to seek the pleasure of Allah,
will benefit in this life and be saved in the afterlife when he
will be in dire need of the good deeds he earned before death.
272

Man will then wish that there were a great distance between
him and anything else other than taqwa.
Allah (SWT) warns you about Himself and He is kind to his
servants. Allah, who has spoken the Truth and fulfilled his
promise, has said: “The Sentence that comes from Me cannot
be changed, and I am not unjust (to the least) to the slaves.”
(Qaf [50]:29).
Fear Allah in your present and future affairs, in secret and in
the open for Whosoever fears Allah (SWT) and keeps his duty
to Him, He will remit his sins from him, and will enlarge his
reward. And Whosoever fears Allah will achieve great
success. Having taqwa (fearful awareness of Allah) protects
man from Allah’s anger, protects him from His punishment
and protects him from His wrath. Taqwa illumines the face,
pleases the Lord, and elevates the rank.
Take what is determined for you and do not neglect your
relationship with Allah. He has taught you His book, laid
down for you His path so that He will know which of you are
the truthful and which of you are the liars. Therefore, do good,
just as Allah has done good to you, and be enemies to His
enemies, (for Allah has said:) “And strive in the way of Allah
sincerely for He has chosen you and named you Muslims” (
and “That those who have died (striving in His way) might
die after a clear sign (had been given to them), and those who
go on to live might live after a clear sign (had been given to
them)”. There is no strength other than by Allah, thus increase
the remembrance of Allah, and work for what will come after
death, for whosoever builds a good relationship with Allah,
Allah will protect him from the harm or need of people. Allah
surely decrees what is destined for mankind, whereas they
have no control over Him, and He has in store for them what
they cannot have in store for Him. Allah is great. There is no
power except by Allah, Elevated, the Great.”
273

The Building of his Noble Mosque During
His Stay at the Residence of Abu Ayyoob AlAnsari
Al-Bukhari related that Anas Ibn Malik said: When Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) arrived
at Madinah, he alighted at the upper part of Madinah among
the people called Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf and he stayed with them
for fourteen nights. Then he sent for the chiefs of Banu AnNajjar, and they came, carrying their swords. As if I am just
now looking at Allah’s Messenger on his she-camel with Abu
Bakr riding behind him (on the same camel) and the chiefs of
Bani An-Najjar around him till he dismounted in the
courtyard of Abu Ayyoob’s home. The Prophet (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) used to offer the prayer
wherever the prayer was due, and he would pray even in
sheepfolds. Then he ordered that the mosque be built. He sent
for the chiefs of Banu an-Najjaar, and when they came, he
said, “O Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me the price of this
garden of yours.” They replied “No! By Allah, we do not
demand its price except from Allah.”
In that garden there were the (following) things that I will tell
you: Graves of pagans, unleveled land with holes and pits etc.,
and date-palm trees. Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) ordered that the graves of the pagans
be dug up and, the unleveled land be leveled and the datepalm trees be cut down. The trunks of the trees were arranged
so as to form the wall facing the Qiblah. The stone pillars were
built at the sides of its gate. The companions of the Prophet
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) were carrying the
stones and reciting some lyrics, and Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) was with them and they
were saying, “O Allah! There is no good except the good of
274

the Hereafter, so bestow victory on the Ansar and the
Muhajiroon." Al-Bukhari has related this Hadith in another
place and Muslim. We have stated earlier in Saheeh AlBukhari through Urwah that the location where the mosque
was sited used to be a place for drying dates belonging to two
orphan boys living in the quarters of As’ad Ibn Zurarah, Sahl
and Suhail. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) bargained the price of the piece of land
with them but they said: “We will rather give it to you free of
charge O Messenger of Allah,” but the Messenger of Allah
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) declined and
bought it from them instead and he built a mosque on it.
Abu Dawood related that Ibn Umar narrated: In the lifetime
of Allah’s Messenger the mosque was built of adobes, its roof
of the leaves of date-palms and its pillars of the stems of datepalms. Abu Bakr did not alter it. Umar expanded it on the
same pattern as it was in the lifetime of Allah’s Messenger by
using adobes, leaves of date-palms and changing the pillars
into wooden ones. ‘Uthman changed it by expanding it to a
great extent and built its walls with engraved stones and lime
and made its pillars of engraved stones and its roof of teak
wood.” This is how Al-Bukhari has related from Ali Ibn AlMadini from Ya’qoob Ibn Ibrahim.
I said: Uthman extended it based on his interpretation of the
statement of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) that: “He who built a mosque for Allah
(as small) as the hole of a sand grouse, Allah would build a
house for him like it in Paradise” and the other Companions
present agreed with him on that and they did not change it
after his demise.
Scholars have used this as evidence that the extension (of a
mosque) takes the same ruling as the main structure. Thus the
ruling of the entire Mosque in terms of multiplication of
275

reward for praying in it is equally applicable to it according
to a more correct opinion.
It was also extended during the time of Al-Waleed Ibn AbdulMalik. On his orders, Umar Ibn AbdulAzeez extended it when
he was the Governor of Madinah and the apartment of the
Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) was
included as shall be explained in due course in the discussion
on his death. There were several other extensions after that.
The direction of Qiblah was also extended till the Rawdah and
the minbar (pulpit) are located behind several front rows as
can be observed today.
Abdur-Razzaq related that Umm Salamah said: When Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) and his
Companions were building the Mosque, the other
Companions would lift a brick each but Ammar would lift two
bricks at a time, one brick for himself and the other on behalf
of Allah’s Messenger. The Prophet (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) massaged his back and said: “The son of
Sumayyah, while the people earn one reward each, your own
reward will be double. Your last drink in this world will be a
drink of milk and then a transgressing group will kill you.”
This chain comfirms to the rules of the Saheehain.

Story of the Construction of the Prophet’s
Mosque upon his plan
Al-Hafiz Al-Baihaqi related in ‘Ad-Dala’il’ from Safeenah,
the freed slave of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) who said: “When the Messenger of
Allah and built the mosque, Abu Bakr brought a stone and
placed it, then Umar came and did similar thing and Uthman
also came with a stone and placed it whereupon Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said:
“These are the men that will be in charge of authority after
me.”
276

What is more well-known is the report of Imam Ahmad from
Safeenah who said: “Khilafah shall be for thirty years and
thereafter there shall be kings.” Then Safeenah said: “Keep
track (of the count); Abu Bakr reigned for two years. Umar
reigned for ten years. Uthman ruled for twelve years and Ali
ruled for six years.” This wording is that of Ahmad. It is also
related by Abu Dawood, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa’i through
Sa’eed Ibn Jumhan.
I said: At the beginning of the construction of the mosque of
the Prophet, there was no minbar (pulpit) upon which address
is given. Instead, he would lean against a trunk in his
Moosalla (prayer place) by the wall toward the Qiblah. When
a pulpit was built for him as will be addressed in its proper
section, he gave khutbah (address) on it instead. When he
moved away from that trunk it cried like that of a pregnant
she-camel in great yearning for what it used to hear of the
Khutbah of the Messenger of Allah. The Prophet (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) descended (the pulpit) and
embraced it while it continued moaning like a child being
quietened as shall be discussed in detail in due course.

A Reminder on the Excellence of this Noble
and Exalted Mosque
Imam Ahmad related that Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri said: “Two
men disagreed, one from Banu Khudrah and the other from
Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf, concerning the mosque founded upon
Taqwa. The man from Khudrah said: “It is the mosque of the
Messenger of Allah” while the man from Banu Amr argued
that it is the mosque of Quba. So both of them came to the
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) to ask him concerning that and he said: “It is this
mosque.” i.e. the mosque of the Messenger of Allah. He also
added: “In that is a lot of good.” i.e. the mosque of Quba.

277

In Saheeh Muslim, Abu Salamah Ibn Abdur-Rahman reported
that Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abu Sa’eed AlKhudri happened to
pass by me and I said to him. “How did you hear your father
making mention of the mosque founded on Piety?” He said:
“My father said: ‘I went to Allah’s Messenger as he was in
the house of one of his wives, and said: ‘Messenger of Allah,
which of the two mosques is founded on piety? Thereupon he
took a handful of pebbles and threw them on the ground and
then said: ‘This is the very mosque of yours (mosque at
Madinah).’”
Imam Ahmad related that Sahl Ibn Sa’d said: “Two men
disagreed concerning the mosque founded upon Taqwa. One
said it is the mosque of the Messenger of Allah while the other
argued that it is the mosque of Quba. So both of them came to
the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) to ask him concerning that and he said: “It is this
mosque.” i.e. the mosque of the Messenger of Allah.
These different paths through which this Hadith is narrated
almost reaching the level of absoluteness establish that the
mosque in question is the mosque of the Messenger of Allah.
This is the opinion of Umar, his son Abdullah, Zaid Ibn
Thabit, Sa’eed Ibn Moosayyab and the preferred opinion of
Ibn Jareer. Others however argued that there is no
contradiction between this Hadith and the fact that the
revelation of the verse is concerning the mosque of Quba as
explained previously. This is because the mosque of the
Prophet is more deserving of this description than the one of
Quba for it is one of the three mosques one is permitted to
make preparation of journey to visit as established in the two
saheehs from the Hadith of Abu Hurairah who narrated that
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
said: “Do not set out on a journey except for three Mosques
i.e. This mosque of mine, Al-Masjid-AI-Haram and the
Mosque of Al-Aqsa, (Mosque of Jerusalem).”
278

In the Saheehain Abu Hurairah narrated that Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said:
“What is between my house and my minbar is one of the
meadows of the Garden, and my minbar is on my wateringplace (Al-Hawd).”
The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) built apartment for himself and his family around his
noble mosque. The rooms were small and with low roofs. AlHasan Ibn Abi Al-Hasan Al-Basri who was a young boy
living with his mother Khairah, the freed slave of Umm
Salamah said: “I used to touch the ceiling of the Prophet’s
room with my hand.” I (the author) said: It is necessary to
point out that Al-Basri was a huge tall man. Allah’s mercy be
upon him.
As-Sauhaili said in ‘Ar-Rawd: His apartments were built of
palm fronds mixed with adobe and its entire roof was made of
palm fronds. The foregoing has been related from Al-Hasan
Al-Basri. In Tareekh AlBukhari, it is recorded that his door
used to be knocked with nails and that is an indication that his
doors never had ring. He said: All the rooms were merged
with the mosque after the death of the wives of the Messenger
of Allah.

The Fever of Madinah Afflicts the
Muhajiroon, but the Messenger was Spared
by the Wisdom and Power of Allah (SWT).
He Supplicated Allah and He Removed the
Fever from Madinah
Al-Bukhari related that 'A’ishah said: When Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) came
to Madinah, Abu Bakr and Bilal got developed fever, and I
went to both of them and said, “O my Father, how do you
279

feel? O Bilaal, how do you feel?” Whenever Abu Bakr’s fever
got worse, he would say,
“Every man will meet his death once in one morning
while he will be among his family, for death is really nearer
to him than his leather shoe laces (to his feet).”
And whenever fever deserted Bilal, he would say aloud,
“Would that I know whether I shall spend a night in the
valley (of Makkah) with Idhkhir and Jaleel (i.e. kinds of
grass) around me, and whether I shall water of Majannah,
and whether I shall see once again the hills of Shamah and
Tafeel?”
Then I went to Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) and told him of that. He prayed, “O Allah,
make us love Madinah as much as or more than we used to
love Makkah, O Allah, make it healthy and bless its Sa’ and
Mudd (i.e. measures), and take away its fever to Al-Juhfah.”
It is recorded in the two saheehs that Ibn Abbas said: When
Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him)
and his companions arrived (at Makkah) in the year of Umrah,
the polytheists said, «There have come to you a group of
people who have been weakened by the fever of Yathrib (i.e.
Madinah).» So the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) ordered his companions to do Ramal (i.e. fast
walking) in the first three rounds of Tawaf around the Ka’bah
and to walk in between the two corners (i.e. the black stone
and the Yemenite corner). The only cause which prevented
the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) from
ordering them to do Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf, was
that he pitied them.

280

Establishment of a Pact of Brotherhood
Between the Muhajiroon and the Ansar
In Madinah, there were some groups of Jews from Banu
Qainuqa’, Banu Nadeer, Banu Quraizah who had came to the
Arabian Peninsula well before the Ansar during the wars of
Bukhtnassar when Palestine was inundated from what was
mentioned by At-Tabari. When the Sail Al-’Arim (flood
released from the dam) occurred, the people of Saba’
dispersed in different directions. Al-'Aws and Khazraj arrived
Madinah among the Jews with whom they entered into an
alliance. They became assimilated to them when they saw that
they had an edge over them owing to the knowledge
transmitted from the Prophets. However, Allah bestowed
favor upon the polytheists of Madinah through the guidance
and Islam which they accepted. Meanwhile, the Jews refused
owing to their envy, transgression arrogance against the
Truth.
Imam Ahmad related that Anas Ibn Malik said: The
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) formed alliance between the Muhajiroon and the Ansar
in the house of Anas Ibn Malik.
In Saheeh Muslim, Jabir narrated: Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) made it obligatory for
every tribe (the payment) of blood-wit.”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said: The Messenger of Allah (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) wrote a document
between the Muhajiroon and the Ansar in which he made a
agreement with the Jews and let them deal with their religion
and wealth as they deem. He equally spelt out the mutual
obligations.
In the Name of Allah the Most Gracious the Most Merciful.
This is a document from Muhammad the unlettered Prophet
281

(governing the relations) between the believers and Muslims
of Quraish and Yathrib and those who have followed and
striven with them. They are one community with the
exclusion of other people. The Muhajiroon of the Quraish
based on their current state (with which they had been wen
Islam came) shall pay the blood money within themselves and
shall ransom their prisoners on reasonable (terms) and with
justice among believers. Banu 'Awf according to their current
state shall pay the blood money they used to pay at first
(before Islam) and every section shall ransom their prisoners
according to reasonable terms and with justice among
believers.
(Then he mentioned every clan and house from the clans of
the Ansar). Banu Al-Harith according to their current state
shall pay the blood money they used to pay at first and every
section shall ransom their prisoners according to reasonable
terms and with justice among believers. Banu Sa’idah
according to their current state and Banu Jusham as well as
Banu An-Najjar and Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf and Banu Nabeet up
to when he said:
Verily the believers shall not leave any destitute person
among them without paying his ransom money or blood
money on reasonable term. A believer shall not make a pledge
with the ally of another believer against him. Whoever is
rebellious and whoever seeks to spread injustice, sin,
aggression, or corruption between the believers, the hand of
every believer who fears Allah shall be against him even if he
be his child.
A Believer shall not kill another Believer for the sake of a
disbeliever, nor shall he support a disbeliever against a
Believer. The protection of Allah is one and is extended to the
least of them I status. The believers are friends and protector
of one another to the exclusion of other people.
282

Whosoever follows us among the Jews, for him shall be help
and sympathy. They shall not be dealt with unjustly nor shall
anyone be aided against them. The Jews shall share in the
expenses of war as long as they fight alongside the Muslims.
The Jews of Banu 'Awf are one community with the believers.
To the believers belong their religion and to the Jews belong
their religion allies and persons except those who perpetrate
injustice and sinfulness and such a person hurts no one except
themselves and their families. For the Jews of Bani Najjar,
Banu Al-Harith, Banu Sa’idah and Banu Ju'sham, Banu AlAws, Banu Tha’labah, Jufnah and Banu Shateebah is
something similar to that of Banu 'Awf. The entourage of the
Jews is like themselves, none of them will go out for war
except with the permission of Muhammad but he shall not be
hampered from avenging for a wound. He who kills a man is
like he had killed himself and his family except one who has
been wronged for Allah will accept that.
The Jews shall bear their own expenses and the Muslims shall
bear their own expenses as well. Each must help the other
against anyone who fights against the people of this pact.
They must seek mutual advice and consultation,
righteousness as opposed to sin. A man is not responsible for
his ally’s misdemeanor. The wronged must be helped. Verily,
Yathrib is a sacred precinct for the people of this pact.

The Prophet’s Formation of Brotherhood
Between the Muhajiroon and the Ansar
Allah says: “And those who, before them, had homes (in
Madinah) and had adopted the Faith, love those who emigrate
to them, and have no jealousy in their breasts for that which
they have been given (from the booty of Bani An-Nadir), and
give them (emigrants) preference over themselves, even
though they were in need of that. And whosoever is saved
from his own covetousness, such are they who will be the
successful.” (Al-Hashr [59]:9)
283

He also says: “And to everyone, We have appointed heirs of
that (property) left by parents and relatives.
To those also with whom you have made a pledge
(brotherhood), give them their due portion (by Wasiyah wills, etc.). Truly, Allah is Ever a Witness over all things.”
(An-Nisa’ [4]:33)
Al-Bukhari related: Ibn Abbas said, “In the verse: To
everyone We have appointed heirs” (an-Nisa’ [4]:33).’ (And
regarding the verse) “To those also with whom you have
made a pledge (brotherhood)”, Ibn Abbas said, “When the
emigrants came to Madinah, the emigrants would inherit the
Ansari excluding the latter’s actual relatives (from inheriting)
because of the bond of brotherhood which the Prophet
established between them (i.e. the emigrants and the Ansar).
When the verse: “And to everyone We have appointed heirs”
was revealed, it cancelled the bond (the pledge) of
brotherhood regarding inheritance).” Then he said, “The
verse: ‘To those also with whom you have made a pledge
(brotherhood)’, remained valid regarding co-operation and
mutual advice, while the matter of inheritance was excluded
and it became permissible to assign something in one’s
testament to the person who had the right of inheritance
before.”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said: the Messenger of Allah (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) formed a pact of
brotherhood between the emigrants and the Ansar and he said,
we seek Allah’s refuge from attributing to him what he did
not say: “Be brothers in Allah pair by pair.” Then he took Ali
Ibn Abi Talib’s hand and said: “This is my brother.”
Meanwhile, the Messenger was the leader of all the
Messengers, the chief of the pious ones and a Messenger of
the Lord of the worlds Who has no similitude or counterpart
among the servants yet he formed a brotherhood with Ali Ibn
Abi Talib. Hamzah Ibn Abdul-Muttalib, the Lion of Allah and
the Lion of His Messenger and an uncle to the Messenger of
284

Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) became a
brother to Zaid Ibn Harithah, the freed slave of Allah’s
Messenger. Hamzah bequeathed to Zaid on the day of the
battle of Uhud in the event of his death. Ja’far Ibn Abi Talib,
the possessor of two wings and Mu’adh Ibn Jabal also became
brothers.
Ibn Hisham added:
“At that time, it was in the absence of Ja’faar while he was
at the land of Abyssinia.”
Al-Bukhari related in the chapter of how the Prophet formed
the bond of brotherhood between his Companions, that
Abdur-Rahman Ibn 'Awf said, “ When we came to Madinah
(as emigrants) Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of
Allah be upon him) established a bond of brotherhood
between me and Sa’d Ibn Ar-Rabee’.” Abu Juhaifah said: The
Prophet formed a bond of brother hood between Salman
AlFarisi and Abud-Darda’, Allah be pleased with them all.
Muhammad Ibn Yoosuf related that Sufyan narrated through
Humaid from Anas that: When AbdurRahmaan Ibn 'Awf
arrived Al-Madinah, the Prophet formed a bond of
brotherhood between him and Sa’d Ibn ar-Rabee’ Al-Ansari.
Sa’d offered him one half of his wives and wealth but AbdurRahmaan declined saying: “May Allah bless you both in your
family and wealth. Rather, show me the way to the market.”
Abdur-Rahman went to that market the following day and
brought some dried butter-milk (yoghurt) and butter. After a
few days, the Prophet saw ‘Abdur-Rahman having traces of
yellow (scent) on his body. Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “What is the matter, O
AbdurRahman?” and he replied, “I have married a woman
from the Ansar.’ Then the Prophet asked, ‘How much did you
pay her?’ He replied, ‘(I gave her) a gold piece equal in weigh
to a date stone (or a date stone of gold)! The Prophet said,
285

‘Give a Waleemah (wedding feast) even if with one sheep'."
This version is solely reported by Al-Bukhari. He has also
reported in another place. Imam Muslim also related it with
different chain through Al-Humaid.
Al-Bukhari related that Abu Hurairah said: The Ansar said to
the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him),
“Divide our date-palms between us and our emigrant
brothers.” The Prophet said, “No.” The Ansar said to the
emigrants, “You may do the labor (in our gardens) and we
will share the fruits with you.” The emigrants said, “We hear
and obey.” Al-Bukhari solely related it.
Abdur-Rahman Ibn Zaid Ibn Aslam narrated that Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) said to
the Ansar: “Your brothers have left wealth and children and
have emigrated to you.” The Ansar said: “Divide our wealth
into portions between us.” The Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “Or something else?”
they asked: “What is that O Messenger of Allah?” the Prophet
said: “They are people who do not have the knowledge of
farming. Let them work on your garden and then share the
fruits with them.” And they said: “Yes.”

The death of Abu Umamah As’ad Ibn
Zurarah, One of the Twelve Delegates on the
Night of the Pledge of 'Aqabah
He had witnessed the three Aqabah pledges and was the first
to pledge allegiance to the Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) on the night of the second
pledge of Aqabah according to a view. Muhammad Ibn Ishaq
related from Anas that the Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) cauterized As’ad Ibn Zurarah
while he was suffering from Shawkah. It narrators are
trustworthy.
286

Ibn Ishaq related from Yahya Ibn Abdullah Ibn AbdurRahman Ibn As’ad Ibn Zurarah that Allah’s Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) said: “How bad the death
of Abu Umamah is for the Jews and the hypocrites. They say,
‘if he was a Prophet (in truth), his Companion would not have
died even though I possess no power on behalf of myself and
my Companions against Allah.” This indicates that he was the
first to die after the arrival of the Prophet (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) in Madinah. Abul-Hasan Ibn AlKatheer had claimed in ‘Usdul-Ghabah’ that he died in
Shawwal, seven months after the arrival of the Prophet (in
Madinah) but Allah knows best.

The Birth of Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair in
Shawwal, the year of Hijrah
He was the first child to be born in Islam among the emigrants
just as an-Nu’man Ibn Basheer was the first child to be born
amongst the Ansar after the migration of the Messenger of
Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him), Allah be
pleased with both of them. Some have claimed that Ibn AzZubair was born twenty months after the hijrah.
Al-Bukhari related that Asma’ conceived Abdullah Ibn AzZubair, she narrated: “I migrated to Madinah while I was at
full term of pregnancy and alighted at Quba where I gave birth
to him. Then I brought him to the Prophet and put him in his
lap. The Prophet asked for a date, chewed it, and put some of
its juice in the child’s mouth. So, the first thing that entered
the child’s stomach was the saliva of Allah’s Messenger
(peace and blessing of Allah be upon him). Then the Prophet
rubbed the child’s palate with a date and invoked for Allah’s
Blessings on him, and he was the first child born amongst the
Emigrants in AlIslam.”

287

Allah’s Messenger Consummated His
Marriage with 'A’ishah in Shawwal
Imam Ahmad related that 'A’ishah said: “The Messenger of
Allah married me in Shawwal, and consummated his marriage
with me during the month of Shawwal. And who among the
wives of Allah’s Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) was dearer to him than I, and A’ishah used to like
that the women (of her family) should enter the houses as
brides during the month of Shawwal.” This is also related by
Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, an-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah from different
chains through Sufyan athThawri. Based on this, his
consummation with her occurred seven or eight months after
the Hijrah.
Ibn Jareer said: In this year, i.e. the first year of hijrah, the
salat of the resident was increased from the two rak‘ahs that
it used to be. The salat of the traveler was left at two rak‘ahs.
This occurred a month after the arrival of the Prophet (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him) in Madinah after twelve
nights have passed in the month of Rabee' ul-Akhir.
I said: We have earlier cited the Hadith related by Al-Bukhari
that 'A’ishah said: “When the prayers were first enjoined they
were of two Rak‘ahs each. Later the prayer in a journey was
kept as it was but the prayers for non-travelers were
completed.” Al-Baihaqi has also related that Al-Hasan AlBasri said that the prayer of residents was first enjoined and it
was enjoined four rak‘ahs.

The Legislation of Adhan (the call to prayer)
Upon the Arrival of the Prophet in Madinah
Ibn Ishaq said: when the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him) settled down in Madinah and his brethren
among the emigrants had joined him and the affairs of the
Ansar became settled and the authority of Al-Islam was
288

founded, the prayer was established, Zakah and Fasting were
enjoined, laws were promulgated, halal and haram were
ordained and Islam held sway before their eyes. When the
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) arrived at Madinah, people used to assemble for the
prayer, and used to guess the time for it. Then Messenger of
Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) decided to
introduce a trumpet like that of the Jews which they used to
gather adherents to their own worship then he detested the
idea. He requested for a bell which will be beaten to announce
the time of Salat to the Muslims. While they were still
deliberating on that Abdullah Ibn Zaid Ibn Tha’labah Ibn Abd
Rabbihi who was paired with Bal-Harith Ibn Al-Khazraj had
a dream in which he was taught the call to prayer. He came to
the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) and said: “I was visited (in my dream) by a visitor. I saw
a man in two green pieces of cloth with a bell in his hand. I
said to him: “O servant of Allah, do you sell this bell?” He
asked: “What do you intend to do with it?” and I said: “I will
call the people to the prayer with it.” Then he said: “Shouldn’t
I direct you to that which is better than that?” I asked, “What
is that?” and he said: “Say Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar,
Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, Ashhadu an la ilaha illallah,
Ash’hadu an la ilaha illallah, Ashhadu anna Muhammadar
Rasoolullah, Ashhadu anna Muhammadar Rasoolullah.
Hayya alas-Salah, Hayya alas-Salah, Hayya alal-Falah,
Hayya alal-Falah, Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, la ilaha
illallah
(Allah is Greatest, Allah is Greatest, Allah is Greatest, Allah
is Greatest, I bear witness that none deserves to be worshipped
(in truth) except Allah, I bear witness that none deserves to be
worshipped (in truth) except Allah, I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Come to Salat, come
to Salat. Come to success, come to success, Allah is Greatest,
289

Allah is Greatest. None deserves to be worshipped (in truth)
except Allah)
When he informed the Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah
be upon him), he said: “It is a true vision, by the wish of Allah,
teach Bilal the words so that he may call to the prayer by it
for his voice is louder than yours. When Bilal called to the
prayer by those words, Umar heard it while he was in his
house, he rushed out to meet the Messenger of Allah while
dragging his upper garment. When he got to him he said: “O
Prophet of Allah, I swear by Him Who has sent you with the
Truth, I have also seen something similar to what he has
seen.” The Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) of Allah said: “Praise be to Allah.” This Hadith has also
been related by Abu Dawood, At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Ibn
Khuzaimah rom different routes.

Expedition of Hamzah Ibn Abdul-Muttalib
Ibn Jareer related: Al-Waqidi claimed that in the month of
Ramadan exactly seven months after his Hijrah, Allah’s
Messenger (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) handed
over a white flag to Hamzah Ibn Abdul-Muttalib to lead thirty
men in a military expedition to intercept the caravans of the
Quraish and that Hamzah met Aba Jahl at the head of three
hundred of the Quraish, but the honor of Ibn Amr restrained
them and there was no fighting between the two groups. He
added that the standard bearer of Hamzah in the expedition
was Abu Marthaid Al-Ghanawi.

The Expedition of Ubaidah Ibn Al-Harith
Ibn Abdul-Muttalib
Ibn Jareer related: Al-Waqidi also claimed that in the eight
(month of hijrah) same year, the Prophet (peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him) gave a white battle flag to Ubaidah Ibn
Al-Harith and commanded him to march to the centre of
290

Rabigh. His standard was held by Mistah Ibn Uthathah. When
they reached Thaniyyat Al-Marah close to Juhfah at the head
sixty men of the emigrants, there was no Ansari man amongst
them, they met the polytheists by the water source called
Ahyaa. An exchange of arrows ensued between them but
there was no sword fighting. Al-Waqidi said: The polytheists
numbered two hundred headed by Abu Sufyan Sakhr Ibn
Harb and that is a confirmed report in our perception too but
some also claim that they were headed by Mikraz Ibn Hafs.

Expedition of Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas
Al-Waqidi related: In Dhul-Qa’dah of the same year, i.e. the
first year (of Hijrah), the Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) sent Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas on
a military expedition to Kharrar with a white flag held by
Miqdad Ibn Al-Aswad. Abu Bakr Ibn Isma‘eel narrated to me
through his father from Amir Ibn Sa’d reporting that his father
said: “I marched out at the head of twenty men on our feet, or
he said twenty one men. We would hide by day time and
march forth by night until we arrived at Kharrar in the early
morning of the fifth day. Allah’s Messenger (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) had taken a covenant from me
never to go beyond Kharrar. Meanwhile, the sixty caravans
had preceded me a day before my arrival.” All of those who
were with Sa’d (in that expedition) were from the emigrants.

Events of the Second Year of Hijrah
Several battles and expeditions occurred in this year. Among
the most significant of those battles was the great battle of
Badr which occurred in the month of Ramadan. With that
battle, Allah made a distinction between the Truth and
falsehood, between guidance and misguidance. Here, we
relate about the battles and military forays and Allah is the
Source of help.
291

The Book of Military Expedition
Imam Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Yasar said in his book of
history after mentioning the Rabbis of the Jews and their
pedigrees as well as their enmity toward Islam and its
adherents and what was revealed concerning them in the
verses of the Qur’an. Among them was Huyayy Ibn Akhtab
and his two brothers, Yasir and Juday as well as Sallam Ibn
Mishkam, Kinanah Ibn ar-Rabee’ Ibn Abil-Huqaiq, Sallam
Ibn Abil-Huqaiq, etc.
From the Banu Tha’labah Ibn Fityawn was Abdullah Ibn
Sooriya. Throughout the Arabian Peninsula, no one had more
knowledge of the Tawrah than him. I (the author) said: It was
said that he accepted Islam along with Ibn Salooba and
Mukhaireeq who accepted Islam on the Day of the Battle of
Uhud as shall be related shortly. He was the Rabbi of his
people.
From the Banu Qainuqa’ were Zaid Ibn Al-Lusait, Sa’d Ibn
Hunaif, Mahmood Ibn Saihaan, Uzaiz Ibn Abi Uzaiz,
Abdullah Ibn Saif, Suwaid Ibn Al-Harith, Rifa’ah Ibn Qais,
Finhas, Ashya’ and Nu’man Ibn Ada’, etc.
Ibn Ishaq added: From Quraizah were Az-Zubair Ibn Bataa
Ibn Wahb, Azzal Ibn Shamweel, Ka’b Ibn Asad who was the
bearer of their pact which they repudiated in the year of
Ahzab, Shamweel Ibn Zaid, Jabal Ibn Amr Ibn Sukainah etc.
From Banu Zuraiq was Labeed Ibn A’sam who casted a spell
on the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be
upon him) From the Jews of Banu Harithah was Kinanah Ibn
Sooriya. From the Jews of Banu Amr Ibn 'Awf was Qardam
Ibn Amr. From the Jews of Banu An-Najjar was Silsilah Ibn
Barham.
Ibn Ishaq added: All of these personalities were the Jewish
Rabbis and the arrow heads of evil and enmity toward the
292

Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon
him) and his Companions, Allah be pleased with them all.
They were also the questioning lots who were profuse in their
putting questions to the Messenger of Allah (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him) in their obstinacy,
intransigence and disbelief. They were also the ones who
made the most strenuous efforts at exterminating Islam with
the exception of Abdullah Ibn Salaam and Mukhaireeq.
Then he mentioned the acceptance of Islam of Abdullah Ibn