whose name was Asiyah, daughter of Muzahim, son of ‘Ubaid, son
of Ar-Rayyan Ibn Al-Waleed, who had been the Fir‘awn of Egypt
during the time of Yoosuf (Peace be upon him). It was said that she
was from Banu Isra’eel, from the descendants of Moosa (Peace be
upon him). It was also said that she was his paternal aunt; this was
reported by As-Suhaili. And Allah knows better.
We will relate the praises and commendations that have been
heaped on her in the story of Maryam, daughter of ‘Imran, and how,
on the Day of Resurrection, they will be with the wives of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in
Paradise. When she opened the box and removed the covering from
him, she saw his face, which was radiant with the light of
Prophethood and the Mosaic Illustriousness. When she saw him,
she immediately loved him intensely. When Fir‘awn came, he said,
“What is this?” And he ordered that he be slaughtered; but she
snatched the baby from him and pushed him away, saying, “A
Sunniconnect.com
23

comfort of the eye for me and for you.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:9)
But Fir‘awn said to her, “As for you, he may be; but for me, no.”
That is, I have no need of him. She said, “maybe he will profit
us…” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:9) Allah granted her that benefit which
she hoped for: In this world, it was that Allah guided her through
him and in the Hereafter, it was that He made her to reside in His
Paradise because of him.
"Or we shall adopt him as a son." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:9) This was
because they brought him up, as they had no children of their own.
Allah, Most High, says, "And they perceived not (the result of that"
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:9) means that, they did not know what Allah
had willed for them, that He had ordained for them to pick him up
as part of His Plan to bring Divine Retribution to Fir‘awn and his
hosts. "And the heart of the mother of Moosa became empty. She
was very near to disclose him, had We not strengthened her heart
(with faith), so that she might remain as one of the Believers. And
she said to his (Moosa’s) sister, 'Follow him.' So she (his sister)
watched him from a junub, while they perceived not. And We had
already forbidden (other) foster suckling mothers for him, until she
(his sister came up and) said, 'Shall I direct you to a household who
will rear him for you, and sincerely they will look after him in a
good manner?' So did We restore him to his mother, that she might
be delighted, and that she might not grieve, and that she might
know that the Promise of Allah is true. But most of them know
not." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:10-13)
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid,
‘Ikrimah, Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair, Abu ‘Ubaidah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah,
Ad-Dahhak and others all said regarding His Saying: "And the
heart of the mother of Moosa became empty" (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:10) which it means: her heart became empty of all worldly
matters, except Moosa (Peace be upon him). "She was very near to
disclose him" means to disclose his case, namely that the child was
her son and to ask about him openly "had We not strengthened her
Sunniconnect.com
24

heart" means made her patient and strong "so that she might remain
as one of the Believers. And she said to his (Moosa’s) sister,
'Follow him'." She was her grownup daughter. That is, go after him
and seek information about him. "She (his sister) watched him from
a junub." Mujahid said that it means: from a distance.
Qatadah said, “She began to observe him, (casually,) as if she had
no interest in him, which is why Allah, Most High, says, "while
they perceived not." This was because, when Moosa (Peace be
upon him) was taken to live in Fir‘awn’s house, they wanted to
provide him with a wet-nurse, but he would not accept the breast
of any of them, nor would he eat any food. So they felt at a loss as
to what to do for him, having exerted all of their efforts to find some
way to feed him, but to no avail. As He, Most High, says, "And We
had already forbidden (other) foster suckling mothers for him."
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:12) So they sent him with the midwives and
maids to the marketplace, in the hope that they would find someone
whose milk he would accept. While they were standing with him
and the people were busy looking at him, his sister espied him, but
she did not reveal that she knew him. Instead she said, “Shall I
direct you to a household who will rear him for you, and sincerely
they will look after him in a good manner?” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:12) According to ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with him), when she said this, they said to her, they had some
doubts about her, so they seized her and asked her how she knew
these people will be sincere and care for him? She said to them,
“They will be sincere and will care for him because they want the
king to be happy and because they hope for some reward.” So they
let her go. After what she said, being safe from their harm, they
took her to their house and brought the baby to his mother. She
gave him her breast and he accepted it, so they rejoiced and sent
the glad tidings to the wife of Fir‘awn. She called for Moosa’s
mother, treating her kindly and rewarding her generously. She did
not realize that she was his real mother, but she saw that the baby
accepted her breast. Then Asiyah asked her to stay with her and
nurse the baby, but she refused, saying, “I have a husband and
Sunniconnect.com
25

children, and I cannot stay with you, but if you would like me to
nurse him in my own home, I will do that.” Fir‘awn’s wife agreed
to that, and paid her a regular salary and gave her extra gifts and
clothing and treated her kindly. The mother of Moosa (Peace be
upon him) came back with her child, happy that after a time of fear
Allah granted her security, prestige and ongoing provision. There
was only a short time between the distress and the way out, a day
and night, or thereabouts. And Allah knows best. Glory be to the
One in Whose Hands are all things; what He wills happens and
what He does not will does not happen. He is the One Who grants
those who fear Him, a way out from every worry and distress, Allah
says, "So did We restore him to his mother, that she might be
delighted, and that she might not grieve, and that she might know
that the Promise of Allah is true." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:13) That is,
We promised to return him to her and make him a Messenger; so
his return to her is proof of the truth of the glad tidings of his status
as a Messenger. But most of them know not." (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:13)
Allah bestowed this favor on Moosa (Peace be upon him) on the
night when He spoke to him, and among the things He said to him
was: “And indeed We conferred a favor on you another time
(before). When We inspired your mother with that which We
inspired. Saying, 'Put him (the child) into the taboot (a box or a case
or a chest) and put it into the river (Nile), then the river shall cast it
up on the bank, and there, an enemy of Mine and an enemy of his
shall take him.' And I endued you with love from Me, in order that
you may be brought up under My Eye.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:37-39)
This was that no person saw him except that he loved him. “that
you may be brought up under My Eye.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:39)
Qatadah and others among the Salaf said that it means: You will be
fed and given a pleasant life and you will be given the best foods
to eat and the finest garments to wear. All of this is due to My
Protection and My Supervision of you in that which I have created
in you and for you and the things that I have ordained, which no
one besides Me could do. “When your sister went and said, 'Shall I
Sunniconnect.com
26

show you one who will nurse him?' So We restored you to your
mother, that she might cool her eyes and she should not grieve.
Then you did kill a man, but We saved you from great distress and
tried you with a heavy trial." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:40)
He, Most High, says, "And when he attained his full strength, and
was perfect (in manhood), We bestowed on him Hukman
(Prophethood, right judgment of the affairs) and religious
knowledge (of the Religion of his forefathers i.e. Islamic
Monotheism). And thus do We reward the muhsinoon (i.e. those
who do good – see the footnote of V. 9:120). And he entered the
city at a time of unawareness of its people, and he found there two
men fighting – one of his party (his Religion – from the Children
of Isra’eel), and the other of his foes. The man of his (own) party
asked him for help against his foe, so Moosa struck him with his
fist and killed him. He said, 'This is of Shaitan’s doing, verily, he
is a plain misleading enemy.' He said, 'My Lord! Verily, I have
wronged myself, so forgive me.' Then He forgave him. Verily, He
is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful. He said, 'My Lord! For
that with which You have favored me, I will never more be a helper
for the mujrimoon (criminals, those disobedient to Allah,
polytheists and sinners, etc.)'!" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:14-17) Allah,
Most High, mentioned that He blessed Moosa’s mother by
returning him to her and by the Kindness and Grace He bestowed
on her following this. Then He described how, when Moosa (Peace
be upon him) grew up and became a man of fine physique and
exemplary character – according to most authorities, he was aged
forty years – Allah bestowed wisdom and knowledge on him, i.e.
Prophethood and the Message, the glad tidings of which He
informed Moosa’s mother in His Words: “Verily! We shall bring
him back to you, and shall make him one of (Our) Messengers.”
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:7) Then He, Most High, described the cause
of Moosa’s departure from Egypt, his journey to the land of
Madyan and his residence there for the time ordained for him, and
how Allah spoke to him and ennobled him with that which He
ennobled him, as we shall make clear. Allah, Most High, says,
Sunniconnect.com
27

"And he entered the city at a time of unawareness of its people."
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:15) ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him), Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair, ‘Ikrimah,
Qatadah and As-Suddi said that this was in the middle of the day.
It was also reported on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said
that it was between the two ‘isha’s "and he found there two men
fighting" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:15) means exchanging blows and
struggling with one another "one of his party". That is, one of them
being from among the Children of Isra’eel "and the other of his
foes". That is, the other being from among the Copts. This was said
by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him),
Qatadah, As-Suddi and Muhammad Ibn Ishaq. "The man of his
(own) party asked him for help against his foe." (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:15) This was because Moosa (Peace be upon him) possessed
power in Egypt, due to the fact that he had been adopted and
brought up by Fir‘awn in his palace. As a result of this, the Children
of Isra’eel had gained a degree of strength and respect and they
acquired prestige and status due to the fact that one of them had
breastfed him, which made them his “uncles”, i.e. through a foster
relationship. So when that Isra’eelite requested Moosa’s help
against the Copt, Moosa (Peace be upon him) advanced toward him
"so Moosa struck him." (Soorah AlQasas 28:15) Mujahid said that
it means that he struck him a blow with his fist. Qatadah said that
he struck him with a stick that he had with him "and killed him."
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:15) That is, he died as a result of the blow;
and that Copt was a disbeliever, who ascribed partners to Allah, the
Almighty. Moosa (Peace be upon him) had not intended to kill him;
he had only intended to restrain him and curb his aggression.
Because of this, Moosa (Peace be upon him) said, “This is of
Shaitan’s doing, verily, he is a plain misleading enemy.' He said,
'My Lord! Verily, I have wronged myself, so forgive me.' Then He
forgave him. Verily, He is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
He said, 'My Lord! For that with which You have favored me, I
will never more be a helper for the mujrimoon (criminals, those
Sunniconnect.com
28

disobedient to Allah, polytheists, sinners, etc.)!” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:15-17)
And He, Most High, says, "So he became afraid, looking about in
the city (waiting as to what would be the result of his crime of
killing), when, behold, the man who had sought his help the day
before, called for his help (again). Moosa said to him, 'Verily, you
are a plain misleader!' Then, when he decided to seize the man who
was an enemy to both of them, the man said, 'O, Moosa! Is it your
intention to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? Your aim is
nothing but to become a tyrant in the land, and not to be one of
those who do right.' And there came a man running, from the
farthest end of the city. He said, 'O, Moosa! Verily, the chiefs are
taking counsel together about you, to kill you, so escape. Truly, I
am to you of those who give sincere advice.' So he escaped from
there, looking about in a state of fear. He said, 'My Lord! Save me
from the people who are zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers)'!”
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:18-21)
Allah, Most High, informs us that the following day, Moosa (Peace
be upon him) was in a state of anxiety in the Egyptian city; i.e. he
was fearful that Fir‘awn and his council of elders would know that
the murder victim, whose case had been submitted to Fir‘awn, had
been killed by none other than Moosa (Peace be upon him), while
supporting a man from among the Children of Isra’eel, for this
would strengthen their belief that Moosa (Peace be upon him) was
one of them – and the consequences of this would be severe. So he
began to walk around the city on that morning, "so he became
afraid, looking about." It means that he started glancing about in all
directions. And while he was engorssed, the same Isra’eelite who
had sought his help the previous day "called to him" (Soorah AlQasas 28:18) That is, he shouted to him and requested his help
against another man with whom he had picked a fight. But Moosa
(Peace be upon him) rebuked him and blamed him for his repeated
wickedness and argumentativeness, saying to him, “Verily, you are
a plain misleader!” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:18) Then, when he
Sunniconnect.com
29

intended to fight with that Copt – who was the enemy of Moosa
(Peace be upon him) and of the Isra’eelite – to restrain him and
rescue the Isra’eelite from him, he advanced toward the Copt, "The
man said, 'O, Moosa! Is it your intention to kill me as you killed a
man yesterday? Your aim is nothing but to become a tyrant in the
land, and not to be one of those who do right'.” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:19) Some said that these words were spoken by the Isra’eelite,
who was aware of what Moosa (Peace be upon him) had done the
previous day; and it was as if, when he saw him advancing on the
Copt, he thought that Moosa (Peace be upon him) wanted to hit him
because of his rebuke to him, “Verily, you are a plain misleader!”
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:18) and so he said those words to Moosa
(Peace be upon him) (in self-defense). Thus he made known what
had transpired the previous day and the Copt went to Fir‘awn and
incited him against Moosa (Peace be upon him).
What is intended here is that Fir‘awn was informed that Moosa
(Peace be upon him) was the man who had killed the Copt the
previous day and so he sent his people out to look for him. But they
were preceded by an advisor, who had taken a shortcut to reach him
"And there came a man running, from the farthest end of the city."
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:20). That is, hastening to him, because he was
concerned for his safety. He said, “O, Moosa! Verily, the chiefs are
taking counsel together about you, to kill you, so escape” (Soorah
Al-Qasas 28:20) means so, you escape from this land. “Truly, I am
to you of those who give sincere advice.” That is, in what I say to
you. Allah, Most High, says, "so he escaped from there, looking
about in a state of fear," (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:21) meaning he left
the land of Egypt immediately, being unaware of which road he
was taking and not knowing where it would lead him, saying, “My
Lord! Save me from the people who are zalimoon." (Soorah AlQasas 28:21).
And He, Most High, says, "And when he went toward (the land of)
Madyan he said, 'It may be that my Lord guides me to the Right
Way.' And when he arrived at the water of Madyan (Midian) he
Sunniconnect.com
30

found there a group of men watering (their flocks), and besides
them he found two women who were holding back. He said, 'What
is the matter with you?' They said, 'We cannot water (our flocks)
until the shepherds take (their flocks). And our father is a very old
man.' So he watered (their flocks) for them, then he turned back to
shade, and said, 'My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good
that You bestow on me'!” (Soorah AlQasas 28:22-24).
Allah, Most High, informs us about the departure of His slave, His
Messenger and His Kaleem from Egypt "looking about in a state of
fear." That is, afraid that one of Fir‘awn’s men would recognize
him, while he had no idea in which direction he was heading, or
where his footsteps were taking him. This was due to the fact that
he had never before left Egypt. "And when he went toward (the
land of) Madyan" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:22) means, when he
(unknowingly) embarked on the road that led him there, "He said,
'It may be that my Lord guides me to the Right Way'.” (Soorah AlQasas 28:22). That is, haply this road will lead to (a good)
destination. And that was what happened; it led him to a destination
– and what a destination! "And when he arrived at the water of
Madyan" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:23) it was a well at which the people
used to draw water. Madyan was the city whose inhabitants, the
companions of the Aykah, whom Allah had destroyed. They were
the people of Shu‘aib (Peace be upon him), and their destruction
took place before the time of Moosa (Peace be upon him),
according to one of two opinions held by the scholars. When he
reached the aforementioned water, "he found there a group of men
watering (their flocks), and besides them he found two women who
were holding back." (Soorah AlQasas 28:23) That is, they were
holding back their sheep, to prevent them from becoming mixed
with the other peoples’ sheep. According to the People of the
Scripture, they were seven girls, but this is also a mistake; possibly
there were seven daughters, but only two of them were watering
the sheep. In this manner, we can reconcile the two sayings, if that
is what has been (reliably) reported. Otherwise, (we must say that)
it is apparent that he had only two daughters. "He said, 'What is the
Sunniconnect.com
31

matter with you?' They said, 'We cannot water (our flocks) until the
shepherds take (their flocks). And our father is a very old man'.”
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:23) They said that, we cannot get near to the
water until after the shepherds have taken their sheep away,
because we are weak; and the reason why we have come here with
our sheep is because our father is elderly and weak. Allah, Most
High, says, "So he watered (their flocks) for them." (Soorah AlQasas 28:24)
He, Most High, says, "Then there came to him one of the two
women, walking shyly. She said, 'Verily, my father calls you that
he may reward you for having watered (our flocks) for us.' So when
he came to him and narrated the story, he said, 'Fear you not. You
have escaped from the people who are zalimoon.' And said one of
them (the two women), 'O, my father! Hire him! Verily, the best of
men for you to hire is the strong, the trustworthy.' He said, 'I intend
to wed one of these two daughters of mine to you, on condition that
you serve me for eight years, but if you complete ten years, it will
be (a favor) from you. But I intend not to place you under a
difficulty. If Allah wills, you will find me one of the righteous.' He
(Moosa) said, 'That (is settled) between me and you, whichever of
the two terms I fulfill, there will be no injustice to me, and Allah is
Surety over what we say'.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:25-28)
When Moosa (Peace be upon him) sat in the shade and said, "O,
'My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good that You bestow
on me'!” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:24), the two women heard him and
they went to their father; it was said that he rebuked them because
of their early return and so they told him about Moosa (Peace be
upon him) and he ordered one of them to go to him and invite him,
"Then there came to him one of the two women, walking shyly,"
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:25) means walking like a free woman. She
said, “Verily, my father calls you that he may reward you for
having watered (our flocks) for us.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:25) She
spoke frankly to him, so that her words should not excite any
suspicion in him – and this was a part of her perfect modesty and
Sunniconnect.com
32

chastity. "So when he came to him and narrated the story" (Soorah
Al-Qasas 28:25) means, when he told him his story and related to
him the events surrounding his departure from Egypt, as he fled
from Fir‘awn. On hearing his story, the old man said, “Fear you
not. You have escaped from the people who are zalimoon.” (Soorah
Al-Qasas 28:25) It means that you have left the area in which they
exercise their authority and you are no longer in their lands.
Scholars disagreed as to the identity of this old man; it was said that
he was Shu‘aib (Peace be upon him) and this is widely accepted by
many; among those who related it were Al-Hasan Al-Basri and
Malik Ibn Anas and he stated it positively in a Hadith, but there is
some doubt regarding the authenticity of its chain of narrators.
Another group declared that Shu‘aib (Peace be upon him) lived for
a very long time after the destruction of his people, so that Moosa
(Peace be upon him) encountered him and married his daughter.
What is intended is that he offered him his hospitality, gave him a
comfortable place to stay and informed him about his situation; he
gave him the glad tidings that he was safe. At that point, one of his
daughters said to him, “O, my father! Hire him!” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:26) so that to herd your sheep; then she praised, him saying that
he was strong and trustworthy.
‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood (May Allah be pleased with him) said: The
most discerning of people are three: The companion of Yoosuf
(Peace be upon him) (i.e. Al-‘Aziz), when he said to his wife,
“Make his stay comfortable.” (Soorah Yoosuf 12:21), the
companion of Moosa, when she said, “O, my father! Hire him!
Verily, the best of men for you to hire is the strong, the
trustworthy.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:26) and Abu Bakr (May Allah
be pleased with him) when he designated ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
(May Allah be pleased with him) as his successor.
He, Most High, says, "He (Moosa) said, 'That (is settled) between
me and you, whichever of the two terms I fulfill, there will be no
injustice to me, and Allah is Surety over what we say'.” (Soorah
Sunniconnect.com
33

Al-Qasas 28:28) Allah tells us that Moosa (Peace be upon him) said
to his father-in-law, “The matter will be as you have said and
whichever you decide, there will be no sin upon me; and Allah will
be the Hearer and Witness to what we agree upon – and He is the
Disposer of my affairs and of yours.” But though he said this, he
completed the ten years in full.
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair that he
said, “A Jew from the people of AlHirah asked me which one of
the two periods Moosa completed." I said, “I don’t know, (but wait)
until I see the most learned Arab and enquire him about it.” So I
went to Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and asked
him. He replied, “Moosa completed the longer and better period.”
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) added, “Verily, a
Messenger of Allah always does what he says.”
He, Most High, says, "Then, when Moosa had fulfilled the term,
and was traveling with his family, he saw a fire in the direction of
At-Toor (Mount). He said to his family, 'Wait, I have seen a fire;
perhaps I may bring to you from there some information, or a
burning fire-brand that you may warm yourselves.' So when he
reached it (the fire), he was called from the right side of the valley,
in the blessed place from the tree, 'O, Moosa! Verily! I am Allah,
the Lord of Al-‘Alameen. And throw your stick!' But when he saw
it moving as if it were a snake, he turned in flight, and looked not
back. (It was said), 'O, Moosa! Draw near, and fear not. Verily, you
are of those who are secure. Put your hand in your bosom, it will
come forth white without a disease, and draw your hand close to
your side to be free from fear (that which you suffered from the
snake, and also by that your hand will return to its original state).
These are two burhan (signs, miracles, evidences and proofs) from
your Lord to Fir‘awn and his chiefs. Verily, they are the people
who are fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah)'.” (Soorah AlQasas 28:29-32)

Sunniconnect.com
34

We said previously that Moosa (Peace be upon him) completed the
longer of the two specified periods (eight years or ten years) and
this may be understood from the Words of Allah: "Then, when
Moosa had fulfilled the term." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:29) It is
reported on the authority of Mujahid that he completed ten years of
service and another ten after that. Allah says, "and was traveling
with his family" (Soorah AlQasas 28:29) means, he had left his
father-in-law – according to what more than one of the scholars of
tafseer and others have said – because he missed his family; so he
set out to visit them in secret in Egypt. He was traveling with his
family, including his two sons, and some sheep which he had
acquired during his time in his father-in-law’s service. The scholars
said, it was a dark, cold night, due to this, they lost their way and
were unable to find the path again. He tried to kindle a fire, but he
was unable to do so. The darkness and cold increased and while he
was occupied in trying to start a fire, he observed a fire burning at
a distance, in the direction of At-Toor, which was a mountain that
lay to the west of him, somewhere of to his right. He said to his
family, “Wait! Verily, I have seen a fire.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:10). It
was as if – and Allah knows better – he alone saw it, because this
fire was from the Light of Truth and it would not be fitting that
every person should see it. “Perhaps I may bring to you from there
some information” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:29) means, perhaps I can
ask those whose fire it is on the way to the road. “…or a burning
fire-brand that you may warm yourselves.” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:29) It is proved that they had lost their way on a cold, dark night,
because Allah, Most High, says in another Verse, "And has there
come to you the story of Moosa? When he saw a fire, he said to his
family, 'Wait! Verily, I have seen a fire, perhaps I can bring you
some burning brand therefrom, or find some guidance at the fire.”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:9,10) So this proves that there was darkness and
that they had lost their way.
He, Most High, says: "(Remember) when Moosa said to his
household, 'Verily! I have seen a fire, I will bring you from there
some information, or I will bring you a burning brand, that you may
Sunniconnect.com
35

warm yourselves.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:7) So he brought them
news from it – and what news he brought them! And he found
guidance there – and what guidance he found! And he acquired a
light from it – but what a light he acquired! Allah, Most High, says,
"So when he reached it (the fire), he was called from the right side
of the valley, in the blessed place from the tree, 'O, Moosa! Verily!
I am Allah, the Lord of Al‘Alameen'!” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:30)
In Soorah An-Naml, He Most High, says, "But when he came to it,
he was called, 'Blessed is whosoever is in the fire, and whosoever
is round about it! And Glorified be Allah, the Lord of Al‘Alameen.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:8) That is, Glory be to Allah,
Who does as He wills and decides what He wills. "And when he
came to it (the fire), he was called by name, 'O, Moosa! Verily! I
am your Lord! So take off your shoes, you are in the sacred valley,
Tuwa. And I have chosen you. So listen to that which is inspired to
you. Verily! I am Allah! La ilaha illa Ana (none has the right to be
worshipped but I), so worship Me, and perform as--salah (iqamat
as-salah – Prayer) for My Remembrance. Verily, the Hour is
coming and My Will is to keep it hidden that every person may be
rewarded for that which he strives. Therefore, let not the one who
believes not therein (i.e. in the Day of Resurrection, Reckoning,
Paradise and Hell, etc.), but follows his own lusts, divert you
therefrom, lest you perish'.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:11-16)
More than one of the scholars of tafseer from among the earlier and
the later generations have said that when Moosa (Peace be upon
him) walked toward that fire which he had seen, and when he
reached it, he found that it was burning in a green boxthorn tree.
The more the fire burned, the more the greenness of the tree
increased and he stood in amazement. The tree was at the foot of a
mountain, which lay west of him, to his right, as He, Most High,
says, "And you (O, Muhammad) were not on the western side (of
the Mount), when We made clear to Moosa the Commandment,
and you were not among those present."
Sunniconnect.com
36

(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:44) Moosa (Peace be upon him) was in a
valley named Tuwa and he was facing the Qiblah and that tree was
on his right, in the West. His Lord called to him in the Sacred
Valley of Tuwa and He commanded him first of all to remove his
shoes, out of reverence and respect for that blessed location – and
especially on that blessed night. According to the People of the
Scriptures, he placed his hand on his face in awe and in fear for his
sight, due to the intensity of the light. Then Allah, Most High,
addressed him as He willed, saying to him, "Verily! I am Allah, the
Lord of Al-‘Alameen!" (Soorah AlQasas 28:30) and “Verily! I am
Allah! La ilaha illa Ana (none has the right to be worshipped but
I), so worship Me, and perform as--salah (iqamat as-salah) for My
Remembrance." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:14). That is, I am the Lord of
the Worlds, besides Whom none has the right to be worshipped –
and worship devoted to any other deity cannot benefit.
Then He informed him that the life of this world is only temporary
and that the permanent abode is that of the Day of Resurrection,
whose establishment is inevitable "that every person may be
rewarded for that which he strives." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:15) That is,
whether good or evil. He encouraged him and incited him to work
for it and to avoid those who do not believe in it, such as those who
disobey their Lord and follow their own vain desires. Then He
informed him that He is able to do all things, saying to a thing,
“Be!” and it is: “And what is that in your right hand, O, Moosa?”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:17) means that, is this not your stick, which We
have known since you had it. This is an interrogative, used for the
purpose of affirmation. "He said, 'It is my stick upon which I lean,
with which I beat down branches for my sheep and for which I find
other uses'.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:18) That is, it is my stick which I
know and of which I am sure. "(Allah) said, 'Cast it down, O,
Moosa!' He cast it down, and behold! It was a snake, moving
quickly." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:19, 20)

Sunniconnect.com
37

This was a great miracle and an irrefutable proof that when the One
Who was speaking to him says to something, “Be!” it is – and that
He does as He wills.
This serpent combined huge size with lightning speed and when
Moosa (Peace be upon him) saw it "he turned in flight" (Soorah
An-Naml 27:10) means, he fled in fear from the snake, because it
was a natural human reaction to do so, "and did not look back."
(Soorah An-Naml 27:10). That is, he did not turn around; so his
Lord called him, saying, “O, Moosa! Draw near, and fear not.
Verily, you are of those who are secure.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:31)
When he returned, Allah, Most High, commanded him to take hold
of it: He said, “Grasp it, and fear not, We shall return it to its former
state.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:21) It was said that he feared it greatly
and so he placed his hand in the sleeve of his garment and then
placed his hand inside its mouth. According to the People of the
Scriptures, he grasped it by its tail and when he held it firmly, it
became a stick once again, with two branches. So Glory be to Allah,
the Omnipotent, Almighty, Lord of the two Easts and the two
Wests. Then He, Most High, commanded him to place his hand
inside his garment and then to remove it, upon which he saw that it
was shining white, like the moon “without any disease” means
without leprosy or bahaq, which is why He says, “Put your hand in
your bosom, it will come forth white, without a disease, and draw
your hand close to your side to be free from fear (that which you
suffered from the snake, and also by that your hand will return to
its original state).” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:32)
What is meant is that when Allah, Most Glorified, commanded
Moosa (Peace be upon him) to go to Fir‘awn, "He said, 'My Lord!
I have killed a man among them, and I fear that they will kill me.
And my brother Haroon (Aaron), he is more eloquent in speech
than I, so send him with me as a helper to confirm me. Verily! I
fear that they will belie me.' Allah said, 'We will strengthen your
arm through your brother, and give you both power, so they shall
Sunniconnect.com
38

not be able to harm you, with Our Ayat, you two as well as those
who follow you will be the victors'.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:33-35)
Allah, Most High, informs us about Moosa (Peace be upon him)
and his reply to his Lord, the Almighty, the All-Powerful, when He
told him to go to his enemy, from whose power and injustice in the
lands of Egypt he had fled, after he had killed the Copt. He said,
"He said, 'My Lord! I have killed a man among them, and I fear
that they will kill me. And my brother Haroon he is more eloquent
in speech than I, so send him with me as a helper to confirm me.
Verily! I fear that they will belie me'.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:33, 34)
That is, make along with me a helper, an adviser and a supporter,
who will aid me in delivering Your Message to them, because he is
more eloquent in speech than I am and better able to elucidate.
Allah, Most High, says in reply to his question, "Allah said, 'We
will strengthen your arm through your brother, and give you both
power'.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:35). That is proof and evidence "So
they shall not be able to harm you, with our Ayat". That is, so they
will not be able to inflict any harm on you because of your acting
upon Our Ayat (fulfilling Our Commands), or it was said, due to
the blessing of Our Ayat. "You two as well as those who follow
you will be the victors."
In Soorah Ta Ha, He says, “Go to Fir’awn! Verily, he has
transgressed (all bounds in disbelief and disobedience, and has
behaved arrogantly and as a tyrant).” (Moosa) said, “O, my Lord!
Open for me my chest (grant me self-confidence, contentment, and
boldness). And ease my task for me; and make loose the knot (the
defect) from my tongue, (i.e. remove my speech defect), that they
may understand my speech.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:24-28) It was said
that he was afflicted by a speech impediment as a result of putting
a burning coal in his mouth when he was a small child. This was
due to Fir‘awn, wanting to test his intelligence when, as a small
child, he seized his beard. Fir‘awn wanted to kill him (for pulling
his beard), but Asiyah, fearing for him, said, “He is a baby!” So
Sunniconnect.com
39

Fir‘awn tested him by placing a date and a burning coal in front of
him; Moosa (Peace be upon him) tried to take the date, but Fir‘awn
directed his hand to the coal and he took it and placed it on his
tongue, as a result of which he was afflicted with a speech defect.
So he asked Allah to remove a part of it – sufficient that the people
might understand his speech – and he did not ask Him to
completely remove it.
Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “Messengers only ask for what is sufficient
for their needs; for this reason, a little of the defect remained on his
tongue. This is why Fir‘awn – may Allah's curse be upon him –
claimed concerning Moosa (Peace be upon him), “…and (he) can
scarcely express himself clearly.” (Soorah AzZukhruf 43:52) It
means that he cannot convey his meaning and express what is in
his mind and his heart. Then Moosa (Peace be upon him) said,
“And appoint for me a helper from my family, Haroon, my brother;
increase my strength with him, and let him share my task (of
conveying Allah’s Message and
Prophethood), that we may glorify You much and remember You
much, verily! You are of us Ever AllSeeing.” (Allah) said, “You
are granted your request, O, Moosa!” (Soorah Al-Qasas 20:29-36)
That is,
We have granted everything that you asked and given you all that
you requested – and it was due to the high estimation in which his
Lord, the Almighty, the All-Powerful held him that when he asked
Allah to grant Prophethood to his brother, He did so. And this is
indicative of great rank. He, Most High, says, "and he was
honorable before Allah." (Soorah Al-Ahzab 33:69)
He, Most High, says, "And We bestowed on him his brother
Haroon, (also) a Prophet, out of Our Mercy."
(Soorah Maryam 19:53)
The Mother of the Believers, ‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with
her, heard a man saying to some people when they were traveling
on the road for Hajj (in Makkah), “Which brother was most
Sunniconnect.com
40

benevolent toward his brother?” The people remained silent, but
‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said to those around her
howdah, “It was Moosa, son of ‘Imran, when he asked for
Prophethood to be bestowed on his brother, Haroon, and Allah did
so. This is why Allah, Most High, says, 'And We bestowed on him
his brother, Haroon, (also) a Prophet, out of Our Mercy'." (Soorah
Maryam 19:53)
He, Most High, says in Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’, "And (remember)
when your Lord called Moosa (saying), 'Go to the people who are
zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers), The people of Fir‘awn.
Will they not fear Allah and become righteous?' He said, 'My Lord!
Verily, I fear that they will belie me, and my breast straitens, and
my tongue expresses not well. So send for Haroon (to come along
with me). And they have a charge of crime against me, and I fear
they will kill me.' Allah said, 'Nay! Go you both with Our Signs.
Verily! We shall be with you, listening. And when you both come
to Fir‘awn, say, We are the Messengers of the Lord of Al‘Alameen, so allow the Children of Isra’eel to go with us'.”
(Fir’awn) said (to Moosa), 'Did we not bring you up among us as a
child? And you did dwell many years of your life with us. And you
did your deed, which you did. And you are one of the ingrates'.”
(Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:10-19) And the meaning of these Words
is: So they went to Fir‘awn and spoke these words to him,
conveying to him the Message they had been given, which was to
call him to the worship of Allah, Most High, Alone, without
ascribing partners to Him; to free the slaves, the Children of
Isra’eel, from his grip and his subjugation and allow them to
worship their Lord as and when they wished; let them be free to
declare His Oneness, invoke Him and humble themselves before
Him. But Fir‘awn responded with arrogance, insolence and
oppression, looking on Moosa (Peace be upon him) with contempt
and scorn, saying to him, “Did we not bring you up among us as a
child? And you did dwell many years of your life with us.” (Soorah
Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:18) That is, was it not you whom we brought up
in our house, to whom we showed kindness, and on whom we
Sunniconnect.com
41

bestowed favors for so many years? This proves that the Fir‘awn to
whom Moosa (Peace be upon him) was sent was the same Fir‘awn
from whom he fled. This contradicts the claim of the People of the
Scriptures, who said that the Fir‘awn from whom he fled died while
he was living in Madyan and that the person to whom he was sent
was another Fir‘awn.
He, Most High, says, “And you did your deed, which you did. And
you are one of the ingrates” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:19). means,
you killed the Coptic man and fled from us and were ungrateful for
the favors we bestowed on you. Moosa said, “I did it then, when I
was ignorant (as regards my Lord and His Message).” (Soorah AshShu‘ara’ 26:20). That is, before my Lord inspired me and sent
down Revelation to me. “So I fled from you when I feared you. But
my Lord has granted me Hukman (i.e. religious knowledge, right
judgment of the affairs and Prophethood), and appointed me as one
of the Messengers.” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:21) Then he replied
to Fir‘awn regarding the favors he had given him, such as bringing
him up and showing kindness to him, “And this is the past favor
with which you reproach me, that you have enslaved the Children
of Isra’eel.” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:22) It means that, this favor
which you have mentioned, which was that you treated me with
kindness – and I am one man from among the Children of Isra’eel
– does it compare with the manner in which you have used this
entire great nation and enslaved them with a view to making them
carry out your works and serve you. Fir‘awn said, “And what is the
Lord of the Al-‘Alameen?” Moosa said, “Lord of the heavens and
the Earth, and all that is between them, if you seek to be convinced
with certainty.” Fir‘awn said to those around, “Do you not hear
(what he says)?” Moosa said, “Your Lord and the Lord of your
ancient fathers!” Fir‘awn said, “Verily, your Messenger who has
been sent to you is a mad man!” Moosa said, “Lord of the East and
the West, and all that is between them, if you did but understand!”
(Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:23-28)

Sunniconnect.com
42

Allah, Most High, informs us of the discussion, the dispute and the
debate which took place between Fir‘awn and Moosa (Peace be
upon him) and the proof (of disbelief) which Al-Kaleem confirmed
against the wicked Fir‘awn, including the rational and spiritual
proofs and then the tangible, perceptible proofs. This was because
Fir‘awn – may Allah have curse on him – demonstrated his
rejection of the Creator, Most Blessed, Most High, and claimed that
he was the (only) deity. "Then he gathered his people and cried
aloud, saying, 'I am your lord, most high'.” (Soorah An-Nazi‘at
79:23,24) And he said, “O, chiefs! I know not that you have an ilah
(god) other than me.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:38) He was just being
stubborn in this dispute and he knew that he was a slave, subject to
Allah’s Mastery and Lordship and that He is the Creator, the
Inventor of all things, the Bestower of forms, the true God, as He,
Most High, says, "And they belied them (those Ayat) wrongfully
and arrogantly, though their ownselves were convinced thereof [i.e.
those (Ayat) are from Allah, and Moosa is the Messenger of Allah
in truth, but they disliked to obey Moosa, and hated to believe in
his Message of Monotheism]. So see what was the end of the
mufsidoon (disbelievers, those disobedient to Allah, evildoers,
liars)." (Soorah An-Naml 27:14)
This is why he said to Moosa (Peace be upon him) by way of
rejection of his Message and evincing his belief that there is no lord
who had sent him, “And what is the Lord of the Al-‘Alameen?”
(Soorah AshShu‘ara’ 26:23) That is, the Lord of the Worlds, the
Creator of these heavens and this Earth, which are visible (to all)
and every oft-created thing in between them, such as the clouds, the
winds, the rains, the plants and the animals, which every rational
person knows, do not create themselves and require a Creator – and
that is Allah, besides Whom none has the right to be worshipped,
the Lord of the Worlds. "He said", that is, Fir‘awn said "to those
around him". Such as his princes, his provincial governors and his
ministers, by way of mockery and ridicule of what Moosa (Peace
be upon him) had related, “Do you not hear?” means these words
of his. Moosa (Peace be upon him) said, addressing both Fir‘awn
Sunniconnect.com
43

and those around him, “Your Lord and the Lord of your ancient
fathers!” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26: 26). It means, it is He Who
created you and your fathers, your grandparents and all of the
previous generations, because every person knows that he did not
create himself nor did his father and mother create themselves; and
he (i.e. everybody) was not brought into being without a Creator –
he was only brought into being and created by the Lord of the
Worlds. And it is these two aspects that are referred to in the Words
of Allah, Most High: "We will show them Our Signs in the
universe, and in their own selves, until it becomes manifest to them
that this (the Qur’an) is the truth." (Soorah Fussilat 41:53) But in
spite of all this, Fir‘awn did not wake up from his sleep, nor did he
divest himself of his errors. Instead, he persisted in his
transgression, stubbornness and rejection. "Fir‘awn said, 'Verily,
your Messenger who has been sent to you is a madman!' Moosa
said, 'Lord of the East and the West, and all that is between them,
if you did but understand'!” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:27, 28) That
is, it is He Who subjugates these shining stars and causes the
celestial bodies to remain in their orbits. He created the darkness
and the light. He is the Lord of the Earth and the heaven. He is the
Lord of the first created people and the last. He created the sun, the
moon and the moving and the fixed celestial bodies. He created the
night with its darkness and the day with its light. All are under His
Subjugation and Control and all of their movements are ordained
by Him and follow courses decreed by Him at all times, for He,
Most High, is the Creator, the Owner, and He disposes of the affairs
of His creation as He wills.
When the proofs were established against Fir‘awn and his specious
arguments had been refuted and no words remained for him except
words of obstinacy, he gave up arguing and used his authority, his
rank and his power, saying, “If you choose an ilah (god) other than
me, I will certainly put you among the prisoners.” Moosa said,
“Even if I bring you something manifest (and convincing)?”
Fir‘awn said, “Bring it forth then, if you are of the truthful!” So
(Moosa) threw his stick, and behold, it was a serpent, manifest. And
Sunniconnect.com
44

he drew out his hand, and behold, it was white to all beholders!"
(Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:29-33) These were the two proofs with
which Allah had supported him: the stick and the hand. In this
situation, he displayed the great miracle, which dazzled their eyes
and their minds when he threw the stick and lo, it became a serpent,
manifest, i.e. with a huge body, terrifying and hideous to the
beholders.
Allah, Most High, says in Soorah Ta Ha, “When your sister went
and said, 'Shall I show you one who will nurse him?' So We
restored you to your mother, that she might cool her eyes and she
should not grieve. Then you did kill a man, but We saved you from
great distress and tried you with a heavy trial. Then you stayed a
number of years with the people of Madyan. Then you came here
according to a fixed term. And I have Istana‘tuka for Myself. Go
you and your brother with My Ayat, and do not taniya in My
Remembrance. Go, both of you, to Fir‘awn, verily, he has
transgressed (all bounds in disbelief and disobedience and behaved
as an arrogant man and as a tyrant). And speak to him mildly,
perhaps he may accept admonition or fear Allah.” They said, “Our
Lord! Verily! We fear lest he should hasten to punish us or lest he
should transgress (all bounds against us).” He (Allah) said, “Fear
not, verily! I am with you both, hearing and seeing.” (Soorah Ta
Ha 20:40-46)
Allah, Most High, addressed Moosa (Peace be upon him) on the
night when He inspired him and conferred Prophethood on him,
and informed him that He was a Witness when he was in the house
of Fir‘awn and that He was guarding him, protecting him and
bestowing His Kindness on him. Then He reminded him of how He
removed him from Egypt to Madyan by His Will, His Power and
His Disposal and how he remained there for a number of years.
“Then you came here according to a fixed term.” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:40). That is, according to the fixed term ordained by Me. “And
I have Istana‘tuka for
Sunniconnect.com
45

Myself.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:41) That is, I have chosen you for
Myself, to convey My Message and to hear
My Speech. “Go you and your brother with My Ayat, and do not
taniya in My Remembrance” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:42) means, do not
be weak or slack in remembering Me when you approach him, for
that will be a support for you when addressing him, answering him,
offering him advice and establishing the evidence against him.
Allah, Most High, says, "O, you who believe! When you meet (an
enemy) force, take a firm stand against them and remember the
Name of Allah much (both with tongue and mind), so that you may
be successful." (Soorah Al-Anfal 8:45) Then He, Most High, says,
“Go, both of you, to Fir‘awn, verily, he has transgressed (all bounds
in disbelief and disobedience and behaved as an arrogant man and
as a tyrant). And speak to him mildly, perhaps he may accept
admonition or fear Allah.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:43, 44) This was from
Allah’s Gentleness, Generosity, Compassion and Mercy toward
His creation, in spite of His Knowledge of Fir‘awn’s disbelief, his
arrogance and his tyranny; and at that time, he was the worst of
Allah’s creation, yet Allah sent one who was the best of His
creation at that time to him. Nevertheless, He commanded them to
call Fir‘awn to Allah in the best way, with kindness and gentleness
and to treat him as one who it is hoped may remember Allah or fear
Him, as He, Most High, said to His Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), "Invite (mankind, O,
Muhammad,) to the Way of your Lord (i.e. Islam) with wisdom
(i.e. with the Divine Inspiration and the Qur’an) and fair preaching,
and argue with them in a way that is better." (Soorah An-Nahl
16:125).
He, Most High, says, "And argue not with the people of the
Scriptures (Jews and Christians), unless it be in (a way) that is
better (with good words and in good manner, inviting them to
Islamic Monotheism with His Verses), except with such of them as
do wrong." (Soorah Al-‘Ankaboot 29:46) Al-Hasan Al-Basri said,
regarding the Words of Allah: "And speak to him mildly" (Soorah
Sunniconnect.com
46

Ta Ha 20:44) means, be tolerant and forbearing with him and say
to him, “Verily, you have a Lord and you have a Hereafter – and
before you are a Garden and a Fire.”
He, Most High, says, “So go you both to him, and say, 'Verily, we
are Messengers of your Lord, so let the Children of Isra’eel go with
us, and torment them not; indeed, we have come with a sign from
your Lord!
And peace will be upon him who follows the guidance! Truly, it
has been revealed to us that the punishment will be for him who
denies (believes not in the Oneness of Allah and in His Messengers,
etc.), and turns away (from the truth and obedience to Allah).”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:47,48) Allah, Most High, tells us that He
commanded them both to go to Fir‘awn and to call him upon him
to believe in Allah, Most High, and worship Him, Alone, without
ascribing partners to Him, and to ask him also to cease tormenting
the Children of Isra’eel; free them from their enslavement and
allow them to leave with Moosa and Haroon,may Allah be pleased
with them both. “And peace will be upon him who follows the
guidance!” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:47) That is, peace will be on you if
you follow the guidance. Then they warned him against rejecting
their Message, saying, “Truly, it has been revealed to us that the
punishment will be for him who denies (believes not in the Oneness
of Allah and in His Messengers, etc.), and turns away (from the
truth and obedience to Allah).” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:48) That is,
rejects the truth in his heart and turns away from acting upon it. He,
Most High, says, regarding Fir‘awn, Fir‘awn said, “Who then, O,
Moosa, is the Lord of you two?” (Moosa) said, “Our Lord is He
Who gave to each thing its form and nature, then guided it aright.”
(Fir‘awn) said, “What about the generations of old?” (Moosa) said,
“The knowledge thereof is with my Lord, in a Record. My Lord is
neither unaware nor does He forget.” Who has made earth for you
like a bed (spread out); and has opened roads (ways and paths, etc.)
for you therein; and has sent down water (rain) from the sky. And
We have brought forth with it various kinds of vegetation. Eat and
pasture your cattle, (therein); verily, in this are proofs and signs for
Sunniconnect.com
47

men of understanding. Thereof (the earth) We created you, and into
it We shall return you, and from it We shall bring you out once
again." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:49-55)
Allah, Most High, informs us that Fir‘awn refused to confirm the
existence of the Creator, saying, “Who then, O, Moosa, is the Lord
of you two?” (Moosa) said, “Our Lord is He Who gave to each
thing its form and nature, then guided it aright.” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:49,50) That is, it is He Who created mankind and ordained for
them their deeds, their sustenance and their lifespans; He recorded
all of these things with Him, in His Book, Al-Lawh Al-Mahfooz
(the Preserved Tablet). This Verse is like the Words of Him, Most
High, "Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High, Who has
created (everything), and then proportioned it. And Who has
measured; then guided (i.e. showed mankind the right as well as
wrong paths, and guided the animals to pasture.)(Soorah Al-A‘la
87:1-3) That is, He ordained preordainments and guided His
creations to them. Fir‘awn said to Moosa (Peace be upon him),
“Then if your Lord is the Creator, Who ordains everything and
guides His creatures to that which He has ordained, in which case,
none would have the right to be worshipped but He, then why did
the earlier peoples worship deities other than Him, ascribing
partners and rivals to Him from such things as the stars, as you
know? Why were the earlier generations not guided to that which
you have mentioned?” "(Moosa) said, 'The knowledge thereof is
with my Lord, in a Record. My Lord is neither unaware nor does
He forget'.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:52) That is, even if they worshipped
other deities besides Allah, that is not an argument or an
authorization for you to do likewise, nor does it prove anything that
contradicts what I say, because they were ignorant, like you. They
will be held accountable for everything that they did and they will
be recompensed accordingly, by my Lord, the Almighty, the AllPowerful and He does not wrong anyone, even as little as an atom’s
weight, because all of the deeds of the slaves are recorded with Him
in a Record and He is not unaware of any of their doeds, nor dies
He forget anything.
Sunniconnect.com
48

Then he spoke to him of Allah’s Greatness and His Ability to create
(all) things; he described to him how Allah made the Earth a resting
place and the sky a ceiling, safe and well-guarded, and He
subjugated the clouds and the rains to provide sustenance to His
slaves and their livestock and (other) animals, as He, Most High,
says, "Eat and pasture your cattle (therein); verily, in this are proofs
and signs for men of understanding." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:54) That
is, for those who possess rational minds and sound innate character,
for He, Most High is the Creator and the Sustainer, as He says, "O,
mankind! Worship your Lord (Allah), Who created you and those
who were before you so that you may become Al-Muttaqoon. Who
has made the Earth a resting place for you, and the sky as a canopy,
and sent down water (rain) from the sky and brought forth
therewith fruits as a provision for you. Then do not set up rivals
unto Allah (in worship) while you know (that He Alone has the
right to be worshipped)." (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:21,22).
And after Allah had described how He gave life to the Earth with
rain and caused thereby the plants and crops to burst forth from it,
He called attention to the ultimate destination (on the Day of
Resurrection), saying "Thereof" i.e. from the Earth "We created
you, and into it We shall return you, and from it We shall bring you
out once again." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:55), as He, Most High, says,
"As He brought you (into being) in the beginning, so shall you be
brought into being (on the Day of Resurrection) (in two groups, one
as a blessed one [Believers], and the other as a wretched one
[disbelievers])." (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:29)
He, Most High, says, "And He it is Who originates the creation,
then will repeat it (after it has been perished), and this is easier for
Him. His is the highest description (i.e. none has the right to be
worshipped but He, and there is nothing comparable unto Him) in
the heavens and in the Earth. And He is the Almighty, the Most Wise." (Soorah Ar-Room 30:27) Then He, Most High, says, "And
indeed We showed him (Fir‘awn) all Our Signs and Evidences, but
he denied and refused. He (Fir‘awn) said, 'Have you come to drive
Sunniconnect.com
49

us out of our land with your magic, O, Moosa? Then verily, we can
produce magic the like thereof; so appoint a meeting between us
and you, which neither we, nor you shall fail to keep, in an open
wide place where both shall have a just and equal chance (and
beholders could witness the competition).' (Moosa) said, “Your
appointed meeting is the day of the festival, and let the people
assemble when the sun has risen.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:56-59)
Allah, Most High, informs us about the wretchedness and sheer
ignorance of Fir‘awn, the meanness of his intellect in denying
Allah’s Signs, his arrogant refusal to follow them and his saying to
Moosa (Peace be upon him), “Verily, what you have brought is no
more than magic and we shall oppose you with its like.” Then he
asked Moosa (Peace be upon him) that he appoint a meeting
between them at a fixed time and in a designated place. And this
was one of Moosa’s major objectives – to show Allah’s Signs and
His Proofs openly to an assembly of the people, which is why he
said, “Your appointed meeting is the day of the festival.” (Soorah
Ta Ha 20:59) That was the day of their New Year celebration and
a day on which it was their custom to gather. “And let the people
assemble when the sun has risen.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:59) That is, in
the late morning, just before noon, when the light of the sun was
very bright; in this way, the truth would be clearer and more
obvious to them; and he did not request that the meeting be held at
night, so that they might not be deceived by trickery and falsehood
in the darkness of night. Instead, he requested that it be held in
daylight and openly, because he had insight from his Lord and he
had certainty that Allah would make His Word and His Religion
triumphant, even though the Copts might dislike it.
Allah, Most High, says, "So Fir‘awn withdrew, devised his plot and
then came back. Moosa said to them, 'Woe unto you! Invent not a
lie against Allah, lest He should destroy you completely by a
punishment. And surely, he who invents a lie (against Allah) will
fail miserably.' Then they debated with one another what they must
do, and they kept their talk secret. They said, 'Verily! These are two
Sunniconnect.com
50

magicians. Their object is to drive you out from your land with
magic, and overcome your chiefs and nobles. So devise your plot,
and then assemble in line. And whoever overcomes this day will be
indeed successful'.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:60-64)
Allah, Most High, informs us about Fir‘awn and how he went and
gathered the magicians in his land – Egypt at that time was filled
with magicians who excelled in their art – so they gathered before
him from all corners of the land and they were very large in
numbers.
Fir‘awn came along with his princes and the governors of his
provinces without exception. This was because Fir‘awn had
ordered their presence at this unprecedented meeting; they came
out, saying, “That we may follow the sorcerers (who were on
Fir‘awn’s religion of disbelief) if they are the winners.” (Soorah
Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26: 40). Moosa (Peace be upon him) advanced
toward the magicians and he admonished them and rebuked them
for practicing vain and false magic, which contradicts Allah’s Signs
and His Proofs, saying, “Woe unto you! Invent not a lie against
Allah, lest He should destroy you completely by a punishment. And
surely, he who invents a lie (against Allah) will fail miserably.”
Then they debated with one another what they must do. (Soorah Ta
Ha 20:61,62) It was said that it means that they disagreed among
themselves and one of them said, “This is the speech of a Prophet
and not magic,” while another said, “Nay, it is magic.” And Allah
knows better. They spoke these words and others secretly, among
themselves. They said: “Verily! These are two magicians. Their
object is to drive you out from your land with magic” (Soorah Ta
Ha 20:63) They said, “This man, Moosa and his brother are skilled
magicians and their aim is to gather the people on their side and to
attack the King and his entourage and expel you from your abodes;
and they are scheming against you by this magic. “So devise your
plot, and then assemble in line. And whoever overcomes this day
will be indeed successful.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:64) They only said
these first words in order to prepare, encourage one another and
Sunniconnect.com
51

bring forth all of the tricks, deceptions, cheating, sorcery and
falsehood. But how far from the truth were their beliefs and how
wrong were their ideas! How could their falsehood, their sorcery
and their folly oppose the proofs which Moosa (Peace be upon
him), Allah’s slave, His Kaleem and His Messenger brought;
proofs which dazzled the eyes and confused the minds. They said,
“and then assemble in line.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:64) As the
assembled all together they incited each other to advance in this
position, because Fir‘awn had promised them and caused them to
hope for a great reward; but that which Satan promises them is
naught but illusion. They said, “O, Moosa! Either you throw first
or we will be the first to throw.” (Moosa) said, “Nay, throw you
(first)!” Then behold, their ropes and their sticks, by their magic,
appeared to him as though they moved fast. So Moosa conceived a
fear in himself. We (Allah) said, “Fear not! Surely, you will have
the upper hand. And throw that which is in your right hand! It will
swallow up that which they have made. That which they have made
is only a magician’s trick, and the magician will never be
successful, no matter whatever amount (of skill) he may attain.”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:65-69)
When the magicians lined up and Moosa and Haroon, peace be
upon them, stood before them and they said to Moosa (Peace be
upon him), “Either you throw before us, or we will throw before
you.” (Moosa) said, “Nay, throw you (first)!” They had taken ropes
and sticks and placed in them quicksilver and other substances,
which would cause them to twist and turn in a manner that would
make them appear to be moving of their own accord. But they only
moved because of these tricks and thus they deceived the eyes of
the people and terrified them. As they threw their ropes and their
sticks, they chanted, “By the might of Fir‘awn, it is we who will
certainly win!” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26: 44). He, Most High, says,
"So when they threw, they bewitched the eyes of the people, and
struck terror into them, and they displayed a great magic." (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:116) He, Most High, says, "Then behold, their ropes and
their sticks, by their magic, appeared to him as though they moved
Sunniconnect.com
52

fast. So Moosa conceived a fear in himself." (Soorah Ta Ha
20:66,67) That is, he feared for the people that they would be
seduced by their sorcery and their trickery before he could throw
what was in his hand, for he would not do anything before Allah
commanded him and inspired him to throw at the fixed time: “Fear
not! Surely, you will have the upper hand. And throw that which is
in your right hand! It will swallow up that which they have made.
That which they have made is only a magician’s trick, and the
magician will never be successful, no matter whatever amount (of
skill) he may attain.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:68, 69) On hearing this,
Moosa (Peace be upon him) threw his stick and he said, "What you
have brought is sorcery, Allah will surely make it of no effect.
Verily, Allah does not set right the work of mufsidoon (the
evildoers, corrupt ones, etc.). And Allah will establish and make
apparent the truth by His Words, however much the mujrimoon
(criminals, disbelievers, polytheists, sinners, etc.) may hate it.”
(Soorah Yoonus 10:81, 82). He, Most High, says, "Then Moosa
threw his stick, and behold, it swallowed up all the falsehoods
which they showed!" (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:45)
He, Most High, says, "Thus truth was confirmed, and all that they
did was made of no effect. So they were defeated then and there,
and were returned disgraced. And the sorcerers fell down in
prostration.
They said, 'We believe in the Lord of the Al-‘Alameen – the Lord
of Moosa and Haroon'.” (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:118-122). This was
because when Moosa (Peace be upon him) threw his stick, it
became a huge serpent with feet – according to what has been
reported from more than one scholars from among the Salaf – and
it also had a large neck and a gigantic, terrifying body, which
caused scare among the people and forced them flee, in awe and
fear, from the spot. The serpent advanced upon the ropes and sticks
they had thrown and began to devour them, one after another,
moving very rapidly. The people looked at it in sheer amazement.
As for the magicians, they saw something that terrified them and
confused them, and they beheld a thing the like of which they had
Sunniconnect.com
53

never seen and never imagined, and was beyond their
comprehension and devoid of capabilities to reproduce. At this
point, with the knowledge of magic they possessed, they realized
that this was not magic, nor was it sleight of hand, nor trickery, nor
imagination, nor falsehood, nor lies, nor misguidance. Rather, it
was real and none could do it except Allah, Who sent it to support
the truth. Allah lifted the cover of foolishness from their hearts and
illuminated them with the guidance that He had created; and He
banished the hardness from them, causing them to turn to their Lord
in repentance and throw themselves down in prostration before
Him. They said loudly for all those present to hear, without fearing
any punishment or affliction, “We have believed in the Lord of
Moosa and Haroon,” as Allah, Most High, says, "So the magicians
fell down in prostration. They said, 'We believe in the Lord of
Haroon and Moosa.' (Fir‘awn) said, 'Believe you in him (Moosa)
before I give you permission? Verily! He is your chief who taught
you magic. So I will surely cut off your hands and feet on opposite
sides, and I will surely crucify you on the trunks of date-palms, and
you shall surely know which of us (I, [Fir‘awn]-) or the Lord of
Moosa [i.e. Allah]) can give the severe and more lasting
punishment.' They said, 'We prefer you not over the clear signs that
have come to us, and to Him (Allah) Who created us. So decree
whatever you desire to decree, for you can only decree (regarding)
the life of this world. Verily! We have believed in our Lord, that
He may forgive us our faults, and the magic to which you did
compel us. And Allah is better as regards reward in comparison to
your (Fir‘awn’s) reward, and more lasting (as regards punishment
in comparison to your punishment).' Verily! Whoever comes to his
Lord as a mujrim (criminal, polytheist, disbeliever in the Oneness
of Allah and His Messengers and sinner, etc.), then surely, for him
is Hell, therein he will neither die nor live. But whoever comes to
Him (Allah) as a Believer (in the Oneness of Allah, etc.), and has
done righteous good deeds, for such are the high ranks (in the
Hereafter), the Gardens of ‘Adn (Eden) (everlasting Gardens),
under which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever: such is
the reward of those who purify themselves (by abstaining from all
Sunniconnect.com
54

kinds of sins and evil deeds which Allah has forbidden and by
doing all that which Allah has ordained)." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:7076) Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair, ‘Ikrimah, Al-Qasim Ibn Abi Burdah,
Al-Awza‘i and others said that when the magicians prostrated, they
saw their houses and their palaces in
Paradise prepared and decorated for their arrival and for this reason,
they did not pay any heed to Fir‘awn’s threats. This was because,
when Fir‘awn saw that the magicians had publicly embraced Islam
and that the people were saying good things about Moosa and
Haroon, peace be upon them, this made him alarmed and he saw
something that confused him, robbed him of his perception and
took away his sight. He was a sly, cunning and deceptive man,
highly skilled in avoiding Allah’s Path and so he said, addressing
the magicians before the assembled crowd, “Believe you in him
(Moosa) before I give you permission?” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:71).
That is, did you not think to consult me before doing this terrible
thing that you have done in front of my assembled subjects? Then
he resorted to threats, intimidation, ranted and raved and lied and
made far-fetched claims, saying, “Verily! He is your chief who
taught you magic.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:71). And in another Verse,
he said, “Surely, this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to
drive out its people, but you shall come to know.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:123) These words which he spoke were false, and every rational
person acknowledges the disbelief, untruthfulness and folly in
them; indeed, a child would not believe them, for all of those
present, including the people of his country and others knew that
these (magicians) had never met Moosa (Peace be upon him)
before, so how could he be their chief, who had taught them magic?
In addition to this, it was not he who had gathered them and he
knew nothing of their gathering. It was Fir‘awn who invited them
and selected them from every deep mountain pass and valley, from
the farthest corners of Egypt, from the cities and from the
countryside. He, Most High, says in Soorah Al-A‘raf, "Then after
them We sent Moosa with Our Signs to Fir‘awn and his chiefs, but
they wrongfully rejected them. So see how was the end of the
mufsidoon. And Moosa said, 'O, Fir‘awn! I am a Messenger from
Sunniconnect.com
55

the Lord of Al-‘Alameen. Proper it is for me that I say nothing
concerning Allah but the truth. Indeed I have come unto you from
your Lord with a clear proof. So let the Children of Isra’eel go
along with me.' (Fir‘awn) said, 'If you have come with a sign, show
it forth - if you are one of those who tell the truth.' Then he (Moosa)
threw his stick and behold! It was a serpent, manifest! And he drew
out his hand, and behold! It was white (with radiance) for the
beholders. The chiefs of the people of Fir‘awn said, 'This is indeed
a well-versed sorcerer; he wants to get you out of your land, so
what do you advise?' They said, 'Put him and his brother off (for a
time), and send callers (men) to the cities to collect (and) that they
bring up to you all well-versed sorcerers.' And so the sorcerers
came to Fir‘awn. They said, 'Indeed there will be a (good) reward
for us if we are the victors.' He said, 'Yes, and moreover you will
(in that case) be of the nearest (to me).' They said, 'O, Moosa! Either
you throw (first), or shall we have the (first) throw?' He (Moosa)
said, 'Throw you (first).' So when they threw, they bewitched the
eyes of the people, and struck terror into them, and they displayed
a great magic. And We inspired Moosa (saying), 'Throw your stick,'
and behold! It swallowed up straight away all the falsehoods which
they showed. Thus truth was confirmed, and all that they did was
made of no effect. So they were defeated then and there, and were
returned disgraced. And the sorcerers fell down prostration. They
said, 'We believe in the Lord of Al-‘Alameen, the Lord of Moosa
and Haroon.' Fir‘awn said, 'You have believed in him (Moosa)
before I give you permission. Surely, this is a plot which you have
plotted in the city to drive out its people, but you shall come to
know. Surely, I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite
sides, then I will crucify you all.' They said, 'Verily, we are
returning to our Lord. And you take vengeance on us only because
we believed in the Ayat of our Lord when they reached us! Our
Lord! Pour out on us patience, and cause us to die as Muslims'.”
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:103-126)
What is meant is that Fir‘awn rejected everything, invented lies and
evinced extreme disbelief in his words: "Verily! He is your chief
Sunniconnect.com
56

who taught you magic." (Soorah Ta Ha 20:71) He brought forth a
statement so patently false that its untruthfulness was clear to all.
He said, “Surely, this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to
drive out its people, but you shall come to know.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:123) And he said, “Surely, I will cut off your hands and your feet
on opposite sides.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:124).
This way he threatened to cut off their right hands and their left
feet. “Then I will crucify you all.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:124). He said
that he would make an example of them and a warning to others
among his subjects against emulating them, which is why he said,
“and I will surely crucify you on the trunks of date-palms.” (Soorah
Ta Ha 20:71) He said he would place them on the trunks of datepalms because they are the highest and most visible “and you shall
surely know which of us (I, [Fir‘awn]- or the Lord of Moosa [i.e.
Allah]) can give the severe and more lasting punishment.” (Soorah
Ta Ha 20:71) means in the life of this world. They said, “We prefer
you not over the clear signs that have come to us.” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:72) That is, we will not obey you and abandon the faith in the
clear signs and irrefutable proofs that has become firmly set in our
hearts “and to Him (Allah) Who created us.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:72).
It was said that the letter "waw" in this Verse means "and", and it
was said that it implies an oath. “So decree whatever you desire to
decree” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:72) means do whatever you are able to
do “for you can only decree (regarding) the life of this world.”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:72). It means that, your jurisdiction over us is
limited to this Earthly life and when we move on from it to the
abode of the Hereafter, we will be under the Jurisdiction of Him to
Whom we have submitted and Whose Messengers we have obeyed.
“Verily! We have believed in our Lord, that He may forgive us our
faults, and the magic to which you did compel us. And Allah is
better as regards reward in comparison to your (Fir’awn’s) reward,
and more lasting (as regards punishment in comparison to your
punishment).” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:73) That is, His Reward is better
than that which you promised us and made us aspire to and “more
lasting” (Soorah Ta
Sunniconnect.com
57

Ha 20:72) means more permanent than this transient, Earthly life.
In another Verse, He says: They said, “No harm! Surely, to our
Lord (Allah) we are to return; verily! We really hope that our Lord
will forgive us our sins” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:50, 51) means
He will forgive us for the sins and unlawful deeds we committed.
“As we are the first of the believers (in Moosa and in the
Monotheism which he has brought from Allah).” That is, we are
the first from among the Copts to believe in Moosa and Haroon,
peace be upon them both.
They also said to him, “And you take vengeance on us only because
we believed in the Ayat!” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:126). That is, we are not guilty of any sin in your eyes
except that we have believed in our Messenger and obeyed the
Signs of our Lord, when they came to us. “Our Lord! pour out on
us patience” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:126). Means to make us steadfast
in the face of the punishment that this obstinate tyrant, this ruthless
ruler may inflict on us “and cause us to die as Muslims.” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:126). They also said, seeking to warn him and make him
fear the Punishment of his Lord, the Great, “Verily! Whoever
comes to his Lord as a mujrim, then surely, for him is Hell, therein
he will neither die nor live.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:74) They said to
him, “So take care not to be one of them,” but he was one of them.
“But whoever comes to Him (Allah) as a believer (in the Oneness
of Allah, etc.), and has done righteous good deeds, for such are the
high ranks (in the Hereafter).” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:75) That is, the
elevated abodes (in Paradise) "The Gardens of ‘Adn (Eden)
(everlasting Gardens), under which rivers flow, wherein they will
abide forever: such is the reward of those who purify themselves
(by abstaining from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which Allah has
forbidden and by doing all that which Allah has ordained).”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:76) So beware of being among them. But those
pre ordainments – which none can overcome and none can prevent
– came between him and that (i.e. Paradise) and the Judgment of
Allah, Most High, was that he would be among the inhabitants of
the blazing Fire, so that he should feel the agonizing punishment
Sunniconnect.com
58

that would be poured on his head from above, and that is alhameem and the painful humiliation. It will be said to him by way
of rebuke and censure – and he is disgraced, manbooh, wretched
and base: “Taste you (this)! Verily, you were (pretending to be) the
mighty, the generous!” (Soorah Ad-Dukhan 44:49)
It is apparent from these words that Fir‘awn – may Allah’s Curse
be on him – crucified them and tortured them – may Allah be
pleased with them all. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with him) and ‘Ubaid Ibn ‘Umair said that at the start of the day,
they were magicians and by the end of it, they were pious martyrs.
This is supported by their saying: “Our Lord! Pour out on us
patience, and cause us to die as Muslims.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:126)

Section:
When this momentous event transpired, i.e. the defeat which was
inflicted on the Copts in that place and the magicians who sought
help from their Lord embraced Islam, it did not increase in them in
anything except disbelief, stubbornness and remoteness from the
truth. Allah, Most High, says, after relating the above mentioned
story in Soorah Al-A‘raf, The chiefs of Fir‘awn’s people said,
“Will you leave Moosa and his people to spread mischief in the
land, and to abandon you and your gods?” He said, “We will kill
their sons, and let their women live, and we have indeed irresistible
power over them.” Moosa said to his people, “Seek help in Allah
and be patient. Verily, the Earth is Allah’s. He gives it as a heritage
to whom He wills of His slaves, and the (blessed) end is for the
muttaqoon.” They said, “We (Children of Isra’eel) had suffered
troubles before you came to us, and since you have come to us.”
He said, “It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and
make you successors on the Earth, so that He may see how you
act.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:127-129)
Allah, Most High, informs us that the chiefs among the people of
Fir‘awn – and they were the governors and the powerful and
Sunniconnect.com
59

influential – incited Fir‘awn to inflict harm on the Prophet of Allah,
Moosa (Peace be upon him), and to respond to the Message he
brought with disbelief, rejection and harm, rather than belief. They
said, “Will you leave Moosa and his people to spread mischief in
the land, and to abandon you and your gods?” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:127) They – may Allah humiliate them – meant that his call to
worship Allah, Alone, without ascribing partners to Him, and his
prohibition of worshipping deities other than Him was a corruption
in comparison to the beliefs of the Copts – may Allah’s Curse be
on them. Some of them said, “and to abandon you and your
ilahah?” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:127) means their worship of you. It is
possible to understand this in two ways; one of them is "and to
abandon your religion" and this is strengthened by the other
recitation. The second is "and to abandon worship of you," because
he used to claim that he was a god – may Allah’s Curse be on him.
He said, “We will kill their sons, and let their women live.” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:127) so that their fighters should not become great in
numbers “and we have indeed irresistible power over them.”
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:127). That is, to overcome them. Moosa said to
his people, “Seek help in Allah and be patient. Verily, the Earth is
Allah’s. He gives it as a heritage to whom He wills of His slaves,
and the (blessed) end is for the muttaqoon.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:128). That is, if they are bent on harming you and murdering you,
then seek refuge with your Lord and bear patiently your tribulation.
“Verily, the Earth is Allah’s. He gives it as a heritage to whom He
wills of His slaves, and the (blessed) end is for the muttaqoon.” It
means that you be of those pious people, so that the blessed end
may be yours, as He, Most High, says in another Verse, And Moosa
said, “O, my people! If you have believed in Allah, then put your
trust in Him, if you are Muslims (those who submit to Allah’s
Will).” They said, “In Allah, we put our trust. Our Lord! Make us
not a trial for the folk who are zalimoon (i.e. do not make them
overpower us). And save us by Your Mercy from the disbelieving
folk.” (Soorah Yoonus 10:84-86)

Sunniconnect.com
60

As for their saying: “We (Children of Isra’eel) had suffered troubles
before you came to us, and since you have come to us.” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:129) That is, our sons were killed before you came to
us and after you came to us. He said, “It may be that your Lord will
destroy your enemy and make you successors on the earth, so that
He may see how you act.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:129)
Allah, Most High, says in Soorah Ha Meem Al-Mu’min, "And
indeed We sent Moosa with Our Ayat, and a manifest authority, to
Fir‘awn, Haman and Qaroon (Korah), but they called (him) 'a
sorcerer, a liar'!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:23, 24). Fir‘awn was the king
and Haman was his minister; Qaroon was an Isra’eelite from
among the people of Moosa (Peace be upon him), yet he followed
the religion of Fir‘awn and his notables. He possessed great wealth,
as we shall show in his story, which we shall relate later, if Allah,
Most High, wills. Then, when he brought them the Truth from Us,
they said, “Kill the sons of those who believe with him and let their
women live,” but the plots of disbelievers are nothing but errors!
(Soorah Ghafir 40:25). The sole purpose of this killing of the male
infants after the start of Moosa’s mission was to humiliate, degrade
and diminish the Children of Isra’eel, so that they would not have
the courage to defend themselves or to attack the Copts. There were
among the Copts those who warned them, but this did not benefit
them and it did not deflect from the Ordainment of the One Who,
(when He wills something,) simply says, “Be!” And it is. Fir’awn
said, “Leave me to kill Moosa, and let him call his Lord (to stop me
from killing him)! I fear that he may change your religion, or that
he may cause mischief to appear in the land!” (Soorah Ghafir
40:26)
This is why the people said, by way of mockery: Fir‘awn has
become a “reminder”, because Fir‘awn, according to his claim,
feared for the people that Moosa (Peace be upon him) would cause
them to go astray. Moosa said, “Verily, I seek refuge in my Lord
and your Lord from every arrogant person who believes not in the
Day of Reckoning!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:27). That is, I have sought
Sunniconnect.com
61

refuge and recourse with Allah against Fir‘awn or anyone else
assailing me with evil. His saying: “from every arrogant person…”
(Soorah Ghafir 40:27). That is, every obstinate tyrant who will not
desist or cease and fears not the Punishment of Allah, because he
does not believe in the Return (to Allah, on the Day of
Resurrection) or the Recompense, which is why he said, “…from
every arrogant person who believes not in the Day of Reckoning!”
(Soorah Ghafir 40:27)
He, Most High, says, And a believing man of Fir‘awn’s family,
who hid his faith said, “Would you kill a man because he says, ‘My
Lord is Allah’, and he has come to you with clear Signs (proofs)
from your Lord? And if he is a liar, upon him will be (the sin of)
his lie. But if he is telling the truth, then some of that (calamity)
wherewith he threatens you will fall on you. Verily, Allah guides
not one who is a musrif (a polytheist, or a murderer who sheds
blood without a right, or the one who commits major sins, an
oppressor, or a transgressor), a liar! O, my people! Yours is the
kingdom this day, you are uppermost in the land. But who will save
us from the Punishment of Allah, should it befall us?” Fir‘awn said,
“I show you only that which I see, and I guide you only to the path
of right policy!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:28, 29)
This man was a paternal cousin of Fir‘awn and he concealed his
faith from his people out of fear for his own safety.
What is meant is that this man hid his belief and when Fir‘awn –
may Allah’s curse be on him – made his intention clear to kill
Moosa (Peace be upon him), he consulted his notables regarding
this matter, the believer feared for Moosa (Peace be upon him) and
so he responded gently to Fir‘awn, with words that contained a
mixture of encouragement (to do good) and warning (against doing
evil); he spoke in the manner of one who is asking for advice and
seeking an opinion – and it has been confirmed in the Hadith from
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
Sunniconnect.com
62

that he said, “The best jihad is to speak words of truth before an
unjust ruler.”
This was the highest level of such kind of a jihad, because Fir‘awn
was the most tyrannical and oppressive of rulers; and there was
nothing truer or more just than this speech, because in it there was
protection of the blood of a Prophet. It is also possible that he
argued with them by revealing his faith and making plain to them
that which he had formerly concealed. But the first explanation
appears more likely, and Allah knows better. He said, “Would you
kill a man because he says, ‘My Lord is Allah’." (Soorah Ghafir
40:28) It means that simply due to his saying that "My Lord is
Allah" you would kill him. If so, this is not a just cause for killing
a man; rather it is a reason to treat him with honor, respect,
gentleness and forsake vengeance, i.e. especially since “he has
come to you with clear Signs (proofs) from your Lord?” (Soorah
Ghafir 40:28). That is, with miracles that prove the truth of that
which he has brought from Him Who sent him. So if you deal
gently with him, you will be safe, because “if he is a liar, upon him
will be (the sin of) his lie.” (Soorah Ghafir 40:28). That is, that will
not harm you, “but if he is telling the truth,” (Soorah Ghafir 40:28)
– and you have opposed him, “then some of that (calamity)
wherewith he threatens you will fall on you.” (Soorah Ghafir
40:28) – and you fear that even the lightest punishment from that
which he has warned you of may befall you, then what will you do
if the whole punishment is inflicted on you? These words in this
situation are at the highest levels of courteousness, carefulness and
perfect logic. His saying: “O, my people! Yours is the kingdom this
day, you are uppermost in the land” (Soorah Ghafir 40:29) was a
warning that they might be deprived of this mighty kingdom,
because states never oppose Allah’s Religion except that they lose
their dominion and are humbled after having possessed great
power. And this is what befell the people of Fir‘awn; they
continued to doubt, oppose and resist the Message brought by
Moosa (Peace be upon him) until Allah removed them from the
authority they had enjoyed, expelled them from their houses and
Sunniconnect.com
63

their palaces and took away their blessings and their pleasures.
Then they were cast into the sea, humiliated; and their souls were
transferred from their former state of greatness and high rank to
that of the lowest. This is why the believing, righteous,
rightlyguided man, follower of the truth, adviser to his people and
possessor of perfect understanding said, “O, my people! Yours is
the kingdom this day, you are uppermost in the land.” That is, you
are in authority over the people, rulers over them. “But who will
save us from the Punishment of Allah, should it befall us?” (Soorah
Ghafir 40:29) means even if possessed double the numbers,
preparedness, strength and power that you do, this would not avail
us anything and it would not protect us from Allah’s Punishment.
Fir‘awn said (Soorah Ghafir 40:29), in answer to all of this, “I show
you only that which I see.” (Soorah Ghafir 40:29). That is, I only
say unto you that which I consider to be true. “and I guide you only
to the path of right policy!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:29). And he lied in
both of these statements, because in his heart, he knew that what
Moosa (Peace be upon him) had brought was the truth from Allah,
without any doubt. He only displayed opposition to it due to
sinfulness, enmity, arrogance and disbelief.
As for his saying: “and I guide you only to the path of right policy!”
(Soorah Ghafir 40:29). He lied in this also, because he was not
following right guidance in the matter; on the contrary, he was
following foolishness, error, stupidity and vain fancy. He was one
of the first to worship idols and graven images, then he called upon
his ignorant, misguided people to follow him and believe his claim
that he was their lord.
What is intended is to make clear the untruthfulness of his saying:
“I show you only that which I see.” (Soorah Ghafir 40:29) and his
saying: “and I guide you only to the path of right policy!” (Soorah
Ghafir 40:29)
He, Most High, says, And he who believed said, “O, my people!
Verily, I fear for you a fate like that day (of disaster) of the
Sunniconnect.com
64

Confederates (of old)! Like the fate of the people of Nooh, and ‘Ad
and Thamood and those who came after them. And Allah wills no
injustice for (His) slaves. And, O, my people! Verily! I fear for you
the Day when there will be mutual calling (between the people of
Hell and of Paradise)." A Day when you will turn your backs and
flee, having no protector from Allah. And whomsoever Allah sends
astray, for him there is no guide. And indeed Yoosuf did come to
you, in times gone by, with clear signs, but you ceased not to doubt
in that which he did bring to you, till when he died you said, “No
Messenger will Allah send after him." Thus Allah leaves astray him
who is a musrif (a polytheist, oppressor, criminal, sinner, who
commit major sins) and a murtab (one who doubts Allah’s Warning
and His Oneness). Those who dispute about the Ayat of Allah,
without any authority that has come to them, it is greatly hateful
and disgusting to Allah and to those who believe. Thus does Allah
seal up the heart of every arrogant tyrant (so they cannot guide
themselves to the Right Path). (Soorah Ghafir 40:30-35)
Allah’s Wali (friend) warned them that if they belied Allah’s
Messenger, Moosa (Peace be upon him), the same punishments that
were inflicted on the people of Nooh (Peace be upon him), ‘Ad,
Thamood and those who came after them, up to the time of
Fir‘awn’s people, would be inflicted on them. By these exemplary
punishments, Allah established the proofs for all of the people of
the Earth in the truth of the Messages that the Prophets brought,
which showed how He exacted retribution on their rejecters and
saved the Awliya’ who followed them. Furthermore, He made them
fear the Day of Resurrection, which is the Day of the Gathering,
i.e. when He will call the people in successive groups and they will
turn on their heels in an attempt to flee, but they will find no way
to do so. On that day man will say, “Where (is the refuge) to flee?”
No! There is no refuge! Unto your Lord (Alone) will be the place
of rest that day. (Soorah Al-Qiyamah 75:10-12)
He, Most High, informs us about the inhabitants of Egypt at that
time, i.e. about their natural inclination to reject the truth and
Sunniconnect.com
65

oppose the Messengers, which is why He says, but you ceased not
to doubt in that which he did bring to you, till when he died you
said, “No Messenger will Allah send after him.” (Soorah Ghafir
40:34). That is, you continued to reject it, which is why he said,
Thus Allah leaves astray him who is a musrif (a polytheist,
oppressor, a criminal, sinner who commit major sins) and a murtab
(one who doubts Allah’s Warning and His Oneness). Those who
dispute about the Ayat of Allah, without any authority that has
come to them, it is greatly hateful and disgusting to Allah and to
those who believe. Thus does Allah seal up the heart of every
arrogant, tyrant. (So they cannot guide themselves to the Right
Path) (Soorah Ghafir 40:34, 35) That is, they reject Allah’s Proofs
and the evidences of His Oneness, and they do not have any proof
or evidence from Allah. This is a thing that is absolutely abhorrent
to Allah, i.e. He hates those of mankind who possess such
characteristics, which is why he says, Thus does Allah seal up the
heart of every arrogant tyrant (so they cannot guide themselves to
the Right Path). (Soorah Ghafir 40:35). The first word in the Verse
(kadhalika) has been read as meaning "likewise" and also as "thus"
– and both of them are inseparable: That is, thus, if the hearts
oppose the truth and do so without any evidence from Allah, He
seals them.
He, Most High, says, And Fir‘awn said, “O, Haman! Build me a
tower that I may arrive at the ways, the ways of the heavens, and I
may look upon the Ilah (God) of Moosa but verily, I think him to
be a liar." Thus it was made fair-looking, in Fir‘awn’s eyes, the evil
of his deeds, and he was hindered from the
(Right) Path, and the plot of Fir‘awn led to nothing but loss and
destruction (for him). (Soorah Ghafir 40:36,37) Fir‘awn belied
Moosa (Peace be upon him) in his assertion that Allah had sent him
and falsely claimed to his people that "I know not that you have an
ilah (a god) other than me, so kindle for me (a fire), O, Haman, to
bake (bricks out of) clay, and set up for me a Sarhan (a lofty tower,
or palace, etc.) in order that I may look at (or look for) the Ilah
(God) of Moosa; and verily, I think that he (Moosa) is one of the
Sunniconnect.com
66

liars.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:38). And here He says, “…that I may
arrive at the ways, the ways of the heavens.” (Soorah Ghafir 40:36,
37). That is, the paths or roads. “…and I may look upon the Ilah
(God) of Moosa but verily, I think him to be a liar.” (Soorah Ghafir
40:37). It is possible to infer two meanings from this Verse; one of
them is: I think that he is a liar when he says that there is a Lord of
this world other than me. The second is in his claim that Allah sent
him. The first appears more likely, based on what is known of
Fir‘awn’s nature, because he used to deny the existence of the
Creator. However, the second is closer to the wording, since he
said, “…and I may look upon the Ilah (God) of Moosa.” (Soorah
Ghafir 40:37). That is, so that I might see if He sent him or not.
“…but verily, I think him to be a liar.” (Soorah Ghafir 40:37). But
Fir‘awn’s intention was no more than to discourage his people from
believing in Moosa (Peace be upon him) and to encourage them to
reject him.
Let us return to the advice of the believer and the arguments he
advanced. Allah, Most High, says, And the man who believed said,
O, my people! Follow me, I will guide you to the way of right
conduct (i.e. guide you to Allah’s Religion of Islamic Monotheism
with which Moosa has been sent). O, my people! Truly, this life of
the world is nothing but a (quick passing) enjoyment, and verily,
the Hereafter that is the home that will remain forever. Whosoever
does an evil deed will not be requited except the like thereof, and
whosoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female and is a
true believer (in the Oneness of Allah), such will enter Paradise,
where they will be provided therein (with all things in abundance)
without limit. (Soorah Ghafir 40:38-40)
He – may Allah be pleased with him – called them to the path of
right guidance and truth, which is following the Prophet of Allah,
Moosa (Peace be upon him), and believing in the Message that he
brought from his Lord. Then he induced them to give up the
pleasures of this temporary Earthly life, which must, without doubt,
come to an end. He encouraged them to seek the reward which is
Sunniconnect.com
67

with Allah, with Whom no deed is lost. He is the Omnipotent, in
Whose Hands is the dominion of all things. It is He Who gives a
great reward for few deeds and it is from His Justice that He does
not recompense an evil deed except with its like. He (the believer)
informed them that the Hereafter is an everlasting abode, which He
will grant to the believer, who performs righteous deeds. Such will
be admitted to the highest Gardens of Paradise and Halls of
Tranquility, and they will have many superior good things,
everlasting blessings which will never perish or pass away. And the
goodness that they will have will be more than they require.
Then he began to invalidate their beliefs and to cause them to fear
the end to which they were heading, saying, “And O, my people!
How is it that I call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire!
You invite me to disbelieve in Allah (and in His Oneness), and to
join partners in worship with Him; of which I have no knowledge,
and I invite you to the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving! No doubt you
call me to (worship) one who cannot grant (me) my request (or
respond to my invocation) in this world or in the Hereafter. And
our return will be to Allah, and musrifoon! They shall be the
dwellers of the Fire! And you will remember what I am telling you,
and my affair I leave it to Allah. Verily, Allah is the All-Seeing of
(His) slaves.” So Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted
(against him), while an evil punishment encompassed Fir‘awn’s
people. The Fire; they are exposed to it morning and afternoon, and
on the day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the
angels), “Cause Fir’awn’s people to enter the severest
punishment!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:41-46)
He had called them to the worship of the Lord of the heavens and
Earth, Who says to a thing, “Be!” and it is, while they called him
to the worship of Fir‘awn, the ignorant man, the misguided, the
cursed, which is why he said to them by way of rebuke, “And O,
my people! How is it that I call you to salvation while you call me
to the Fire! You invite me to disbelieve in Allah (and in His
Oneness), and to join partners in worship with Him; of which I have
Sunniconnect.com
68

no knowledge, and I invite you to the Almighty, the OftForgiving!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:41,42). Then he made clear to them
the futility of worshipping anything other than Allah, such as idols
and graven images and he further explained that they have no
power to benefit or harm, saying, “No doubt you call me to
(worship) one who cannot grant (me) my request (or respond to my
invocation) in this world or in the Hereafter. And our return will be
to Allah, and musrifoon! They shall be the dwellers of the Fire!”
(Soorah Ghafir 40:43)
Then he warned them what would happen if they continued in their
obstinacy, saying, “And you will remember what I am telling you,
and my affair I leave it to Allah. Verily, Allah is the All-Seeing of
(His) slaves.” (Soorah Ghafir 40:44) Allah, Most High, says, So
Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted (against him)
(Soorah Ghafir 40:45) means, because of his rebuke to them, Allah
saved him from the punishment that befell them, because of their
disbelief in Allah and the plots they hatched in order to prevent
people from reaching the Path of Allah, such as vain fancies and
tricks which they imposed on the common people, which is why
He said, "encompassed". That is, surrounded. So Allah saved him
from the evils that they plotted (against him), while an evil
punishment encompassed Fir‘awn’s people. The Fire; they are
exposed to it morning and afternoon." (Soorah Ghafir 40:45,46).
That is, their souls are exposed night and day in their barzakh to the
Fire. “And on the day when the Hour will be established (it will be
said to the angels), 'Cause Fir‘awn’s people to enter the severest
punishment'!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:46). And we have already
discussed the evidence in this Verse for the punishment of the grave
in the Tafseer. All praise and thanks be to Allah (SWT).
What is meant is that Allah, Most High, did not destroy them until
after the proofs had been established against them, including the
sending of Messengers to them and the removal of doubts from
them. And the establishment of the proofs against them was
achieved sometimes by instilling fear in them and at other times by
Sunniconnect.com
69

encouragement, as He Most High, says, And indeed We punished
the people of Fir‘awn with years of drought and shortness of fruits,
that they might remember (take heed). But whenever good came to
them, they said, “Ours is this.” And if evil afflicted them, they
ascribed it to evil omens connected with Moosa and those with him.
Be informed! Verily, their evil omens are with Allah but most of
them know not. They said (to Moosa), “Whatever Ayat you may
bring to us, to work therewith your sorcery on us, we shall never
believe in you.” So We sent on them the flood, the locusts, the lice,
the frogs, and the blood: (as a succession of) manifest signs, yet
they remained arrogant, and they were of those people who were
mujrimoon." (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:130-133)
Allah, Most High, informs us how He tried the people of Fir‘awn,
i.e. the Copts, with the years; and these were the years of drought
during which the crops failed and no entreaty was of benefit. He
says, "and shortness of fruits" (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:130) is referred
to the fruits of the trees. That they might remember (take heed).
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:130). But they did not benefit from it, nor did
they take heed; instead, they remained arrogant and persisted in
their disbelief and obstinacy. But whenever good came to them
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:131) means abundance of crops and the like.
They said, “Ours is this.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:131) means this is
what we deserve and what is fitting for us. And if evil afflicted
them, they ascribed it to evil omens connected with Moosa and
those with him. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:131) That is, they would say,
“This has befallen us because of their evil portents, yet they would
not say regarding their good fortune that it was their blessing (from
Allah) and due to their (the Copts’) proximity to Moosa (Peace be
upon him) and his people. Instead, their hearts were filled with
rejection and arrogance and were averse to the truth. When evil
befell them, they ascribed it to Moosa (Peace be upon him) and
when good came their way, they ascribed it to themselves. He,
Most High, says, Be informed! Verily, their evil omens are with
Allah (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:131) means Allah will recompense them
with the fullest recompensation for this. But most of them know
Sunniconnect.com
70

not. They said (to Moosa), “Whatever Ayat you may bring to us, to
work therewith your sorcery on us, we shall never believe in you.”
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:131132). That is, no matter what Ayat (i.e.
miracles) you may bring, we will not believe in you, we will not
follow you and we will not obey you – even if you were to bring
every Ayah. Likewise, Allah informs us in His Saying: Truly!
Those, against whom the Word (Wrath) of your Lord has been
justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should come to them
– until they see the painful torment. (Soorah Yoonus 10:96-97). He,
Most High, says, So We sent on them the flood, the locusts, the
lice, the frogs and the blood: (as a succession of) manifest signs,
yet they remained arrogant, and they were of those people who
were mujrimoon. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:133)
Allah, Most High, says, And when the punishment fell on them they
said, “O, Moosa! Invoke your Lord for us because of His Promise
to you. If you will remove the punishment from us, we indeed shall
believe in you, and we shall let the Children of Isra’eel go with
you.” But when We removed the punishment from them to a fixed
term, which they had to reach, behold! They broke their word! So
We took retribution from them. We drowned them in the sea,
because they belied Our Ayat and were heedless about them.
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:134-136)
He, Most High, informs us about their disbelief, their arrogance and
their determination to continue in their error, ignorance and refusal
to follow Allah’s Ayat and to believe in His Messenger, in spite of
the great and clear signs and the profound and overwhelming
proofs which Allah allowed them to witness with their own eyes.
But the more signs they witnessed, and the more they weakened
them and exhausted them, the more they swore to Moosa (Peace be
upon him) and promised him that if he relieved them of these
(afflictions), they would surely believe in him and they would
definitely send with him his followers. But every time they were
relieved of these signs, they returned to the evil they had formerly
practiced and they rejected the truth that he had brought to them
Sunniconnect.com
71

and did not pay any heed to it. And so Allah would send upon them
another sign, more severe than the last and more powerful. So they
would speak, but they would lie, and they would promise, but they
would not keep their promise. “If you will remove the punishment
from us, we indeed shall believe in you, and we shall let the
Children of Isra’eel go with you.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:134). So they
would be relieved of the calamitous punishment, after which they
would return to their vast and deep ignorance. And Allah, the
Mighty, the Gentle, the Omnipotent would grant them a respite; He
would not hurry them. Instead He would defer their punishment.
Then He seized them after the evidence was established against
them and they had received the warning. He seized them with the
Seizure of the Almighty and made them a warning and an example
to those disbelievers who resemble them and a lesson to those
believers among His slaves who allow themselves to be
admonished by them, as He, Most Blessed, Most High, says – and
He is the Most Truthful of speakers – in Soorah Ha Meem WalKitab Al-Mubeen: And indeed We did send Moosa with
Our Ayat to Fir‘awn and his chiefs (inviting them to Allah’s
Religion of Islam) He said, “Verily, I am a Messenger of the Lord
of Al-‘Alameen.” But when he came to them with Our Ayat,
behold! They laughed at them. And not an Ayah (sign, etc.) We
showed them but it was greater than its fellow, and We seized them
with torment, in order that they might turn (from their polytheism
to Allah’s Religion [Islamic Monotheism]). And they said (to
Moosa), “O, you sorcerer! Invoke your Lord for us according to
what He has covenanted with you. Verily, We shall guide ourselves
(aright).” But when We removed the punishment from them,
behold! They broke their covenant (that they will believe if We
remove the punishment for them). And Fir‘awn proclaimed among
his people, saying, “O, my people! Is not mine the dominion of
Egypt, and these rivers flowing underneath me. See you not then?
Am I not better than this one (Moosa), who is maheen (has no honor
nor any respect, and is weak and despicable) and can scarcely
express himself clearly? Why then are not golden bracelets
bestowed on him, or angels sent along with him?” Thus he
Sunniconnect.com
72

(Fir‘awn) befooled and misled his people, and they obeyed him.
Verily, they were ever a people who were fasiqoon (rebellious,
disobedient to Allah). So when they angered Us, We punished them
and drowned them all. And We made them a precedent and an
example to later generations. (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:46-56)
Allah, Most High, describes how He sent His slave, Al-Kaleem, the
noble, to Fir‘awn, the despicable, the vile; and how He, Most High,
supported him with clear and obvious signs, which deserved to be
received with exaltation and belief, abandonment of the pagan
beliefs that they followed and a return to the truth and the Straight
Path. Whereas instead of that, they laughed at them and mocked at
and they rejected Allah’s Path and declined to follow the truth. So
Allah sent upon them the Ayat, one after another; and each Ayah
was greater than the one that preceded it, because confirmation was
more profound than that which came before it. And not an Ayah
(sign, etc.) We showed them but it was greater than its fellow, and
We seized them with punishment, in order that they might turn
(from their polytheism to Allah’s Religion [Islamic Monotheism]).
And they said (to Moosa), “O, you sorcerer! Invoke your Lord for
us according to what He has covenanted with you. Verily, We shall
guide ourselves (aright).” (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:48, 49) The word
“sorcerer” at that time did not have any negative connotations,
because the learned men at that time were sorcerers, which is why
they addressed him thus when they needed him and implored him.
Allah, Most High, says, But when We removed the punishment
from them, behold! They broke their covenant (that they will
believe if We remove the punishment for them). (Soorah AzZukhruf 43:50) Then He, Most High, informs us about Fir‘awn’s
bragging of his kingdom, the vastness of his land, of its beauty and
of the waterways which traverse it, i.e. the canals which they dug
for minimizing the effect of the Nile’s flood and to make use of its
waters for irrigation purposes. Then he boasted about himself and
his jewelry and began to belittle the Messenger of Allah, Moosa
(Peace be upon him) , and to ridicule him, saying that he "can
scarcely express himself clearly" (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:52)
Sunniconnect.com
73

means his speech was not clear due to the remainder of that tongue
impediment, which in him was a sign of nobility, perfection and
beauty and it did not prevent him from being spoken to by Allah
and receiving Revelation from Him; and after that, He revealed the
Tawrah to him, yet Fir‘awn belittled him – may Allah’s curse be
upon him – because he did not wear bracelets on his arms and bore
no adornments. And yet (in fact) such adornments are for women
and are unbefitting an ordinary man, so what then of the
Messengers, who possess the most complete discernment and
understanding and the highest intentions, and are the most
abstemious people on Earth, and know best what Allah has
prepared for His Awliya’ in the Hereafter.
And He, Most High, says, “…or angels sent along with him?”
(Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:53) But the matter does not require that; if
the idea was that the angels would glorify and exalt him, the angels
glorify and display humility toward much lesser men than Moosa
(Peace be upon him), according to the Hadith which states, “Verily,
the angels lower their wings for the seeker of knowledge, out of
pleasure for what he is doing.” So what would be the manner of
their humility and glorification toward Moosa (Peace be upon him),
Al-Kaleem? And if the idea was that they might bear witness to the
truth of his Message, then Allah has already supported him with
miracles, which prove indisputably to those with good hearts and
those who are seeking truth and that which is right and proper. But
those who look at the outer covering and ignore what is inside it
are blind to the clear proofs and plain evidences that he brought;
and the Lord of lords has sealed their hearts, because of the doubt
and uncertainty they feel, as was the case with Fir‘awn, the Copt,
the blind man (i.e. blind to the truth), the liar. Allah, Most High,
says, Thus he (Fir‘awn) befooled and misled his people, and they
obeyed him" (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:54) means, he deceived their
hearts and minds and turned them from one state to another, until
they believed his claim that he was their lord – may Allah's curse
be on him and disgrace them. Verily, they were ever a people who
were fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah). (Soorah AzSunniconnect.com
74

Zukhruf 43:54) So when they angered Us, We visited vengeance
on them. (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:55) That is, by drowning,
debasement and deprivation of power, replacing might with
humiliation, blessings with punishment, luxury with poverty and
fine living with the Fire – we seek refuge with Allah from that. And
We made them a precedent (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:56) means as a
lesson for those who possessed similar characteristics. And an
example (Soorah Az-Zukhruf 43:56). That is to those who take
warning from them and fear the evil consequences that befell them,
as He, Most High, says, Then, when Moosa came to them with Our
Clear Ayat, they said, “This is nothing but invented magic. Never
did we hear of this among our fathers of old.” Moosa said, “My
Lord knows him best who came with guidance from Him, and
whose will be the happy ending in the Hereafter. Verily, the
zalimoon will not be successful.” Fir‘awn said, “O, chiefs! I know
not that you have an ilah (a god) other than me, so kindle for me (a
fire), O, Haman, to bake (bricks out of) clay, and set up for me a
Sarhan (a lofty tower, or palace, etc.) in order that I may look at (or
look for) the Ilah (God) of Moosa; and verily, I think that he
(Moosa is one of the liars.” And he and his hosts were arrogant in
the land, without right, and they thought that they would never
return to Us. So We seized him and his hosts, and We threw them
all into the sea (and drowned them). So behold (O, Muhammad)
what was the end of the zalimoon. And We made them leaders
inviting to the Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will not
be helped. And We made a curse to follow them in this world, and
on the Day of Resurrection, they will be among maqboohoon (those
who are prevented from receiving Allah’s Mercy or any good,
despised or destroyed, etc.). (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:36-42)
Allah, Most High, informs us that when they arrogantly refused to
follow the truth and their king made his false claim, and they agreed
upon it and obeyed him in it, the Anger of the Lord, the Omnipotent
– the Almighty, Whom none can overcome and none can resist –
increased upon them, and He inflicted the severest of punishments
on them and He drowned Fir‘awn and his followers on one
Sunniconnect.com
75

morning, so that not a single one of them escaped. In fact, all of
them died and entered the Fire and they continue to be cursed by
the people in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection, wretched
will be the state of the supporters and the supported (Fir‘awn) and
on that Day they will be the most abject and debased.

Sunniconnect.com
76

The Story of the Destruction of Fir‘awn
and His Armies
When the Copts of Egypt persisted in their disbelief, arrogance and
obstinacy, in obedience to Fir‘awn and disobedience to Allah’s
Prophet and Messenger and His Kaleem, Moosa (Peace be upon
him), son of ‘Imran, and Allah, Most High, bared the solid proofs
against the people of Egypt and showed them the miracles which
dazzled their eyes and bewildered their minds, they paid no heed;
in spite of all this, they would not stop their nasty activities, would
not desist and would not return (to belief) – none but a few of them
believed. It was said only three, Fir‘awn’s wife – and the People of
the Scriptures have no information about her – the Believer from
Fir‘awn’s family whose story we have already told, and the man
who came running to advise Moosa (Peace be upon him) from the
farthest side of the city, saying, “O, Moosa! Verily, the chiefs are
taking counsel together about you, to kill you, so escape. Truly, I
am to you of those who give sincere advice.” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:20) This was said by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him), according to what was narrated by Ibn Abi
Hatim from him; and he was referring to other than the magicians,
for they were from the Copts.
They kept their faith concealed because of the fear of Fir‘awn and
his power, his tyranny and his authoritative rule, and also that news
of their accepting Islam would be conveyed to him by his chiefs,
which would result in him preventing them from practicing their
religion.
Allah, Most High, says, and verily, Fir’awn was an arrogant tyrant
on the Earth. (Soorah Yoonus 10:83)
He was an obstinate oppressor, determined to practice falsehood.
He was indeed one of the musrifoon (polytheists, sinners and
transgressors, those who give up the truth and follow the evil, and
commit all kinds of great sins). (Soorah Yoonus 10:83) He was a
Sunniconnect.com
77

disease the time for whose eradication had come, an evil fruit
whose time to be destroyed had arrived and an evil soul whose
destruction had been ordained.
On this, Moosa (Peace be upon him) said, “O, my people! If you
have believed in Allah, then put your trust in Him if you are Muslim
(those who submit to Allah’s Will).” They said, “In Allah we put
our trust. Our Lord! Make us not a trial for the folk who are
zalimoon (i.e. do not make them overpower us). And save us by
Your Mercy from the disbelieving folk.” (Soorah Yoonus 10:8486) He ordered them to put their trust in Allah and seek help from
Him and to seek refuge with Him and they complied with his
orders, so Allah made for them a release and a way of escape from
the situation they were in. And We inspired Moosa and his brother
(saying), “Take dwellings for your people in Egypt, and make your
dwellings as a qiblah, and perform as-Salah (iqamat us-Salah), and
give glad tidings to the believers.” (Soorah Yoonus 10:87). Allah
revealed to Moosa (Peace be upon him) and his brother, Haroon
(Peace be upon him) that they should tell the Children of Isra’eel
to take houses that were separate from the houses of the Copts, so
that they might be ready to leave in case they were commanded to
do so, and in that case, they would know each other’s houses. As
for His Saying: “and make your dwellings as a qiblah…” (Soorah
Yoonus 10:87), it was said that it means as places of worship and
it was also said that it means as places in which you offer frequent
prayers; this latter opinion was held by Mujahid, Abu Malik,
Ibraheem An-Nakha‘i, Ar-Rabee‘, Ad-Dahhak, Zaid Ibn Aslam,
his son, ‘Abdur Rahman and others.
Based on this understanding, the meaning of the Verse would be
that they should seek help from Allah against the pain, misery and
oppression to which they were being subjected by offering frequent
prayers, as He, Most High, says, And seek help in patience and asSalah (the prayer) and truly it is extremely heavy and hard except
for al-khashi‘oon (i.e. the true Believers in Allah – those who obey
Allah with full submission, fear much from His Punishment, and
Sunniconnect.com
78

believe in His Promise [Paradise, etc.] and in His Warnings [Hell,
etc.]). (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:45) And whenever the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was beset by any
problem, he would pray.
Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair said that “and make your dwellings as a
qiblah…” (Soorah Yoonus 10:87) means make them facing each
other.
And He, Most High, says, And Moosa said, “Our Lord! You have
indeed bestowed on Fir‘awn and his chiefs splendor and wealth in
the life of this world. Our Lord! That they may lead men astray
from Your Path. Our Lord! Destroy their wealth, and harden their
hearts, so that they will not believe until they see the painful
punishment.” Allah said, “Verily, the invocation of you both is
accepted. So keep you both to the Straight Way (i.e. keep on doing
good deeds and preaching Allah’s Message with patience), and
follow not the path of those who know not (the truth, i.e. to believe
in the Oneness of Allah, and also to believe in the Reward of Allah:
Paradise, etc.) (Soorah Yoonus 10:88, 89)
This was a great and momentous invocation which Allah’s Kaleem,
Moosa (Peace be upon him) , made against his enemy, Fir‘awn, out
of anger for Allah’s sake, because of his arrogant refusal to follow
the truth, his turning away from Allah’s Path, his obstinacy, his
recalcitrance, his disobedience, his dogged insistence on adhering
to follow that which is false and invalid and his disdain for the
clear, plain and perceptible truth and the indisputable evidence,
which is why he said, “Our Lord! You have indeed bestowed on
Fir’awn and his chiefs" (Soorah Yoonus 10:88) (on his followers
among the Copts and those who professed and practiced his
religion) "splendor and wealth in the life of this world, our Lord!
That they may lead men astray from Your Path." (Soorah Yoonus
10:88). It means that those who exalt the importance of the life of
this world are bedazzled by this, causing the ignorant among them
to think that they are following what is correct, because of the fine
Sunniconnect.com
79

things, such as garments, ships, houses and palaces, foodstuffs,
beautiful landscapes, great power, etc., that they possess, but these
things were theirs in the life of this world, not in the Hereafter. Our
Lord! Destroy their wealth. (Soorah Yoonus 10:88). ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and Mujahid said that it
means, eradicate it. As for His
Saying: “and harden their hearts, so that they will not believe until
they see the painful punishment” (Soorah Yoonus 10:88),
according to ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), it means seal them; and this invocation was made out of anger
for Allah’s sake, for His Religion and for His Proofs. And Allah,
Most High, accepted it and implemented it, just as He accepted the
invocation of Nooh (Peace be upon him) against his people, when
he said, “My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers on the Earth!”
(Soorah Nooh 71:26). This is why Allah, Most High, says,
addressing Moosa (Peace be upon him) when he made his
invocation against Fir‘awn and his chiefs and his invocation was
affirmed by Haroon (Peace be upon him) and so he was described
as a supplicator also: Allah said “Verily, the invocation of you both
is accepted. So you both keep to the Straight Way (i.e. keep on
doing good deeds and preaching Allah’s Message with patience),
and follow not the path of those who know not (the truth i.e. to
believe in the Oneness of Allah, and also to believe in the Reward
of Allah: Paradise, etc.).” (Soorah Yoonus 10:89)
And He, Most High, says, And We inspired Moosa, saying, “Take
away My slaves by night, verily, you will be pursued.” Then
Fir‘awn sent callers to (all) the cities, (saying), “Verily! These
indeed are but a small band. And verily, they have done what has
enraged us; But we are host all assembled, amply forewarned.” So,
We expelled them from gardens and springs, treasures and every
kind of honorable place. Thus (We turned them [Fir‘awn’s people]
out) and We caused the Children of Isra’eel to inherit them. So they
pursued them at sunrise. And when the two hosts saw each other,
the companions of Moosa said, “We are sure to be overtaken.”
(Moosa) said, “Nay, verily! With me is my Lord, He will guide
Sunniconnect.com
80

me.” Then We inspired Moosa (saying), “Strike the sea with your
stick.” And it parted, and each separate part
(of that seawater) became like the huge, firm mass of a mountain.
Then We brought near the others (Fir‘awn’s party) to that place.
And We saved Moosa and all those with him. Then We drowned
the others. Verily! In this is indeed a sign (or a proof), yet most of
them are not believers. And verily, your Lord! He is truly the
Almighty, the Most Merciful. (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:52-68).
The scholars of tafseer said that when Fir‘awn and his army set out
in pursuit of the Children of Isra’eel, he headed a large force.
What is meant is that Fir‘awn and his army caught up with them at
sunset and the two hosts saw one another and there remained no
doubt and no confusion. They looked across at each other and it
seemed that naught remained except for them to fight each other.
At that point, Moosa’s companions said fearfully to him, “We are
sure to be overtaken.” (Soorah Ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:61). This was they
had had to follow a path to the sea and they had no way to go except
into the sea – and none of them could do this. To their left and to
their right lay mountains – and they were of towering heights.
Fir‘awn had trapped them and now faced them; they saw him
before him at the head of his soldiers and they observed their great
numbers and their preparedness (weapons, chariots, armor, etc.)
and they were in a state of extreme fear and terror, because of the
humiliation and deception they had experienced under his rule. So
they complained to the Prophet of Allah (Peace be upon him) of
their situation; but the Messenger, the honest and trustworthy said
to them, “Nay, verily! With me is my Lord, He will guide me.”
(Soorah AshShu‘ara’ 26:62)
Then, when the matter came to a head and the situation became
critical and Fir‘awn advanced with his armies, intent on their task,
bearing their arms and filled with anger and resentment and the
eyes (of the Children of Isra’eel) were turned away and their hearts
were in their throats, at that moment, the Most Gentle, the Mighty,
the Omnipotent, Lord of the Noble Throne revealed to Moosa, AlSunniconnect.com
81

Kaleem (Peace be upon him): “Strike the sea with your stick.”
(Soorah Ash-Shu'ara' 26:63). And when he struck the sea, it was
reported that he said to it, “Split, by Allah’s Permission.”
Allah, Most High, says, Then We inspired Moosa (saying), “Strike
the sea with your stick.” And it parted, and each separate part (of
that seawater) became like the huge, firm mass of a mountain.
(Soorah AshShu’ara' 26:63). It was said that it parted revealing
twelve paths, one for each tribe to proceed. It was even said that
Allah caused apertures (like windows) to appear so that they might
see each other, but this statement requires verification, because
water is a transparent substance when there is light behind it. So
the water was standing still, like mountains, held back by the
Mighty Power which emanates from the One Who says to a thing,
“Be!” and it is. And He, Most High, commanded the west wind and
it burned the black clay of the sea, so that it became dry and did not
stick to the hooves of their horses and the feet of their camels.
Allah, Most High, says, {And indeed We inspired Moosa (saying),
“Travel by night with ‘ibadi (My slaves) and strike a dry path for
them in the sea, fearing neither to be overtaken (by Fir‘awn
[Fir‘awn]) nor being afraid (of drowning in the sea).” Then Fir’awn
pursued them with his hosts, but the seawater completely
overwhelmed them and covered them up. And Fir’awn led his
people astray, and he did not guide them} (Soorah Ta Ha 20:77-79)
And what is meant is that when the sea was transformed in this
manner by the Permission of the Lord, the
Mighty, the Powerful, He commanded Moosa (Peace be upon him)
to cross it with the Children of Isra’eel, and so they went down to
it in haste, filled with happiness. And they had seen that amazing
sight, which bedazzled those who saw it and guided the hearts of
the Believers. Then, when they had crossed it and the last of them
had emerged from it, they departed from it. This happened as the
first of Fir‘awn’s army arrived at the path across the sea, and Moosa
(Peace be upon him) intended to strike the sea with his staff again,
Sunniconnect.com
82

so that it would return to its former state, in order to prevent
Fir‘awn and his army from reaching them. But Allah, the
Omnipotent, Owner of Majesty ordered him to leave the sea in this
state, as He, the Truthful says in His Words: {And indeed We tried
before them Fir’awn’s people, when there came to them a noble
Messenger (i.e. Moosa [Moosa] saying, “Restore to me the slaves
of Allah (i.e. the Children of Isra’eel). Verily! I am to you a
Messenger worthy of all trust. And exalt not (yourselves) against
Allah. Truly, I have come to you with a manifest authority. And
truly, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me
(or call me a sorcerer or kill me). But if you believe me not, then
keep away from me and leave me alone. (But they were
aggressive), so he (Moosa) called upon his Lord (saying), “These
are indeed the people who are mujrimoon (disbelievers, polytheists,
sinners, criminals, etc.). (Allah said), “Depart you with My slaves
by night. Surely, you will be pursued. And leave the sea as it is.
Verily, they are a host to be drowned. How many of gardens and
springs have they (Fir’awn’s) people left. And green crops (fields,
etc.) and goodly places, and comforts of life wherein they used to
take delight! Thus (it was)! And We made other people inherit them
(i.e. We made the Children of Isra’eel to inherit the kingdom of
Egypt). And the heavens and the Earth wept not for them, nor were
they given a respite. And indeed We saved the Children of Isra’eel
from the humiliating punishment, from Fir‘awn. Verily! He was
arrogant and was of the musrifoon (those who transgress all bounds
in spending and other things and commit great sins). And We chose
them (the Children of Isra’eel) above the ‘Alameen (during the time
of Moosa [Moosa]) with knowledge, and granted them signs in
which there was a plain trial} (Soorah Ad-Dukhan 44:17-33). The
meaning of His Words: {“And leave the sea as it is”} (Soorah AdDukhan 44:24) is: still, as it is, do not change it from this state. This
was said by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Ar-Rabee‘, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, Ka‘b
Al-Ahbar, Simak Ibn Harb, ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Zaid Ibn Aslam
and others.
Sunniconnect.com
83

When he left it as it was, and Fir‘awn reached it and saw what he
saw and witnessed what he witnessed, he was alarmed at the sight
and he acknowledged what he had secretly acknowledged before,
which was that this was the Work of the Lord of the Noble Throne
and he recoiled and did not advance. In his heart, he regretted that
he had set out in pursuit of them; but at such a time and in such
circumstances, his regret profited him nothing. However, he
showed a brave front to his troops and he dealt with them in an
aggressive manner. But his disbelieving soul and his sinful nature
caused him to say to those who scorned and despised them and
obeyed him and followed him in his falsehood, “See how the sea
has rolled up so that I may overtake my slaves who have run away
from my authority, abandoned obedience to me and left my land!”
And he told himself that he should go after them and he hoped that
he would be safe, but how far he was from that!
Allah, Most High, says, And We saved Moosa and all those with
him. Then We drowned the others. Verily! In this is indeed a sign
(or a proof), yet most of them are not believers. And verily, your
Lord! He is truly the Almighty, the Most Merciful. (Soorah AshShu‘ara’ 26:65-68) That is, in His saving of His Awliya’ – for not
a single one of them was drowned – and His drowning of His
enemies – for not a single one of them was saved. And this was a
great sign and an indisputable proof of His Mighty, the
Omnipotence and of the truthfulness of His Messenger with regard
to the noble law and the righteous system of jurisprudence that he
brought from his Lord. And He, Most High, says, And We took the
Children of Isra’eel across the sea, and Fir‘awn with his hosts
followed them in oppression and enmity, till when drowning
overtook him, he said, “I believe that La ilaha illa (Allah): (none
has the right to be worshipped but [Allah]), in Whom the Children
of Isra’eel believe, and I am one of the Muslims (those who submit
to Allah’s Will).” Now (you believe) while you refused to believe
before and you were one of the mufsidoon. So this day We shall
deliver your (dead) body (out from the sea) that you may be a sign
Sunniconnect.com
84

to those who come after you! And verily, many among mankind
are heedless of Our Ayat. (Soorah Yoonus 10:90-92)
Allah, Most High, informs us how Fir‘awn, the leader of the
disbelieving Copts, was drowned and how the waves plunged him
down and then raised him up, while the Children of Isra’eel looked
at him and at his troops and the great punishment which Allah had
inflicted on them, in order to gladden the eyes of the Children of
Isra’eel and heal their hearts. When Fir‘awn saw the destruction
and the agony of death approached him, he regretted and repented
(of his disbelief) and at that moment, he believed, when his belief
no longer availed him, as Allah, Most High, says, Truly! Those
against whom the Word (Wrath) of your Lord has been justified
will not believe. Even if every sign should come to them – until
they see the painful punishment. (Soorah Yoonus 10:96,97) And
He, Most High, says, So when they saw Our punishment, they said,
“We believe in Allah, Alone, and reject (all) that we used to
associate with Him as (His) partners. Then their Faith (in Islamic
Monotheism) could not avail them when they saw Our Punishment.
(Like) this has been the way of Allah in dealing with His slaves.
And there the disbelievers lost utterly (when Our Punishment
covered them). (Soorah Ghafir 40:84,85) And thus did Moosa
(Peace be upon him) supplicate against Fir‘awn and his chiefs, that
Allah destroy their wealth and harden their hearts, “…so that they
will not believe until they see the painful punishment.” (Soorah
Yoonus 10:88) That is, when it would no longer avail them and it
would be a cause of regret for them. And Allah, Most High, had
said to them both, i.e. Moosa (Peace be upon him) and Haroon
(Peace be upon him) when they made this supplication, “Verily, the
invocation of you both is accepted.” (Soorah Yoonus 10:89). So
this proves that Allah, Most High, accepted and answered the
supplication of His Kaleem, Moosa (Peace be upon him) and his
brother, Haroon (Peace be upon him).
It is also clear from the Hadith narrated by Imam Ahmad, on the
authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
Sunniconnect.com
85

him), who said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “(Regarding) when Fir‘awn said, “I
believe that La ilaha illa (Allah): (none has the right to be
worshipped but [Allah]), in Whom the Children of Isra’eel believe,
and I am one of the Muslims (those who submit to Allah’s Will).”}
(Soorah Yoonus 10:90), Jibraeel said to me, “If you had seen me…
when I thrust the mire of the sea into his mouth in order to prevent
the Mercy (of Allah) reaching him.”
And He, Most High, says, “Now (you believe) while you refused
to believe before and you were one of the mufsidoon?” (Soorah
Yoonus 10:91). This is a rhetorical question, implying censure and
rebuke and it proves that Allah, Most High, did not accept his
repentance, because – and Allah knows better – if he were returned
to the life of this world, he would have returned to what he was
doing before, as Allah, Most High, says, regarding the disbelievers,
when they see the Fire, that they will say, “Would that we were but
sent back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our
Lord, and we would be of the believers!” (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:27)
And He, Most High, says, “So this day We shall deliver your (dead)
body (out from the sea) that you may be a sign to those who come
after you!” (Soorah Yoonus 10:92). ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him) and more than one scholars said that
some of the Children of Isra’eel doubted that Fir‘awn was dead,
indeed some of them even went so far as to say, “Fir‘awn does not
(i.e. cannot) die.” So Allah commanded the sea to raise him up
high, or it was said, onto the surface of the water, or it was also
said, onto an elevated piece of land – and he was wearing his armor,
which they recognized and by which they were able to confirm that
he was dead and to realize Allah’s Omnipotence over him. This is
why He says, “So this day We shall deliver your (dead) body (out
from the sea)…” (Soorah Yoonus 10:92) means with your armor
on your body by which you will be recognized “…that you may be
a sign." (Soorah Yoonus 10:92) That is, you are a sign “…to those
who come after you!” (Soorah Yoonus 10:92). That is, from the
Sunniconnect.com
86

Children of Isra’eel, as evidence of Allah’s Ability to destroy him.
For this reason, some of the Salaf recited “…that you may be a sign
to those who come after you!” (Soorah Yoonus 10:92), meaning:
We shall deliver you along with your armor, in order that your
armor may be a sign to those who come after you from the Children
of Isra’eel, by which they may recognize you and know that you
are dead. And Allah knows better. The destruction of Fir‘awn and
his army took place on the Day of ‘Ashurah, according to what
Imam Al-Bukhari has narrated in his Saheeh, on the authority of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), who said,
“When the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
arrived in Madinah, the Jews were fasting on the Day of ‘Ashurah
and they said, “This is the day on which Moosa defeated Fir‘awn.”
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said (to
the Muslims), “You have more right to celebrate Moosa’s victory
than they have. So observe the fast on this day.” The essence of this
Hadith is recorded in the Saheehain and in other compilations. And
Allah (SWT) knows better.

Chapter Regarding the Events Surrounding the
Children of Isra’eel After the Destruction of
Fir‘awn
Allah, Most High, says, So We took retribution from them. We
drowned them in the sea, because they belied Our Ayat and were
heedless about them. And We made the people who were
considered weak to inherit the eastern parts of the land and the
western parts thereof which We have blessed. And the fair Word of
your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Isra’eel, because of their
endurance. And We destroyed completely all the great works and
buildings which Fir’awn and his people had erected. And We
brought the Children of Isra’eel (with safety) across the sea, and
they came upon a people devoted to some of their idols (in
worship). They said, “O, Moosa! Make for us an ilah (a god) as
they have alihah (gods).” He said, “Verily, you are a people who
Sunniconnect.com
87

know not (the Majesty and Greatness of Allah and what is
obligatory upon you, i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone, the One
and the Only God of all that exists).” (Moosa added,) “Verily, these
people will be destroyed for that in which they are engaged (idol
worship). And all that they are doing is in vain.” He said, “Shall I
seek for you an ilah (a god) other than Allah, while He has given
you superiority over Al-‘Alameen?” And (remember) when We
rescued you from Fir‘awn’s people, who were subjecting you to the
worst kind of torment, killing your sons and letting your daughters
live? And in that was a great trial from your Lord. (Soorah Al-A'raf
7:136-141). Allah, Most High, mentions what happened to Fir‘awn
and his army, how they were drowned and how He took away their
power, their wealth and their lives and caused the Children of
Isra’eel to inherit all of their wealth and property, as He, Most High,
says, Thus (We turned them [Fir‘awn’s people] out) and We caused
the Children of Isra’eel to inherit them. (Soorah Ash-Shu’ara’
26:59). And He, Most High says, And We wished to do a favor to
those who were weak (and oppressed) in the land, and to make them
rulers and to make them the inheritors. (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:5).
And (in Soorah Al-A‘raf) He, Most High, says, And We made the
people who were considered weak to inherit the eastern parts of the
land and the western parts thereof which We have blessed. And the
fair Word of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Isra’eel,
because of their endurance. And We destroyed completely all the
great works and buildings which Fir‘awn and his people had
erected. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:137). He demolished all of that and
took from them their great and vast power in the world and
destroyed the king, his followers, his governors and his troops and
none remained in Egypt except the common folk. Ibn ‘AbdulHakam reported in his Tareekh Misr (History of Egypt) that from
that time onward, the women of Egypt enjoyed dominance over
men, due to the fact that the wives of the governors and the
aristocracy married men of lesser social status from among the
general populace and so they had power over them; and this has
continued to be the custom of women in Egypt to this day.
Sunniconnect.com
88

And they (the scholars) mentioned that when they (the Children of
Isra’eel) crossed the sea and headed toward Ash-Sham (Syria), they
remained for three days without finding any water. Some of them
began to talk due to this and they found some salty water which
they were unable to drink, but Allah commanded Moosa (Peace be
upon him) to place a piece of wood in it and he did so; and it became
sweet and drinkable. And there the Lord taught him the religious
obligations and supererogatory practices and taught him a number
of Commandments. He, Most High, says in His Noble Book, And
We brought the Children of Isra’eel (with safety) across the sea,
and they came upon a people devoted to some of their idols (in
worship). They said, “O, Moosa! Make for us an ilah (a god) as
they have alihah (gods).” He said, “Verily, you are a people who
know not (the Majesty and Greatness of Allah and what is
obligatory upon you, i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone, the One
and the Only God of all that exists).” (Moosa added,) “Verily, these
people will be destroyed for that which they are engaged in (idol
worship). And all that they are doing is in vain.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:138,139)
They spoke these words of ignorance and misguidance after they
had already witnessed Allah’s Ayat and His Ability to do all things,
which demonstrated to them the truth of what Allah’s Messenger
(Peace be upon him) brought to them from the Owner of Majesty
and Honor. This occurred when they passed by a people who were
worshipping idols – it was said that they were in the form of cows
– and it appears as if they asked them why they were worshipping
them and they replied that they had the ability to benefit them and
harm them, and they said that they sought sustenance through them
in times of need. It appears as if some of the ignorant ones among
them believed these claims of theirs and so they asked their
Prophet, Al-Kaleem, the noble, the great, to make for them deities,
like the deities of these people. And he said to them, in order to
make clear to them that they had no sense and were not rightly
guided, “Verily, these people will be destroyed for that which they
are engaged in (idol worship). And all that they are doing is in
Sunniconnect.com
89

vain.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:139). Then he reminded them of the
blessings that Allah had bestowed on them and of how He had
favored them over all of the peoples of their time with knowledge,
the Law, the Messenger in their midst, His Kindness toward them
and the Graces that He bestowed on them, such as their deliverance
from the grasp of Fir‘awn, the obstinate tyrant and his subsequent
destruction, which they witnessed. He also reminded them of how
He had made them to inherit the wealth and prosperity that Fir‘awn
and his chiefs had gathered and the buildings that they had erected.
And he made clear to them that no worship Allah is of benefit
except that of Allah, Alone, without ascribing partners to Him,
because He is the Creator, the Sustainer and the Subduer. Not all
of the Children of Isra’eel asked this question; rather, the name
“Children of Isra’eel” is used in Allah’s Words: And We brought
the Children of Isra’eel (with safety) across the sea, and they came
upon a people devoted to some of their idols (in worship). They
said, “O, Moosa! Make for us an ilah (a god) as they have alihah
(gods).” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:138) to refer to those who asked the
question, without indicating that all of them are included, i.e. some
of them said it, as in His Saying: And we shall gather them all
together so as to leave not one of them behind. And they will be set
before your Lord in (lines as) rows, (and Allah will say), “Now
indeed, you have come to Us as We created you the first time. Nay,
but you thought that We had appointed no meeting for you (with
Us).” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:47,48)
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Waqid Al-Laithi
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “We set out with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
for Hunain and we passed by a lote tree and we said, “O, Messenger
of Allah! Make for us a Dhat Anwat, like that of the disbelievers.”
The pagans had a lote tree on which they used to hang their
weapons and they used to stay around it. On hearing this, the
Prophet of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
“Allahu Akbar! This is similar to what the Children of Isra’eel said
to Moosa (Peace be upon him): “Make for us an ilah (a god) as they
Sunniconnect.com
90

have alihah (gods).” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:138)! Verily, you are
following the ways of those who went before you!”
What is meant is that when Moosa (Peace be upon him) departed
from Egypt and headed for Bait AlMaqdis (the Holy Land), he
found there arrogant people from among the Hittites, the Cananites,
the Perizzites and others and Moosa (Peace be upon him)
commanded the Children of Isra’eel to make war on them and drive
them out of Jerusalem, because Allah had ordained that for them
and promised it for them through Revelation given to Ibraheem,
Al-Khaleel (Peace be upon him) and Moosa, Al-Kaleem (Peace be
upon him). But they refused and recoiled from jihad and so Allah
caused fear to overpower them and cast them into the desert, where
they wandered here and there, back and forth for forty long years,
as He, Most High, says, And (remember) when Moosa said to his
people, “O, my people! Remember the Favor of Allah to you, when
He made Prophets among you, made you kings, and gave you what
He had not given to any other among the Al-‘Alameen. O, my
people! Enter the Holy Land (Palestine) which Allah has assigned
to you, and turn not back for then you will be returned as losers.”
They said, “O, Moosa! In it (this Holy Land) are a people of great
strength, and we shall never enter it, till they leave it; when they
leave, then we will enter.” Two men of those who feared and on
whom Allah had bestowed His Grace (they were Yeshua [Joshua]
and Kalab [Caleb]) said, “Assault them through the gate, for when
you are in, victory will be yours, and put your trust in Allah if you
are indeed Believers.” They said, “O Moosa! We shall never enter
it as long as they are there. So go you and your Lord and fight you
two, we are sitting right here.” He (Moosa) said, “O, my Lord! I
have power only over myself and my brother, so separate us from
the people who are the fasiqoon (rebellious and disobedient to
Allah)!” (Allah) said, “Therefore it (this Holy Land) is forbidden
to them for forty years; in distraction they will wander through the
land. So be not sorrowful over the people who are the fasiqoon.”
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:20-26)
Sunniconnect.com
91

The Prophet of Allah (Peace be upon him) reminded them of the
Blessings that Allah had bestowed on them and the Kindness He
had shown them by granting them worldly and religious favors and
he ordered them to make jihad in Allah's Cause and to fight His
enemies; he said, “O, my people! Enter the holy land (Palestine)
which Allah has assigned to you, and turn not back”, (Soorah AlMa’idah 5:21) means do not turn on your heels and refuse to fight
your enemies “for then you will be returned as losers.” (Soorah
AlMa’idah 5:21). It means that you will lose after your previous
gains and you will be diminished after having been complete. They
said, “O, Moosa! In it (this Holy Land) are a people of great
strength.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:22) That is, they are fierce and
arrogant disbelievers. “and we shall never enter it, till they leave it;
when they leave, then we will enter.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:22).
They feared these strong, aggressive people, even though they had
witnessed the destruction of Fir‘awn, who was more tyrannical than
they, sterner in punishment, commanding more people and with a
stronger force at his disposal. This proves that they were rebuked
due to saying these words and censured because of them. This was
due to their cowardice in the face of the enemy’s aggression and
their refusal to fight them.
Regarding the Saying of Allah, Most High: Two men of those who
feared said (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:23) means, feared Allah, though
some recited it as "who were feared". On whom Allah had
bestowed His Grace (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:23) means with Islam,
faith, obedience and courage. …said, “Assault them through the
gate, for when you are in, victory will be yours, and put your trust
in Allah if you are indeed Believers.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:24).
That is, if you have put your trust in Allah, sought help from Him
and protection from Him, He will help you against your enemy,
help you against them and make you victorious over them. They
said, “O Moosa! We shall never enter it as long as they are there.
So go you and your Lord and fight you two, we are sitting right
here.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:24). Their elders were determined to
refrain from engaging in jihad in Allah’s Cause and a serious
Sunniconnect.com
92

situation developed. It was said that when Yoosha‘ and Kalab heard
these words, they tore their garments and Moosa (Peace be upon
him) and Haroon (Peace be upon him) sat down in shock at these
words and they became angry for Allah’s sake and they also felt
compassion for them, because of the awful consequences for them
of their words: He (Moosa) said, “O, my Lord! I have power only
over myself and my brother, so separate us from the people who
are the fasiqoon!” (Soorah Al-Ma'idah 5:25). ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) said, “Judge between me and
them.” (Allah) said, “Therefore it (this Holy Land) is forbidden to
them for forty years; in distraction they will wander through the
land. So be not sorrowful over the people who are the fasiqoon
(rebellious and disobedient to Allah).” (Soorah Al-Ma'idah 5:26)
They were punished for their refusal to do jihad by being made to
wander aimlessly night and day, morning and evening in the desert.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Al-Miqdad that he said
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on the day of the Battle of Badr, “O, Messenger of Allah! We
will not say to you, as the Children of Isra’eel said to Moosa (Peace
be upon him), “So go you and your Lord and fight you two, we are
sitting right here.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:24).’ But (we will say),
“Go you and your Lord and fight; we are with you fighting.” This
chain of narrators is good from this source and it is narrated from
other sources. ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas'ood said that Al-Miqdad went to
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and found him invoking Allah against the pagans and he said, “By
Allah, O, Messenger of Allah, we will not say to you as the
Children of Isra’eel said to Moosa, “So go you and your Lord and
fight you two, we are sitting right here.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:24).
Rather, we will fight on your right, on your left, in front of you and
behind you,” and I saw the Messenger of Allah’s face beaming
when he heard this and he was extremely happy.”

Sunniconnect.com
93

Chapter Concerning the Children of Isra’eel’s
Wandering in the Wilderness
We have already discussed the Children of Isra’eel’s refusal to fight
against the giants and how Allah, Most High, punished them by
causing them to wander in the wilderness and He ordained that they
would not leave it for forty years.
According to the scholars of tafseer, the Children of Isra’eel
camped around Mount Sinai and Moosa (Peace be upon him)
ascended the mountain and his Lord spoke to him and commanded
him to remind the Children of Isra’eel of the Blessings that Allah
had bestowed on them, such as how He had delivered them from
Pharaoh and his people … and He told him that on the third day,
they must assemble around the mountain, but that none of them
should approach it, for anyone who did so would be killed. He even
forbade that any of their livestock should come near so long as they
could hear the sound of the horn, but that once the horn was silent,
it was lawful for them to approach it. The Children of Isra’eel heard
these Words of Allah, but they did not understand until Moosa
(Peace be upon him) made them understand. Then they said to
Moosa (Peace be upon him), “Convey to us what the Lord, the
Almighty, the AllPowerful has told you, for we fear to die.” So
Moosa (Peace be upon him) conveyed to them what Allah had told
him and he spoke these Ten Commandments:
1. That they should worship Allah, Alone, without ascribing
partners to Him.
2. That they should not swear falsely by Allah (SWT).
3. That they should preserve the sanctity of the Sabbath, meaning
that they should devote themselves on one day in the week to the
worship of Allah – and this occurs (now) on Friday, the day
which Allah selected to replace the abrogated day, Saturday.
Sunniconnect.com
94

4. That they should honor their fathers and their mothers, in order
that they might enjoy a long life in this world which Allah, their
Lord, had given them.
5. That they should not commit murder.
6. That they should not commit adultery or unlawful sexual
intercourse.
7. That they should not steal.
8. That they should not bear false witness against their neighbors.
9. That they should not covet their neighbors’ houses.
10.
That they should not covet their neighbors’ wives, or male
or female slaves, or oxen, or donkeys, or anything that belonged
to their neighbors.
All of this is a prohibition of envy. Many of the scholars from
among the Salaf and others said that these Ten Commandments are
all implied in two Qur'anic Verses; and they are the Words of Allah,
Most High, in Soorah Al-An‘am: Say (O, Muhammad). “Come, I
will recite what your Lord has prohibited to you: Join not anything
in worship with Him; be good and dutiful to your parents; kill not
your children because of poverty – We provide sustenance for you
and for them; come not near to fawahish (shameful sins, illegal
sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed openly or secretly, and
kill not anyone whom Allah has forbidden, except for a just cause
(according to Islamic law). This He has commanded you that you
may understand. And come not near to the orphan’s property,
except to improve it, until he (or she) attains the age of full strength;
and give full measure and full weight with justice. We burden not
any person, but that which he can bear. And whenever you give
your word (i.e. judge between men or give evidence, etc.), say the
truth even if a near relative is concerned, and fulfill the Covenant
Sunniconnect.com
95

of Allah, This He commands you, that you may remember. And
verily, this (i.e. Allah’s Commandments mentioned in the above
two Verses 151 and 152) is my Straight Path, so follow it, and
follow not (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His
Path. This He has ordained for you that you may become
muttaqoon.” (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:151-153)
In addition to these Ten Commandments, they mentioned many
other counsels and rulings which have come and gone and which
were acted upon for a time, until they were disobeyed by those who
were charged with the duty of fulfilling them. Then they set about
changing them, distorting them and misinterpreting them. Then
after all this, they abandoned them and they became abrogated and
replaced with others, after having been prescribed and executed.
And the whole affair – both past and present – is in Allah’s Hands;
and He commands what He wills and does as He wants. Surely, His
is the Creation and Commandment. Blessed be Allah, the Lord of
Al-‘Alameen!
And He, Most High, says, O, Children of Isra’eel! We delivered
you from your enemy, and We made a covenant with you on the
right side of the Mount, and We sent down to you al-manna and
quails, (saying) eat of the Tayyibat (good and lawful things)
wherewith We have provided you, and commit no oppression
therein, lest My Anger should justly descend on you. And he on
whom My Anger descends, is indeed destroyed. And verily, I am
indeed Forgiving to him who repents, believes (in My Oneness, and
associates none in worship with Me) and does righteous good
deeds, and then remains constant in doing them, (till his death).
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:80-82)
Allah, Most High, reminds the Children of Isra'eel the Grace and
Kindness that He has shown to them, by saving them from their
enemies and delivering them from hardship and oppression. And
He reminds them that He promised them the company of their
Prophet – His Kaleem – to the right side of the mountain, i.e. to the
Sunniconnect.com
96

right of them, in order that He might send down the great
Commandments to him – and in these Commandments was great
benefit for them – both in the life of this world and in the Hereafter.
He also calls upon them to bring to mind how He sent down manna
to them from the heaven when they were traveling throughout the
Earth, in places where there were no crops and no livestock. They
would awake each morning and find it around their tents and they
would take from it for that day, sufficient for their needs until the
same time the next day. And if anyone stored up more than that, he
would find that it had gone bad, but if anyone took a little from it,
he would find that it was enough for him. They used to make from
it something resembling bread, which was just white and very
sweet. Then in the afternoon, quails would descend on them and
they would avail themselves of them without difficulty, as much as
they needed, according to what was sufficient for their dinner.
And during the summer months, Allah would shade them with
clouds, which protected them from the heat and dazzling brightness
of the sun, as He, Most High, says in Soorah Al-Baqarah, O,
Children of Isra’eel! Remember My Favor which I bestowed upon
you, and fulfill (your obligations to) My Covenant (with you) so
that I fulfill (My Obligations to) your covenant (with Me), and fear
none but Me. And believe in what I have sent down (this Qur’an),
confirming that which is with you, (the Tawrah and the Injeel), and
be not the first to disbelieve therein, and buy (get) not with My
Verses (the Tawrah and the
Injeel) a small price (i.e. getting a small gain by selling My Verses),
and fear Me and Me Alone. (Tafseer At-Tabari, Vol. I, page 253).
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2: 40,41) up to His words: And (remember)
when We delivered you from Fir'awn’s people, who were
subjecting you to horrible torment, killing your sons and sparing
your daughters, and therein was a mighty trial from your Lord. And
(remember) when We separated the sea for you and saved you and
drowned Fir'awn’s people while you were looking (at them, when
the seawater covered them). And (remember) when We appointed
for Moosa forty nights, and (in his absence) you took the calf (for
Sunniconnect.com
97

worship), and you were zalimoon. Then after that We forgave you
so that you might be grateful. And (remember) when We gave
Moosa the Scripture (the Tawrah) and the criterion (of right and
wrong) so that you may be guided aright. And (remember) when
Moosa said to his people, “O, my people! Verily, you have
wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf. So turn in repentance
to your Creator and kill yourselves (the innocent kill the
wrongdoers among you), that will be better for you with your
Lord.” Then He accepted your repentance. Truly, He is the One
Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful. And (remember) when
you said, “O, Moosa! We shall never believe in you till we see
Allah plainly.” But you were seized with a thunderbolt (lightning)
while you were looking. Then We raised you up after your death,
so that you might be grateful. And We shaded you with clouds and
sent down on you al-manna and the quails, (saying), “Eat of the
good lawful things We have provided for you,” (but they rebelled).
And they did not wrong Us but they wronged themselves. (Soorah
AlBaqarah 2:49-57) – up to His Words: And (remember) when
Moosa asked for water for his people, We said, “Strike the stone
with your stick.” Then twelve springs gushed forth therefrom. Each
(group of) people knew its own place for water. “Eat and drink of
that which Allah has provided and do not act corruptly, making
mischief on the Earth.” And (remember) when you said, “O Moosa!
We cannot endure one kind of food. So invoke your Lord for us to
bring forth for us of what the earth grows, its herbs, its cucumbers,
its foom, its lentils and its onions.” He said, “Would you exchange
that which is better for that which is lower? Go you down to any
town and you shall find what you want!” And they were covered
with humiliation and misery, and they drew on themselves the
Wrath of Allah. That was because they used to disbelieve the Ayat
of Allah and killed the Prophets wrongfully. That was because they
disobeyed and used to transgress the bounds (in their disobedience
to Allah, i.e. commit crimes and sins) (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:60,61)
So Allah, Most High, reminded them of the Blessings that He had
bestowed on them and the Kindness He had shown to them, which
Sunniconnect.com
98

made their lives easier, such as the manna and the quails – two
pleasant foods, which they obtained without difficulty or effort on
their part; indeed, Allah used to send down the manna in the early
morning and the quails in the afternoon and He caused the water to
gush forth in springs for them. Moosa (Peace be upon him) struck
a rock which they had been carrying with them with his stick, upon
which twelve springs gushed forth, one surging spring for each
tribe. Then the flow became cold and they drew water, drank and
watered their riding beasts, after which they kept what sufficed to
supply their needs. In addition, He shaded them with the clouds
from the heat (of the sun).
These were a plenty of blessings and valuable gifts from Allah, but
they did not give them the attention or respect that they deserved,
nor did they give thanks or observe worship for them. Then many
of them became dissatisfied and bored with them and so they asked
to be given something else in their place, from the produce of the
land, such as herbs, cucumbers, foom, lentils and onions.
Al-Kaleem rebuked them, scolded them and reprehended them for
these words and berated them, saying, “Would you exchange that
which is better for that which is lower? Go you down to any town
and you shall find what you want!” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:61) It
means that which you request and desire, in place of these blessings
which you are enjoying may be found with the inhabitants of large
and small towns; so if you go to them, i.e. and you give up this
privilege – which you do not deserve – you will find there (in the
towns) all those inferior foods that you mentioned, which you
desire and yearn for. But I will not accede to your request, nor will
I convey to you the fate which you bring upon yourselves.
And all of these characteristics which they displayed prove that
they did not desist from what they were forbidden to do, as He,
Most High, says, …and commit no oppression therein, lest My
Anger should justly descend on you. And he on whom My Anger
descends, he is indeed perished. (Soorah Ta Ha 20:81) That is, he
Sunniconnect.com
99

is surely destroyed and he is most deserving of that; and Allah is
the Destroyer, the Annihilator, Whose Anger rightly befalls such a
person.

The Request to See Allah
Allah, Most High, says, And We appointed for Moosa thirty nights
and added (to the period) ten (more), and he completed the term,
appointed by his Lord, of forty nights. And Moosa said to his
brother Haroon, “Replace me among my people, act in the Right
Way (by ordering the people to obey Allah and to worship Him
Alone) and follow not the way of the mufsidoon (mischiefmakers).” And when Moosa came to the meeting appointed by Us,
and his Lord spoke to him, he said, “O, my Lord! Show me
(Yourself), that I may look upon You.” Allah said, “You cannot see
Me, but look upon the mountain, if it stands still in its place, then
you shall see Me.” So when his Lord appeared to the mountain, He
made it collapse to dust, and Moosa fell down unconscious. Then,
when he recovered his senses he said, “Glory be to You, I turn to
You in repentance and I am the first of the Believers.” He (Allah)
said, “O, Moosa I have chosen you above men by My Messages,
and by My speaking (to you). So hold that which I have given you
and be of the grateful.” And We wrote for him on the Tablets the
lesson to be drawn from all things and the explanation of all things
(and said), “Hold unto these with firmness, and enjoin your people
to take the better therein. I shall show you the home of fasiqoon. I
shall turn away from My Ayat those who behave arrogantly on the
Earth, without a right, and (even) if they see all the Ayat, they will
not believe in them. And if they see the way of righteousness
(Monotheism, piety, and good deeds), they will not adopt it as the
way, but if they see the way of error (polytheism, crimes and evil
deeds), they will adopt that way, that is because they have rejected
Our Ayat and were heedless (to learn a lesson) from them. Those
who deny Our Ayat and the Meeting in the Hereafter (Day of
Resurrection,), vain are their deeds. Do they expect to be rewarded
Sunniconnect.com
100

with anything except what they used to do?” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:142-147)
A number of the Salaf, including ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah
be pleased with him), Masrooq and Mujahid said that the thirty
nights referred to were the whole month of Dhul-Qa‘dah and he
completed forty days by remaining for ten days of Dhul-Hijjah;
based on this reckoning, Allah’s Words would have been spoken to
him on the day of ‘Eid An-Nahr. And on the same day, Allah, the
Almighty, the AllPowerful, completed for Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) His Religion and confirmed His
Evidence and His Proof. What is meant is that when Moosa (Peace
be upon him) had completed the appointed time period, during
which he fasted – it was said that he did not taste food and when
the month was over, he took some tree bark and chewed it in order
to improve the smell of his breath. Then Allah commanded him to
remain for a further ten nights, making a total of forty nights; this
is why it was authentically reported in the Hadith: “The smell of
the fasting person’s breath is sweeter to Allah than the odour of
musk.”
Before leaving, Moosa (Peace be upon him) had appointed his
beloved, respected and honored brother, Haroon (Peace be upon
him), to be leader of the Children of Isra’eel in his absence; Haroon
(Peace be upon him) was his full brother and his minister in
supplicating to Allah, and so he advised him and commanded him
– and his status as a Prophet does not make this incompatible or
incongruous – Allah, Most High, says, And when Moosa came to
the meeting appointed by Us (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143) means at the
time he was commanded to attend and his Lord spoke to him.
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143). That is, Allah spoke to him from behind
a screen, which allowed him to hear what was said to him, and He
called him, confided in him and brought him near. This was indeed,
a high rank, a strong position, a noble office and an exalted station
– may abundant blessings and peace be upon him in the life of this
world and in the Hereafter. When he was given this elevated status
Sunniconnect.com
101

and sublime rank and he heard the (Divine) Speech, he asked Allah
to raise the screen, saying to the Almighty, Whom no eyes may
behold and Whose Evidence is Strong, “O, my Lord! Show me
(Yourself), that I may look upon You.” Allah said, "You can not
see Me" (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143). Then Allah, Most High,
explained to him that he could not withstand Allah’s revealing
Himself, because the mountain, which was stronger, of greater size
and firmer than a human being, could not withstand His revealing
Himself to it, which is why He says, “…but look upon the
mountain, if it stands still in its place, then you shall see Me.”
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143)
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said,
regarding the Words of Allah, Most High: No vision can grasp Him
(Soorah Al-An’am 6:103), “This refers to His Light; it is His Light
which, if it is revealed to anything, it cannot withstand it.” This is
why He, Most High, said to Moosa (Peace be upon him), So when
his Lord appeared to the mountain, He made it collapse to dust, and
Moosa fell down unconscious. Then, when he recovered his senses
he said, “Glory be to You, I turn to You in repentance and I am the
first of the Believers.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143)
Mujahid said, regarding the Words of Him, Most High: “…but look
upon the mountain, if it stands still in its place, then you shall see
Me.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143), “(It means:) Because it (the
mountain) is larger than you and stronger; but when his Lord
revealed Himself to the mountain, and he saw that the mountain
could not withstand it and collapsed into dust, he fell to the ground
unconscious.”
We have mentioned in the Tafseer the narration of Imams Ahmad
and At-Tirmidhi – which was declared authentic by Ibn Jareer AtTabari and Al-Hakim – on the authority of Anas (May Allah be
pleased with him), who reported that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) recited So when his
Lord appeared to the mountain, He made it collapse to dust. He
Sunniconnect.com
102

indicated by placing his thumb on the top joint of his little finger
(how much of Himself Allah had revealed to the mountain) and this
caused the mountain to sink to the ground.”
As-Suddi narrated on the authority of ‘Ikrimah, who reported on
the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him) that he said that what Allah revealed of Himself it was no
more than the extent of a little finger and it caused the mountain to
turn to dust. …and Moosa fell down unconscious. That is, it caused
him to swoon. Qatadah said, “(He fell down) dead.” But the first
interpretation is the correct one, because He says, Then, when he
recovered his senses… (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143) – and one can only
recover or awake from a faint (not from death) – he (Moosa (Peace
be upon him)) said, “Glory be to You…” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143).
This is an acknowledgement that Allah is Above such a thing (as
being seen by His creation) and glorification and exaltation of Him.
“I turn to You in repentance…” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143). That is, I
shall not ask to see You again after this. “…and I am the first of the
Believers” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:143) means, the first to believe that
You cannot be seen by any living thing without it being killed and
(You cannot be revealed to) any dry (inanimate) thing without it
tumbling to the ground.
And it has been authentically reported in the Saheehain on the
authority of Abu Sa'eed Al-Khudri (May Allah be pleased with
him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, ‘Do not ascribe to me superiority over
the other Prophets, for on the Day of Resurrection the people will
become unconscious and I will (feel that) I am the first to regain
consciousness. Then I will see Moosa holding one of the legs of the
Throne. I will not know whether he has come to his senses before
me or that the shock he had received at the Mountain, (during his
worldly life) was sufficient for him'."
And He, Most High, says, He (Allah) said, “O, Moosa I have
chosen you above men by My Messages, and by My speaking (to
Sunniconnect.com
103

you).” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:144). That is, in that time, not the times
before him, because Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel (Peace be upon him)
was superior to him, as we made clear earlier, in the story of
Ibraheem (Peace be upon him). Nor does it include the time after
him, because Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) is superior to both of them, as evinced by the story of Al-Isra,
where his superiority over all of the Messengers and Prophets was
made clear. And it was also confirmed that he said, “The entire
creation will turn to me, including even Ibraheem (Peace be upon
him) (for intercession).”
And He, Most High, says, “So hold that which I have given you
and be of the grateful” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:144) means, so take
what I have given you of the Message and (My) Speech and do not
ask for more than that, and be grateful for it.
And He, Most High, says, And We wrote for him on the Tablets the
lesson to be drawn from all things and the explanation of all things.
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:145). The Tablets were of precious stone; and
it has been reported in the Saheeh that Allah wrote for him the
Tawrah with His Hand and in it there are admonitions against sin
and details of all that they needed to know regarding what is lawful
and what is unlawful, punishments and rulings. “Hold unto these
with firmness.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:145). That is, with a firm
resolve and a sincere intention. “…and enjoin your people to take
the better therein.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:145) means, to take them
and act upon them in the best manner. “I shall show you the home
of fasiqoon.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:145). That is, you (Children of
Isra’eel) will see the consequences for those who turn away from
obedience to Allah, disobey His Commands and belie His
Messengers. I shall turn away from My Ayat (Verses of the Qur’an)
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:146) It means that, I shall deprive the hearts of
those who are too proud to obey Me, and arrogant with people
without right, from understanding the Signs and proofs that testify
to My Might, Law and Commandments. Those who behave
arrogantly on Earth, without a right, and (even) if they see all the
Sunniconnect.com
104

Ayat, they will not believe in them. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:146) That
is, no matter what miracles and supernatural phenomena they
witnessed, they would not agree to be guided by them. And if they
see the way of righteousness (monotheism, piety, and good deeds),
they will not adopt it as the Way. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:146) That is,
they will not travel it or follow it. …but if they see the way of error
(polytheism, crimes and evil deeds), they will adopt that way, that
is because they have rejected Our Ayat and were heedless (to learn
a lesson) from them (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:146) means We have
turned them away from following the Straight Path because of their
rejection of Our Ayat, their disregard of them, their refusal to
believe in them, reflect on their meaning and act upon them. Those
who deny Our Ayat and the Meeting in the Hereafter (Day of
Resurrection,), vain are their deeds. Do they expect to be rewarded
with anything except what they used to do? (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:147)

Sunniconnect.com
105

The Story of Their Worship of the Calf
During the Absence of Allah’s Kaleem
From Them
Allah, Most High, says, And the people of Moosa made in his
absence, out of their ornaments, the image of a calf (for worship).
It had a sound (as if it was mooing). Did they not see that it could
neither speak to them nor guide them to the way? They took it for
worship and they were zalimoon (wrongdoers). And when they
regretted and saw that they had gone astray, they (repented and)
said, “If our Lord has not Mercy upon us and forgives us not, we
shall certainly be of the losers.” And when Moosa returned to his
people, angry and grieved, he said, “What an evil thing is that
which you have done (i.e. worshipping the calf) during my absence.
Did you hasten and go ahead as regards the matter of your Lord
(you left His worship)?” And he threw down the Tablets and seized
his brother by (the hair of) his head and dragged him toward him.
Haroon said, “O, son of my mother! Indeed the people judged me
weak and were about to kill me, so make not the enemies rejoice
over me, nor put me amongst the people who are zalimoon.” Moosa
said, “O, my Lord! Forgive me and my brother, and make us enter
into Your Mercy, for you are the Most Merciful of those who show
mercy.” Certainly, those who took the calf (for worship), wrath
from their Lord and humiliation will come upon them in the life of
this world. Thus do We recompense those who invent lies. But
those who committed evil deeds and then repented afterward and
believed, verily, your Lord after (all) that is indeed Oft-Forgiving,
Most Merciful. And when the anger of Moosa was subsided, he
took up the Tablets, and in their inscription was guidance and
mercy for those who fear their Lord. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:148-154)
Allah, Most High, informs us about the affair of the Children of
Isra’eel and how, when Moosa (Peace be upon him) departed from
them for the appointment with his Lord and remained on the
mountain, where his Lord confided in him and he asked Him about
Sunniconnect.com
106

many things and He answered him, a man from among the Children
of Isra’eel, whose name was Haroon (Aaron) As-Samiri, took some
jewelry that that he had borrowed and fashioned a calf from it; in it
he cast some dust which he had taken from the trace of Jibraeel’s
steed, when he saw him on the day when Allah drowned Pharaoh
at Jibraeel’s hand. When he cast it, the calf lowed as a real calf
lows. It was said that it was transformed into a living, flesh-andblood calf and that it lowed. This was said by Qatadah and others.
It was also said that it was only the wind, when it entered it from
the rear and exited from its mouth, making the lowing sound, in the
manner in which a cow lows. Upon this, they began to dance
around it and celebrate. They said, “This is your ilah (god), and the
ilah (god) of Moosa, but (Moosa) has forgotten.” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:88). It means that Moosa (Peace be upon him) has forgotten his
“Lord”, which is with us and he has gone off to seek him, when he
is here. Exalted is He above what they say, hallowed be His Names
and His Attributes and multiplied be His Blessings and His
Promised Rewards. Allah, Most High, says, making clear the
falseness of their claims, Did they not see that it could not return
them a word (for answer), and that it had no power either to harm
them or to do them good? (Soorah Ta Ha 20:89). And He says, Did
they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them to
the way? They took it for worship and they were zalimoon. (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:148). So He said that the animal could not speak and
could not reply to them, nor did it possess the power to inflict harm
on them or benefit them, nor could it guide them to right conduct.
They took it as a deity to be worshipped and thus they wronged
themselves, knowing within themselves that what they were doing
was falsehood, ignorance and plain error. And when they regretted
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:149) means, when they repented of what they
had done …and saw that they had gone astray, they (repented and)
said, “If our Lord has not Mercy upon us and forgives us not, we
shall certainly be of the losers.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:149). Then,
when Moosa (Peace be upon him) returned to them, and saw that
they were worshipping the calf, and he had with him the Tablets
Sunniconnect.com
107

containing the Towrah, he threw them down and it was said that he
broke them.
Then he advanced upon them and reprimanded them, rebuked them
and disparaged them for their wicked deed and they offered an
invalid excuse for their action, saying, “…we were made to carry
the weight of the ornaments of the (Fir‘awn’s) people, then we cast
them (into the fire), and that was what As-Samiri suggested.”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:87). They said that they found it difficult to carry
the people of Pharaoh’s jewelry – and they were the soldiers; Allah
had commanded them to take it and made it lawful for them. They
did not seek to excuse themselves for having worshipped the calf,
which had a body and which lowed, besides Allah, the One, AsSamad, the Subduer, because of their ignorance, lack of knowledge
and intelligence. Then Moosa (Peace be upon him) went to his
brother, Haroon (Peace be upon him), and said to him, “O, Haroon!
What stopped you when you saw them going astray, that you
followed me not (according to my advice to you)?” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:92,93). That is, why, when you saw what they were doing, did
you not obey me and inform me of what they were doing? “Verily,
I feared lest you should say, “You have caused a division among
the Children of Isra’eel,” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:94). means you have
left them and come to me, when you had been appointed to take my
place as their leader in my absence. He (Moosa) said, “O, my Lord!
Forgive me and my brother, and make us enter into Your Mercy,
for you are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy.” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:151). Haroon (Peace be upon him) had indeed forbidden
them to do this wicked deed in the sternest of terms and strongly
rebuked them for it. Allah, Most High, says, And Haroon indeed
had said to them beforehand, “O, my people! You are being tried
in this…” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:90). That is, Allah has ordained this
calf for you and made it low as a trial and a test for you. “…and
verily, your Lord is (Allah) the Most Beneficent” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:90) means not this calf; “…so follow me.” (Soorah Ta Ha
20:90). That is, in what I say to you. and obey my order.” They
said, “We will not stop worshipping it (i.e. the calf), until Moosa
Sunniconnect.com
108

returns to us.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:90-91) Allah bears witness on
behalf of Haroon (Peace be upon him) – and Allah, Most High, is
Sufficient as a Witness – that he forbade them to do that and
rebuked them for it, but they did not obey him and they did not
follow him. Then Moosa (Peace be upon him) approached AsSamiri. “And what is the matter with you, O, Samiri?” (Soorah Ta
Ha 20:95) That is, what made you do what you did? He (AsSamiri)
said, “I saw what they saw not” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:96) means I saw
Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) when he was riding his steed “…so I
took a handful (of dust) from the (hoof) prints of the messenger.”
(Soorah Ta Ha 20:96) the hoof prints of Jibraeel’s steed.
And some of the scholars mentioned that he saw it and every time
it placed its hooves on the ground, the place became green and grass
grew; so he took some dust from its hoof prints and he threw it onto
the calf which had been manufactured from gold, that which we
have mentioned happened. This is why Allah, Most High, says,
“…and I threw it (into the fire in which were put the ornaments of
the Fir‘awn’s people, or into the calf). Thus my inner-self
suggested to me.” He (Moosa) said, “Then go away! And verily,
your (punishment) in this life will be that you will say, “Touch me
not (i.e. you will live alone exiled away from mankind).” (Soorah
Ta Ha 20:96,97). This was a supplication against him, that he might
not touch anyone, as a punishment for touching that which he had
no right to touch. This was a punishment for him in this world; then
he informed him of what awaited him in the Hereafter, saying,
“…and verily (for a future punishment), you have a promise that
will not fail.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:97) It was also recited as: that We
will not fail (to fulfill). “And look at your ilah (god), to which you
have been devoted. We will certainly burn it, and scatter its
particles in the sea.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:97). It was said that Moosa
(Peace be upon him) went to the calf and burned it in fire; this was
said by Qatadah and others. It was also said that it was filed down;
this was said by ‘Ali (May Allah be pleased with him), ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and others and it was
the version according to the People of the Scriptures. Then he
Sunniconnect.com
109

scattered it into the sea. After that, he commanded the Children of
Isra’eel to drink from it and when those who had worshipped the
calf drank of it, the sand stuck to their lips, as proof of their guilt.
It was also said that their skin became yellow. Then Allah, Most
High, tells us that Moosa (Peace be upon him) said to them, “Your
Ilah (God) is only Allah, the One (La ilaha illa Huwa) (none has
the right to be worshipped but He). He has full knowledge of all
things.” (Soorah Ta Ha 20:98) And He, Most High, says, Certainly,
those who took the calf (for worship), wrath from their Lord and
humiliation will come upon them in the life of this world. Thus do
We recompense those who invent lies. (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:152).
And that is what happened. Some of the Salaf said that Allah’s
Saying: Thus do We recompense those who invent lies (Soorah AlA‘raf 7:152) applies to all those who innovate in religious matters
until the Day of Resurrection. Then He, Most High, informs us of
His Gentleness and Mercy toward His creation and His Kindness
toward His slaves, in accepting the repentance of those who turn in
repentance to Him. He says, But those who committed evil deeds
and then repented afterward and believed, verily, your Lord after
(all) that is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:153). But Allah, Most High, did not accept the repentance of
those who worshipped the calf, except by their being killed, as He,
Most High, says, And (remember) when Moosa said to his people,
“O, my people! Verily, you have wronged yourselves by
worshipping the calf. So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill
yourselves (the innocent kill the wrongdoers among you), that will
be better for you with your Lord.” Then He accepted your
repentance. Truly, He is the One Who accepts repentance, the Most
Merciful. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:54)
Then He, Most High, says, And when the anger of Moosa subsided,
he took up the Tablets, and in their inscription was guidance and
mercy for those who fear their Lord. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:154) Some
of the scholars cited His Saying: and in their inscription (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:154) as evidence that they were destroyed; but there is
some doubt about this claim; there is nothing in the wording to
Sunniconnect.com
110

suggest that they were broken. And Allah knows better. ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said in the Hadith of
the trial that their worship of the calf was soon after their
emergence from the sea and this is not improbable, because when
they came out from it, They said, “O, Moosa! Make for us an ilah
(a god) as they have alihah (gods).” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:138)
And He, Most High, says, And Moosa chose out of his people
seventy (of the best) men for Our appointed time and place of
meeting, and when they were seized with a violent earthquake, he
said, “O, my Lord, if it had been Your Will, You could have
destroyed them and me before; would You destroy us for the deeds
of the foolish ones among us? It is only Your Trial by which You
lead astray whom You will, and keep guided whom You will. You
are our Wali (Protector), so forgive us and have Mercy on us, for
You are the Best of those who forgive. And ordain for us good in
this world, and in the Hereafter. Certainly we have turned unto
You.” He said, “(As to) My Punishment I afflict therewith whom I
will and My Mercy embraces all things. That (Mercy) I shall ordain
for those who are the muttaqoon, and give zakah; and those who
believe in Our Ayat; those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet
who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad) whom they find
written with them in the Tawrah (Deut, xviii, 15) and the Injeel
(John xiv, 16), – he commands them for al-ma‘roof (i.e. Islamic
Monotheism and all that Islam has ordained); and forbids them
from al-munkar (i.e. disbelief, polytheism of all kinds, and all that
Islam has forbidden); he allows them as lawful Tayyibat (i.e. all
good and lawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods,
etc.), and prohibits them as unlawful khaba'ith (i.e. all evil and
unlawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods, etc.), he
releases them from their heavy burdens (of Allah’s Covenant), and
from the fetters (bindings) that were upon them. So those who
believe in him (Muhammad), honor him, help him, and follow the
Light (the Qur'an) which has been sent down with him, it is they
who will be successful. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:155-157)
Sunniconnect.com
111

As-Suddi, ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him)
and others said that these seventy were scholars from among the
Children of Isra’eel and with them was Moosa (Peace be upon
him), Haroon (Peace be upon him), Yoosha', Nadab and Abihu.
They went with Moosa (Peace be upon him) to ask for forgiveness
for the Children of Isra’eel for their worship of the calf. They had
been commanded to bathe, purify themselves and wear perfume
and when they went with him and approached the mountain, it was
covered with clouds and there was a column of brilliant light
emanating from them. Moosa (Peace be upon him) went up the
mountain. The Children of Isra’eel said that they heard the Speech
of Allah and this corresponds with what was said by a group of the
scholars of tafseer and they understood Allah’s Saying: …a party
of them (Jewish rabbis) had heard the Word of Allah (the Tawrah),
then they changed it knowingly after they had understood it.
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:75) in light of it. But this is not necessarily
so, because He, Most High, says, …then grant him protection, so
that he may hear the Word of Allah (the Qur'an). (Soorah AtTawbah 9:6). That is, conveyed to him. In the same way, those
(from the Children of Isra’eel) heard it from Moosa (Peace be upon
him).
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “Moosa (Peace be upon him) selected
from among the Children of Isra’eel seventy of the best men. He
said to them, “Go to the meeting with Allah and repent for what
you committed. Beg His Forgiveness for those of your people
whom you left behind. Fast, purify yourselves and clean your
clothes.” So, he went with them to Mount Toor in Sinai for the
meeting place and time designated by his Lord. He went there only
with the leave and knowledge of Allah.
The seventy requested that they might hear the Speech of Allah and
he (Moosa) said, “I will do so.” (i.e. I will submit your request to
Allah). Then, when Moosa (Peace be upon him) approached the
mountain, a column of clouds came down over it and the mountain
was covered. Moosa (Peace be upon him) approached and entered
Sunniconnect.com
112

the clouds and he said to the people, “Approach.” When Allah
spoke to Moosa (Peace be upon him), his cloak was surrounded by
a brilliant light which no human could bear to look at, so below him
a barrier was placed and the people approached. When they entered
the cloud they fell in prostration and they heard Him while he was
speaking to Moosa (Peace be upon him), commanding him and
forbidding him, saying what to do and what not to do. When He
completed commanding him, and removed the cloud from Moosa
(Peace be upon him), he faced the people and they said, “O, Moosa!
We will not believe in you unless we see Allah directly.” So the
thunder shook them, their souls were captured and they all died.
Moosa (Peace be upon him) stood up invoking, begging and
supplicating to his Lord, “O, My Lord, if it had been Your will, you
could have destroyed them and me before; would you destroy us
for the deeds of the foolish ones among us.” (Soorah Al-A'raf 7:55).
But the thunderbolt seized them and their souls were destroyed and
all of them died. Then Moosa (Peace be upon him) stood up and
implored his Lord, saying, “O, my Lord, if it had been Your Will,
You could have destroyed them and me before; would You destroy
us for the deeds of the foolish ones among us?” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:155). That is, do not blame us because of the actions of those
foolish people among us who worshipped the calf, for we are
innocent of what they did. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him), Mujahid, Qatadah and Ibn Juraij said that the
thunderbolt only took them because they did not forbid their people
to worship the calf. As for Allah’s Saying: “It is only Your Trial”
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:155), the meaning is: Your Test (of the
Children of Isra’eel). This was said by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him), Sa'eed Ibn Jubair, Abul ‘Aliyah, ArRabee‘ Ibn Anas and more than one of the earlier and the later
scholars. That is, it is You Who ordained this and created the affair
of the calf in order to test them thereby, as Haroon (Peace be upon
him) said to them before, “O, my people! You are being tried in
this” (Soorah Ta Ha
Sunniconnect.com
113

20:90) means you are being tested by this; this is why Allah tells us
that Moosa (Peace be upon him) said,
“…by which You lead astray whom You will, and keep guided
whom You will.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:155). That is, You cause to
go astray whom You will by Your Trial and You guide whom You
will thereby. The Judgment and the Decision belongs to You and
no one can prevent or repel what You have decided and ordained.
“You are our Wali (Protector), so forgive us and have Mercy on us,
for You are the Best of those who forgive.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:155)
And He, Most High, says, “And ordain for us good in this world,
and in the Hereafter. Certainly we have turned unto You.” (Soorah
Al-A‘raf 7:156) It means that we have repented to You, returned to
You and sought forgiveness from You. This was said by ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid, Sa‘eed Ibn
Jubair-Abul ‘Aliyah, Ibraheem At-Taimi, Adh-Dahhak, As-Suddi,
Qatadah and a number of others and it is also linguistically correct.
He said: “(As to) My Punishment I afflict therewith whom I will
and My Mercy embraces all things.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:156) That
is, I punish whomsoever I will, with whatever punishment I will
from among the things that I have created and ordained. “…and My
Mercy embraces all things.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:156) – as
confirmed in the Saheehain, from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
who said, “When Allah created the Creation, He wrote in His Book
– and He wrote (that) about Himself, and it is placed with Him on
the Throne – ‘Verily My Mercy overcomes My Anger’.” “That
(Mercy) I shall ordain for those who are the muttaqoon, and give
zakah; and those who believe in Our Ayat” (Soorah Al-A‘raf
7:156) means I shall definitely ordain it for those who possess these
attributes. Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can
neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad). (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:157)
In this there is confirmation that Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and his nation were mentioned by Allah to
Sunniconnect.com
114

Moosa (Peace be upon him) among the things which He confided
to him, taught him and apprised him of.
Al-Hafiz Abu Hatim Muhammad Ibn Hatim Ibn Hibban said in his
Saheeh, on the authority of AlMugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah (May Allah
be pleased with him) who reported on the authority of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while standing on the
pulpit, “Verily, Moosa (Peace be upon him) asked his Lord, the
Almighty, the All-Powerful, 'Which of the inhabitants of Paradise
will have the least rank?' He said, 'A man will come after the people
of Paradise have entered it and it will be said to him, Enter Paradise.
He will say, 'How shall I enter Paradise when the people have
entered their abodes and taken what is theirs?' It will be said to him,
'Would you be happy to have of Paradise what one of the kings of
the Earth had?' He will say, 'Yes, O, my Lord!' So it will be said to
him, 'This is yours, plus the like of it, plus the like of it again.' He
will say, 'O, my Lord! I am well-pleased.' It will be said to him, 'In
addition to this, yours is whatever your heart desires and whatever
pleases your eye.' And he asked his Lord, 'Which of the people of
Paradise occupy the highest position in Paradise?' Allah said, 'I will
tell you about them: I have fixed their nobility with My Own Hands
and sealed it and no eye has seen Paradise, no ear has heard it and
it cannot be imagined by the mind of any human being'.”
Ibn Hibban said, on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be
pleased with him), that he reported from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Moosa (Peace be
upon him) asked his Lord, the Almighty, the All-Powerful about
six qualities which he believed belonged to him, and a seventh,
which Moosa (Peace be upon him) did not like. He said, “O, my
Lord! Which of your slaves is the most pious?” He said, “The one
who remembers (Allah) and does not forget (Him).” Moosa (Peace
be upon him) then asked, “And which of Your slaves is most rightly
guided?” Allah said, “He who follows the (Divine) guidance.”
Moosa (Peace be upon him) then asked, “And which of Your slaves
is most judicious?” Allah said, “The one who judges for the people
Sunniconnect.com
115

as he judges for himself.” Moosa (Peace be upon him) said, “And
which of Your slaves is most knowledgeable?” Allah said, “The
scholar whose appetite for knowledge is never satisfied; he
combines the knowledge of the people with his (own) knowledge.”
Moosa (Peace be upon him) then said, “And which of Your slaves
is most mighty?” Allah replied, “He who, when he is master,
displays forgiveness.” Moosa (Peace be upon him) then asked,
“And which of Your slaves is wealthiest?” Allah answered, “He
who is happy with what he is given.” Moosa (Peace be upon him)
then said, “And which of Your slaves is poorest?” Allah said, “The
one who possesses manqoos.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “(True) wealth is not that
which is apparent; it is only wealth of the soul. And when Allah
wills something good for a slave, He places his wealth in his soul
and his piety in his heart. But if He wills something bad for a slave,
He places his poverty in front of his eyes (i.e. He makes him feel it
and he is always discontented).”
Ibn Hibban said that the possessor of “manqoos” means the one
who is dissatisfied with his circumstances; he regards what he has
been given as insufficient and seeks more.
Ibn Hibban said, “Allah’s Kaleem asked his Lord to teach him
something by which he might remember Him”. It was reported on
the authority of Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Moosa said, 'O, my
Lord! Teach me something by which I might remember You and
supplicate You.' Allah said, 'Say, O, Moosa, ‘La ilaha ill-Allah
(none has the right to be worshipped except Allah)’.” Moosa (Peace
be upon him) said, “O, my Lord! All of your slaves say this.” Allah
said, “Say, ‘La ilaha ill-Allah (none has the right to be worshipped
except Allah)’.” Moosa (Peace be upon him) said, “I only want You
to give something special for me.” Allah said, “O, Moosa! If all of
the inhabitants of the seven heavens and the seven earths were
placed in a scale and ‘La ilaha illAllah, was placed in (the other
Sunniconnect.com
116

side of) it, ‘La ilaha ill-Allah (none has the right to be worshipped
except Allah)’ would be heavier than they.”
This Hadith is supported by the Hadith of Al-Bitaqah and the
nearest thing to its meaning is the Hadith narrated in the Sunan
from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), in
which it is reported that he said, “The best invocation is the
invocation on ‘Arafah and the best thing that I and the Prophets
who came before me have said is: ‘La ilaha ill-Allah Wahdahu la
shareeka Lahu; Lahul-mulku wa Lahul-hamdu wa Huwa ‘ala kulli
shay'in Qadeer (none has the right to be worshipped except Allah,
Alone, without partners; His is the Kingdom and to Him belongs
all praise and He is Able to do all things)’.”
Ibn Abi Hatim said, in the explanation of "Ayat Al-Kursi", “It is
reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) that the Children of Isra’eel asked Moosa (Peace
be upon him), “Does your Lord sleep?” He said, “Fear Allah!”
Then his Lord, the Almighty, the All-Powerful called him (saying),
“O, Moosa! They asked you if your Lord sleeps; take two bottles
in your hands and stand for the whole night.” So Moosa (Peace be
upon him) did so, and when a third of the night had passed, he
became drowsy and fell to his knees; then he recovered and retained
his grip on them. But toward the end of the night, he became
drowsy and the two bottles fell and smashed. Then Allah said, “O,
Moosa! If I were to sleep, the heavens and the Earth would fall and
be destroyed, just as the two bottles in your hands were destroyed.”
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said, “So Allah sent
down to His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) Ayat Al-Kursi.”
And He, Most High, says, "And (remember) when We raised the
mountain over them as if it had been a canopy, and they thought
that it was going to fall on them. (We said), 'Hold firmly to what
We have given you (i.e. the Tawrah), and remember that which is
Sunniconnect.com
117

therein (act on its Commandments), so that you may fear Allah and
obey Him.” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:171)
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and more
than one of the Salaf said, “When Moosa (Peace be upon him) came
to them with the Tablets on which was written the Tawrah, he
ordered them to accept them and hold onto them with strength and
determination, but they said, “Announce them to us, and if their
commands and prohibitions are easy, we will accept them.” He
said, “Nay, you must accept them with all that they entail.” But they
examined them over and over again, until Allah raised the
mountain over their heads, so that it became like a canopy over
them, i.e. like a cloud over their heads and it was said to them, “If
you do not accept them and all that they entail, this mountain will
fall on you.” So they accepted that and then they were commanded
to prostrate, which they did. But they began to look toward the
mountain, from the sides of their faces and this became a Sunnah
for the Jews until this day. They say, “There is no prostration
greater than the prostration in which the punishment was lifted
from us.” Sunaid Ibn Dawood reported on the authority of Hajjaj
Ibn Muhammad, who in turn reported on the authority of Abu Bakr
Ibn ‘Abdullah that he said, “When he proclaimed them (the
Commandments) to them, there was not a mountain, a tree or a rock
on the face of the Earth that did not shake and there is not a Jew on
the face of the Earth – whether great or small – who does not
tremble when the Tawrah is recited to him and shake his head.”
Allah, Most High, says, "Then after that you turned away" (Soorah
AlBaqarah 2:64) means then after witnessing this great covenant
and this momentous matter, you violated your oaths and your
covenants. "Had it not been for the Grace and Mercy of Allah upon
you" (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:64) means that He sent to you a
succession of Messengers and sent down to you His Books "indeed
you would have been among the losers." (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:64)

Sunniconnect.com
118

The Story of the Cow of the Children of
Isra’eel
Allah, Most High, says, "And (remember) when Moosa said to his
people, 'Verily, Allah commands you that you slaughter a cow.'
They said, 'Do you make fun of us?' He said, 'I take Allah’s Refuge
from being among Al-Jahiloon (the ignorant or the foolish).' They
said, 'Call upon your Lord for us that He may make plain to us what
it is!' He said, 'He says, ‘Verily, it is a cow neither too old nor too
young, but (it is) between the two conditions’, so do what you are
commanded.' They said, 'Call upon your Lord for us to make plain
to us its color.' He said, 'Allah says, ‘It is a yellow cow, bright in
its color, pleasing to the beholders’.' They said, 'Call upon your
Lord for us to make plain to us what it is. Verily, to us all cows are
alike, and surely, if Allah wills, we will be guided.' He (Moosa)
said, 'He says, ‘It is a cow neither trained to till the soil nor water
the fields, sound, having no other color except bright yellow’.' They
said, 'Now you have brought the truth.' So they slaughtered it
though they were near to not doing it. And (remember) when you
killed a man and fell into dispute among yourselves as to the crime.
But Allah brought forth that which you were hiding. So We said,
'Strike him (the dead man) with a piece of it (the cow).' Thus Allah
brings the dead to life and shows you His Ayat so that you may
understand." (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:67-73)
They were commanded to slaughter a cow which was ‘awan, i.e.
halfway between old and young. This was said by ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid, Abul-‘Aliyah
‘Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and a number of others. Then they
became more demanding and made things more difficult for
themselves, asking about its color. They were then commanded to
slaughter a yellow cow, whose color was bright, i.e. mixed with
redness, which was pleasing to those who saw it; and this color is
hard to find.
Sunniconnect.com
119

Then they became even more demanding, They said, “Call upon
your Lord for us to make plain to us what it is. Verily, to us all cows
are alike, and surely, if Allah wills, we will be guided.” (Soorah
AlBaqarah 2:70) And in the Hadith traceable to the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) which was narrated by Ibn
Abi Hatim and Ibn Marduyah, it was reported: “Had not the
Children of Isra’eel said that they would be guided if Allah willed,
they would not have been granted guidance.” But there is some
doubt about its authenticity – and Allah knows better. He (Moosa)
said, “He says, ‘It is a cow neither trained to till the soil nor water
the fields, sound, having no shiyah in it’.” They said, “Now you
have brought the truth.” So they slaughtered it though they were
near to not doing it. (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:71) This description was
more difficult than what had preceded it, since they were now
commanded to slaughter a cow which had not been trained to
plough the earth or irrigate the soil with a water scoop, being
musallamah, i.e. sound in body, without any defects. This was said
by Abul-‘Aliyah and Qatadah. Allah’s Saying: "…having no
shiyah in it" (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:71) means: having no other
color besides yellow. Rather, it was free from any defect and free
from having any other colors mixed with its yellow color. When he
had determined its description in such great detail, They said, “Now
you have brought the truth.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:71) It was said
that they did not find a cow matching this description except with
a man from among them who was dutiful to his father and they
requested it from him, but he refused to give it to them. So they
asked him to suggest a price for it, even offering to pay him its
weight in gold, according to As-Suddi, but he still refused to give
it to them unless they agreed to give him ten times its weight in
gold. They did so and he then sold it to them, after which Allah’s
Prophet (Peace be upon him) commanded them to slaughter it. "So
they slaughtered it though they were near to not doing it." (Soorah
Al-Baqarah 2:71) That is, they were uncertain regarding it. Then
he conveyed to them from Allah that they should strike the body of
the murdered man with a part of it. It was said that that part was the
meat of its thigh and it was also said that it was the bone that adjoins
Sunniconnect.com
120

the cartilage. It was also said that they struck him with the part that
is between the shoulders. When they struck him with a part of it,
Allah, Most High, brought him back to life and he stood up and the
blood was flowing from his jugular veins. Then the Prophet of
Allah (Peace be upon him) asked him, “Who killed you?” He
replied, “My brother’s son killed me.” Then he became dead once
more. Allah, Most High, says, "Thus Allah brings the dead to life
and shows you His Ayat so that you may understand." (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:73) It means that as you have witnessed the bringing
back to life of this murdered man, as a result of Allah’s Command
to him, likewise it is the case regarding all people who die; if Allah
wills to revive them, He revives them in a single hour, as He, Most
High, says, "The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all
are only as (the creation and resurrection of) a single person."
(Soorah Luqman
31:28)

Sunniconnect.com
121

The Story of Moosa and Al-Khidr
Allah, Most High, says, "And (remember) when Moosa said to his
servant, 'I will not give up (traveling) until I reach the junction of
the two seas or (until) I spend years and years in traveling.' But
when they reached the junction of the two seas, they forgot their
fish, and it took its way through the sea as in a tunnel. So when they
passed further on (beyond that fixed place), Moosa said to his
servant, 'Bring us our morning meal; truly, we have suffered much
fatigue in this, our journey.' He said, 'Do you remember when we
betook ourselves to the rock? I indeed forgot the fish; none but
Shaitan made me forget it. It took its course into the sea in a strange
(way)!' (Moosa) said, 'That is what we have been seeking.' So they
went back retracing their footsteps. Then they found one of Our
slaves, unto whom We had bestowed Mercy from Us, and whom
We had taught knowledge from Us. Moosa said to him (Al-Khidr),
'May I follow you so that you teach me something of that
knowledge (guidance and true path) which you have been taught
(by Allah)?' He (Al-Khidr) said, 'Verily! You will not be able to
have patience with me! And how can you have patience about a
thing which you know not?' Moosa said, 'If Allah wills, you will
find me patient, and I will not disobey you in aught.' He (Al-Khidr)
said, 'Then, if you follow me, ask me not about anything till I
myself mention it to you.' So they both proceeded, till, when they
boarded the ship, he (Al-Khidr) scuttled it. Moosa said, 'Have you
scuttled it in order to drown its people? Verily, you have committed
a thing imran (a munkar - evil, bad, dreadful thing).' He (Al-Khidr)
said, 'Did I not tell you that you would not be able to have patience
with me?' (Moosa) said, 'Call me not to account for what I forgot,
and be not hard upon me for my affair (with you).' Then they both
proceeded, till they met a boy, and he (Al-Khidr) killed him. Moosa
said, 'Have you killed an innocent person who had killed none?
Verily, you have committed a thing nukran (a great munkar prohibited, evil, dreadful thing)!' (Al-Khidr) said, 'Did I not tell you
that you would not be able to have patience with me?' (Moosa) said,
'If I ask you anything after this, keep me not in your company, you
Sunniconnect.com
122

have received an excuse from me.' Then they both proceeded till,
when they came to the people of a town, they asked them for food,
but they refused to entertain them. Then they found therein a wall
about to collapse and he (Al-Khidr) set it up straight. (Moosa) said,
'If you had wished, surely, you could have taken wages for it!' (AlKhidr) said, 'This is the parting between me and you; I will tell you
the interpretation of (those) things regarding which you were
unable to have patience: As for the ship, it belonged to masakeen
(poor people) working in the sea. So I wished to make a defective
damage in it, as there was a king after them who seized every ship
by force. And as for the boy, his parents were Believers, and we
feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief. So
we intended that their Lord should change him for them for one
better in righteousness and near to mercy. And as for the wall, it
belonged to two orphan boys in the town; and there was under it a
treasure belonging to them; and their father was a righteous man,
and your Lord intended that they should attain their age of full
strength and take out their treasure as a Mercy from your Lord. And
I did it not of my own accord. That is the interpretation of those
(things) regarding which you could not be patient'.” (Soorah AlKahf 18:60-82)
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair that
he said, “I said to ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with him), ‘Nawf Al-Bikali claims that Moosa of the Children of
Isra’eel was not Moosa, the companion of Al-Khidr’.” Ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) said, “Allah’s enemy tells a lie!
Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b narrated to us that Allah’s Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Moosa got up to deliver a
sermon before the Children of Isra’eel and he was asked, “Who is
the most learned person among the people?” Moosa replied, “I (am
the most learned).” Allah then admonished Moosa for he did not
ascribe all knowledge to Allah only. (Then) came the Divine
Inspiration: “Yes, one of Our slaves at the junction of the two seas
is more learned than you.” Moosa said, “O, my Lord ! How can I
meet him?” Allah said, “Take a fish in a basket and wherever the
Sunniconnect.com
123

fish is lost, follow it (you will find him at that place). So Moosa set
out along with his slave, Yoosha‘ Ibn Noon, and they carried with
them a fish till they reached a rock and rested there. Moosa put his
head down and slept. (Sufyan, a sub-narrator said that somebody
other than ‘Amr said:) “At the rock there was a water spring called
‘Al-Hayat’ and none came in touch with its water but became alive.
Some of the water of that spring fell over that fish, so it moved and
slipped out of the basket and entered the sea. When Moosa woke
up, he said to his servant, “Bring us our morning meal.” (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:62) The narrator added: Moosa did not suffer from
fatigue except after he had passed the place he had been ordered to
observe. His servant, Yoosha‘ (Joshua) said to him, “Do you
remember when we betook ourselves to the rock? I indeed forgot
the fish; none but Shaitan made me forget it. It took its course into
the sea in a strange (way)!” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18.63) The narrator
added, “So they came back, retracing their steps and then they
found in the sea, the way of the fish looking like a tunnel. So there
was an astonishing event for his slave, and there was a tunnel for
the fish. When they reached the rock, they found a man covered
with a garment. Moosa greeted him. The man said astonishingly,
“Is there any such greeting in your land?” Moosa said, “I am
Moosa.” The man said, “Moosa of the Children of Isra’eel?” Moosa
said, “Yes,” and added, “May I follow you so that you teach me
something of that knowledge (guidance and true path) which you
have been taught (by Allah)?” (18.66) Al-Khidr said to him, “O,
Moosa! You have something of Allah’s knowledge which Allah
has taught you and which I do not know; and I have something of
Allah’s knowledge which Allah has taught me and which you do
not know.” Moosa said, “But I will follow you.” Al-Khidr said,
“Then if you follow me, ask me no question about anything until I
myself speak to you concerning it.” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:70) After
that both of them proceeded along the seashore. There passed by
them a boat whose crew recognized Al-Khidr and received them on
board free of charge. So they both got on board. A sparrow came
and sat on the edge of the boat and dipped its beak unto the sea. AlKhidr said to Moosa, “My knowledge and your knowledge and all
Sunniconnect.com
124

the creation’s knowledge compared to Allah’s knowledge is not
more than the water taken by this sparrow’s beak.” Then Moosa
was startled by Al-Khidr’s action of taking an adze and scuttling
the boat with it. Moosa said to him, “These people gave us a free
lift, but you intentionally scuttled their boat so as to drown them.
“In order to drown its people? Verily, you have committed a thing
imran (a munkar – evil, bad, dreadful thing) He (Al-Khidr) said,
Did I not tell you, that you would not be able to have patience with
me? Moosa said, "call me not to account for what I forgot, and be
not haved upon me for my affair (with you).” (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:71-73) Then they both proceeded and found a boy playing with
other boys. Al-Khidr took hold of him by the head and cut it off.
Moosa said to him, “Have you killed an innocent person who had
killed none? Verily, you have committed a thing nukran (a great
munkar – prohibited, evil, dreadful thing)!” (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:74) He said, “Did I not tell you that you would not be able to
have patience with me?” – up to "…but they refused to entertain
them. Then they found therein a wall about to collapse." (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:75-77) Al-Khidr moved his hand thus and set it upright
(repaired it). Moosa said to him, “When we entered this town, they
neither gave us hospitality nor fed us; if you had wished, you could
have taken wages for it,” Al-Khidr said, “This is the parting
between me and you; I will tell you the interpretation of (those)
things regarding which you were unable to have patience.” (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:78)
Allah’s Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “We wished that Moosa could have been more patient so that
He (Allah) could have described to us more about their story.”
Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair said that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) used to recite, “as there was a king before them
who seized every ship by force.” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:79) and he
used to recite, “And as for the boy, he was a disbeliever and his
parents were Believers.” (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:80).”
Sunniconnect.com
125

And He, Most High, says, “And as for the wall, it belonged to two
orphan boys in the town; and there was under it a treasure
belonging to them; and their father was a righteous man, and your
Lord intended that they should attain their age of full strength and
take out their treasure as a Mercy from your Lord. And I did it not
of my own accord. That is the interpretation of those (things)
regarding which you could not be patient.” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:82)
As-Suhaili said that they were Asram and Sareem, the sons of
Kashih. “…and there was under it a treasure belonging to them.”
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:82) According to ‘Ikrimah, it was gold.
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said that it
was knowledge. What appears most likely is that it was a golden
tablet on which knowledge was written.
He, Most High, says, “…and their father was a righteous man.”
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:82) It was said that he was the seventh father
and it was also said that he was the tenth. At all events, in it there
is evidence that the righteous man is protected in his offspring and
Allah is the One Whose Help is sought. And He, Most High, says,
“…as a Mercy from your Lord.” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:82) This
proves that he was a Prophet and that he did nothing of his own
accord; rather, he acted in accordance with the Command of his
Lord, which means that he was a Prophet. It was also said that he
was a Messenger and also that he was a Wali. But stranger than that
is the claim of those who said that he was an angel.

The Story of the Building of the Tabernacle of
Time
The People of the Scripture said that Allah commanded Moosa
(Peace be upon him) to make a tent from cedar wood, leather and
sheepskin; and He commanded him to embellish it with dyed silk,
gold and silver, using intricate designs, according to the People of
the Scripture. This Tabernacle of Time was with the Children of
Isra’eel in the wilderness and they used to pray toward it, so it was
Sunniconnect.com
126

their Qiblah and their Ka‘bah; and their Imam was Allah’s Kaleem,
Moosa (Peace be upon him), while the one who offered the
sacrifices was his brother, Haroon (Peace be upon him). When
Haroon and then Moosa (peace be upon them both) died, the sons
of Haroon (Peace be upon him) continued to follow what their
father had practiced with regard to the sacrifice – and they still
practice it until this day. They undertook the burden of
Prophethood after Moosa (Peace be upon him) and the
responsibility of leadership after him was given to his slave,
Yoosha‘, and it was he who brought them into Bait Al-Maqdis (the
Holy Land).
What is meant here is that when he became ruler of Bait Al-Maqdis,
this Tabernacle was erected on the rock of Bait Al-Maqdis and they
used to pray toward it. After it had gone, they prayed toward its
former place, i.e. the rock. This is why it was the Qiblah of the
Prophets who came after him, until the time of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – and he prayed
toward it prior to the migration to Madinah, though he would pray
with the Ka‘bah directly in front of him. After he had migrated to
Madinah, he was commanded to pray toward Bait Al-Maqdis and
he did so for sixteen or seventeen months. Then the Qiblah was
changed to the Ka‘bah – and that was the Qiblah of Ibraheem – in
the month of Sha‘aban, in the year 2 A.H., at the time of the ‘Asr
prayer, or, it was said, the Zuhr prayer.

The Story of Qaroon with Moosa
Allah, Most High, says, "Verily, Qaroon (Korah) was of Moosa’s
people, but he behaved arrogantly toward them. And We gave him
the treasures, that of which the keys would have been a burden to a
body of strong men. When his people said to him, 'Do not exult;
verily! Allah likes not those who exult. But seek, with that (wealth)
which Allah has bestowed you, the home of the Hereafter, and
forget not your portion of legal enjoyment in this world, and be
generous as Allah has been Generous to you, and seek not mischief
Sunniconnect.com
127

in the land. Verily, Allah likes not the mufsidoon (those who
commit great crimes and sins, oppressors, tyrants, mischief-makers
and corrupt people).' He said, 'This has been given to me only
because of knowledge I possess.' Did he not know that Allah had
destroyed before him generations, men who were stronger than him
in might and greater in the amount (of riches) they had collected.
But the mujrimoon (criminals, disbelievers, polytheists and
sinners, etc.) will not be questioned of their sins (because Allah
knows them well, so they will be punished without account). So he
went forth before his people in his pomp. Those who were desirous
of the life of the world, said, 'Ah, would that we had the like of
what Qaroon has been given! Verily! He is the owner of a great
fortune.' But those who had been given (religious) knowledge said,
'Woe to you! The Reward of Allah is better for those who believe
and do righteous good deeds, and this none shall attain except those
who are patient (in following the truth).' So We caused the earth to
swallow him and his dwelling place. Then he had no group or party
to help him against Allah, nor was he one of those who could save
themselves. And those who had desired (a position like) his
position the day before, began to say, 'Know you not that it is Allah
Who enlarges the provision or restricts it to whomsoever He
pleases of His slaves? Had it not been that Allah was Gracious to
us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us up (also)! Know
you not that the disbelievers will never be successful? That home
of the Hereafter (i.e. Paradise), We shall assign to those who rebel
not against the truth with pride and oppression in the land nor do
mischief by committing crimes. And the good end is for the
muttaqoon'." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:76-83)
It is reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah
be pleased with him) that he said, “Qaroon was Moosa’s cousin.
Qatadah said that he was called An-Noor (the Light) because of his
pleasant voice when reciting the Tawrah. But the enemy of Allah
was guilty of hypocrisy, like the hypocrisy of As-Samiri, and he
was destroyed by his wrongdoing, because of his wealth.
Sunniconnect.com
128

Allah, Most High, described his enormous wealth to the extent that
a group of strong men would have found the keys to his treasures
heavy to carry. It was also said that his wealth was in animal skins
and that it was carried on sixty mules. And Allah knows better. The
advisers among his people had admonished him, saying, “Do not
exult. Verily! Allah likes not those who exult” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:76) means do not be proud because of what you have been given
and do not behave arrogantly toward others. “But seek, with that
(wealth) which Allah has bestowed on you, the home of the
Hereafter.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:77) They were saying, "Let your
priority be the attainment of Allah’s Reward in the abode of the
Hereafter, because it is better than and more lasting." And at the
same time, “…and forget not your portion of legal enjoyment in
this world.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:77) That is, take from your
property what Allah has made lawful to you and enjoy yourself
with it in a lawful manner. “…and be generous as Allah has been
Generous to you” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:77) means be good to
Allah’s creation, just as their Creator has been good to you. “…and
seek not mischief in the land.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:77) It means
that do not act meanly toward them, do not spread corruption
among them and do not treat them in a manner contrary to that
which you were commanded to do, for (if you do that), He will
punish you and take what He has given you away from you.
“Verily, Allah likes not the mufsidoon.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:77)
But his reply to this correct and eloquent advice from his people
was naught but to say, “This has been given to me only because of
knowledge I possess.” (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:78) That is, I have no
need to act upon what you have mentioned or what you have
indicated, because Allah has only given me this (wealth) because
He knows that I deserve it and am worthy of it; and if I was not
beloved by Him, He would not have given me what He has given
me. But Allah answered him, saying, "Did he not know that Allah
had destroyed before him generations, men who were stronger than
him in might and greater in the amount (of riches) they had
collected. But the mujrimoon will not be questioned of their sins
(because Allah knows them well, so they will be punished without
Sunniconnect.com
129

account)" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:78) means We have destroyed
previous generations because of their sins and offenses – and they
possessed much greater power and wealth and more children than
Qaroon. So if what he says is correct; We would not punish anyone
who had more wealth than he. His wealth is not a proof of Our Love
for him or Our Care for him, as He, Most High, says, "And it is not
your wealth, nor your children that bring you nearer to Us (i.e.
pleases Allah), but only he (will please Us) who believes (in
Islamic Monotheism), and does righteous deeds; as for such, there
will be twofold reward for what they did, and they will reside in the
high dwellings (Paradise) in peace and security." (Soorah Saba'
34:37) And He, Most High says, "Do they think that We enlarge
them in wealth and children, We hasten unto them with good things
(in this worldly life so that they will have no share of good things
in the Hereafter)? Nay, but they perceive not." (Soorah AlMu'minoon 23:55, 56)
Allah, Most High, says, "So he went forth before his people in his
pomp." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:79) Many of the scholars of tafseer
said that he would set out with great pomp and ceremony, wearing
fine clothes and riding in a beautiful carriage, with servants and
retinue and when those who are impressed by the splendor of the
life of this world saw him, they wished that they had wealth like his
and were envious of his situation. When the scholars – those who
possessed correct understanding, the intelligent and ascetic – heard
their words, they said to them, “Woe to you! The Reward of Allah
is better for those who believe and do righteous good deeds.”
(Soorah Al-Qasas 28:80) That is, Allah’s Reward in the abode of
the Hereafter is better, more lasting, more splendid and more
exalted. Allah, Most High, says, “…and this none shall attain
except those who are patient (in following the truth)” (Soorah AlQasas 28:80) means none shall attain this advice, this statement and
this high-mindedness zeal for the abode of the Hereafter, which is
much superior when compared to the embellishments of this
inferior, Earthly life – except those whose hearts Allah guides and
makes firm, whose understanding He supports and whose aims and
Sunniconnect.com
130

goals He causes to be achieved. And how fine is the saying of one
of the Salaf, who said, “Verily, Allah loves penetrating insight in
cases of doubt or obscurity and perfect rationality in cases of vain
desire.” Allah, Most High, says, "So We caused the earth to
swallow him and his dwelling place. Then he had no group or party
to help him against Allah, nor was he one of those who could save
themselves." (Soorah AlQasas 28:81) After describing how he
would set out with his pomp and his pride therein, showing disdain
toward the people because of it, Allah said, "So We caused the earth
to swallow him and his dwelling place."
As narrated in Saheeh Al-Bukhari in the Hadith of Az-Zuhri, who
reported on the authority of Salim, who in turn reported on the
authority of his father, who reported from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “While a man was
dragging his izar (lower garment) on the ground
(behind him), suddenly Allah made him sink into the earth and he
will go on sinking into it till the Day of Resurrection.”
And Allah, Most High, says, "Then he had no group or party to help
him against Allah, nor was he one of those who could save
themselves." (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:81) There was no one to help
him – neither he himself nor any other, as Allah says, "Then will
(man) have no power, nor any helper." (Soorah At-Tariq 86:10)
And when the swallowing of the earth, the loss of his wealth, the
ruin of his house and the destruction of him, his family and his
landed property befell him, those who had wished for wealth such
as he had been given repented and thanked Allah, Who organizes
the affairs of His slaves as He wills, in the best way. This is why
they said, “Had it not been that Allah was Gracious to us, He could
have caused the earth to swallow us up (also)! Know you not that
the disbelievers will never be successful?” (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:82)
Then He, Most High, informs us of that "That home of the Hereafter
(i.e. Paradise)" (Soorah Al-Qasas 28:83) – and that is the
Sunniconnect.com
131

everlasting abode, the abode which those who are given it will be
happy and will be comforted by the (beautiful) women therein. And
it is only prepared for those who desire not grandeur and greatness
in this world, nor corruption. Grandeur is pride, arrogance and
insolence and corruption is acts of disobedience, such as taking the
wealth of the people by force, corrupting their way of life, treating
them badly and not advising them. Then He, Most High, says, "And
the good end is for the muttaqoon (pious)." (Soorah Al-Qasas
28:83)
Allah, Most High, has described the censure of Qaroon in more
than one Verse of the Qur'an: He, Most
High, says, "And indeed We sent Moosa with Our Ayat, and a
manifest authority, to Fir'awn, Haman and Qaroon, but they called
(him) “a sorcerer, a liar!” (Soorah Ghafir 40:23,24)
And Imam Ahmad has narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Amr (May Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that one day he mentioned the
prayer, saying, “Whoever observes it (regularly and
conscientiously) will have a light, a proof and salvation on the Day
of Resurrection. But he who does not observe it will have no light,
no proof and no salvation; and on the Day of Resurrection, he will
be with Qaroon, Fir‘awn, Haman and 'Ubayy Ibn Khalaf.” Imam
Ahmad was alone in narrating this.

Description of the Virtues, Good
Qualities and Characteristics of Moosa
and His Death
Allah, Most High, says, "And mention in the Book (this Qur'an)
Moosa. Verily! He was chosen and he was a Messenger (and) a
Prophet. And We called him from the right side of the Mount, and
made him draw near to Us for a talk with him (Moosa). And We
Sunniconnect.com
132

bestowed on him his brother Haroon, (also) a Prophet, out of Our
Mercy." (Soorah Maryam 19:51-53)
And He, Most High, says, (Allah) said, “O, Moosa! I have chosen
you above men by My Messages, and by My speaking (to you).”
(Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:144)
And we have mentioned previously that it is recorded in the
Saheehain from the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Do not
ascribe to me superiority over the other Prophets, for on the Day of
Resurrection the people will become unconscious and I will (feel
that) I am the first to regain consciousness. Then I will see Moosa
holding one of the legs of the Throne. I will not know whether he
has come to his senses before me or that the shock he had received
at the Mountain, (during his worldly life) was sufficient for him.”
And Imam Abu ‘Abdullah Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of
Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, '(Prophet) Moosa was a shy person and used to cover his body
completely because of his extensive shyness. One of the Children
of Isra’eel hurt him by saying, He covers his body in this way only
because of some defect in his skin, either leprosy or scrotal hernia,
or he has some other defect. Allah wished to clear Moosa of what
they said about him, so one day while Moosa was in seclusion, he
took off his clothes and put them on a stone and started taking a
bath. When he finished the bath, he moved toward his clothes so as
to take them, but the stone took his clothes and fled; Moosa picked
up his stick and ran after the stone saying, 'O, stone! Give me my
garment!' Till he reached a group of the Children of Isra’eel who
saw him naked then, and found him the best of what Allah had
created, and Allah cleared him of what they had accused him of.
The stone stopped there and Moosa took and put his garment on
and started hitting the stone with his stick. By Allah, the stone still
has some traces of the hitting, three, four or five marks. This was
Sunniconnect.com
133

what Allah refers to in His Saying: “O, you who believe! Be you
not like those who annoyed Moosa, But Allah cleared him of that
which they alleged, and he was honorable in Allah’s Sight.”
(Soorah Al-Ahzab 33.69)
And it is reported in the Saheehain in the narration of Qatadah, on
the authority of Anas, who reported on the authority of Malik Ibn
Sa’sa’ah, who reported from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) that on the night when he was raised up to the
heavens, he met Moosa (Peace be upon him) in the sixth heaven
and Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) said to him, “This is Moosa.” So
he greeted him with salutations of peace; he said, “I greeted him
with salutations of peace and he said, 'Welcome to the righteous
Prophet and righteous brother.' When I proceeded on, he started
weeping and when he was asked why he was weeping, he said, 'I
am weeping because followers of this youth who was sent after me
will enter Paradise in greater number than my followers'."
Allah, Most High, has mentioned Moosa (Peace be upon him) in
the Qur'an in many places, praised him and related his story in His
Noble Book a number of times and He has repeated it at length and
in brief. He has praised him eloquently and in many places, He has
coupled mention of him and his Book (the
Towrah) with the mention of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and His Book (the
Qur’an), as in Soorah Al-Baqarah, where He says, "And when there
came to them a Messenger from Allah (i.e. Muhammad)
confirming what was with them, a party of those who were given
the Scripture threw away the Book of Allah behind their backs as
if they did not know!" (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:101) And He, Most
High, says "And indeed We granted to Moosa and Haroon the
criterion (of right and wrong), and a shining light (i.e. the Tawrah)
and a Reminder for Al-Muttaqoon. Those who fear their Lord
without seeing Him, while they are afraid of the Hour. And this is
a blessed Reminder (the Qur’an) which We have sent down, will
you then (dare to) deny it?" (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:48-50)
Sunniconnect.com
134

And He, Most High, says, "Let the people of the Injeel (Gospel)
judge by what Allah has revealed therein. And whosoever does not
judge by what Allah has revealed (then) such (people) are the
Fasiqoon (the rebellious i.e. disobedient (of a lesser degree) to
Allah. And We have sent down to you (O, Muhammad,) the Book
(this Qur’an) in truth, confirming the Scripture that came before it
and muhaiminan (trustworthy in highness and a witness) over it
(old Scriptures)." (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:47,48) So He has made the
Qur’an as a judge over all of the previous Scriptures, a confirmation
of them and an explanation of the alterations and substitutions that
have occurred therein, because the People of the Scripture were
entrusted with the Scriptures that were in their hands, but they were
unable to preserve them, retain them and protect them. This is why
alterations and substitutions occurred therein – because of their
poor understanding, their deficient knowledge, their bad intentions
and their betrayal of their Deity – may Allah’s Curse remain upon
them until the Day of Resurrection. This is why their books contain
clear errors regarding Allah and His Messengers – errors which are
innumerable and indescribable, the like of which are not to be
found and are unknown elsewhere.
In short, the law of Moosa (Peace be upon him) was great and the
people of his nation were in large numbers; among them were
Prophets, learned men, those who were devoted to worshipping
Allah, ascetics, men of understanding, kings, princes, leaders and
nobles. But they passed away and were replaced, and they altered
their law and were turned into apes and swine. Then they abrogated
them after all of the accounting of their nation and misadventures
too numerous to mention befell them. However, we shall relate
those which contain convincing arguments for those who wish to
know it, if Allah wills. On Him we depend and on Him we rely.

Sunniconnect.com
135

Mention of the Pilgrimage of Moosa to the
Ancient House and the Description of It
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
passed by Al-Azraq Valley and he asked, “Which valley is this?”
They said, “It is Al-Azraq Valley.” He said, “It is as if I am now
looking at Moosa coming down from the mountain track and he is
calling upon Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful in a loud voice,
saying, 'Here I am, at Your service, O, Allah!' – until he reached
the mountain track of Harsha’.” He then asked them, “Which
mountain track is this?” They said, “This is the mountain track of
Harsha’.” He said, “It is as if I am now looking at Yoonus, son of
Matta, riding on a red she-camel, with a cloak of wool around him
and the reins of his she-camel are made from khulbah.” Hushaim
said, “It (khulbah) means date-palm fibers – and he was calling
upon Allah, saying, 'Here I am, at Your service, O,
Allah'!”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Mujahid that he said,
“We were with Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and
someone mentioned Ad-Dajjal and it was said, “It is written
between his eyes: ‘Kaf, Fa’, Ra’ ’.” He said, “What do they say?”
He said, “They say, “It is written between his eyes: ‘Kaf,
Fa’, Ra’.” Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) then said,
“I did not hear him (i.e. the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him)) say that, but he said, “As for Ibraheem, look at your
companion (i.e. look at me), while as for Moosa, he was a wellbuilt man, with curly hair and he rode a red camel, whose reins
were made of khulbah. It is as if I am seeing him now going down
into the valley and calling out, 'Here I am, at Your service, O,
Allah!'.” Hushaim said that khulbah means date-palm fibers.

Sunniconnect.com
136

Description of Moosa's Death
Al-Bukhari narrated in his Saheeh on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Angel of Death
was sent to Moosa (Peace be upon him). When he came to Moosa,
he struck him. The angel returned to his Lord and said, “You have
sent me to a slave who does not want to die.” Allah said, “Return
to him and tell him to put his hand on the back of an ox and for
every hair that will come under it, he will be granted one year of
life.” Moosa said, “O, Lord! What will happen after that?” Allah
replied, “Then death.” Moosa said, “Let it come now!” Moosa then
requested Allah to let him die close to the Holy Land so that he
would be at a stone’s throw distance from it.” Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) added, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 'If I were there, I would
show you his grave below the red sand dune at the side of the road'.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, The Angel of Death came
to Moosa (Peace be upon him) and he said, “Answer your Lord.”
But Moosa struck the Angel of Death in the eye and knocked it out.
The angel returned to Allah and said, “You sent me to a slave of
Yours who does not wish to die.” He added, “And he has knocked
out my eye!” Allah then restored his eye and said, “Return to My
slave and say to him, 'Is it life you desire? If you desire to live, then
place your hand on the back of the bull. Then you will live as many
years as the number of hairs covered by your hand'.” Moosa (Peace
be upon him) asked, “Then what?” He was told, “Then death.” He
said, “Then now, O, my Lord, or soon!” Imam Ahmad was alone
in narrating this and it is mawqoof with this wording. It was
narrated by Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh, on the authority of Abu
Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) from the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Ibn Hibban was
doubtful about it, and he explained it, saying, “When the Angel of
Death said this, Moosa (Peace be upon him) did not know him,
because he came to him in a form which Moosa (Peace be upon
Sunniconnect.com
137

him) did not recognize, just as Jibraeel (Peace be upon him) came
to the Prophet (Peace be upon him) in the form of a Bedouin and
the angels came to Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) and Lot (Peace
be upon him) in the form of young men and Ibraheem (Peace be
upon him) and Lot (Peace be upon him) did not recognize them at
first. Similarly, it seems likely that Moosa (Peace be upon him) did
not recognize him for the same reason, and so he struck him and
knocked out his eye, because he entered his house without seeking
permission. This is in agreement with our law, which permits the
removal of the eye of one who looks at you in your house without
permission.”
Then he related the Hadith via ‘Abdur-Razzaq, on the authority of
Ma‘mar, who reported on the authority of Hammam, who in turn
reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased
with him) that he said, The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “The Angel of Death came
to Moosa in order to take his soul and he said to him, 'Answer your
Lord.' But Moosa struck the Angel of Death in the eye and knocked
out his eye.”
It was as if he did not recognize him in that form; he did not know
that the angel was speaking the truth, since at that time, he had not
established that it was a noble angel, for there were many things
that he hoped to see occur in his lifetime, such as their departure
from the wilderness and their entry into the Holy Land. But it had
already been ordained by Allah that he should die in the wilderness,
after his brother, Haroon (Peace be upon him), as we shall make
clear, if Allah, Most High, wills.
Some of them claimed that it was Moosa (Peace be upon him) who
led them out of the wilderness and into the Holy Land – and this
contradicts what the People of the Scripture and the majority of the
Muslims believe.

Sunniconnect.com
138

Among the proofs for this is the saying of Moosa (Peace be upon
him), when he chose death, saying, “My Lord! Bring as close as a
stone’s throw to the Holy Land,” and if he had entered it, he would
not have said that. But when he was with his people in the
wilderness and the time of his death drew near, he wished to be
close to the land to which he had migrated and he encouraged his
people to go there. But fate intervened between them and it by a
stone’s throw.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “When I was
raised up to the heaven, I passed by Moosa and he was standing in
prayer in his grave, near the red sand dune.”

Sunniconnect.com
139

The Story of Yoosha'
Prophethood and His Undertaking of the
Burdens of the Children of Isra’eel After the
Deaths of Moosa and Haroon
He was Yoosha‘, son of Noon, son of Afrayeem, son of Yoosuf,
son of Ya‘qoob, son of Ishaq, son of
Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel (peace be upon them all). The People of the
Scriptures say that he was the cousin of Hood (Peace be upon him)
and Allah has mentioned him in the Qur’an, without specifying his
name, in the story of Al-Khidr, as we mentioned previously: "And
(remember) when Moosa said to his servant." (Soorah Al-Kahf
18:60) "So when they had passed further on (beyond that fixed
place), Moosa said to his servant..." (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:62) And
we have mentioned previously the authentic narration of Ubayy Ibn
Ka‘b (May Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), in which he stated that he was
Yoosha‘, son of Noon (Peace be upon him) and the People of the
Scriptures concur with the view that he was a Prophet.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “One of the
Prophets fought in a battle and he said to his people, 'Let no man
follow me who has married a woman and wishes to consummate
the marriage but has not yet done so, nor one who has built a house
and has not yet erected its roof, nor one who has bought a sheep or
a she-camel and he is waiting for it to deliver its young.' So he set
out to do battle and neared the town at the time for ‘Asr prayer, or
thereabouts and he said to the sun, “You are commanded (by Allah)
and I am commanded (by Allah). O, Allah! hold it (the sun) back
for me for a little while.” So it was held back for him until Allah
granted him victory. Then they gathered the booty they had won
and the fire came to burn it, but it refused to consume it. So he said,
Sunniconnect.com
140

“Among you there is someone who has stolen something from the
booty. So let one man from every tribe swear an oath of allegiance
to me. The hand of one of them stuck to his hand and he said,
“Among you are the ones who have stolen something from the
booty. Let your tribe swear an oath of allegiance to me.” So his
tribe swore an oath of allegiance to him and the hands of two or
three men stuck to his hand and he said, “Among you are those who
have stolen the booty. You are the thieves who have stolen the
booty.” Then they produced for him the equivalent of a cow’s head
in gold and they put it with the wealth and it was on a plateau. Then
the fire accepted it and consumed it. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) added, “The spoils of war were
not made lawful for any people before us. This is because Allah
saw our weakness and humility and made them lawful for us.”
Muslim was alone in narrating it from this source.
What is meant is that when he led them through the gate of the city,
they were commanded to enter it while bowing in submission and
thanks to Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful for the great
victory which He had bestowed on them, and which He had
promised them. And they were commanded to say as they entered
the city, hittatun. That is, remove from us the sins that we
committed in the past, i.e. our refusal to fight. This is why, when
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
entered Makkah on the day of the conquest, he entered it – and he
was riding his she-camel – in a state of submission, in order to
express praise and thanks to Allah. In fact, so low did he bow his
head that the tip of his beard touched the saddle of his riding beast.
And with him were the soldiers, in particular, the green regiment,
of whom nothing was visible except their eyes (because of their
armor). When he entered it, he first bathed and then prayed eight
rak‘ahs.
As for the Children of Isra’eel, they disobeyed the command given
to them in word and in deed: They entered the gate, crawling on
their posteriors and saying, “Habbatun fee sha‘rah (a seed in a
Sunniconnect.com
141

hair),” or, according to another narration, “Hintatun fee sha‘rah (a
grain of wheat in a hair).” In short, they altered what they had been
commanded to do and mocked it, as Allah, Most High, says about
them in Soorah AlA‘raf, which is a Makkan Soorah, And
(remember) when it was said to them, “Dwell in this town
(Jerusalem) and eat therefrom wherever you wish, and say, ‘(O,
Allah) forgive our sins.’ And enter the gate in prostration (bowing
with humility). We shall forgive you your wrongdoings. We shall
increase (the reward) for those who do good.” But those among
them who did wrong changed the word that had been told to them.
So We sent on them a punishment from heaven in return for their
wrongdoings. (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:161-162)
And He, Most High, says in Soorah Al-Baqarah – which is a
Madinan Soorah – addressing them, And (remember) when We
said, “Enter this town (Jerusalem) and eat bountifully therein with
pleasure and delight wherever you wish, and enter the gate in
prostration (or bowing with humility) and say, ‘Forgive us’, and
We shall forgive you your sins and shall increase (reward) for those
who do good.” But those who did wrong changed the word from
that which had been told to them for another, so We sent upon the
wrongdoers rijzan (a punishment) from the heaven because of their
refusal to obey Allah. (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:58-59) (Tafseer AtTabari, Vol. 1, Page 305)

Sunniconnect.com
142

Mention of the Stories of Al-Khidr and
Ilyas (Elias) (Peace be upon them)
As for Al-Khidr (Peace be upon him), we have already said that
Moosa (Peace be upon him) traveled to him in order to seek the
hidden knowledge that he possessed; and Allah relates their stories
in His Book, in Soorah Al-Kahf, which we have spoken of in the
tafseer of that Soorah. And here we relate the Hadith which clearly
mentions Al-Khidr (Peace be upon him) and describes how Moosa
(Peace be upon him), son of ‘Imran, the Prophet of the Children of
Isra’eel, to whom the Towrah was sent down, traveled to see him.
Scholars have continued to disagree regarding his name, his lineage
and whether or not he was a Prophet until now, voicing a number
of opinions, which I will mention to you here, if Allah wills, by His
Strength and His Power. Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir said, “It is said that
he was Al-Khidr, son of Adam (Peace be upon him), i.e. the fruit
of his loins." Then he narrated a Hadith from Ad-Daraqutni, on the
authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), who said, “Al-Khidr is the son of Adam, the fruit of his loins.
And Allah has prolonged his lifespan until the day when he will
belie the Dajjal.
Ibn Qutaibah mentioned in Al-Ma‘arif, on the authority of Wahb
Ibn Munabbih that Al-Khidr’s name was Balya. It was also said
that he was Eelya, son of Malkan, son of Falagh, son of ‘Abir, son
of Shalakh, son of Arfakhshadh, son of Sham, son of Nooh (Peace
be upon him). Isma‘eel Ibn Abi Uwais said, “According to what
has been conveyed to us, Al-Khidr’s name was Al-Mu’ammar, son
of Malik, son of ‘Abdullah, son of Nasr, son of Al-Azad – and
Allah knows better.”
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) that he said, “He was only known as AlSunniconnect.com
143

Khidr because when he sat upon a piece of white, barren land, it
became green with plantation (after he sat on
it).”
The context of the story proves that he was a Prophet from a number
of aspects; one of them is the Saying of Allah, Most High: Then
they found one of Our slaves, unto whom We had bestowed mercy
from Us, and whom We had taught knowledge from Us. (Soorah
Al-Kahf 18:65) Another is when Moosa (Peace be upon him) said
to him, “May I follow you so that you teach me something of that
knowledge (guidance and true path) which you have been taught
(by Allah)?” He (Al-Khidr) said, “Verily! You will not be able to
have patience with me! And how can you have patience about a
thing which you know not?” Moosa said, “If Allah wills, you will
find me patient, and I will not disobey you in aught.” He (Al-Khidr)
said, “Then, if you follow me, ask me not about anything till I
myself mention it to you.” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:66-70) Now if he
was a Wali and not a Prophet, Moosa (Peace be upon him) would
not have addressed him in this manner and he would not have
answered Moosa (Peace be upon him) in this way. Moosa (Peace
be upon him) only asked to accompany him in order to acquire the
knowledge with which Allah had favored him, and not Moosa
(Peace be upon him). And if he was not a Prophet, he would not
have been infallible and Moosa (Peace be upon him) – who was
also a great Prophet and a noble Messenger and necessarily
infallible – would not have felt any great need to acquire knowledge
from a Wali, who was not necessarily infallible and he would not
have decided to go to him and remain with him for an extended
period of time – it was said that it was eighty years – and when he
met with him, he behaved with humility toward him and followed
in him in a manner that enabled him to benefit from him. This
proves that he was a Prophet, like him and that he received
Revelation, like him. And he was favored with hidden knowledge
and Prophetic secrets which Moosa, Al-Kaleem, the noble Prophet
(Peace be upon him) had not been made privy to. Ar-Rummani
cited this as evidence of Al-Khidr’s Prophethood. The third aspect
Sunniconnect.com
144

is that Al-Khidr killed the boy and he would not have done so
unless he had been ordered to do so via Revelation from an angel.
This is a separate proof of his Prophethood and a clear evidence of
his infallibility, because it is not permissible for a Wali to embark
on killing individuals simply based on what might enter his mind,
because his notions are not infallible, since it is possible for him to
make mistakes, according to the consensus of the scholars. And
when Al-Khidr resolved to kill that boy, who had not yet reached
maturity, it was because he knew that if he reached maturity, he
would become a disbeliever and his parents might follow him into
disbelief, because of their great love for him. So in killing him there
was a great benefit for them, since it prevented them from falling
into disbelief and being punished for that. This proves that he was
a Prophet, and that he was supported by Allah with infallibility. I
have seen Shaikh Abul Faraj Ibn Al-Jawzi following this path in
citing the evidence for AlKhidr’s Prophethood and it was declared
authentic and cited as evidence by Ar-Rummani as well. The fourth
aspect is that when Al-Khidr explained the reasons for his actions
to Moosa (Peace be upon him) and made clear to him the truth of
the matter, after all that, he said, “…as a Mercy from your Lord.
And I did it not of my own accord.” (Soorah Al-Kahf 18:82) That
is, I did not do those things of my own accord; rather, I was
commanded to do them and I received Revelation regarding them.
These aspects prove that he was a Prophet and his attainment of the
status of Wali, or even Messenger does not invalidate that, as others
have said. As for the view that he was one of the angels, it is very
strange. And if it is established that he was a Prophet, as we have
mentioned, then those who claimed that he was a Wali have nothing
to support their claim – although a Wali might become acquainted
with the truth in matters, without being a Prophet or Messenger.
As for the difference of opinion regarding his existence in our time,
the majority of scholars hold that he remains alive to this day. It
was said that because Adam (Peace be upon him) was buried after
they escaped from the flood, he was included in the supplication of
his father, Adam (Peace be upon him), requesting long life. It was
Sunniconnect.com
145

said that his longevity was due to the fact that he drank from the
spring of life and so he lives on. They also mentioned reports which
they cited as evidence that he remains alive until now and we shall
relate them if Allah wills. And this was his advice to Moosa (Peace
be upon him), when he said this, (Al-Khidr) said, “This is the
parting between me and you, I will tell you the interpretation of
(those) things over which you were unable to hold patience."
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:78)
Numerous traditions which are munqati‘ah have been narrated in
this regard.
Shaikh Abul-Faraj Ibn Al-Jawzi – may Allah have Mercy on him –
has dealt with the Ahadeeth related in this regard that are marfoo‘ah
in his book Ujalatul-Muntaziri Fee Sharhi Halat Al-Khidr and he
has made clear that they are fabricated. As to the traditions from
the Companions (y) and the Tabi‘oon, he has shown that their
asaneed are weak, by explaining them and the ignorance of their
narrators and he has succeeded in this very well and delivered an
expert critique.
As for those who claimed that he has died, they include Al-Bukhari,
Ibraheem Al-Harbi, Abul-Husain AlMunadi and Ibn Al-Jawzi, who supported the idea and wrote a
Ujalatul-Muntaziri Fee Sharhi Halat AlKhidr. And he argued on
their behalf, citing a number of proofs, including the Words of
Allah, Most
High: And We granted not to any human being immortality before
you (O, Muhammad) (Soorah AlAnbiya’ 21:34) So if Al-Khidr was
human, then he must necessarily be included in the generality of
this statement; and it is not permissible to exclude him from it
without some authentic proof – and the basic principle is nonexistence, unless until it is proven otherwise. And nothing has been
reported from any infallible source that contains evidence that he is
so excluded, which would necessitate acceptance. Another of the
Sunniconnect.com
146

proofs cited by Ibn Al-Jawzi is the Saying of Allah, Most High:
And (remember) when
Allah took the Covenant of the Prophets, saying, “Take whatever I
gave you from the Book and Hikmah
(understanding of the Laws of Allah, etc.), and afterward there will
come to you a Messenger (Muhammad) confirming what is with
you; you must, then, believe in him and help him.” Allah said, “Do
you agree (to it) and will you take up My Covenant (which I
conclude with you)?” They said, “We agree.” He said, “Then bear
witness; and I am with you among the witnesses (for this).” (Soorah
Ali ‘Imran 3:81) ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him) said, “Allah did not send a Prophet except that He took from
him a Covenant that if Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) should be sent while he was alive, he would certainly
believe in him and support him. And He commanded each Prophet
to take from his nation a covenant that if Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was sent during their lifetime, they
would believe in him and support him. Al-Bukhari narrated this
from him. Now if Al-Khidr was a Prophet or a Wali, he would be
included in this covenant and if he had been alive during the time
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), he would have come to him and believed in what Allah
revealed to him, and would have helped prevent any of his enemies
reaching him, for if he was a Wali, then Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq was
better than he; and if he was a Prophet, then Moosa (Peace be upon
him) was better than he. Imam Ahmad has narrated on the authority
of Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah (May Allah be pleased with him) that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “By Him in Whose Hand is my soul, If Moosa (Peace be upon
him) was alive, he would have no alternative but to follow me.”
And this is conclusive argument. And this Verse has proved that if
it had happened that all of the Prophets were alive and mukallafoon
during the time of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), all of them would have followed him and
would have been under his orders, and they would have been
obliged to live in accordance with the law that he was given, just
Sunniconnect.com
147

as when he met with them on the night of AlIsra (the Night
Journey), he was raised above all of them and when they descended
with him to Bait AlMaqdis, and the time for prayer came, Jibraeel
(Peace be upon him) conveyed to them Allah’s Command that he
should lead them in the prayer, which he did, in the place of their
wilayah (responsibility) and the abode in which they had lived.
This proves that he is the greatest Imam and the Seal of the
Messengers, who has been given precedence over all of them – may
Allah’s choicest Blessings and Peace be upon him and upon all of
them. If this is known – and it is something known to every
Believer – then it must be accepted that if Al-Khidr (Peace be upon
him) was alive, he would have been one of the nation of
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and
among those who followed his Law and he would have had no
alternative but to do so. And when ‘Eesa, the son of Mary, (Peace
be upon him) will descend at the end of time, he will judge in
accordance with this pure Law and he will not depart from it or
deviate from it; and he is one of the five Messengers known as Ulul‘Azm and the Seal of the Prophets of Banu Isra’eel. And it is wellknown that it has not been transmitted in any authentic or hasan
narration that Al-Khidr (Peace be upon him) met with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on
even a single day, or that he fought with him in any battle; and on
the day of the Battle of Badr, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) invoked his Lord, asking Him for help and
victory against the disbelievers, saying, “O, Allah! If this small
band of Muslims is destroyed, You will not be worshipped on this
Earth.” This small band of Muslims included the leaders of the
Muslims and the leaders of the angels, including Jibraeel (Peace be
upon him), as Hassan Ibn Thabit said in a Verse of one of his poems
which has been called “the most splendid verse spoken by the
Arabs”:
“And (remember) the Battle of Badr, When they were repelled by
Jibraeel, (Fighting) under our banner, and Muhammad.”
Sunniconnect.com
148

Now if Al-Khidr had been alive, his standing under this banner
would have been the noblest position he had ever occupied and the
greatest battle in which he had ever fought. Also, if he had still been
alive after that, he would have transmitted the Prophetic Ahadeeth
and Qur’anic Verses that he heard from the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he would have
denounced the fabricated Ahadeeth, the narrations that were
maqloobah, the innovated opinions and the fanatical heresies. And
he would have fought alongside the Muslims in their battles,
attended their Friday prayers and their gatherings and benefited
them (with his knowledge and wisdom) and repelled the harm that
the disbelievers desired to inflict on them. He would have
supported the scholars and lawmakers and corroborated their
proofs and rulings. This would have the best thing said of him
regarding his existence throughout time, his traversing of the
deserts and tracts of land, his meetings with peoples, many of
whose circumstances are unknown. No one has any doubts
regarding these things that we have mentioned after he has been
made to understand – and Allah guides whom He wills to the
Straight Path.
And it has been authentically reported in the Saheehain and
elsewhere on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (May Allah be
pleased with him) that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) performed the ‘Isha’ prayer one night and
then he said, “Do you know the importance of this night? Nobody
present on the face of the Earth tonight will be living after one
hundred years from this night.” In another version, it was reported
that he said, “no eye will be moving….”
Ibn Al-Jawzi said, “These authentic Ahadeeth prove conclusively
that the claim that Al-Khidr is alive is incorrect. The scholars said
that if Al-Khidr did not reach the era of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – as appears most
apparent – then there is no ambiguity in the matter. And if he
reached his era, then this Hadith must mean that he was not alive a
Sunniconnect.com
149

hundred years after that night, in which case, he must now be dead,
because he is included in the generality of this statement; and the
fundamental principle is that there is no exception to such a general
statement, unless it is confirmed by some authentic proof which
must be accepted. And Allah knows better.

As For Ilyas …(Elias)
Allah, Most High, says, after relating the story of Moosa and
Haroon (peace be upon them both) in Soorah As-Saffat, And verily,
Ilyas was one of the Messengers. When he said to his people, “Will
you not fear Allah? Will you call upon Ba‘l (a well- known idol of
his nation whom they used to worship) and forsake the Best of
creators, Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?” But
they denied him (Ilyas), so they will certainly be brought forth (to
the punishment), except the chosen slaves of Allah. And We left
for him (a goodly remembrance) among generations (to come) in
later times. Salamun (peace) be upon Ilyaseen (Ilyas)!” Verily, thus
do We reward the Muhsinoon (those who do good, who perform
good deeds totally for Allah’s sake only). Verily, he was one of Our
believing slaves. (Soorah As-Saffat 37:123-132)
The scholars of genealogy said that he was Ilyas Ibn Tusba. It was
also said that he was the son of Ya Seen, son of Finhas, son of Al‘Eezar, son of Haroon (Peace be upon him).
And it was said that he was Ilyas, son of Al‘azir, son of Al-‘Eezar,
son of Haroon (Peace be upon him), son of ‘Imran. They (the
scholars) said that he was sent to the people of Ba‘labak, which lies
to the east of Damascus. He called upon them to believe in Allah,
the Almighty, the All-Powerful and to abandon the worship of their
idol, which they called Ba‘l.
It was said that the idol was a woman called Ba‘l, but the first
explanation is more correct. This is why he said to them, “Will you
not fear Allah? Will you call upon Ba‘l and forsake the Best of
Sunniconnect.com
150

creators, Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?”
(Soorah As-Saffat 37:124-126) But they belied him and opposed
him and attempted to kill him. It was said that he fled from them
and that he hid from them.
Makhool narrated on the authority of Ka‘b that he said, “Four
Prophets are living: two of them are on Earth – Ilyas and Al-Khidr
– and two of them are in the heavens – Idrees and 'Eesa (peace be
upon them
all).”

Mention of a Number of Prophets From
Banu Isra’eel After Moosa
Ibn Jareer At-Tabari said in his Tareekh, “There is no disagreement
among the scholars of the history of the people of the past and their
affairs from among our nation and others, that the one who took
over the affairs of Banu Isra’eel after Yoosha‘ (Peace be upon him)
(Joshua)was Caleb (Kalab), son of Yuafanna, i.e. one of the
companions of Moosa (Peace be upon him) and his brother-in-law.
He was one of the two men from among those who feared Allah –
Joshua and Caleb – and it was they who said to the Children of
Isra’eel, when they refused to fight in Allah’s Cause, “Assault them
through the gate, for when you are in, victory will be yours, and put
your trust in Allah if you are indeed Believers.” (Soorah AlMa’idah
5:23)
Ibn Jareer At-Tabari said, “Then after him, the one who undertook
responsibility for the affairs of Banu
Isra’eel was (Hizqeel) Ezekiel (Peace be upon him), son of Boozi,
and it was he who invoked Allah and
He revived …those who went forth from their homes in thousands,
fearing death. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:243)
Sunniconnect.com
151

The Story of Hizqeel (Ezekiel ) – Peace be upon
him
Allah, Most High, says, Did you (O Muhammad,) not think of those
who went forth from their homes in thousands, fearing death? Allah
said to them, “Die”. And then He restored them to life. Truly, Allah
is full of Bounty to mankind, but most men thank not. (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:243)
And Muhammad Ibn Ishaq reported on the authority of Wahb Ibn
Munabbih that he said, “When Allah took Kalab, the son of
Yoofanna to Him after Yoosha‘, he appointed as his successor to
lead the Children of Isra’eel, Hizqeel, son of Boozi, who was the
son of Al-‘Ajooz and it was he who supplicated for the people
whom Allah mentioned in His Book, according to what has been
conveyed to us: those who went forth from their homes in
thousands, fearing death… (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:243) Ibn Ishaq
said, “They fled from the plague and they camped on a raised area
of land; and Allah said to them, “Die,” and they all died.”
And it was reported on the authority of As-Suddi, who in turn
reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) and ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘ood and on the authority of other Companions that they said
regarding Allah’s Words: Did you (O Muhammad,) not think of
those who went forth from their homes in thousands, fearing death?
Allah said to them, “Die”. And then He restored them to life.
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:243) that they were the people of a town
known as Dawardan, in the direction of Wasit, where the plague
broke out. As a result of that, the majority of the population fled
and camped in an area near to it. And (most of) those who remained
in the town were destroyed, while others were saved and not many
of them died. When the plague ended, they returned safely and
(those who still lived from) those who had remained alive said,
“These companions of ours were more prudent than we; had we
done as they did, we would (all) have survived. And if the plague
Sunniconnect.com
152

returns, we shall certainly leave with them.” So when the plague
returned, they fled and they numbered more than thirty thousand
and they camped in a place which was a wide valley. There, an
angel called them from the floor of the valley and another from the
top of it, saying, “Die!” And they died. Then, when they were dead
and their bodies remained lying there (decomposed), a Prophet
named Hizqeel (Peace be upon him) passed by them and when he
saw them, he stopped and began to think about them, twisting the
corners of his mouth and his fingers. Then Allah revealed to him,
“Do you wish Me to show you how I will return them to life?” He
said, “Yes,” thinking only of his amazement at Allah’s Power over
them. It was said to him, “Call!” So he called, “O, you bones! Allah
commands you to unite!” upon which, the bones flew together until
they became skeletal bodies. Then Allah revealed to him that he
should call, “O, you bones! Allah commands you to be clothed in
flesh!” upon which, they became covered with flesh and blood and
(even) the garments in which they had died. Then it was said to
him, “Call.” So he called, “O, you bodies! Allah commands you to
stand up!” upon which, they stood up. Some said that Mansoor
claimed, on the authority of Mujahid, that when they were brought
back to life, they said, “Glorified be You, O Allah, and all praise
and thanks be to You. None has the right to be worshipped except
You.” Then they returned to their people alive, and their people
knew that they had been dead, for they had the pallor of death on
their faces and they were wearing rotted garments. Then they lived
on until the time written for them. Imam Ahmad and the compilers
of the Saheehain (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) narrated on the
authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him)
that ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him) set out
for Ash-Sham (Syria) and when he reached Sargh, the
Commanders of the (Muslim) army, Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah
(May Allah be pleased with him) and his Companions met him and
told him that an epidemic had broken out in Ash-Sham. ‘Umar
(May Allah be pleased with him) said, “Call for me the early
emigrants.” So ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) called
them, consulted them and informed them that an epidemic had
Sunniconnect.com
153

broken out in Ash-Sham. Those people differed in their opinions.
Some of them said, “We have come out for a purpose and we do
not think that it is proper to give it up,” while others said (to
‘Umar), “You have along with you other people and the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), so do not advise that we take them to this
epidemic.” ‘Umar said to them, “Leave me now.” Then he said,
“Call the Ansar for me.” I called them and he consulted them and
they followed the way of the emigrants and differed as they did. He
then said to them, “Leave me now,” and added, “Call for me the
old people of Quraish who emigrated in the year of the Conquest
of Makkah.” I called them and they gave a unanimous opinion
saying, “We advise that you should return with the people and do
not take them to that (place) of epidemic.” So ‘Umar (May Allah
be pleased with him) made an announcement, “I will ride back to
Madinah in the morning, so you should do the same.” Abu
‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah said (to ‘Umar), “Are you running away
from what Allah has ordained?” ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with
him) said, “Would that someone else had said such a thing, O Abu
‘Ubaidah! Yes, we are running from what Allah has ordained to
what Allah has ordained. Don’t you agree that if you had camels
that went down a valley having two places, one green and the other
dry, you would graze them on the green one only if Allah had
ordained that, and you would graze them on the dry one only if
Allah had ordained that?” At that time ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf,
who had been absent because of some job, came and said, “I have
some knowledge about this. I have heard the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, 'If you hear about
it (an outbreak of plague) in a land, do not go to it; but if plague
breaks out in a country where you are staying, do not run away
from it.' ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) thanked Allah and
returned to Madinah.”
I say: We have already related the story of Ilyas (Peace be upon
him) (Elias) following on from the story of Al-Khidr (Peace be
upon him), because they are frequently mentioned together and
Sunniconnect.com
154

because their story is after the story of Moosa (Peace be upon him)
in Soorah As-Saffat and so we have advanced his story because of
this. And Allah knows better. It has been reported that Muhammad
Ibn Ishaq narrated on the authority of Wahb Ibn Munabbih that he
said, “Then Ilyas’ successor, Al-Yasa‘ (Elisha) (Peace be upon
him) was raised to Prophethood after him and this is his story:

The Story of Al-Yasa‘a (Elisha) – Peace be upon
him
Allah has mentioned him among the Prophets in Soorah Al-An‘am
in His Saying: And Isma‘eel (Ishmael) and Al-Yasa‘a (Elisha), and
Yoonus (Jonah) and Loot (Lot), and each one of them We preferred
above Al-‘Alameen (of their times). (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:86) And
He, Most High says in Soorah Sad, And remember Isma‘eel, AlYasa‘a, and Zul-Kifl (Isaiah), all are among the best. (Soorah Sad
38:48). Ishaq Ibn Bishr Abu Huzaifah said, “Sa‘eed informed us on
the authority of Qatadah, who reported on the authority of AlHasan that he said, “After Ilyas (Peace be upon him) was Al-Yasa‘a
(Peace be upon him) and he remained for as long as Allah willed,
calling them to Allah and holding fast to the teachings of Ilyas
(Peace be upon him) and the law given to him until Allah, the
Almighty, the All-Powerful took him.
After that, changes and corruption spread among them, innovations
and sins became widespread, tyrants became numerous and they
killed the Prophets. Among them was a willful, obstinate and
despotic king.
Al-Hafiz Abul-Qasim Ibn ‘Asakir said in “the letter Ya’” in his
Tareekh, “Al-Yasa‘a – and he was AlAsbat, son of ‘Adiyy, son of
Shootlam, son of Afratheem, son of Yoosuf, son of Ya‘qoob, son
of Ishaq, son of Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel (peace be upon them all). It
was also said that he was the paternal cousin of Ilyas (Peace be
upon him). And it was said that he hid with him on the mountain
known as Qasiyoon, from the king of Ba‘labak, that then he went
Sunniconnect.com
155

with him to that land and that when Ilyas (Peace be upon him) was
raised up, Al-Yasa‘a (Peace be upon him) succeeded him as leader
of his people and Allah appointed him as a Prophet after him.

The Story of Shamweel (Samuel) – Peace be
upon him
And Therein Begins the Case of Dawood (David)
He was Shamweel (Samuel), son of Bali, son of ‘Al-Qamah, son of
Yarkham, son of Aleehoo, son of Tahoo, son of Zoof, son of ‘AlQamah, son of Mahath, son of Amusa, son of Ezria. Muqatil said
that he was descended from Haroon (Peace be upon him), while
Mujahid said that he was Asamweel, son of Halfaqa, but he did not
give details of his lineage more than this. And Allah knows better.
Allah, Most High, says in His Noble Book, Have you not thought
about the group of the Children of Isra’eel after (the time of)
Moosa? When they said to a Prophet of theirs, “Appoint for us a
king and we will fight in Allah’s Cause.” He said, “Would you then
refrain from fighting, if fighting was prescribed for you?” They
said, “Why should we not fight in Allah’s Cause, while we have
been driven out of our homes and our children (families have been
taken as captives)?” But when fighting was ordered for them, they
turned away, all except a few of them. And Allah is Aware of the
Zalimoon. And their Prophet (Samuel) said to them, “Indeed Allah
has appointed Taloot (Saul) as a king over you.” They said, “How
can he be a king over us when we are better fitted than he for the
kingdom, and he has not been given enough wealth?” He said,
“Verily, Allah has chosen him above you and has increased him
abundantly in knowledge and body. And Allah grants His Kingdom
to whom He wills. And Allah is Sufficient for His creature’ needs,
All-Knowing.” And their Prophet (Samuel) said to them, “Verily!
The sign of His Kingdom is that there shall come to you At-Taboot
(a wooden box), wherein is Sakeenah (peace and reassurance) from
your Lord and a remnant of that which Moosa and Haroon left
Sunniconnect.com
156

behind, carried by the angels. Verily, in this is a sign for you if you
are indeed Believers.” Then, when Taloot set out with the army, he
said, “Verily! Allah will try you by a river. So whoever drinks
thereof, he is not of me, and whoever tastes it not, he is of me,
except him who takes (thereof) in the hollow of his hand.” Yet they
drank thereof, all except a few of them. So when he had crossed it
(the river), he and those who believed with him, said, “We have no
power this day against Jaloot (Goliath) and his hosts.” But those
who knew with certainty that they were to meet their Lord, said,
“How often a small group overcame a mighty host by Allah’s
Leave?” And Allah is with As-Sabireen (the patient, persevering
ones). And when they advanced to meet Jaloot (Goliath) and his
forces, they invoked (Allah, saying), “Our Lord! Pour forth on us
patience and make us victorious over the disbelieving people.” So
they routed them by Allah’s Leave and Dawood (David) killed
Jaloot, and Allah gave him (Dawood) the kingdom (after the death
of Taloot and Samuel) and Al-Hikmah (Prophethood) and taught
him of that which He willed. And if Allah did not check one set of
people by means of another, the Earth would indeed be full of
mischief. But Allah is full of Bounty to Al-‘Alameen. (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:246-251)
Most of the scholars of tafseer said that the Prophet of the people
mentioned in this story is Shamweel (Peace be upon him). It was
also said that it is Sham‘oon and it was said they are one and the
same person. And it was also said that it is Yoosha‘ (Peace be upon
him), but this is very improbable, according to what Imam Abu
Ja‘afar Ibn Jareer At-Tabari has narrated in his Tafseer, which
states that between the death of Yoosha‘ (Peace be upon him) and
the sending of Shamweel (Peace be upon him) was a period of four
hundred and sixty years. And Allah knows better.
What is meant by this is that when these people had become
exhausted by wars and they had been vanquished by enemies, they
asked the Prophet of Allah (Peace be upon him) at that time to
appoint for them a king to whom they would pledge their obedience
Sunniconnect.com
157

and alongside whom they would fight their enemies. He said to
them, “Would you then refrain from fighting, if fighting was
prescribed for you? They said,"Why should we not fight in Allah’s
way”. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:246) That is, what prevents you from
fighting? “…while we have been driven out of our homes and our
children (families have been taken as captives)?” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:246) They said, “We have been fought against and
wronged and so it is only fitting that we should fight in defense of
our children who have been taken by force and the weak among
them and those who have taken away by them. He, Most High,
says, But when fighting was ordered for them, they turned away,
all except a few of them. And Allah is Aware of the Zalimoon.
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:246). As Allah says at the end of the story,
none crossed the river with the king except a few, while the rest
returned and refused to fight.
And their Prophet (Samuel) said to them, “Indeed Allah has
appointed Taloot as a king over you.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:247)
‘Ikrimah and As-Suddi said that he was a water carrier. Wahb Ibn
Munabbih said that he was a tanner. Others mentioned other
occupations. And Allah knows better. This is why they said, “How
can he be a king over us when we are better fitted than he for the
kingdom, and he has not been given enough wealth?” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:24) He said, “Verily, Allah has chosen him above you
and has increased him abundantly in knowledge…” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:247) It was said that the knowledge was in matters
pertaining to warfare; and it was said that rather, it was in all
matters. “…and body.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:247) It was said that
it means in height and also that it means in handsomeness. But it
would appear from the context that he was the most handsome of
them and the most knowledgeable of them after their Prophet
(Peace be upon him). “And Allah grants His Kingdom to whom He
wills.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:247) Judgment is for Him, as is the
creation and all matters. “And Allah is Sufficient for His creature
needs, All-Knowing.” And their Prophet (Samuel) said to them,
Sunniconnect.com
158

“Verily! The sign of His Kingdom is that there shall come to you
at-taboot (the wooden box), wherein is Sakeenah (peace and
reassurance) from your Lord and a remnant of that which Moosa
and Haroon left behind, carried by the angels. Verily, in this is a
sign for you if you are indeed Believers.” (Soorah AlBaqarah
2:247,248) This is also from the blessing of the appointment of this
righteous man over them and good fortune bestowed on them, that
Allah returned to them the Taboot, which had been forcibly taken
from them by their enemies. And aforetimes, they had been aided
in achieving victory over their enemies because of it. “…wherein
is Sakeenah from your Lord and a remnant of that which Moosa
and Haroon (Aaron) left behind.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:248) It
was said that in it were pieces of the Tablets (on which the Ten
Commandments were written) and some of the manna that had
descended on them when they were in the wilderness. “…carried
by the angels” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:248) means the angels will
come to you bearing it and you will witness that with your own
eyes, so that it will be a proof from Allah against you and a clear
evidence of the truth of what I say to you and of the correctness of
the appointment of this righteous king over you. This is why he
said, “Verily, in this is a sign for you if you are indeed Believers.”
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:248) It was said that the Amalekites had
seized this box, which contained the things we have mentioned,
such as the Sakeenah and the blessed remnants.
And it was said that it also contained the Towrah and while it was
in their possession, they placed it under an idol belonging to them
in their land and in the morning they found it on the head of the
idol, so they placed it under it again, but on the following day, they
found the box on top of the idol. When this was repeated, they
realized that it was the Work of Allah, Most High, and so they sent
it out of their city, to one of their villages. But a disease afflicted
their necks. When this situation had persisted for some time, they
put it in a cart and tied two cows to it and sent them forth. It was
said that the angels gave them water until they came to the leaders
Sunniconnect.com
159

of the Children of Isra’eel, who were waiting for it, in according
with the information given to them by their Prophet regarding it.
And He, Most High, says, Then, when Taloot set out with the army,
he said, “Verily! Allah will try you by a river. So whoever drinks
thereof, he is not of me, and whoever tastes it not, he is of me,
except him who takes (thereof) in the hollow of his hand.” (Soorah
Al-Baqarah 2:249) ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with him) and several scholars of tafseer said that it was the River
Jordan, which was known as Ash-Sharee‘ah. One of the commands
given by Taloot to his army at the edge of the river – which was
conveyed to him by the Prophet of Allah (Peace be upon him) as a
test and a trial – was that if any of them drank from the river, he
could not accompany Taloot into battle, except those who only took
a handful of water.
Allah, Most High, says, Yet, they drank thereof, all except a few of
them. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:249) AsSuddi said, “The army
consisted of eighty thousand men and seventy-six thousand of them
drank from it, leaving only four thousand men remaining with
Taloot.” And Al-Bukhari narrated in his Saheeh, on the authority
of Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said,
“We, the Companions of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), used to say that the number of the warriors of
Badr was the same as the number of Taloot’s companions who
crossed the river (of Jordan) with him, and none crossed the river
with him but a Believer, and they were over three hundred and more
than ten
Believers.”
As-Suddi’s claim that the number of soldiers was eighty thousand
is questionable, because it is not likely that an army of warriors
reaching eighty thousand could have assembled in the land of Bait
Al-Maqdis. And Allah knows better. Allah, Most High, says, So
when he had crossed it (the river), he and those who believed with
him, they said, “We have no power this day against Jaloot and his
Sunniconnect.com
160

hosts.” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:249). That is, they deemed
themselves too few in numbers and too weak to stand against their
enemies, when they compared their own small force with the huge
numbers of their enemies. But those who knew with certainty that
they were to meet their Lord, said, “How often has a small group
overcome a mighty host by Allah’s Leave!” And Allah is with AsSabiroon (the patient ones, etc.).” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:249.
Meaning the cavalry among them; and the cavalry were those who
possessed faith and certainty and they were patient in the face of
argument and abuse. And when they advanced to meet Jaloot
(Goliath) and his forces, they invoked, “Our Lord! Pour forth on us
patience and make us victorious over the disbelieving people.”
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:250) They asked Allah to pour on them
patience, i.e. to immerse them in it from above, so that their hearts
would remain steadfast and they would not fear, make their feet
firm on the battlefield and strengthen the brave ones in the turmoil
of battle. So they asked Allah to grant them steadfastness, both
open and hidden, that He grant them victory against their enemies
and His enemies among the disbelievers and the rejecters of His
Signs and His Blessings and He, the Almighty, the Omnipotent, the
All-Hearing, the All-Seeing, the Most Wise, the All-Knowing
granted their request and caused them to achieve their objectives.
This is why He says, So they routed them by Allah’s Leave.
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:251) That is, by Allah’s Power, not by their
own power and by Allah’s Strength and Help, not by their own
strength and their numbers; and they won this victory in spite of the
great numbers of the enemy, as Allah, Most High, says, And Allah
has already made you victorious at Badr, when you were a weak
little force. So, fear Allah much (abstain from all kinds of sins and
evil deeds which He has forbidden and love Allah much, perform
all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained) that you may be
grateful. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:123) And in the Words of Him,
Most High: …and Dawood killed Jaloot, and Allah gave him
(Dawood) the kingdom (after the death of Taloot and
Samuel) and Al-Hikmah (Prophethood), and taught him of that
which He willed. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:251) There is evidence of
Sunniconnect.com
161

the bravery of Dawood (Peace be upon him) and that he killed
Jaloot and humiliated thereby his army and broke it; and there is no
greater battle than the one in which a king kills his enemy and due
to that, he captures (as booty) a huge amount of wealth, their
champions are taken as captives, the word of faith is elevated over
the idols, Allah’s Awliya’ are given ascendancy over His enemies
and the Religion of Truth is made victorious over falsehood and its
adherents.

The Story of Dawood (David) – Peace be upon
him
He was Dawood, son of ‘Eesha, son of Uwaid, son of Ba‘az, son of
Salmoon, son of Nahshoon, son of ‘Uwainazab, son of ’Iram, son
of Hisroon, son of Faras, son of Yahooza, son of Ya‘qoob, son of
Ishaq, son of Ibraheem, Al-Khaleel (peace be upon them): Allah’s
slave and His Prophet, and His Khaleefah in the land of Bait AlMaqdis. Allah combined in him kingship and Prophethood, the best
of this earthly life and the Afterlife. Kings belonged to one lineage
and Prophets to another, but in the case of Dawood (Peace be upon
him), both were combined in him. This is as Allah, Most High,
says, …and Dawood killed Jaloot, and Allah gave him (Dawood)
the kingdom (after the death of Taloot and Samuel) and AlHikmah
(Prophethood), and taught him of that which He willed. And if
Allah did not check one set of people by means of another, the
Earth would indeed be full of mischief. But Allah is full of Bounty
to Al‘Alameen. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:251) It means that if kings
were not set up to rule over the people, the strong would devour the
weak. And Allah says, And indeed We bestowed Grace on Dawood
from Us (saying), “O, you mountains! Glorify (Allah) with him!
And you birds (also)! And We made the iron soft for him.” Saying,
“Make you perfect coats of mail, balancing well the rings of chain
armor, and work you (men) righteousness. Truly, I see all that you
do.” (Soorah Saba’ 34:10,11) And He, Most High, says,
Sunniconnect.com
162

And We subjected the mountains and the birds to glorify Our
Praises along with Dawood, And it was We Who was the doer (of
all these things). And We taught him the making of metal coats of
mail (for battles), to protect you in your fighting. Are you then
grateful? (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:79,80) Allah helped him in the
making of iron coats of mail, to strengthen them against their
enemies and He guided him as to how to make them. He says,
“…balancing well the rings of chain armor.” (Soorah Saba’ 34:11)
That is, do not make the rivets too loose that the rings (of chain
mail) will shake, or make them too tight that they will not be able
to move at all, but make it just right. This was said by Mujahid,
Qatadah, Al-Hakam and ‘Ikrimah.
And it has been confirmed in an authentic Hadith: “The best thing
that a man can eat is that which he has earned by working with his
own hands. The Prophet of Allah, Dawood, used to eat from the
earnings of his own hands.”
And He, Most High, says, and remember Our slave Dawood, DhulAydi. Verily, he was ever oftreturning in all matters and in
repentance (toward Allah). Verily, We made the mountains to
glorify Our Praises with him (Dawood) in the ‘ashiyy (i.e. after
midday till sunset) and ishraq (i.e. after sunrise till midday). And
(so did) the birds assemble, all with him (Dawood) did turn (to
Allah i.e. glorified His Praises). We made his kingdom strong and
gave him Al-Hikmah and sound judgment in speech and decision.
(Soorah Sad 38:17-20) ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) and Mujahid said that Dhul-Aydi (literally, the
Owner of Hands) means possessor of strength in obedience (to
Allah); i.e. strong in worship and the performance of righteous
deeds. Qatadah said, “He was given strength in worship and
understanding of Islam.” He added, “And it was reported to us that
he used to stand at night (in prayer) and he would fast half of the
time.” And it has been confirmed in the Saheehain that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “The prayer most beloved by Allah is the prayer of Dawood
Sunniconnect.com
163

(Peace be upon him) and the fast most beloved by Allah is the fast
of Dawood (Peace be upon him): he used to sleep for half of the
night, then he would stand (in prayer) for a third of it and then sleep
for a sixth of it. And he would fast for a day and break his fast for
a day and he would not flee if he encountered (an enemy).”
And He, Most High, says, Verily, We made the mountains to
glorify Our Praises with him (Dawood) in the ‘ashiyy and ishraq.
And (so did) the birds assemble: all with him (Dawood) did turn
(to Allah i.e. glorified His Praises). (Soorah Sad 38:18,19) This is,
like His Saying: “O, you mountains! Glorify with him! And you
birds (also)!” (Soorah Saba’ 34:10) This was said by ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid and others in
the explanation of this Verse. Verily, We made the mountains to
glorify Our Praises with him (Dawood) in the ‘ashiyy and ishraq
(Soorah Sad 38:18) means at the end of the forenoon and at the start
of it. This was because Allah had bestowed on him a beautiful
voice, the like of which He had not given to anyone before him, so
that whenever he recited His Book (the Zaboor [Psalms]), the birds
would stop in the air and sing with him and glorify (Allah) with
him, and likewise, the mountains responded to him and glorified
(Allah) with him, singing praises with him every morning and
evening – may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon him.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘A’ishah, may Allah be
pleased with her, that she said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
heard the voice of Abu Moosa AlAsh‘ari (May Allah be pleased
with him) when he was reciting (the Qur’an) and he said, “Abu
Moosa has been given one of the Psalms of the people of Dawood
(Peace be upon him).” And this is in accordance with the conditions
for acceptance stipulated by the two Shaikhs (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim), though they did not narrate it via this route. In addition to
his pleasant voice, he was swift in reciting the Psalms, according to
the narration of Imam Ahmad on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him), who said, The Messenger of
Sunniconnect.com
164

Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Recitation
was made easy for Dawood (Peace be upon him); he used to order
that his riding beast be saddled and he would finish his recitation
before it was saddled and he would not eat except from the fruits
of his own labor.”
And He, Most High, says, We made his kingdom strong and gave
him Al-Hikmah and sound judgment (Soorah Sad 38:20)means,
We gave him a great kingdom and insightful judgment.
As to His Saying: …and gave him Al-Hikmah. (Soorah Sad 38:20)
That is, Prophethood. …and sound judgment. Shuraih Al-Qadi,
Ash-Sha‘bi and Qatadah said that and sound judgment is testimony
and oaths. Qatadah said, “Two witnesses for the plaintiff or an oath
on the part of the defendant is meaning of sound judgment.” This
is the sound judgment which the Prophets and Messengers judged
and the believers and righteous accepted. This is the basis of this
Ummah’s judicial system until the Day of Resurrection. This was
the view of Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman As-Sulami. Mujahid and AsSuddi said that it means passing the right judgment and
understanding the case. Mujahid also said, “It is soundness in
speech and in judgment, and this includes all of the above.” This is
what is meant, and it is the view favored by Ibn Jareer At-Tabari.
And Allah, Most High, says, And has the news of the litigants
reached you? When they climbed over the wall into (his) mihrab (a
praying place or a private room). When they entered upon Dawood,
he was terrified of them, they said, “Fear not! (We are) two
litigants, one of whom has wronged the other, therefore judge
between us with truth, and treat us not with injustice, and guide us
to the Right Way. Verily, this my brother (in religion) has ninetynine ewes, while I have (only) one ewe, and he says, “Hand it over
to me, and he overpowered me in speech.” (Dawood) said
(immediately without listening to the opponent), “He has wronged
you in demanding your ewe in addition to his ewes. And, verily,
many partners oppress one another, except those who believe and
Sunniconnect.com
165

do righteous good deeds, and they are few.” And Dawood guessed
that We had tried him and he sought Forgiveness of his Lord, and
he fell down prostration and turned (to Allah) in repentance. So We
forgave him that, and verily, for him is a near access to Us and a
good place of (final) return (Paradise). (Soorah Sad 38:21-25)
Many of the scholars of tafseer from among the earlier and later
scholars have related stories and reports in explanation of these
Verses, but most of them are Isra’eeliyyat and they include
fabricated stories which we have no alternative but to omit from
our book. So it is better to speak briefly of this story and refer
knowledge of it to Allah, may He be exalted. And Allah guides
whom He wills to the Straight Path.
Allah, Most High, says, So We forgave him that, and verily, for
him is a near access to Us and a good place of (final) return
(Paradise). (Soorah Sad 38:25) That is, on the Day of Resurrection,
he will be brought close to Allah by virtue of his good deeds, as
confirmed in the Hadith: “Behold! the Dispensers of Justice will be
seated on pulpits of light, on the right side of the Merciful, Exalted
and Glorious. Either side of Him is the right side, both being
equally meritorious. (The Dispensers of Justice are) those who do
justice in their rules, in matters relating to their families and in all
that they undertake to do.”
Scholars have differed regarding whether the prostration of Soorah
Sad is obligatory or one of thanks. There are two opinions in this
matter:
Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Al-‘Awwam that he said,
“I asked Mujahid about the prostration of Soorah Sad and he said,
“I asked Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him), “Why do
you prostrate?” He said, “Have you not read …and among his
progeny Dawood, Sulaiman. (Soorah Al-An‘am 6:84) (and) They
are those whom Allah had guided. So follow their guidance.
(Soorah Al-An‘am 6:90) So Dawood (Peace be upon him) was one
Sunniconnect.com
166

of those whom your Prophet was commanded to follow. Dawood
(Peace be upon him) prostrated here so the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) also prostrated here.”
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said regarding the
prostration in Soorah Sad, “It is not one of the obligatory
prostrations, but I have seen the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) prostrating in it.”
Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawood, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’i narrated
likewise on the authority of Ayyoob and At-Tirmidhi said that it is
hasan-saheeh. An-Nasa’i said, “Ibraheem Ibn Al-Hasan AlMaqsami told me: 'Hajjaj Ibn Muhammad related to us on the
authority of ‘Umar Ibn Dharr, who in turn reported on the authority
of his father, who likewise reported on the authority of Sa‘eed Ibn
Jubair, on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) prostrated in Soorah Sad and he said, Dawood (Peace
be upon him) performed this prostration out of repentance and we
perform it out of thanks'.” Ahmad was alone in narrating this, but
all of the men (in the chain of narrators) are trustworthy.
Ibn Abi Hatim said, “It was reported on the authority of Malik Ibn
Deenar that he said regarding the Words of Allah: …and verily, for
him is a near access to Us and a good place of (final) return
(Paradise). (Soorah Sad 38:25) “Dawood will stand on the Day of
Resurrection at the foot of the Throne and Allah will say, “O,
Dawood! Glorify Me on this Day with that fine and pleasant voice
with which you used to glorify Me in the life of the world.”
Dawood (Peace be upon him) will say, “How, when You have
taken it?” Then Allah will say, “Verily, I return it to you.” Then
Dawood (Peace be upon him) will lift up his voice in a manner that
will bring forth all of the felicities and delights of the Gardens (of
Paradise).” O, Dawood! Verily! We have placed you as a successor
on Earth, so judge you between men in truth (and justice) and
Sunniconnect.com
167

follow not your desire for it will mislead you from the Path of
Allah. Verily! Those who wander astray from the Path of Allah
(shall) have a severe punishment, because they forgot the Day of
Reckoning. (Soorah Sad 38:26) This was an address from Allah,
Most High, to Dawood (Peace be upon him) and what is meant by
this is the rulers and governors of the people; He commanded them
to be just and to follow the truth sent down from Allah and no other
opinions or fancies. And He warned those who follow something
other than that and judge according to something other than that, of
a severe punishment. And Dawood (Peace be upon him) was the
model at that time of justice and frequent worship and all deeds
through which one may draw near to Allah (taqarrubat), to such a
degree that he would pass an hour of the day or night without the
members of his household being engaged in acts of worship, as He,
Most High, says, “Work you, O, family of Dawood, with thanks!”
But few of My slaves are grateful. (Soorah Saba’ 34:13)
Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir reported many pleasant and agreeable things
in The Biography of Dawood (Peace be upon him), such as his
saying: “Be toward the orphan as a compassionate father.” And:
“Know that as you sow, so shall you reap.” And he narrated with a
chain of narrators that is ghareeb and marfoo‘ that Dawood (Peace
be upon him) said, “O, you sower of evil deeds! You shall reap
their thorns and their hasak.” And it was reported from Dawood
(Peace be upon him) that he said, “The likeness of a foolish orator
in the meeting place of the people is as the likeness of the one who
sings at the head of a dead person.” He also said, “How
ignominious is poverty after wealth, yet how much worse than that
is error after guidance.” And he said, “Think of something that you
would hate to be said of you in the meeting place of the people and
do not do it when you are alone.” And he said, “Never promise your
brother that which you do not fulfill for him, for that is enmity
between you and him.”
And the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “The best fast is the fast of Dawood (Peace be upon
Sunniconnect.com
168

him).” He used to recite the Zaboor in seventy different
recitations… and he used to bow in prayer at night and weep in it
and everything would weep along with him; and his voice would
alleviate the troubled and the sick.

A Description of Dawood's Death
As for his death – may Allah’s Peace be upon him – Imam Ahmad
narrated in his Musnad, on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him), that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Dawood (Peace be upon
him) was intensely protective and solicitous of his family and
whenever he went out, he would lock the door and no one would
visit his family until he returned. He went out one day and the house
was locked. His wife happened to look out and saw a man standing
in the middle of the courtyard. She said to those within in the house,
“From where did this man enter when the house is locked? By
Allah, we will bring disgrace on Dawood.” Then Dawood (Peace
be upon him) arrived and found the man standing in the middle of
the house and he said to him, “Who are you?” He said, “I am the
one who fears not the kings and who may not be prevented by a
barrier.” Dawood (Peace be upon him) said, “Then by Allah, you
are the Angel of Death; I welcome Allah’s Commandment.” Then
he remained until his soul had been taken. When he had been
washed and shrouded and all matters pertaining to him had been
completed, the sun rose upon him and Sulaiman (Peace be upon
him) said to the birds, “Shade Dawood,” so they shaded him until
the earth covered him. Then Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) said to
the birds, “Grasp your wings.” Abu Hurairah (May Allah be
pleased with him) said that at this point in the story, the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) grasped his
hand to show them what the birds did. On that day, most of the
shade was provided by falcons with large wingspans.

Sunniconnect.com
169

The Story of Sulaiman (Solomon), Son of
Dawood – Peace be upon him
Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir said that he was Sulaiman, son of Dawood,
son of ‘Eesa, son of ‘Owaid, son of Ba‘az, son of Salmoon, son of
Nahshoon, son of Aminazab, son of Iram, son of Hasroon, son of
Faras, son of Yahooda, son of Ya‘qoob, son of Ishaq, son of
Ibraheem, Abur-Rabee‘ (peace be upon them), the Prophet of
Allah, son of the Prophet of Allah.
Allah, Most High, says, And Sulaiman inherited Dawood. He said,
“O, mankind! We have been taught the language of birds, and on
us have been bestowed all things. This, verily, is an evident Grace.”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:16) That is, he inherited Prophethood and the
throne of his father. It does not refer to wealth, because Dawood
(Peace be upon him) had other sons and he would not favor him
over the others. It has been confirmed in authentic Ahadeeth from
more than one source, on the authority of a number of the
Companions that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “We do not bequeath our property to
anyone; what we leave is given in charity.” And in another version:
“We, the community of Prophets, are not inherited.” So the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) has informed us that
the Prophets’ wealth is not inherited from them, as other people’s
wealth is inherited. Rather, their wealth is given in charity after
their death to the poor and needy. It is not given to their kin,
because the life of this world was considered of too little value by
them for them to do that, as it was in the Sight of Him Who sent
them, chose them and preferred them. He says, “O, mankind! We
have been taught the language of birds.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:16)
This means that Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) understood the
language by which the birds used to converse with each other and
was able to interpret for the people their meanings and their desires.
And He, Most High, says, “…and on us have been bestowed all
things.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:16) That is, everything that the king
Sunniconnect.com
170

needs, including numbers, materials, troops, armies, hosts from
among the Jinn and mankind, birds, wild animals, free roaming
devils, knowledge, understanding and the ability to read the minds
of Allah’s creatures, both those that speak and those that do not.
Then He says, “This, verily, is an evident Grace” (Soorah An-Naml
27:16) means from the Originator of all creatures and the Creator
of the heavens and the Earth, as He, Most High says, And there
were gathered before Sulaiman his hosts of Jinn and men and birds,
and they all were set in battle order (marching forward). Till when
they came to the valley of the ants, one of the ants said, “O, ants!
Enter your dwellings, lest Sulaiman and his hosts crush you, while
they perceive not.” So he (Sulaiman) smiled, amused at her speech
and said, “My Lord! Awzi‘nee that I may be grateful for Your
Favors which You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and
that I may do righteous good deeds that will please You, and admit
me by Your Mercy among Your righteous slaves.” (Soorah AnNaml 27:17-19)
Allah, Most High, informs us about His Prophet, the son of His
Prophet, Sulaiman, son of Dawood, of how he rode with his army
one day, all of them from the jinn, mankind and the birds; the jinn
and men marched with him, while the birds flew over him, shading
him and the others with their wings from the heat of the sun. And
there were three men charged with the task of keeping each row
straight, i.e. officers who organized the ranks into straight lines, so
that no one advanced from his designated marching place or lagged
behind it. Allah, Most High, says, Till when they came to the valley
of the ants, one of the ants said, “O, ants! Enter your dwellings, lest
Sulaiman and his hosts crush you, while they perceive not.”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:18) So it commanded and warned and
excused Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) and his armies, due to the
fact that they were unaware (of the ants’ presence). Wahb said that
he (Sulaiman) was sitting on a carpet in a valley in At-Ta’if and
that this ant’s name was Jarsa and that it belonged to a colony called
Banu Shaisaban, that she was lame and that she was the same size
Sunniconnect.com
171

as a wolf, but these claims are doubtful. Indeed, the wording of the
Verse indicates that he was riding with his army at the time, not, as
some claimed, sitting on a carpet. This is because, if it had been as
they said, the ants would not have been harmed in any way by him,
nor would they have been trampled.
What is intended is that Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) understood
the words of good advice which that ant addressed to its community
and he smiled at that, out of a feeling of delight and happiness at
the gift which Allah had bestowed on him alone. It is not as some
of the foolish people claim, that before Sulaiman (Peace be upon
him), the animals of the earth used to converse with mankind, until
Sulaiman, son of Dawood took from them a covenant which
silenced them, after which they did not converse with mankind. All
of this is only claimed by those who do not know. If it were so,
Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) would not have any superiority over
others due to his understanding of their languages, since all of
mankind – according to their claim – would have understood them.
And if he had taken a covenant from them not to speak to anyone
other than him, while he understood them, there would have been
no benefit in this either. This is why he said, My Lord
“Awzi‘nee…” (Soorah An-Naml 27:19). That is, inspire me and
guide me “…that I may be grateful for Your Favors which You
have bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do
righteous good deeds that will please You, and admit me by Your
Mercy among Your righteous slaves.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:19) So
he asked Allah to ordain for him gratitude for the Blessing that He
had bestowed on him and the superiority that He had granted to him
over other men. He also asked Him to make it easy for him to
perform righteous deeds and to gather him when he should, with
His righteous slaves. And Allah, Most High, acceded to his
supplication. What is meant by his parents is his father, Dawood
(Peace be upon him) and his mother, who was one of the righteous
slaves (of Allah).

Sunniconnect.com
172

He, Most High, says, He inspected the birds, and said, “What is the
matter that I see not the hoopoe? Or is he among the absentees? I
will surely punish him with a severe punishment, or slaughter him,
unless he brings me a clear reason.” But the hoopoe stayed not long,
he said, “I have grasped that which you have not grasped and I have
come to you from Saba’ (Sheba) with sure news. I found a woman
ruling over them, and she has been given all things and she has a
great ‘arsh. I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead
of Allah, and Shaitan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them,
and has barred them from (Allah’s) Way, so they have no guidance
Al-la (this word has two interpretations) (a) (as Shaitan has barred
them from Allah’s Way) so that they do not worship (prostrate
before) Allah, or (b) So that they may worship (prostrate before)
Allah, Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the
Earth, and knows what you conceal and what you reveal.” (Tafseer
At-Tabari, Vol. 19, page 149) Allah, la ilaha illa Huwa (none has
the right to be worshipped but He), the Lord of the Supreme
Throne! (Sulaiman) said, “We shall see whether you speak the truth
or you are (one) of the liars. Go you with this letter of mine, and
deliver it to them, then draw back from them, and see what (answer)
they return.” She said, “O, chiefs! Verily! Here is delivered to me
a noble letter. Verily, it is from Sulaiman, and verily! It (reads), “In
the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful: “Be you
not exalted against me, but come to me as Muslims (true Believers
who submit to Allah with full submission).” She said, “O, chiefs!
Advise me in (this) case of mine. I decide no case till you are
present with me.” They said, “We have great strength, and great
fortitude, but it is for you to command; so think over what you will
command.” She said, “Verily! kings, when they enter a town
(country), they despoil it, and make the most honorable amongst its
people low. And thus they do. But verily, I am going to send him a
present, and see with what (answer) the messengers return.” So
when (the messengers with the present) came to Sulaiman, he said,
“Will you help me in wealth? What Allah has given me is better
than that which He has given you! Nay, you rejoice in your gift!”
(Then Sulaiman said to the chief of her messengers who brought
Sunniconnect.com
173

the present), “Go back to them. We verily shall come to them with
hosts that they cannot resist, and we shall drive them out from there
in disgrace, and they will be abased.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:20-37)
Allah, Most High, tells us about the affair of Sulaiman (Peace be
upon him) and the hoopoe, describing how the birds of all kinds
came, fulfilling what he requested from them and coming to him in
rotation, as is the custom of armies with kings. And the job of the
hoopoe – according to what Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him) and others said – was, when they were in need of water in the
deserts during their travels, it would come and see if there was
water for them in a certain spot. It had an ability given to it by
Allah, Most High, which allowed it to see water underground.
When it had shown them where to find it, they would dig for it, find
it, extract it and use as much of it as they needed. So when Sulaiman
(Peace be upon him) called for it one day, he did not find it in its
place of service. He inspected the birds, and said, “What is the
matter that I see not the hoopoe? Or is he among the absentees?”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:20) means why is he missing from here? Has
he absented himself from my sight, so that I do not see him before
me? “I will surely punish him with a severe punishment.” (Soorah
An-Naml 27:21). He threatened him with some kind of
punishment. Scholars disagreed as to what the nature of that
punishment was, but the result is the same, no matter what kind of
punishment it was. “…or slaughter him, unless he brings me a clear
reason” (Soorah An-Naml 27:21) means a reason that saves him
from this predicament. Allah, Most High says, But the hoopoe
stayed not long. (Soorah An-Naml 27:22). That is, the hoopoe
remained absent for only a short time, then he came back and he
said to Sulaiman (Peace be upon him), “I have grasped that which
you have not grasped…” (Soorah An-Naml 27:22) That is, I have
obtained information of something which is unknown to you.
“…and I have come to you from Saba’ (Sheba) with sure news”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:22) meaning with true information. “I found
a woman ruling over them, and she has been given all things that
could be possessed by any ruler of the Earth, and she has a great
Sunniconnect.com
174

throne.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:23) He described the great kingdom
ruled over by the kings of Saba’ in Yemen. At that time, the crown
had been inherited by a woman from among them, who was the
daughter of a king who had not left any other heir besides her, so
they made her their queen.
Ath-Tha‘labi narrated on the authority of Abu Bakrah that he said,
“I mentioned Bilqees in the presence of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he said, “Any
people who appoint a woman to rule over them will not be
successful.” Isma‘eel Ibn Muslim (one of the narrators) is AlMakki and he is weak. But it has been confirmed in Saheeh AlBukhari on the authority of Abu Bakrah (May Allah be pleased
with him) that when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was informed that the people of Persia had
crowned the daughter of Kisra (Khosrau) as their queen he said, “A
people who appoint a woman as their leader will never be
successful.”
And He, Most High, says, “…and she has been given all things.”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:23) That is, everything that kings are given.
“…and she has a great ‘arsh” (Soorah An-Naml 27:23) means the
throne of her kingdom, which was inlaid with all kinds of precious
stones, pearls, gold and dazzling gems. Then he mentioned their
disbelief in Allah, their worship of the sun, to the exclusion of
Allah, Shaitan's misguidance of them and his hindering of them
from worshipping Allah, Alone, without partners Who brings to
light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what
you conceal and what you reveal. (Soorah An-Naml 27:25) It
means that He knows everything that is hidden in the heavens and
on earth and He knows what His servants say and do in secret, and
what they say and do openly. Allah, la ilaha illa Huwa (none has
the right to be worshipped but He), the Lord of the Supreme
Throne! (Soorah An-Naml 27:26) That is, to Him belongs the
Supreme Throne, besides which there is no greater throne among
the created things. On hearing this, Sulaiman (Peace be upon him)
Sunniconnect.com
175

sent with him a letter containing an invitation to declare their
obedience to Allah and to His Messenger (Peace be upon him), to
turn to Him in repentance and to submit in humility to His
Dominion and His Authority, which is why He said to them, “Be
you not exalted against me…” (Soorah An-Naml 27:31) That is, do
arrogantly refuse to obey me and follow my commands. “…but
come to me as Muslims (true Believers who submit to Allah with
full submission).” (Soorah An-Naml 27:31) That is, come to me as
those who hear and obey, without argument or hesitation. When the
letter came to them with the bird, then the people took the letter but
what has the ground to do with the Pleiades? This paper was with
a bird who heard and obeyed, who understood and had knowledge
of what was said. And more than one of the scholars of tafseer and
other scholars have mentioned that the hoopoe bore the letter and
arrived at her palace, where he dropped it on her while she was
alone. Then he stood at one side and waited to see what her reply
to the letter would be. She gathered her governors, ministers and
the leading members of the country in order to seek their advice.
She said, “O, chiefs! Verily, here is delivered to me a noble letter.”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:29) Then she read the first line of the letter to
them: “Verily, it is from Sulaiman.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:30) Then
she read the letter: “In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the
Most Merciful, Be you not exalted against me, but come to me as
Muslims (true believers who submit to Allah with full
submission).” (Soorah An-Naml 27:30) Then she asked their
advice regarding the letter and what had befallen her. She behaved
courteously toward them and addressed them and they listened to
her. She said, “O, chiefs! Advise me in (this) case of mine. I decide
no case till you are present with me.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:32) That
is, I do not settle or determine any matter unless you are present.
They said, “We have great strength and great fortitude” (Soorah
An-Naml 27:33) means, we possess (military) strength and have
the ability to fight and oppose their warriors, so if you desire us to
do that, we are fully able to do so. “…but it is for you to command;
so think over what you will command.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:33)
So they expressed their commitment to hear and obey and they
Sunniconnect.com
176

informed her of their readiness for war, but they left it to her to
decide what the best guidance for her and for them was. Her
opinion was better and more correct than theirs, for she realized
that the writer of this letter could not be defeated, thwarted,
opposed or deceived. She said, “Verily! kings, when they enter a
town (country), they despoil it, and make the most honorable
amongst its people low. And thus they do.” (Soorah An-Naml
27:34) She gave her sensible opinion, which was that if this king
defeated her kingdom, the responsibility would be hers alone and
their enmity would be mainly directed toward her, as the ruler. “But
verily, I am going to send him a present, and see with what (answer)
the messengers return.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:35). She decided to
cooperate with him, in order to protect herself and her people, by
sending a gift to Sulaiman (Peace be upon him), but she did not
know that Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) would not accept a gift
from them in such circumstances, because they were disbelievers
and he and his armies were able to defeat them, which is why when
(the messengers with the present) came to Sulaiman, he said, “Will
you help me in wealth? What Allah has given me is better than that
which He has given you! Nay, you rejoice in your gift!” (Soorah
An-Naml 27:36) This was in spite of the fact that those gifts were
magnificent, according to what the scholars of tafseer have said.
Then he said to her messenger and the delegation she had sent to
him – while the people were gathered and were listening – “Go
back to them. We verily shall come to them with hosts that they
cannot resist, and we shall drive them out from there in disgrace,
and they will be abased.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:37) He said: Return
with the gifts that you have presented to me to the one who
bestowed them, for the wealth, gifts and men with which Allah has
blessed me are better and more numerous than that which pleases
you so much and due to which you glory over the rest of mankind.
“We verily shall come to them with hosts that they cannot resist.”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:37) It means that I will surely send upon them
armies against which they will be unable to defend themselves and
I will surely expel them from their land, their estates, their
Sunniconnect.com
177

businesses and their country belittled. “…and they will be abased.”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:37) That is, upon them will be heaped
humiliation, disgrace and ruin. When this was conveyed to them
from the Prophet of Allah (Peace be upon him), they had no
alternative but to hear and obey. They hastened to answer him in
that hour and they went to their queen together in obedience to
Sulaiman’s command. When Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) heard
of their delegation, he said to those of the Jinn who were in his
presence and who were subjugated to him, “O, chiefs! Which of
you can bring me her throne before they come to me surrendering
themselves in obedience?” An ‘Ifreet from the Jinn said, “I will
bring it to you before you rise from your place (council). And
verily, I am indeed strong and trustworthy for such work.” One
with whom was knowledge of the Scripture said, “I will bring it to
you within the twinkling of an eye!” then, when (Sulaiman) saw it
placed before him, he said, “This is by the Grace of my Lord to test
me whether I am grateful or ungrateful! And whoever is grateful,
truly, his gratitude is for (the good of) his ownself, and whoever is
ungrateful, certainly, my Lord is Rich (Free of all wants),
Bountiful.” He said, “Disguise her throne for her that we may see
whether she will be guided (to recognize her throne), or she will be
one of those not guided.” So when she came, it was said (to her),
“Is your throne like this?” She said, “(It is) as though it were the
very same.” And (Sulaiman) said, “Knowledge was bestowed on
us before her, and we submitted to Allah (in Islam as Muslims
before her).” And that which she used to worship besides Allah has
prevented her, for she was of a disbelieving people. It was said to
her, “Enter as-sarh,” (a glass surface with water underneath it or a
palace), but when she saw it, she thought it was a pool, and she
(tucked up her clothes) uncovering her legs, Sulaiman said,
“Verily, it is sarh (a glass surface with water underneath it or a
palace) paved smooth with glass.” She said, “My Lord! Verily, I
have wronged myself, and I submit (in Islam), together with
Sulaiman, to Allah, the Lord of Al‘Alameen.” (Soorah An-Naml
27:38-44)
Sunniconnect.com
178

When Sulaiman requested from the jinn that they bring him the
throne of Bilqees (Saba’), which was the seat of her kingdom on
which she used to sit when passing judgment, before her arrival in
Sulaiman’s court. An ‘Ifreet from the jinn said, “I will bring it to
you before you rise from your place (council)” (Soorah An-Naml
27:39) means, before he could complete his judgments. It was said
that this council customarily took place from early in the morning
until just before midday; during this council, he would busy himself
with the affairs and concerns of Banu Isra’eel. “And verily, I am
indeed strong and trustworthy for such work.” (Soorah An-Naml
27:39) That is, I possess the ability to bring it to you and I can be
trusted with the precious stones in it. One with whom was
knowledge of the Scripture said… (Soorah An-Naml 27:40) It is
well-known that his name was Asif Ibn Barkhiya, who was the
maternal cousin of Sulaiman (Peace be upon him). It was also said
that he was a man from among the Believers of the jinn who knew
the Greatest Name of Allah. It was also said that he was a man from
among Banu Isra’eel and that he was one of their scholars. And it
was said that he was Sulaiman (Peace be upon him), but this is a
very strange claim. It was dismissed as weak by As-Suhaili, on the
basis that it was incompatible with the wording. It was also said
that there was a fourth opinion, which was that the speaker was
Jibraeel. “I will bring it to you within the twinkling of an eye!”
(Soorah An-Naml 27:40) It was said that the meaning is: before
you can send a messenger to the farthest point on the Earth which
your eye can see and he can return to you. It was also said that it
means: before the farthest person you can see can reach you. And
it was said that it means: before your glance becomes weary and
you blink your eye. It was also said that it means: before you can
close your eyes. And it was also said that it means: before your
glance can return to you, when you look toward the farthest point
from you, then you close your eyes. And this seems most likely of
all these sayings. Then, when (Sulaiman) saw it placed before
him… (Soorah An-Naml 27:40) means when he saw the throne of
Bilqees placed in front of him in this short space of time from the
land of Yemen to Bait Al-Maqdis, in the blink of an eye, he said,
Sunniconnect.com
179

“This is by the Grace of my Lord to test me whether I am grateful
or ungrateful!" (Soorah An-Naml 27:41) That is, this is from
Allah’s Favor upon me and upon His slaves, to test us and see if we
are grateful for that Favor or not. And whoever is grateful, truly,
his gratitude is for (the good of) his ownself. (Soorah An-Naml
27:40) That is, the benefit of that gratitude will only accrue to him.
"and whoever is ungrateful, certainly, my Lord is Rich (Free of all
wants), Bountiful.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:40) means that He is in
no need of the thanks of those who show gratitude and He is not
harmed by the ingratitude of those who are ungrateful to Him. Then
Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) ordered that the throne’s
adornments be altered and disguised so that she would not
recognize it, in order to test her understanding and her intelligence,
which is why he said, “Disguise her throne for her that we may see
whether she will be guided (to recognize her throne), or she will be
one of those not guided.” So when she came, it was said (to her),
“Is your throne like this?” She said, “(It is) as though it were the
very same.” (Soorah An-Naml 27:41,42) This was due to her
astuteness and deep understanding, because she considered it
unlikely that it could be her throne, since she had left it behind in
the land of Yemen and she knew of no one who was able to do such
an amazing thing. Allah, Most High, says, informing us about
Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) and his people, “Knowledge was
bestowed on us before her, and we submitted to Allah (in Islam as
Muslims before her).” And that which she used to worship besides
Allah has prevented her, for she was of a disbelieving people.
(Soorah An-Naml 27:42,43) That is, the worship of the sun, before
which she and her people used to prostrate, instead of to Allah,
prevented her from embracing Islam. They did this because they
followed the religion of their fathers and their forefathers; no
evidence led them or urged them to do so. Sulaiman (Peace be upon
him) had ordered the construction of a palace made of glass and he
ordered them to make a passageway of water, over which a glass
floor was placed. In the water he had placed fish and other aquatic
creatures. The Queen of Saba’ was ordered to enter the palace,
where she found Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) sitting on his
Sunniconnect.com
180

throne. …But when she saw it, she thought it was a pool, and she
(tucked up her clothes) uncovering her legs, Sulaiman said,
“Verily, it is sarh (a glass surface with water underneath it or a
palace) paved smooth with glass.” She said, “My Lord! Verily, I
have wronged myself, and I submit (in Islam), together with
Sulaiman, to Allah, the Lord of Al‘Alameen.” (Soorah An-Naml
27:44)
And He, Most High, says, And to Dawood We gave Sulaiman. How
excellent (a) slave! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance
(to Us)! When there were displayed before him in the afternoon,
welltrained horses of the highest breed (for jihad [holy fight in
Allah’s Cause]). And he said, “I did love the good (these horses)
instead of remembering my Lord (in my ‘Asr prayer),” till the time
was over and it had hidden in the veil (of night). Then he said,
“Bring them (horses) back to me.” Then he began to pass his hand
over their sooq and their a‘naq (till the end of the display). And
indeed We did try Sulaiman and We placed on his throne Jasad (a
devil, so he lost his kingdom for a while) but he did return (to his
throne and kingdom by the Grace of Allah and he did return) to
Allah with obedience and in repentance. He said, “My Lord!
Forgive me and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not
belong to any other after me: verily, You are the Bestower.” So We
subjected to him the wind; it blew gently to his order whithersoever
he willed, and also the Shayateen (devils) from the Jinn (including)
every kind of builder and diver. And also others bound in fetters.
(Saying of Allah to Sulaiman), “This is Our gift, so spend you or
withhold, no account will be asked.” And verily, he enjoyed a near
access to Us and a good final return (Paradise).” (Soorah Sad
38:30-40)
Allah, Most High, relates how He granted Dawood (Peace be upon
him) a son, Sulaiman (Peace be upon him), then He praises them
both, saying, How excellent (a) slave! Verily, he was ever oftreturning in repentance (to Us)! (Soorah Sad 38:30) That is, oftreturning to Allah and obedient to Him. Then Allah relates the story
Sunniconnect.com
181

of the horses which were safinat, i.e. those which stand on three
legs and raise the fourth. They were outstanding horses, lean and
swift. And he said, “I did love the good (these horses) instead of
remembering my Lord (in my ‘Asr prayer),” till the time was over
and it had hidden in the veil (of night) (Soorah Sad 38:32) means
the sun, or it was said, the horses. “Bring them (horses) back to
me.” Then he began to pass his hand over their sooq and their a‘naq
(till the end of the display). (Soorah Sad 38:33) It was said that their
hamstrings and their necks were struck with swords. It was also
said that he began patting the horses’ heads and legs out of love for
them. Most of the Salaf supported the first interpretation; they said
that he was busily engaged with the presentation of those horses
until the time for offering the ‘Asr prayer had departed and the sun
had set. This was narrated on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(May Allah be pleased with him) and others. What is certain is that
he did not intentionally neglect the prayer, without permission,
though it was said that he was engaged in watering them and so he
delayed the prayer for reasons of jihad – and the presentation of the
horses was a part of that.
He, Most High, says, And indeed We did try Sulaiman and We
placed on his throne Jasad (a devil, so he lost his kingdom for a
while) and he did return (to Allah with obedience and in
repentence, and to his throne and kingdom by the Grace of Allah.
(Soorah Sad 38:34) Ibn Jareer At-Tabari, Ibn Abi Hatim and other
scholars of tafseer related here a number of traditions from a group
of the Salaf, but most, if not all of them are taken from Isra’eeliyyat
– and in many of them there are extremely unacceptable things.
It is reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “When
Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) built Bait Al-Maqdis, he asked his
Lord, the Almighty, the All-powerful for three things; Allah
granted him two of them and we hope that the third will be granted
to us. He asked Him for judgment that concurred with His
Sunniconnect.com
182

Judgment and He granted him that; he asked Him for a kingdom
the like of which no one after him would ever enjoy and He granted
him that; He also asked Him that if any man left his house desiring
nothing but prayer in this mosque, he would leave behind his sins,
like he was on the day on which his mother gave birth to him. And
we hope that Allah has granted this to us.”
As for the judgment which agreed with Allah’s Judgment, Allah
has praised him and his father, Dawood (Peace be upon him) in His
Words: And (remember) Dawood and Sulaiman, when they gave
judgment in the case of the field in which the sheep of certain
people had pastured at night and We were witness to their
judgment. And We made Sulaiman to understand (the case), and to
each of them We gave Hukman (right judgment of the affairs and
Prophethood) and knowledge. And We subjected the mountains
and the birds to glorify Our Praises along with Dawood, And it was
We Who was the Doer (of all these things). (Soorah Al-Anbiya’
21:78,79)Shuraih Al-Qadi and more than one of the Salaf have
mentioned that these people owned grapevines and the sheep of
some other people ate them during the night, consuming the whole
vine. They took their case to Dawood (Peace be upon him) for
judgment and he ruled in favor of the owners of the grapevines,
saying that the owners of the sheep must pay them the full value of
what their sheep had consumed. When they came out, Sulaiman
asked them, “What did the Prophet of Allah judge for you?” They
said, “Such-and-such.” He said, “Were I the judge, I would have
not ruled except that the owners of the sheep hand them over to the
owners of the grapevines, so that they could benefit from their
offspring and milk, until the owners of the sheep had repaired the
grapevines and returned them to the condition they were in
previously, after which their sheep would be returned to them.
When this was conveyed to Dawood (Peace be upon him), he ruled
accordingly.
In Soorah Sad, Allah, Most High, says, So We subjected to him the
wind, it blew gently to his order whithersoever he willed and also
Sunniconnect.com
183

the Shayateen (devils) from the Jinn (including) every kind of
builder and diver and also others bound in fetters. (Saying of Allah
to Sulaiman), “This is Our gift, so spend you or withhold, no
account will be asked.” And verily, he enjoyed a near access to Us
and a good final return (Paradise). (Soorah Sad 38:36-40) When he
gave up the horses, seeking thereby Allah’s Countenance, Allah
replaced them for him with the wind, which is faster, stronger and
greater and entailed no trouble or expense for him (unlike the
horses). …it blew gently to his order whithersoever he willed.
(Soorah Sad 38:36) That is, wherever he wished from any country;
it seems that he had a wooden platform, on which he could place
all that he needed, such as erected houses, palaces and tents, goods,
horses, camels, loads, men from among mankind and the jinn and
other things, such as animals and birds. Then, when he wanted to
travel or go on a pleasure trip, or make war on a king or enemies
from any land that Allah willed, when the aforementioned things
had been loaded on the platform, he would command the wind and
it would get underneath it and raise it up. Then, when it was raised
up between the heaven and the Earth, he would order it to blow
gently and it would proceed with him. If he wanted to go faster than
that, he would command the storm and it would carry him at the
fastest possible speed and put him down in any place he wished, so
that he would set out from Bait Al-Maqdis in the early part of the
day and the wind would come and take him to Istakhr (in Persia)
and he would remain there throughout the morning hours until
midday, then the wind would return him to Bait Al-Maqdis, as
Allah, Most High, says, And to Sulaiman We subjected the wind,
its morning (stride from sunrise till midday) was a month’s
(journey), and its afternoon (stride from the midday decline of the
sun to sunset) was a month’s (journey i.e. in one day he could travel
two months’ journey). And We caused a fount of qitr to flow for
him, and there were Jinn that worked in front of him, by the Leave
of his Lord, and whosoever of them turned aside from Our
Command, We shall cause him to taste of the punishment of the
blazing Fire. They worked for him what he desired, (making) high
rooms, images, jifan like jawab and qudoor rasiyat. “Work you, O
Sunniconnect.com
184

family of Dawood, with thanks!” But few of My slaves are grateful.
(Soorah Saba’ 34:12,13) Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “He used to set
out in the morning from Damascus and he would alight at Istakhr,
where he would take lunch. From there he would travel to Kabul
(in Turkey); and the distance between Damascus and Istakhr was
one month’s travel, while the distance between Istakhr and Kabul
is also one month’s travel.” I say: The scholars of buildings and
towns say that Istakhr was built by the jinn of Sulaiman (Peace be
upon him) and that in ancient times, it had been the seat of power
of the Turks. They said that likewise, numerous cities, such as
Tadmur, Bait Al-Maqdis, Bab Jairoon and Bab Al-Bareed, which
are both in Damascus were built by them.
As for qitr, according to ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him), Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Qatadah and a number of
others, it means (molten) copper. Qatadah said, “It was in Yemen
that Allah brought it forth for him.” As-Suddi said, “In just three
days, He extracted for him all that he needed for buildings and other
things.”
And He, Most High, says, …and there were Jinn that worked in
front of him, by the Leave of his Lord, and whosoever of them
turned aside from Our Command, We shall cause him to taste of
the punishment of the blazing Fire. (Soorah Saba’ 34:12) That is,
Allah subjected to him workers from among the Jinn, who worked
for him on whatever he wished and did not disobey him; as for
those who did refuse to obey his commands he punished and
shackled them. They worked for him what he desired, (making)
high rooms. (Soorah Saba’ 34:13) And they are beautiful places,
the best and innermost parts of meeting places. This was
permissible under their law and their religious code. jifan. Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said that a jafnah (jifan is
the plural) is like a pit in the ground, or in another narration on his
authority, like a water basin. Mujahid said likewise, as did AlHasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and others. Based on this narration,
Sunniconnect.com
185

the word jawab would be the plural of jabiyah, which is a basin in
which water collects, as Al-A‘sha said in Al-Bahr At-Taweel:
“A pool of water passes by the family of Al-Muhallaq, Like
the reservoir of As-Saih Al-‘Iraqi, it fills to overflowing.”
As for the qudoor rasiyat, ‘Ikrimah said that they are fixed cooking
cauldrons. Mujahid and others concurred with this, and they were
placed thus for the purpose of feeding people and giving charity to
mankind and the jinn. Allah, Most High, says, “Work you, O family
of Dawood, with thanks!” But few of My slaves are grateful.
(Soorah Saba’ 34:13) and He, Most High, says, And also the
Shayateen (devils) from the jinn, (including) every kind of builder
and diver and also others bound in fetters. (Soorah Sad 38:37,38)
means, some of them had been subjugated to him as builders, while
others had been subjugated to him as divers, whose job it was to
dive in the sea and collect precious stones and pearls and other
things which were not present with them. and also others bound in
fetters (Soorah Sad 38:38) means that they had disobeyed and so
they had been shackled in pairs. All of these were among the things
that Allah had prepared for him and subjugated to his will and
which were a part of the completeness of his kingdom, the like of
which was not given to anyone before him or after him.
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Verily, an ‘ifreet from among
the Jinn came to me yesterday suddenly, so as to spoil my prayer,
but Allah enabled me to overpower him, and I caught him and
intended to tie him to one of the pillars of the Mosque so that all of
you might see him, but I remembered the invocation of my brother
Sulaiman: 'My Lord! Forgive me, And grant me a kingdom such as
shall not belong to any other after me.' (Soorah Sad 38:35) so I let
him go cursed.”

Sunniconnect.com
186

And more than one of the Salaf have mentioned that Sulaiman
(Peace be upon him) had a thousand wives; seven hundred of them
had been wedded to him after the payment of dowries and three
hundred had been taken as captives. It was also said that it was the
other way around, that they were three hundred free women and
seven hundred slaves. It was said that he had a huge appetite for
women. Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah
(May Allah be pleased with him) from the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he said, “Sulaiman, the son of
Dawood, said, 'Tonight I will sleep with seventy women each of
whom will conceive a child who will be a knight fighting for
Allah’s Cause.' His companion said, 'if Allah wills.' But Sulaiman
did not say so; therefore none of those women got pregnant except
one who gave birth to a half child.' The Prophet further said, 'If
Prophet Sulaiman had said it (i.e. if Allah wills) he would have
begotten children who would have fought in Allah’s Cause'.”
Shu‘aib and Ibn Abi Az-Zinad said, “Ninety (women) is more
correct (than seventy).” Al-Bukhari was alone in narrating it from
this source.
He, Most High, says, He said, “My Lord! Forgive me, and bestow
upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me:
verily, You are the Bestower.” (Soorah Sad 38:35). And Allah gave
him all of that, according to the testimony of the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). And when Allah, Most High,
mentioned the great and complete blessings that He had bestowed
on him, He said, “This is Our gift, so spend you or withhold, no
account will be asked.” (Soorah Sad 38:39) That is, give to whom
you will and deny whom you will, for you will not be held
accountable for it, i.e. dispose of the wealth as you will, because
Allah has permitted whatever you may do with it and He will not
ask you to account for it. This was the case with the Prophet-King,
unlike the slave-Messenger, who neither gave nor denied without
Allah’s Permission. And Allah allowed our Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), to choose between these two
Sunniconnect.com
187

situations (slave-Messenger or Prophet-King), and he chose to be a
slave-Messenger.
When Allah described what He had granted to His Prophet,
Sulaiman (Peace be upon him) of the goodness of this life, He
described the reward, abundance and beautiful recompense that He
has prepared for him in the Hereafter, in addition to the nearness to
Him, the great success and the honor that he will enjoy before Him.
All of this will be on the Day of Return and Recompense, as He,
Most High, says, And verily, he enjoyed a near access to Us and a
good final return (Paradise). (Soorah Sad 38:40)

A Description of His Death
Allah, Most Glorified, Most High, says, Then ,when We decreed
death for him (Sulaiman), nothing informed them (the Jinn) of his
death except a crawling creature of the earth, which kept (slowly)
gnawing away at his stick, so when he fell down, the Jinn saw
clearly that if they had known the Unseen, they would not have
stayed in the humiliating punishment. ( Soorah Sad 34:14)
And Ibn Jareer At-Tabari, Ibn Abi Hatim and others narrated the
Hadith of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him), in which he reported on the authority
of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he
said, “Sulaiman (Peace be upon him), the Prophet of Allah used to
see a tree growing before him and he would say to it, “What is your
name?” The tree would answer, “So-and-so.” He said, “For what
purpose are you? If it was for seeds, it would be allowed to go to
seed. If it was for medicine, it would be allowed to grow. One day,
when he was praying, he saw a tree before him and he said to it,
“What is your name?” It said, “Al-Kharroobah.” He said, “For what
purpose are you?” It replied, “For the destruction of this house.”
He said, “O, Allah! Keep my death hidden from the jinn until the
humans realize that the jinn do not know the unseen.” So he carved
a stick from it and he leaned on it for a whole year, while the jinn
Sunniconnect.com
188

continued working. The stick was eaten by a termite (causing him
to fall down), after which it was clear to mankind that if the jinn
had known the unseen, they would not have remained for a year in
humiliating punishment.”

Sunniconnect.com
189

Mention of a Number of Prophets from
Banu Isra’eel after Dawood and
Sulaiman and before Zakriyya and
Yahya
Among them were those whose lifetime cannot be precisely
pinpointed, except to say that they lived after Dawood (Peace be
upon him) and before Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) and (Yahya
(Peace be upon him)). They included: Sha‘ya, son of Amsiya;
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “He was before Zakariyya and Yahya
(peace be upon them both) and he was one of those who gave the
glad tidings of ‘Eesa and Muhammad (peace be upon them both).”
During his lifetime there was a king over the Children of Isra’eel
whose name was Sadeeqah, in the land of Bait Al-Maqdis. He used
to listen to Sha‘ya (Peace be upon him) and obey whatever he
commanded him to do and refrain from whatever he forbade.
Affairs had become difficult among the Children of Isra’eel and the
king became ill, suffering from an ulcer in his leg. The king of
Babylon set out for Bait Al-Maqdis at that time, and his name was
Sanhareeb. Ibn Ishaq said that he had six hundred thousand troops
with him.
The people were greatly terrified. The king asked Sha‘ya, “What
did Allah reveal to you regarding Sanhareeb and his army?” He
replied, “He has not yet revealed anything to me.” Then the
revelation came down for King Sadeeqah to appoint a successor, as
he wished, because his end was at hand. When Sha‘ya told him this,
the king turned to the Qiblah (the direction faced in prayer); he
prayed, glorified Allah, invoked Him, and wept. Weeping and
invoking Allah, the All-Powerful, and majestic with a sincere heart,
trust and patience, he said, “O, Lord of lords, and God of gods! O,
Benevolent and Merciful One Whom neither sleep nor nodding can
overpower, remember me for my deeds and my just judgment over
Sunniconnect.com
190

the Children of Isra’eel; and all that was from You, and You know
it better than I do, my open acts and my secrets are with You.”
Allah answered his prayers had compassion on him. He revealed to
Sha‘ya to tell him the glad tidings that He had compassion for his
weeping and would extend his life for a further fifteen years and
save him from the enemy, Sanhareeb. When Sha‘ya told this to
Sadeeqah, his disease was healed. Evil and sadness departed, and
he fell in prostration, saying, “O, Lord, it is You Who grants
kingship to whomsoever You wish and dethrones whomsoever You
wish and elevates whomsoever You wish and degrades
whomsoever You wish, Knower of the Unseen and the evident.
And lo! You are the First and the Last; the Manifest and the
Perceived; You grant Mercy and answer the prayers of the troubled
ones.” When he raised his head, Allah revealed to Sha‘ya to
command the king to extract the juice of the fig and apply it to his
ulcer, and he would be whole and cured. He did so and was cured.
Then Allah sent death upon the army of Sanhareeb. In the morning,
they were all corpses, except
Sanuhareeb and five of his companions, among them
Nebuchadnezzar (Bukhtunassar). The king of Isra’eel immediately
sent for them, put them in shackles and displayed them in the land
for seventy days to spite and insult them. Every day each of them
was fed a loaf of barley bread; after seventy days he confined them
in prison. Allah then revealed to Sha‘ya that the king should send
them back to their country so that they might warn their people
what would happen to them. When they returned, Sanhareeb
gathered his people and told them what had happened to them. The
priests and magicians said to him, “We told you about their Lord
and their prophets, but you did not listen to us. It is a nation which,
with their God, nobody can overcome.” So, Sanhareeb was afraid
of Allah. He died seven years later.

Sunniconnect.com
191

A Description of the Destruction of Bait AlMaqdis
Allah, Most High, says, And We gave Moosa the Scripture and
made it a guidance for the Children of Isra’eel (saying), “Take not
other than Me as (your) Wakil (Protector, Lord, or Disposer of your
affairs, etc). O offspring of those whom We carried (in the ship)
with Nooh (Noah)! Verily, he was a grateful slave.” And We
decreed for the Children of Isra’eel in the Scripture, that indeed you
would do mischief on the earth twice and you will become tyrants
and extremely arrogant! So, when the promise came for the first of
the two, We sent against you slaves of Ours given to terrible
warfare. They entered the very innermost parts of your homes. And
it was a promise (completely) fulfilled. Then We gave you once
again, a return of victory over them. And We helped you with
wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower.
(And We said), “If you do good, you do good for your own selves,
and if you do evil (you do it) against yourselves.” Then, when the
second promise came to pass, (We permitted your enemies) to
make your faces sorrowful and to enter the mosque (of Jerusalem)
as they had entered it before, and to destroy with utter destruction
all that fell in their hands. (And We said in the Tawrah,) “It may be
that your Lord may show mercy unto you, but if you return (to sins),
We shall return (to Our Punishment). And We have made Hell a
prison for the disbelievers. (Soorah Al-Isra 17:2-8)
Wahb Ibn Munabbih said, “When sins became prevalent among the
Children of Isra’eel, Allah revealed to a Prophet from among them,
whose name was ‘Armiya (Jeremiah) that he should stand up in the
midst of them and inform them that: “You have hearts, yet you do
not understand; you have eyes, yet you do not see; and you have
ears, yet you do not hear. I thought of the righteousness of their
fathers and that made Me feel compassion for their children.”
(Allah said,) “So ask them, how did they find the outcome of
obedience to Me? And was anyone who disobeyed Me made
fortunate as a result of his disobedience? And was anyone who
Sunniconnect.com
192

obeyed Me made wretched as a result of his obedience? The
animals remember their homes and they feel a desire for them, yet
these people have abandoned the Religion which I commanded
their fathers to follow and sought blessings from other than it. As
for their rabbis, they denied My Truth; and as for their (Towrah)
reciters, they worshipped other (gods) than Me; and as for their
devout, learned men, they did not benefit from what they knew;
And as for their rulers, they lied against Me and against My
Messengers and they harbored deception in their hearts and
accustomed their tongues to lying. I swear by My Majesty and My
Might that I will surely incite armies against them whose languages
they will not understand and whose faces they will not recognize
and they will show no mercy for their tears. And I will surely send
to them a tyrannical and cruel king with armies like racing clouds
and retinues like mountain trails, as if the flapping of their banners
were the wings of eagles, and as if the attacks of their cavalry were
the attacks of hawks. They will demolish the buildings and leave
the towns deserted, then woe to their inhabitants, how I will subject
them to killing and captivity! And I will replace the raised voices
in their wedding celebrations with screams and the whinnying of
the horses with howling of wolves. And I will turn the galleries of
their palaces into the dwellings of beasts of prey. I will replace the
lamplight with flames and smoke, might with humiliation and
blessings with slavery. And I will surely replace the perfume of
their women with dust and their soft carpets will be walked on by
their enemies. I will surely make their bodies as fertilizer for the
earth and their bones will be bleached by the sun. I will surely
humiliate them with all kinds of punishment, then I will surely
command the heaven and it will become as a cover of iron, while
the earth will become as a copper smelter. If it rains, the earth will
not bring forth vegetation. And if anything comes forth from it at
that time, it will be by My Mercy toward the grazing animals. Then
I will withhold it (the rain) at the time of sowing and send it at the
time of harvesting. So if they have grown anything during that time,
it will be ruined. And if anything is saved from it, it will be devoid
of any blessing. If they call upon Me, I will not answer them and if
Sunniconnect.com
193

they ask anything, I will not give it. If they weep, I will not show
Mercy to them and if they humble themselves, I will turn My Face
away from them.” It was narrated by Ibn ‘Asakir with this wording.
Hisham Ibn Muhammad Ibn As-Sa’ib Al-Kalbi said, “Then
(Bukhtunassar) Nebuchadnezzar advanced upon Bait Al-Maqdis
and its king made a peace treaty with him. He was of the family of
Dawood (Peace be upon him) and he bribed him into leaving the
Children of Isra’eel. He took from him captives and set out to return
home. When he reached Tabariyyah, word reached him that the
Children of Isra’eel had rebelled against their king and killed him,
because of the peace treaty he had made with him. So he beheaded
the captives who were with him and returned to them and took the
city by force, killing the fighters and taking the children captive.”
Hisham said, “We were informed that he found Prophet ‘Armiya
(Peace be upon him) in jail and he set him free…” Then he related
his story and his relations with them, how he warned them about
these things, and how they belied him and imprisoned him.
Bukhtunassar said, “How wretched are a people who disobey the
Messenger of Allah (Peace be upon him) and abandon his Path!”
He treated him well and the weak ones who remained from the
Children of Isra’eel gathered to him and they said, “We have done
wrong and have been unjust and we turn in repentance to Allah, the
Almighty, the All-Powerful for what we have done, so ask Allah to
accept our repentance.” So he asked his Lord, but Allah revealed to
him that He would not do so, and if they were truthful, they should
reside with him in that city, and He told him to inform them of what
Allah, Most High, had commanded them to do. But they said,
“How shall we reside in this city, when it has been destroyed and
Allah is Angry with its inhabitants?” So they refused to reside
therein.
Ibn Al-Kalbi said, “From that time, the Children of Isra’eel became
dispersed throughout the land; a group of them settled in Al-Hijaz,
while another group settled in Yathrib (Madinah), still another
group settled in Wadi Al-Qura and a small number of them went to
Sunniconnect.com
194

Egypt. Bukhtunassar wrote to its king, asking him to return those
who had fled there, but he refused and so he set out with his army
and fought him, vanquishing him and taking his people captive.
Then he rode to the land of Al-Maghrib (Morocco) until he reached
the farthest borders of that land. Then he departed therefrom with
numerous captives from the land of Al-Maghrib, Egypt, Bait AlMaqdis, the land of Palestine and Jordan – and included among the
captives was Danyal (Daniel (Peace be upon him)).”
I say, “It would appear that he was Danyal (Daniel), son of Hizqeel
(Ezekiel) – the younger, not the elder
– according to what was related by Wahb Ibn Munabbih. And Allah
knows better.”

Some Details About Danyal (Daniel) – Peace be
upon him
Yoonus Ibn Bukair reported on the authority of Muhammad Ibn
Ishaq, who in turn reported on the authority of Abu Khaldah Khalid
Ibn Deenar, that he was informed by Abul-‘Aliyah: “When we
conquered Tustar, we found among the property of Hurmuzan a
couch on which there was a dead man and at his head was a book.
We took the book and carried it to ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab (May
Allah be pleased with him). He called for Ka‘b, who translated it
for him into Arabic. I was the first Arab man to read it as I read this
Qur’an.” (The sub-narrator said,) “I said to Abul-‘Aliyah, “What
was in it?” He replied, “Your stories, your affairs, your speech and
what will be in the future.” I said, “What did you do with the (dead)
man?” He said, “We dug thirteen different graves by the river and
when it was nighttime, we buried him and leveled all of the graves,
so that the people should not know where he was buried and dig
him up.” I said, “And what did they hope from him?” He said,
“When rain did not fall on them, they used to bring out his couch
and supplicate for rain.” I said, “Who do you think the man was?”
He said, “A man who was known as Danyal.” I asked, “How long
Sunniconnect.com
195

ago did he die?” He replied, “Three hundred years ago.” I said,
“Had nothing changed in him?” He said, “No, except some hairs at
the back of his head. Verily, the flesh of the Prophets does not
decompose in the earth and it is not eaten by wild beasts.” The isnad
of this narration is authentic up to Abul-‘Aliyah, but if it is correct
that he had lived three hundred years before them, then he was not
a Prophet, but some other righteous man, because there was no
Prophet between ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), the son of Maryam,
and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), according to the text of a Hadith which is found in Saheeh
Al-Bukhari.

An Account of the Reconstruction of Bait AlMaqdis
Allah, Most High, says in His Book – and He is the Most Truthful
of speakers – Or like the one who passed by a town and it had
tumbled over its rooves. He said, “Oh! How will Allah ever bring
it to life after its death?” So Allah caused him to die for a hundred
years, then raised him up (again). He said, “How long did you
remain (dead)?” He (the man) said, “(Perhaps) I remained (dead) a
day or part of a day.” He said, “Nay, you have remained (dead) for
a hundred years, look at your food and your drink, they show no
change; and look at your donkey! And thus We have made of you
a sign for the people. Look at the bones, how We bring them
together and clothe them with flesh.” When this was clearly shown
to him, he said, “I know (now) that Allah is Able to do all things.”
(Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259)
Hisham Ibn Al-Kalbi said, “Then Allah, Most High, revealed to
‘Armiya (Peace be upon him), according to what has been
conveyed to me: I will rebuild Bait Al-Maqdis, so go out to it and
take up quarters there.” So he set out for it and as he approached it
and saw it destroyed, he said to himself, “Glorified be Allah! Allah
commanded me to take up quarters in this city and He informed me
Sunniconnect.com
196

that He will rebuild it. When will Allah rebuild it and when will He
revive it after its death?” Then he laid his head down and slept; with
him was his donkey, and also a basket of food. He remained
sleeping for seventy years until Bukhtunassar had died and his
successor, Lahrasab had ascended to the throne. His reign lasted for
a hundred and twenty years and after him, his son, Bashtasab Ibn
Lahrasab became king. News of the death of Bukhtunassar had
reached Bashtasab that Ash-Sham was in utter ruin. The wild beasts
had multiplied in Palestine, for it had become empty of men.
Bashtasab therefore called to the Children of Isra’eel in Babylon,
“Whoever wants to return to Ash-Sham may do so.” It was ruled
by one from the House of Dawood, who was ordered by Bashtasab
to rebuild Jerusalem and its mosque, so they returned and rebuilt it.
Then ‘Armiya opened his eyes, blinked from the seventy year
sleep, and saw how the city was being reconstructed. He remained
in that sleep of his until he had completed one hundred years. When
Allah awoke him, he thought that he had slept not more than an
hour. He had known the city as a devastated land; when he saw it
rebuilt and peopled, he said: “I know (now) that Allah is Able to
do all things.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259) Ibn Al-Kalbi said that
the Isra’eelites settled in it, and Allah rebuilt their glory. It
remained so until Rome vanquished them in the era of the tribal
kings; then they lost their community and their authority after the
appearance of Christianity. This is how Ibn Jareer tells their story
in his Tareekh.

The Story of 'Uzair (Ezra) – Peace be upon him
Ishaq Ibn Bishr reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with him) that he said that ‘Uzair (Ezra)
(Peace be upon him) was a righteous and wise slave. He went out
one day to his own farm, as was his custom. About noon he came
to a deserted, ruined place and felt the heat. He entered the ruined
town and dismounted his donkey, taking figs and grapes in his
basket. He went under the shade of the kharibah tree and ate his
food. Then he got up to look at what remained of the ruins. The
Sunniconnect.com
197

people had long been lost, and he saw bones. “Oh! How will Allah
ever bring it to life after its death?” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259) He
said this not out of doubt but out of curiosity. Allah sent the Angel
of Death to take his life. He remained dead for a hundred years.
After a hundred years had passed and there had been changes in the
affairs of the Children of Isra’eel, Allah sent an angel to ‘Uzair
(Peace be upon him) to revive his heart and his eyes in order for
him to feel and see how Allah revives the dead. The angel said to
him, “How long did you remain (dead)?” He (the man) said,
“(Perhaps) I remained (dead) a day or part of a day.” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:259) He said this because he knew he had slept early in
the afternoon and woken up late in the afternoon. The angel said,
Nay, you have remained (dead) for a hundred years, look at your
food and your drink. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259) His food was dry
bread and his drink was juice that he had pressed in his bowl. When
he looked at them, he saw that they had not changed. Likewise, the
figs and grapes had not changed and were still fresh. It was as if he
doubted in his heart and so the angel said to him, “Do you doubt
what I have told you? Look at your donkey.” So he looked at his
donkey and saw that its bones had become dried and decayed. So
the angel called the donkey’s bones and they responded and
gathered from every side and the angel reconstructed them, while
‘Uzair (Peace be upon him) looked on. Then he dressed them with
veins and nerves, then he clothed them with muscles and then he
grew skin and hair over them. Then the angel breathed into the
donkey and it stood up and raised its head and its ears to the heaven
and brayed, thinking that the Resurrection had begun. This is why
he said, …and look at your donkey! And thus We have made of
you a sign for the people. Look at the bones, how We bring them
together and clothe them with flesh.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259)
That is, look at the bones of your donkey, how they are connected
to one another in their joints until they form the skeleton of a
donkey, without flesh. Then see how we clothe them in flesh. When
this was clearly shown to him, he said, “I know (now) that Allah is
Able to do all things.” (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259) That is, to give
life to the dead and other things. He rode on his donkey and entered
Sunniconnect.com
198

his native place, but the people did not recognize him, nor did his
household, except the maid, now an old woman. She had been a
girl of twenty years of age when he had left. He asked her, “Is this
the house of ‘Uzair?” She wept and said, “Yes, but I have not seen
anyone since the year such-and-such speaking of ‘Uzair, and the
people have forgotten him.” He said, “I am ‘Uzair, Allah had taken
my life for a hundred years and then he returned it to me.” She said:
“Glorified be Allah! We had lost ‘Uzair a hundred years ago and
we have heard no mention of him.” He repeated, “I am ‘Uzair.” She
said, “‘Uzair used to be answered when he prayed to Allah; he
would ask Allah to grant wellbeing and recovery to the sick and
those afflicted by disaster. So ask Allah to return my sight to me,
so that I may see you. If you are ‘Uzair, I will recognize you.” So
he supplicated for her and massaged her eyes with his hands and
she was cured. Then he took her by the hand and said, “Get up, by
Allah’s Permission,” Allah freed her legs and she stood up, cured,
as if she had been released from a hobbling rope. She looked and
said, “I bear witness that you are ‘Uzair,” and she rushed to the
place of Children of Isra’eel and found them in their assembly.
‘Uzair’s son was a hundred and eighteen years old, and his
children’s children now were chiefs of the assembly. She called out
to them saying,” “This is ‘Uzair come to you.” They accused her of
lying. She said, “I am soand-so, your old maid. He supplicated his
Lord for me, and He has returned my sight to me and cured my
lameness. He claims that Allah caused him to do for a hundred
years, then He returned him to life.” The people stood up and
looked at him. His son said, “My father had a black mole between
his shoulders.” So he uncovered his shoulders and they saw that he
was ‘Uzair. They said: “None among us memorized the Towrah
except ‘Uzair, according to what we have been told, and
Bukhtunassar burned the Towrah, so nothing remains of it except
what the men have memorized. So write it for us.” There was only
one copy of the Towrah, which was hidden by his father, Sarookh.
He buried it in the days of Bukhtunassar in a place none but ‘Uzair
knows.” ‘Uzair led the people to the hidden place and took out that
copy of the Towrah. Its leaves had rotted, and the book itself
Sunniconnect.com
199

crumbled. ‘Uzair (Peace be upon him) sat under the shade of a tree
surrounded by the Children of Isra’eel and copied out the Towrah
for them. And it was said that two shooting stars descended from
the heaven and entered him and he recalled the Towrah and copied
it out for the Children of Isra’eel. It was from this time that the Jews
began to say that ‘Uzair (Peace be upon him) is the son of Allah,
because of the two shooting stars, his re-copying of the Towrah and
his undertaking of the affairs of the Children of Isra’eel.
He had been copying the Towrah for Hizqeel in the rural region, in
Dair Hizqeel. The village in which he died was said to be
Sayirabaz. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him)
remarked, “So it is as Allah said: And thus We have made of you a
sign for the people." (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:259) That is, for the
Children of Isra’eel, in that he was sitting among his children, and
they were old men, while he was a young man, because he died
when he was forty years old and so Allah resurrected him as he had
been on the day he died. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) said, “He was resurrected after Bukhtunassar had
died.” Al-Hasan concurred with this.

Conclusion
It is well-known that ‘Uzair (Peace be upon him) was one of the
Prophets sent to the Children of Isra’eel, that his mission was after
Dawood and Sulaiman (peace be upon them both) and before
Zakariyya and Yahya (peace be upon them both) and that no one
remained among the Children of Isra’eel who had memorized the
Towrah. Because of this, Allah inspired him with the memorization
of it and he recited it to the Children of Isra’eel, as Wahb Ibn
Munabbih said, “Allah commanded an angel to descend with a
large ladle filled with light; the angel emptied it over ‘Uzair (Peace
be upon him) and he copied the Towrah, letter by letter, until he
had completed it.”
Sunniconnect.com
200

Ibn ‘Asakir narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he asked ‘Abdullah Ibn Salam
(May Allah be pleased with him) about the Words of Allah, Most
High: And the Jews say, “ ‘Uzair (Ezra) is the son of Allah.”
(Soorah At-Tawbah 9:30), saying, “Why did they say this?” Ibn
Salam (May Allah be pleased with him) then related to him from
what he had memorized of the written Towrah that was in the hands
of the Children of Isra’eel and of how they had said, “Moosa could
not bring us the Towrah except as a book, but ‘Uzair brought it to
us without a book.” So a group of them claimed that he was the son
of Allah. This is why many of the scholars say that the continuity
of the Towrah was interrupted during the time of ‘Uzair (Peace be
upon him).

Sunniconnect.com
201

The Story of Zakariyya and Yahya (Peace
be upon them)
Allah says in His Noble Book, Kaf Ha Ya ‘Ain Sad. (These letters
are one of the miracles of the Qur’an, and none but Allah, Alone,
knows their meanings). (This is) a mention of the Mercy of your
Lord to His slave Zakariyya. When he called out to his Lord (Allah)
a call in secret, saying, “My Lord! Indeed my bones have grown
feeble, and grey hair has spread on my head, and I have never been
unblessed in my invocation to You, O, my Lord! And Verily! I fear
the mawali after me, since my wife is barren. So give me from
Yourself an heir, who shall inherit me, and inherit (also) the
posterity of Ya‘qoob. And make him, my Lord, one with whom
You are Well-pleased!” (Allah said), “O Zakariyya! Verily, We
give you the glad tidings of a son, his name will be Yahya. We have
given that name to none before (him).” He said, “My Lord! How
can I have a son, when my wife is barren, and I have reached
extreme old age?” He said, “So (it will be). Your Lord says: It is
easy for Me. Certainly I have created you before, when you had
been nothing!” He (Zakariyya) said, “My Lord! Appoint for me a
sign.” He said, “Your sign is that you shall not speak unto mankind
for three nights, though having no bodily defect.” Then he came
out to his people from Al-Mihrab (a praying place or a private
room, etc.), he revealed to them that they should glorify Allah’s
Praises in the morning and in the afternoon. (It was said to his son),
“O, Yahya! Hold fast to the Scripture (the Tawrah).” And We gave
him wisdom while yet a child. And (We gave him) Hanan from Us,
and (made him) pure from sins (i.e. Yahya) and he was righteous,
and dutiful toward his parents, and he was neither arrogant nor
disobedient (to Allah or to his parents). And Salamun (peace) be on
him the day he was born, the day he dies, and the day he will be
raised up to life (again)! (Soorah Maryam 19:1-15)
And He, Most High, says, So her Lord (Allah) accepted her with
goodly acceptance. He made her grow in a good manner and put
Sunniconnect.com
202

her under the care of Zakariyya. Every time he entered Al-Mihrab
to (visit) her, he found her supplied with sustenance. He said, “O
Maryam! From where have you got this?” She said, “This is from
Allah.” Verily, Allah provides sustenance to whom He wills,
without limit.” At that time Zakariyya invoked his Lord, saying, “O
my Lord! Grant me from You a good offspring. You are indeed the
Hearer of (all) invocations.” Then the angels called him, while he
was standing in prayer in AlMihrab, (saying), “Allah gives you
glad tidings of Yahya, confirming (believing in) the Word from
Allah (i.e. the creation of ‘Eesa, the Word from Allah [“Be!” – and
he was!]), noble, hasoor, a Prophet, from among the righteous.” He
said, “O, my Lord! How can I have a son when I am very old, and
my wife is barren?” Allah said, “Thus Allah does what He wills.”
He said, “O, my Lord! Make a sign for me.” Allah said, “Your sign
is that you shall not speak to mankind for three days except with
signals. And remember your Lord much (by praising Him again
and again), and glorify (Him) in the afternoon and in the morning.”
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37-41)
What is meant by these Verses is that Allah, Most High,
commanded His Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) to relate to the people the story of Zakariyya (Peace be upon
him) and the events that transpired when Allah, Most High, granted
him a son in his old age, when his wife was barren, due to her
advanced age, so that no one should give up hope or despair of His
Bounty and His Mercy. He, Most High, says, (This is) a mention
of the Mercy of your Lord to His slave Zakariyya. When he called
out to his Lord (Allah) a call in secret. (Soorah Maryam 19:2,3)
Qatadah said in his explanation of these Verses, “Verily, Allah
knows the pure heart and hears the secret call.” Some of the Salaf
said that he stood up for a part of the night and called to his Lord
in secret, so that those present in the house should not hear him,
saying, “O, my Lord!” His Lord answered, “I am here, I am here, I
am here.” He said, “My Lord! Indeed my bones have grown
feeble…” (Soorah Maryam 19:4) That is, they have grown weak
and declined in vigor, due to old age. “…and grey hair has spread
Sunniconnect.com
203

on my head.” (Soorah Maryam 19:4) That is, as fire spreads over
kindling, i.e. white hair has overcome the black hair, as Ibn Duraid
said in his poetic verses:

“Do you not see my head, how its color resembles,
The sprouting of morning under the tail of night,
And the white has spread through the black,
Like the spreading of fire through hot coals,
And the youthful branch has become dry and withered,
Having formerly been flexible and moist?
He said that weakness has overcome him, both internally and
externally and that was what Zakariyya
(Peace be upon him) said: “Indeed my bones have grown feeble and
grey hair has spread on my head.”
(Soorah Maryam 19:4) And he said, “…and I have never been
unblessed in my invocation to You, O my Lord!” (Soorah Maryam
19:4) That is, you have accustomed me to naught in supplications
to You, except that You have answered them. What caused him to
make this request was that after he became the guardian of
Maryam, daughter of Mathan, he found that whenever he entered
her room, she had fruits which were not in season and these were
among the blessings of Allah’s Awliya’ and he realized that the
Provider of something outside its season is Able to provide him
with a son, even though he has become old. At that time Zakariyya
invoked his Lord, saying, “O my Lord! Grant me from You, a good
offspring. You are indeed the Hearer of (all) invocations.” (Soorah
Aal ‘Imran 3:38)

Sunniconnect.com
204

And He, Most High, says, “And Verily! I fear the mawali after me,
since my wife is barren.” (Soorah Maryam 19:5) It is said that what
is meant by mawali is relatives; it was as if he feared that whoever
managed the affairs of the Children of Isra’eel after his death might
do so in accordance with ideas that were not consistent with Allah’s
Law and obedience to Him. So he asked Allah to produce a son for
him from his loins, who would be pious and pure and would seek
to please his Lord, which is why he said, “Grant me from
Yourself…” (Soorah Maryam 19:5) That is by Your Power and
Your Strength. “…an heir, who shall inherit me” (Soorah Maryam
19:5,6) means in Prophethood and judgment among the Children
of Isra’eel. “…and inherit (also) the posterity of Ya‘qoob. And
make him, my Lord, one with whom You are Well-pleased!”
(Soorah Maryam 19:6) That is, just as his fathers and forefathers
from the descendants of Ya‘qoob (Peace be upon him) were
Prophets, make him like them in the Honor that You bestowed upon
them by granting them Prophethood and Revelation. This does not
refer to the inheritance of wealth, as some of the Shiites have
claimed.
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Zakariyya was a carpenter.”
And He, Most High, says, (Allah said,) “O Zakariya! Verily, We
give you the glad tidings of a son, His name will be Yahya. We
have given that name to none before (him).” (Soorah Maryam 19:7)
This is explained by His Words: Then the angels called him, while
he was standing in prayer in Al-Mihrab (saying), “Allah gives you
glad tidings of Yahya, confirming (believing in) the Word from
Allah (i.e. the creation of ‘Eesa, the Word from Allah [“Be!” – and
he was!]), noble, keeping away from sexual relations with women,
a Prophet, from among the righteous.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:39).
Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) was surprised to hear these glad
tidings, to hear that a son could be conceived in such
circumstances, which is why he said, “My Lord! How can I have a
Sunniconnect.com
205

son, when my wife is barren, and I have reached extreme old age?”
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:40) That is, how can an old man father a son?
It was said that his age at that time was seventy-seven years, but it
seems more likely – and Allah knows better – that he was older
than that. “…when my wife is barren” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:40)
means at the time of her old age, she has become barren and cannot
bear a child – and Allah knows better – as Al-Khaleel (Peace be
upon him) said, “Do you give me glad tidings (of a son) when old
age has overtaken me? Of what then is your news?” (Soorah AlHijr 15:54) and Sarah said, She said (in astonishment), “Woe unto
me! Shall I bear a child while I am an old woman, and here is my
husband, an old man? Verily! This is a strange thing!” They said,
“Do you wonder at the Decree of Allah? The Mercy of Allah and
His Blessings be on you, O family (of Ibraheem). Surely, He
(Allah) is Most Praiseworthy, Most Glorious.” (Soorah Hood
11:72,73). And in the same way was Zakariyya (Peace be upon
him) answered. Said the angel to whom Revelation was given, by
the Command of his Lord, “So (it will be). Your Lord says, “It is
easy for Me.” (Soorah Maryam 19:9) That is, a simple matter,
posing no difficulty for Him. “Certainly I have created you before,
when you had been nothing!” (Soorah Maryam 19:9) That is, His
Ability to do all things brought you into being after you had
previously not existed, so can He not then produce a son from you,
even though you are an old man?
And He, Most High, says, So We answered his call, and We
bestowed upon him Yahya, and cured his wife (to bear a child) for
him. Verily, they used to hasten on to do good deeds, and they used
to call on Us with hope and fear, and used to humble themselves
before Us. (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:90) And the meaning of curing
his wife is that she had not had menses and how she had them once
more.
And He, Most High, says, He said, “O, my Lord! Make a sign for
me.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:41) That is, make a sign that alerts me
that the child will come. Allah said, “Your sign is that you shall not
Sunniconnect.com
206

speak unto mankind for three nights, though having no bodily
defect.” (Soorah Maryam 19:10) Allah tells him that his sign is that
he will be afflicted by silence, which will leave him unable to speak
for three days and that he will only be able to communicate by
signs, but that in spite of this, he would be in good health. And He
commanded him to mention Allah frequently at this time in his
heart and to remember Him much at night and in the morning.
When he was given these glad tidings, he went out happily to his
people from his mihrab. He revealed to them that they should
glorify Allah’s Praises in the morning and in the afternoon. (Soorah
Maryam 19:11) Revealing here means silently communicating with
them, either by writing, as Mujahid and As-Suddi said, or by signs,
as Mujahid also said, and Wahb and Qatadah concurred with this.
Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Wahb, As-Suddi and Qatadah said that his
tongue was stilled, without him being afflicted by any illness. Ibn
Zaid said, “He used to recite and glorify Allah, but he could not
speak to anyone.”
And Allah, Most High, says, (It was said to his son), “O, Yahya!
Hold fast to the Scripture (the Tawrah).” And We gave him wisdom
while yet a child. (Soorah Maryam 19:12) Allah, Most High,
informs us about the birth of the son, in accordance with the Divine
Tidings given to, Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) and
He tells us that He taught him the Scripture and wisdom while he
was still a child. ‘Abdullah Ibn AlMubarak said, “Ma’mar said,
“The children said to Yahya, son of Zakariyya, “Come with us and
we will play.” But he replied, “We were not created for play.” This
is the explanation of His Words: And We gave him wisdom while
yet a child. (Soorah Maryam 19:12) As for His Saying: And (We
gave him) Hanan from Us. (Soorah Maryam 19:13) Ibn Jareer AtTabari narrated on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn
Deenar, who in turn narrated on the authority of ‘Ikrimah, who
narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) that he said, “I do not know what Hanan is.” It
was also narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May
Allah be pleased with him), Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, Qatadah and AdSunniconnect.com
207

Dahhak that And (We gave him) Hanan from Us means: as a Mercy
from Us; through it We showed Mercy to Zakariyya (Peace be upon
him) and blessed him with a son. It was reported on the authority
of ‘Ikrimah that Hanan means: Love. It is possible that this was an
attribute to make Yahya (Peace be upon him) beloved by the
people, in particular, by his parents, who loved him, for he was
dutiful and solicitous toward them. As for the purity, it means
purity of the heart and freedom from defects and vices. As for the
righteousness, it means showing obedience to Allah, by fulfilling
His Commands and avoiding the things that He has prohibited.
Then He mentioned his dutifulness toward his parents, his
obedience to their commands and prohibitions and his avoidance
of showing disrespect to them in word and deed. And He, Most
High, says, And dutiful toward his parents, and he was neither an
arrogant nor disobedient (to Allah or to his parents). (Soorah
Maryam 19:14) Then He says, And Salamun (peace) be on him the
day he was born, the day he dies, and the day he will be raised up
to life (again)! (Soorah Maryam 19:15) These three times are the
most difficult for mankind, because in each case, he transfers from
one state to another. He loses the first, after he becomes familiar
with it and comes to know it and he goes onto another state in which
he knows not what is before him, which is why he cries out when
he emerges from the womb and leaves it softness and its embrace
and comes into this world, where he will endure its anxieties and
its sorrows. Likewise, when he departs from this life and goes onto
AlBarzakh, which is between the life of this world and the
permanent abode of the Hereafter. After living in houses and
palaces, he takes up residence among the dead, in the graves. There
he waits for the blow of the Trumpet, which will herald the arrival
of the Day of Resurrection and Gathering. On that Day, a group
will be in Paradise and another will be in the blazing Fire. One of
the poets put it well when he said:
When your mother gave birth to you, you were crying and
screaming,
Sunniconnect.com
208

And the people around you were laughing and happy,
So take care of yourself, so that when, on the day of your death,
they weep,
You will be laughing, happy.
And since these three stages are the most difficult for mankind,
Allah sent peace upon Yahya (Peace be upon him) in all three of
them, saying, And Salamun (peace) be on him the day he was born,
the day he dies, and the day he will be raised up to life (again)!
(Soorah Maryam 19:15) Sa‘eed Ibn Abi ‘Aroobah reported on the
authority of Qatadah that Al-Hasan said, “Yahya and ‘Eesa met and
‘Eesa said to Yahya, “Ask forgiveness for me, for you are better
than I.” Yahya said, “Ask forgiveness for me, for you are better
than I.” ‘Eesa answered, “You are better than I, because I invoked
peace on myself, but Allah sent peace on you.”
And He says in another Verse, “…noble, hasoor, a Prophet, from
among the righteous.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:39) What is meant by
hasoor is that he avoids sexual relations with women. Other
explanations have been given for this, but it is similar to His Words:
“Grant me from You a good offspring.” (Soorah Aal‘Imran 3:38)
And Imam Ahmad has narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “There is
none among the sons of Adam who has not committed a sin or
intended to do so except Yahya, son of Zakariyya; and it is not right
that anyone should say that I am better than Yoonus, son of Matta.”
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Al-Harith AlAsh‘ari that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Verily, Allah commanded Yahya, son of Zakariyya, to
act upon five things and to order the Children of Isra’eel to act upon
them. But Yahya was slow in carrying out these commandments.
Sunniconnect.com
209

‘Eesa said to Yahya, “You were ordered to implement five
commandments and to order the Children of Isra’eel to implement
them. So either order it, or I will order it.” Yahya said, “My brother!
I fear that if you do it before me, I will be punished or the earth will
be shaken under my feet.” So Yahya called the Children of Isra’eel
to Bait Al-Maqdis, until they filled the Mosque. He sat on the
balcony, thanked Allah and praised him and then said, “Allah
ordered me to implement five commandments and He commanded
me to order you to adhere to them. The first is that you worship
Allah alone and not associate anyone with Him. The example of
this command ment is the example of a man who bought a servant
from his money with paper or gold. The servant started to work for
the master, but was paying the profits to another person. Who
among you would like his servant to do that? Allah created you and
sustains you. Therefore, worship Him alone and do not associate
anything with Him. I also command you to pray, for Allah directs
His Face toward His servant’s face, as long as the servant does not
turn away. So when you pray, do not turn your heads to and fro. I
also command you to fast. The example of it is the example of a
man in a group of men and he has some musk wrapped in a piece
of cloth, and consequently, all of the group smells the scent of the
wrapped musk. Verily, the odour of the mouth of a fasting person
is better before Allah than the scent of musk. I also command you
to give charity. The example of this is the example of a man who
was captured by the enemy. They tied his hands to his neck and
brought him forth to cut off his head. He said to them, “Can I pay
a ransom for myself?” He kept ransoming himself with small and
large amounts until he liberated himself. I also command you to
always remember Allah. The example of this deed is that of a man
who the enemy is tirelessly pursuing. He takes refuge in a fortified
fort. When the slave remembers Allah, the Almighty, the
AllPowerful, he will be resorting to the best refuge from Shaitan.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “And I order you to fulfill five commandments that Allah
has ordered me to fulfill. Hold fast to the Jama‘ah (Community of
the Faithful), listen to and obey (your leaders) and perform hijrah
Sunniconnect.com
210

(migration) and jihad for the sake of Allah. Whoever abandons the
Jama‘ah, even the distance of a hand span, will have removed the
tie of Islam from his neck, unless he returns. Whoever uses the
slogans of Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic period of ignorance) he will
be among those kneeling in Jahannam (Hellfire). He said, “O,
Messenger of Allah! Even if he prays and fasts?’ He said, “Even if
he prays, fasts and claims to be Muslim. So call the Muslims with
the names with which Allah has called them: the Muslims, the
believing slaves of Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful.”

Explanation of the Cause of Yahya’s Killing
Scholars have cited numerous reasons for the killing of Yahya
(Peace be upon him); among the most well-known of them is that
one of the kings at that time in Damascus desired to marry a
member of his family who was unlawful to him and Yahya (Peace
be upon him) forbade him from doing so, but he insisted on
marrying her. Dressing attractively, she sang and danced before
him. She succeeded in arousing his lust. Embracing her, he offered
to fulfill whatever she desired. She then asked for Yahya (Peace be
upon him) to be killed. The king granted this request and sent men
to kill him and bring his head and his blood to her in a bowl. It was
said that she died immediately upon holding it. It was also said that
the wife of that king loved Yahya (Peace be upon him) and so she
sent a message to him, but he refused her. When she despaired of
him, she requested of the king that he kill him, but he refused.
However, she kept on insisting until he agreed; then he sent some
men to kill him and bring his head and his blood in a bowl.
Scholars differed regarding the killing of Yahya (Peace be upon
him): Did it happen in Al-Aqsa Mosque, or somewhere else? There
are two opinions in the matter: Ath-Thawri reported on the
authority of AlA‘mash, who in turn reported on the authority of
Shimr Ibn ‘Atiyyah that he said, “Seventy Prophets were killed on
the rock that is in Bait Al-Maqdis, including Yahya, son of
Zakariyya (peace be upon them both).”
Sunniconnect.com
211

Abu ‘Ubaid Al-Qasim Ibn Sallam said, “We were informed by
‘Abdullah Ibn Salih, who reported on the authority of Al-Laith,
who in turn reported on the authority of Yahya Ibn Sa‘eed, who
likewise reported on the authority of Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyib that
he said, “Bukhtunossar advanced on Damascus and he found the
blood of Yahya boiling. He asked about it and they told him about
it. On account of his blood, he killed seventy thousand, after which
it became still.” The isnad of this narration is authentic up to Sa‘eed
Ibn Al-Musayyib and this must mean that he was killed in
Damascus and that the story of Bukhtunassar was after ‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him), as claimed by ‘Ata’ and Al-Hasan Al-Basri.
And Allah knows better.
Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir narrated by way of Al-Waleed Ibn Muslim,
on the authority of Zaid Ibn Waqid, who said, “I saw the head of
Yahya, son of Zakariyya, when they intended to build the
Damascus Mosque; it was taken from beneath one of the pillars of
the Qiblah, which is next to the mihrab, adjacent to the east. The
skin and the hair were unaffected by decay and remained
unchanged.” In another version, it was stated that: “…it was as if
he had just been killed.”
It was reported regarding the building of Damascus Mosque that it
was placed under the pillar which is known as As-Sakasikah. And
Allah knows better.
Al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir narrated in Al-Mustaqsa Fi Fada’ilil-Aqsa by
way of Al-‘Abbas Ibn Subh, who reported on the authority of
Marwan, who in turn reported on the authority of Sa‘eed Ibn
‘Abdul-‘Azeez, who likewise reported on the authority of qusaim,
the freed slave of Mu‘awiyah that he said, “The king of this city
(i.e. Damascus) was Hadad Ibn Hadad and he had married his
niece, Aryal, Queen of Saida. Included among its territories was
Sooq Al-Mulook in Damascus. He had sworn to divorce her three
times, but then he wished to return her to him and so he sought a
religious verdict from Yahya. Yahya (Peace be upon him) told him,
Sunniconnect.com
212

“She is not lawful for you until she has married another man (and
been divorced by him).” She harbored feelings of hatred toward
him because of this and so she requested from the king that he give
her the head of Yahya. This was at the instigation of her mother,
but he refused her at first, then later he agreed and sent some men
to Jairoon Mosque, where they found him praying; they then killed
him and brought the king his head. The head said to him, “She will
not be lawful to you until she marries another man (and is
subsequently divorced from him).” The woman took the plate and
carried it on her head to her mother and it was still repeating the
words it had said to the king. When she stood before her mother,
the earth opened up at her feet and she sank down to her loins. Her
mother began to wail and the servants screamed and slapped their
faces. Then she sank down to her shoulders and so her mother
ordered the swordsman to strike her neck and cut off her head, so
that at least she could keep her head. Then the earth spat out her
body. They were then humiliated and destroyed and the blood of
Yahya (Peace be upon him) continued to boil until Bukhtunassar
arrived and killed seventy-five thousand people on account of it.”

The Story of ‘Eesa, Son of Maryam (Peace be
upon them)
Allah, Most High, says, Allah chose Adam, Nooh (Noah), the
family of Ibraheem (Abraham) and the family of ‘Imran above Al‘Alameen (of their times). Offspring, one of the other, and Allah is
the AllHearing, All-Knowing. (Remember) when the wife of
‘Imran said, “O, my Lord! I have vowed to You what (i.e. the child
that) is in my womb to be dedicated for Your services (free from
all worldly work; to serve Your Place of worship), so accept this,
from me. Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the AllKnowing.” Then,
when she delivered her child, she said, “O, my Lord! I have
delivered a female child…” – and Allah knew better what she had
delivered – “And the male is not like the female, and I have named
her Maryam, and I seek refuge with You (Allah) for her and for her
Sunniconnect.com
213

offspring from Shaitan, the outcast.” So her Lord (Allah) accepted
her with goodly acceptance. He made her grow in a good manner
and put her under the care of Zakariyya. Every time he entered AlMihrab to (visit) her, he found her supplied with sustenance. He
said, “O, Maryam! From where have you got this?” She said, “This
is from Allah.” Verily, Allah provides sustenance to whomever He
wills, without limit. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:33-37)
Allah, Most High, describes how He chose Adam (Peace be upon
him) and the purest of his progeny, who observed His Law and
were resolute in their obedience to Him. Then He made a particular
specification, saying, “…the family of Ibraheem.” (Soorah Aal
‘Imran 3:33) and He included among them the children of Isma‘eel
(Peace be upon him) and the children of Ishaq (Peace be upon him).
Then He spoke of the virtue of this pure and noble house, i.e. the
family of ‘Imran. The ‘Imran referred to is the father of Maryam
(peace be upon her). Muhammad Ibn Ishaq said, “He was ‘Imran,
son of Basham, son of Amoon, son of Mansha, son of Hizqiya, son
of ’Ahzeeq son of Motham, son of ‘Azariya, son of ’Amsiya, son
of Yawash, son of ’Ahzeehoo, son of Yaram, son of Yahfashat, son
of ’Aish, son of Aban, son of Rahab‘am, son of Yaram, son of
Dawood (peace be upon them).”
Muhammad Ibn Ishaq and others also said that Mary’s mother was
unable to conceive. Then one day, she saw a bird feeding its chick
and she wanted a child and so she vowed that if she became
pregnant, she would surely devote the child to be a servant of Bait
Al-Maqdis. It was said that she immediately was afflicted by
menses, and that when she became purified from it, her husband
was intimate with her and she became pregnant with Maryam
(peace be upon her). When she delivered her, she said, “O, my
Lord! I have delivered a female child…” – and Allah knew better
what she had delivered. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:36) This was also
recited in a manner that would mean: “And Allah knows better
what I have delivered.” “And the male is not like the female.”
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:36). That is, regarding service to Bait AlSunniconnect.com
214

Maqdis; at that time, they used to pledge their sons to the service
of Bait Al-Maqdis.
Her saying: “…and I have named her Maryam.” (Soorah Aal
‘Imran 3:36) proves that the naming of a child is done on the day
of its birth. Likewise, it has been confirmed in the Saheehain on the
authority of Anas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he went
with his (newborn) brother to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), who performed
tahneek for his brother and named him ‘Abdullah. It was also
mentioned in the Hadith of Al-Hasan from Samurah (May Allah be
pleased with him) in a marfoo‘ form that: “Every child is held in
pledge for his ‘aqeeqah which is sacrificed for him on his seventh
day and he is named on it and his head is shaved.” This was narrated
by Imam Ahmad and the compilers of the Sunan and it was
declared authentic by At-Tirmidhi. In some versions, it was said,
“tadmiyyah should be performed on him,” instead of: “he is
named.” And Allah knows better. And she said, “…and I seek
refuge with You (Allah) for her and for her offspring from Shaitan,
the outcast.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:36) This supplication was
answered by Allah, just as her pledge was accepted.
Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May
Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “Every newborn is touched by Shaitan
when he is born, causing him to cry out, except Maryam and her
son.” Then Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) said,
“And recite if you wish: “…and I seek refuge with You (Allah) for
her and for her offspring from Shaitan, the outcast.” (Soorah Aal
‘Imran 3:36).”
Allah, Most High, says, So her Lord (Allah) accepted her with
goodly acceptance. He made her grow in a good manner and put
her under the care of Zakariyya. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37). Many
of the scholars of tafseer said that when her mother delivered her,
she wrapped her in her garments and went out to the mosque with
her. She presented her to the worshippers who lived there and
Sunniconnect.com
215

because she was the daughter of their Imam and prayer leader, they
vied with one another to be her guardian.
It would appear that she only presented her to them after she had
completed breastfeeding her. Then, when she presented her to
them, they vied with one another regarding which of them would
be her guardian. Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) was their Prophet
at that time and he wished to be alone in being her guardian,
because his wife was her sister or her maternal aunt, according to
two different opinions. But they did not agree to this and so they
requested that he allow them to draw lots for her. They did so and
Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) was the successful one. This was
because a maternal aunt is of the same status as a mother.
Allah, Most High, says, and put her under the care of Zakariyya.
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37) That is, because he defeated them in the
drawing of lots, as He, Most High, says, This is a part of the news
of the ghaib (Unseen, i.e. the news of the past nations of which you
have no knowledge) which We inspire you with (O Muhammad).
You were not with them, when they cast lots with their pens as to
which of them should be charged with the care of Maryam; nor
were you with them when they disputed. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:44)
Scholars said that it means that all of them threw their pens, which
were recognizable. Then they carried them and placed them in a
certain location and ordered a sinless boy to select one of them.
He did so and it was the pen of Zakariyya (Peace be upon him).
They then requested that they might cast their pens again, but that
this time, they might throw them into the river and that whichever
of them remained still, in spite of the current, its owner would be
Mary’s guardian. It was Zakariyya’s pen that resisted the current.
They then requested that they might cast them a third time. This
time, they said that whichever pen flowed with the river’s current,
while the others flowed in a contrary direction, the owner of that
pen would win. They did this, and again, it was Zakariyya (Peace
be upon him) who was the winner. So he became her guardian,
Sunniconnect.com
216

since he had the greatest right, according to the Divine Law and
based on numerous (other) reasons. Allah, Most High, says, Every
time he entered Al-Mihrab to (visit) her, he found her supplied with
sustenance. He said, “O, Maryam! From where have you got this?”
She said, “This is from Allah.” Verily, Allah provides sustenance
to whomever He wills, without limit. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37) The
scholars of tafseer said that Zakariyya (Peace be upon him)
appointed for her a noble place in the mosque which none but she
could enter. There she used to worship Allah and undertake the
duties incumbent upon her, such as acting as caretaker of the
mosque, when it was her turn to do so. The days and nights she
would spend in the worship of Allah, until her name became a
byword for devotion among the Children of Isra’eel. She also
became known for the miracles with which she was blessed and for
her noble character, to such a degree that, whenever the Prophet of
Allah, Zakariyya (Peace be upon him), came to see her in her place
of worship, he would find with her strange sustenance which was
not in season; he would find with her summer fruits in winter and
winter fruits in summer. He asked her, “From where have you got
this?” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37), to which she replied, “This is from
Allah.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37) That is, this is sustenance which
Allah has provided for me. Verily,
Allah provides sustenance to whomever He wills, without limit.
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:37). At this point, Zakariyya (Peace be upon
him) conceived a desire for a son of his own, even though he was
well advanced in years. He said, “O, my Lord! Grant me from You
a good offspring. You are indeed the AllHearing of invocation.”
(Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:38). Some of the scholars said that he said,
“O, You Who provides Maryam with fruits that are out of season,
grant me a son, even though I am “out of season” (i.e. no longer of
the age when one might normally father a child).” And we have
already told what happened to him in his story.
Allah, Most High, says, And (remember) when the angels said, “O
Maryam! Verily, Allah has chosen you, purified you (from
polytheism and disbelief) and chosen you above the women of AlSunniconnect.com
217

‘Alameen. O, Maryam! Submit yourself with obedience to your
Lord (Allah, by worshipping none but Him Alone) and prostrate
yourself, and irka‘i (bow down, etc.) along with Ar-Raki‘oon
(those who bow down, etc.).” This is a part of the news of the ghaib
(Unseen, i.e. the news of the past nations of which you have no
knowledge) with which We inspire you (O Muhammad). You were
not with them when they cast lots with their pens as to which of
them should be charged with the care of Maryam; nor were you
with them when they disputed. (Remember) when the angels said,
“O Maryam! Verily, Allah gives you the glad tidings of a Word
(“Be!” - and he was! i.e. ‘Eesa the son of Maryam [Mary]) from
Him, his name will be the Maseeh, ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, held
in honor in this world and in the Hereafter, and will be one of those
who are near to Allah. He will speak to the people in the cradle and
in manhood, and he will be one of the righteous.” She said, “O my
Lord! How shall I have a son when no man has touched me.” He
said, “So (it will be) for Allah creates what He wills. When He has
decreed something, He says to it only, “Be!” and it is. And He
(Allah) will teach him (‘Eesa) the Book and Al-Hikmah (i.e. the
Sunnah, the faultless speech of the Prophets, wisdom, etc.), (and)
the Tawrah and the Injeel. (And He will make him ‘Eesa) a
Messenger to the Children of Isra’eel (saying), “I have come to you
with a sign from your Lord, that I design for you out of clay, as it
were, the figure of a bird, and breathe into it, and it becomes a bird
by Allah’s Leave; and I heal him who was born blind and the leper,
and I bring the dead to life by Allah’s Leave. And I inform you of
what you eat and what you store in your houses. Surely, therein is
a sign for you, if you believe. And I have come confirming that
which was before me of the Tawrah, and to make lawful to you part
of what was forbidden to you, and I have come to you with a proof
from your Lord. So fear Allah and obey me. Truly! Allah is my
Lord and your Lord, so worship Him (Alone). This is the Straight
Path. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:42-51)
Allah, Most High, says that the angels informed Maryam (peace be
upon her) that Allah had chosen her from among all of the women
Sunniconnect.com
218

of her time to bear a son, without a father. She was also informed
that he would be a noble Prophet. “He will speak to the people in
the cradle.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:46) That is, when he is an infant,
he will call them to the worship of Allah, Alone, without partners.
He will also do so when he is a man of mature age. This proves that
he attained middle age and called the people to Allah in it. She was
commanded to worship Allah much, to be pious and devout, to
prostrate and bow, in order to be deserving of this generosity and
to show gratitude for this blessing. It was said that she used to stand
in prayer until the skin of her feet split – may Allah be pleased with
her and show Mercy to her and to her mother and father. The angels
said, “O, Maryam! Verily, Allah has chosen you.” (Soorah Aal
‘Imran 3:42) That is, He has selected you and preferred you over
the low creatures and given you beautiful characteristics. “…and
chosen you above the women of Al-‘Alameen.” (Soorah Aal
‘Imran 3:42) It is possible that this means the women of her time,
as in Allah’s Words to Moosa (Peace be upon him): “I have chosen
you above men…” (Soorah Al-A‘raf 7:144) and as in His Words
regarding the Children of
Isra’eel: And We chose them (the Children of Isra’eel) above Al‘Alameen with knowledge. (Soorah AdDukhan 44:32). And it is
well known that Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) is better than
Moosa (Peace be upon him) and that Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) is better than both of them. And
likewise, this nation (of Islam) is better than all of the other nations,
greater in numbers, superior in knowledge and purer in deeds than
the Children of Isra’eel and others.
It is also possible that: “…and have chosen you above the women
of Al-‘Alameen.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:42) is a general statement,
meaning that she is the best of women in this world, including all
those before her and all those after her, because she was a
Prophetess, according to those who opine that she, Sarah, the
mother of Ishaq (Peace be upon him) and the mother of Moosa
(Peace be upon him) were Prophetesses. Ibn Hazm and others cite
as evidence for this the words of the angels and the Revelation
Sunniconnect.com
219

given to the mother of Moosa (Peace be upon him). According to
this, it is not impossible that Maryam might be better than Sarah
and the mother of Moosa (Peace be upon him), based on the
generality of Allah’s Words: “…and have chosen you above the
women of Al-‘Alameen.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:42), if it (the
generality) is not contradicted by any other evidence. And Allah
knows better. As for the opinion of the majority, according to what
has been related by Abul-Hasan Al-Ash‘ari and others, on the
authority of Ahl As-Sunnah Wal-Jama‘ah, which states that the
Prophethood is conferred exclusively on men and there are no
Prophetesses. So the status of Maryam would be as Allah, Most
High, says, The Maseeh (‘Eesa, son of Maryam), was no more than
a Messenger; many were the Messengers that passed away before
him. His mother (Maryam was a Siddiqah (i.e. she believed in the
words of Allah and His Books). (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:75) Based
on this, it is not impossible that she might be the best of the
renowned and celebrated Siddeeqat – including those before her
and those after her. And Allah knows better. She has been linked
with Asiyah Bint Muzahim, Khadeejah Bint Khuwailid and
Fatimah Bint Muhammad, may Allah be pleased with them all.
Imam Ahmad, Al-Bukhari and Muslim, At-Tirmidhi and AnNasa’i narrated on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (May Allah
be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Maryam, the daughter
of ‘Imran, was the best among the women (of the world of her time)
and Khadeejah is the best amongst the women (of this nation).”
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Ibn Al-Musayyib
that he said, “Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) said
that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
“The best women are the riders of the camels and the righteous
among the women of Quraish; and show affection to their children
and zealously guard the wealth of their husbands.” Abu Hurairah
said that Maryam, the daughter of ‘Imran, never rode a camel.
Sunniconnect.com
220

And Abu Ya‘la Al-Mawsili narrated on the authority of ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
drew four lines in the earth and he said, “Do you know what this
is?” They said, “Allah and His Messenger know better.” The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “The best among the women of Paradise are Khadeejah Bint
Khuwailid, Fatimah Bint Muhammad, Maryam Bint ‘Imran and
Asiyah Bint Muzahim, the wife of Fir‘awn.”
As for the Hadith narrated by Ibn Marduyayih, on the authority of
Shu‘bah, who reported on the authority of Mu‘awiyah Ibn Qurrah,
who in turn reported on the authority of his father that he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “Many men attained perfection, but no women attained
perfection except three: Mary, the daughter of ‘Imran, Asiyah, the
wife of and Khadeejah, the daughter of Khuwailid. And the
superiority of ‘A'ishah over other women is as the superiority of
thareed over all other foods.”
And likewise, the following Hadith narrated by the Jama‘ah – aside
from Abu Dawood – is also authentic.
It was reported on the authority of Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari (May
Allah be pleased with him) that he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Many men
attained perfection but no women attained perfection except
Asiyah, the wife of Fir‘awn and Maryam, the daughter of ‘Imran;
and verily, the superiority of ‘A’ishah over other women is as the
superiority of thareed over all other foods.” As you see, the
Shaikhain (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) agreed upon it. And its
wording necessitates that perfection in women was confined to
Maryam and Asiyah; and it is likely that what is meant by this is in
their times, because each of them was the guardian and protector of
a Prophet during his formative years: Asiyah was the guardian of
Moosa (Peace be upon him) and Mary was the guardian of her son,
the slave of Allah and His Messenger, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him).
Sunniconnect.com
221

And this does not negate the possibility that other women from this
nation, such as Khadeejah and Fatimah (may Allah be pleased with
them) attained perfection. Khadeejah (may Allah be pleased with
her) served the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) before his mission started for fifteen years, and after
it for more than ten years. She was his adviser and she devoted
herself and her wealth in the cause of Islam – may Allah be Pleased
with her and gratify her. As for Fatimah (may Allah be Pleased with
her), the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), she was favored with greater excellence
than her sisters, for she outlived the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), while all of her sisters died during his
lifetime. And as for ‘A’ishah (May Allah be Pleased with her), she
was the most beloved wife of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to him and he did not marry any
virgin except her. In addition, no woman in this nation – or in any
other nation – is known of who was superior to her in (religious)
knowledge and understanding. And Allah protected her (honor)
when the slanderers lied about her, by revealing to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) from above seven
heavens that she was innocent. She lived for about fifty years after
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), during which time she conveyed what she had learned of the
Qur’an and Sunnah from him and acted as peacemaker between
those who differed. She was the noblest of the Mothers of the
Faithful, even Khadeejah, the daughter of Khuwailid (may Allah
be Pleased with her), the mother of the sons and daughters of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), according to
the opinion of one group of scholars. But it is better to refrain from
making pronouncements regarding which of them was superior.
This is because the Prophet’s statement: “And the superiority of
‘A’ishah over other women is as the superiority of thareed over all
other foods.” – may be understood to be a general statement,
including the aforementioned and others, or it may be a general
statement with regard to other women only. And Allah knows
better.
Sunniconnect.com
222

What is intended here is to discuss matters pertaining to Maryam,
(peace be upon her) daughter of ‘Imran, for Allah purified her and
chose her over the women of her time; and it is also possible that
her superiority was over all women, as we have said. It has been
reported in a Hadith that she will be one of the wives of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in Paradise, along with
Asiyah, the daughter of Muzahim. We have related in the Tafseer
on the authority of some of the Salaf that when he said that, he drew
support from the Words of Allah: …previously married and
virgins. (Soorah AtTahreem 66:5) He said, “The previously
married refers to Asiyah, while among the virgins is Maryam, the
daughter of ‘Imran.” And we have spoken of this at the end of
Soorah At-Tahreem. And Allah knows better.

The Description of the Birth of ‘Eesa – Peace be
upon him
Allah, Most High, says, And mention in the Book (the Qur’an, O
Muhammad, the story of) Maryam, when she withdrew in seclusion
from her family to a place facing east. She placed a barrier (to
screen herself) from them; then We sent to her Our Rooh (Angel
Jibraeel), and he appeared before her in the form of a man in all
respects. She said, “Verily! I seek refuge with the Most Beneficent
(Allah) from you, if you are truly taqiyy.” He said, “I am only a
Messenger from your Lord, to give you a pure boy.” She said,
“How can I have a son, when no man has touched me, nor am I
unchaste?” He said, “So your Lord said; (He said,) “That is easy
for Me (Allah). And We will appoint him as a sign to mankind and
a Mercy from Us (Allah), and it is a matter (already) decreed, (by
Allah).” So she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a far
place (i.e. Bethlehem valley about 4-6 miles from Jerusalem). And
the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a date-palm. She
said, “Would that I had died before this, and had been forgotten and
out of sight!” Then he who was below her cried unto her, saying,
“Grieve not! Your Lord has provided a water stream under you;
Sunniconnect.com
223

and shake the trunk of the date-palm toward you, it will let fall fresh
ripe-dates upon you. So eat and drink and be glad, and if you see
any human being, say, “Verily! I have vowed a fast unto the Most
Beneficent (Allah) so I shall not speak to any human being this
day.” Then she brought him (the baby) to her people, carrying him.
They said, “O, Mary! Indeed you have brought a thing fariyan. O
sister of Haroon (Aaron)! Your father was not a man who used to
commit adultery, nor was your mother an unchaste woman.” Then
she pointed to him. They said, “How can we talk to one who is a
child in the cradle?” He (‘Eesa) said, “Verily! I am a slave of Allah;
He has given me the Scripture and made me a Prophet. And He has
made me blessed wheresoever I may be, and He has enjoined on
me salah (prayer) and zakah as long as I live. And dutiful to my
mother, and made me not arrogant and unblessed. And salam
(peace) be upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the
day I shall be raised alive!” Such is ‘Eesa, son of Maryam. (It is) a
statement of truth, about which they doubt
(or dispute). It befits not (the Majesty of) Allah that He should
beget a son (this refers to the slander of Christians against Allah,
by saying that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah). Glorified (and Exalted) be
He (above all that they associate with Him). When He decrees a
thing, He only says to it, “Be!” and it is. (‘Eesa said), “And verily
Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him (Alone). That is
the Straight Path (Allah’s Religion of Islamic Monotheism which
He did ordain for all of His Prophets).” (Soorah Maryam 19:16-37)
(Tafseer At-Tabari) Then the sects differed (i.e. they differed
regarding ‘Eesa), so woe unto the disbelievers (those who gave
false witness by saying that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah) from the
meeting of a great Day (i.e. the Day of Resurrection, when they will
be thrown in the blazing Fire).
Allah, Most High tells this story after the story of Zakariyya (Peace
be upon him), which is like an introduction and a preparation before
it.

Sunniconnect.com
224

We have already said that when Maryam’s mother pledged her to
the service of Bait Al-Maqdis, her sister’s husband or her maternal
aunt’s husband, Zakariyya (Peace be upon him), the Prophet of that
time, became her guardian. He appointed for her a mihrab in which
to worship, and that was a noble place in the Mosque, in which
none could visit her except he. Allah also informed us that when
she came of age, she devoted herself to worship and she was
without equal at that time in all aspects of worship. That which
caused Zakariyya (Peace be upon him) to envy her befell her and
she was spoken to by the angels, who indicated to her that Allah
had chosen her and that He would bestow on her a pure son, who
would be a Noble Prophet, purified, venerated and aided by
miracles. She was amazed at the idea that she might have a child
without a father, because she was not married, nor was she among
those who would marry. The angels informed her that Allah is Able
to anything that He wills and that when he ordains a thing, He
merely says to it, “Be!” and it is. On hearing this, she submitted to
it and surrendered herself to Allah’s Command. She knew that in
this there was a great trial for her, because people would speak
about her due to it, for they would be unaware of the truth of the
matter. She would simply judge by appearances without reflection
or understanding. She only used to leave the Mosque when she was
menstruating or in order to fulfill some essential need, such as
drawing water or bringing food. One day, when she had left the
Mosque to take care of her affairs, when she withdrew in seclusion
(Soorah Maryam 19:17) she went alone to the eastern corner of AlAqsa Mosque and lo, Allah sent to her the Angel Jibraeel (Peace be
upon him), the Trustworthy Spirit, and he appeared before her in
the form of a man in all respects. (Soorah Maryam 19:17) When
she saw him, She said, “Verily! I seek refuge with the Most
Beneficent (Allah) from you, if you are truly taqiyy.” (Soorah
Maryam 19:18)
Abul-‘Aliyah said, “I learned that taqiyy means the one who
possesses intellect and understanding. This is a reply to those who
claimed that among the Children of Isra’eel there was a man who
Sunniconnect.com
225

was well known for his immorality and sinfulness and that his name
was taqiyy, for this claim is false and baseless; indeed, it is
ridiculous saying. He said, “I am only a Messenger from your
Lord.” (Soorah Maryam 19:19) That is, the angel addressed her,
saying, “I am only a Messenger from your Lord, not a human being
and He has sent me to you.” “…to give you a pure boy.” (Soorah
Maryam 19:19) That is, to give you news of a pure and righteous
son. She said, “How can I have a son…” (Soorah Maryam 19:20)
This means that Maryam was amazed at this. She said, “How can I
have a son…” meaning: “In what way would a son be born to
me…” “…when no man has touched me, nor am I unchaste?”
(Soorah Maryam 19:20) That is, I have no husband and I am not a
woman who commits sinful acts (i.e. unlawful sexual intercourse).
He said, “So your Lord said; (He said,) “That is easy for Me
(Allah).” (Soorah Maryam 19:21) That is, the angel responded to
her amazement that she should have a son in such circumstances
by saying, “So your Lord said” (Soorah Maryam 19:21) means He
has promised that He will create from you a son, even though you
have no husband and you are not among those who commit
outrages. “That is easy for Me (Allah).” (Soorah Maryam 19:21)
That is, it is an easy thing for Him to do, because He is Able to do
all things.
And He, Most High, says, “And We will appoint him as a sign to
mankind” (Soorah Maryam 19:21) means We will make his
creation in these circumstances a proof for the completeness and
perfection of Our Ability to create all kinds of things, for He, Most
High, created Adam (Peace be upon him) without a male or a
female and Eve from a male, without a female. And He created
‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) from a female, without a male. The rest
of the mankind, He created from a male and a female.
And He, Most High, says, “…and a mercy from Us (Allah).”
(Soorah Maryam 19:21) means through him We shall show Mercy
to the slaves, by him calling them to Allah in his infachildhood and
in his adult life, and in his middle age, asking them to worship
Sunniconnect.com
226

Allah, Alone, without partners and to declare Him above taking a
wife or having sons, or having partners or equals. “…and it is a
matter (already) decreed, (by Allah).” (Soorah Maryam 19:21) It is
possible that these words are part of Jibraeel’s dialogue with
Maryam, i.e. he informed her that this matter was preordained by
Allah’s Power and Will. Muhammad Ibn Ishaq gave this
interpretation and Ibn Jareer At-Tabari preferred it, but it was not
related by anyone besides Ibn Ishaq. And Allah knows better.
It is also possible that His Words: “…and it is a matter (already)
decreed, (by Allah)” (Soorah Maryam
19:21) are an allusion to Jibraeel breathing into her, as He, Most
High, says, Andv (the example of)
Maryam, the daughter of ‘Imran, who guarded her chastity, so We
blew into (her garment) through Our Spirit (i.e. Jibraeel) (Soorah
At-Tahreem 66:12) So she conceived him. (Soorah Maryam 19:22)
…and she withdrew with him to a far place (i.e. Bethlehem valley
about 4-6 miles from Jerusalem). (Soorah Maryam 19:22) This was
because when Maryam (peace be upon her) conceived, she was
unable to bear it, for she knew that many of the people would gossip
about her situation. More than one of the Salaf, including Wahb Ibn
Munabbih said that when the signs of pregnancy became obvious
in her, among the first persons to notice it was a man from among
the slaves of Banu Isra’eel, whose name was Yoosuf, son of
Ya‘qoob, the carpenter. He was her maternal cousin and he
expressed great amazement at her state. This was because he knew
how religious, decent and devout she was, and yet in spite of this,
he observed that she was pregnant when she had no husband. So
one day, he confronted her, saying, “O, Maryam! Can there be
cultivation without a seed being planted?” She said, “Yes, for who
made the first cultivation grow?” Then he asked, “Then can a tree
grow without water or rain?” She replied, “Yes, for who created the
first tree?” Then he asked her, “Then can there be a son without a
male (i.e. a father)?” She answered, “Yes, for verily, Allah created
Adam without a male or a female.” He said, “Then tell me your
news (i.e. how you came to be pregnant).” She said, “Verily, Allah
Sunniconnect.com
227

gave me glad tidings. (Remember) when the angels said, “O
Maryam! Verily, Allah gives you the glad tidings of a Word (“Be!”
– and he was! i.e. ‘Eesa the son of Maryam) from Him, his name
will be the Maseeh ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam, held in honor in this
world and in the Hereafter, and will be one of those who are near
to Allah. He will speak to the people in the cradle and in manhood,
and he will be one of the righteous.” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran
3:45,46)And something like this has been narrated about Zakariyya
(Peace be upon him), that he asked her and she answered him in the
same way. And Allah knows better.
He, Most High, says, And the pains of childbirth drove her to the
trunk of a date-palm. (Soorah Maryam 19:23) That is, her labor
pains caused her to make for the trunk of a date-palm tree and this
interpretation is substantiated by a Hadith narrated by An-Nasa’i,
with a chain of narrators that is not objectionable (i.e. there are no
weak narrators in it): It is reported on the authority of Anas (May
Allah be pleased with him) in a marfoo‘ form and by Al-Baihaqi,
with a chain of narrators that he declared to be authentic, on the
authority of Shaddad Ibn Aws, which is also in a marfoo‘ form.
According to this narration, this took place at Baitlahm
(Bethlehem). And Allah knows best. She said, “Would that I had
died before this, and had been forgotten and out of sight!” (Soorah
Maryam 19:23) In this there is evidence that it is permissible to
wish for death when afflicted by trial and tribulation. This is
because she knew that the people would accuse her (of unlawful
sexual intercourse) and they would not believe her. Instead they
would accuse her of lying when she came to them with a son in her
arms, in spite of the fact that she had been with them in performing
acts of worship, religious rites and used to seclude herself in the
Mosque. Because of this she wished that she might have died
before this or that she had been “…forgotten and out of sight!”
(Soorah Maryam 19:23) means that she had never been created at
all. And He, Most High, says, Then he who was below her cried
unto her. (Soorah Maryam 19:2) This was also recited as Then he
called to her from below her. There are two opinions with regard to
Sunniconnect.com
228

who the personal pronoun “he” refers to. One is that it refers to
Jibraeel (Peace be upon him). This was said by Al-‘Awfi, who
reported it on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him). He said, “ ‘Eesa did not speak except in the
presence of the people.” Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair concurred with this, as
did ‘Amr Ibn Maimoon, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi and Qatadah.
Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Ibn Zaid and Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair – according to
another narration – said that it refers to her son, ‘Eesa (Peace be
upon him). This was the preferred view of Ibn Jareer At-Tabari and
it is authentic.
But the correct interpretation is the first one, based on the Words of
Allah, Most High, “And shake the trunk of date-palm toward you,
it will let fall fresh ripe-dates upon you.” (Soorah Maryam 19:25)
So He mentions food and drink, which is why He says, “So eat and
drink and be glad.” (Soorah Maryam 19:26). Then it was said that
the trunk of the date-palm was dry. It was also said that the datepalm was bearing fruit. And Allah knows better. It is possible that
it was a date-palm, but that it was not bearing fruit at that time,
because the time of his birth was in the winter – and that is not the
time when date-palms bear fruit. This might be understood from
the Words of Allah, Most High, as being a Grace (from Allah): it
will let fall fresh ripe-dates upon you.” (Soorah Maryam 19:26)
‘Amr Ibn Maimoon said, “There is nothing better for the woman in
childbirth than dried dates and fresh dates.” Then he recited this
Verse. And He, Most High, says, “…and if you see any human
being, say, “Verily! I have vowed a fast unto the Most Beneficent
(Allah) so I shall not speak to any human being this day.” (Soorah
Maryam 19:26) That is, if you see any person, say to him, by mute
expression and sign, "Verily! I have vowed a fast unto the Most
Beneficent (Allah)." (Soorah Maryam 19:26) That is, I have vowed
to remain silent; according to Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Aslam, it
was a part of their religious law that when a person fasted, he would
refrain from speaking and from eating. This is proven by the Words
of Allah: “…so I shall not speak to any human being this day.”
Sunniconnect.com
229

(Soorah Maryam 19:26) But in our religious law, it is disliked for
the fasting person to remain silent from morning till night.
And He, Most High, says, Then she brought him (the baby) to her
people, carrying him. They said, “O Mary! Indeed you have
brought a thing fariyan. O sister of Haroon! Your father was not a
man who used to commit adultery, nor was your mother was an
unchaste woman.” (Soorah Maryam 19:27,28)
What is meant is that when they saw her carrying her son, They
said, “O Mary! Indeed you have brought a thing fariyan.” (Soorah
Maryam 19:27) The word fariyah means a shocking and terrible
deed or statement. Then they said, “O sister of Haroon (Aaron)!”
(Soorah Maryam 19:28) It was said that they compared her to one
of the devout men of their time, whom she sought to surpass in
worship and that his name was Haroon. It was also said that they
compared her with an adulterous man of their time, whose name
was Haroon. This was said by Sa‘eed Ibn Jubair. It was also said
that they were referring to Haroon (Peace be upon him), the brother
of Moosa (Peace be upon him), and that they were comparing her
to him because of her devoutness in worship.
And Imam Ahmad narrated on the authority of Al-Mugheerah Ibn
Shu‘bah that he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent me to Najran and they said,
“You read: “O sister of Haroon…” (i.e. Maryam) in the Qur’an,
whereas Moosa was born much before ‘Eesa.” When I came back
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), I asked him about that, whereupon he said, “Did you not
inform them that they (the people of former times) used to be
named after the Prophets and righteous people who had gone before
them?”
What is meant by this is that they (Maryam’s people) said, “O sister
of Haroon!” (Soorah Maryam 19:28) and the Hadith has prove that
she had a brother in lineage whose name was Haroon, and that he
Sunniconnect.com
230

was wellknown for his devoutness, his righteousness and his
charitable deeds, which is why they said, “Your father was not a
man who used to commit adultery, nor was your mother an
unchaste woman” (Soorah Maryam 19:28) means you are not from
a family who possessed these evil traits, nor were your parents or
your brother ever accused of committing such major sins. Then she
pointed to him (Soorah Maryam 19:29) meaning: address him and
speak to him, because your answer is his responsibility and that
which you seek you may hear from him. When she indicated the
baby, those among them who were arrogant and nasty said, “How
can we talk to one who is a child in the cradle?” (Soorah Maryam
19:29) That is, how can you refer us for an answer to a small baby,
who is unable to speak, and is a suckling infant in his crib, unable
to distinguish between pure milk, unadulterated by water – and
buttermilk. And by this suggestion of yours you are merely
mocking, ridiculing and belittling us. You are also making light of
us, when you do not answer us in words; instead, you refer us for
an answer to a child in his crib. At this point, He (‘Eesa) said,
“Verily! I am a slave of Allah; He has given me the Scripture and
made me a Prophet. And He has made me blessed wheresoever I
may be, and He has enjoined on me salah (prayer) and zakah as
long as I live.” (Soorah Maryam 19:30,31) These were the first
words uttered by ‘Eesa, the son of Maryam (Peace be upon him),
and the very first words he spoke were: “Verily! I am a slave of
Allah.” (Soorah Maryam 19:30) – in which he acknowledged that
he worships his Lord and that Allah is his Lord, and so he declared
himself to be innocent what the unjust people attribute to him, i.e.
that he is the son of Allah. Rather, he is His slave and His
Messenger, and the son of his people. Then he declared his mother
innocent of what the ignorant folk attributed to her and accused her
of, saying, “He has given me the Scripture and made me a Prophet.”
(Soorah Maryam 19:30), for Allah does not give Prophethood to
one who is as they claim, may Allah curse them and disgrace them.
He, Most High, says, And because of their (the Jews’) disbelief and
(their) uttering against Maryam a grave false charge… (Soorah AnNisa’ 4:156) This was that a group from among the Jews at that
Sunniconnect.com
231

time said, “She became pregnant with him due to having committed
unlawful sexual intercourse during the time of her menses,” may
Allah curse them. So Allah declared her innocent of that and
informed us that she was honest and upright and that He had taken
her child as a Prophet sent by Him, one of the Ulul-‘Azm, the five
greatest Prophets. This is why He says, “And He has made me
blessed wheresoever I may be.” (Soorah Maryam 19:31) This is
because wherever he was, he used to call the people to the worship
of Allah, Alone, without partners and deny the imperfection or
deficiency which is implicit in the claim that He had taken a son or
a consort. Far above that is He. “…and He has enjoined on me salah
(prayer) and zakah as long as I live.” (Soorah Maryam 19:31). This
is the obligation of slaves (of Allah), to fulfill the rights of the
Almighty, Most Praiseworthy, to offer prayers and to do good to
His creatures, through zakah. The word zakah includes the
purification of souls from mean, despicable traits and the
purification of wealth, by giving to all kinds of needy folk, offering
hospitality to guests, providing for wives, slaves and kinfolk, and
all acts of obedience (to Allah) and deeds through which one seeks
closeness to Him. Then He says, “And dutiful to my mother, and
made me not arrogant and unblessed.” (Soorah Maryam 19:32)
That is, He has made me dutiful to my mother. This He did by
confirming her rights upon him, for he had no parent except her. So
Glorified be He Who created all things, showered His Benevolence
on them and offered every soul its true guidance. “…and made me
not arrogant and unblessed” (Soorah Maryam 19:32) means I am
neither rude nor impolite and no words or deeds that contradict
Allah’s Commands or the obligation to obey Him ever emanate
from me.
Then Allah, Most High, related his true story, made clear his
situation and fully explained it, saying, Such is ‘Eesa, son of
Maryam. (It is) a statement of truth, about which they doubt (or
dispute). It befits not (the Majesty of) Allah that He should beget a
son (this refers to the slander of Christians against Allah, by saying
that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah). Glorified be He (and Exalted above
Sunniconnect.com
232

all that they associate with Him). When He decrees a thing, He only
says to it, “Be!” and it is. (Soorah Maryam 19:34,35), as He, Most
High, says in Soorah Aal ‘Imran, after relating his story and his
situation: This is (what We recite to you, O Muhammad) of the
Verses and the Wise Reminder (i.e. the Qur’an). Verily, the
likeness of ‘Eesa before Allah is the likeness of Adam. He created
him from dust, then (He) said to him, “Be!” – and he was. (This is)
the truth from your Lord, so be not of those who doubt. Then
whoever disputes with you concerning him (‘Eesa) after (all this)
knowledge that has come to you, (i.e. ‘Eesa being a slave of Allah,
and having no share in Divinity) say, (O Muhammad), “Come, let
us call our sons and your sons, our women and your women,
ourselves and yourselves – then we pray and invoke (sincerely) the
Curse of
Allah upon those who lie.” Verily! This is the true narrative (about
the story of ‘Eesa), and La ilaha illAllah (none has the right to be
worshipped but Allah, the One and the Only True God, Who has
neither a wife nor a son). And indeed, Allah is the Almighty, Most
Wise. And if they turn away (and do not accept these true proofs
and evidences), then surely, Allah is Most Aware of those who do
mischief. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:58-63)
What is meant is that when Allah, Most High, made clear the
situation of the Maseeh (Peace be upon him), He said to His
Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), "Such is
‘Eesa, son of Maryam. (It is) a statement of truth, about which they
doubt (or dispute). (Soorah Maryam 19:34) That is, that he is a
created slave, born of a woman from among Allah’s slaves, which
is why He says, “It befits not (the Majesty of) Allah that He should
beget a son (this refers to the slander of Christians against Allah,
by saying that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah). Glorified be He (and
Exalted above all that they associate with Him). When He decrees
a thing, He only says to it, “Be!” and it is. (Soorah Maryam 19:35)
That is, nothing is impossible for Him, nothing troubles Him and
nothing, for He is Omnipotent and the Doer of whatever He wills.
"Verily, His Command, when He intends a thing, is only that He
Sunniconnect.com
233

says to it, “Be!” and it is!" (Soorah Ya Seen 36:82) And as for His
Saying: “Truly! Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him
(Alone). This is the Straight Path” (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:51) it is
the completion of ‘Eesa’s speech to them in the cradle, in which he
informed them that Allah is their Lord, the God Whom he
worshipped and the God Whom they were obliged to worship and
that it was the Straight Path. He, Most High, says, Then the sects
differed (i.e. regarding ‘Eesa), so woe unto the disbelievers (those
who gave false witness by saying that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah)
from the meeting of a great Day (i.e. the Day of Resurrection, when
they will be thrown in the blazing Fire). (Soorah Maryam 19:37)
That is, the people of that time and those after them differed
regarding him. Among the Jews there were those who claimed that
he was the illegitimate son of an adulteress and persisted in their
disbelief and obstinacy. Another group went to the other extreme
and claimed that he is the son of Allah. But the true Believers said
that he is Allah’s slave and His Messenger, the son of his nation
and Allah’s Word, which He bestowed on Maryam, and a spirit
created by Him. These people are the saved ones, who will be
rewarded (by Allah) and they are supported and helped (by Him).
And those who contradicted them in any of these things are
disbelievers, they are astray and they are ignorant. And Allah has
warned them (of the punishment that awaits them) in His Words:
So woe unto the disbelievers (those who gave false witness by
saying that ‘Eesa is the son of Allah) from the meeting of a great
Day (i.e. the Day of Resurrection, when they will be thrown in the
blazing Fire). (Soorah Maryam 19:37)
And Al-Bukhari narrated on the authority of ‘Ubadah Ibn AsSamit, who reported from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) that he said, “Whoever bore witness that none
has the right to be worshipped but Allah, Alone, Who has no
partners, that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger, and that
‘Eesa is Allah’s slave and His Messenger and His Word, which He
bestowed on Maryam and a Spirit created by Him, that Paradise is
true and Hell is true, Allah will admit him into Paradise with the
Sunniconnect.com
234

deeds which he had done even if those deeds were few.” (Junadah,
the sub-narrator said, “ ‘Ubadah added, “Such a person can enter
Paradise through any of its eight gates he likes.”)

Sunniconnect.com
235

Chapter on Declaration that Allah, Most
High, Has no Son
Allah, Most High, says at the end of this Soorah, And they say,
“The Most Beneficent (Allah) has begotten a son (or offspring or
children) [as the Jews say: ‘Uzair is the son of Allah, the Christians
say that He has begotten a son (‘Eesa), and the pagan Arabs say
that He has begotten daughters (angels, etc.)]. Indeed you have
brought forth (said) a thing ‘iddan! That is, a terrible, evil saying
and a lie. Whereby the heavens are almost torn, and the Earth is
split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins, that they ascribe a son
(or offspring or children) to the Most Beneficent (Allah). But it is
not suitable for (the Majesty of) the Most Beneficent (Allah) that
He should beget a son (or offspring or children). There is none in
the heavens and the earth but comes unto the Most Beneficent
(Allah) as a slave. Verily, He knows each one of them, and has
counted them a full counting. And everyone of them will come to
Him alone on the Day of Resurrection (without any helper, or
protector or defender). (Soorah Maryam 19:88-95) Thus Allah,
Most High, has made it clear that it is not fitting that He should
have a son, because He is the Creator of all things and the Owner
of all things and every thing is in need of Him, submits to Him and
is humbled before Him. And all of the inhabitants of the heavens
and the Earth are His slaves, while He is their Lord, La ilaha illa
Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He) – and there is
no lord but He, as He, Most
High, says, Yet, they join the Jinn as partners in worship with Allah,
though He has created them (the
Jinn), and they attribute falsely without knowledge sons and
daughters to Him. Be He Glorified and
Exalted above (all) that they attribute to Him. He is the Originator
of the heavens and the Earth. How can
He have children when He has no wife? He created all things and
He is the Knower of everything. Such is Allah, your Lord! La ilaha
illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), the Creator
Sunniconnect.com
236

of all things. So worship Him (Alone), and He is the Wakil
(Trustee, Disposer of affairs, Guardian, etc.) over all things. No
vision can grasp Him, but His Grasp is over all vision. He is the
Most Subtle and Courteous, Well-Acquainted with all things.
(Soorah Al-An‘am 6:100-103) So He has made clear that He is the
Creator of all things, so how can He have a son, when a son cannot
be produced except from two like beings – and Allah, Most High,
has no like or equal, so He can have no consort and therefore, no
son, as He, Most High, says, Say (O Muhammad, “He is Allah,
(the) One. Allah-us Samad (the Self-Sufficient Master, Whom all
creatures need, He neither eats nor drinks). He begets not, nor was
He begotten; and there is none coequal or comparable unto Him.”
(Soorah Al-Ikhlas 112:1-4) He has determined that He is the One,
Who has no equal in His Divine Essence, in His Attributes or His
Actions. “Allah-us Samad (the Self-Sufficient Master, Whom all
creatures need, He neither eats nor drinks).” He is the Master, Who
is
Complete in His Knowledge, His Wisdom, His Mercy and all of
His Attributes. “He begets not.” That is, No son has come from
Him “…nor was He begotten” means He was not born to anyone
or anything that existed before Him (because nothing existed
before Him). “…and there is none coequal or comparable unto
Him.” That is, there is nothing equal to Him, nor anything similar
to Him. So He is without equal in all ways and all senses, to it is
not possible that he could have a son, since a son can only be
begotten of two equal things, or similar things. Far Above that is
Allah, Most High.
He, Most High, says, And they say, “The Most Beneficent (Allah)
has begotten a son (or children).” Glory to Him! They (those whom
they call children of Allah, i.e. the angels, ‘Eesa son of Maryam,
‘Uzair, etc.), are but honored slaves. They speak not until He has
spoken, and they act on His Command. He knows what is before
them, and what is behind them, and they cannot intercede except
for him with whom He is Pleased. And they stand in awe for fear
of Him. And if anyone of them should say, “Verily, I am an ilah (a
Sunniconnect.com
237

god) besides Him (Allah),” such a one We should recompense with
Hell. Thus We recompense the zalimoon (polytheists, wrongdoers,
etc.). (Soorah Al-Anbiya’ 21:26-29)
And He, Most High, says at the beginning of Soorah Al-Kahf,
which was revealed in Makkah, All the praises and thanks be to
Allah, Who has sent down to His slave (Muhammad) the Book (the
Qur’an), and has not placed therein any crookedness. (He has made
it) Straight to give warning (to the disbelievers) of a severe
punishment from Him, and to give glad tidings to the believers (in
the Oneness of Allah, Islamic Monotheism), who work righteous
deeds, that they shall have a fair reward (i.e. Paradise). They shall
abide therein forever. And to warn those (Jews, Christians, and
pagans) who say, “Allah has begotten a son (or offspring or
children).” No knowledge have they of such a thing, nor had their
fathers. Mighty is the word that comes out of their mouths (i.e. that
He begot (took) sons and daughters). They utter nothing but a lie.
(Soorah Al-Kahf 18:1-5)
And He, Most High, says, They (Jews, Christians and pagans) say,
“Allah has begotten a son (children).” Glory be to Him! He is Rich
(Free of all wants). His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in
the Earth. No warrant have you for this. Do you say against Allah
what you know not? Say, “Verily, those who invent a lie against
Allah will never be successful.” – A brief enjoyment in this world!
– And then unto Us will be their return, then We shall make them
taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve (in Allah,
belie His Messengers, deny and challenge His Ayat.) (Soorah
Yoonus 10:68-70)
The Noble Verses, which were revealed in Makkah include a reply
to all of those disbelieving parties, such as the philosophers, the
pagan Arabs, the Jews and the Christians, who claimed – without
knowledge – that Allah has a son (or children). Glorified be He! He
is Far Above what the unjust wrongdoers say.
Sunniconnect.com
238

And since the Christians – may Allah’s Curse be on them in
perpetuity, until the Day of Resurrection – were among the
foremost of those who made this claim, they were mentioned
frequently in the Qur’an, in order for Allah to reply to their claims
and to expose their contradictions, their lack of knowledge and
their deep ignorance.
Their sayings of disbelief take manifold forms and this is because
falsehood has a way of diversifying into many branches, varieties
and mutual contradictions. As for the truth, it does not vary and it
does not suffer from any confusion or contradiction. Allah, Most
High, says, Had it been from other than Allah, they would surely
have found therein much contradictions. (Soorah An-Nisa’ 4:82)
This proves that truth is one and is in agreement and conformity
with itself, while falsehood is contradictory and confused. A party
from among their ignorant and misguided folk claimed that the
Maseeh (Peace be upon him) is Allah, Most High, while another
party said that he is the son of Allah, the Almighty, the AllPowerful.
Another group said that he is the third part of a trinity of which they
claim that Allah consists. He, Most
High, says, Surely, in disbelief are they who say that Allah is the
Maseeh, son of Maryam. Say (O
Muhammad), “Who then has the least power against Allah, if He
were to destroy the Maseeh, son of Maryam, his mother, and all
those who are on the earth together?” And to Allah belongs the
dominion of the heavens and the Earth, and all that is between
them. He creates what He wills. And Allah is Able to do all things.
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:17)
So Allah, Most High, informs us about their disbelief and their
ignorance and He makes it clear that He is the Creator, Who is Able
to do all things, and it is He Who disposes of the affairs of all things,
and He is the Lord of all things, the Owner of all things and the
God Who should be worshipped by all things. At the end of Soorah
Al-Ma’idah, He, Most High, says, Surely, they have disbelieved
Sunniconnect.com
239

who say, “Allah is the Maseeh (‘Eesa), son of Maryam.” But the
Maseeh said, “O, Children of Isra’eel! Worship Allah, my Lord and
your Lord.” Verily, whosoever sets up partners in worship with
Allah, then Allah has forbidden Paradise for him, and the Fire will
be his abode. And for the Zalimoon there are no helpers. Surely,
disbelievers are those who said, “Allah is the third of the three (in
a trinity).” But there is no ilah (god) (none who has the right to be
worshipped) but One Ilah (God – Allah). And if they cease not from
what they say, verily, a painful torment will befall the disbelievers
among them. Will they not repent to Allah and ask His
Forgiveness? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. The
Maseeh, son of Maryam, was no more than a Messenger; many
were the Messengers that passed away before him. His mother
(Maryam) was a Siddiqah (i.e. she believed in the Words of Allah
and His Books. They both used to eat food (as any other human
being, while Allah does not eat). Look how We make the Ayat clear
to them, yet look how they are deluded away (from the truth).
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:72-75)
Allah, Most High, has delivered His Verdict on their disbelief with
good cause and He informs us that this (disbelief) emanated from
them, in spite of the fact that the Messenger sent to them, i.e. ‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him), the son of Maryam, had made clear to them
that he was a slave, subject to Allah’s Lordship, created and
fashioned in the womb and he called the people to the worship of
Allah, Alone, without partners. And he warned them that opposing
this would lead to punishment in the Hellfire in the Eternal Abode
and humiliation, degradation and ignominy in the Hereafter. This
is why He says, Verily, whosoever sets up partners in worship with
Allah, then Allah has forbidden Paradise for him, and the Fire will
be his abode. And for the Zalimoon there are no helpers. (Soorah
Al-Ma’idah 5:72) Then He says, Surely, disbelievers are those who
said, “Allah is the third of the three (in a trinity).” But there is no
ilah
(god) (none who has the right to be worshipped) but One Ilah.
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:73) Ibn Jareer AtTabari and others said that
Sunniconnect.com
240

what is meant by this is their saying regarding the personages of
the trinity, the personage of the Lord, the personage of the son and
the personage of the Word sent from the father to the son, according
to all the differing sects, including the Melkites to the Jacobites and
the Nestorians – may Allah’s Curse be on them. And we shall
explain how they differed in this and the three councils they held
during the reign of Constantine, son of Constantius – three hundred
years after ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) and three hundred years
before the commencement of the Mission of Prophet Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). This is why Allah,
Most High, says, But there is no ilah (god) (none who has the right
to be worshipped) but One Ilah. (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:73). That is,
there is no god who has the right to be worshipped, except Allah,
Alone, without partners and He has no equal, no like, no consort
and no son.
Then He warned them and threatened them, saying, And if they
cease not from what they say, verily, a painful torment will befall
the disbelievers among them. (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:73) Then He
called upon them, with His Mercy and Kindness, to repent and ask
forgiveness for these terrible sins and enormities, which merit the
Fire; He says, Will they not repent to Allah and seek His
Forgiveness? For Allah is OftForgiving, Most Merciful. (Soorah
Al-Ma’idah 5:74) Then He made clear the situation of the Maseeh
(Peace be upon him) and his mother and emphasized that he was a
slave and Messenger and that his mother was a Siddiqah, i.e. she
was not an adulteress, as the Jews claim – may Allah’s Curse be on
them. And in this there is evidence that she was not a Prophet, as a
group of scholars have claimed.
And He, Most High, says, They both used to eat food (as any other
human being, while Allah does not eat). (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:75)
This is an allusion to the fact that food was excreted by them, just
as it is excreted by others. That is to say, how can anyone who
shares such an attribute be a deity? Far Above their claim and their
ignorance is Allah, Most High.
Sunniconnect.com
241

As-Suddi and others said that what is intended by Allah’s Saying:
Surely, disbelievers are those who said,
“Allah is the third of the three (in a trinity)” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah
5:73) is a reference to their claim that ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him)
and Maryam are deities besides Allah, i.e. as Allah, Most High,
made clear regarding their disbelief in this matter, in His Saying:
And (remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection),
“O ‘Eesa, son of Maryam! Did you say unto men, ‘Worship me and
my mother as two gods besides Allah’?” He will say, “Glory be to
You! It was not for me to say what I had no right (to say). Had I
said such a thing, You would surely have known it. You know what
is in my inner self, though I do not know what is in Yours, truly,
You, only You, are the All-Knowing of all that is hidden and
unseen. Never did I say to them aught except what You (Allah) did
command me to say: ‘Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.’
And I was a witness over them while I dwelt amongst them, but
when You tawaffaitani, You were the Watcher over them, and You
are a Witness to all things.” (This is a great admonition and warning
to the Christians of the whole world) “If You punish them, they are
Your slaves, and if You forgive them, verily You, only You are the
Almighty, the Most Wise.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:116-118)
Allah, Most High, informs us that He will question ‘Eesa (Peace be
upon him) on the Day of Resurrection, in a manner which honors
him and which rebukes and censures those who worshipped him.
Those who lie against him and invent a calumny, claiming that he
is the son of Allah, or that he is Allah, or that he is His partner –
Allah is Far Above all that they ascribe to Him. He will question
him, even though He knows that he did not do what he is being
asked about. But He will ask in order to rebuke those lied against
him; He will say to him, Did you say unto men, ‘Worship me and
my mother as two gods besides Allah’?” He will say, “Glory be to
You!” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:116) That is, You are Far
Above the partners they ascribe to You. It was not for me to say
what I had no right (to say) (Soorah AlMa’idah 5:116) means no
one has this right but You. “Had I said such a thing, You would
Sunniconnect.com
242

surely have known it. You know what is in my inner self, though I
do not know what is in Yours, truly, You, only You, are the AllKnowing of all that is hidden and unseen.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah
5:116) One may note that great courteousness is shown in the
question and the answer. “Never did I say to them aught except
what You (Allah) did command me to say” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah
5:117) means when You sent me to them and revealed to me the
Scripture, which I used to recite to them. Then he explained what
he used to say to them in his words: "Worship Allah, my Lord and
your Lord." (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:117) That is, my Creator and
your Creator, my Sustainer and your Sustainer. “And I was a
witness over them while I dwelt amongst them, but when You
tawaffaitani…” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:117) That is, when You
raised me up to You, when they intended to crucify me and kill me,
but You had Mercy on me and saved me from them, casting my
likeness upon one of them, so that they took their vengeance upon
him. And when this happened, “You were the Watcher over them,
and You are a Witness to all things.” (This is a great admonition
and warning to the Christians of the whole world). (Soorah AlMa’idah 5:117) Then he said, in tones indicating submission to the
Will of the Lord, the Almighty, the All-Powerful and a declaration
of self-exoneration from the claims of the Christians, “If You
punish them, they are Your slaves…” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:118)
means they deserve that. “…and if You forgive them, verily You,
only You are the Almighty, the Most Wise.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah
5:118) All matters refer back to Allah, for He does what He Wills
and none can question Him about what He does, while He will
question them, which is why he said, “…verily You, only You are
the Almighty, the Most Wise.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah 5:118). He did
not say, the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
And it has been confirmed in an authentic Hadith from the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
that he said, “Allah, Most High, says, “The son of Adam has reviled
Me and he had no right to do so; he claims that I have a son, when
Sunniconnect.com
243

I am the One, As-Samad, Who does not beget and Who was not
begotten and like unto Whom there is none.”

Explanation of the Revelation of Four
Scriptures and the Times of Their
Revelation
Abu Zur‘ah Ad-Dimashqi said, ‘Abdullah Ibn Saleh told us, “I was
told by Mu‘awiyah Ibn Saleh, on the authority of the person who
informed him, that he said, The Towrah was sent down to Moosa
(Peace be upon him) on the sixth night of the month of Ramadan.
The Zaboor (Psalms) was sent down to Dawood (Peace be upon
him) on the twelfth night of the month of Ramadan. This was four
hundred and eightytwo years after the Towrah. The Injeel (Gospel)
was sent down to ‘Eesa, (Peace be upon him) on the eighteenth
night of the month of Ramadan, one thousand and fifty years after
the Zaboor. And Al-Furqan (the Criterion, i.e. the Qur’an) was sent
down to Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
on the twenty-fourth night of the month of Ramadan.”
We have mentioned in the Tafseer in the explanation of the Words
of Allah, Most High: The month of Ramadan in which was revealed
the Qur’an. (Soorah Al-Baqarah 2:185) the Ahadeeth reported to
that effect and it is mentioned in them that the Injeel was sent down
to ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) on the eighteenth night of the month
of Ramadan.
Ibn Jareer mentioned in his Tareekh that it was sent down to him
when he was thirty years old and he remained until Allah raised
him up to the heaven, when he was thirty-three years old.
Ishaq Ibn Bishr said, “We were informed by Sa‘eed Ibn Abi
‘Aroobah, who reported on the authority of Qatadah – and Muqatil
on his authority – on the authority of ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Adam,
Sunniconnect.com
244

who reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah (May Allah be
pleased with him) that he said, “Allah, the Almighty, the AllPowerful, revealed to ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), 'O, ‘Eesa! Be
diligent in (practicing and teaching) My Religion and be tireless;
and listen and obey, O son of the pure woman, the chaste, the
virgin. You were born without a father, and I created you as a Sign
for the worlds. So worship Me Alone and depend upon Me Alone.
Take the Scripture (i.e. the Injeel) with vigor and zeal and go to the
Syriac people and convey to them from what is in your hands, that
I am the Truth, the Living, the Everlasting, Who never goes away.
Believe in the Unlettered, Arab Prophet, the owner of the camel
and the headdress (i.e. the ‘imamah [turban]), the woollen garment,
the sandals and the staff, the wide-eyed, the smooth-browed, the
smooth-cheeked, the curly-haired, the heavily-bearded, whose
eyebrows are joined, the hook-nosed, whose incisors are split,
whose ‘anfaqah is free of hair, whose neck is like a silver pitcher,
whose clavicles appear to have gold running in them, who has hairs
from his throat to his navel, like a branch – and there is no hair on
his stomach or on his chest except this. His hands and feet are thick,
when he turns (to look), he does so with his whole body and when
he walks, it is as if he is walking down from a rock and descending
from a hillside (i.e. he walks with confidence). The sweat on his
face is like pearls and the scent of musk emanates from it. His like
has not been seen before and will not be seen again. He is of fine
build and he has a good odour. He will marry many women, but
will have only a small number of offspring, His descendants are
from a blessed woman (i.e. Khadeejah, may Allah be Pleased with
her) and she will have an abode (in Paradise) made from hollowed
pearl, in which there will neither be fatigue nor clamor. You will
support him, O ‘Eesa, at the end of time, just as Zakariyya
supported your mother. He will have two offsprings through her
(i.e. Khadeejah), both of whom shall be martyred. He will have an
abode in Paradise the like of which no other human being will have.
His speech is the Qur’an, his Religion is Islam and I am Peace.
Tooba will be for those who live in his time, witness his days and
pay heed to his words'.”
Sunniconnect.com
245

‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) said, “O, my Lord! What is Tooba?” He
said, “It is a tree which I have planted with My Own Hands; it is
for all of the Gardens (of Paradise). Its roots are of ridwan, its water
is from tasneem, whose coldness is like kafoor and whose taste is
like that of ginger. Anyone who drinks once of that spring shall
never be thirsty.” ‘Eesa said, “O, my Lord! Give me to drink of it.”
He answered, “It is forbidden for the Prophets to drink from it until
that Prophet first drinks of it; it is forbidden for the nations to drink
from it until the nation (i.e. followers) of that Prophet first drinks
from it. I shall take you up to Me and send you down at the end of
time to see wonders from the nation of that Prophet, and that you
might assist them against the accursed Dajjal. I shall send you down
at prayer time that you may pray with them, but then you shall not
lead them in prayer, for they are a nation favored with mercy, and
no Prophet will come after him.”
Hisham Ibn ‘Ammar reported on the authority of Al-Waleed Ibn
Muslim, who reported on the authority of ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn
Zaid, who in turn reported on the authority of his father that ‘Eesa
(Peace be upon him) said, “O, my Lord! Inform me about this
nation that is favored with mercy.” He said, “It is the nation of
Ahmad; they are scholars and men of wisdom, as if they are
Prophets. They are pleased with little that they receive from Me
and I am Well-Pleased with few deeds from them. I will admit them
to Paradise because of (their declaration:) ‘La ilaha ill-Allah (none
has the right to be worshipped except Allah)’. O, ‘Eesa! They will
be the majority of the inhabitants in Paradise, because the tongues
of no nation have been humbled by ‘La ilaha ill-Allah (none has
the right to be worshipped except Allah)’ as their tongues have
been humbled. And the necks of no nation have been humbled by
prostration as their necks have been humbled.” (Narrated by Ibn
‘Asakir)
And He, Most High, says, And when I (Allah) put in the hearts of
Al-Hawariyyoon (the Disciples of
Sunniconnect.com
246

‘Eesa) to believe in Me and My Messenger, they said, “We believe.
And bear witness that we are Muslims.” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah
5:111) It was said that what is meant by this Revelation is the
Revelation of inspiration. That is, Allah led them to it and guided
them to it. It was also said that what is meant by it is Revelation
through the medium of the Messenger and the reconciliation of
their hearts toward the acceptance of the truth. This is why they
responded by saying, we believe in Allah, and bear witness that we
are Muslims (i.e. we submit to Allah).” (Soorah Ali ‘Imran 3:52)
This is one of the Blessings bestowed by Allah on His slave and
Messenger, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), that He granted him helpers
and supporters, who aided him and called with him to the worship
of Allah, Alone, without partners.
The miracles given to each Prophet in his time were suited to the
communities in which they lived. It was said that the miracle given
to Moosa (Peace be upon him) befitted the people of his time, who
were skilled magicians, so he was sent with Signs which dazzled
the eyes and humbled the necks. And since the magicians were
well-versed in the art of magic and its consequences and they
witnessed those dazzling occurrences, which they knew could not
have been produced by anyone except one who was helped by
Allah and given supernatural miracles to prove his truthfulness,
they immediately embraced Islam and they did not hesitate.
Likewise, ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was sent at a time when his
people excelled in the natural sciences and so he was sent with
miracles which they could not emulate and the secrets of which
they could not discover, for what could a physician do for the one
who was born blind, which is the worst form of blindness, the leper
and the one who was afflicted with a chronic illness? And how
could any created being acquire the knowledge of how to raise the
dead from his grave? As everyone knows, such a miracle proves
the truthfulness of the one who performs it and the Omnipotence of
the One Who sent him.
Sunniconnect.com
247

Likewise, Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him),
according to the consensus of the scholars, was sent at a time
renowned for the eloquence and articulacy of the people. So Allah
sent to them the Mighty Qur’an, which falsehood cannot approach
from the front or from behind; (it is) sent down by the Most Wise,
Worthy of All Praise. Its Words are a miracle, which challenge the
mankind and the jinn to produce the like of it, or to produce even
ten Soorahs like it, or even one Soorah like it – and He pronounced
definitely that they would not be able to do so, whether at that time
or in the future, saying that if they did not do it, and they would
never do it, because it is the Speech of the Creator, the Almighty,
the All-Powerful. And there is nothing that resembles Allah, Most
High, neither in His Essence, nor in His Attributes, nor in His
Actions.
What is meant is that when ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) established
the arguments and proofs against them, most of them persisted in
their disbelief, error, obduracy and oppression, though a righteous
group of them dedicated themselves to him and they were his
helpers and supporters. They followed him, assisted him and
offered sincere advice to him. This was at the time when the
Children of Isra’eel became preoccupied with him and denounced
him to one of the rulers of that time. They became determined to
kill him and crucify him, but Allah saved him from them and raised
him up to Him from their midst and cast his likeness on one of his
companions and they took him and crucified him to death,
believing him to be ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him). But they were
mistaken in this and contradicted the truth. Many of the Christians
believed their claim, but both parties were in error in the matter.
Allah, Most High, says, And they (the disbelievers) plotted (to kill
‘Eesa), and Allah planned too. And
Allah is the Best of planners. (Soorah Aal ‘Imran 3:54) And He,
Most High, says, And (remember) when ‘Eesa, son of Maryam,
said, “O, Children of Isra’eel! I am the Messenger of Allah unto
you confirming the Tawrah (which came) before me, and giving
Sunniconnect.com
248

glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be
Ahmad.” But when he (Ahmad i.e. Muhammad) came to them with
clear proofs, they said, “This is plain magic.” And who does more
wrong than the one who invents a lie against Allah, while he is
being invited to Islam? And Allah guides not the people who are
Zalimoon. They intend to put out the Light of Allah (i.e. the
Religion of Islam, this Qur’an, and Prophet Muhammad) with their
mouths. But
Allah will complete His Light even though the disbelievers hate
(it). (Soorah As-Saff 61:6-8) – up to the
Words of Him, Most High after that: O you who believe! Be you
helpers (in the Cause) of Allah as said
‘Eesa, son of Maryam, to Al-Hawariyyoon (the Disciples), “Who
are my helpers (in the Cause) of Allah?” Al-Hawariyyoon said,
“We are Allah’s helpers (i.e. we will strive in His Cause)!” Then a
group of the Children of Isra’eel believed and a group disbelieved.
So We gave power to those who believed against their enemies,
and they became the uppermost. (Soorah As-Saff 61:14)
And something similar to this has been narrated on the authority of
Al-‘Irbadh Ibn Sariyah and Abu Umamah (may Allah be Pleased
with them both) from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and in it he spoke of: “…the supplication of my father,
Ibraheem and the glad tidings of ‘Eesa.” This was because when
Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) built the Ka‘bah he said, “Our Lord!
Send amongst them a Messenger of their own.” (Soorah AlBaqarah 2:129) When Prophethood among the Children of Isra’eel
came to an end with ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him), he addressed them
and informed them that
Prophethood had been cut off from them and that after him, it
would go to the Arabian Prophet, the final
Seal of the Prophets, Ahmad, who is Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn