conquest of Egypt in the days of ‘Umar. He was initially owned
by the family of Al-‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib, then Al‘Abbas gave him to the Prophet and freed him, then married
him to his freed slave Salma. She gave birth to several children
and he used to carry things for the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him).

www.sunniconnect.com l 79

And from them Anasah Ibn Badah Abu Misrah and he is
nicknamed Abu Masrooh from MuwalladisSarat Muhajiri.
He took part in Badr according to what ‘Urwah, Az- Zuhri,
Moosa Ibn Uqbah, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq and Al-Bukhari
mentioned. They said: He was from those (guards) who would
(be asked permission to) let people enter on the Prophet when
he sat.
And from them was Aiman Ibn ‘Ubaid Ibn Zaid Al-Habashi
and his lineage is Ibn Mandah to Awf Ibn Al-Khazraj and there
is doubt in it. He is the son of Umm Aiman Barakah, the
maternal brother of Usamah.
And from them is Badham.
And from them was Thawban Ibn Bujdud and it is said, Ibn
Jahdar Abu Abdullah and it is said, Abu Abdul-Kareem and it
is (also) said, Abu Abdur- Rahman (was his name).
His origin is from As-Sarat (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) an area between Makkah and Yemen. And it is
mentioned from Himyar from the people of Yemen. And it is
also said, from Al-Han and it is said, from Hakam Ibn Sa‘d Al‘Asheerah from Madh-hij he was enslaved in the pre-Islamic
period of ignorance. The Messenger of Allah bought him then
freed him, and gave him a choice that if he willed he could
return to his family or if he willed he could remain and be
considered from the household (of the Prophet). So he
remained upon being adopted by the Messenger of Allah and
he did not depart from him whether on a journey or not until
the Messenger of Allah passed away. And he participated in the
conquest of Egypt in the days of ‘Umar and settled in Hims
after that and built a house there. He remained there until he

www.sunniconnect.com l 80

died in the Year 54 A.H. and it is also said Year 44 A.H. which
is an error. It is mentioned that he died in Egypt and the correct
(opinion) in Hims as we mentioned. And Allah (SWT) knows
best. Al-Bukhari narrated from him in the Book of Manners,
Muslim in his Saheeh and the authors of the Four Sunan.
And from them was Hunain, a freed slave of the Messenger of
Allah, and he was the grandfather of Ibraheem Ibn ‘Abdullah
Ibn Hunain.
We narrated that he used to serve the Prophet and pour (the
water for) his ablution. When the Prophet would finish he
would exit with the leftover from his ablution to his
Companions, then from them were those who would drink from
it and from them were those who would wipe themselves with
it. Then (on one occasion) Hunain held it back and hid it in a
jar until they complained about him to the Prophet, so he said
to him: “What do you do with it?” He replied: “I store it (and)
I drink it, O Messenger of Allah.” The Prophet said: “Have you
seen a servant who calculated what he calculated?” Thereafter
the Prophet gave him to Al-‘Abbas, who later freed him.
And from them was Dhakwan. His mention will come in the
biography of Tahman.
And from them was Rafi‘ or Abu Rafi‘. He is also known as,
Abul-Bahiyy.
Abu Bakr Ibn Abu Khaithamah said he belonged to Abu
Uhaihah Sa‘eed Ibn Al-‘As Al-Akbar. His sons inherited him
and three of them freed their share. And he participated with
them on the day of Badr and the three were killed. Thereafter
Abu Rafi‘ bought the shares of the rest of the children of
Sa‘eed, his freed slave, except for the share of Khalid Ibn

www.sunniconnect.com l 81

Sa‘eed. Then Khalid gave his share to the Messenger of Allah
he accepted it and freed him. And he would say: “I am the freed
slave of the Messenger of Allah” and his sons after him would
also say that.
And from them Rabah Al-Aswad. He was to guard the
Messenger of Allah’s sittings.
He was the one who got permission for ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
to enter upon the Messenger of Allah in the place of drinking
when he vowed to not come near his wives (’Eela’ a type of
divorce in Islam).
And from them was Ruwaifi‘, his adopted child – may peace
be upon him. Similarly, Mus‘ab Ibn Abdullah Az-Zubairi and
Abu Bakr Ibn Abu Khaithamah counted him from his freed
slaves. They said: His son came to ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-Azeez in
the days of his Caliphate and allocated for him
(money/provisions) and he had no children.
I say: ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-Azeez used to take great care of the
adopted children of the Messenger of Allah; he would love to
get to know them and be good to them. And he wrote in the
days of his Caliphate to Abu Bakr Ibn Hazm, the scholar of
Madinah, during his time that he should search for the freed
slaves of the Messenger of Allah.
And from them: Zaid Ibn Harithah Al-Kalbi. We have already
mentioned something about him in the mention of his death in
the Battle of Mu’tah in the month of Jumada of the Year 8 A.H.
before the Conquest (of Makkah) by a few months. And he was
the leader at the forefront, then after him Ja‘far, then after them
‘Abdullah Ibn Rawaha (May Allah be pleased with him)
And from them is Zaid Abu Yasar.
www.sunniconnect.com l 82

Abu’l-Qasim Al-Baghawi said in Biography of the
Companions, that he lived in Madinah, and narrated one
Hadith, I don’t know of any other. He heard the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, say: “Whoever says I seek
forgiveness from Allah, there is no god worthy of worship
except Him, the Ever Living, the Sustainer, and I repent to
him”, he will be forgiven, even if he had fled the battlefield.
And from them was Safeenah Abu ‘Abdur- Rahman, and it is
said his name was Abul-Bakhtari, Mihran and also Abas. It is
also said that he was called Ahmar and Rooman. Then the
Messenger of Allah named him Safeenah - for a reason which
we will mention - and it became popular.
He was the slave of Umm Salamah, then she freed him and
stipulated upon him that he should serve the Messenger of
Allah until he dies, so he accepted that and said: “If you had
not stipulated upon me I (still) wouldn’t have left him, and this
Hadith is in “the four Sunan (Sunan Abu Dawood, An-Nasa’i,
AtTirmidhi and Ibn Majah).” He was from the Muwalladi
Arabs and his origin is from the sons of Persia, he was called
Safeenah Ibn Marfannah.
Ahmad narrated from Sa‘eed Ibn Jumhan, Safeenah informed
me: The Messenger of Allah said, “The Caliphate in my nation
is for 30 years, then kingship after it.” Then Safeenah said to
me: Calculate the Caliphate of Abu Bakr, and the Caliphate of
‘Umar, and the Caliphate of ‘Uthman and calculate the
Caliphate of ‘Ali; we found it to be 30 years. Thereafter I
looked after that at the Caliphs and didn’t find that they had 30
years between them. I said to Sa‘eed: Where did you meet
Safeenah? He replied: In Batn Nakhlah in the era of Al-Hajjaj.
I stayed with him for three nights asking him about the
Ahadeeth of the Messenger of Allah g.

www.sunniconnect.com l 83

I asked him: What is your name? He replied: I am not going to
tell you, the Messenger of Allah named me Safeenah. I said:
And why did he name you Safeenah? He replied: The
Messenger of Allah exited and his Companions were with him,
when their provisions became too heavy for them, then he said
to me: “Open your cloth.” So I opened it, then they placed their
provisions in it. Thereafter they placed it on me, then the
Messenger of Allah said to me, “Carry for you are only but a
ship (Safeenah in Arabic).” So if I were to carry on that day the
burden of a camel, or two camels, or three, or four, or five, or
six or seven it wouldn’t be heavy for me unless they were to
turn away.
And from them: Salman Al-Farisi, Abu ‘Abdullah the freed
slave of Islam.
His origin was from Persia and his circumstances changed until
he was owned by a man from the Jews in Madinah. When the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, migrated to Madinah,
Salman embraced Islam, and the Messenger of Allah
commanded him to make a contract of Mukatabah (a contract
of manumission between a master and a slave according to
which the slave is required to pay a certain sum of money
during a specific time period in exchange for freedom) to his
Jewish master. The Messenger of Allah helped him to fulfill
the payments he was indebted for, so he was attributed to him.
And he said, “Salman is from us people of the household (of
the Prophet).”
We have already mentioned the description of his migration
from his country and companionship with monks, one after the
other until a series of events brought him to Madinah. We have
also dealt with the description of his embracing Islam – may
Allah be pleased with him – in the beginning of the Prophet’s

www.sunniconnect.com l 84

migration to Madinah. His death was in Year 35 A.H. in the
last days of ‘Uthman’s reign, or in the beginning of Year 36
A.H. It is said that he died in the last days of ‘Umar Ibn AlKhattab and the first is more common.
Al-‘Abbas Ibn Yazeed Al-Bahrani said: The people of
knowledge would not doubt that he lived for 250 years, and
they differed in what was greater than that up until 350 (years).
Some of the later memorizers claimed that he didn’t pass 100
(years). And Allah (SWT) knows best.
And from them Shuqran Al-Habashi; his name was Saleh Ibn
‘Adiyy. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, inherited him from his father. Mus‘ab Az-Zubairi and
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d said: He belonged to ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn
‘Awf, then he granted him to the Prophet.
And from them was Dumairah Ibn Abu Dumairah Al-Himyari.
He was enslaved during the Jahiliyyah, then the Prophet bought
him and freed him, according to Mus‘ab Az-Zubairi. He said:
He had a house at Al- Baqee‘ and a child.
And from them was Tahman. It is said (that his name was)
Dhakwan. He was also called Mihran, Maimoon, Kaisan and
Badham.
And from them: ‘Ubaid the freed slave of the Prophet.
And from them: Fadalah, the freed slave of the Prophet as
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d mentioned. And from them: Qafeez. The
beginning of it is (Arabic letter) “Qaf” and the end of it is
(Arabic letter) “Zay”. Anas he said: The Messenger of Allah
had a servant called: Qafeez.

www.sunniconnect.com l 85

And from them Kirkirah. He was entrusted with the Prophet’s
belongings in some of his battles. Abu Bakr Ibn Hazm
mentioned it in what he wrote to ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Azeez.
And from them was Ma’boor Al-Qibti, the emasculated slave.
The Viceroy of Alexandra gave him as a gift to the Prophet
along with Mariyah, Seereen and a mule. And we mentioned
part of it in the biography of Mariyah which is sufficient.
And from them: Mid‘am, and he was black man from
Muwalladi Hisma. Rifa‘ah Ibn Zaid Al-Judhami gave him as a
gift. He was killed in the lifetime of the Prophet and that was
upon their return from Khaibar. When they reached Wadiy ulQura, while Mid‘am was removing the saddle from the shecamel of the Messenger of Allah, a stray arrow hit and killed
him.
And from them Mihran and it is said: Tahman, and he is the one
whom Umm Kulthoom Bint ‘Ali narrated from the
impermissibility of giving charity to the Banu Hashim tribe and
their freed slaves as was mentioned.
And from them: Maimoon.
And from them: Nafi‘.
And from them was Nufai‘. He was also called Masrooh and
Nufai‘ Ibn Masrooh. His correct name was
Nufai‘ Ibn Al-Harith Ibn Kaadah Ibn Amr Ibn ‘Ilaj Ibn Abu
Salamah Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Uzza Ibn Ghiyarah Ibn ‘Awf Ibn Qusayy.
He was Thaqeef Abu Bakr Ath-Thaqafi and his mother was
Sumayyah Umm Ziyad. He and a group of the slaves descended
from the wall of At-Ta’if. Then the Messenger of Allah freed
them and stopped at a place called Bakrah so the Messenger of

www.sunniconnect.com l 86

Allah called him Abu Bakrah. Abu Nu‘aim said: He was a
righteous man. The Messenger of Allah created brotherhood
between him and Abu Barzah Al-Aslami (a rule which was
changed shortly afterward which was making Mu’akhat
(brotherhood) between the Muhajiroon and the Ansar that
enabled them to inherit from each other).
I say: He is the one who prayed the funeral prayer upon him
due to his will. Abu Bakrah didn’t participate in the Battle of
the Camel, or the Days of Siffeen (the two battles between ‘Ali
and the other group of Muslims who opposed him). His death
was in Year 51 A.H. or Year 52 A.H.
And from them: Waqid or Abu Waqid, the freed slave of the
Messenger of Allah.
And from them: Hurmuz Abu Kaisan, It is also said Hurmuz or
Kaisan. He was also known as Tamhan.
And from them: Hisham, the freed slave of the Prophet.
And from them: Yasar. It is said that he was the one who the
Aal-‘Uraniyyoon killed and they had mutilated him.
And from them: Abul-Hamra’, freed slave of the Prophet and
his servant. He was also called Hilal Ibn AlHarith, Ibn Zafar
and Hilal Ibn Al-Harith Ib Zafar As-Sulami. He was enslaved
during Jahiliyyah.
And from them: Abu Sulma, the Prophet’s shepherd; he was
called Abu Sallam and his name was Huraith.
And from them: Abu Safiyyah, the freed slave of the Prophet.

www.sunniconnect.com l 87

And from them: Abu Dumairah, the freed slave of the Prophet,
the father of Dumairah mentioned earlier, and the husband of
Umm Dumairah.
And from them: Abu ‘Ubaid, his freed slave
And from them: Abu ‘Aseeb, and from them (scholars) are
those who say Abu ‘Aseem, and the first is the correct opinon.
There are some scholars who made a differentiation between
them. And it has been mentioned earlier that he witnessed the
prayer on the Prophet and attended his burial, and he narrated
the story of Al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu‘bah.
And from them: Abu Kabshah Al-‘Anmari from ‘Anmar
Madhhij based on the renowned opinion. Mawla (freed slave)
of the Prophet.
There are several other opinions regarding his name, the most
famous of them is that his name was Sulaim. He was also called
‘Amr Ibn Sa‘d. His origin was from Muwalladi, the land of
Daws (tribe). And he is from those who participated in Badr
(as) Moosa Ibn ‘Uqbah mentioned from Az-Zuhri. Ibn Ishaq,
Al-Bukhari, Al-Waqidi, Mus‘ab Az-Zubairi and Abu Bakr Ibn
Abu Khaithamah also mentioned it.
Al-Waqidi added: He participated in Uhud and the battles
which came after it, and he died the day ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
was appointed Caliph and that was on Tuesday with 8 days left
from Jumadal-Akhirah, Year 13 A.H. And from them: Abu
Muwaihibah, the freed slave of the Prophet g. He was from
Muwalladi Muzainah. The Messenger of Allah purchased him
and then freed him, and his name is unknown. Abu Mus‘ab AzZubairi said: Abu Muwaihibah fought at Al-Muraisee‘, and he
was the one who guided ‘Aishah’s camel for her.

www.sunniconnect.com l 88

And from them was Amatullah Bint Razeenah. And the correct
(opinion) is that her mother Razeenah was the Companion of
the Messenger of Allah.
And from them: Barakah Umm Aiman and Umm Usamah Ibn
Zaid Ibn Harithah, and she was Barakah Bint Tha‘labah Ibn
Amr Ibn Husain Ibn Malik Ibn Salamah Ibn Amr Ibn AnNu‘man Al-Habashiyyah.
She was known by her nickname, Umm Aiman,; Aiman was
her son from her first husband ‘Ubaid Ibn Zaid Al-Habashi.
Then Zaid Ibn Harithah married her after him, whereupon she
gave birth to Usamah Ibn Zaid from him and she was known as
Ummuz-Ziba’. She made two Hijrahs (Abyssinia and
Madinah) and she was the nursemaid of the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, with his
mother Aminah Bint Wahb.
She was from those who the Messenger of Allah inherited from
his father as Al-Waqidi stated. And others mentioned: Rather
he inherited her from his mother, and it has been said that she
belonged to
Khadeejah’s sister, then she gave her as a gift to the Messenger
of Allah and she believed from the start and migrated and lived
after the Prophet. We have previously mentioned the visit Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar paid her after the death of the Prophet and she
burst into tears, so they said to her: Do you not know indeed
that which is better for the Messenger of Allah? So she replied:
Indeed, however, I cry because the revelation has ceased from
the sky, thereafter they began to cry with her.
And from them: Khadirah, Ibn Mandah mentioned her.

www.sunniconnect.com l 89

And from them: Khulaisah Mawla Hafsah Bint ‘Umar Ibn AlKhattab.
And from them: Khawlah, the servant of the Prophet.
And from them: Razeenah. Ibn ‘Asakir said: The correct
(opinion) is that she belonged to Safiyyah Bint Huyayy, and
she would serve the Prophet.
I say: It has been mentioned previously in the biography of her
daughter, Amatullah, that the Prophet, may peace be upon him,
gave Safiyyah Bint Huyayy her mother Razeenah as dowry. So
on this basis her origin would be that she belonged to him.
And from them: Radwa.
And from them: Raihanah Bint Sham‘oon Al-Qurziyyah and it
has been said: An-Nadariyyah, and she was mentioned
previously after his wives.
And from them: Zareenah. The correct (opinion) is Razeenah
as was mentioned previously.
And from them: Sa’ibah, Mawla of the Messenger of Allah.
And from them Sadeesah Al-Ansariyyah, and it has been said:
Mawlat of Hafsah Bint ‘Umar.
And from them: Salamah, the nursemaid of Ibrahim, son of the
Messenger of Allah.
And from them: Salma. She was Umm Rafi‘, the wife of Abu
Rafi‘.

www.sunniconnect.com l 90

I say: It has been narrated that she would cook Al-Hareerah for
the Prophet and it would please him. She lived until after his
death – and witnessed the death of Fatimah. She initially
belonged to Safiyyah Bint ‘Abdul-Muttalib, his paternal aunt,
then she came in possession of the Messenger of Allah. She
was the midwife for the children of Fatimah. to She was also
the one who was a midwife for Ibrahim, the son of the
Messenger of Allah,. She witnessed the washing of Fatimah
(when she died) and washed her with her husband ‘Ali Ibn Abu
Talib, and Asma Bint Umais, the wife of As-Siddiq.
And from them: Sheereen. It is said that Sheereen the sister of
Mariyah Al-Qibtiyyah, the maternal aunt of Ibrahim.
We have mentioned that Al-Muqawqis was the Viceroy of
Alexandria and his name was Juraij Ibn Meena. He granted
them along with a slave called Ma’boor and a mule called AdDuldul. Thereafter the Messenger of Allahgranted her to
Hassan Ibn Thabit and she gave birth to his son Abdur-Rahman
Ibn Hassan.
And from them: ‘Unqoodah Umm Sabeeh Al- Habashiyyah,
the servant of ‘Aishah. Her name was ‘Inabah (grape), then the
Messenger of Allah named her bunch (of grapes), Abu Nu‘aim
narrated it. It is also said her name was Ghufairah. Farwah the
wet nurse of the Prophet, i.e., his suckling mother, Fiddah AnNoobiyyah, Laila Mawlat ‘Aishah.
Mariyah Al-Qibtiyyah the mother of Ibrahim. She has been
mentioned with the Mothers of the Believers. And Ibn Atheer
made a differentiation between her and Mariyah UmmurRabab. He said: She also was a slave girl of the Prophet.
And from them: Maimoonah Bint Sa‘d.

www.sunniconnect.com l 91

And from them: Maimoonah Bint Abu Anbasah or Bint
Anbasah, (as) Abu Umar and Ibn Mandah said. Abu Nu‘aim
said: It is a writing error and Maimoonah Bint Abu ‘Aseeb is
correct.
And from them: Umm Dumairah, the wife of Abu Dumairah,
and they have already been mentioned.
And from them: Umm Ayyash, the Messenger of Allah sent her
with his daughter in order to help her when he married her to
‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan.
So these are his female slaves - may Allah be pleased with
them. Thumamah Ibn Hazn narrated: I asked ‘Aishah about AnNabeedh (a drink made from dates). She replied: This is the
servant of the Messenger of Allah so ask her – (pointing) a
Habashiyyah slave girl. She said: I used to make Nabeedh for
the Messenger of Allah in a water skin in the evening, and then
covered it. When he would wake up in the morning he would
drink from it.
This is how the people who wrote Atraf (the starting words of
Ahadeeth) mentioned it in the collection of ‘Aishah (‘Aishah’s
narrations). And it is more befitting for it to be mentioned in
the collection of the Habashiyyah slave girl who served the
Prophet, and she is either from those we mentioned or
additional to what we mentioned. And Allah (SWT) knows
best.

www.sunniconnect.com l 92

Those Who Served Him from the
Companions Other Than His Mawali (Freed
Slaves)
From them is Anas Ibn Malik Ibn An-Nadr Ibn Damdam Ibn
Zaid Ibn Haram Ibn Jundub Ibn Asim Ibn Ghanm Ibn ‘Adiyy
Ibn An-Najjar Al-Ansari Al-Najjari Abu Hamzah Al-Madani,
inhabitant of Basrah. He served the Messenger of Allah for the
period of his stay in Madinah for 10 years. The Prophet didn’t
even once scorn him for something he did, nor did he say about
anything whatever he did. And his mother was Umm Sulaim
Bint Milhan Ibn Khalid Ibn Zaid Ibn Haram. She is the one who
gave him to the Messenger of Allah and he accepted him, and
asked him to pray for him. He said: “O Allah increase his
wealth, his children, lengthen his life and admit him into
Paradise.” Anas said: I saw two (matters) and I am waiting for
the third. By Allah, I have a lot of wealth, and my children and
grandchildren exceed 100.
And in a narration, “And my vineyard harvests twice a year.
And my children from my backbone are 106.” There is a
difference of opinion over his participation in Badr. Al-Ansari
narrated from his father, from Thumamah that he said, “It was
said to Anas: Did you participate in Badr? He replied, “And
where can I be absent from Badr? You have no mother (a type
of taunt in Arabic).” That which is well-known is that he didn’t
participate in Badr due to his young age, and he didn’t
participate in Uhud also for that reason. And he participated in
Hudaibiyah, Khaibar, Umratul-Qada’, the Conquest (of
Makkah), Hunain, Ta’if and that which followed.
Abu Hurairah said, “I have not seen anyone more similar in
prayer to the Messenger of Allah than Ibn Umm Sulaim - i.e.
Anas Ibn Malik.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 93

Ibn Seereen said, “He was the best of the people in prayer, on
his journey and while stationary.” He died in Basrah and he is
the last of those who remained there from the Companions
according to what ‘Ali Ibn Al-Madeeni mentioned and that is
in Year 90 A.H. and it has also been said 91 A.H. It has also
been said 92 A.H. and it has been said 93 A.H., which is the
most well-known and what the majority (of the scholars) were
upon. As for his age the day he died, Imam Ahmad narrated in
his Musnad from Humaid that Anas lived for 99 years. The
least of what has been mentioned is 96 years and the most that
has been mentioned is 107 years and it has also been said
variously 106 and 103 years. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
And from them: Al-Asla‘ Ibn Shareek Ibn ‘Awf Al-A‘raji.
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d said: His name was Maimoon Ibn
Sinbadh.
And from them: Asma’ Ibn Harithah Ibn Sa‘eed Ibn Abdullah
Ibn Ghiyath Ibn Sa‘d Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Amir Ibn Tha‘labah Ibn
Malik Ibn Afsa Al-Aslami and he was from the People of
Suffah (as) Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d has mentioned. And he is the
brother of Hind Ibn Harithah from the servants of the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, apart from his Mawali,
and they would serve the Prophet.
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d said: Asma’ Ibn Harithah died in the Year
66 A.H. in Basrah at 80 years of age.
And from them: Bilal Ibn Rabah Al-Habashi. He was born in
Makkah, and he was a freed slave of Umayyah bin Khalaf. Abu
Bakr bought him for a big amount of money because Umayyah
would give him a severe punishment in refusing to apostate
from the religion of Islam and he refused to accept any other
religion except Islam - may Allah be pleased with him. Abu

www.sunniconnect.com l 94

Bakr bought him and then freed. Thereafter, he migrated with
other people and participated in the battles of Badr and Uhud
and the battles after them, may Allah be pleased with him.
He was also known as Bilal Ibn Hamamah whereas Hamamah
was his mother. He was from the most eloquent of people,
contrary to what people believe that his (pronunciation of the
Arabic letter) Seen was Sheen, to the extent that some people
narrate a Hadith that has no basis from the Messenger of Allah
that he indeed said, “Verily, the Seen of Bilal is a Sheen.”
He was one of the four Mu’adhdhins account of which is going
to come. He was the first to pronounce the Adhan as we
mentioned and he was in charge of spending on children and he
had a sum of money that was with him (all the time). When the
Messenger of Allah passed away he was from those who went
to Ash-Sham for battle. And it has been mentioned He
established the Adhan for Abu Bakr during the days of his
Caliphate and the first is more authentic and renowned.
Al-Waqidi said: He died in Damascus in the Year 20 A.H. and
he was over 60 years old. Al-Fallas said: In Ash-Sham, his
grave is in Darayya. And it is also said that he died in Halab.
The truth is that the one who died in Halab was his brother
Khalid. Makhool said: Someone who saw Bilal informed me
that he was very tanned, thin, little flesh on his cheeks, he had
lots of hair and he wouldn’t dye his white hair.
And from them: Bukair bin ash-Shaddakh al-Laithi. Ibn
Mandah mentioned it.
And from them: Habbah and Sawa’, the two sons of Khalid.
And from them: Dhu Mikhmar and he has also been called Dhu
Mikhbar. He was the son of the brother of Abyssinian King
www.sunniconnect.com l 95

Najashi. He is also know as the son of his sister. However, the
first is correct. He sent him to serve the Messenger of Allah as
a substitute for himself.
And from them: Rabee‘ah bin Ka‘b al-Aslami, Abu Firas.
And from them: Sa‘d Mawla Abu Bakr As-Siddiq (May Allah
be pleased with him) He is also known as the Mawla of the
Prophet.
And from them: Abdullah bin Rawahah; he entered Makkah on
the day of Umratul-Qada’ while leading the she-camel of the
Messenger of Allah and he was saying:
“Eradicate the sons of the disbelievers from his path,
Today we will hit you upon its (Qur’an’s) interpretation
Just as we struck you upon its revelation a blow
That will remove the head of the arrow shaft
And will occupy the close friend from his close friend.”
And Abdullah bin Rawahah was killed months after this on the
day of (battle) Mu’tah as was mentioned previously.
And from them: Abdullah bin Mas‘ood - the servant of the
Prophet, peace be upon him - bin Ghafil bin Habeeb bin
Shamkh Abu Abdur- Rahman al-Hudhali, one of the Imams of
the Companions: He made two Hijrahs and participated in the
Battle of Badr and that which followed it. He would carry the
sandals of the Prophet, assist him in his ablution and prepare
his riding animal if he wished to ride. He had the longest hand

www.sunniconnect.com l 96

in explaining (Tafseer) of the words of Allah and he had
immense knowledge, grace and tolerance.
In a Hadith the Messenger of Allah said to his Companions
when they were astonished by the thinness of his shins: “By the
One in Whose Hands is my soul, they are heavier than Mount
Uhud on the scales (that weighs good deeds and bad deeds).”
And Umar ‘bin Khattab said concerning Ibn Mas‘ood: He is a
vessel filled with knowledge. And it is said that he was of a thin
stature and had good manners.
And it is said: He would cause the seated to have good conduct
when he walked, and he was similar to the Prophet in his
guidance, mannerisms and conduct, i.e., he would be similar to
the Prophet in his actions, stillness and speech. He would
emulate and copy his worship according to his ability. He died
in the days of ‘Uthman in the Year 32 A.H. or 33 A.H. in
Madinah at 63 years of age, and it has also been said that he
died in Kufah, and the first (opinion) is more correct.
And from them: Uqbah bin Amir al-Juhani.
And from them: Qais bin Sa‘d bin Ubadah al-Ansari alKhazraji.
And from them: Al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah ath-Thaqafi. He
was like a bodyguard in the presence of the Messenger of Allah
as he stood at the head of the Prophet raising a sword in his
hand in the tent on the Day of Al-Hudaibiyah. Everytime his
paternal uncle Urwah bin Mas‘ood ath-Thaqafi would come
close to the beard of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him - according to the tradition of the Arabs in their speech –
he would hit his hand with the edge of the sword and say: Move

www.sunniconnect.com l 97

your hand from the beard of the Messenger of Allah before it
(your hand) doesn’t return to you.
Muhammad bin Sa‘d and others said: He participated in all the
battles with the Messenger of Allah and he made him in charge
along with Abu Sufyan when they went and destroyed the idol
of the people of Ta’if called “Rabbah” or al-Lat. He was
considered clever from amongst the cleverest Arabs. AshSha‘bi said I heard him say: Nobody [has] ever defeated me.
And ash-Sha‘bi said: I heard Qabeesah bin Jabir say: I
accompanied al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah and if there was a city
with eight gates that nobody could leave except by extensive
planning, he would have left from its gates. Ash-Sha‘bi also
said: The judges are four: Abu Bakr, Umar, Ibn Mas‘ood, and
Abu Moosa. And the intelligent men were four: Mu‘awiyah,
Amr bin al-As, al-Mugheerah and Ziyad. Az-Zuhri said: The
intelligent men were five: Mu‘awiyah, ‘Amr, al-Mugheerah
and two with Ali and they were; Qais bin Sa‘d bin Ubadah and
Abdullah bin Budail bin Warqa’.
Imam Malik said: Al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah was a man who
would often marry women and he would say: The one who has
one (wife) if she menstruates then he also menstruates with her
and if she is ill then he becomes ill with her. And the one who
has two is between two burning fires. He said: So he would
marry four and divorce them together. And others said: He
married 80 women and it is also said 300 women. And it has
also been mentioned that he married 1,000 women. The date of
his death has been differed over with many varying opinions,
the most renowned and correct of them was the one al-Khateeb
al-Baghdadi mentioned a consensus upon that he died in the
Year 50 A.H.

www.sunniconnect.com l 98

And from them: al- Miqdad bin al-Aswad Abu Ma‘bad al-Kindi
[tribe] ally of the tribe Zuhrah.
And from them: Muhajir Mawla Umm Salamah.
And from them: Abus-Samh.
And from them was the best of the Companions in totality, Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq. He served him out of his own accord in the
journey of the Hijrah, especially in the cave and after they left
it, until they reached Madinah as has been extensively
mentioned previously and for Allah is all praise and grace.

Writers of the Revelation
From them were the four Caliphs: Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman
and ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, may Allah be pleased with them all.
And from them: Aban bin Sa‘eed bin al-As bin Umayyah bin
Abd Shams bin Abd Manaf bin Qusayy alUmawi. He embraced
Islam after his two brothers Khalid and ‘Amr. He is the one
who safeguarded Uthman when the Messenger of Allah sent
him to the people of Makkah on the Day of al-Hudaibiyah. It is
also said that it was at Khaibar because he is mentioned in the
Saheeh from the Hadith of Abu Hurairah in the distribution of
the war booty of Khaibar.
The reason for his acceptance of Islam was that he met with a
monk when he was on business in Sham. He explained to him
the affair of the Messenger of Allah. The monk asked: What is
his name? He replied Muhammad. He said: I will describe him
to you; then he described him with his exact description and
said: When you return to your family, give him the greeting
(salam), thereafter, he embraced Islam upon returning. He was

www.sunniconnect.com l 99

the brother of ‘Amr bin Sa‘eed al- Ashdaq the one who was
killed by Abdul-Malik bin Marwan.
Abu Bakr bin Abu Shaibah said: The first to write the revelation
(Qur’an) during the time of the Messenger of Allah was Ubayy
bin Ka‘b and if he was not in attendance then Zaid bin Thabit
would write. And Uthman, Khalid bin Sa‘eed and ’Aban bin
Sa‘eed (also) wrote for him. This is what the Prophet dictated,
i.e. in Madinah. As for the Makkan chapters, Ubayy bin Ka‘b
was not present at the time of their revelation and the
Companions wrote them in Makkah. The death of ’Aban bin
Sa‘eed has been differed over - Moosa bin Uqbah, Mus‘ab bin
Zubair, Zubair bin Bakkar and most of the people of lineage
said: He was killed on the day of Ajnadayn, i.e., in JumadalOola in the Year 12 A.H. And others said: He was killed on the
day of Marjus-Suffar in the year 14 A.H.
From them: Ubayy bin Ka‘b bin Qais bin Ubaid al-Khazraji alAnsari Abul-Mundhir, It is also said Abu’t-Tufail, the master
of the (Qur’anic) reciters. He participated in al-‘AqabatuthThaniyah (the second Pledge of Aqabah), Badr and the battles
which followed. He was of average height, slim, with white
head and facial hair and he would not dye his hair. Anas said:
Four people compiled the Qur’an – i.e. from the Ansar – Ubayy
bin Ka‘b, Mu‘adh bin Jabal, Zaid bin Thabit and a man from
the Ansar called: Abu Yazeed.
Ibn Abu Khaithamah said: He was the first who wrote the
revelation in the presence of the Messenger of Allah in
Madinah.
Muhammad bin Sa‘d said: He [Ubayy] would write the
revelation in the presence of the Messenger of Allah.

www.sunniconnect.com l 100

The year of his death has been differed over; it is said that in
the Year 19 A.H, in the year 20 A.H. and it occurred also in the
year 23 A.H. It has also been said before the assassination of
Uthman by a week. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
From them: Arqam bin Abu’l-Arqam and his name is Abd
Manaf bin Asad bin Jundab bin Abdullah bin Umar bin
Makhzoom al-Makhzoomi. He embraced Islam early and he is
the one whose house the Messenger of Allah used to hide in
Safa; thereafter the house was known as al-Khaizuran. He
migrated and participated in Badr and that which followed
[from battles]. The Messenger of Allah joined him and
Abdullah bin Unais in brotherhood [Mu’akhat: To enable them
to inherit from one another so as to create love between the
Migrants and the Ansar].
He is the one who wrote the part of the land of Uzaim bin Harith
al-Muharibi by the order of the Messenger of Allah, and that is
according to what al-Hafiz Ibn ‘Asakir has narrated. He died in
the Year 53 A.H.. It has also been said year 55 A.H. when he
was 85 years old.
From them: Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas al-Ansari alKhazraji, Abu Abdur-Rahman. And it has been mentioned:
Abu Muhammad al-Madani the spokesman for the Ansar. And
he has also been named ‘spokesperson for the Prophet’.
Muhammad bin Sa‘d said: Ali bin Muhammad Madayini with
his chain of narration from his Shaikhs in the Arab delegations
to the Messenger of Allah, [that] they said: Abdullah bin Alas
ath-Thumali and Musliyah bin Hirran al-Huddani came to the
Messenger of Allah, peace upon him, in a group from their
people after the Conquest of Makkah. Thereafter, they
embraced Islam and made a Bai‘ah on behalf of their people.
He wrote for them a note with what was obligatory upon them

www.sunniconnect.com l 101

from charity on their wealth. Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas
wrote it and Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh and Muhammad bin Maslamah
testified to it. And this man is from those who have been
affirmed in Saheeh Muslim that the Messenger of Allah gave
them glad tidings of Paradise.
He was martyred on the Day of al-Yamamah, in the year 12
A.H. in the era of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq and there is a story
mentioned in connection with him which we will mention
insha’Allah when the opportunity arises with Allah’s Will.
From them: Hanzalah bin ar-Rabee‘ bin Saifiyy bin Rabah bin
al- Harith bin Mukhashin bin Mu‘awiyah bin Shuraif bin
Jirwah bin Usayyid bin ‘Amr bin Tameem at-Tameemi alUsayyidi the writer, and his brother Rabah was also a
Companion. His paternal uncle Aktham bin Saifiyy was the
wise man of the Arabs.
From them: Khalid bin Sa‘eed bin al-As bin Umayyah bin Abd
Shams bin Abd Manaf, Abu Sa‘eed alUmawi. He embraced
Islam early, and it has been said after as-Siddiq by three or four
and the most that has been mentioned is five [men]. They stated
that the reason for his embracing Islam was that he saw in his
dream that it was as if he was standing on the edge of Hell. And
he mentioned from its vastness that which (only) Allah knows.
He said: And his father was pushing him into it, and the
Messenger of Allah held his hand to prevent him from falling
into it. Then he narrated this dream to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq. He
told him: I wish good for you; this is the Messenger of Allah,
follow him and you will be saved from that which you feared.
Then he came to the Messenger of Allah and embraced Islam.
When the news of his embracing Islam reached his father he
became angry with him and hit him with a stick that was in his

www.sunniconnect.com l 102

hand until he broke it on his head. He threw him out of his
house and withheld sustenance from him and forbade his
brothers from talking to him. Thereafter Khalid accompanied
the Messenger of Allah day and night. Later, his brother ‘Amr
accepted Islam. When the people migrated to Abyssinia, he
also migrated with them. Thereafter, he was the one who
married Umm Habeebah to the Messenger of Allah as we
mentioned earlier. Then they migrated from Abyssinia in the
company of Ja‘far and came to the Messenger of Allah in
Khaibar when he conquered it, and he gave them a share after
consulting the Muslims. And from them: Khalid bin al-Waleed
bin al-Mugheerah bin Abdullah bin Amr bin Makhzoom, Abu
Sulaiman al- Makhzoomi. He was the leader of the victorious
Islamic armies, of Muslim soldiers, memorable events and with
the Quraish (after his acceptance of Islam). He had a tent
(which was used to carry, which they pitched to gather the
provisions of the army) and [was at] the head of the horses (he
led them when he would go to battle) on momentous days of
glory days. In addition he was a person of sound thinking,
fearsome [in war] and a good role-model.
With regard to Abu Sulaiman Khalid bin al-Waleed, it has been
said that he had never been in an army that was defeated either
in Jahiliyyah or Islam. He accepted Islam along with Amr bin
al-As, Uthman bin Talhah bin Abu Talhah after al-Hudaibiyah;
it is also said that it was Khaibar.
The Messenger of Allah did not cease to make him as a the
leader of the expeditions that he sent. Thereafter, he was the
head of all the soldiers in the era of As-Siddiq. When Umar
came to power he dismissed him and Abu Ubaidah became the
leader upon the basis that he would not depart from the ideas
of Abu Sulaiman (Khalid). Thereafter, Khalid died in the reign
of Umar and that was in the Year 21 A.H. And it is also said

www.sunniconnect.com l 103

the Year 22 A.H, but the first is more correct, in a village a mile
away from Hims.
From them: az-Zubair bin al-Awwam bin Khuwailid bin Asad
bin Abdul-Uzza bin Qusayy, Abu Abdullah al-Asadi from the
ten (given glad tidings of Paradise) and one of the six from the
People of Consultation whom the Messenger of Allah passed
away while being pleased with them. And he was a disciple of
the Messenger of Allah and son of his paternal aunt Safiyyah
bint Abdul-Muttalib and husband of Asma Bint Abu Bakr.
Az-Zubair accepted Islam early when he was 16 years old. It is
also said 8 years old. He made the two migrations (the two
Hijrahs to Ethiopia and then Madinah) and participated in all
the battles and was the first to unleash his sword in the path of
Allah. The Messenger of Allah said, “Verily, for every Prophet
is a disciple and my disciple is az-Zubair.” He participated in
al-Yarmook and was the best of those who participated therein.
He penetrated the rows of the Romans on that day from the first
of them to the last of them twice and left from the other side
safe. However, he was struck twice on the back of his neck.
He had many virtues and good traits and he died in the Battle
of the Camel (Yawmul-Jamal, the battle between Ali and his
opposition). This occurred when he was returning from an
offensive leaving the battle, then Amr bin Jurmooz, Fadalah bin
Habis and a third man called Nufai‘ at-Tameemiyyoon in a
place called Wadi as-Siba‘ (valley of predators). Then Amr bin
Jurmooz attacked him while he was sleeping and killed him and
that was on Thursday 10th of Jumadal-Oola, Year 36 A.H. and
he was 67 years old on that day. He left a massive inheritance
behind him. When he had paid off his debts and took out a third
of his wealth (as a will to his non–inheritors) he distributed the
remainder to his inheritors. The entire wealth was from

www.sunniconnect.com l 104

permissible means acquired in his lifetime from that which he
obtained from alFai’, war booty and many different permissible
sources of trade. And that is after paying the Zakah whenever
due, and giving away generous gifts to those eligible in times
of need. And from them: Zaid bin Thabit bin ad-Dhahhak bin
Zaid bin Lawdhan bin Amr bin Abd bin Awf bin Ghanm bin
Malik bin anNajjar al-Ansari al-Najjari, Abu Sa‘eed. He is also known as
Abu Kharijah and Abu Abdur Rahman alMadani. The
Messenger of Allah arrived at Madinah when he was 11 years
old. Due to his young age he didn’t participate in Badr. It also
said he did not participate in Uhud. The first of his battles was
alKhandaq and he fought in those that followed. He was a
Hafiz, a person of understanding, knowledgeable and
intelligent. It has been affirmed from him in Saheeh Al-Bukhari
that the Messenger of Allah commanded him to learn the
Jewish language so he could read it out to the Prophet when
they [Jews] wrote to him; he learned it in 15 days. He is from
those who compiled the Qur’an at the time of the Messenger of
Allah from the reciters.
He wrote the revelation in the presence of the Messenger of
Allah on more than one occasion. Then Ibn Umm Maktoom
came and began to complain about his blindness. Thereafter the
revelation descended upon the Messenger of Allah in such a
way that his thigh became heavy on my thigh to the extent that
it was about to break it then it (the Verse) was revealed: “except
those who are disabled (by injury or are blind or lame, etc.)”
(Soorah An-Nisa’: 95) Thereafter he commanded me so I added
it (to the first revelation of the Verse). Zaid said: “For, verily, I
know of the place it was added, by a crack in that tablet, i.e.,
from bones.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 105

Zaid participated in (the battle of) al-Yamamah and an arrow
hit him, but it didn’t harm him. He was the one who was
commanded by As-Siddiq after that to search for the Qur’an
and then compile it, and he said to him: “ You are an intelligent
youth and we were not suspicious of you. You used to write the
revelation for the Messenger of Allah so search for the Qur’an
and compile it.” He did as As-Siddiq ordered him and there was
much good in that.
‘Umar appointed him in charge of Madinah twice during two
Hajj (periods) and he appointed him in charge when he went to
Sham. ‘Uthman would also appoint him over Madinah, and
‘Ali loved him very much. On his part, he would venerate ‘Ali
and recognize his position and he didn’t participate in any of
the wars during his time and lived after him till he died in the
Year 45 A.H. or 41 A.H. or 55 A.H. He is from those who wrote
the master copies of the Qur’an that ‘Uthman sent to the
different parts whose recitation was according to its print by
consensus and agreement. Just as we established that in the
book Fada’il ul-Qur’an [Virtues of the Qur’an] which we wrote
in the introduction to our book At-Tafseer. And from them:
those who would wrote the records as has been mentioned in a
Hadith narrated by Ibn Abbas if it was authentic.
From them: Sa‘d bin Abu Sarh as will be mentioned shortly,
insha’Allah.
From them: Amir bin Fuhairah Mawla of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq,
the scribe of for the Prophet. Amir bin Fuhairah was nicknamed
Abu Amr from Muwalladil-Azd, he was black in complexion
and was initially the Mawla of at-Tufail bin al-Harith brother
of ‘A’ishah from Umm Rumman, on her mother’s side. He
embraced Islam early before the Messenger of Allah entered

www.sunniconnect.com l 106

the House of al-Arqam bin Abu’l-Arqam – the one that is near
as-Safa – in hiding.
Amir was tortured along with a group of the weak in Makkah
so that he may leave his religion, but he would refuse. Abu Bakr
bought him, then freed him. Thenceforth he would look after
his sheep on the outskirts of Makkah. When the Messenger of
Allah migrated accompanied by Abu Bakr, he was with them
behind Abu Bakr. When they reached Madinah, Amir bin
Fuhairah stayed with Sa‘d bin Khaithamah and the Messenger
of Allah made Mu’akhat between him and Aws bin Mu‘adh.
He fought in Badr and Uhud and was killed on the Day of Bi’r
Ma‘oonah as was previously mentioned in the Year 4 A.H.. He
was 40 years old at the time.
Urwah, Ibn Ishaq, al-Waqidi and others mentioned that Amir
was killed on the Day of Bi’r Ma‘oonah by a man called Jabbar
bin Sulma from Banu Kilab tribe. When he was stabbed with
the spear he said: “I have succeeded by the Lord of the Ka‘bah.”
Jabbar said: I asked ad-Dahhak bin Sufyan about that which he
said, what did he mean by it? He replied: He meant Paradise.
Amir was raised till he couldn’t be seen by the eyes to the extent
that Amir bin at-Tufail said: He was raised till I saw the sky
without him.
And when Amr bin Umayyah was asked about him, he said: He
was from the best of us and from the first of the household of
our Prophet. Ad-Dahhak called me to Islam, and I embraced it,
due to what I witnessed from the killing of Amir bin Fuhairah.
Thereafter, ad-Dahhak wrote to the Messenger of Allah
informing him of my acceptance of Islam and it was due to the
affair of Amir so he said: “The Angels buried him and sent
down the ‘Illiyyoon (dwellers of the seventh heaven, some said
guardian angels).”

www.sunniconnect.com l 107

From them: Abdullah bin Arqam bin Abu’l-Arqam alMakhzoomi. He embraced Islam in the year of the Conquest of
Makkah, and was the scribe of the Prophet. Imam Malik said:
He would do well in his work and the Prophet would thank him
and held him in high esteem.
He was the scribe for Abu Bakr who made him in charge of the
treasury, and ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab kept him in that position,
then in the era of ‘Uthman he was relieved of his duties.
I say: That was after Abdullah bin Arqam resigned, it has been
said: ‘Uthman offered him 300,000 Dirhams for his
employment, but he refused to accept it and said I only worked
for the sake of Allah, so my reward is with Allah, the Great and
the Almighty.
From them: Abdullah bin Zaid bin Abd Rabihi al-Ansari alKhazraji, the Mu’adhdhhin. He embraced Islam early and
fought in Aqabat as-Sab‘een, Badr and that which followed.
From the greatest of his virtues is his dream of the Adhan and
Iqamah in his sleep and his mention of that to the Messenger of
Allah with his approval of him and his statement to him:
“Verily it is a true dream, so give it (teach it) to Bilal for he has
a louder voice.” We have mentioned the Hadith earlier
concerning this.
Al-Waqidi narrated with his chains of narrations from Ibn
‘Abbas that he wrote a note to those who embraced Islam from
Jurash, in it is the command to them to establish the prayer,
give the Zakah and give a fifth from the war booty (in charity).
He died in Year 32 A.H. at 64 years old and ‘Uthman Ibn
‘Affan prayed over him (funeral prayer).

www.sunniconnect.com l 108

From them: Abdullah bin Sa‘d bin Abu Sarh, al-Qurashi alAmiri, the brother of ‘Uthman, in terms of his suckling mother.
‘Uthman’s mother suckled him. He wrote the revelation but
thereafter he apostate from Islam and joined the idolaters in
Makkah. When the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
conquered it, he came to ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan and he sought
protection for him so the Messenger of Allah granted him
safety as we have mentioned in the Battle of the Conquest.
Thereafter Abdullah bin Sa‘d became well-established in his
belief.
I say: He was on the right wing of Amr bin al-As when Amr
conquered Egypt in Year 20 A.H. in the reign of ‘Umar.
Thereafter ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab left Amr in charge of it. When
Uthman became Caliph, he retired Amr from it and put
Abdullah bin Sa‘d in charge in the Year 25 A.H. and ordered
him to go on a battle in Africa whereupon he conquered it. The
army received huge wealth from it and the portion of the war
booty for every horseman from the army was 3,000 Mithqal of
gold and for the foot soldier 1,000 Mithqal. He had with him in
this army three of those named Abdullah: Abdullah bin azZubair, Abdullah bin Umar and Abdullah bin Amr. Thereafter
Abdullah bin Sa‘d invaded al-Asawid in an-Noobah.
Subsequently, he made a peace agreement with them, and that
was in the Year 31 A.H. Thereafter, he fought the Battle of asSawari in the sea toward the Romans and it was a great battle,
as is going to be mentioned in its place insha’Allah.
When the people differed with ‘Uthman, he left Egypt and left
someone in a position of leadership so that he could go to assist
‘Uthman. When ‘Uthman was killed he resided in ‘Asqalan,
and it is said ar-Ramlah. He invoked Allah to take him [his
soul] in prayer so one day he prayed Fajr and read in the first
raka‘ah Soorah Al-Fatihah and Al-‘Adiyat. And in the second

www.sunniconnect.com l 109

he read Al-Fatihah and another Soorah, and when he read the
Tashahhud, he made the first Tasleem. When he was making
the second Tasleem he died between them and that was in the
Year 36 A.H. It is also said in the Year 37 A.H. It is also
mentioned that he lived till the Year 59 A.H. and the first is
correct.
I say: He does not have a narration in the Six Books of Hadith
or in Imam Ahmad’s Musnad.
From them: Abdullah bin Uthman, Abu Bakr As-Siddiq. the
promise has been mentioned earlier that his biography shall
come in the era of his Caliphate, insha’Allah. I have compiled
a volume on his biography with what he narrated from
Ahadeeth and what has been narrated from him.
From them: ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, and his biography shall follow
in (the mention of) his Caliphate. It has been mentioned earlier
that he wrote the peace agreement between the Messenger of
Allah and the Quraish on the Day of Hudaibiyah; He wrote
other notes in his presence. As for the claim of a group of Jews
in Khaibar that they had a note from the Prophet which granted
them exemption from Jizyah (tax levied on those who refuse to
accept Islam but wish to live in peace under Muslim rule), and
in the end (it reads), “written by ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib” and
contains the testimony of a group of Companions, from them,
Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh and Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan then (this
claim), is a calculated lie, a slanderous forgery, a fabrication
and invention. A group from among the scholars has clarified
its falsehood. Some of the early scholars of Fiqh
(Jurisprudence) were deceived by it and supported the removal
of Jizyah from them. But this is very weak. I have compiled a
book explaining its falsehood and that it was a fabrication that
they invented and they are known for that. And I clarified it and

www.sunniconnect.com l 110

compiled various statements of the Imams in that respect. From
them: ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab and his biography shall come in its
(proper) place. I have reserved a volume about him, and another
comprehensive book covering the Ahadeeth that he narrated
from the Messenger of Allah in addition to the narrations and
rulings narrated from him, may Allah be pleased with him. The
discussion about his writing has been mentioned earlier in the
biography of Abdullah bin al-Arqam.
From them: al-‘Ala bin al-Hadrami. Al-Hadrami’s name was
‘Abbad. It also said his name was Abdullah bin ‘Abbad bin
Akbar bin Rabee‘ah bin Uwaif bin Malik bin al-Khazraj bin
Iyad bin as-Sadif bin Zaid bin Muqni‘ bin Hadramawt bin
Qahtan and other than this has been stated for his lineage. He
was from the allies of the Banu Umayyah tribe. The discussion
about his writing was mentioned in the biography of Aban bin
Sa‘eed bin al-As. He had 10 brothers apart from himself and
from them was ‘Amr bin alHadrami, the first of the idolaters to
be killed. The Muslims killed him in the expedition of Abdullah
bin Jahsh and it was the first expedition as was mentioned
earlier.
From them was Amir bin al-Hadrami the one who Abu Jahl
ordered – may the curse of Allah be upon him – then showed
his ‘Awrah (private parts) and called, “O ‘Amir,” when the
Muslims and the idolaters met in the Battle of Badr. Then the
war intensified and became severe and then the events
happened as mentioned earlier in detail in its place.
From them is Shuraih bin al-Hadrami and he was from the best
of the Companions. The Messenger of Allah said about him,
“He is a man who doesn’t sleep on the Qur’an.” The intended
meaning is that he doesn’t sleep and leave it; rather he stands

www.sunniconnect.com l 111

with it during the day and night. They all had one sister and she
was as-Sa‘bah bint al-Hadrami, Umm Talhah bin Ubaidallah.
The Prophet sent al-‘Ala’ bin al-Hadrami to al-Mundhir bin
Sawa, the king of Bahrain. Later, he appointed him as a leader
over it when he conquered Bahrain. As-Siddiq kept him in
charge of it, then ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab and he remained in that
position until ‘Umar removed him and appointed him over
Basrah. When he was on the way he died and that was in the
Year 21 A.H.
Al-Baihaqi and others narrated many miracles from him; from
them was that he really walked with his army on the surface of
the sea with it reaching the knees of their horses. It has been
said that the soles of the horseshoes did not even become moist,
and he commanded all of them so they began to say, “O the
Tolerant, O the Great (referring to Allah’s names).” And on one
occasion he was with his army and they were in need of water.
He called upon Allah, Who sent the rain to fulfill their needs.
When he was buried he did not leave a single trace, as he had
asked Allah for that, and this will be mentioned in the book
Dala’il un-Nubuwwah shortly insha’Allah.
From them: al-‘Ala’ bin Uqbah.
From them: Muhammad bin Maslamah bin Salamah bin
Hareesh bin Khalid bin Adiyy bin Majda‘ah bin Harithah bin
al- Harith bin al-Khazraj al-Ansari al-Harithi, Abu Abdullah as
well as Abu Abdur- Rahman. In addition it also said Abu
Sa‘eed al-Madani, a subdivision of Abul-Ash-hal tribe. He
embraced Islam on the hands of Mus‘ab bin ‘Umair and it also
said Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh and Usaid bin Hudair and the Messenger
of Allah made Mu’akhat between him and Abu Ubaidah bin alJarrah when he came to Madinah. He fought in Badr and the

www.sunniconnect.com l 112

battles that followed it and the Messenger of Allah appointed
him over Madinah in the year of Tabook.
Ibn Abdul-Barr said in Al-Istee‘ab: He was dark brown, tall,
bold, and had a strong body. He was from the virtuous
Companions and from those who stayed away from the Fitnah
(the feuds between the Companions). He took a sword made
from wood (i.e. he did not fight as the phrase was mentioned
by the Prophet which shall be mentioned later) and died in
Madinah in the Year 43 A.H. upon the well-known opinion of
the majority. Marwan bin al-Hakam prayed upon him and he
narrated many Ahadeeth from the Prophet. Muhammad bin
Sa‘d mentioned from Ali bin Muhammad al-Madayini with his
chains of narrations that indeed Muhammad bin Maslamah was
the one who wrote a note for the delegation of Mahrah
following the command of the Messenger of Allah.
From them: Mu‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb bin
Umayyah al-Umawi.
From them: Al- Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah ath-Thaqafi, and his
biography was mentioned earlier with those who used to serve
him from the Companions other than his Mawali and he was an
executioner upon the head of a guard for the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him.
Ibn ‘Asakir narrated with his chain of narrations from ‘Ateeq
bin Ya‘qoob with his chain mentioned earlier on more than one
occasion that al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah was the one who
wrote the Aqta‘ (allotment or piece of land) for Husain bin
Nadlah al-Asadi which the Messenger of Allah gave to him
with his command.

www.sunniconnect.com l 113

So these are his writers who wrote with his command in his
presence - may the prayers of Allah and his peace be upon Him.
Ibn ‘Asakir mentioned from his trustees Abu Ubaidah Amir bin
Abdullah bin al-Jarrah al-Qurashi al- Fihri one of the ten (given
glad tidings of Paradise) and Abdur-Rahman bin Awf az-Zuhri.
I say: As for Abu Ubaidah, al-Bukhari narrated from the Hadith
of Abu Qilabah from Anas that the Messenger of Allah said:
“For every nation is a trustee, and the trustee of this Ummah is
Abu Ubaidah.” And in a narration the Messenger of Allah said
to the delegation of Najran, “I will certainly send a trustee with
you, a true trustee.” He sent Abu Ubaidah with them.
Ibn ‘Asakir said, “And from them is Mu‘aiqeeb bin Abu
Fatimah ad-Dawsi, the freed slave of Banu Abd Shams. He was
in charge of his ring/seal and it is said he was his servant.
Others said he accepted Islam early and migrated to alHabashah on the second occasion and then to Madinah. He
fought in Badr and that which followed and was in charge of
his ring/seal. Abu Bakr and ‘Umar put him in charge of the
treasury. It is said that he was afflicted by leprosy and was
treated with colocynth. He died during the caliphate of
‘Uthman, in the Year 40 A.H. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
As for his leaders we have mentioned them during the dispatch
of the expeditions by name.
As for the total number of Companions, the people have
differed in this regard. It has been narrated from Abu Zur‘ah
that he said, “There were 120,000.” From Ash-Shafi‘i that he
said, “The Messenger of Allah passed away and the Muslims
from those who heard from him and saw him were close to
60,000.” Al-

www.sunniconnect.com l 114

Hakim Abu Abdullah said, “The Ahadeeth are narrated from
close to 5,000 Companions.”
I say: Those whom Imam Ahmad narrated from, despite his
numerous narrations, extensive research and the magnitude of
his journeys and the duration of his imamate, were 987
individuals from the Companions (and close to 300
Companions have been placed in the six books in addition to
that). And a group from the memorizers of the Ahadeeth – may
Allah have Mercy on them – have paid attention to pinpointing
their names, their lives and their deaths; some the most exalted
of them are Shaikh Abu Umar bin Abdul-Barr an-Namri in his
book Al-Istee‘ab, Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Ishaq bin
Mandah and Abu Moosa al-Madeeni. There after al-Hafiz
‘Izzud-Deen Abul-Hasan Ali bin Muhammad bin
AbdulKareem al- Jazari, well known as Ibnul-Atheer. He
compiled his book Usdul-Ghabah in its regard, and was
thorough in benefiting, compiling and summing up
(information) and obtained that which he desired and wished.
(May Allah be pleased with him)

The Traits of the Prophet that Were
Particular for him in his Lifetime
Abu Dawood has a special section in his book As-Sunan. Let
us view what he has mentioned in this respect, in addition to
which we will add the source of what we say.
Anas bin Malik narrated: “Allah’s Apostle wanted to write a
letter to a group of people or some nonArabs (i.e. nonMuslims). It was said to him, ‘They do not accept any letter
unless it is stamped’. So the Prophet had a silver ring made for
himself, and on it was engraved: Muhammad, the Messenger
of Allah’.” It was on his hand until he died and on the hand of

www.sunniconnect.com l 115

Abu Bakr until he died, also on the hand of ‘Umar till he died
and on the hand of ‘Uthman. Then, once he was passing by a
well when it suddenly dropped in it. He commanded its
retrieval and although the well was drained it wasn’t possible
to retrieve it.
Anas said, “The Prophet’s ring was made from silver and its
stone was Habashi.” Also narrated by Anas, “ The Prophet’s
ring was made from silver as its stone was, too.” Ibn ‘Umar
narrated, “The Prophet took a ring made from gold. He used to
turn its stone toward the palm of his hand and engraved on it
was: ’Muhammad [is the] Messenger of Allah.’ So the people
took gold rings. When he saw it that they had taken (wore) gold
rings, he threw it and said, “I will never wear it again.” Then
he wore a ring from silver and engraved on it, ’Muhammad [is
the] Messenger of Allah.’ Abu Bakr wore it after him, then
‘Umar wore it after Abu Bakr, then ‘Uthman wore it until it fell
in the well of ’Arees.” The truth is that the ring he wore for one
day and then discarded was the gold ring, not the silver ring,
due to what has been affirmed in the Saheehain. Ibn ‘Umar, he
said, “The Messenger of Allah wore a ring from gold, then he
discarded it and said, I will never wear it again.” Thereafter, the
people discarded their rings. He wore the silver ring often and
it remained on his hand until he passed away, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him. Its stone was from it (silver),
i.e. it didn’t have a stone that was separate from it.
The one who narrated that it had an image of a person on it, he
has gone far and erred. Rather it was all silver and its stone was
from it and it was engraved with the words: ‘Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah’ in three lines: ‘Muhammad’, [on one line].
‘Messenger’ [on one] line, ‘Allah’[on one] line. It was as
though – And Allah (SWT) knows best – it was engraved with
writing in reverse in order to stamp correctly in keeping with

www.sunniconnect.com l 116

the norm. It has also been mentioned that it was written
correctly and it would print in the same fashion, and the
authenticity of this is doubtful and I don’t know a chain of
narrations supporting that - whether authentic or weak.
These Ahadeeth that we narrated that he had a silver ring refute
the Ahadeeth which we mentioned earlier in Sunan Abu
Dawood and An-Nasa’i. Mu‘aiqeeb narrated, “The Prophet’s
ring was made from iron, plated with silver.” Nafi‘ narrated,
“Ibn ‘Umar would wear his ring on his left hand.” Muhammad
bin Ishaq narrated, “I saw on as-Salt bin Abdullah bin Nawfal
bin Abdul-Muttalib a ring on his right little finger, so I said,
‘What is this?’ He replied, ‘I saw Ibn Abbas wear a ring like
this and he made the top part of the ring face outward’. The
narrator said, “It cannot be imagined except that Ibn Abbas
remembered that the Messenger of Allah wore his ring in the
same manner.”
Abdullah bin Ja‘far narrated, “The Messenger of Allah wore his
ring on his right hand.”.

A Mention of His Sword
Ibn Abbas narrated, “The Messenger of Allah optionally took
his sword Dhul-Faqar with him on the Day of Badr. And that
is the one he saw a dream about on the Day of Uhud, he said,
“I saw in my sword DhulFaqar defeat, so I interpreted it as a
defeat amongst you. I saw that I was behind a sheep so I
interpreted it as being the battalion. I saw that I was behind a
secure shield so I interpreted it as being Madinah. I saw a cow
being slaughtered, so a cow by Allah is good sign, so a cow
by Allah is good sign.” The words of the Messenger of Allah
have been narrated by Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah from the
Hadith of Abdur-Rahman bin Abuz-Zinad from his father.

www.sunniconnect.com l 117

Narrated by Sa‘eed bin Abul-Hasan, he said, “The pommel of
the sword of the Messenger was from silver.” A sword from the
swords of the Messenger of Allah became the property of the
family of ‘Ali, when al-Husain bin ‘Ali was killed in Karbala
and it was in his possession Then ‘Ali bin al-Husain Zainul‘Abideen took it and entered Damascus with it when he entered
upon Yazeed bin Mu‘awiyah. Thereafter, he returned with it to
Madinah. It has been affirmed in the Saheehain as narrated
from alMiswar bin Makhramah that he met him and said to him,
“Do you have any need that you may order me to satisfy?” ‘Ali
said, “No.” Then al-Miswar said, “Will you give me the sword
of the Messenger of Allah for I am afraid that the people may
take it from you by force. By Allah, if you give it to me, they
will never be able to take it till I die.”
Other weapons have been mentioned that belonged to the
Prophet, and from them are the shields that the Messenger of
Allah would wear, as narrated by many such as as-Sa’ib bin
Yazeed and Abdullah bin azZubair that the Messenger of Allah
had two shields on the Day of Uhud.
In the Saheehain as narrated by Anas, “The Messenger of Allah
entered on the day of the Conquest (of Makkah) with a helmet
on his head. When he removed it, someone said to him, “Ibn
Khatal is holding on to the drapes of the Ka‘bah.” So he said,
“Kill him.”
Jabir narrated, “The Messenger of Allah entered on the day of
the Conquest of Makkah with a black turban.”
Ibn Umar narrated, “When the Messenger of Allah would wear
the turban he would let it (the excess cloth) drop between his
shoulders.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 118

A Mention of the Sandals He Used
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from Ibn Umar, “The
Messenger of Allah used to wear Sibtiyyah sandals and they
are the ones with no fur on them.”
Narrated by ‘Eesa bin Tamhan from Anas, “Anas showed us a
pair of sandals with no fur and two straps.”
Abu Hurairah narrated, “The sandals of the Messenger of Allah
had two straps.” I say, it was well-known that approximately in
the Year 600 A.H. and the years that followed that a single
sandal was with a man called Ibn Abul-Hadrad and it was
thought to be the sandal of the Prophet, peace be upon him. The
noble king Moosa, son of the just king Abu Bakr bin Ayyoob,
proposed to buy it for a huge amount of wealth but he refused
to sell it. Then his death coincided with that after a short period
of time and it came in the aforementioned king’s possession.
He took it and revered it. When he built Darul-Hadeeth alAshrafiyyah on the side of the fortress he kept it in a safe place
and made a servant to look after it and gave him 40 Dirhams
every month as is well-known. It is still in the aforementioned
Dar (house).
At-Tirmidhi said in “Ash-Shama’il”, Moosa bin Anas narrated
from his father, “The Messenger of Allah had a perfume bottle
that he would perfume himself from.”

The Description of the Wooden Cup of the
Prophet
Asim al-Ahwal narrated, “I saw the wooden cup of the Prophet,
peace be upon him, with Anas bin Malik and it had split, and
he had shackled it with silver. It was a good wide wooden cup

www.sunniconnect.com l 119

made from (the best type of wood) Nudar. Anas said, “I served
the Messenger of Allah from this wooden cup...” Ibn Seereen
said, “It had a ring from iron in it (where it had split), then Anas
wanted to put a ring of gold in it [in the gap] or silver, so Abu
Talhah said to him, “Don’t change anything that the Messenger
of Allah did,” so he
left it.”

Chapter
A mention of what has been narrated
concerning the bottle of antimony [kuhl] that
he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
would use
Narrated by Ibn Abbas, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had a bottle that he
would use on his eyes at the time of sleep, three [strokes] in
every eye.”
I say: It has reached me that in the Egyptian lands there is a
sanctuary, within it are many of the artifacts of the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Some of the late
ministers made an effort to compile them and from them is the
antimony bottle and Meel [antimony] and [an eye] brush and
other things. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

The Cloak
Al-Hafiz al-Baihaqi said, “As for the cloaks that the Caliphs
wore then we have narrated from Muhammad bin Ishaq bin
Yasar in the story of Tabook that the Messenger of Allah

www.sunniconnect.com l 120

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) gave the people of
Ailah a cloak with a note that he wrote to them as a trust for
them. Then Abu’l-Abbas Abdullah bin Muhammad bought it
for 300 Dinars - he meant by that the first of the Caliphs of the
Banu’l-Abbas tribe called as-Saffah, (May Allah be pleased
with him) And the Banu’lAbbas tribe inherited this cloak
generation after generation. The Caliph used to wear it on the
Day of ‘Eid on his shoulders and would take the staff attributed
to him - (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) - in one of
his hands. And he would emerge having a tranquillity and
calmness that would split the hearts and dazzle the eyes. They
would dress in black on special occasions and Eids in
accordance with the [practice of] the master of the rural and
urban people, from those who live as nomads and [in] cities.
This is due to that which al-Bukhari and Muslim [the two
Imams of the narrations] collected from Anas, “Indeed the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) entered Makkah with a helmet on his head.”
Also in a narration, [it is reported] “With a black turban.”
In a narration, [it is reported] “He let its end hang between his
shoulders - (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
Narrated by Abu Burdah, he said, “‘Aishah showed us a thick
top [kisa’] and a lower garment [izar] then she said, “The
Prophet’s soul was taken in these two.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah and Ibn Abbas, they said, “When the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) fell ill, he began to throw a sheet he had on his face. Then
when he was tired of it he removed it from his face and said at
that point, “May the curse of Allah be upon the Jews and the
Christians, they took the graves of their Prophets as places of

www.sunniconnect.com l 121

worship.” He warned against what they did. I say these three
chapters he didn’t know what happened to them after this. And
it has been mentioned that he indeed – May peace be upon him
– red velvet was placed under his grave that he would pray on.
If we were delve into that which he used to wear in his lifetime
[then] the section would be long. It is [mentioned] in the Book
of Dress from the book Kitabul-Ahkamil-Kabeer in sha’ Allah,
and in Him [Allah] is faith and upon Him is reliance.

A mention of his (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) horses and means of
transport
Al-Baihaqi said, “And we have narrated in the book Sunan, the
names of his horses that were with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him): Sa‘idiyain, Lizaz
and al-Luhaif and it has been said, al- Lukhaif and az-Zarib.
The one he rode that belonged to Abu Talhah was called al
Mandoob, in addition to his she-camels al-Qaswa’, al-Adba’
and al-Jad‘a’, and his mules ash-Shahba’ and al-Baida’. It is
not mentioned in any of the narrations that he passed away after
them except for what is narrated concerning his mule al-Baida’,
his weapons, land that he gave away in charity, his clothes,
sandals and his ring that we have narrated in this chapter.
Narrated by Sahl bin Sa‘d, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed away with
a knitted gown [made] from wool.” And this chain of narrators
is good.”
It has been mentioned previously from more than one of the
Companions that indeed the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) did not leave behind a Dinar,

www.sunniconnect.com l 122

nor Dirham, nor slave boy, nor slave girl, except for his mule
and land that he gave in charity. This necessitates that he freed
all of the slave boys and girls that we mentioned and gave in
charity his weapons, animals, furniture and provisions that we
mentioned and that which we didn’t mention.
As for his mule, it was called ash-Shahba’ as well as al- Baida’
And Allah (SWT) knows best. This is the one that al-Muqawqis
(whose name was Juraij bin Meena) the Viceroy of Alexandria
granted him from the gifts he bestowed. This is the same one
that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) rode on the Day of al-Hunain when [he was] in the
necks of the enemies [i.e., in their midst] extolling His Noble
Name [Allah] with courage and reliance upon Allah the Great
and the Almighty. It has been mentioned that it lived after him
to the extent that it was with Ali bin Abu Talib in his Caliphate.
It lived until it was with Abdullah bin Ja‘far after succeeding
Ali, and wheat was ground for it to eat due to its weakness from
then on.
As for his donkey, it was called Ya‘foor which is transformed
and then pronounced, Ufair, then he (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) would ride it on some occasions.
And in the two Saheehs indeed he (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) passed by a mixed gathering when riding a
donkey, in it was Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salool and a number
of Muslims, idolaters (worshipers of idols) and Jews. Then he
descended and called them to Allah – the Great and the
Almighty – and this was before the Battle of Badr and he had
decided to visit Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah. It was then that Abdullah bin
Ubayy said to him, “I am not good at doing what you say, O
man. So if it is true then don’t overwhelm us with it in our
assemblies.” That was before Islam had become dominant and

www.sunniconnect.com l 123

it has been said that he covered his nose when the scent of the
animal reached them. And he said, “Don’t harm us with the foul
smell of your animal.”
At this, Abdullah bin Rawahah retorted, “Indeed the scent of
the donkey of the Messenger of Allah is better than your scent.
Rather, O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), cover us with it in our assemblies for we indeed like
it.” Thereafter the two sides erupted and were about to come to
blows so the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) calmed them down. Then he went to Sa‘d bin
‘Ubadah and complained about Abdullah bin Ubayy, at which
he said, “Be gentle with him O Messenger of Allah, for by the
One who ennobled you with the truth, Allah indeed sent you
with the truth whilst we were preparing to make him in charge
of us. Then when Allah brought the truth that he sent you with,
he became jealous.”
We have mentioned previously that he rode the donkey during
some of the days of Khaibar, and it is mentioned in a hadeeth
that he placed Mu‘adh behind him on a donkey, and if we were
to narrate them [these narrations] with their wordings and
chains of narrators then the section would be rendered very
long. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

www.sunniconnect.com l 124

Chapter: The book of Ash-Shama’il
Now we shall mention what remains related to the Noble
Seerah, and that is four books. The first is in Ash-Shama’il
[characteristics], the second in Ad-Dala’il [signs], the third in
al-Fada’il [virtues] and the fourth in al-Khasa’is [particular
traits]. And with Allah is assistance and upon Him do we rely.
And there is no might or power except with Allah, the Great
and the Wise.

The characteristics of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and a mention of his apparent and nonapparent traits
People have authored numerous books on this subject – both in
the past and present [whether] solely dealing with this subject
or otherwise. From the best of authors of these compilations,
the most proficient and the one that caused the most benefit was
Imam Abu ‘Eesa Muhammad bin ‘Eesa bin Sawrah atTirmidhi
- (May Allah be pleased with him) The renowned book ashShama’il is devoted exclusively to this subject and we have a
chain from hearing that leads back to it. We shall mention some
points from it and add important matters that the Muhaddith
[scholar of hadeeth] and the Faqeeh [scholar in Fiqh or
jurisprudence] cannot suffice without.
Let us first mention his immense good looks – may peace be
upon him – and his handsome beauty after which we will
commence to mention [the same] in brief and details.

www.sunniconnect.com l 125

Narrations concerning his dazzling handsome
appearance, after that which was mentioned
previously from his handsome looks
Al-Bukhari narrated from al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib, he said, “The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had the
most handsome face of the people and the best of them in
stature. He was neither very tall nor short.”
Also narrated by al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib, he said, “The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was of medium
height, [had] wide shoulders, he had hair that reached his
earlobes. I saw him in a red cloak [and] I have never seen
anything better than him [in appearance].”
Narrated by Abu Ishaq, he said, “Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib was asked,
was the Prophet’s (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
face like the sword? He said, “No, rather like the moon.”
Narrated by Jabir bin Samurah, a man said to him, “Was the
face of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) like the sword?” Jabir said, “No, rather round like
the sun and moon.”
It has been affirmed in Saheeh al-Bukhari from Ka‘b bin Malik
in the hadeeth of repentance, he said, “And when the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was happy his face would light up as though it was a piece
of the moon.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) entered upon me
happy, the features of his face shining.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 126

Narrated by al-Harith bin ‘Amr as-Sahmi indeed al- Harith bin
‘Amr informed him, “I came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he was in Mina or
Arafah and the people had surrounded him. Yahya said, “When
the people saw his face they said: ‘This is a blessed face.’”

The description of the complexion of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)
Narrated by Rabee‘ah bin Abu Abdur-Rahman, he said, “ I
heard Anas bin Malik describe the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), he said, “He was of medium
height of the people, he was not tall nor short, radiant in
complexion not albino white nor brown. He did not have curly
hair nor did he have straight hair. He received revelation when
he was 40 years old, then he stayed in Makkah for 10 years
whilst receiving revelation and he spent 10 years in Madinah.
[When] He passed away he did not have 20 white hairs on his
head and beard.” Rabee‘ah said, “Then I saw a hair from his
hairs and behold it was red, so I enquired it was said it was red
from perfume.”
Narrated by Anas bin Malik t, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was not very tall
nor was he short. And he was not albino white nor was he
brown, he did not have curly hair nor did he have straight hair.
Allah sent him [as a Prophet] at the start of 40 years then he
stayed in Makkah for 10 years and 10 years in Madinah. Allah
took his soul at the beginning of 60 years and there were not 20
white hairs on his head and beard.”
Narrated by Abu’t-Tufail, he said, “I saw the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and nobody remained

www.sunniconnect.com l 127

that had seen him other than myself, so we said to him,
“Describe the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) to us.” So he said, “He was white with a
handsome face.”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah he said, “I had not seen anything
more handsome than the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). It was as though the sun
would follow its course on his forehead. And I did not see
anybody faster than the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) while walking, it was as
though the earth was folded for him we would try hard whilst
he would not notice.” Narrated by Tirmidhi from Qutaibah
from Ibn Lahee’ah and he narrated, “And the sun would follow
its course on his face.”
Narrated by Nafi bin Jubair, he said, “Ali described the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to us, he said, “He
was reddish white [had a mixed complexion].”

The description of the face of the Messenger
of Allah and a mention of his features: his
parting, forehead, eyebrows, eyes, nose,
mouth, teeth and other features of his looks
and appearance
The statement of Abu’t-Tufail has been mentioned previously
that he was white and had a handsome face, also the statement
of Anas that he had a bright complexion, in addition to the
statement of al-Bara’ when he was asked, “Was the face of the
Messenger of Allah like the sword?” i.e., in smoothness so he
said, “No, rather like the moon.” When Jabir bin Samurah was
asked a similar question, he said, “No, rather round like the sun

www.sunniconnect.com l 128

and the moon.” And the statement of ar-Rubayyi‘ bint
Mu‘awwidh, “If you were to see him, you would have said the
sun is rising.” And in another narration, “You would have seen
the sun rising.”
Abu Ishaq as-Sabee‘i said narrating from a woman from
Hamdan who had performed Hajj with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), so when he asked
about him (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), she
said, “He was like the moon on a clear night, I have not seen
before him or after him [anyone] similar to him.”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah [he said], “It was as though the sun
would follow its course on his face.” And in another narration
[he said], “His forehead.”
Narrated by Muhammad bin Ali from his father, he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had a large head, big eyes, long eyelashes, eye [color]
mixed with redness, thick beard, bright complexion, coarse
short palms and feet. When he would walk it was as though he
was walking on a hill and when he would glance he would turn
with his whole body.” Only Ahmad narrated this.
Narrated by ‘A’ishah she said, “I was sitting reading poetry
whilst the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was fixing his sandals. As I looked at him his
forehead began to sweat and his sweat began to generate light,
so I became astonished. Then he looked at me and said, “What
is the matter with you O ‘A’ishah?” She said, “I said, O
Messenger of Allah, I looked at you, then your forehead began
to sweat and your sweat began to generate light and if Abu
Katheer al-Hudhali saw you he would have known that you are
the most deserving of his poetry.” He said, “What does Abu

www.sunniconnect.com l 129

Kabeer say?” I said he says, “The cure for every remainder of
menstruation and every corruption of wet nurse and disease of
the first milk of the pregnant woman. When you look at the
features of his face, it shines like the rain cloud [or thunder
cloud].”
Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) left what was in his hand and stood in front of me
and kissed me between my eyes, then he said, “You have not
become happy with me like my happiness from you.”
Narrated by Jabir bin Samurah, he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had bluish
black eyes, little flesh on his heels and a wide mouth.”
Narrated by al-Hasan bin Ali from his aunt, he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had a wide forehead, naturally groomed fully detached
eyebrows, there was a vein between them which pulsed and
filled with blood when he was angry His nose was aquiline; it
had a brightness about the upper part that led those who were
less observant to think him haughty. He had small cheeks, a
wide mouth, he had white teeth with a space between his front
teeth.”
Narrated from a man of the Ansar, he said, “I asked Ali bin Abu
Talib whilst he was Muhtabin [sitting with his knees facing up]
with the sheath of his sword [wrapped around him] in the
mosque of Koofah about the description of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), so he said,
“He was white in complexion mixed with redness, he had black
eyes and silky hair, and thin hair from his chest to his navel,
small cheeks, a full thick beard, his neck was like a silver jug,
he had hair from his upper chest to his navel like a staff, he did

www.sunniconnect.com l 130

not have any hair on his stomach or chest apart from that, coarse
small palms and feet.
When he walked, it was as though he was descending a slope,
and when he walked it was as though he was avoiding rocks
[i.e. he would raise his legs high]. And when he would turn to
glance he would turn with his whole body. He was not tall nor
was he short, he was not weak and he was not very strong. The
sweat on his face was [like] pearls and the smell of his sweat
was better than al-Adhfar musk. I did not see anyone like him
before or after him.”
It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from Anas, he said,
“The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “Indeed I can see you from behind my back.”
Some of the scholars said he meant “with the eye of my heart”.
Some of them even explained His statement, the Most High:
“And Your movements among those who fall prostrate( to
Allah in the five compulsory congregational prayers).” (Soorat
ash-Shu‘ara’: 219) with that [explanation] and this is a weak
explanation. And others said, “Rather this is from his specific
traits – (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – that he
would indeed see with his sight from behind him similar to
what he would see in front of him. Al-Hafiz Abu Zur‘ah arRazi mentioned that in his book Dala’il un- Nubuwwah. In the
two Saheehs also from Abu Hurairah, indeed the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Do
you see my Qiblah over here? For by Allah your tranquility,
bowing and prostrating are not hidden from me. Indeed I see
you from behind my back.”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah, he said, “It was as though the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was formed from silver, he had silky hair, a level stomach

www.sunniconnect.com l 131

[i.e. his stomach did not protrude more than his chest], big
shoulder bones. He would place his whole foot on the ground,
when he would walk forward he would walk forward with all
his body, and when he would return he would return with all
his body [i.e. he would not stray left or right from where he was
going].”

The description of his (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) Hair
It has indeed been affirmed in the two Saheehs from Ibn Abbas,
he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) liked to agree with the People of the Book
in that which he had not received a [specific] command. The
People of the Book used to let their hair hang forward and the
idolaters would part their hair, so the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) let his hair hang
forward then he parted [his hair] afterwards.
And it has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from al- Bara’,
“Indeed the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) let his hair grow to his shoulders.” It has been
mentioned in the Saheeh from him and others, “To the middle
of his ears.” There is no contradiction between the two states,
for indeed hair can be long sometimes and shorter than it at
other times. So each one narrated according to what he saw.
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said, “The Messenger of Allah’s hair
was longer than his ear lobes yet above the shoulders.” It has
been affirmed that he indeed (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) shaved his head in the Farewell Pilgrimage. And he
died after that by 81 days - may the prayers of Allah be upon
him forever until the Day of Judgment.

www.sunniconnect.com l 132

It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from the hadeeth of
Rabee‘ah from Anas after his mentioning of the Messenger of
Allah’s hair, he said, “It indeed was not straight nor was it curly
and Allah caused him to die whilst not having more than 20
white hairs on his head and beard.”
In Saheeh al-Bukhari from the hadeeth of Ayyoob from Ibn
Seereen he indeed said, “I said to Anas: Did the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) dye his
hair?” He said, “No, he did not see [on him] except a little white
hair.”
And with Muslim from Anas, “Indeed the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) did not dye his
hair. He only had a few white hair under his lower lip, a little
on his temples and a little on his head.”
Narrated by Uthman bin Mawhab, he said, “Umm Salamah had
a small wide bell made from silver containing some of the hairs
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him). If a person had a fever he would send a vessel to her
then she would dip the hairs into it. Thereafter the man would
sprinkle it on his face. My family sent me to her so she
produced it and it was like so – and Isra’eel [the sub-narrator]
illustrated with 3 fingers – and it contained 5 red hairs,”
narrated by al-Bukhari.
Narrated by Abu Rimthah he said, “I went with my father to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and when I saw him he said, “Do you know who this is?”
I said, “No”, he said, “Indeed this is the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).” I trembled when
he said that and I used to think that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was a being that

www.sunniconnect.com l 133

did not resemble mankind, then suddenly [I saw] he was a man
with hair to his shoulders with traces of Hinna’ [dye] wearing
two green cloaks.”
Narrated by Ibn Umar, “Indeed the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to wear Sibtiyyah
[tanned cow skin] sandals, and he would die his beard yellow
with al-Wars and saffron, and Ibn Umar would [also] do so.”
Narrated by Ibn Umar, he said, “The white hairs of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) were close to 20 hairs [in total],” and in the narration of
Ishaq, “I saw the white hairs of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) approximately 20 white
hairs on the forefront [of his head].”
Abdullah bin Muhammad bin ‘Aqeel said, “Anas bin Malik
came to Madinah when Umar bin Abdul‘Azeez was a governor
of Madinah. Then Umar sent [a messenger] to him and said to
the messenger, “Ask him if the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) dyed his hair, for indeed I have
seen a hair from his hairs that was colored.”Then Anas said,
“Indeed the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was bestowed with black [hair], and if I was to
count his white hairs on his head I would not find more than 11
hairs. And only this [hair] has been colored with perfume that
was used to perfume the hair of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), that changed its color.”
I say: Anas’ negation of dyeing opposes what has preceded
from others in affirmation of it. And the established rule is that
“affirmation takes precedence over negation” because the one
who affirms has extra knowledge that the one who negates
doesn’t possess. Similarly the affirmation of other than him

www.sunniconnect.com l 134

[Anas] of what was mentioned of white hairs takes precedence,
especially from Ibn Umar who most probably received that
[information] from his sister, the Mother of the Believers,
Hafsah. Indeed her awareness was more complete than Anas’
awareness, because she may have washed his noble head
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).

That which has been narrated concerning his
shoulders, forearms, armpits, feet and ankles
The narrations of al-Bukhari and Muslim have been mentioned
previously, from al-Bara’ bin Azib he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was of
average height [and] had broad shoulders.” Az-Zubaidi said
from az-Zuhri from Sa‘eed from Abu Hurairah, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had broad shoulders.”
Al-Bukhari narrated from Anas he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had a wide
head and feet [and] soft palms.” It has preceded in more than
one narration that he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) had coarse short hands and feet and in a narration, “large
hands and feet.”
In Saheeh Muslim narrated from Jabir bin Samurah, “He had a
wide mouth - and it has been explained that he had a generous
mouth, Ashkal eyes – and it has been explained as having large
ovals of the eyes, having Manhoosal-‘Aqib – which has been
explained as having little flesh on the heels,” which is more
appropriate in relation to males.
Narrated by Maimoonah bint Kardam, she said, “I saw the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 135

him) in Makkah when he was on his she-camel and I was with
my father. In the hand of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was a whip, like the whip of
those who write [or teach]. Then my father came close to him
and then took his foot and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) allowed him, thereafter I never
forgot the length of his index toe over all the other toes.”

Description of his height (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and his fragrant scent
Narrated by Anas in Saheeh al-Bukhari, he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was of medium height [with respect to] the people, he was
not tall or short.”
Abu Ishaq said from al-Bara’, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was the most handsome
amongst the people and the best of them in stature, he was
neither tall nor short,” collected in the two Saheehs.
Narrated by Ali, he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was not very tall and taller
than medium height. When he came with the people he would
be taller than them, the sweat on his face appeared like pearls.”
It has been affirmed in Saheeh al-Bukhari from Anas, he said,
“I have never touched silk or Deebaj (thick silk) softer than the
palm of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) nor have I smelt a perfume nicer than the sweat of the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) had a bright complexion, it

www.sunniconnect.com l 136

was as though his sweat was pearls. When he walked he would
lean forward. And I have never touched silk or Deebaj (thick
silk) softer than the palm of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) nor have I smelt a perfume nicer than
the sweat of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).”
Narrated by Jabir bin Samurah, he said, “I prayed the first
prayer [Fajr] with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), thereafter he went in to his family, and
I left with him. Then the children received him so he began to
stroke their cheeks one after the other. And as for me, when he
stroked my cheeks then I noticed coldness and a scent from his
hand as though he had taken it out from a perfume bottle.”
Narrated by Abu Juhaifah, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went at midday to
al-Batha’, then he performed ablution and prayed adh-Dhuhr
two units [Rak‘ahs] with an ‘Anazah [iron tipped walking
stick] in front of him.” ‘Awn added [the following wording]
from his father, “The donkey and the woman would pass by
behind it.” Hajjaj added to this hadeeth, “Then the people stood
and began to take his hand wiping their faces with it. Then I
took his hand and put it on my face and suddenly it was colder
than ice and better in scent than perfume.”
Narrated by Yazeed bin al-Aswad, who said, “The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed alFajr in Mina, thereafter he turned and saw two men behind the
people. So he called them, then they were brought with their
sides shaking. Then he said, “What prevented you from praying
with the people?” They said, “O Messenger of Allah, we prayed
at home or in a tent.” He said, “Then do not do so [don’t repeat
this], if anyone amongst you prays in his house then comes to

www.sunniconnect.com l 137

then reaches the prayer with the Imam, he should pray with him
for it is Nafilah [superogatory] for him.” Then one of them said,
“Ask forgiveness for me, O Messenger of Allah.” So he sought
forgiveness for him.
Then the people rose for the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and I stood with them, and I
was at the time the youngest and bravest of the men. I continued
pushing the people till I reached the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), then I took his hand and
placed it either on my face or my chest. And I never found
anything more fragrant or cooler than the hand of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). And he was at the time in al- Khaif Mosque.”
Narrated by Abdul-Jabbar bin Wa’il bin Hujr, he said, “My
family informed me from my father, he said, “The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was given
a bucket of water so he drank from it. Thereafter, he spat in the
bucket then poured into the well or drank from the bucket. Then
he spat in the well and the likeness of the scent of musk arose
from it.”This is how al-Baihaqi narrated it from the path of
Ya‘qoob bin Sufyan from Abu Nu‘aim and his name was alFadl bin Dukain.
Narrated by Anas, he said, “When the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed the morning
prayer the servants of Madinah came with their vessels
containing water. Then no vessel was brought except that he
submerged his hand in it, and sometimes they would come in
the cold morning and then he would submerge his hand in it
[their vessels].”

www.sunniconnect.com l 138

Narrated by Anas bin Malik, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to enter the
house of Umm Sulaim and sleep on her mattress when she
wasn’t on it. One day he came and slept on it, then she was
confronted and it was said to her, “This is the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) he slept in your house on
your mattress.”
When she came, she saw him sweating and his sweat had
become soaked on a piece of leather on the mattress. Then she
opened her safe box or hand bag and began to gather that sweat
and squeeze it into containers. The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) became astonished and said,
“What are you doing, O Umm Sulaim?” She said, “O
Messenger of Allah we wish for its blessings for our children.”
He said, “You did right.”
Narrated by Anas also, he said, “When the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would pass on a
pathway from the pathways of Madinah they found the scent of
perfume from him and say, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed by on this path.”
And narrated from him, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “That which
has been made beloved to me from this world are women,
perfume and the pleasure of my eyes has been made in prayer.”

Description of the Seal of Prophethood which
was between his (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) shoulders
Narrated by as-Sa’ib bin Yazeed, he said, “My maternal aunt
took me to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of

www.sunniconnect.com l 139

Allah be upon him) and said, “O Messenger of Allah, the son
of my sister has become ill.” Then he stroked my head and
invoked blessings upon me and made ablution then I drank
from his ablution water. I stood behind him and then I saw the
Seal of Prophethood between his shoulders similar to the egg
of a pigeon.”
Narrated by Jabir bin Samurah, he said, “The front of the
forehead of the Messenger of Allah and his beard had become
white and when he would oil his hair it would be concealed but
when his hair was dry it would be apparent. He had a thick
beard, and once a man asked, “Was his face like the sword?”He
said, “No, rather it was like the sun and the moon and was
round. And I saw the Seal by his shoulder like a pigeon’s egg
similar to his body.”
Narrated by Abdullah bin Sarjis, he said, “I came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and ate bread and meat with him,” or he said, “Porridge.”
I said, “O Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) - may Allah forgive you.” He said, “And you.” Then
I said, “Did the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) ask for forgiveness for you?” He said, “Yes
and for you [the believers].” Then he recited this verse: “And
ask forgiveness for your sin, and also for (the sin of) believing
men and believing women.” (Soorah Muhammad: 19) Then I
moved behind him and I saw the Seal of the Prophets between
his shoulders by his left shoulder blade, like closed fingers with
two beauty spots on it like warts.”
Narrated by Mu‘awiyah bin Qurrah from his father, he said, “I
came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and said, “O Messenger of Allah, show me the
Seal.” Then he said, “Insert your hand.”So I inserted my hand

www.sunniconnect.com l 140

in his shirt pocket and began to feel and look at the Seal and it
was on his shoulder blade similar to an egg. That did not
prevent him from praying for me whilst my hand was in his
shirt pocket.”
Narrated by Abu Rimthah at-Taimi, he said, “I exited with my
father until I came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). Then I saw trace of Hinna’
[dye] on his head and saw on his shoulder what was similar to
an apple. Then my father said, “I am a doctor so shall I not cut
it for you?” He said, “Its doctor is the One that created it.”And
he said to my father, “Is this your son?”He said, “Yes.” He [the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)] said, “You should indeed not harm him nor should you
harm him.”
The best opinion of Ibn Dihyah and others from the scholars
before him in the wisdom behind the Seal being between the
shoulders of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) is that it was an indication that there was
no Prophet after him. It has been said it was on his shoulder
blade because it is said that is the place from where the Shaitan
enters inside man so this was a protection for him (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) from the Shaitan.
I say, we have previously mentioned the hadeeths illustrating
that there is no Prophet nor Messenger after him during the
explanation of His statement the Most High: “Muhammad
((Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) is not the father
of any man among you, but he is the Messenger of Allah and
the last (end) of the Prophets. And Allah is Ever All Aware of
everything.” (Soorah al- Ahzab: 40)

www.sunniconnect.com l 141

Chapter
Compilation of the hadeeths concerning the
description of the Messenger of Allah
It has been mentioned previously in the narration of Nafi‘ bin
Jubair from Ali bin Abu Talib that he said, “I never saw before
him or after him a similitude.”
Narrated by Ibraheem bin Muhammad the son of Ali, who said,
“When Ali would describe the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) he would say, “He was not
very tall nor was he very short he was of medium height, he did
not have curly hair nor was it straight, he had hair in between
that. He did not have a fat face or a thin face, there was a
roundness in his face reddish-white [complexion], black eyes,
long eyelashes, big boned and joints [i.e. knees, shoulders,
elbows, wrist, ankle etc.].
He had a faint line of hair from his chest to his navel, big hands
and feet, when he would walk he would raise his feet as though
he was walking uphill and when he would turn he would turn
with his whole body. Between his shoulders lay the Seal of
Prophethood. He was from the most generous of people in
giving and the most welcoming of them in receiving, the most
truthful of people in speech, the most trustworthy of people in
obligation, the most soft of them in character, most noble of
them in companionship. Whoever saw him would naturally
respect him, and whoever associated with him loved him. One
person describing him said, “I never saw before him nor after
him a similitude.”And Imam Abu Ubaid al-Qasim bin Sallam
narrated this in Kitabul-Ghareeb. Thereafter he narrated from
al-Kisa’i and alAsma‘i and Abu ‘Amr an explanation of the
Ghareeb [uncommon words], and a summary of the uncommon

www.sunniconnect.com l 142

words mentioned in his narration: al- Mutahham means a full
body, al-Mukaltham means very round face i.e., it was not fat
and raised nor was it weak rather between that, and his face was
not completely round rather it was slight in places and that is
[considered] most preferred among the Arabs and those who
know [of such matters].
He was white mixed with red and that is the best of
complexions and for this reason he was not extremely white,
and al-Ad‘aj means strong blackness of the pupils, and JaleelulMushash means his joints (like the knees, elbows, shoulders,
wrists) were broad and [so was] that which was near it from the
body. And his statement Shathnal-Kaffain means big hands,
and Taqalla‘a in his walk means fast walk. Mention of his
groomed eyebrows with long eyelashes has occurred in a
hadeeth, along with “He had Shabh arms,” i.e. thick arms. And
Allah the Most High knows best.

The hadeeth of Umm Ma‘bad concerning him
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
The hadeeth has been mentioned previously in full in the Hijrah
from Makkah to Madinah when the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came to her [Umm
Ma’bad] with Abu Bakr and his Mawla Amir bin Fuhairah and
their guide Abdullah bin Uraiqit ad-Deeli. Then they had asked
her if she had any Laban or meat with her that they could
purchase from her but they didn’t find anything with her. She
said, “If we had anything I would entertain you,” and they [her
tribe] were afflicted by drought [at that time].
Then he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) spotted at
a sheep through a gap in the tent and said, “What is wrong with
this sheep, O Umm Ma‘bad?” She said, “It is weak.” Then he

www.sunniconnect.com l 143

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Would you
let me milk her?” She said, “If it has milk then milk her.”Then
he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) requested the
sheep [be brought] and stroked it and mentioned the Name of
Allah. Then he [the narrator] mentioned the hadeeth and the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) milking it so that it was enough for all of them. Then he
milked it and left a full vessel with her.
The group left after having quenched their thirst, then when her
husband came he was astonished by the milk and said, “Where
did you find this when there is no milk in the house and the
sheep is single?” She said, “No, by Allah, indeed a blessed man
passed and from his speech [and behavior] was such and such.”
He said, “Describe him for me, by Allah, I indeed think he is
the man whom the Quraish are searching for.”
She said, “He is bright, he has a good face, well-mannered, and
is not defective with a large abdomen or a small head. He is a
handsome man, the pupils of his eyes are very black, the hair
of his eyelashes is very long, there is a mild hoarseness in his
voice, intensely white and deep black eyes, his eyebrows are
arched and very close to each other, his neck was radiant, and
there was a thickness in his beard.
He is dignified when he is silent and he is splendid when he
talks, he explains thoroughly not too little and not too much, he
is fluent and his speech appears like pearls. He is most beautiful
and graceful from a distance and the best one when he is near,
no eye looks up to him out of tallness and no eye looks down
on him from shortness. He becomes the brightest and the most
supreme one when he is between two people, and the best of
them in stature. He always has companions who listen to him
when he talks and obey his orders when he ask them to do

www.sunniconnect.com l 144

something, his companions accompany and serve him, he was
not frowning, and he does not talk in vain.”
Then her husband said, “This is the one whom the Quraish seek,
if I was to encounter him I would seek to accompany him and
I would strive if I was to find a way to do so. Then there was a
loud voice between the heavens and the earth, they could hear
it but didn’t see who said it, and he said [some Arabic poetry],
“May Allah the Lord of mankind reward with his best reward,
The two companions that
resided in the tent of Umm
Ma‘bad, They arrived in
goodness and left with it,
So successful is the one who became a friend of Muhammad”
We mentioned previously Hassan bin Thabit’s response to this
blessed poetry in a fashion similar to it in splendor.
Al-Hafiz Ya‘qoob bin Sufyan al-Fasawi and al- Hafiz Abu
Nu‘aim in his book Dala’ilun-Nubuwwah. Abdul-Malik said,
“It has reached me that Abu Ma‘bad embraced Islam after that
and that indeed Umm Ma‘bad migrated then embraced
Islam.”Thereafter al-Hafiz al-Baihaqi mentioned the
uncommon words after this hadeeth.

Hadeeth of Hind bin Abu Halah
Al-Hasan bin Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) said: “I
asked my uncle Hind bin Abu Halah about the hilyah

www.sunniconnect.com l 145

[description] of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). Hind was known to be a prolific
describer of the Prophet, and I wished him to relate some of it
for me so I might hold fast to it.”
So Hind said: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), was of mighty significance to Allah, and
profoundly honored among the people. His face radiated light
like the moon on its fullest night. He was a bit taller than those
of medium stature and a bit shorter than the tall and skinny. His
head was large. His hair was wavy. If his hair parted, he would
leave it parted, if not he would leave it, and it would not be long
enough to go past his earlobes. His complexion was fair. He
had a wide forehead, arched, thick eyebrows with a space
between them. There was a vein between them that would swell
and pulse when he was angry. His nose was aquiline; it had a
brightness about the upper part that led those who were less
observant to think him haughty. He had a thick beard. His eyes
were very black and the whites very white. His cheeks were not
prominent, he had a wide mouth. His teeth were white and there
was a space between his front teeth.
“There was a fine line of hair on his chest, and it was as if it
were an ivory statue with the purity of silver. His figure was
well proportioned, full bodied and strong. There was no
slackness in his musculature, his chest did not protrude over his
belly, nor the reverse. His chest was broad and his shoulders
wide and muscular. He had large limbs. The parts of his body
that could be seen while he was clothed were luminous. His
body from the neck to the navel was joined by hair which
flowed down like a line. There was no hair on his nipples. His
forearms, shoulders, and upper chest were hairy. The bones of
his forearms were long. His palms were wide and generous. His
hands and feet were thick. His limbs were long. He had long

www.sunniconnect.com l 146

sinews. His insteps were high. His feet were smooth without
protuberances and water would run off them.
When he would move off, he would move with determination.
He would step surely and unhurriedly and not proudly. He
walked gently and with dignity, and he would take wide steps
when he wanted to walk quickly. When he walked, it was as if
he were descending from a slope and when he would look at
someone, he would turn to him fully. He would lower his gaze
and looked down more often than up. He did not stare. He
would lead his companions by walking behind them out of
modesty and would always be the first to greet them.”
At this point, Al-Hasan said to Hind, “Describe to me the way
he spoke.”
Hind said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), was continually full of concern. He was
constantly deep in thought. He had no rest, and would not speak
without a reason. He would be silent for long periods of time.
He would begin conversations, and end them clearly and
distinctly and would speak in a way that combined many
meanings in few words. He spoke with excellence, and there
was no excess in it, nor unnatural brevity. He was gentle by
nature and not coarse, nor was he contemptuous of anyone.
He would extol the favors he received, even when they were
few and small. He never found fault with them. He never
criticized the food or drink that was prepared for him, nor did
he overly praise it. No one would stand against his anger when
matters of the Lord’s truth were opposed, until he had
triumphed, but he would never get angry for his own sake, nor
would he ever seek to win such an argument. He would gesture
with his whole palm, to point. When he was astonished, he

www.sunniconnect.com l 147

would make his palm face upwards. He used his hands
frequently as he spoke, and would strike his left palm with his
right thumb. When he would get angry, he would turn away and
avert his gaze, and when he was full of joy he would lower his
eyes. Most of his laughing was [no more than] smiling; when
he did laugh, it was not loud, and he would show his teeth a bit
like they were hailstones.”
Al-Hasan said, “I kept this report to myself, away from [my
brother] Al-Husain for a while, then I told it to him, but he had
already heard it and found out even more. He had asked our
father [Ali] about the way the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), was at home, when he went
out in his assemblies, and about his way of living.” Al-Hasan
left nothing of this out.
Al-Husain said, “I asked my father [Ali]t, about how the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) entered the house. He [Ali] said, “He always asked
permission to enter his home, from Allah, and those within.
When he was at home, he would divide his time into three parts:
one part for Allah, one for his family and one for himself. Then
he would divide his own portion between himself and the
people. His chosen companions would mostly share this time
with him, and they would convey his words to the common
people. He would hold nothing back from them, neither
knowledge or worldly things. It was his way to prefer the
people of excellence, according to their merit in religious
matters. Among the people there were those with a need, those
with two needs, and those with many needs. He would work
with them, and he would occupy them and the community in
general with that which would improve their situations.

www.sunniconnect.com l 148

This he would do by asking about them and their needs, and
informing them what they ought to do. He would say, ‘Let the
one who is present among you inform the one who is absent,
and bring to me the need of the one who is unable to tell me
himself. Truly, the one who informs a person of authority of
the need of one who is unable to convey it himself, Allah will
make firm his feet on the Day of Judgment.’ This was the kind
of topic mentioned in his presence, and he did not accept
anything else from anyone [he did not like meaningless
conversation and liked to talk about how to help people].”
Ali then said, in the hadeeth of Sufyan bin Wakee‘: “They
would come as scouts [seeking decisions or knowledge], and
they would not go on their way until they had found what they
sought, and then they would leave as guides and learned
people.”
I said [Husain to his father Ali], “Tell me about his going out
and how he acted outside.”
Ali said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), would hold his tongue except in matters
which concerned his companions. He would encourage
affection and concord between them and would say nothing to
alienate one from another. He honored the noblemen of every
people who would come to him and make them their leaders.
He would be wary around some people and on his guard against
them [especially nomads], but he would never withhold from
anyone his open-faced friendliness and fine personality. He
would ask his companions about their circumstances, and he
would ask people about what was going on amongst them. He
would approve of that which was good and advocate it, and he
would denounce that which was base and discourage it.

www.sunniconnect.com l 149

“Everything he did was in moderation, without excess or
contrariness. He was not thoughtless, out of fear that those who
came to him would become unmindful or weary. He was
prepared for every situation in this world and the next. He did
not fail to fulfill what was right, and he did not overstep his
authority in regards to those near him. The most meritorious
and excellent people to him were those whose advice was most
universal; the most significant of them to him were those most
beneficial to others, and the most helpful in helping others bear
their burdens.”
Then Al-Husain said, “Then I asked him [Ali] about his
gatherings and about what he did in them, and he said: “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), did not sit down or stand up without mentioning Allah,
nor did he reserve for himself fixed places among the people to
be seated, and he forbade others also to reserve places for
themselves [especially in mosques and public gatherings].
When he would go to visit a group, he would sit in the nearest
available spot, and ordered that others follow this practice. He
would give those seated near him his full share of attention in
such a way that no one would think others had been given
precedence over him.
Whenever someone he sat with would tell him of his needs, he
would bear with that person until that person left him. When
someone would ask him to solve a problem, he would not turn
him away without solving it for him, if possible, or saying a
comforting word or a prayer for its fulfillment. His cheerfulness
and open personality were felt by all the people, and he became
like a father to them. They came to have the right of mercy and
compassion from him, as they were close, like the relation of
parent and child, distinguished only by virtue and devotion to

www.sunniconnect.com l 150

Allah. And in another narrative, they became equals regarding
their rights in his eyes.
“Assemblies with him were gatherings of gentleness, dignified
conduct, modesty, patience, and trust. No voice would be
raised, nor would women be spoken of in a depraved way, nor
would people’s errors be mentioned. [This last item comes via
different narrations.] They inclined to each other in affection
born out of devotion to Allah, as humble people. In these
gatherings, the old were honored, the young were treated with
gentleness. They would come to the aid of the needy and would
have compassion for the stranger.”
And then I asked him [Ali] about the Messenger’s conduct
among his close associates and servants.
[Ali] said: “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), was unfailingly cheerful, easygoing by
nature, and mild mannered. He was neither crude nor harsh. He
was not a clamorous loudmouth, nor a repeater of obscenities.
He was not one to find fault in others, nor did he overly praise
them either. He was unconcerned about what he did not want,
and this did not bother him. He allowed his soul no portion of
three things – hypocrisy, acquisitiveness, and that which did
not concern him. He did not allow himself to engage in three
things regarding people – he would not criticize others, he
would not revile anyone, and he would not seek out others’
faults. He would speak of nothing unless he hoped a reward
from Allah for it.
When he would talk, the ones sitting with him would be so still
and quiet, you would imagine birds were sitting on their heads.
When he was silent, they would talk, but not quarrel in his
presence. When one of them would talk, they would all listen

www.sunniconnect.com l 151

attentively until he had finished. They would speak about a
subject that was brought up by the first to speak until they had
finished with it. He would laugh at what they laughed at, and
he would be amazed by what amazed them. He was patient with
the stranger who had roughness in his speech. He would say,
‘Whenever you see someone seeking to solve a problem, help
him out.’ He did not seek praise, except to be spoken of
appropriately. He would not interrupt another’s speech unless
it got excessive or too long, then he would end it or get up to
leave.”
[Al-Hasan continues in the words of his brother Al-Husain]. I
said [to Ali], “What was the silence of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) like?”
He said, “His silences were for four situations: forbearance,
caution, estimation, and contemplation. As for his estimation,
it was to take an impartial study of events and listen to the
people in order to be just. As for his contemplation, it was about
what was eternal and what was transitory. His forbearance was
part of his patience, he was not angered by that which was
provocative. His caution was for four reasons – taking good
speech or action into consideration so he might use it in an
exemplary way; abjuring the ugly and bad so it would be left
alone; exerting his judgment to improve the situation of his
community; [and] establishing ways to maintain the good state
of his community in regard to this world and the next.”
Narrated by ‘Uqbah bin al-Harith he said, “Abu Bakr prayed
al-Asr after the death of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) by a few nights, then he and Ali went out
walking and suddenly saw al-Hasan bin Ali [who] was playing
with the children. Then Abu Bakr lifted him on to his shoulders
and said, “Let my father be sacrificed for your sake, [you]

www.sunniconnect.com l 152

resemble the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and not Ali,” whilst Ali was laughing at them (May Allah
be pleased with him).”
Narrated by Abu Juhaifah, he said, “I saw the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and al-Hasan
bin Ali resembled him.”
Narrated by Ali(May Allah be pleased with him)who said, “AlHasan is the most resemblant of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) between his chest and
head and alHusain is the most resemblant of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the area
below that.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 153

Section: His manners and pure
characteristics
We mentioned his noble origin and ancestry, the purity of his
lineage and birth and Allah the Most High indeed said, “Allah
knows best with whom to place His Message” [Soorah alAn‘am: 124]
Narrated by Abu Hurairah, indeed the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I was sent
from the best of the generations of Adam’s children, generation
after generation till I was from the generation I am now in.”
In Saheeh Muslim from Wathilah bin al-Asqa‘, who said the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Indeed Allah chose Quraish from the children of
Isma‘eel and chose the children of Hashim from Quraish. And
he chose me from the children of Hashim.”
Allah (SWT) says:
“Noon. [These letters (Noon, etc.) are one of the miracles of
the Qur’ân, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their
meanings]. By the pen and what the (angels) write (in the
Records of men). You (O
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) are
not, by the Grace of your Lord, a madman.
And verily, for you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)) will be an endless reward. And verily,
you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)) are on an exalted standard of character.” [Soorah al
Qalam: 1-4]

www.sunniconnect.com l 154

Al-Awfi said narrating from Ibn Abbas regarding His
statement, The Most High: “And verily, you (O Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) are on an exalted
standard of character.” [Soorah al-Qalam: 4] It means, and
verily you are on a great religion and that is Islam. This is what
Mujahid, Ibn Malik, as-Suddi, ad-Dhahhak, Abdur- Rahman
bin Zaid bin Aslam mentioned and al- Atiyyah said, “On great
manners or conduct.”
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Muslim from the hadeeth of
Qatadah narrated from Zurarah bin Awfa, from Sa‘d bin
Hisham, he said, “I asked ‘Aishah the Mother of the Believers,
and said, ‘Inform me of the manners of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)’ so she said, “Do
you not read the Qur’an?” I said, ‘Indeed.’ Then she said, “His
manners were [in accordance with] the Qur’an.”
Narrated by al-Hasan al-Basri, he said, “‘Aishah was asked
about the manners of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), so she said, “His manners
were the Qur’an.”
The meaning of this is that indeed his manners – (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) – no matter what the Qur’an
commanded him with - he implemented it, and whatever it
forbade him he abstained from it. This is in accordance with
what Allah fashioned him upon, from a great natural sound
disposition that nobody has ever had nor shall have perfected
[manners] more than him. He legislated for him the great
religion that He never ordained for anyone before him and in
addition to that he is the Seal of the Prophets, so there shall be
no Messenger or Prophet after him. He possessed shyness,
generosity, courage, forbearance, remission, mercy and the rest

www.sunniconnect.com l 155

of the perfect mannerisms that cannot be defined or described
[completely].
Narrated by Abdullah bin az-Zubair regarding the statement of
the Most High: “Show forgiveness, enjoin what is good, and
turn away from the foolish (i.e. don’t punish them)” [Soorah alA‘raf: 199] He said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was commanded to take
forgiveness from the manners of the people.”
Narrated by al-Bara’ bin Azib, he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had the most
handsome face of the people and was the best of the people in
manners.”Malik said [narrating] from az-Zuhri, from Urwah,
from ‘Aishah, she said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was not given a choice
between two matters except that he chose the easiest of them as
long as it was not a sin, and if it was a sin he was the most
distant of people from it. He never sought revenge for himself
except if a boundary of Allah was violated then he would seek
revenge for Allah’s sake.”
Narrated by ‘Aishah, she said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) never hit anyone with his
hand, not a slave nor a woman nor a servant unless he was
fighting Jihad in the way of Allah. And nobody ever wronged
him and then he took revenge from him except if a boundary
from the boundaries of Allah was violated, then he would take
revenge for the sake of Allah the Great and the Almighty.”
Narrated by Abu Ishaq [he said], “I heard Abu Abdullah alJadali say, “I heard ‘Aishah and asked her about the manners
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), so she said, “He was not foul in speech nor would

www.sunniconnect.com l 156

he commit foul acts, nor was he one to shout in the markets,
and he would not follow a wrongdoing with a wrongdoing
rather he would forgive and pardon – or he said – pardon and
forgive.”
Narrated by Abdullah bin ‘Amr he said, “Indeed the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) is
described in the Tawrat just as he is described in the Qur’an,
“O Prophet (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him))! Verily, We have sent you as witness, and a bearer
of glad tidings, and a warner” [Soorah al-Ahzab: 45], and a
refuge for the illiterate. You are my slave and Messenger. I
named you the Mutawakkil [one who relies on his Lord] not
harsh or severe, nor one who shouts in the markets. And one
who does not reward a wrong doing with a [another] wrong
doing, however he forgives and pardons. And he [his Lord] will
not take him until he straightens with him the crooked path
[correct the distorted religion] until they say, “There is no true
deity that deserves to be worshipped but Allah.” And that he
opens blind eyes, deaf ears and sealed hearts.”
Narrated by Abu Sa‘eed, who said, “The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was more shy than a virgin
in her separate room.”And when he disliked something it
would be known by his facial expression.
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, who said, “The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was not
abusive, nor a curser and nor foul [in speech] and he would say
to one of us when rebuking, “What is wrong with him, may his
forehead be dusty [i.e. an invocation for him so that he is
enabled to make a lot of prostrations].”

www.sunniconnect.com l 157

Narrated by Anas, who said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had the most handsome
face, he was from the most generous of people and was from
the most courageous of the people. Once the people of Madinah
got terrified at night, so they went in the direction of the noise
[that terrified them]. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) met them on the way back as
he had beat them to the [source of] noise. He was riding an
unsaddled horse belonging to Abu Talhah and a sword was
hanging out by his neck, and he was saying, “Do not be afraid.
Do not be afraid. I found it very fast – or he said – this horse is
very fast.”He [sub narrator] said, “It was a slow horse.”
Narrated by Ali bin Abu Talib, he said, “When it was the Battle
of Badr we were safe from the idolaters with the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). And he was
the most severe person [in battle].”
It has been mentioned previously in the Battle of Hawazin, that
when the majority of his Companions fled on that day, he – may
peace be upon him – stayed firm on his mule whilst
commending his noble name, saying, “I am the Prophet, no lie.
I am the son of Abdul- Muttalib.”And despite that he would
ride the mule towards the enemy and this is the epitome of great
courage and complete reliance [on Allah] - may the prayers of
Allah and peace be upon him.
In Saheeh Muslim narrated from Anas, he said, “When the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) arrived in Madinah Abu Talhah took me by the hand to
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), then he said, “O Messenger of Allah, indeed Anas is a
young active boy, so let him serve you.” So I served him on
journey and Hadar [when he was stationed in one place, the

www.sunniconnect.com l 158

opposite state of journey]. By Allah, he never said to me about
a matter, “Why did you do this like so?” Nor to a matter I did
not perform, “Why did not you do this like so ?”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “I served the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) for nine years and
I do not remember him ever saying, “Why did you do such and
such?”And he did not ever rebuke me over anything.”
Narrated by Anas also, who said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was the best of the
people in mannerisms. One day he sent me for a need [i.e., on
an errand], so I said, ‘By Allah I won’t go’. While within me, I
wanted to perform that which the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) ordered me with. So I exited to pass by
some children playing in the market, then suddenly the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) grabbed hold of my neck from behind me. I looked at him
whilst he was laughing then he said, “O Unais [lessened version
of the name Anas], did you go to where I ordered you?” I said,
‘Yes, I am going O Messenger of Allah’. By Allah I served him
for nine years, I do not remember him saying about a matter I
performed, “Why did you do such and such?” or a matter that I
left, “If only you had done such and such.”
He said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) was the most well mannered of people and
I had a brother called Abu Umair, - he [the sub-narrator] said,
“I thought he said weaning [young child]” - so when the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) came and saw him he said, “O Abu Umair, what did the
small Nughayr [bird] do [for you].” [The subnarrator said:] It
was a serin that he used to play with.

www.sunniconnect.com l 159

[Anas] He said, “Sometimes the time of prayer would enter
when he was in our house and then [he would] order that the
rug under him was brushed then water would be sprinkled on
it, thereafter the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) would stand and we would stand behind
then he would lead us in prayer.” [The sub- narrator added] He
said, “And their rug was from the leaves of date palm trees.”
Narrated by Ibn Abbas, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was the most
generous of people, and he would be most generous in
Ramadan when Jibreel would meet him and teach him the
Qur’an. Indeed, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) was more generous than the strong
uncontrollable wind [in readiness to give charity].”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said, “If something [disliked] from a
man reached the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), he would not say, “What is wrong with so and so?”
However, he would say, “What is wrong with the people they
say such and such.”
It has been affirmed in the Saheeh that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Nobody
should tell me anything [disliked] about anyone. I prefer to
meet you with a sound heart.”
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, he said, “I was walking with the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he was
wearing a cloak with a thick hem. Then a Bedouin came to him
and pulled his cloak roughly and I looked at the base of the
Messenger of Allah’s shoulder and saw that it had left a mark
from the harshness of the tugging. Then he said, “O
Muhammad, order for me some of Allah’s wealth that is with

www.sunniconnect.com l 160

you.”Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) turned to him, he smiled and commanded
that he should be given [money],” reported by the two Imams
from the hadeeth of Malik.
Narrated by Abu Hurairah, he said, “We were with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in the mosque, then when we stood with him a Bedouin
came and said, “Give me [money/provision], O Muhammad.”
So he said, “No, and ask forgiveness from Allah.” So he pulled
him by his belt [in a narration, his hem] and it left a mark on
him. They [the people] wanted to kill him, then he said, “Leave
him.”Then he gave him, his oath used to be, “No, and ask
forgiveness from Allah.”
Narrated by Zaid bin Arqam, he said, “A man from the Ansar
would enter upon the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and he would trust him. [Once] He tied
a knot [for the purpose of sorcery] and threw it in a well, then
that overwhelmed the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). Then two angels came to visit him and
told him that so and so had tied a knot for him and it was in
such and such well. The well had become yellow due to the
severity of the knot. Then the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) went to the well and extracted the knot. He
found that the water had turned yellow. Thereafter he opened
the knot then the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) slept. For indeed I saw the man enter upon the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) after that
and I did not see him in the presence of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) till he died.
I say: it is well known in the Saheeh that the Jew Labeed bin alA‘sam was the one who performed magic on the Prophet

www.sunniconnect.com l 161

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with a comb, the
hair gathered on it in the outer skin of the pollen of the male
date palm underneath the lid of the Dhi ’Arwan well. The state
remained the same for approximately 6 months [under the
influence of magic] until Allah revealed the two Soorahs for
protection [al-Falaq and an-Nas]. It has been said that the
verses of the two chapters amount to 11 verses and the knot
whose magic he was victim to, consisted of 11 knots and we
have mentioned that in sufficient detail in our book Tafseer.
And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, he said, “I never saw a man
embrace the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and then [saw him – peace be upon him) move
his head until that man moved his head [away from the other].
And I never saw a man take hold of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) then [saw him] let
go until the man let go of his hand.” Narrated only by Abu
Dawood.
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, he said, “There was a young slave
girl from the slave girls of the people of Madinah that used to
come and take the hand of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). He would not remove his
hand from hers until she took him to where she willed.”
Narrated by Ibn Majah from the hadeeth of Shu‘bah.
Narrated by Anas also, he said, “A woman who had mental
disorientation said, “O Messenger of Allah, I have a need.” So
he said, “O mother of so and so, see which path you wish to
take [in order that I solve your need]. Then he went with her
and spoke to her in seclusion until she had obtained her need.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 162

It has been affirmed from Abu Hurairah, who said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) never criticized food, if he liked it he ate it
and if not, he left it.”
Narrated by Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri, “When the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would sit he
would sit with his hands wrapped round his shins to his chest.”
Narrated by Abdullah bin Hassan al-‘Anbari, he said, “Both my
grandmothers, Safiyyah and Duhaibah daughters of ‘Ulaibah –
Moosa [the sub narrator] added, “the daughter of Harmalah.”
And they were the stepdaughters of Qailah bint Makhramah
who was the grandmother of their father. She told them that she
saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) when he was sitting with his hands wrapped around
his shins to his chest. Then when I saw the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the state of
humbleness in his sitting, I feared him.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, “Indeed the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would talk with words
such that if one was to enumerate them he would have been
able to [due to their order and clarity].”
And also from ‘Aishah, she said, “Did not Abu so and so
surprise you? He came and sat by my house and mentioned
hadeeth[s] from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) making me hear that [due to the loudness
of his voice] whilst I was praying Nafilah. He left before I
finished my Nafilah and if I had reached him I would have
replied to him [saying] that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) never used to relate hadeeth
as you do [in one tone].”

www.sunniconnect.com l 163

Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said, “The Prophet’s speech used to
have breaks in it - everyone would understand it. He never used
to recite with a continuous tone.”
Narrated by Ibn Umar, he said, “In the speech of the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was
intonation or [he said] fluidity.”
Narrated by Anas he said, “When the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would mention a
word [of importance] he would repeat it three times. And when
he gave Salaam to a people he gave Salaam thrice.”
Narrated by Thumamah bin Anas, he said, “When Anas spoke
he repeated himself three times and he said that when the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would
speak he would repeat himself thrice, it was his (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) guidance in speech. And he
used to seek permission to enter [a dwelling] three times.”
In the Saheeh, he said, “I have been given eloquent speech and
speech has been abbreviated for me [i.e. shortened speech].”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah, he said, “I heard the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “I have
been sent with eloquent speech and have been given victory
with awe. And whilst I was asleep I was given the keys to the
bounties of the earth in my hand.”
It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from ‘A’ishah, she said,
“I never saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) laugh fully to the extent that I could see his
teeth, he would only smile.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 164

Narrated by Abdullah bin al-Harith bin Jaz’, he said, “I never
saw anyone smile more than the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
And Muslim said, “Narrated by Simak bin Harb, “I said to Jabir
bin Samurah, did you used to sit with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?” He said, “Yes,
many a times he would not move from the place of prayer that
he prayed Fajr in until the sun rose, then when it rose he left.
And they [Companions] used to talk about what they did in
Jahiliyyah and they would laugh and he would smile.”

His Generosity
What has been narrated in the two Saheehs from Ibn Abbas, he
said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was the most generous of people, and he would
be most generous in Ramadan when Jibreel would meet him
and teach him the Qur’an. Indeed, The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was more generous
than the strong uncontrollable wind [in readiness to give
charity]. This similitude is the epitome of eloquence in making
a similitude with the uncontrollable wind in its generality and
limitless abundance.
In the two Saheehs from Jabir bin Abdullah, he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was never asked anything and then replied, “No.””
Narrated by Anas, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was not asked for anything
upon Islam except that he gave it to him. A man came to him
and asked him, so he ordered for [as] many sheep [as filled]
between two mountains from the sheep of Zakat. Then he

www.sunniconnect.com l 165

returned to his people and said, “O my people, embrace Islam
for indeed Muhammad gives in the manner of someone who
doesn’t fear poverty.”
And from him – may Allah reward him – he said, “A man asked
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) so he
gave him some sheep [such that they filled the space] between
two mountains. Then he came to his people and said, “O my
people embrace Islam, for by Allah Muhammad gives in the
way of the one who does not fear poverty.” Indeed a man would
come to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) not wanting anything but worldly [matters], then
he would not reach the evening until his religion would be more
beloved and dear to him than the world and that which is in
it.”
And this giving [in charity] indeed pleases the hearts of those
with weak hearts [faith] in [staying on] Islam and encourages
others to enter into Islam, just as he did in the Battle of Hunain
when he distributed the abundant wealth from camels, sheep
and silver among those who were al-Mu’allafatu Quloobuhum
[bringing hearts together for Islam]. Despite that he did not give
the Ansar and the majority of the Muhajiroon anything. Rather,
he distributed [the spoils] amongst those whose hearts he
wanted to bring upon Islam and left them because of the
richness and goodness that was [already] in their hearts.
When condoling whoever questioned him about the wisdom
behind this distribution, and answering those who rebuked him
from a group of the Ansar, he said, “Are you not satisfied that
the people leave with sheep and camel and that you leave with
the Messenger of Allah, returning with him to your homes?”
They said, “We are satisfied, O Messenger of Allah.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 166

Similarly, he gave his uncle al-Abbas after he embraced Islam
when the fortune from Bahrain came to him and was placed in
front of him in the mosque. Al-Abbas came to him and said, “O
Messenger of Allah give me [from the fortune] because I
redeemed myself in the Battle of Badr and I redeemed ‘Aqeel
[he paid for his and ‘Aqeel’s freedom], so he said, “Take.”
Then he removed his thawb and began to place some of the
fortune in it then he stood up to carry it but he couldn’t, then he
said to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him), “Lift it on my back.” He said, “I will not do so.”
So [al-Abbas] said, “Order some of them to lift it on my back.”
So he said, “No.” So he removed something from it and still
couldn’t carry it. Then he asked him to lift it or tell some of
them to lift it yet he did not, so he removed some of it and
carried the rest. And he left the mosque carrying it whilst the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) watched him in amazement at his zeal.”
I say: al-Abbas was a tall, strong nobleman, so the least of what
he could carry would have been close to 40,000 And Allah
(SWT) knows best. Al-Bukhari mentioned it in his Saheeh in
some places in suspended form [without mentioning the
transmitter] in the form of certainty [that it is a Saheeh
hadeeth].
And this is mentioned from the virtues of al-Abbas because of
His statement the Most High: “O Prophet! Say to the captives
that are in your hands: “If Allah knows any good in your hearts,
He will give you something better than what has been taken
from you, and He will forgive you, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving,
Most Merciful” [Soorah al-Anfal: 70]
It has preceded from Anas bin Malik, his (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) servant that he said, “The Messenger of

www.sunniconnect.com l 167

Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was the most
generous of people and the most courageous of them....”And
how could it not be so, when he is the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and formed with
the most perfect of attributes, firm in belief in what is in Allah’s
hands the Great and the Almighty, the one to whom Allah
revealed His perfected great book: “And what is the matter with
you that you spend not in the Cause of Allah? And to Allah
belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth” [Soorah alHadeed: 10]
And He said, the Most High: “And whatsoever you spend of
anything (in Allah’s Cause), He will replace it. And He is the
Best of providers.” [Soorah Saba’: 39]
He is the one who said to his Mu’aththin Bilal and he is the
truthful and his truthfulness is attested in promise and speech,
“Spend O Bilal, and do not fear diminution from the Possessor
of the Throne
[Allah].”
He (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) is the one who
said, “There is not a day that the slaves [mankind] wake in the
morning except that two angels descend, one of them says, “O
Allah give the one who spends a replacement [reward for
charity].”And the other says, “O Allah give the miser loss.”
And in the other hadeeth, he said to ‘A’ishah, “Do not gather
your wealth and be miserly with it lest Allah is miserly with
you. And do not prevent [anyone] from what you have lest
Allah will prevent you [from what he has].”
In the Saheeh he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
said, “Allah the Great and the Almighty says: “Spend O son of
Adam, I will spend on you.”And how couldn’t he be the most

www.sunniconnect.com l 168

generous of the people when there was nobody who had greater
reliance [on Allah] than him, with firm belief in Allah’s
provision and help, the one who sought aid from his Lord in all
of his affairs? He was - before his Prophethood, after it and
before his migration - a source of refuge for the poor, widows,
orphans, the weak and the poor as mentioned previously in the
famous poem by his uncle Abu Talib.

His Humility
Narrated by Anas, “A man said to the Messenger of Allah, “O
master and the son of our master. O, the best of us and the son
of the best of us.” So the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “O people, say what you
have to say, do not allow the Shaitan fascinate you. I am
Muhammad bin Abdullah, the Slave of Allah and his
Messenger. By Allah I do not like that you raise me above the
station that Allah has raised me.”
In Saheeh Muslim from ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, he said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Do not exaggerate your praise of me like the
Christians exaggerated the praise of ‘Eesa [Jesus] the son of
Maryam, for I am only the Slave of Allah and his Messenger.”
Narrated by al-Aswad, he said, “I said to ‘A’ishah, “What did
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) do for his family?” She said, “He was in the service of his
family, then when the time for prayer entered he left for the
prayer.”
Narrated by ‘Urwah and Hisham bin ‘Urwah from his father,
he said, “A man asked ‘A’ishah, “Did the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) work in the house?

www.sunniconnect.com l 169

She said, “Yes, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) used to repair his sandals, sew his thawb
and work in the house just as any of you work in the house.”
Narrated by ‘Amrah, she said, “I said to ‘A’ishah, how was the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) with his family?” She said, “He was the softest of people,
the most noble of them and he was someone who was cheerful
and smiling.”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) would make much
remembrance of Allah, minimize idle speech, ride a donkey,
wear wool and respond to the invitations of the kings. I indeed
saw him in the Battle of Khaibar on a donkey, its rein was of
fiber.”
Narrated by Abdullah bin Abu ’Awfa, he said, “The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would
make much remembrance of Allah, minimize idle speech,
lengthen the prayer, shorten the Khutbah, he was not too
haughty to [prevent him] walk with a slave, nor the widows in
order that he serves their needs.”
Narrated by Abu Moosa, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would ride the
donkey, wear wool [clothing], milk the sheep and he would
come to honor the guest.”
Narrated by Sahl Mawla Ghunaimah - he was a Christian from
the people of Maris and he was in the house of his uncle - and
he said, “Today I read from the scripture [Bible] of my uncle
and I saw in it a page without lines and I saw on it the
description of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be

www.sunniconnect.com l 170

upon him): “Not tall nor short, white [complexion] with two
plaits, between his shoulders is the seal [of the Prophets], he
sits much in a state of Ihtiba’, he does not accept charity, he
rides the donkey and camel, he milks sheep, wears a stitched
shirt and whoever does that is free from arrogance, he is from
the descendants of Isma‘eel and his name is Ahmad.” When my
uncle came and saw that I read it, he hit me and said why did
you open this?” I said, “In it is the description of Ahmad.” So
he said, “He hasn’t arrived yet.”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “I never saw anyone who was more
merciful to children than the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
And al-Bukhari narrated from Anas, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) passed by some
children playing and gave Salaam to them.”

His Humor
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, “A man came to the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and sought a ride.
Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “We are going to carry you on the young of a
she camel.” So he said, “O Messenger of Allah what shall I do
with a young of a she camel?” Then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “And does
the camel give birth to other than she camels?.”
Narrated by ‘Awf bin Malik al-Ashja‘i, he said, “I came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in the Battle of Tabook when he was in a tent made from
leather, so I gave the Salaam, he replied and said, “Enter.” I

www.sunniconnect.com l 171

said, “All of me O Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Entirely,”
so I entered.”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me, “O, the one who
has two ears.”
Also narrated by him [Anas](May Allah be pleased with him),
“A man from the Bedouins called Zahir used to give the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) a gift from
the desert and the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) would inform him when he wanted to exit. Then the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Zahir is our [man] desert and we are his [men] urban
area. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) used to love him and he was not a handsome man.
Once the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) came to him when he was selling his things and
hugged him from behind when he could not see him. Then the
man said, “Let go of me, who is this?”
Then he turned and recognized the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and didn’t mind that his back
was pressed against the chest of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he knew it was him. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) began to say, “Who will buy this slave?” So he said, “O
Messenger of Allah, by Allah so you find me unsalable.”Then
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “However with Allah you are not unsalable,” – or he
said – “However with Allah you are expensive.”
Also from this type [of humor] is what al-Bukhari narrated in
his Saheeh, “A man called Abdullah, nicknamed al-Himar

www.sunniconnect.com l 172

(donkey) used to make the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) laugh and he was brought summoned [for
punishment] for drinking [alcohol] so he was summoned on
one day then a man said, “May Allah curse him! How often it
is that he is summoned [for punishment]. Then the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Do
not curse him because he loves Allah and his Messenger.”
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, “The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was on a journey and the
camel rider was escorting his wives and his wives were in front
of him so he said, “O Anjashah, woe be unto you! Be careful
with the glass vessels.”The meaning of al-Qawareer, is women,
and it was a word of jest - may the prayers of Allah and his
peace be upon him forever till the Day of Judgment.
Also from his noble manners, jesting and good manners is his
listening to the hadeeth of Umm Zar‘ from ‘Aishah till its
completion. And it is mentioned in some of the narrations that
he is the one who informed ‘Aishah.
Narrated by al-Hasan, he said, “An old woman came to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said,
“O Messenger of Allah pray for me that Allah enters me into
paradise. He said, “O Mother of so and so, no old woman shall
enter paradise.” Then the old woman left crying, so he said,
“Inform her that she won’t enter when she is old because Allah
the Most High said: “Verily, We have created them (maidens)
of special creation. And made them virgins. Loving (their
husbands only), equal in age.” [Soorah al-Waqi‘ah: 35-37]
Narrated by Abu Hurairah, who said, “They said, O Messenger
of Allah you joke with us.” He said, “I only tell the truth.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 173

His abstinence (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and his disregard of this world,
his focus, effort and action for the world of
eternity
The Most High says:
“And strain not your eyes in longing for the things We have
given for enjoyment to various groups of them (polytheists
and disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah), the splendor of the
life of this world that We may test them thereby. But the
provision (good reward in the Hereafter) of your Lord is
better and more lasting.” [Soorah Taha: 131]
Allah the Most High says:
“And keep yourself (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)) patiently with those who call on their Lord
(i.e. your companions who remember their Lord with
glorification, praising in prayers, and other righteous deeds)
morning and afternoon, seeking His Face; and let not your eyes
overlook them, desiring the pomp and glitter of the life of the
world; and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless
of Our Remembrance, and who allows his own lusts, and whose
affair (deeds) has been lost.” Allah the Most High says:
“ Therefore withdraw (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him)) from him who turns away from Our
Reminder (this Qur’an) and desires nothing but the life of
this world. That is what they could reach of knowledge.”
[Soorah an-Najm: 29, 30]
He (SWT) says:

www.sunniconnect.com l 174

“And indeed, We have bestowed upon you seven of AlMathani (the seven repeatedly recited Verses), (i.e.
Soorat Al-Fatihah) and the Grand Qur’an. Look not with your
eyes ambitiously at what We have bestowed on certain classes
of them (the disbelievers), nor grieve over them. And lower
your wings for the believers (be courteous to the fellowbelievers)” [Soorah Al- Hijr 15:87, 88].
And the verses in this respect are many.
Ibn Abbas would narrate, “Allah sent one of the angels to his
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with
Jibreel, and the angel said to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), “Allah gives you the choice
either to become a Prophet slave or a Prophet king.” So the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) turned to Jibreel like the one who seeks counsel then
Jibreel indicated to him that he should be humble. Thereafter
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Rather, I shall be a Prophet slave.” From those
words onwards, he never ate leaning back until he met Allah
the Great and the Almighty.
It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from the hadeeth of Ibn
Abbas, from Umar bin al-Khattab in the hadeeth of the ’Eela’
[type of divorce] of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) from his wives that he would
not have intimate relations with his wives for a month. He
secluded himself from them in a single room, and when Umar
entered upon him in that room he saw that there wasn’t
anything therein except for a pile of prickly leaves and some
leather skin hung up and a heap of wheat whilst he was lying
on a knitted rug that had left an impression on his side.

www.sunniconnect.com l 175

On seeing this, Umar began to cry then he [the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)] said, “What
is wrong with you?” So I said, “O Messenger of Allah, you are
the best of Allah’s creation and Kisra and Qaisar are in [the
bliss] the condition that they are in.” Then he sat up with a
reddened face and said, “Are you in a state of doubt, O Ibn alKhattab?” Thereafter he said, “They are a people who have had
their pleasures/enjoyment brought forward for their worldly
abode.”
In the narration of Muslim, “Are you not satisfied that they have
the worldly life and for us is the Hereafter?” So I said, “Indeed,
O Messenger of Allah.” He said, “So praise Allah the Great and
the Almighty.” Then when a month passed by Allah the Great
and the Almighty commanded him to inform his wives and
revealed to him his statement:
“O Prophet (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him))! Say to your wives: If you desire the life of this world,
and its glitter, Then come! I will make a provision for you and
set you free in a handsome manner (divorce).But if you desire
Allah and His Messenger, and the home of the Hereafter, then
verily, Allah has prepared for the good-doers amongst you an
enormous reward.” [Soorah al- Ahzab 33: 28, 29].
And we mentioned this in detail in our book Tafseer. So he
began with ‘A’ishah and said to her, “I am going to mention a
matter to you, so do not rush until you ask your parents’
permission.” And he read to her this verse. She said, “I said,
“Shall I ask my parents’ permission in this? For indeed I choose
Allah and his Messenger and the abode of the Hereafter.” And
the rest of his wives also said the same - may Allah be pleased
with them.

www.sunniconnect.com l 176

Narrated by Ibn Mas‘ood, he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) lay on a rug and
the rug left a mark on his skin. Then I began to rub it and said,
“May my father and mother be sacrificed for you! Would you
not give me permission so we can spread something that will
protect you from that you can lie on?” He said, “My example
in this world is that of a traveler that took rest under the shade
of a tree and then went and left it.”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “If I had the amount of
Uhud in gold it would not please me that three nights pass by
me and I have some of it left over, unless I was to keep it for a
debt.”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “O Allah, the
provision of the family of Muhammad, is basic food needs.”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “O Allah let me live the life of a
poor person, cause me to die as a poor person and raise me with
the poor people on the Day of Judgment.” Then ‘A’ishah said,
“Why, O Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Indeed they enter
Paradise before the rich by [the period of] 40 autumns. O
‘A’ishah, do not turn the poor person away even [if you give]
a date stone. O ‘A’ishah, love the poor and bring them close,
then Allah will bring you near on the Day of Judgment.”
Narrated by Sahl bin Sa‘d, he was asked, “Did the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) see anNaqiyy with his eyes, i.e., al-Huwwara [a type of bread]. Then
he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) did not see an-Naqiyy with his eyes until
he met Allah the Great and the Almighty.” Then he was asked,

www.sunniconnect.com l 177

“Did you have sieves in the era of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?” He said, “We
didn’t have sieves.”Then he was asked, “So what do you do
with wheat?”He said, “We would blow it, some of it would be
blown away.”
Narrated by Abu Umamah, he said, “Even a loaf of wheat bread
would not remain in the household of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).”
Narrated by Abu Hazim, he said, “I saw Abu Hurairah point
with his finger many times, “By the One in Whose hand is the
soul of Abu Hurairah, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and his family did not eat to their fill for
three consecutive days from wheat bread until he left this
world.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said the household of Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) never ate to their
fill of wheat bread since they arrived in Madinah for three
consecutive days till he left on his path [i.e. died].”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said, “We used to bring out al-Kura‘
[thin shin bone with little meat] after 15 days to eat.” I asked,
“Why did you do that?” So she laughed and said, “The family
of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
were never full from wheat bread three consecutive days until
he met Allah the Great and the Almighty.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah also, she said, “A month would pass by
the family of the Prophet without them lighting a fire, [we had]
nothing but dates and water unless we were given meat.”
And in the two Saheehs, from ‘A’ishah she said, “A month
would pass by us, the family of Muhammad (Peace and
www.sunniconnect.com l 178

Blessings of Allah be upon him), then another month and then
another month without us lighting a fire. We only had the two
black [sources]: dates and water, except that the dwellers
surrounding us from the Ansar would send to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) the milk of
their sheep. So he would drink and give us some from that
milk.”
Narrated by ‘A’ishah, she said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) did not satisfy his
hunger from wheat bread for two consecutive days till he was
taken [died].”
‘A’ishah said, “The family of Abu Bakr sent us a sheep’s leg at
night, then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) held and I cut, or I held and I cut.” Then
the one who she informed said, “Without a lamp?” She said, “If
we had a lamp we would have used it as soup [i.e. the fat or oil
for the lamp]. A month would pass by the family of Muhammad
without them baking bread or cooking a pot.”
Narrated by Anas he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to blow in the drink thrice
and say, “It quenches better and is safer and more appropriate.”
Al-Bukhari narrated from the hadeeth of Qatadah from Anas,
he said, “I have not known that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ever saw a thin well-baked
bread till he died, and he never saw a roasted sheep with his
eyes.”
In another narration by him [al-Bukhari] also, “The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) did not
eat on a table or a small bowl, nor was thin well-baked bread,

www.sunniconnect.com l 179

baked for him.” So I said to Anas, “Then what did they used to
eat on?” He said,” On Sufar [sheets placed on the floor].”
Also [narrated] by him from Anas, “[Anas] walked to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) with wheat bread and oil of changing scent. He had
redeemed his shield to a Jew in return for some wheat for his
family and I heard him on one day say, “There has never been
a Sa‘
[measurement approx. just over 2 kg] of dates nor a Sa‘ of
wheat with the family of Muhammad.” Narrated by Anas,
“The Messenger of Allah did not have lunch and dinner of
bread and meat except in a gathering of people [i.e. he did not
satisfy his hunger eating with many people].”
Narrated by an-Nu‘man bin Basheer, he said, “I heard Umar
bin al-Khattab give a speech, he mentioned what Allah granted
for the people. He said, “Indeed I saw the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) experience pangs
from hunger. He could not [even] find the amount of poor
quality dates to fill his stomach.”
In the story of Abu’l-Haitham bin at-Tayyihan, “Abu Bakr and
Umar came out [from their houses] owing to hunger and whilst
they were in that state the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) came out, then said, “What
causes you to come out?” They said, “Hunger.” Then he said,
“By the One in Whose hand is my soul, indeed that which
caused you to come out, caused me to come out.” Then they
went to Abu’l-Haitham bin at- Tayyihan’s garden then he gave
them fresh dates and sacrificed a sheep for them. Then they ate
and drank cold water. And the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “This is from the
pleasures that you will be asked about.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 180

It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from ‘A’ishah that she
was asked about the mattress of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), so she said, “It was from
leather stuffed with palm tree fiber.”
Narrated by Hakeem bin Hizam, he said, “I went to Yemen
and bought the cloak of Dhu Yazan [king of Yemen] and
granted it to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) at the time when there was an agreement between
him and the Quraish, so he said, “I do not accept the gift of an
idolater.” He rejected it, then I offered it for sale and he
bought it. Then he wore it and came out to his Companions
wearing it and I never saw a thing on another better than him
in it [cloak]. I couldn’t control myself and said,
“The leaders don’t look with grace
After it has become clearly manifest from Ghurrah and
Hujool [white patches on horses’ forehead and legs]
When they compare him with majesty he overcomes them.
With the drainage of water out of a full bucket.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) heard it and turned to me smiling then he entered and
clothed Usamah bin Zaid with it.”
Narrated by Umm Salamah, she said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) entered upon us
with a reddened face, I thought that was from illness or pain.
So I said, “O Messenger of Allah, I see you have a reddened
face, is that from illness?” He said, “No, however the seven
Dinars that came to us yesterday, a day has passed and we have

www.sunniconnect.com l 181

not spent it [for Allah’s sake], I forgot it in the side of the
mattress.”
Narrated by Abu Umamah bin Sahl, he said, “Urwah and I
entered upon ‘Aishah one day, she said, “Only if you were to
see the Prophet of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on one day during his illness. He had six Dinars with me
- Moosa [sub narrator] said, “seven,” – then the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) commanded
me to distribute it. The illness of the Prophet of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) distracted me till Allah
the Great and the Almighty cured him. Then he asked me about
it and said, “What happened with the six?” – the sub narrator
said, “or seven.” I [‘Aishah] said, “No, by Allah your illness
distracted me from it.” She said, “Then he asked for it and
placed it in his hand and said, “What would the Prophet of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) think if he
met Allah and this was with him.”
Narrated by Anas, he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) would not save anything for
the next day.”And this hadeeth is in the Saheeh.”
The meaning is that he wouldn’t save anything for tomorrow
that deteriorates quickly like foods and similar items because
of what has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from Umar, that
he said, “The fortunes of Banu an-Nadeer [a Jewish tribe] is
from what Allah gave to his Messenger (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) which the Muslims had not rushed
towards [in battle with] any horses or camels. He would give
the year’s amount of expenses to his wives and then spend the
rest on cavalry and weapons as preparation for Jihad in the way
of Allah.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 182

Imam Ahmad’s narration supports what we have mentioned.
Narrated by Abu Sa‘eed from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him), he said, “How can I enjoy when the one
who possesses the horn has put the horn [trumpet] to his mouth
and has his forehead leaned forward and listens attentively,
waiting till when he is commanded [to blow in it]?” The
Muslims said, “O Messenger of Allah, what shall we say?” He
said, “Say Allah is sufficient for us and the best to rely on, upon
Allah we rely.”
Narrated by Khabbab regarding His statement the Most High:
“And turn not away those who invoke their Lord, morning and
afternoon seeking His Face, till his statement, and thus become
of the Zalimoon (unjust).” [Soorah al-An‘am: 52]
Al-Aqra‘ bin Habis at-Tameemi and Uyaina bin Hisn al-Fazari
and found the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) with Suhaib, Bilal, Ammar and Khabbab
sitting in the company of some of the weak ones from the
believers. When they saw them around the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) they looked down
on them. Then they came and secluded themselves with him
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), and said, “We
want you to organize such an assembly that the Arabs can see
our virtue, because delegations of the Arabs come to you and
we feel ashamed that they see us with these slaves. So we have
come to you in order that you turn them away and when we are
done you can sit with them if you want to.” He (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Yes.” They said, “So
write a note for us against you.”
He said [ the narrator], “Then he (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) asked for a book or paper and called upon Ali to

www.sunniconnect.com l 183

write whilst we were sitting in a corner, then Jibreel (Peace be
upon him) descended and said, “And turn not away those who
invoke their Lord, morning and afternoon seeking His Face.
You are accountable for them in nothing, and they are
accountable for you in nothing, that you may turn them away,
and thus become of the Zalimoon (unjust). [Soorah al-An‘am:
52]
Then He mentioned al-Aqra‘ bin Habis and Uyaina bin Hisn:
“Thus We have tried some of them with others, that they might
say: “Is it these (poor believers) that Allah has favored from
amongst us?” Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?
[Soorah al-An‘am: 53]
Then He said, “When those who believe in Our Ayat (proofs,
evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) come to you,
say: “Salamun ‘Alaikum” (peace be on you); your Lord has
written Mercy for Himself” [Soorah al-An‘am: 54]
He said [the narrator], “Thereafter we sat close to him till our
knees were on his knees, then the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) sat with us and if he
wanted to leave he stood and left us, then Allah the Great and
the Almighty revealed: “And keep yourself (O Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) patiently with
those who call on their Lord (i.e. your companions who
remember their Lord with glorification, praising in prayers,
etc., and other righteous deeds, etc.) morning and afternoon,
seeking His Face, and let not your eyes overlook them [Soorah
alKahf: 28]
“And don’t sit with the rich/noble, desiring the pomp and
glitter of the life of the world; and obey not him whose heart
We have made heedless of Our Remembrance, - i.e. Uyainah

www.sunniconnect.com l 184

and al-Aqra‘ - one who follows his own lusts and whose affair
(deeds) has been lost.” [Soorah al-Kahf: 28]
The Prophet said, “Destruction” i.e. the affair of Uyainah and
al-Aqra‘, then he [Allah] set forth for them the parable of two
men and the parable of worldly life. Khabbab said, “We used
to sit with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and when we reached the time he would
leave or stand we stood and left him so he could leave.”
And Imam Ahmad, Abu Dawood and Tirmidhi narrated from
Anas [that] he said, “There wasn’t a person more beloved to me
than the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him). And when they [the Companions] would see him
they wouldn’t stand due to their knowledge of his dislike of
that.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 185

Chapter
Concerning his worship (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) and his effort in that
‘A’ishah said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) used to fast till we said, he does not eat
[he fasts everyday]. And he would eat till we said, he does not
fast. And [sometimes] you wouldn’t wish to see him standing
[praying] in the night except that you saw him. And
[sometimes] you would wish not to see him sleeping except that
you saw him [i.e. he would pray in different times of the
night].”
She said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) did not pray more than 11 Rak‘ah in
Ramadan or outside it. He would pray 4, and do not ask about
their quality and length. Then he would pray 4, and do not ask
about their quality and length. Then he would pray the Witr
three [Rak‘ahs].”
She said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) used to read a Soorah then recite it to the
extent that it would become longer than a Soorah that is longer
than it.”
She said, “He would indeed stand till I would feel sorry for him
due to the length of his standing.”
Ibn Mas‘ood mentioned that he prayed with the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) one night,
and read in the first Rak‘ah al-Baqarah, an-Nisa’ and Aal-iImran. Then he performed the Rukoo‘ close to that [amount of

www.sunniconnect.com l 186

time], and stood [after Rukoo‘] and made prostration similar to
that.”
Narrated by Abu Dharr: the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) stood on one night until he
reached the morning reading this verse: “If You punish them,
they are Your slaves, and if You forgive them, verily You, only
You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise [Soorah al-Ma’idah:
118], narrated by Imam Ahmad.
All of this is in the two Saheehs and other than them from the
authentic books of hadeeth, and the place of the elaboration of
these matters is in the book al- Ahkamul- Kabeer.
It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from al- Mugheerah bin
Shu‘bah, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) stood till his feet blistered or cracked. So it
was said to him, “Has not Allah already forgiven your previous
and future sins?” He said, “Shall I not be a grateful slave.”
It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from Abu’d-Darda’, he
said, “We exited with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) in Ramadan in extreme heat
and there wasn’t anyone fasting among us except for the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and Abdullah bin Rawahah.”
In the two Saheehs from ‘Alqamah, he said, “I asked ‘Aishah,
“Did the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) specify a day from the days?” She said, “No, His
action was constant and who from you is capable of what the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) was able?”

www.sunniconnect.com l 187

It has been affirmed in the two Saheehs from the hadeeth of
Anas, Abdullah bin ‘Umar, Abu Hurairah and ‘A’ishah,
“Indeed the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) used to fast continuously and forbade his
Companions from continuously fasting [and] he said, “I am not
like one of you, I spend the night with my Lord – he feeds me
and gives me drink.”
The truth [opinion] is that this feeding and giving of drink is
metaphorical as has occurred in the hadeeth that Ibn Majah
narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “Don’t force your sick to eat and
drink, for indeed Allah feeds them and gives them drink.”
Narrated by Abu Hurairah he said, “The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Indeed I seek
forgiveness from Allah 100 times every day.”
Al-Bukhari narrated from Abdullah, he said, “The Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to
me, “Read to me.” So I said, “Shall I read to you when it was
revealed to you?” He said, “I like to hear it from someone else.”
So I read Soorah an-Nisa’ until I reached: How (will it be) then,
when We bring from each nation a witness and We bring you
(O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) as
a witness against these people? [Soorah an-Nisa’: 41] He said,
“That is enough.” He turned and I saw his eyes flowing [with
tears].”
It has been affirmed in the Saheeh, “That he (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) would find a date on his
mattress and say, “If I did not fear that it might be from charity
I would have eaten it.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 188

Narrated by ‘Amr bin Shu‘aib, from his father, from his
grandfather, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) found under his side, a date from the night
then ate it. Thereafter he did not sleep that night so some of his
wives said, “O Messenger of Allah, you were sleepless [last]
night.” He said, “I found a date under my side so I ate it. We
had dates from the dates of charity so I feared that it may be
from it.”
And it has been affirmed from him also in the Saheeh that he
said, “By Allah, I have the most Taqwa of Allah amongst you
and the most knowledgeable in knowing with what I need to do
to have Taqwa.”And in another hadeeth he said, “Leave that
which causes doubt in you for that which does not raise a doubt
in you.”
Narrated by Mutarrif bin Abdullah bin ash-Shikhkheer from his
father, he said, “I came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) when he was praying and a
noise from his chest [would be heard] like the boiling of [liquid
in] a pot.”And in a narration, “And in his chest was a noise like
the noise of a grinder from crying.”
Narrated by Ibn Abbas, he said, “Abu Bakr said, “O Messenger
of Allah, I see that you have grown white hairs.” So he said,
“[Soorahs] Hood, al-Waqi‘ah, al- Mursalat, “About what are
they asking one another?” [Soorah Naba’] and, “When the Sun
is wrapped,” [in darkness] [Soorah Takweer].”

His Courage
We mentioned in Tafseer from some of the Salaf, that it is
derived from His statement, the Most High: “Then fight (O
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) in the

www.sunniconnect.com l 189

Cause of Allah, you are not tasked (held responsible) except for
yourself, and incite the believers (to fight along with you)
[Soorah an-Nisa’: 84], that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was commanded not to flee
from the idolaters when they faced him even if he was alone,
from his statement: “you are not tasked (held responsible)
except for yourself” [Soorah an-Nisa’: 84].
And he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was from
the most courageous of people, most patient and the greatest of
them in perseverance. He never fled from confrontation, even
if his Companions fled from it. Some of the Companions said,
“When the war heightened and the onslaught had heated up we
would fall behind the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). In the Battle of Badr he threw a handful
of stones on 1,000 idolaters and it struck all of them when he
said, “Shahatil-Wujooh [may their faces be debased].”
And similarly in the Battle of Hunain as has preceded, when
most of his Companions fled in the second state [turn of events]
in the Battle of Uhud he stayed firm in his place without leaving
it and none but 12 remained with him, 7 of them were killed
and 5 survived. It was at this time that Ubayy bin Khalaf was
killed – may Allah’s curse be upon him – so Allah hastened
him to the fire.
In the Battle of Hunain all of the people fled whilst they were
12,000 in number yet he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) remained along with 100 from his Companions when he
was riding on that day on his mule, galloping towards the
enemy extolling his name and announcing saying, “I am the
Prophet without a lie [doubt], I am the son of Abdul-Muttalib.”
To the extent that al-Abbas, Ali and Abu Sufyan bin al-Harith
tied themselves to the mule to slow it down from fear that one

www.sunniconnect.com l 190

of the enemies would reach him. And he (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) remained like this until Allah helped him
and assisted him in that situation and the people did not retreat
except that gravel [pieces of stones] was in front of him.

www.sunniconnect.com l 191

Chapter
What has been mentioned about his attributes
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in
the books narrated from the previous
Prophets
We have already mentioned a good summary about this in the
Chapter “The glad tidings for his arrival before his birth,” and
we shall mention further along those lines.
Narrated by ‘Ata’ bin Yasar, he said, “I met Abdullah bin ‘Amr
and said, “Inform me of the description of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the
Tawrah.” He said, “Indeed, by Allah he is described in the
Tawrah with some of what he is described in the Qur’an: “O
Prophet (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) )! Verily, We have sent you as witness, and a bearer of
glad tidings, and a warner” [Soorah al- Ahzab: 45]
“...and a refuge for the illiterate. You are my slave and
Messenger. I named you the Mutawakkil [relies on his Lord]
not harsh or severe, nor one who shouts in the markets. And
one who doesn’t reward a
wrongdoing with a [another] wrongdoing, however he
forgives and pardons. And he [his Lord] will not take him
until he straightens with him the crooked path [correct the
distorted religion] until they say, “There is no true God that
deserves to be worshipped but Allah.” And that he opens
blind eyes, deaf ears and sealed hearts.”
‘Ata’ bin Yasar said, “Then I met Ka‘b the [Jewish] scholar,
then I asked him and they [the texts] did not differ in a single

www.sunniconnect.com l 192

word except that Ka‘b said, “eyes Umooma and Qulooban
Ghuloofa and ears Sumooma [i.e. he used the plural form
instead of the singular form of these words].”
Narrated by Muqatil bin Hayyan, he said, “Allah revealed to
‘Eesa bin Maryam,
“Be serious in my affair and don’t joke around. Hear and obey,
O son of the chaste celibate virgin. I created you without a male
and made you as a sign for the creation so worship Me alone.
And have reliance upon me. So make clear to the people of
Sooran in Suryaniyyah that I am the Truth the Everlasting that
will not disappear. Believe in the illiterate Arab Prophet, the
owner of camels and woollen garment, turban and slippers and
staff, curly hair, wide forehead, joint eyebrows, wide eyes,
aquiline nose, clear cheeks, thick beard, his sweat on his face
is like pearls his scent is musk [that] emanates from him, his
neck was like an ivory stature with from silver, it is as though
gold would flow down his throat, he has hairs from his chest to
his navel flowing like a staff, he does not have any hair on his
chest or stomach hair other than it, thick palms and feet, when
he came with the people he would overwhelm them, when he
walks it is like he is avoiding rocks and as though he is
descending, and he has few offspring.”
Al-Hafiz al-Baihaqi narrated with his chain from Wahb bin
Munabbih al-Yamani, who said, “When Allah spoke in secret
with Moosa he said, “O my Lord, I find in the Tawrah a nation
which is the best nation brought for the people, they command
the good, forbid the evil and they believe in Allah so make them
my nation.” He said that is the nation of Ahmad.” He said, “O
my Lord I find in the Tawrah a nation which is the best and last
of the nations, the first on the Day of Judgment so make them
my nation.” He said, “That is the nation of Ahmad.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 193

He said, “O my Lord I find in the Tawrah a nation whose
scriptures are in their hearts they read it and those who came
before them would read their books from citing and not
memory so make them my nation.” He said, “That is the nation
of Ahmad.” He said, “O my Lord, I find in the Tawrah a nation
that believes in the first and last book and they fight against the
heads of misguidance till they fight against the one eyed liar,
so make them my nation.” He said, “That is the nation of
Ahmad.”
He said O my Lord, I find in the Tawrah a nation they consume
their sacrifice in their stomachs and those who came before
them when one of them brought forward his charity Allah sent
a fire to consume it and if it wasn’t to be accepted the fire
wouldn’t go near it, so make them my nation.” He said, “That
is the nation of Ahmad.” He said, “O my Lord, I find in the
Tawrah a nation that if one of them was to think about
committing a bad deed, it would not be written against him and
if he performed it, then it would be written as one bad deed. If
one of them was to think about performing a good deed then
not do so it would be written as a good deed, yet if he was to
perform it then it would be written as 10 good deeds [and it
would be] upto 700 [times], so make them my nation.” He said,
“That is the nation of Ahmad.”He said O my Lord, I find in the
Tawrah a nation who accept the call and their calls are
accepted, so make them my nation.” He said, “That is the nation
of Ahmad.”
He said, “And Wahb bin Munabbih in the story of Dawood
(Peace be upon him) and that which was revealed to him in azZaboor, “O Dawood, a Prophet shall come after you called
Ahmad and Muhammad, [a] truthful master and I shall never
be angry with him nor shall he infuriate Me. And I have
forgiven him before he sins that which he has erred in the past

www.sunniconnect.com l 194

and future. His nation is under mercy. I give them from the
superogatory actions similar to what I gave the Prophets. I have
made obligatory upon them obligations that I made obligatory
on the Prophets and Messengers in order that they come to me
on the Day of Judgment with their illumination like the
illumination of the Prophets. And that is because I have made
it incumbent upon them to purify themselves for every prayer
just as I made it incumbent upon the Prophets before them. I
have commanded them with making Ghusl [bath] from Janabah
[major impurities; ejaculation, sexual intercourse and
menstruation] just as I ordered the Prophets before them. I
commanded them with Hajj as I ordered the Prophets before
them and I ordered them with performing Jihad just as I ordered
the Messengers before them.
O Dawood, I have favored Muhammad and his nation over all
the nations. I gave them six characteristics which I did not give
to nations other than them:
I do not hold them to account due to error and forgetfulness and
every sin which they commit by mistake
If they were to ask forgiveness from me for it I would forgive
them
That which they give from their good I will magnify it for them
and they shall have with me many a times more and greater
than it [i.e. reward for charity in this life and hereafter]
And I shall give them as a recompense from afflictions in
difficulties if they are patient and say, “Verily we belong to
Allah and to him we will return” prayers, mercy and guidance
to the Gardens of Pleasure.

www.sunniconnect.com l 195

If they call upon me I shall answer them. They will either see
that in this world, or I shall avert from them evil, or I shall save
it for them in the Hereafter.
O Dawood, whoever meets me from the nation of Muhammad
bearing witness that there is no deity worthy of worship but
Allah, alone without a partner believing in it, then he shall be
with me in my Paradise and be among the elite. And whoever
meets me denying Muhammad or that which he was sent with
and made a mockery of my book, I would shower on him
punishment in his grave and the angels shall beat his face and
his back during his resurrection from his grave. Thereafter I
shall admit him into the lowest level of the Hell Fire.”
Narrated by Jubair bin Mut‘im he said, “When Allah sent his
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his
affair had become known in Makkah, I went to ash-Sham
[Syria]. When I was in Basrah a group from the Christians came
to me and said to me, “Are you from the Haram [Makkah]?” I
said, “Yes.” They said, “Then you will know this person who
has become a Prophet amongst you?” I said, “Yes.” Then they
took my hand and entered me into their monastery with statues
and pictures in it. Then they said to me, “Take a look to see if
you can see the picture of your Prophet that has been sent to
you?” So I looked and I couldn’t see his picture. I said, “I can’t
see his picture.”
Thereafter they admitted me into a monastery bigger than the
previous and I saw statues and pictures more than what was in
the previous one. Then they said to me, “Take a look, do you
see his picture?” So I looked and saw the description of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and his picture and the description of Abu Bakr and his
picture holding the heel of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and

www.sunniconnect.com l 196

Blessings of Allah be upon him). Then they said to me, “Can
you see his description?”I said, “Yes.” They said, “Is this him?”
whilst pointing to the description of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). I said, “O Allah,
yes I testify that it is him.” They said, “Do you know he who is
holding his heel?”I said, “Yes.” They said, “We testify that this
is your Companion and this is the Caliph after him.”

Miracles/Signs of Prophethood
They are [two types]: perceived and sensed. From the perceived
signs/miracles is the revelation of the Great Qur’an. And this is
the greatest of miracles and the most dazzling of signs and the
most clear of arguments due to the miraculous composition
with which He challenged mankind and Jinn to bring
something similar to it, but they could not do so despite the
many reasons of his enemies to oppose him and their
eloquence. Thereafter He challenged them to bring 10 Soorahs
similar to it and they were incapable [of doing so]. Then He
compromised with a single Soorah similar to it, yet they were
incapable of doing so. And thus, they knew their incapability
and their failure in that respect, and there will never be a way
for anyone to do so.
In a Makkan verse, Allah says: “Say: “If the mankind and the
Jinns were together to produce the like of this Qur’an, they
could not produce the like thereof, even if they helped one
another.” [Soorah al-Isra’:
88]
And He says in another Makkan verse, in Soorah at-Toor: “Or
do they say: “He (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him)) has forged it (this Qur’an)?” Nay! They believe
not! Let them then produce a recital like unto it (the Qur’an) if

www.sunniconnect.com l 197

they are truthful. [Soorah at-Toor: 33-34] i.e. if you are truthful
[in believing] that he conveyed the Qur’an from himself, then
he is a man like you, so bring that which is similar to it because
you are men like him.
Allah the Most High said in Soorah al-Baqarah which is
Madani [revealed in Madinah] repeating the challenge:
“And if you (Arab pagans, Jews, and Christians) are in doubt
concerning that which We have sent down (i.e. the Qur’an) to
Our slave (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)), then produce a Soorah (chapter) of the like thereof and
call your witnesses (supporters and helpers) besides Allah, if
you are truthful. But if you do it not, and you can never do it,
then fear the Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones, prepared
for the disbelievers.” [Soorah al- Baqarah: 23, 24]
Allah the Most High says:
“Or they say, “He (Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him)) forged it (the Qur’an).” Say: “Bring you
then ten forged Soorah (chapters) like unto it, and call
whomsoever you can, other than Allah (to your help), if you
speak the truth!”If then they answer you not, know then that the
Revelation (this Qur’an) is sent down with the Knowledge of
Allah and that La ilaha illa Huwa: (none has the right to be
worshipped but He)! Will you then be Muslims (those who
submit to Islam)?” [Soorah al- Hood: 13, 14]
Allah the Most High says,
“And this Qur’ân is not such as could ever be produced by other
than Allah (Lord of the heavens and the earth), but it is a
confirmation of (the revelation) which was before it [i.e. the
Tawrah (Torah), and the Injeel (Gospel), etc.], and a full
www.sunniconnect.com l 198

explanation of the Book (i.e. laws and orders, etc, decreed for
mankind) - wherein there is no doubt from the Lord of the
‘Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists). Or do they say:
“He (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him))
has forged it?” Say: “Bring then a Soorah (chapter) like unto it,
and call upon whomsoever you can, besides Allah, if you are
truthful!”Nay, they deny that; the knowledge whereof they
could not compass and whereof the interpretation has not yet
come unto them. Thus those before them did deny. Then see
what was the end of the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers, etc.)![ Soorah Yoonus:37-39]
So He, the Most High, clarified that the creation is unable to
produce this Qur’an - even 10 Soorahs similar to it and even
one Soorah like it. Moreover, they shall never be able to do that
just as Allah mentioned: “But if you do it not, and you can
never do it.” [Soorah al-Baqarah: 24] i.e. if you did not do so
in the past, then you shall never be able to do so in the future.
This is a second challenge that it is not possible for them to
contest it whether in the present or the future. Challenges such
as this only come from one who has certainty in the [fact] that
it is not possible for mankind to contest or to bring similar to
what he has come with.
If it had come from someone who had invented it by himself,
then he would have feared that he would be contested against,
lest he should be humiliated and that it backfires against his
intention in the people following him. Yet it is known to
everyone who possesses a brain that Muhammad is from the
most intelligent of Allah’s creation, rather the most intelligent
of them and the most perfect of them in totality at the same
time. He did not embark on this affair except that he knew that
it was not possible to contest and this is what has occurred.

www.sunniconnect.com l 199

From the time of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) till our time, nobody has been able to
come with something similar to it or even a Soorah similar to
it. This shall never be possible for this is the speech of the Lord
of the mankind and Jinn, whom nobody resembles from
creation, not in His essence, nor His attributes and nor His
actions. So how is it possible for the speech of the created
resemble the speech of the Creator? the statement of the
Quraish which the Most High narrated from them in His
statement:
“And when Our Verses (of the Qur’an) are recited to them, they
say: “We have heard this (the Qur’an); if we wish we can say
the like of this. This is nothing but the tales of the ancients.”
[Soorah al-Anfal: 31]
This is a lie from them and a false claim without proof or
evidence or an argument. If they were truthful, then they would
have come with that which contests it. However, they knew that
they were lying just as they knew that they were lying in His
statement, the Most High: “Tales of the ancients, which he has
written down, and they are dictated to him morning and
afternoon.” [Soorah al-Furqan: 5]
Allah the Most High [then] says:
“Say: It (this Qur’an) has been sent down by Him (Allah)
(the Real Lord of the heavens and earth) Who knows the
secret of the heavens and the earth. Truly, He is OftForgiving, Most Merciful.”[Soorah al- Furqan: 6]
That is, the One Who knows the hidden revealed it, the Lord of
the earth and the Heavens, the One Who knows that which was
and what shall be, and how that which has not existed would

www.sunniconnect.com l 200

be. Verily He, The Most High, inspired to his Slave and
Messenger, the Illiterate Prophet, the one who did not know
how to write well and did not know how to read at all. And he
did not know anything from the knowledge of the prior
generations and the stories of those in ancient times.
Thereafter, Allah informed him about that which had passed
and the present in its true form and in doing so, He
differentiated between truth and falsehood that most of the
previous books had differed in narrating just as Allah the Most
High said: “This is of the news of the unseen which We reveal
unto you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)), neither you nor your people knew them before this. So
be patient. Surely, the (good) end is for the Muttaqoon [God
fearing]” [Soorah Hood: 49].
He said the Most High,
“Thus We relate to you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him)) some information of what happened
before. And indeed We have given you from Us a Reminder
(this Qur’an). Whoever turns away from it (this Qur’an i.e.
does not believe in it, nor acts on its orders), verily, they will
bear a heavy burden (of sins) on the Day of Resurrection,
They will abide in that (state in the Fire of Hell), and evil
indeed will it be that load for them on the Day of
Resurrection” [Soorah Ta Ha: 99-101].
He (SWT) says:
“And We have sent down to you (O Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)) the Book

www.sunniconnect.com l 201

(this Qur’an) in truth, confirming the Scripture that came
before it and Mohaimin (trustworthy in highness and a
witness) over it (old Scriptures).” [Soorah al-Ma’idah: 48]
He (SWT) says,
“Neither did you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him)) read any book before it (this Qur’an), nor did
you write any book (whatsoever) with your right hand. In that
case, indeed, the followers of falsehood might have doubted.
Nay, but they, the clear Ayat [i.e. the description and the
qualities of Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) written like verses in the Tawrah (Torah) and the
Injeel (Gospel)] are preserved in the breasts of those who have
been given knowledge (from the people of the Scriptures). And
none but the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers, etc.) deny
Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,
etc.). And they say: “Why are not signs sent down to him from
his Lord? Say: “The signs are only with Allah, and I am only a
plain warner.”Is it not sufficient for them that We have sent
down to you the Book (the Qur’an) which is recited to them?
Verily, herein is mercy and a reminder (or an admonition) for
a people who believe. Say (to them O Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)): “Sufficient is Allah for a
witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens
and on earth.” And those who believe in Batil (all false deities
other than Allah), and disbelieve in Allah and (in His Oneness),
it is they who are the losers.” [Soorah al-Ankaboot: 48-52]
So Allah clarified that the revelation of this book containing
knowledge of what happened [in the past], that which will
happen and the ruling upon that which exists between mankind
upon this illiterate Prophet is in itself sufficient proof of his
truthfulness.

www.sunniconnect.com l 202

He (SWT) says:
“And when Our Clear Verses are recited unto them, those
who hope not for their meeting with Us, say:
Bring us a Qur’an other than this, or change it.”Say (O
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)): “It
is not for me to change it on my own accord; I only follow
that which is revealed unto me.
Verily, I fear if I were to disobey my Lord, the torment of the
Great Day (i.e. the Day of
Resurrection).”Say (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)): “If Allah had so willed,
I should not have recited it to you nor would He have made it
known to you. Verily, I have stayed amongst you a life time
before this. Have you then no sense?” So who does more
wrong than he who forges a lie
against Allah or denies His Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses,
lessons, signs, revelations, etc.)? Surely, the Mujrimoon
(criminals, sinners, disbelievers and polytheists) will never
be successful! [Soorah Yoonus: 15-17]
He says to them, “I cannot alter this from my desires. It is only
Allah the Great and the Almighty, Who is able to erase that
which He wills and establishes. I am a conveyer from Him and
you know my truthfulness in what I brought to you because I
grew up among you. And you know my lineage, my
truthfulness, my faithfulness, and [the fact that] I never lied to
anyone of you even once in my life. So how is it possible for
me to lie against Allah the Great and the Almighty, the
Possessor of harm and benefit, the One Who is able to do all
things and is knowledgeable of all affairs? And which sin is
graver than lying upon Allah and attributing to Him that which
is not from him?”

www.sunniconnect.com l 203

Just as Allah (SWT) says:
“And if he (Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him)) had forged a false saying concerning Us (Allah),
We surely should have seized him by his right hand (or with
power and might), And then certainly should have cut off his
life artery (Aorta), And none of you could withhold Us from
(punishing) him.” [Soorah al-Haqqah: 44-47]
That is: If he was to lie upon Us, we would have certainly taken
most severe revenge/exacted a severe punishment and none
from the dwellers of the earth could hinder or prevent us from
[punishing] him.
He (SWT) says:
“And who can be more unjust than he who invents a lie
against Allah, or says: “I have received inspiration,”
whereas he is not inspired in anything; and who says, “I will
reveal the like of what Allah
has revealed.” And if you could but see when the Zalimoon
(polytheists and wrongdoers, etc.) are in the
agonies of death, while the angels are stretching forth their
hands (saying): “Deliver your souls! This day you shall be
recompensed with the torment of degradation because of what
you used to utter against Allah other than the truth. And you
used to reject His Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons,
signs, revelations, etc.) with disrespect!” [Soorah al-An‘am:
93]
He (SWT) says:
“Say (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)): “What thing is the most great in witness?” Say: “Allah
(the Most Great!) is Witness between me and you; this Qur’an
www.sunniconnect.com l 204

has been revealed to me that I may therewith warn you and
whomsoever it may reach.” [Soorah al-An‘am: 19]
And in these words is proof that Allah is a witness over
everything and that He, the Most High, is the greatest of
witnesses and is well aware of me and you in regards to that
which I brought to you. The strength of the words entails an
oath that He sent me to the creation in order to warn them and
whoever it reaches, then it is a warning for them, just as Allah
says:
“ But those of the sects (Jews, Christians and all the other
non-Muslim nations) that reject it (the
Qur’an), the Fire will be their promised meeting-place. So be
not in doubt about it (i.e. those who denied
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and also denied all that which he brought from Allah,
surely, they will enter Hell). Verily, it is the truth from your
Lord, but most of the mankind believe not. [Soorah Hood:17]
Thus, in this Qur’an there is true information about Allah, His
Throne, His upper and lower beings like the heavens and the
earths – that which is between them and therein, great matters
proved with clear evidences, guidance from the point of view
of sound intellect, just as Allah the Most High says:
“And indeed We have fully explained to mankind, in this
Qur’an, every kind of similitude, but most mankind
refuse (the truth and accept nothing) but disbelief.”
[Soorah al-Isra’: 89]
He (SWT) says:
“And these similitudes We put forward for mankind, but none
will understand them except those who have
www.sunniconnect.com l 205

knowledge (of Allah and His Signs, etc.). [Soorah
al-Ankaboot: 43]
He says, the Most High:
“And indeed We have put forth for men, in this Qur’an every
kind of similitude in order that they may remember. An Arabic
Qur’an, without any crookedness (therein) in order that they
may avoid all evil
which Allah has ordered them to avoid, fear Him and keep
their duty to Him.” [Soorah az-Zumar: 27, 28]
The Noble Qur’an relates true stories about the events that have
happened before and the evidence for this lies in the books of
the People of the Book. These books give testimony to the
revelation upon an unlettered man who did not know how to
write, and he had not studied for even a [single] day anything
from the sciences of the previous generations or the stories of
the ancients. Thus, the people were not amazed except by the
inspiration to him about the beneficial stories which are worthy
of being remembered and contemplated over, from the stories
of the nations with their Prophets and their affairs with them
[Prophets] - how Allah saved the Believers and destroyed the
Kuffar with a single statement which mankind could never ever
reproduce till the end of time.
So in one place a story is mentioned briefly with the epitome of
clarity and eloquence, and other times it is mentioned fully and
there is nothing more radiant, clear or loftier than that context,
to the extent that the reciter or the listener [would feel as if he
was] witnessing what was being presented, seeing the story by
himself. This is just as Allah (SWT) says:

www.sunniconnect.com l 206

“And you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him)) were not at the side of the Toor
(Mount) when We did call, [it is said that Allah called the
followers of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him), and they answered His Call, or that Allah called
Moosa (Moses)]. But (you are
sent) as a mercy from your Lord, to give warning to a people
to whom no warner had come before you, in
order that they may remember or receive admonition. [Tafseer AtTabari, Vol. 20,
Page 81]. [Soorah
al- Qasas: 46]
He says, The Most High:
“This is a part of the news of the Ghaib (unseen, i.e. the news
of the past nations of which you have no knowledge) which We
inspire you with (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him)). You were not with them, when they cast lots
with their pens as to which of them should be charged with the
care of Maryam (Mary); nor were you with them when they
disputed.” [Soorah Al Imran: 44]
He says, the Most High:
“This is of the news of the Ghaib (unseen) which We reveal by
Inspiration to you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) ). You were not (present) with them when
they arranged their plan together, and (also, while) they were
plotting. And most of mankind will not believe even if you
desire it eagerly. And no reward you (O Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)) ask of them (those who deny
your Prophethood) for it, it(the Qur’an) is no less than a

www.sunniconnect.com l 207

Reminder and an advice unto the ‘Alameen (men and jinns).
[Soorah Yoosuf: 102-104]
Till He says at the end of it [the Soorah]:
“Indeed in their stories, there is a lesson for men of
understanding. It (the Qur’an) is not a forged statement but a
confirmation of the Allah’s existing Books [the Tawrah
(Torah), the Injeel (Gospel) and other Scriptures of Allah] and
a detailed explanation of everything and a guide and a Mercy
for the people who believe. [Soorah Yoosuf: 111]
He says, the Most High:
“They say: “Why does he not bring us a sign (proof) from his
Lord?” Has there not come to them the proof of that which is
(written) in the former papers [Scriptures, i.e. the Tawrah
(Torah), and the Injeel (Gospel), etc. about the coming of the
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) ].” [Soorah Ta Ha: 133]
He says, the Most High:
“Say: “Tell me, if it (the Qur’an) is from Allah, and you
disbelieve in it, who is more astray than one who is in
opposition far away (from Allah’s Right Path and His
obedience). We will show them Our Signs in the universe, and
in their ownselves, until it becomes manifest to them that this
(the Qur’an) is the truth. Is it not sufficient in regard to your
Lord that He is a Witness over all things?” [Soorah Fussilat:
52,53]
He has promised, the Most High, that He shall make the verses
of the Qur’an apparent and its truthfulness and the truthfulness
of the one who came with it, with signs proving the truthfulness

www.sunniconnect.com l 208

of this book. And also in the souls of those who deny it, which
will be an evidence against them and an evidence that cuts their
doubts, until they have certainty that it was revealed by Allah
upon the tongue of the truthful [Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)].
Then He guided towards a separate evidence with His
statement: Is it not sufficient in regard to your Lord that He is
a Witness over all things? That is, knowing that Allah is aware
of this matter is enough [to illustrate] the truthfulness of this
informer, because if he was a liar he would have brought a
severe punishment swiftly upon him.
In the Qur’an is news about what shall occur in the future [after
the revelation] matching what happened, word for word. And
similarly in the hadeeths according to what we established in
our book Tafseer and also what we shall mention from features
and trials, such as His statement the Most High:
“He knows that there will be some among you sick, others
travelling through the land, seeking of Allah’s Bounty; yet
others fighting in Allah’s Cause.” [Soorah al-Muzzammil:
20]
This Soorah is from the first of the Soorahs that were revealed
in Makkah. And similarly, His statement in Soorah Iqtarabat
[Soorah al-Qamar] which is Makkan without any difference [of
opinion]: Their multitude will be put to flight, and they will
show their backs. Nay, but the Hour is their appointed time (for
their full recompense), and the Hour will be more grievous and
more bitter. The confirmation of this occurred in the Battle of
Badr after that. Other examples such as this are from the clear
evidences, and a section shall come later about matters which

www.sunniconnect.com l 209

the Messenger of Allah said shall occur after him – may peace
be upon him – in accordance to what he mentioned.
In the Qur’an are just rules – commands and prohibitions –
entailing great wisdom, If a person of understanding and sound
intellect contemplates over them, he would have certainty that
these rules only came from the One who knows the Unseen, the
Merciful to His slaves who deals with them with His care and
mercy and goodness.
Allah the Most High says:
“And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in truth and in
justice.” [Soorah al-An‘am: 115]
That is, [the Qur’an] is truthful in its stories and fair in its
commands and prohibitions.
He says, the Most High:
“Alif-Lam-Ra. [These letters are one of the miracles of the
Qur’an and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings].
(This is) a Book, the Verses whereof are perfected (in every
sphere of knowledge, etc.),
and then explained in detail from One (Allah), Who is All-Wise
and Well-Acquainted
(with all things)”
[Soorah Hood: 1]
That is, the words have been perfected and the meanings have
been clarified.
He says, the Most High:

www.sunniconnect.com l 210

“It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)) with
guidance and the religion of truth (Islam)
[Soorah at-Tawbah: 33]
That is, beneficial knowledge and righteous action, and thus it
has been narrated from Ali bin Abu Talib(May Allah be pleased
with him)that he said to Kumail bin Ziyad, “It is the book of
Allah, therein is the news of what was before you, and the
ruling between you and the news of what is after you.” We have
mentioned all of this in detail in our book Tafseer which is
sufficient, and for Allah is all praise and grace.
Thus, the Great Qur’an is a miracle from many angles - from
[the point of view of] its eloquence, composition, synthesis,
phrasing, and what it contains from news of the Unseen, both
past and future, and what it contains from clear perfect rulings.
The challenge with [regard to] the eloquence of its words is
specific for the eloquent Arabs, and the challenge of the true
and perfect meanings contained in it – and this is the greatest
challenge according to many scholars – is general to the
dwellers of the earth from the two faiths, the people of the two
books [Jews and Christians] and other than them from the
intellectuals of the Greeks, Indians, Persians, Qibt and other
than them from the groups of the children of Adam all over the
world.
Whoever claims from the philosophers [people of innovation]
that its miracle is in discouraging the disbelievers in
challenging it whilst denying it, or removing the ability from
them to do so, then this is a false claim. And it is derived from
their [Islamic philosophers] belief that the Qur’an was created,
Allah created it in some bodies. There is no differentiation
according to them between one creation and another. This

www.sunniconnect.com l 211

statement of theirs is disbelief and falsehood and is not in
accordance with reality. Rather the Qur’an is the speech of
Allah, not created - He spoke it as He wished, far removed is
He, The Most High and Sacred from what they say.
In reality, all of the creation are incapable of bringing
something similar to it, even if they were to help and assist one
another upon this. Even the Messengers who are the most
eloquent of the creation, the most knowledgeable of creation
and the most perfect of them could not speak with words
similar to the speech of Allah. This Qur’an, that the Messenger
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) conveyed from
Allah, has speech and wordings that do not resemble the style
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him). The style of his speech – may peace be upon him –
preserved from him by authentic chains of narration, [is such
that] none from the Companions nor those after them could
speak with his expressions and eloquence or with the meanings
contained in his noble words.
Rather, the speech of the Companions has a style more lofty
than the style of the speech of the Tabi‘oon and so on, and so
forth till our time. The scholars of the Salaf were more
eloquent, knowledgeable and exaggerated less in conveying the
meanings they intended with their expressions than the scholars
of the Khalaf [those after the Salaf]. This is witnessed by the
one who has the knack of [distinguishing] people’s speech, just
as he perceives the difference between the poetry of the Arabs
in the pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance and the poetry of those
born after them.

www.sunniconnect.com l 212

Section
From the miracles that are perceived are: his pure manners –
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) – and his perfect
disposition, courage, perseverance, hospitality, abstinence,
satisfaction, selflessness, his good companionship,
truthfulness, trustworthiness, Taqwa, worship, nobility of his
origin, pure birth and upbringing as we mentioned in detail
under their respective headings. And how amazing are the
words our Shaikh Abu’l-Abbas Ibn Taimiyyah –(May Allah be
pleased with him)- mentioned in his book in which he refuted
sects of the Christians, Jews and those similar to them from the
People of the Book. He mentioned in its conclusion the
miracles/signs of Prophethood and followed a sound, timetested approach with eloquent speech, such that everyone who
contemplates upon it understands it and submits to it.
As for the miracles of Prophethood that are sensed – I mean
witnessed by the eyes – then they are Heavenly and the earthly
And from the greatest of all of them is the splitting of the
shining moon into two parts, Allah the Most High says:
“ The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been cleft
asunder (the people of Makkah requested
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) to show them a miracle, so he showed them the splitting
of the moon). And if they see a sign, they turn away, and say:
“This is continuous
magic.”They belied (the Verses of Allah, this Qur’an), and
followed their own lusts. And every matter will be settled
[according to the kind of deeds (for the doer of good deeds,
his deeds will take him to Paradise, and similarly evil deeds
will take their doers to Hell)]. And indeed there has come to

www.sunniconnect.com l 213

them news (in this Qur’an) wherein there is (enough
warning) to check (them from evil), Perfect wisdom (this
Qur’an), but (the preaching of) warners benefit them not
[Soorah al-Qamar: 1-5].
The scholars agreed with the rest of the Imams that the splitting
of the moon was in the era of the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and hadeeths have been
narrated from many paths that provide certainty to the Ummah.
Narrated by Anas, he said, “The people of Makkah asked the
Prophet for a sign, then the moon split twice, then he said, “The
Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been cleft asunder (the
people of Makkah requested Prophet Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to show them a miracle, so he
showed them the splitting of the moon). And if they see a sign,
they turn away, and say: “This is continuous magic.”
Narrated by Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab regarding His
statement, “The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been
cleft asunder” (the people of Makkah requested Prophet
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to
show them a miracle, so he showed them the splitting of the
moon). He said, “That was at the time of the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), it [the
moon] split in two: one part in front of the mountain and the
other part behind the mountain, then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “O Allah, I
testify.”
And in Saheeh al-Bukhari from Ibn Mas‘ood, that he said,
“Five [signs] have passed, the Romans [defeat], al- Lizam
[defeat of the Mushriks in Badr], the Mighty grasp, the Smoke
and the moon [its splitting].

www.sunniconnect.com l 214

Thus, these are paths [of hadeeth] from this group of
Companions and this matter is so well-known that it makes it
self sufficient from a chain, in addition to its mention in the
Great Book [Qur’an]. Some storytellers mentioned that the
moon entered the Prophet’s (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) pocket and exited from his sleeve and words similar
to that effect which doesn’t have any basis. When the moon
split, it didn’t disappear from the sky, rather it split in two and
one of the parts travelled behind the mountain Hira’ and the
other moved the other way till the mountain was between the
two fractions. And both the fractions were in the sky whilst the
people of Makkah were looking on, and many of their ignorant
ones said that this was a trickery of their eyes. Then they asked
the travelers that arrived in Makkah who told them an account
similar to what they had witnessed, thereafter they knew the
truth of it and had certainty in it.
And if it is said: why was this not known in all the countries of
the world? Then the answer to that is: who denies that?
However, for a long time the disbelievers rejected the signs of
Allah and perhaps when they were told that this was a sign for
the Prophet who was sent, [holders of] the corrupt opinions
agreed upon hiding it and forgetting about it. More than one
traveler mentioned that they witnessed a skeleton in India
which had written on it that it had been raised erect on the night
the moon had split. Thereafter, because the splitting of the
moon was at night it could have been concealed from many of
the people due to factors preventing its sighting at that time,
such as clouds in those countries that night or due to many of
them sleeping. Maybe it was during the night when many of the
people sleep and matters other than that [aforementioned], And
Allah (SWT) knows best. And we have compiled this in our
book Tafseer.

www.sunniconnect.com l 215

In the Saheeh from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), “The sun has not been held
back from anyone except for Yoosha‘.”
And from that which is related to the heavenly signs in the
chapter of Signs of Prophethood, his seeking of rain – (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) from his Lord the Great
and the Almighty for his nation when there was a drought,
[which] is from the heavenly signs that prove his Prophethood.
Allah answered his prayer swiftly to the extent that he hadn’t
descended from the pulpit except that the rain was dripping
from his (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) beard and
similarly his prayer to hold back the rain.
Al-Bukhari narrated from Salim from his father, “I remembered
the saying of a poet when I was looking at the face of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) seeking rain and he didn’t descend till the rain water
flowed profoundly from every roof gutter [The verses of Abu
Talib]:
“And a white [person] [i.e. The Prophet]
Who is requested to pray for rain
And who takes care of the orphans
And is the guardian of widows.”
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, he said, “A man entered the
mosque on Jumu‘ah from a door that was facing the pulpit
whilst the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was standing giving the Khutbah. Then he stood
in front of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and said, “O Allah’s Messenger! The

www.sunniconnect.com l 216

livestock are dying and the roads are cut off, so please pray to
Allah for rain.”Anas added, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) raised both his hands and
said, “O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain!
O Allah! Bless us with rain!”
Anas said, “By Allah, we could not see any trace of clouds in
the sky and there was no building or a house between us and
[the mountains] of Sala‘.” Anas added, “A heavy cloud like a
shield appeared from behind it. When it reached the middle of
the sky, it spread then it rained.” Anas added, “By Allah! We
could not see the sun for a week. The next Friday a person
entered through the same gate when the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was delivering the
Khutbah. The man stood in front of him and said, “O
Messenger of Allah! The livestock are dying and the roads are
cut off, please pray to Allah to withhold the rain.”
Anas added, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) raised both his hands and said, “O Allah!
[Send the rain] on the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills,
in the valleys and on the places where the trees grow.”So the
rain stopped and we came out walking in the sun.” Shareek
asked Anas whether it was the same person who had asked for
the rain [the previous Friday]. Anas replied that he did not
know.”
Narrated by Abu Wajzah Yazeed bin Ubaid as-Sa‘di, he said,
“When the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) returned [victorious] from the Battle of Tabook
the delegation of Fazarah tribe came to him. They were an odd
number between 13 and 19 men, among them was Kharijah bin
Hisn and al-Hurr bin Qais – who was the youngest of them –
the son of Uyainah bin Hisn’s brother. They rested at Ramlah

www.sunniconnect.com l 217

bint al-Harith’s house from the Ansar and had arrived on weak
skinny camels and they were sleepy. They came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) as Mulims, and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked them about their
homelands. So they said, “Our lands are dormant, our lives are
barren, our families are naked and our cattle have died. So call
upon your Lord to send the aid [rain] and intercede to your Lord
for us and your Lord intercedes with you.”
At this, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, “Glorified be Allah! Woe be onto you! This
is me interceding to my Lord, then who is the one whom my
Lord intercedes with? There is no deity worthy of worship
except Allah, His footstool encompasses the Heavens and the
Earth and it caves in from His Greatness and Majesty just as a
new saddle caves in.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Allah laughs from your despair and hardship and
[despite] the nearness of your aid and relief.” So the Bedouin
said, “And our Lord laughs O Messenger of Allah?” He said,
“Yes.” Then the Bedouin said, “We shall not be stripped O
Messenger of Allah from a Lord that laughs of goodness.” So
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) laughed due to his remark, then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) stood and ascended
the pulpit and spoke a few words and raised his hands. And the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would not raise his hands for Du‘a’ except when seeking
rain and he raised his hands till the whiteness of his armpits
were visible.
And that which has been preserved from his supplication is,

www.sunniconnect.com l 218

“O Allah supply Your land and your animals with water,
spread Your mercy and give life to Your dead land. O Allah
provide us with aid that relieves us, irrigates, fertile,
covering, encompassing and sooner
not later; that benefits and does not harm. O Allah [I ask
you] rain of mercy and not rain of punishment nor
destruction, [that causes] drowning and does not eradicate.
O Allah bless us with aid [rain] and help us against our
enemies.”
Then Abu Lubabah bin Abdul-Mundhir stood and said, “O
Messenger of Allah, the dates are in the Marabid [container in
which dates are dried out].” Then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “O Allah!
Bless us with rain.” So Abu Lubabah said, “The dates are in the
Marabid holes,” three times. Then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “O Allah,
bless us with rain until Abu Lubabah stands naked and then
close the drainage hole of the Marabid with his lower garment.”
By Allah there wasn’t any trace of clouds in the sky and there
wasn’t a building or house between the mosque and Sal‘
[mountain]. Then a cloud like a shield came from behind Sal‘,
then when it reached the middle of the sky it spread as they
were looking and then rained. By Allah, they didn’t see the sun
for six days. Then Abu Lubabah stood naked covering the
drainage hole of his Mirbad with his lower garment so that no
date would fall from it.
Then a man said, “O Messenger of Allah the wealth has
perished and the roads have been cut off.” So the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ascended the pulpit
then made supplication and raised his hands till the whiteness
of his armpits was visible then he said, “O Allah around us and

www.sunniconnect.com l 219

not upon us. O Allah upon the plateaus, the hills, the valleys
and where the trees grow.” Thereafter the cloud dispersed or
split from Madinah like the splitting of a cloth.”
And how many [occurrences] similar to this did he have in
more than one authentic hadeeth, and for Allah is all praise. It
has preceded when he invoked against the Quraish due to their
transgression that Allah plague them with seven years like the
seven years of Yoosuf. So they were afflicted by drought that
dried everything up till they ate bones, dogs and ‘ilhiz [a type
of plant]. Then Abu Sufyan came asking for intercession from
him so that he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
would pray for them. So he (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) prayed for them and that [harm] was removed.
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, “Whenever drought threatened
them, Umar bin al-Khattab, used to ask al- Abbas to invoke
Allah for rain. He used to say, “O Allah! We used to ask our
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to invoke
you for rain and you would bless us with rain, and now we ask
the uncle of our Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) to invoke you for rain, O Allah bless us with rain! ” And
so it would rain,” narrated solely by al-Bukhari.

Miracles on the land
From these miracles are those which are related to inanimate
beings and those that are in relation to animals. From those that
are related to inanimate beings are his increase of water on
more than one occasion in different ways which we shall
narrate with their chains of narration In sha’ Allah. We start
with this because it is more appropriate following what we
mentioned earlier from his seeking rain and Allah’s acceptance
of his supplications [in that respect].

www.sunniconnect.com l 220

Narrated by Anas bin Malik, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) embarked one day for
some of his errands with some of his Companions with him.
They traveled until the time of prayer entered, yet the people
couldn’t find water for ablution, so they said, 'O Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), we cannot
find water for ablution.' He saw the discontentment with that
[state] on the faces of his Companions. Then he left the people
and brought a water skin with little water in. Thereafter the
Prophet of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
began to perform the ablution from it, then he spread his four
fingers over the water skin and said, 'Come, perform the
ablution.' So the people performed the ablution to the extent
that they were excessive in what they wanted." Al-Hasan said,
“Anas was asked how many were they He replied, “70 or close
to that.”
Narrated by Anas bin Malik, “The Prophet of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was at az-Zawra’, a cup was
brought to him with water not even as deep as his fingers. Then
he ordered his Companions to make ablution and placed his
palm in the water. The water flowed from between his fingers
and his finger tips until the people had performed the
ablution.”Anas was asked how many were there, he replied
saying, “We were 300.”
Narrated by al-Bara’(May Allah be pleased with him)he said,
“We were 1400 on the day of alHudaibiyah, and al-Hudaibiyah
was a well. So we took from it to the extent that we didn’t leave
a drop inside it. Then the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) sat on the edge of the well and asked for water
and rinsed his mouth then he threw it in the well. We didn’t
wait long before we drank till we quenched our thirst and the
thirst of our camels.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 221

From the hadeeth narrated solely by Muslim, from Jabir bin
Abdullah in a lengthy hadeeth in which he said, “We travelled
with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) until we reached a wide valley. Then the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went to
relieve himself so I followed him with a vessel of water. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) looked on and could not find anything to cover himself
with, then he saw two trees on the edge of the valley. So the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) went to one of them and took a branch from its branches
then he said, 'Follow me with the permission of Allah.' So it
followed him like a camel Makhshoosh [with a piece of wood
through its nose with a rope tied to it] that follows its master.
Then he came to the other one and took a branch from its
branches then said, 'Follow me with the permission of Allah.'
So it also followed him, then when he was in the midpoint
between them he brought them together and said, “Cover me
with the permission of Allah.” Then they were joined together.
Jabir said, “So I left swiftly fearing that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would sense my
closeness and then distance himself. So I sat and spoke to
myself and looked once and saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) coming and I saw the trees
fall apart and each one of them stood on [its] trunk. Then I saw
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) stand and indicate with his head like this, left and right.
Thereafter he walked and when he reached me he said, 'O Jabir,
did you see my position?' I said, 'Yes, O Messenger of Allah.'
He said, 'Go to the two trees and cut a branch off each of them
then go to where I was standing then throw a branch on your
right and a branch on your left.'”

www.sunniconnect.com l 222

Jabir added, “So I stood, then took a stone and broke it and
sharpened it and it became sharp. Then I came to the two trees
and cut a branch off each of them, thereafter I went till I stood
where the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was standing, threw a branch to my right and a
branch to my left then returned and said, 'I have done so, O
Messenger of Allah.' He said, 'I asked what that was for.' He
said, 'I passed by two graves [its dwellers] being punished, so I
wanted that to be raised from them as long as the branches were
still fresh.'”
Jabir added, “When we came to the camp, then the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 'O
Jabir, call for the ablution water.' So I said, 'Alas the ablution
water! Alas the ablution water! Alas the ablution water!' He
said, 'I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah I did not find a drop in the
camp.' Whilst a man from the Ansar was cooling water for the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in water skins on a rack made from date palm leaves. He
added: Then he said to me, 'Go to so and so al-Ansari and
look to see if you find anything [water] in his water skins.'
He said, “So I went to him and I looked in them and did not
find but a drop in the mouth of one of the water skins, if I were
to empty it in order to drink [the drop] it would have dried it.
He said, 'Go and bring it and bring it to me.' So I brought it to
him, then he took it with his hand then began to say something
which I did not know what it was. He touched it with his hands
and then gave it to me and said, 'O Jabir, call for a pot.' So I
said, 'O the one who possesses the pot of the camp.' Then it was
carried to me and I put it in front of him. Then the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) did this
with his hand in the pot: spread it [his hand] and spread his
fingers then he placed it [hand] in the bottom of the pot and

www.sunniconnect.com l 223

said, 'Take [this] O Jabir and pour it on me and say: In the Name
of Allah’.”
So I poured on him and said: ‘In the Name of Allah’. I saw the
water gush from between the fingers of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) then the pot
overflowed and went round till it was filled then he said, “O
Jabir, invite anyone who has a need for water.” The people
came and drank to their fill. Then I said, “Is there anyone that
remains who has a need?” Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) raised his hand from the
pot when it was full. He [Jabir] added, “The people complained
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) from hunger, so he said, “Perchance Allah will feed
you.”
We came to the shore of the sea then it shuddered with a tremor
then threw out an animal. Then we lit the fire on its side, cooked
and fried it and ate our fill. Jabir said, “Then Fulan [so and so],
Fulan and Fulan – till he counted 5 men – entered its eye socket
and nobody saw us till we exited. Then we took a rib from its
ribs and then made an arch, thereafter we called the biggest
man, the biggest camel in the camp and the biggest seat in the
camp then he passed through without lowering his head.”
And in Saheeh Muslim narrated by Salamah bin al- Akwa‘, he
said, “We travelled to al-Hudaibiyah [a well] with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) whilst we were 1400 – or more than that – and around it
there was 50 heads [people] who had not drunk from it. Then
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) sat on the wall of the well and either he prayed or spat in
it.” [Salamah] He added, “Thereafter it gushed and we drank
the water.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 224

Narrated by al-Miswar and Marwan bin al-Hakam in the
lengthy hadeeth of the Treaty of al-Hudaibiyah, “Then the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) left them and descended to the lowest part of alHudaibiyah on an area with little water so that the people would
take little by little till they finished it. The complaint of thirst
was raised to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) so he took an arrow from his sack and
commanded them to throw it in. By Allah the area did not cease
to flood with water such that they turned away from it.”
This hadeeth has been previously narrated in its totality in [the
section] the Treaty of al-Hudaibiyah which is sufficient and
there is no need for it to be repeated. Ibn Ishaq narrated from
some of them that Najiyah bin Jundab the camel driver threw
the arrow in it. He said it has been mentioned [that it was] alBara’ bin ‘Azib thereafter Ibn Ishaq preferred the first
[opinion].
Narrated by Abdullah, he said, “We used to consider the signs
as blessings and you consider them as fearsome. We were with
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on a journey and the water had become scarce so he said,
'Find a surplus of water.' They brought a vessel with a little
water therein, so he placed his hand in the vessel then he said,
'Come forth to blessed water from Allah the Great and the
Almighty.' I indeed saw the water flow from between the
fingers of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). We used to hear the glorification of the
food [of Allah] when it was eaten.”
Narrated by Abu Raja’, he said, “Imran bin Husain informed us
that they were on a journey with the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and they travelled through

www.sunniconnect.com l 225

the night until it was close to the morning. They took a rest then
their eyes overcame them up until the sun rose [midmorning].
The first to wake from his sleep was Abu Bakr and the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) would not be woken from his sleep till he awoke [on his
own]. Then Umar awoke and then Abu Bakr sat next to his head
and proceeded to say pronounce Allahu Akbar and raise his
voice until the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) awoke. Then he descended and led us in the morning
prayer. A man secluded himself from the people, he had not
prayed with us then when he completed [the prayer] he (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 'O so and so, what
prevented you from praying with us?' He said, 'I was in a state
of Janabah [sexual impurity], then the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) commanded him to make
Tayammum with the earth and pray."
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) made me
ride in front of Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and we had become severely thirsty. Whilst we were
proceeding with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) we met a woman who was sitting [on her
camel] between two bags of water. We asked her, “Where can
we find water?” She replied, “Verily, there is no water.” We
said, “How far is the distance between your family and the
water?” She said, “A day and a night.” We said, “Go to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).” She said, “And what is the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?” Then we brought her to
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). She
told him what she told us except that she informed him that she
had orphans. Then he ordered that the bags of water [be
dismounted from the camel] and wiped over the openings of
them. Then forty of us thirsty men drank till we quenched our

www.sunniconnect.com l 226

thirst and we filled every water skin and vessel we had with us.
We did not ride a camel except that it [the bag] was about to
burst from fullness. Thereafter he said, “Give that which you
have with you.” So some foodstuff and dates were collected for
her, then when she reached her family she said, “I met the
greatest magician of the people or a Prophet as they claimed.”
Thus, Allah guided those people through that woman, then she
embraced Islam and they too embraced Islam.
Narrated by Abu Qatadah, who said, “We were with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) on a journey then he said, 'If you do not find water
tomorrow, you shall become thirsty.' And the first of the people
set off in search of water. I stayed with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his ridinganimal swayed with him then Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) became drowsy, so I helped
him [straighten] and he straightened. Then he swayed so I
helped him [straighten] and he straightened. Thereafter he
swayed till he was about to fall off his riding-animal then he
was alerted and said, 'Who is this man?' So I said, 'Abu
Qatadah, He said, 'Since when have you been journeying?' I
said, since night. He said, 'May Allah protect you as you
protected His Messenger.'
Thereafter he said we should sleep, so he walked towards a tree
and rested then he said, 'Look to see if you can find anyone?' I
said, 'This is a traveler, these two are travelers,' until he reached
7. Thereafter he said, 'Take heed of our prayer [time].' So we
slept and nothing but the heat of the sun woke us then we came
to. Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) rode and we rode for a while, he dismounted and
said, 'Do you have water?' He added [Abu Qatadah]: I said, 'I

www.sunniconnect.com l 227

have a vessel containing some water.' He said, 'Bring it.' He
added: So I gave it to him, then he said, “Take some of it.
Take some of it.” So the people performed the ablution and a
little sip of water remained then he said, 'Hold on to it O Abu
Qatadah, for it shall have news [a usage].'
Thereafter Bilal performed the ’Athan and they prayed the two
units before Fajr, then they prayed Fajr. Then he rode and we
rode then some of them said to one another we have been
neglectful of our prayer, so the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 'What are you saying? If
it is a matter of your worldly affairs then that is your affair and
if it is a matter of your religion then that is for me.'
We said, 'O Messenger of Allah we have been neglectful of our
prayer.' So he said, 'Sleep [at the time of prayer] is not
neglectful, however being awake [and missing prayer] is
neglectful and it is so, then pray it tomorrow on its time.' Then
he said, 'The people perceived [guessed].' They said, “You said
yesterday, ‘If you do not find water tomorrow you will be
thirsty.’ And the people need water.”
He [Abu Qatadah] added: When the people awoke and found
their Prophet was missing, the people said to one another, 'The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) has found water,' and Abu Bakr and Umar were among
the people so they said, 'O people, the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would not precede
you to the water and leave you behind and if the people obey
Abu Bakr and Umar they shall be guided, he [the Prophet] said
this thrice.'

www.sunniconnect.com l 228

Then when the midday heat had heightened the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) appeared, so
they said, 'O Messenger of Allah, we have been perishing from
thirst [so much so] that the necks have been cut.' So he said,
'You shall not perish.' Thereafter he said, 'O Abu Qatadah,
bring the vessel.' So I brought it to him, then he said, 'Open my
water skin for me.” So I opened it and brought it to him. Then
he began to pour it in it [the vessel] and serve the people. The
people crowded round it, so the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 'O people, have good
conduct, for all of you are going to leave full.'
Thus the people drank until nobody but the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and I remained.
Then he poured some for me and said, 'Drink O Abu Qatadah.'
He [Abu Qatadah] said: “I said, ‘You drink [first] O Messenger
of Allah’. He replied, 'The one who serves drink for the people
is the last of them to drink.' So I drank then he drank after me
and the amount [of water] that was previously in the vessel
remained and they were 300.”
Abdullah said, “Imran bin Husain heard me mention this
hadeeth in the Jami‘ Mosque, then he said, 'Who are you?' I
said, 'I am Abdullah bin Rabah al- Ansari.' He said, 'The people
[who were present] are more aware of their incident. Watch
how you speak, for I am one of the seven on that night.' Then
when I finished, he said, 'I did not think that anyone had
memorized this hadeeth apart for myself.'
Narrated by Mu‘adh bin Jabal - then he [Abdullah] mentioned
the hadeeth of combining the prayer in the battle of Tabook till
he said that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “You shall reach the spring of Tabook
tomorrow by the will of Allah and you shall not arrive by it

www.sunniconnect.com l 229

until forenoon. So whosoever arrives there, then he should not
touch any of its water until I arrive.” He [Mu‘adh] added: So
we arrived by it and two men were already present and the
stream was flowing like the strap of a sandal with some water.
So the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) asked them, “Have you touched [consumed] some
of its water?”They said, “Yes.” So the Messenger of Allah
rebuked them and said to them that which Allah allowed him
to say. Then they scooped the water from the spring bit by bit
until it was collected in something. Thereafter the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) washed
his face and his hands and returned it to it [the spring]. Then
the spring [began to] flow with plentiful water. Then the people
drank, thereafter the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “O Mu‘adh, if you live long you
may see what is here filled with gardens.”
We mentioned in the book, al-Wufood from Ziyad bin al-Harith
as-Suda’i the story of his arrival [upon the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)] and he mentioned
a long narration, part of it: Then we said, “O Messenger of
Allah, we have a well which has sufficient water for us in the
winter and we gather around it. And in the summer the water is
scarce so we disperse upon water around us. We have just
accepted Islam and everyone around us is an enemy. So invoke
Allah for us with regards to our well so that its water is
sufficient for us and we can gather around it and we don’t
disperse.”
So he asked for seven stones and scratched them with his hands
and prayed upon them, then he said, “Go with these stones and
when you reach the well then throw one at a time and mention
[the Name of Allah].”Suda’i said, “So we did as he requested,
then we could not see its bed thereafter i.e. the well.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 230

www.sunniconnect.com l 231

Chapter on the multiplication of food at
times of need
His increasing of Laban (soluble yoghurt) in many instances
also. Abu Hurairah narrated: By the One besides Whom there
is no diety, I would lay on my stomach on the ground because
of hunger. I would tie a stone to my stomach and Abu Bakr
passed by. I asked him about a Verse from the Book of Allah.
I asked him so that he would satisfy my hunger, but he passed
by without doing so. Then Umar passed by me and I asked him
about a Verse from the Book of Allah. I did so because perhaps
he would satisfy my hunger. But he also passed by without
doing so. Thereafter, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) passed by me, then he smiled when he saw me
and he knew what was on my face and my inner self. Then he
said, “O Abu Hirr,” I said, “I am at your service, O Messenger
of Allah.” He said, “Follow (me).” He proceeded and I
followed him. He entered the house and asked for permission
(for me) and later allowed me to enter. He saw some Laban in
a pot and asked, “Where is this Laban from?” They said suchand-such person donated it to you. He said, “O Abu Hirr, (short
for Hurairah).” I said, “I am at your service, O Messenger of
Allah.” He said, “Go and call the people of Suffah for me.” The
narrator added: The people of Suffah were the guests of Islam,
they didn’t have family or wealth or anyone to support them
and when charity was brought to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) he would send it to them and
he didn’t take anything from it. Whenever a gift came to him
he would send it to them and took some of it and shared it with
them and that would sadden me. So I (Abu Hurairah) said to
myself, and what is this Laban with the people of Suffah! I am
more deserving of a drink from this Laban that will strengthen
me than them. When they would come and if the Prophet orders
me, I thought if I give them that Laban then I would be left with
www.sunniconnect.com l 232

hardly any Laban. But there was no escape from the obedience
of Allah and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). So I came to them and called them. They
came and sought permission to enter and the Prophet allowed
them and they took their places in the house. He said, “O Abu
Hirr.” I said, “I am at your service, O Messenger of Allah.” He
said, “Take and give to them.” So I took the pot and gave it to
one of them, which he drank till his fill and then returned the
pot to me and I came back to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). Gradually all the people
fully satisfied their thirst. Then he took the pot and placed it on
my hand and then looking at me he smiled and said, “O Abu
Hirr.” I said, “I am at your service, O Messenger of Allah.” He
said, “You and I remain.” I said, “You have spoken the truth,
O Messenger of Allah.” He then said, “Sit and drink.” So I sat
and drank, then he said, “Drink.” I drank it, and he continued
to say so until I said, “No, by the One Who sent you with Truth
I can’t take any more!” He said, “So show me.” So I gave him
the pot and he praised Allah, the Most High, mentioned His
name and drank the remaining.”
Ibn Mas‘ood narrated that: I used to attend sheep belonging to
‘Uqbah Ibn Abu Mu‘ait. One day, the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Abu Bakr
passed by me and said, “O boy, is there any Laban?” I said,
“Yes, but I am entrusted.” The Prophet said, “Is there a female
sheep that hasn’t been mated by a male sheep?” I brought him
a female sheep and he wiped over its udder and milk descended
which he milked into a vessel. He drank some and gave some
to Abu Bakr. Then he said to the udder, “Shrink.” So it shrank
(dried up). Ibn Mas‘ood added: I came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said, “O
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), teach me from these words.” He wiped over my head and

www.sunniconnect.com l 233

said, “O child, May Allah have mercy upon you for you are a
young learning boy."

His increasing of Samn (butter/ghee) for
Umm Sulaim
Hafiz Abu Ya‘la said: Shaiban informed us, Muhammad Ibn
Ziyad Al-Burjumi also informed us from Abuz-Zilal, from
Anas Ibn Malik from his mother that she had a sheep and
gathered from its Samn in an ‘Ukkah (a pot used to carry
Samn). So she filled the ‘Ukkah and sent it with Rabeebah
saying, “O
Rabeebah, give this ‘Ukkah to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him); he can use it as soup.
Rabeebah took it along with her till she met the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said, “O
Messenger of Allah, this is an ‘Ukkah of Samn that Umm
Sulaim sent to you.” He said, “Empty the ‘Ukkah.” She
emptied the ‘Ukkah and then it was returned to her. She left and
arrived when Umm Sulaim wasn’t at home. So she hung the
‘Ukkah on a peg. When Umm Sulaim arrived she saw the
‘Ukkah full and dripping. Umm Sulaim said, “O Rabeebah,
didn’t I command you to take it to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?” She replied, “I
did, and if you don’t believe me go and ask the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)." Umm
Sulaim went accompanied by Rabeebah to the Prophet and
said, “O Messenger of Allah, I sent her with an ‘Ukkah
containing Samn to you.” He said, “Yes you did and she
brought it.” She said, “By the One Who sent you with Truth
and the religion of Truth, it is indeed full and dripping with
Samn!” Anas said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to her, “O Umm Sulaim,
are you amazed that Allah provided for you just as you
www.sunniconnect.com l 234

provided for his Prophet? Eat and feed others.” She said, “I
came to the house and put in a big pot (Qa‘b) of ours such and
such (amount) and left in it that which we used as a soup for a
month or two months.”
Abu Bakr Ibn Muhammad Ibn Hamzah narrated from his
father, from his grandfather that once, The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) left for Tabook and
I was at his service on that journey. I looked at the vessel
containing the Samn and there was left a little in it. I prepared
food for the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and left the vessel out in the sun and slept and woke
suddenly by the gurgle of the vessel. I stood and put my hand
on my head, then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “If you had left it would have
flowed a valley of Samn.”
Jabir narrated: Umm Malik Al-Bahziyyah used to give Samn in
her ‘Ukkah to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), and once while her children were asking
her for soup she didn’t have anything. When she went to her
‘Ukkah, in which she used to deliver food to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him), she found
Samn. She started giving soup to her children until she
squeezed it. She came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). He said, “Did you squeeze
drain it out?” She said, “Yes.” He said, “If you had left it, (then)
there would have remained some in it.”
Thereafter Imam Ahmad narrated with this chain from Jabir
from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him):
A man came to him asking for food. He fed him half a Wasq of
barley. The man didn’t stop eating along with his wife and their
servant until they weighed it. Then the Prophet (Peace and

www.sunniconnect.com l 235

Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “If you hadn’t weighed
it, you would have eaten from it and still it would have
remained in it.”

The story of Abu Talha honoring the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and that which appeared
from the miracles of Prophethood in the
increasing of little food:
Al-Bukhari narrated from Anas Ibn Malik: Abu Talhah said to
Umm Sulaim, “I heard the voice of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was weak, and I
noticed hunger from it, so do you have anything?” She said,
“Yes.” Then she produced tablets of barley, thereafter she
produced yeast which she had. She rolled the bread up and
forced it under my arm and placed some on my head. Then she
sent me to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him).” Anas said, “I took it and I found the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in the Mosque and he had people with him. I stood in front
of them. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, ‘Did Abu Talhah send you?’ I said, ‘Yes.’
He said, ‘With food?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ Then the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to those
who were with him, ‘Stand (leave).’ So he left and I went in
front of them until I came to Abu Talhah and I informed him.
Then Abu Talhah said, “O Umm Sulaim, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came and
the people and we don’t have enough to feed them.” So she
said, “Allah and his Messenger know best.” Then Abu Talhah
went till he met the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). The Messenger of Allah (Peace and

www.sunniconnect.com l 236

Blessings of Allah be upon him) accompanied Abu Talhah and
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Come, O Umm Sulaim, what do you have with
you?” Then she brought the bread and then the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ordered that
the bread be crumbled and Umm Sulaim emptied an ‘Ukkah
and put the soup/fat in it. Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said that which Allah
allowed him to say on it (he prayed on it) then he said, “Allow
10 people to enter.” So he gave them permission, then they ate
till their fill and then they left. Then he said, “Allow 10 people
to enter.” So he gave them permission, then they ate till their
fill and then they left. Then he said, “Allow 10 people to enter.”
So he gave them permission, then they ate till their fill and then
they left. Thereafter he said, “Allow 10 people to enter.” So all
of the people ate till their fill and they were 70 or 80 in
number.”
Samurah narrated: A bowl was brought to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) of Thareed
(a kind of meat dish) and they all ate from it from morning till
Zuhr. Some people would leave then others would sit. Then a
man said to him: “Was it filled each time?” He said, “From
what are you amazed? It was filled from here,” and he pointed
to the sky.

The story of Siddeeq’s bowl
It may be the bowl which is mentioned in the Hadith of
Samurah Ibn Jundab. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr narrated: The people of Suffah
were poor people and the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said on one occasion, “Whosoever has the

www.sunniconnect.com l 237

food of two people then he should invite a third, and whosoever
has the food for four then he should invite a fifth or a sixth,” or
words to that effect. Abu Bakr came with three and the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) went with 10. Abu
Bakr went with three saying, “It was my father, my mother and
I.” (The narrator added: I don’t know if he said, “My wife and
my servant from our house and Abu Bakr’s house.”) Abu Bakr
had supper with the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and stayed until he prayed Isha’ then he returned and
waited till the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) had eaten his supper. Then he came after a
portion of the night that Allah willed had passed. His wife said
to him, “What held you back from your guests or guest?” He
said, “Didn’t you serve them supper?” She said, “They refused
until you come (the family of Abu Bakr) they offered them
however they were overcome (in attempting to persuade the
guests). So I went and hid.” Then Abu Bakr said to his son
Abdur Rahman, “O ignorant one.” Then he cursed him (saying
“may your nose or ear be cut”) and said, “Eat,” - and in a
narration – “Not pleasantly (rebuking or cursing them for
waiting for him).” He said, “I shall not eat.” By Allah we
wouldn’t take a morsel except that it was replaced from where
we took it from (i.e. the bowl) or more than that until they were
all full and the food become more than it was before they ate.
Then Abu Bakr looked and saw that it was something left or
more, so he said to his wife – in another narration – “What is
this, O sister of Bani Firas tribe?” She said, “No, by the pleasure
of my eyes. It is three times more than it was.” So Abu Bakr
ate from it and said, “It was Satan,” – i.e. his oath not to eat –
then he ate another morsel of food then he took the dish to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and it
remained with him till the morning. And there was an
agreement between us and the people and the time had finished.
So we split into 12 men and every man had people with him

www.sunniconnect.com l 238

And Allah (SWT) knows best how many were with each man.
Then they all ate – or words to that effect – and others said, “So
we knew, from the word knowledge (instead of the word split
mentioned earlier).” Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr narrated
that, “Once we were 130 with the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him). The Prophet said, ‘Does
any of you have food?’ One man had a Sa‘ of food. Then a tall
scruffy haired idolater came with some sheep, so the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “For sale or
a gift?” Or he said, “Is it a gift?” He said, “No it is for sale.” So
he bought a sheep from him and it was cooked and he asked
that the liver be fried. Abdur-Rahman said, “By Allah there was
none from the 130 except that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) sliced a piece of liver for
him. If he was present he gave it to him and if he was absent he
saved it for him.” He added, “He made two bowls from it. So
we all ate from them and we were full. A little remained in the
two bowls so we carried it on the camel.”
Abu Sa‘eed or Abu Hurairah – al-A‘mash was doubtful –
narrated, “In the Battle of Tabook, the people were afflicted by
hunger so they said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, would you give us
permission so that we can sacrifice our camels, (that were used
for irrigation) then eat and use its fat as oil (for lightening fires
and other uses)?’ The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, ‘Do so.’ Then Umar(May Allah be
pleased with him)came and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, if you
do that then our transport (camels) will be lessened, but instead
call for their surplus provisions from them and invoke Allah for
them that He bestows Blessings upon them (surplus
provisions).’ Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Yes.” Then he asked for
a sheet which was spread out, thereafter he called for their
surplus provisions. All of them would come one by one with a

www.sunniconnect.com l 239

handful of corn and would bring a handful of dates, and nuts
till a little sufficient amount was collected on the sheet.
Thereafter the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) invoked blessings and said, “Place in your
utensils/vessels.” So they collected in their utensils to the fill.
And they ate till their fill and still remained a lot of it. Then the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “I testify that there is no deity worthy of worship
except Allah and that I am the Messenger of Allah. No slave
meets Allah with them (the two testimonies of faith) without
doubting and is screened from Paradise (i.e. he will enter
Paradise).”
Iyas Ibn Salamah narrated from his father, “We left with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) for the Battle of Khaibar and we were suffering from
exhaustion to the extent that we thought about sacrificing some
of our camels. The Prophet of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) asked for our provisions and we gathered
our provisions. We spread a sheet for him and the people’s
provision was put on the sheet." The narrator added, “I looked
to estimate as to how much was there. I calculated it as being
the same as a grazing she goat (i.e. the collection of provisions)
while we were 1,400.” He added: "So we ate till we were all
full; we also filled our pockets. Then the Prophet of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) asked if there was
ablution water?” The narrator added: Then a man came with a
water skin with a very little water inside it. Then he emptied it
in a vessel and all of us performed the ablution. We poured it
over 1,400 men., 8 men came and asked, “Is there any water for
purification?” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “The ablution water has finished.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 240

The story of Jabir (May Allah be pleased with
him) and his father’s debt and his increasing
of dates
Jabir narrated: His father passed away while he was in debt, “I
came to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and I said: My father left a debt, and I don’t have except
that which date-tree produces, yet its produce doesn’t comply
with the heavy debt upon him. He went with me so that the
creditors don’t rebuke me. He walked around a threshold of
container of dates and supplicated and walked again and
supplicated around another container. Then he sat on it and
said, “Remove it.” So he repaid them whatever was due to them
and similar to it remained with us.

The story of Salman in the Prophet’s
increasing of that piece of gold to clear his
debt
Salman Al-Khair said, “When I said: where is this in proportion
to that debt which is upon me, O Messenger of Allah? The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) took it and turned it on its tongue, and he said, “Take this
and repay them from it.” I took it and I returned their right to
them from it completely 40 ’Ooqiyyah.”
Abu Hurairah narrated, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) was in an expedition and they
were afflicted with hunger so he said, “O Abu Hurairah, do you
have anything?” Abu Hurairah said, “Yes I have some dates in
a sack that I own.” He said, “Bring it.” Abu Hurairah said, “I
brought the sack.” The Prophet said, “Bring a sheet.” I brought
the sheet and spread it. Then he put his hand in the sack and

www.sunniconnect.com l 241

grabbed the dates and found there were only 21. Then he picked
every date and mentioned the Name of Allah over them and
said, “Call so-and-so and his companions.” They came and ate
their fill and left. He again said, “Call so-and-so and his
companions.” Then they ate their fill and left. He did the same
again and there was still a surplus. Then he asked me to sit. I
sat and he and I ate. Yet some dates remained so I put them
back it in the sack and he said to me, “O Abu Hurairah, if you
want some put your hand in it and take but don’t resist lest it
resist you, i.e. finish.” He added: And I didn’t wish for dates
except that I put my hand inside it. I took 50 Wasq from it in
the path of Allah. And it was attached behind my saddle, and it
dropped in the era of Uthman. Later, it disappeared.”
Jabir narrated: A man came to the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) asking for food, so he gave him half a
Wasq of barley. The man didn’t stop eating from it with his
wife and their guest until they measured it. He came to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who told
him, “If you hadn’t measured it, and would have eaten from it,
it would have remained with you.”
Jabir narrated that Umm Malik used to give Samn in her
‘Ukkah to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). While her children were asking her for
soup, she didn’t have anything so she went to her ‘Ukkah. In it,
she found Samn. She continued having soup for her children
until she squeezed it. And she came to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who said, “Did you
squeeze it (drain it out)?” She said, “Yes.” He said, “If you had
left it, it would have remained there.”
Abu Hurairah narrated that a disbeliever came to the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) as a guest.

www.sunniconnect.com l 242

A sheep was milked for him and he drank its milk. The Prophet
ordered another sheep to be milked and he drank its milk. He
ordered another sheep to be milked and he drank the milk until
he drank the milk of seven sheep. The disbeliever woke up in
the morning and accepted Islam. He came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) who ordered
a sheep to be milked and he drank from its milk. The Prophet
ordered another for him but he couldn’t finish it. The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “The Muslim drinks in one intestine but the
disbeliever drinks in 7 intestines.”
Dukain Ibn Sa‘eed Al-Khath‘ami narrated, “We came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and, we were 440 in number, asking him for food. The
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to
Umar, “Get up and donate to them.” He said, “O Messenger of
Allah, except that which is sufficient for me and my children
for 4 months.” He said, “Get up and donate to them.” Umar
said, “O Messenger of Allah, I hear and obey.” Then Umar
stood and we stood with him and he led us to a room of his and
produced the key from his pocket and opened the door. Dukain
said,
“There were dates in the room the amount of a young grazing
camel/cow that has stopped feeding.” Umar said, “Take as you
wish.” Dukain said, “Then everyone of us took his needs as he
wished, then he glanced and I was from the last of them and it
was though we never took a single date from him.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 243

Chapter on following of the trees with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)
Jabir Ibn Abdullah narrated, “We traveled with the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) until we
reached a wide valley. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) went to relieve himself and I
followed him with a vessel of water. The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) looked on and
couldn’t find anything to cover himself with. He saw two trees
on the edge of the valley. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) went to one of them and took
a branch from its branches and said, “Follow me with the
permission of Allah.” It followed him like a camel Makhshoosh
(with a piece of wood through its nose with a rope tied to it)
that follows its master. Then he came to the other one and took
a branch from its branches and said, “Follow me with the
permission of Allah.” And it also followed him. When he was
midway he brought them together and said, “Cover me with the
permission of Allah.” They were joined together. Jabir said, “I
left quickly fearing that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) would sense my closeness and
might distance himself. So I sat and spoke to myself and looked
once and saw the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) coming and I saw the trees falling apart and
each one of them stood on its trunk. I saw the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) standing and
indicating with his head like this: “left and right.”
Anas narrated, “Jibreel came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) one day when he was
upset, stained with blood from an attack from some of the
people of Makkah.” Anas added: He asked him, “What is
www.sunniconnect.com l 244

wrong with you?” He said, “They did to me and they did, i.e.,
hurt me.” Anas added: Then Jibreel said to him: “Do you want
me to show you a sign?” He said, “Yes.” He looked at a tree
behind the valley and said, “Call that tree.” He called it and it
came running and stood in front of him. Then Jibreel said,
“Order it so that it returns.” So he commanded it and it returned
to its place. Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “That’s sufficient for me as a sign.”
Ibn Abbas narrated: A man came to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) from the tribe of Amir and
said, “O Messenger of Allah, show me the seal that is between
your shoulders because I am from the most learned of people
in magic.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “Shall I not show you a sign?” He
said, “Indeed.” He looked at a date-palm tree and told the man,
“Call that cluster of dates.” The man called it and it came
skipping till it stood in front of him. The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Return.”
And it returned to its place. The Amiri man said, “O family of
the tribe of Amir, I haven’t seen a man greater in magic than
this man like today.”
Ibn Umar narrated: We were with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) during a journey,
where a Bedouin approached and after coming close the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Where do you want to go?” He said, “To my
family.” He said, “Do you want to go to goodness?” He said,
“What is that (goodness)?” He said, “Bear witness: There is no
deity worthy of worship except Allah, Alone, without a partner
and that Muhammad is his slave and Messenger.” He said, “Do
you have a proof of what you say?” He said, “This tree.” The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 245

him) called it and it was at the edge of the valley. So it came
dragging itself on the ground till it stood in front of the Prophet.
He asked it to make the Shahadah (testimony of Islam) three
times so it made the testimony that he (the Prophet) was as he
claimed. Then it returned to its roots and the Bedouin returned
to his people and said, “If they follow me I will bring them to
you and if not I will return to you and remain with you.”

The tree trunk yearning for the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and sadness due to his departure from it
It has been narrated in a Hadith from a group of the
Companions with many chains that provide certainty with the
Imams of this affair and the knights of this field (Hadith).
Al-Qadi Iyad said in his book Ash- Shifa’ and it is a wellknown Hadith, widespread, Mutawatir (related from many
paths due to their number providing certain authenticity) and
narrated by the writers of the Saheeh and as between 13-19
Companions narrated it, from them: Ubayy, Jabir, Anas, Ibn
Umar, Ibn Abbas, Sahl Ibn Sa‘d, Abu Sa‘eed, Buraidah, Umm
Salamah and Al-Muttalib Ibn Abu Wada‘ah.
Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b narrated from his father, “The Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to give Khutba
(speech) using a date-tree trunk as a rest as the Mosque was in
the shade. He used to address the people leaning on that trunk.
Someone from the Companions said, “O Messenger of Allah,
can we make you a pulpit that you can stand on during Fridays
so that you can make the people hear your Khutbah?” He said,
“Yes.” Three steps were built which were used as the pulpit.
When the pulpit was made and was fixed where the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) wanted it,
www.sunniconnect.com l 246

the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) decided to stand on it and give the Khutbah. As he walked
toward it and passed by the trunk that he used to lean on, it cleft
and split and started crying. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) descended from the pulpit and
when he heard the voice of the tree trunk, he came close to it
and put his hands over it to make it calm down and he returned
to the pulpit. When the Mosque was destroyed, Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b
took that tree trunk and it remained with him till it perished and
was eaten by worms and thrown into the ruins.”

The stone’s glorification (of Allah) in the
Prophet’s hand
Abu Dharr narrated, “I do not mention Uthman except with
goodness after something which I witnessed. I used to be a
watchman who used to search for the moments of seclusion for
Messenger of Allah. One day I saw him sitting alone and I
ceased the opportunity of his seclusion. I came and sat in front
of him. Abu Bakr also came and gave the greetings and sat on
the right side of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him). Thereafter, Umar came and gave the
greetings and sat on the right side of Abu Bakr. Then Uthman
came and gave the greetings and sat on the right side of Umar.
In front of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) were seven stones – or it is said 9 stones.
He took them in his hands and they began to glorify (Allah)
which I heard from them the humming like the humming of the
bee. When he put them down they became quiet. Then he took
them and put them in Abu Bakr’s hands and they began to
glorify (Allah) which I heard from them the humming like the
humming of the bee. Then he put them down and they became
quiet. Thereafter, he took them and put them in the hands of
Umar and they started glorifying (Allah) which I heard from
www.sunniconnect.com l 247

them the humming like the humming of the bee. He also put
them down and they became quiet. Thereafter, the Messenger
of Allah took them and placed them in Uthman’s hands and
they began to glorify (Allah) which I heard from them the
humming like the humming of the bee. He put them down and
they became quiet. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, 'This is the Caliphate of Prophethood.'
Jabir Ibn Samurah narrated, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, ‘I know a stone in
Makkah that used to greet me before I was sent (as a Prophet).
I indeed recognize it now’.”
We have mentioned earlier in the section Al-Mab‘ath (the
beginning of Prophethood) that when he returned after
receiving the Revelation he wouldn’t pass by a stone, a tree,
clots of mud or anything except that they said to him Assalamu
Alaika Ya Rasoolallah. We mentioned in the Battles of Badr
and Hunain his hurling of a handful of soil (and it reached the
Kuffar despite their distance from him) and his order of his
Companions to follow it with a true attack so that help, victory,
and assistance will occur soon after that. As for the Battle of
Badr, then Allah said in that context: And you (O Muhammad)
threw not when you did throw but Allah threw. (Soorah AlAnfal: 17) As for the Battle of Hunain, we have mentioned it in
the Hadith with its chains and wordings which suffices
mentioning it here.
Another Hadith: We have mentioned in regard to the Battle of
the Conquest that when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) entered the Haram Mosque
and found idols around the Ka‘bah he began to poke them with
something in his hand and said, “The Truth has come and the
falsehood has perished, falsehood always perishes. Say: The

www.sunniconnect.com l 248

truth has come and the falsehood (Iblees) doesn’t create
anything nor does it resurrect anything.” And in a narration,
“He didn’t point to an idol from them except that it tumbled on
its neck.” In another narration, “Except that it fell.”
‘A’ishah narrated: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) entered upon me while I was
wearing a garment with pictures on it. He removed it and said,
“The people receiving most severe punishment on the Day of
Judgment will be those who try to resemble (draw) the creation
of Allah, i.e., that which has a soul.” Al-Awza‘i said: ‘A’ishah
said, “A shield was brought to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with a picture of an eagle.
He put his hand on it and then Allah, the Great and the
Almighty, caused it to disappear.”

Chapter about animals from the miracles of
Prophethood; the story of the chanting camel
and its prostration to him and its complaint to
him
Anas Ibn Malik narrated: A household from the Ansar tribe had
a camel which they used for irrigation purposes and it became
hostile toward them and refused to be controlled. The Ansar
came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and said, “We have a camel that we would use
for irrigation and it has become hostile toward us and refuses
to be controlled. The agriculture and the date trees have become
thirsty.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said to his Companions, “Stand (leave).” So they
stood and left. When he entered the (date-tree) garden, the
camel was in its place. The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) walked toward it then the Ansar said, “O

www.sunniconnect.com l 249

Messenger of Allah, it has become like a dog and we fear its
attack upon you.” He said, “No harm shall afflict me from it.”
When the camel looked at the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) it walked toward him until it
came close to him and fell in prostration. The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) held it by its
forehead in a way more subservient than it ever had been till he
made it work. Thereafter, his Companions said to him, “O
Messenger of Allah, this is an animal that doesn’t have intellect
yet it prostrates before you and we are more worthy that we
prostrate to you.” He said, “It is not befitting for a human being
to prostrate before another human being. And it if it was
befitting for a human being to prostrate before another then I
would have commanded the woman to prostrate before her
husband due to the greater rights he has upon her. By the One
in Whose Hands is my soul, if there was a wart from his feet to
the parting of his head seeping with pus and she faced him then
licked it, she would have still not fulfilled his right (upon her).”
And this is a good chain and An-Nasa’i narrated a portion of it
from the Hadith of Khalaf Ibn Khaleefah with it (same chain).
Ya‘la Ibn Murrah Ath-Thaqafi narrated: I witnessed three
matters (miracles) from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). While we were traveling with
him we passed by a camel irrigating the land. When the camel
saw him it shuffled and it dropped its head. The Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) stood in front of it and
said, “Where is the owner of this camel?” When he came, the
Prophet said, “Sell it to me.” He said, “No, rather I grant it to
you.” He again said, “No, rather sell it to me.” He replied, “No,
rather we grant it to you, it belongs to someone who doesn’t
own a livelihood other than it.” He said, “If you mention this
from its affair, then it is suffering from much work and a lack
of feeding, so look after it.” The narrator added: Then we

www.sunniconnect.com l 250

traveled and we stopped at a place where the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) slept. There
a tree came dragging itself until it enveloped him and then it
returned to its place. When he woke up I mentioned that to him.
He said, “It is a tree that sought permission from its Lord to
give greetings to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) so he allowed it.” The narrator added:
Then we journeyed till we came to some water where a woman
came to him with her child who was possessed. The Prophet
held it by the nose and said, “Exit, for indeed I am Muhammad,
the Messenger of Allah.” The narrator added: Then we traveled
and when we returned from our journey we passed by that
water and the woman came with a sheep (which was) sound for
a sacrifice and some Laban. He commanded her to take back
the sheep which was sound for a sacrifice and he commanded
his Companions to drink the Laban which they did. Then he
asked about her child. She replied, “By the One Who sent you
with Truth we haven’t seen a problem with him after you left.”

Hadith of the sheep’s prostration before the
Prophet
Anas Ibn Malik narrated, “The Prophet entered a courtyard
belonging to the Ansar and Abu Bakr, Umar and a man from
the Ansar were with him, and therein were sheep and they
prostrated before him. Abu Bakr said, “O Messenger of Allah,
we are more deserving that we prostrate before you than these
sheep.” He said, “It isn’t appropriate for anyone to prostrate
before another and if it was appropriate for someone to
prostrate before another I would have indeed commanded the
woman to prostrate before her husband”. Ghareeb Hadith
collected by fewer than 2 narrators throughout its chain and in
its chain is someone who is unknown. And Allah (SWT) knows
best.
www.sunniconnect.com l 251

The story of the wolf and its testimony of the
Prophethood
Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri narrated: A wolf attacked a sheep,
grabbed and took it away. The shepherd searched for it and
retrieved it. The wolf sat on its tale and said, “Do you not fear
Allah that you snatch from me a provision which Allah has
given to me?” He said, “My amazement, a wolf sits on its tail
and speaks to me with the speech of man?” The wolf said,
“Shall I not inform you of something more amazing than that?
Muhammad g in Yathrib (old name for Madinah) tells the
people news which has come before.” Abu Sa‘eed said: The
shepherd went on herding his sheep until he reached Madinah,
tied them to a corner of its corners and came to the Messenger
of Allah g and informed him about the incident. The Messenger
of Allah g called for a congregation prayer. After that he left
and told the shepherd, “Tell them.” The shepherd told them.
The Messenger of Allah g said, "He spoke the truth. By the One
in Whose Hands is my soul, the hour shall not be established
until the beasts speak to the people and the tassel of the man’s
whip shall speak to him and the strap of his sandals. And his
thigh shall inform him of what his family (wife) did after him.”
A man from Muzainah tribe or Juhainah narrated: The
Messenger of Allah g offered Fajr prayers and then suddenly
close to 100 wolves started heading forward like packs of
wolves do. The Messenger of Allah g said to them, “Sacrifice
for them some of your food, you can be safe from (sacrificing)
other than that.” So they complained their need to the
Messenger of Allah g (for the food) He said, “Then ask them
(to leave).” The narrator said: They asked them to leave and
they left howling.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 252

Al-Qadi Iyad spoke about the authenticity of the Hadith of the
wolf and narrated it from Abu Hurairah,
Abu Sa‘eed and Uhban Ibn Aws and was nicknamed, “The one
who speaks to wolves.” And Ibn Wahb narrated that a similar
occurrence happened to Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb and Safwan Ibn
Umayyah regarding a wolf which they found had taken a deer.
Then the deer entered the Haram and the wolf disappeared and
they were amazed by that. But the wolf said, “More amazing
than that: Muhammad Ibn Abdullah in
Madinah calls you to paradise and you call him to the fire.”
Then Abu Sufyan said, “By Al-Lat and AlUzza, if I mention this to the people of Makkah its people will
certainly leave.”

The story of the beast that was in the house of
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and would respect him and
venerate him
Jabir narrated, ‘A’ishah i said, “The family of the Prophet had
a beast and when the Messenger of Allah g would leave, it
would play and become active roaming around. When it
perceived that the Messenger of Allah g had entered, it sat and
didn’t move when the Messenger of Allah g was in the house
out of respect for him.”

The story of the lion
We have mentioned in the biography of Safeenah the Mawla of
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) his Hadith when the ship had been ripped apart. Then he
floated on a board from it until he entered an island in the sea
and found a lion on it. Safeenah said to him, “O AbulHarith, I

www.sunniconnect.com l 253

am Safeenah the Mawla of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)." The narrator said, “He struck
my shoulder and stayed adjacent to me until he set me on the
path, then sometime passed and I saw that he was giving me
the farewell.”
Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadir said: Safeenah the Mawla of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) became lost from the army in the land of the Romans or
he was captured in the land of the Romans. He left looking for
the army when suddenly he was confronted by a lion. He said,
“O Abul-Harith, I am the Mawla of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Such-and-such was from my affair.” The lion advanced
wagging his tail until it stood still by his side. Everytime he
heard a noise he would move toward it. Then it advanced
walking to his side and remained like that until he took him to
the army. Then the lion left him. Narrated by Al-Baihaqi.

The Hadith of the gazelle
Umm Salamah, the wife of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him), narrated: While the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was on a rock in
the ground cave, suddenly someone shouted, “O Messenger of
Allah. O Messenger of Allah.” The Prophet said: I turned but I
couldn’t see anyone. Then I walked a short distance. Then
suddenly I heard the voice, “O Messenger of Allah. O
Messenger of Allah.” I turned but I couldn’t see anyone.
Suddenly the voice was shouting for me. I followed the voice
and I stumbled upon a deer tied up in a rope and I saw a
Bedouin wrapped in a blanket in the sun. Thereafter the deer
said, “O Messenger of Allah, this Bedouin hunted me before,
while I have 2 fawns (young deer) on this mountain. If you can

www.sunniconnect.com l 254

see that you should free me so that I may suckle them. Then I
will return to my shackle?” He said, “And will you do so?” It
replied, “May Allah punish me with punishment of Al‘Ashshar if I don’t comply.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) set it free and it went and
suckled its fawns and returned. While the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was tying it, the
Bedouin woke up and said, “May my father and mother be
sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah. I seized it shortly
before, do you have a need for it?” He said, “Yes.” He said, “It
is yours.” He freed it and it left running in the desert in delight
beating its legs into the ground saying, “I testify that there is no
god worthy of worship except Allah and that you are the
Messenger of Allah.”

The Hadith of the lizard despite its Nakarah
and Gharabah
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab narrated: The Messenger of Allah g was
with a group of his Companions when a Bedouin came from
the tribe of Sulaim and he had hunted a lizard and put it in his
pocket so he could take it to his resting place to fry it and eat it.
When he saw the group he said, “What is this?” They said,
“This is the one who says he is a Prophet," then he came and
split the people and said, "By Al-Lat and Al-Uzza, the sky
doesn’t hold (under it) a man who speaks more hated to me than
you, nor more detested than you. And if it wasn’t for my fear
that my people will call me impatient then I would have
certainly rushed toward you and killed you. Then the black, red,
white and other people would have been delighted with your
death.” Then Umar Ibn Al-Khattab said, “O Messenger of
Allah, allow me to kill him.” He said, “O Umar, don’t you
know that the fore-bearing person would have been a Prophet?”
Then he approached the Bedouin and said, “What made you

www.sunniconnect.com l 255

say what you said, made you say falsehood and not honor me
in my gathering?” He replied, “And you speak to me also?” –
out of disrespect for the Messenger of Allah g – “By Al-Lat and
Al-Uzza I will not believe in you until this lizard believes in
you.” He produced the lizard from his pocket and threw it in
front of the Messenger of Allah g. The Messenger of Allah g
said, “O lizard.” The lizard responded to him with the clear
language of Arabic. All of the people heard it say: "I am at your
service and pleasure, O the most brilliant of those who fulfilled
the Day of Judgment.” He said, “Who do you worship, O
lizard?” It said, “The One Whose throne is above the sky and
on the Earth is his authority, in the sea is his path, in the
Paradise is his mercy and in the Hellfire is his punishment.” He
said, “So who am I, O lizard?” It said, “The Messenger of the
Lord of the worlds and the Seal of the Prophets. The one who
believes in you succeeds and wretched is the one who rejects
you.” Then the Bedouin said, “By Allah I shall not follow a
story about you after what I saw. By Allah I came to you and
there was no one on the face of the Earth more hated to me than
you, but today you are indeed more beloved to me than my
father, my eye and myself. And I indeed love you with my inner
self and my exterior, and my secret and my apparent. And I
bear witness that there is no god worthy of worship except
Allah and that you are the Messenger of Allah g.” The
Messenger of Allah g said, “All praise be to Allah, the One
Who guided you through me. Indeed this religion shall be
victorious and won’t be defeated and shall not be accepted
without prayer. And the prayer isn’t accepted without the
Qur’an.” He said, “Teach me.” So he taught him a Soorah: 'Say:
He is Allah the One.' He said, “Tell me something extra,
because I haven’t heard anything long or short which is better
than this from speech.” He said, “O Bedouin, this is the speech
of Allah, it is not poetry. Verily, if you read, the Soorah “Say:
He is Allah the One,” once then you shall have the reward of

www.sunniconnect.com l 256

the one who read a third of the Qur’an. And if you read it twice,
then you shall have the reward of the one who read two-thirds
of the Qur’an. And if you read it thrice, then you shall have the
reward of the one who read all of the Qur’an.” The Bedouin
said, “What a wonderful God, He accepts a little action and
gives in abundance.” Then the Messenger of Allah g said, “Do
you have any wealth?” He said, “There isn’t a man in the entire
Sulaim tribe who is poorer than me.” Then the Messenger of
Allah g said to his Companions, “Donate to him.” They donated
to him till they made him proud. Then Abdur-Rahman Ibn Awf
stood and said, “O Messenger of Allah, I a she-camel with me
which has been pregnant for 10 months. It is not extremely
valuable nor is it defective. It follows and isn’t followed
(obedient), it was given to me in the Battle of Tabook. Shall I
use it to get closer to Allah by giving it to the Bedouin?” The
Messenger of Allah g said, “You described your she-camel, so
that I describe to you your wealth with Allah on the Day of
Judgment?” He said, “Yes.” He said, “You have a she-camel
made from interior pearl, its legs are from green aquamarine
(precious stone), its neck is from yellow aquamarine upon it is
a howdah (carriage). Upon the howdah is a type of silk and
brocade. It shall take you on the Sirat (pathway over Hellfire)
like rapid lightning; everyone who sees you shall envy you on
the Day of Judgment.” Then Abdur-Rahman said, “I am
satisfied.” Then the Bedouin left and 1,000 Bedouins from
Sulaim tribe met him sitting upon 1,000 riding animals, armed
with 1,000 swords and spears. He said to them, “Where are you
going?” They said, “We are going to the one who belittled our
gods; we will kill him.” He said, “Don’t do that. I bear witness
that there is no god deserving worship except Allah and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” He told them the story,
and they all said, “We bear witness that there is no god
deserving worship except Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah.” Then they all also came and the

www.sunniconnect.com l 257

Messenger of Allah g was informed. He met them without an
upper garment and they descended from their saddles and came
close to him saying, “There is no god deserving worship except
Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” They
said, “O Messenger of Allah, command us with your
command.” He said, “Be under the flag of Khalid Ibn
AlWaleed.”

Hadith of the donkey
More than one of the great scholars including imams have
rejected it from Abu Manzoor saying: When Allah made his
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) victorious
in Khaibar his share was 4 pairs of sandals, 4 pairs of leather
socks, 10 Awaq of gold and silver, a black donkey and a heap
of dates. The narrator said: The Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) spoke to the donkey, and he spoke to
him. He asked it, “What is your name.” He said, “Yazeed Ibn
Shihab. Allah took 60 donkeys from the descendants of my
grandfathers, none of them was used except by a Prophet. None
from the descendants of my grandfather remains except me and
there is none from the Prophets that remains other than you and
I expected that you would ride me. Before you, I belonged to a
Jew and I used to stumble with him deliberately. He used to
starve me and strike my back.” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “I name you Ya‘foor, O
Ya‘foor.” He replied, “I am at your service.” He said, “Do you
desire mates?” He said, “No.” The Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) used to ride it for his need, and
when he dismounted from it he would send it to the gate of a
man and it would come to the door and hit it with his head.
When the owner of the house would come out it would indicate
with its head toward the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). Thereafter, when the Prophet

www.sunniconnect.com l 258

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) died it came to a
well that belonged to Abul-Haitham Ibn At-Tayyihan and fell
inside it; it became its grave out of sorrow for the passing away
of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him).

The Hadith of Al-Hummarah (robin) a wellknown bird
Abdur-Rahman Ibn Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood narrated from his
father: We were with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) on a journey, and we passed
by a tree with two young robin chicks and we captured them.
The narrator added that the robin came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while it was
close to the ground and said, “Who has taken my chicks?” The
narrator said, “We did.” The Prophet said, “Return them.” So
we returned them to their place and the robin didn’t return.

Another Hadith
Abu Hurairah narrated that We used to pray Isha’ with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him). While in prayers he would prostrate, Al-Hasan and AlHusain would pounce upon his back. When he would raise his
head he would take them away and place them down gently.
They would do the same again when the Prophet would
prostrate. The Prophet used to separate them after the prayers
and put them on his and left. Then I would come to him and
say, “O Messenger of Allah, shall I not take them to their
mother?” He would say, “No.” But when the lightning flashed
then he said, “Take them to their mother.” And they continued
to walk in the light until they entered the house.

www.sunniconnect.com l 259

Another Hadith
Muhammad Ibn Hamzah Ibn Amr Al-Aslami narrated from his
father, “We were with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) on a journey then we split up
on a dark night. My fingers lit up until they gathered their backs
upon it and none of them dispersed as my fingers were beaming
with light.”

Another Hadith
Abu ‘Abs narrated that he would offer prayers with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him), and then would return to Banu Harithah tribe. Once, he
left on a dark rainy night and his stick lit up for him until he
entered the dwelling of Banu Harithah tribe. Al-Baihaqi said:
Abu ‘Abs is from those who fought in Badr.
I say: We have narrated from Yazeed Ibn Al-Aswad – and he
was from the Tabi‘een – that he prayed in congregation in a
mosque in Damascus from Jisreen, and maybe the toe of his
foot showed light for him on a dark night. we mentioned earlier
in the story of At-Tufail Ibn Amr’s embracement of Islam in
Makkah before the Hijrah, and that he asked the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) for a sign
that he could use to invite the people to Islam. When he went
to them and descended from Ath-Thaniyyah a light shone
between his eyes, so he said, “O Allah, may they not say that it
is a defect.” So Allah moved the light to the end of his whip.
Thereafter, they began to see it like a candle.

www.sunniconnect.com l 260

Another Hadith in which is a sign for a Wali
from this Ummah
It is considered to be from the miracles because everything
which has been affirmed from a Wali (friend of Allah) is a
miracle for his Prophet.
Abu Sabrah An-Nakha‘i narrated that a man from Yemen came
and his donkey died while he was on the journey. He stayed
and prayed two Raka‘ahs and said, “O Allah, I have come from
Ad-Datheenah as a Mujahid for your path and seeking your
pleasure, and I bear witness that you bring life to the dead and
resurrect those that are in the graves. Don’t allow anyone to
have a favor over me today, I ask you today to resurrect my
donkey.” Then the donkey stood up flapping its ears. AlBaihaqi said: This has an authentic chain.
We have mentioned earlier in the chapter of his suckling that
which occurred with the donkey of Haleemah As-Sa‘diyyah
(the lady who suckled the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) in his infancy) and how it would beat the
other riders in its return when the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) rode with her when he was
a baby and the riders were held back due to it stopping (because
of the donkeys’ slow pace) when they went to Makkah.
Similarly, his blessings became apparent to them on their Sharif
which was the she-camel that they used to milk and their sheep,
their Samn and abundance of its milk.

Another story with the incident of Al-‘Ala’
Ibn Al-Hadrami
Anas narrated that I witnessed three matters which if they were
in Bani Isra’eel, the nations wouldn’t have shared with them
www.sunniconnect.com l 261

their virtue. We said, “What were they, O Abu Hamzah?” He
said: We were at Suffah with the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) when a migrating woman
came to him with a son of hers who had reached the age of
adolescence. He grouped the woman with the women and
grouped her son with us. It wasn’t long before he was afflicted
by the harsh conditions of Madinah so he became ill for days
and then died. The Prophet covered him and ordered that he be
prepared for burial. He said when we wanted to wash him, “O
Anas, go to his mother and inform her.” He informed her. The
narrator said: She came and sat at his feet and said, “O Allah, I
submitted myself to you voluntarily and turned against the idols
from abstinence and migrated to you out of desire. O Allah,
don’t cause the idol-worshippers to become delighted with my
affliction and don’t burden me from this calamity what I can’t
bear.” The narrator said: By Allah she didn’t finish her words
before he moved his feet and threw the sheet from his face. And
he lived till after Allah had taken his Messenger (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and till after his mother died.
The narrator added: Then Umar prepared an army and made
Al-‘Ala’ Ibn Hadrami in charge of it. Anas said: I was in his
army and we came to our camp and found that our people felt
our arrival and had no water and the heat was intense. Thirst
had exhausted us and our animals and that was on Friday. When
the sun was about to set he prayed two Raka‘ahs and he
stretched his hands in supplication toward the sky and we
couldn’t see anything in the sky (i.e., the rain clouds). He
added: By Allah before he dropped his hands Allah sent a wind
and formed a cloud and it rained until it filled the water
passages. We drank and gave water to our animals and carried
some with us. Then we approached our enemy who had passed
a gulf in the sea to an island. He stood on the gulf and said, “O
Lofty one, O the Great, O Fore-bearing one, O Noble one.”
Then he said, “Traverse in the Name of Allah.” The narrator

www.sunniconnect.com l 262

added: So we traversed, the water didn’t moisten even the
hooves of our riding animals and it wasn’t except a short
passing of time then we attacked the enemy and killed, captured
and apprehended them. Then we came to the gulf where he said
what he mentioned earlier and we traversed and the water
didn’t even moisten the hooves of our riding animals. The
narrator added: A short time passed and he was struck into his
funeral. So we dug for him, washed him and then buried him.
Then a man came after we had buried him and said, “Who is
this?” We said, “This is the best of mankind, this is Ibn AlHadrami.” He said, “This ground repels its dead, so you should
take him to a land that takes the dead.” We said, “What is the
reward of our Companion that we leave him for the beasts to
devour him if we left him here?” The narrator added: We
gathered upon exhuming him, and when we reached the Lahd
(the side chamber where the dead person is placed in the grave)
suddenly our Companion wasn’t in it. And suddenly the Lahd
was a glittering light as far as the eye can see. The narrator
added: We returned the soil and left.

Another story
Al-A‘amsh narrated from some of his Companions,, “We
reached Dijlah River in Baghdad and it was overflowing with
water and the non-believers were behind it. A man from the
Muslims said: “Bismillah,” and he stormed with his horse and
it rose above the water. Then the people said: “Bismillah,” and
they stormed with their horses and rose above the water. The
non-believers looked at them and said: Insane people, insane
people. Then they fled. The narrator added: The people didn’t
lose except a vessel which had a lantern attached to it. When
they exited they obtained war booty and shared it and a man
said, “Who will exchange yellow for white ?”

www.sunniconnect.com l 263

Sulaiman Ibn Al-Mugheerah narrated that Abu Muslim AlKhawlani came to Dijlah while it was throwing wood from its
vastness. He walked on the water and looked at his companions
and said, “Have you lost any of your provisions so we may
supplicate to Allah, the Great and the Almighty.”

The story of Zaid Ibn Kharijah and his words
after his death
Sa‘eed Ibn Al-Musayyab narrated: Zaid Ibn Kharijah Al-Ansari
tribe and then from Al-Harith Ibn AlKhazraj tribe, passed away
in the era of Uthman Ibn Affan and was wrapped in his shroud.
They heard a rumbling coming from his chest and he said,
“Ahmad, Ahmad (was mentioned) in the first (revealed) books.
Abu Bakr was truthful, was truthful (in Muhammad) the
Siddeeq; weak by himself and strong in the command of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) (mentioned) in the
(previous) first books. Umar Ibn Al-Khattab was truthful, was
truthful, strong and trustworthy (mentioned) in the first book.
Uthman Ibn Affan was truthful, was truthful upon their
methodology (Abu Bakr and Umar) 4 (years) had passed and
two (years) remained came with trials. And the strong ate the
weak and news shall come to you about your army, the well of
’Arees. And what is ’Arees well.
Yahya said that Sa‘eed narrated: Then a man died from
Khatmah tribe and was covered in his shroud, then a rumbling
was heard from his chest when he said, “The brother of BanulHarith Ibn Al-Khazraj told the truth, told the truth.”
Al-Bukhari said in At-Tareekh: Zaid Ibn Kharijah Al-Khazraji
Al-Ansari witnessed the Battle of Badr. He passed away in the
era of Uthman and he is the one who spoke after death.

www.sunniconnect.com l 264

Al-Baihaqi said it has been narrated about speaking after death
from many with sound chains. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

The dead speaking and their wonders
Hisham Ibn Ammar said in his book, Al-Mab‘ath, in the chapter
regarding the speech of the dead and their wonders, that
narrated from Rib‘i Ibn Hirash Al-Absi: My brother Ar-Rabee‘
Ibn Hirash fell ill so I nursed him but he died. We went to
prepare his burial, and when we arrived he removed the sheet
from his face and he said, “Assalamu ‘Alaikum.” We replied:
Wa ‘Alaikas-Salam, didn’t you die?” He said, “Indeed,
however, I met my Lord with rest and bounty and a Lord who
isn’t angry. Then He clothed me with clothes of green silk. And
I asked Him to allow me to give you the glad tidings so He
allowed me. The affair is as you see it, so do things correctly
(and if not), try to (do things correctly), give glad tidings and
don’t shun (people) away.” When he said that, it was like a
stone that has fallen in the water.
Thereafter, he narrated many other matters in this chapter and
it was the last of his books.

The story of the child that was suffering from
seizures
This has been mentioned in the narration of Usamah Ibn Zaid,
Jabir Ibn Abdullah and Ya‘la Ibn Murrah Ath-Thaqafi in the
story of the camel, the Hadith in its complete form. Imam
Ahmad narrated from Ibn Abbas: A woman came with her son
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) and said, “O Messenger of Allah, he has a touch of
madness and it effect’s him when we eat so he spoils our food
for us.” The narrator said: The Messenger of Allah stroked his

www.sunniconnect.com l 265

chest and supplicated for him. He vomited once and it came out
of him like a black puppy.

Another Hadith
Ata’ Ibn Abu Rabbah narrated that Ibn Abbas said to me, “Shall
I not show you a woman from the people of Paradise?” I said:
“Yes.” He said, “This black woman came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said, ‘I
have seizures and my body becomes exposed, so pray to Allah
for me’.” He said, “If you wish, you can be patient and Paradise
is for you. And if you wish I pray to Allah for you to cure you.”
She said: "No, rather I shall remain patient so ask Allah that I
don’t become naked – or that my clothes aren’t removed from
me.” The narrator said: So he prayed for her.

Another Hadith in that regard
Uthman Ibn Hunaif narrated that a blind man came to the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said,
“O Messenger of Allah, ask Allah to cure me.” He said, “If you
wish, I will delay that because it is better for your afterlife. And
if you wish, I shall pray for you.” He said, “No, rather pray for
me.” The narrator said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) commanded him to make
ablution and pray two Raka‘ahs and supplicate with this Du‘a’:
O Allah, I ask you and turn to you with the supplication of your
Prophet, Muhammad, the Prophet of mercy. O Muhammad, I
ask you to pray for my need so it is fulfilled and that you
intercede for me and that you intercede that my supplication is
accepted.” The narrator said: He repeated it many times. He
added: So he did and he was cured.

www.sunniconnect.com l 266

Another Hadith
Abu Bakr Ibn Abu Shaibah narrated from a man from Banu
Salaman Ibn Sa‘d tribe, from his mother that her maternal uncle
Habeeb Ibn Fuwaik told her that his father went to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and his eyes were white, he couldn’t see anything with
them at all. He asked him, “What afflicted you?” He said, “I
used to look after my sheep when my leg fell on the stomach of
a snake and I was afflicted in my eyes.” The narrator said: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) spitted in his eyes and he began to see. I saw him put the
thread in the needle when he was 80 years old while his eyes
were still white.
In this regard the Hadith of Qatadah Ibn An-Nu‘man has been
mentioned earlier: His eye was afflicted and his iris trickled
down his cheek. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) returned it to its place. Thereafter, he
didn’t know which one was afflicted.”
I say this Hadith was mentioned in the Battle of Uhud. And we
narrated during the mention of Abu Rafi‘’s killing that he
wiped over him with his noble hands on the leg of Abdullah Ibn
‘Ateek when his shin was broken and he was cured
immediately.
Al-Baihaqi mentioned with his chain of narration: The Prophet
wiped over the hand of Muhammad Ibn Hatib when his hand
was burned by fire and he was cured immediately, and that he
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) blew in the hand
of Shurahbeel Al-Ju‘fi a cut that was in his hand. I say: It has
been mentioned earlier in the Battle of Khaibar his spittle in
Ali’s eyes when they were sore and he was cured.

www.sunniconnect.com l 267

And in the Saheeh that the Prophet said to Abu Hurairah and
others, “Who will spread his robe today, for he will not forget
anything from my words.” Abu Hurairah said, “I spread it and
didn’t forget anything from his words.” It is said that was from
Abu Hurairah committing everything to memory that he heard
that day from him. It has also been said for others also. And
Allah (SWT) knows best. And he prayed for Sa‘d Ibn Abi
Waqqas and he was cured.
Al-Baihaqi narrated that the Prophet prayed for his uncle Abu
Talib due to his illness and he requested from the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) that he calls
upon his Lord. Then he prayed for him and was cured
immediately.
And the AHadith in this regard are many; it will be lengthy to
mention all of them.

Another Hadith
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain, from Jabir Ibn Abdullah
that he was riding upon his camel and it became fatigued so he
wanted to sacrifice it. He said then the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came to me and hit
it and prayed for me. It advanced in a way that it never had.
And in a narration it remained in front of the camels to the
extent that I had held its reigns but couldn’t stop it. Then he
said, “How do you find your camel?” I said, “Your blessings
have fallen on it.” Thereafter, he mentioned that the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) bought it
from him. The narrators differed over the price of it on many
narrations. He exempted transporting it to Madinah. When he
reached Madinah he brought the camel to him so he gave him

www.sunniconnect.com l 268

more than the price of it and returned the camel to him (Jabir)
also.

Another Hadith
Anas Ibn Malik narrated: The people sought help from the
Prophet and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) rode a slow horse belonging to Abu Talhah,
which left galloping by himself. Then the people galloped
behind the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) and he said, “You won’t keep up.” And he said
concerning the horse that he was fast. Anas said, It was never
beaten after that day.

Another Hadith
Ju‘ail Al-Ashja‘i narrated, “I participated with the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on one of
his expeditions while I was on a weak horse.” He added, “I was
lagging behind the people when the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) came to me and said,
‘Move, O owner of the horse’.” So I said, “O Messenger of
Allah, it is weak and slender.” He added: The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) raised a whip
which he had with him and struck it with it and said, “O Allah,
bless him with it horse.” He added: I saw myself holding it by
its head because it had advanced in front of the people and I
sold from its stomach (offspring) for 12,000.

Another Hadith
Abu Hurairah said: A man came to the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said, “I have got married
to a woman from the Ansar." The Prophet (Peace and Blessings

www.sunniconnect.com l 269

of Allah be upon him) said, “Have you seen her, because there
is something in the eyes of the Ansar.” He replied, “I have seen
her.” The Prophet said, “How much did you marry her for
(dowry)?” He replied: 4 Awaq (160 Dirhams).” The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “4 Awaq? It
is as though you extract silver from this mountain. We don’t
have anything to give you. However, we may send you on an
expedition that you will gain from.” The narrator said, “He sent
an expedition to Banu Abs tribe and sent that man with them.”
In another narration: So he came to him and said: O Messenger
of Allah, my she-camel refuses to go from exhaustion. The
narrator said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) gave him his hand like the one who offers
his hand to stand, then he came to it and kicked it. Abu Hurairah
said: By the One in Whose Hands is my soul I saw it overtaking
with it (his kick) the rider.”

Another Hadith
Khubaib Ibn Isaf narrated: I came to the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) along with a man
from my people in one of his expeditions. We said, “We desire
to participate in a battle with you.” He said, “Have you
embraced Islam?” We replied, “No.” He said, “We don’t seek
help from the idolaters against the idolaters.” Khubaib said: We
embraced Islam and I participated with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and I was struck
with a blow to my shoulder and it penetrated me and my arm
became motionless. I came to the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he spitted in it, closed
it and it healed and I was cured. And I killed the one who struck
me. Thereafter, I married the daughter of the one I killed. And
she used to say, “I shall not miss man who scarred you with this

www.sunniconnect.com l 270

scar.” Then I would say, “I won’t miss a man in more of a hurry
who left you for the Fire.”

Another Hadith
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from Ibn Abbas that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) came to the Khala’ (a place to relieve oneself). I placed
the ablution water for him. When he came out he said, “Who
placed this.” They said: Ibn Abbas. He said, “O Allah, grant
him understanding of the religion.”
Allah accepted from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) this supplication for his nephew (Ibn Abbas). He
was an Imam whose guidance was followed and his ways were
adopted in the sciences of the Shari‘ah and especially the
knowledge the science of interpretation which is Tafseer. The
knowledge of the Companions before him reached him and that
which the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) understood from the speech of his nephew.
Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood said: If Ibn Abbas was to live to our age
none of us will accompany him, and he used to say to them,
“How wonderful the commentator of the Qur’an Ibn Abbas
was.” The death of Ibn Abbas was later than the death of Ibn
Mas‘ood by 33-39 years, so what do you think he gained (from
knowledge) after him in this period? And we have narrated
from some of his companions that he said: Ibn Abbas addressed
the people on the night of Arafah and made tafseer of Soorah
Al-Baqarah for them. He made a tafseer of it which if the
Romans, Turks and Ad-Dailam heard it they would have indeed
embraced Islam.

www.sunniconnect.com l 271

Another Hadith
It has been affirmed in the Saheeh that he (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) prayed for Anas Ibn Malik for
abundance in wealth and children and it was so that Allah
accepted his prayer. Even Tirmidhi narrated from Abu
Khaldah, he said: I said to Abul-‘Aliyah, “Did Anas hear from
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)?” He
said, “He served him for 10 years and prayed for him. He had
a garden which bore fruit twice a year and he had a scent which
came from him like the scent of musk.”
We have narrated in the Saheeh that he had close to 100 persons
from his descendants or slightly more than that, and in a
narration the Prophet said, “O Allah, increase his life.” He
made him live for 100 years.
He prayed for Umm Sulaim and Abu Talhah in their night
which had passed and a child was born whom the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) named
Abdullah and 9 descendants from him, all of them had
memorized the Qur’an. That has been affirmed in the Saheeh.
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Muslim from the Hadith of
‘Ikrimah Ibn ‘Ammar, from Abu Katheer Al‘Anbari from Abu
Hurairah that he asked the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to pray for his mother so that
Allah will guide her. He prayed for her. When Abu Hurairah
went home he found his mother taking a bath behind the door.
When she finished she said: I bear witness that there is no god
deserving worship except Allah and I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Abu Hurairah cried
with happiness, and went to inform the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) about that and

www.sunniconnect.com l 272

asked him to pray for them that Allah make them beloved to his
believing slaves and so it occurred.
Abu Hurairah said: There isn’t a believing male or female
except that he loves us. And Abu Hurairah spoke the truth about
that. And from the completion of this supplication is that Allah
made his mention famous in the days of gathering, because the
people mentioned him in the Jumu‘ah (Friday) Sermon.
It has been affirmed in the Saheeh, that the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him), prayed for Sa‘d when he was
ill and he was cured and prayed that he would become a person
whose supplication was answered. So he said, “O Allah, answer
his supplication and make his aim accurate.” Then he became
likewise. What a great leader of brigades and armies he
became. He cursed Abu Sa‘dah, Usamah Ibn Qatadah when he
made a false testimony against him that he has a long life, deep
poverty and exposure by trials (he would harass women). He
became likewise and when he was asked (as to what caused him
to be this way) he would say: An old man, exposed to trials the
supplication of Sa‘d fell upon me.
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari and others that the
Prophet prayed for As-Sa’ib Ibn Yazeed and wiped over his
head with his hand. Then he lived long till he reached 94 years
old and yet he had a perfect upright posture and the place where
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) placed his hand wasn’t covered with white hairs and his
senses and strength remained intact.
Abu Zaid Al-Ansari narrated: The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said to me, “Come close
to me.” He wiped his hand over my head and he said, “O
Allah, make him beautiful and continue his beauty.” The

www.sunniconnect.com l 273

narrator added: he reached 103-109 years of age and there was
no white hairs in his beard except a little patch. His face
remained stretched and didn’t wrinkle till he died.
And it has been affirmed in the Saheehain that the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed for AbdurRahman Ibn Awf for blessings when he saw the patch of
saffron on him when he got married. Allah accepted (the
supplication) from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he made him successful
in trade and war booty till he gained abundant wealth to the
extent that one wife’s share from his inheritance from his four
wives was a quarter of an eighth of his wealth when he died.
‘Urwah Ibn Abul-Ja‘d Al-Bariqi narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) gave him a
dinar to buy a sheep for himself. He purchased two with it and
sold one of them for one dinar and returned to him with the
sheep and the dinar. He invoked the blessings of Allah for him
in his purchases. In another narration it is said that then he said
to him, “May Allah bless you in the dealing of your right hand.”
Abu ‘Uqail narrated: His grandfather ‘Abdullah Ibn Hisham
used to go with him to the market and buy food where Ibn AzZubair and Ibn ‘Umar would meet him and say, “Let us join
you in your purchases; for indeed the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed for
blessings for you.” He would let them become partner with
him, and he would even buy a riding animal and would send it
to the house.
Abu Tufail narrated that a man had a newborn baby who was
brought to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him). The Messenger of Allah (Peace and

www.sunniconnect.com l 274

Blessings of Allah be upon him) prayed for blessings for him
and held his forehead. Thereafter, a hair grew on his forehead
as though it was a hair of a horse. The boy grew up and when
it was the era of the Khawarij and he followed them. Then the
hair fell from his forehead so his father detained him and kept
him safe from fear that he may join them. The narrator added:
We entered upon him and admonished him and we said to him,
“Do you not see that the blessing of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) has fallen?” So we
continued reasoning with him until he left their opinion. The
narrator added: Then Allah returned that hair to his forehead
because he had repented.

Another Hadith
Zaid Ibn Thabit narrated that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) looked toward the
direction of Yemen and said, “O Allah, bring their hearts (to
Islam).” Then he looked toward the direction of Sham and said,
“O Allah, bring their hearts (to Islam).” Then he looked toward
the direction of Iraq and said, “O Allah, bring their hearts (to
Islam) and bless us with our Sa‘ (measurement of food stuffs)
and our Mudd (handful of foodstuff).” And this is what
occurred; the people of Yemen embraced Islam. And goodness
and blessings came from Iraq, and he promised that the people
of Sham would remain upon guidance and establishment upon
helping the religion until the final affair.
Imam Ahmad narrated in his Musnad, “The Hour shall not be
established until the best of the people of Iraq move to Sham
and the worst of the people of Sham move to Iraq.”
Muslim narrated from Iyas Ibn Salamah Ibn Al- Akwa‘ that his
father informed him that a man ate with the Messenger of Allah

www.sunniconnect.com l 275

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) with his left hand.
The Prophet said to him, “Eat with your right hand.” He
replied: “I can’t.” He said, “You couldn’t, nothing prevented
you except for pride.” The narrator said: After that, he couldn’t
raise his hand to his mouth.
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Muslim from Ibn Abbas: I was
playing with children when the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) came and I hid myself from
him. He noticed me and patted me twice between the shoulders
and sent me to Mu‘awiyah for a need. I came to him while he
was eating food. I went and came back and said, “I went to him
when he was eating.” He sent me a second time and I arrived
when he was again eating. I came back again and said, “I went
to him when he was eating.” Then the Prophet said, “May Allah
not fill his stomach.”
I say: Mu‘awiyah wouldn’t ever be full ever since. And this
supplication suited him in the days of his leadership for it is
mentioned that he would eat food with meat 7 times a day and
would say, “By Allah I am never full, I am only fatigued.”
And we mentioned in the Battle of Tabook that a child
wandered in front of them while they were praying; he cursed
him and he never stood after that.
Jabir Ibn Abdullah he said: We exited with the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) in the Battle
of Banu Anmar tribe. Jabir mentioned the Hadith of a man
wearing two garments which were worn out and yet he had two
other garments. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) commanded him after that he wore them
and then he turned. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “What is wrong with

www.sunniconnect.com l 276

him, Allah struck his neck?” The man replied: In the path of
Allah. The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, “In the path of Allah.” The man was killed
in the path of Allah.
Many narrations have been recorded of this type. It has been
affirmed in authentic AHadith with many paths from a group
of the Companions which provide certainty as we shall narrate
soon in the chapter of his merits, that he said, “O Allah,
whosoever I insulted or struck or cursed and he isn’t deserving
of that then make that an act of goodness that will bring him
near to you on the Day of Judgment.”
We have mentioned earlier in the beginning of the “Prophetic
mission,” the Hadith of Ibn Mas‘ood in his supplication against
the group of seven among whom was Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham and
his Companions when they threw the intestines of a camel upon
his back (while in prayer) and his daughter Fatimah removed
them. When he finished he said, “O Allah, curse Abu Jahl Ibn
Hisham, Shaibah Ibn Rabee‘ah,
‘Utbah Ibn Rabee‘ah and Al-Waleed Ibn ‘Utbah.” He named
the rest of the seven. Ibn Mas‘ood said, “By the one who sent
him with the Truth, I saw them killed in the well of Badr.” And
it is agreed upon in Saheeh Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Another Hadith
Anas Ibn Malik narrated: There was a man from one of us, from
the tribe of Banun-Najjar, who read Soorah Al-Baqarah and
Soorah Aal Imran, and he would write for the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). But he fled
and met the People of the Book. The narrator added: They lifted
him up and said: “This man used to write for Muhammad so
must be amazed with him.” And it wasn’t long before Allah

www.sunniconnect.com l 277

struck his neck amongst them (i.e. took his soul). They dug a
grave for him and covered him, then the ground threw him out
on his face in the morning on the surface. They returned and
dug a grave again for him, but the ground threw him out in the
morning on the surface, so they left him exhumed.

The issues that the Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was
asked about and then answered in accordance
with the truth in agreement with what the
previous inherited books from the Prophets
before him stated
We have mentioned in the beginning of the section, “Prophetic
mission,” that the Quraish used to repeatedly ask about with
stubbornness in accepting the truth. So they sent a delegation
to enquire from the Jews of Madinah about what they should
ask from the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him). They said: "Ask him about the soul, the people
who disappeared in ancient times and it is not known what
happened to them and about a man who reached the East and
the West of the world." When they returned they asked the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) about that. Allah revealed his statement: “And they ask
you (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him)) concerning Rooh (the Spirit); Say: ‘The Rooh, it is one
of the things, the knowledge of which is only with my Lord.
And of knowledge, you (mankind) have been given only a
little.” (Soorah Al-Isra’: 85) Then He revealed Soorah Al-Kahf
explaining in it the news of the young men who left the religion
of their people and believed in Allah and they singled him out
in worship and they secluded themselves from their people.
They stayed in a cave and that is Al- Kahf and slept in it. Allah
www.sunniconnect.com l 278

woke them after 309 years and from their affair is that which
Allah narrated to us in His Book. He told the story of two men;
a believer and a disbeliever and what occurred from their affair,
and then the story of Moosa and Al-Khidr and that which took
place from wisdoms and admonishments. He said: And they
ask you about DhulQarnain. Say: I shall recite to you
something of his story. (Soorah Al-Kahf: 83) He gave account
of his news and that which he had reached from the East and
the West of the world, and that which he performed from
benefits to the world. This is the reality of what happened. The
books which are in the hands of the People of the Book
exclusively are in agreement with it that which is true from
them (books). As for that which has been changed and altered
then it is rejected, for indeed Allah sent Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) with the truth and revealed a
book to him to clarify to the people that which they differ in
from stories and regulations. Allah said after mentioning the
Tawrah and the Bible: And We have sent down to you (O
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)) the
Book (this Qur'an) in truth, confirming the Scripture that came
before it and Muhaimin (trustworthy in highness and a witness)
over it (old Scriptures) (Soorah Al-Ma’idah: 48) And we
mentioned in the beginning of the, Hijrah (section) the story of
Abdullah Ibn Salam’s embracement of Islam and he said:
“When the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) arrived in Madinah the people rushed toward him.
And I was from those who rushed toward him and when I saw
his face I said that his face isn’t the face of a liar. The first thing
which I heard him say was, ‘O people, spread the Salam, and
keep the ties of kinship, feed the people and pray in the night
when the people are asleep (then) you shall enter Paradise with
peace’.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 279

It has been affirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari, from Anas the story
of Abdullah Ibn Salam’s questioning of the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him): Three matters,
nobody knows them except a Prophet; what is the first of the
signs of the Last Hour, what is the first meal that the people of
Paradise shall eat and what makes the child go to his mother or
father (i.e. what determines male or female gender)? The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Jibreel informed me earlier.” Then he said, “As for
the first of the signs of the hour, a fire that will gather the people
from the East to the West. And as for the first meal that the
people of Paradise shall eat, it is the extra piece of flesh of the
whale’s liver. And as for the child, if the substance
(chromosomes and genes) precedes the substance of the woman
then the child shall take from his father and if the substance of
the woman precedes the substance of the man then the child
shall take from his mother.”

Another Hadith with the same meaning
Narrated by Thawban, he said: I was standing with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and a Rabbi came and said, “Assalamu ‘Alaika, Ya
Muhammad.” I pushed him with a hard push which almost
made him fall. Then he said, “Why did you push me?” The
narrator said: I said, “Won’t you say: O Messenger of Allah?”
He said, “I only named with the name that his family named
him.” Then the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “The name which my family named
me with is Muhammad.” The Jew said, “I came to ask you.”
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “Will it benefit you if I spoke to you?” He replied,
“I shall listen with my ear.” He made a mark with a stick on the
ground which was with him. He said to him, “Ask.” The Jew

www.sunniconnect.com l 280

said to him, “Where will the people be on the day when the
Earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the
heavens?” The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) said, “In darkness before the bridge.” He
said, “Who will be the first to pass?” He replied, “The poor
from the Muhajiroon.” The Jew said, “What will be their first
snack when they enter Paradise?” He said, “The piece of flesh
attached to the whales liver.” He said, “What shall be their
dinner straight after it?” He said, “The bull of Paradise which
ate from its boundaries.” He said, “What shall they drink
following that?” He said, “From a spring therein (Paradise)
called Salsabeela.” He said, “You spoke the truth.” The Jew
added, “I came to ask you about something which nobody from
the inhabitants of the world knows about except either a
Prophet or a man or two men. The Prophet said, “Has it
benefitted you that I informed you?” He replied, “I hear with
my ear.” The Jew later said, “I came to ask you about the child.”
He said, “The substance of the man is white and the substance
of the woman is yellow. When they come together and the fluid
of the man overcomes the fluid of the woman it becomes a male
with the permission of Allah.” The Jew said, “You spoke the
truth and you are indeed a Prophet.” Then he left. The Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “He asked me
what he asked while I didn’t have any knowledge about until
Allah inspired it to me.” Narrated by Muslim.

Another Hadith
Narrated by Ibn Abbas, he said: A group from the Jews came
to the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) one day and said, “O Abul-Qasim, inform us of
some matters that nobody knows except a Prophet.” He said,
“Ask me that which you wish, however make for me the
agreement of Allah and that which Ya‘qoob (Peace be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 281

him) took from his children; that if I tell you something and you
recognize it you shall follow me upon Islam.” They said, “That
shall be yours.” He said, “Ask me what you wish.” They said,
“Tell us about four matters which we will ask you about:
Inform us which food Isra’eel made forbidden upon himself
before the Tawrah was revealed? And inform us how is the
fluid of the woman and the fluid of the man and how the male
receives from it? And inform us how this illiterate Prophet is in
his sleep and who is his ally from the angels?” He replied:
“Incumbent upon you is the pact of Allah and his covenant that
if I inform you, then you shall follow me.” The narrator said:
They gave him what he wished from pact and covenant.
He said, “I shall inform you by the One Who revealed the
Tawrah to Moosa (Peace be upon him); do you know that
Isra’eel was Ya‘qoob (Peace be upon him), he became very ill
and his illness lasted long. The most beloved food to him was
the meat of the camel and the most beloved drink to him was
its milk?” They said: "O Allah, yes. He said, “O Allah, bear
witness over them. For I ask you by the One besides Whom
there is no God deserving of worship except Him, the One Who
revealed the Tawrah to Moosa; do you know that the fluid of
the man is white and thick and the fluid of the woman is yellow
and thin and whichever of them overcomes the other then for
him (/her) is the child and resemblance with the permission of
Allah; if the fluid of the man overcomes the fluid of the woman
then it shall be a male with the permission of Allah, and if the
fluid of the woman overcomes the fluid of the man then it shall
be a female with the permission of Allah?” They said: O Allah,
yes. He said, O Allah, bear witness over them. For I ask you by
the One Who revealed the Tawrah to Moosa; do you know that
this illiterate Prophet’s eyes sleep, yet his heart does not sleep?”
They replied: O Allah, yes. He said, “O Allah, bear witness.”
They said, “Tell us: Who is your guardian ally from the angels?

www.sunniconnect.com l 282

Based on this we shall either join you or leave you. If your
guardian was other than him from the angels, then we shall
follow you and deem you truthful.” He replied, “What prevents
you from believing in him?” They said, “He indeed is our
enemy from the angels.” Then at that point Allah said
(revealed): Say (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him)): "Whoever is an enemy to Jibreel (Gabriel) (let
him die in his fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur'an)
down to your heart by Allah's Permission.” (Soorah AlBaqarah: 97). And at that point the Verse was revealed: So they
have drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath. (Soorah AlBaqarah:
90).”
We mentioned this story in the “Tafseer” at the explanation of
Allah’s statement in Soorah Al-Baqarah: Say to (them): “If the
home of the Hereafter with Allah is indeed for you specially
and not for others, of mankind, then long for death if you are
truthful.” But they will never long for it because of what their
hands have sent before them (i.e. what they have done). And
Allah is All-Aware of the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers). (Soorah Al-Baqarah: 94-95) And similar to it in Soorah
Al-Jumu‘ah and it is his statement: Say (O Muhammad (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him)): "O you Jews! If you
pretend that you are friends of Allah, to the exclusion of (all)
other mankind, then long for death if you are truthful." But they
will never long for it (death), because of what (deeds) their
hands have sent before them! And Allah knows well the
Zalimoon. (Soorah Jumu‘ah: 6-7) And we mentioned the
opinions of the Mufassiroon (commentators of the Qur’an) in
that regards and the truth is that he called them to AlMubahalah
(invoking the curse on the family of the one who is a liar) and
to pray for death upon the liar from either them or the Muslims.
However, they refused to do so because of their knowledge of

www.sunniconnect.com l 283

them oppressing themselves and that the curse will fall upon
them, and its disaster shall fall on them. He similarly invited
the Christians of Najran when they debated with him regarding
‘Eesa Ibn Maryam. Allah commanded him to invite them to
make Al-Mubahalah in his statement: Then whoever disputes
with you concerning him (‘Eesa) after (all this) knowledge that
has come to you, (i.e. ‘Eesa being a slave of Allah, and having
no share in Divinity) say: (O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him)) "Come, let us call our sons and your
sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves then we pray and invoke (sincerely) the Curse of Allah upon
those who lie." (Soorah Aal Imran: 61) And similarly he cursed
the idolaters by the way of Al-Mubahalah in his statement: Say
(O Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him))
whoever is in error, the Most Beneficent (Allah) will extend
(the rope) to him, until when they see that which they were
promised, either the torment or the Hour, they will come to
know who is worst in position, and who is weaker in forces.
(Soorah Maryam: 75) And we spoke in detail about this in the
explanation of these verses in our book, “Tafseer” which is
sufficient.

Another Hadith which includes the
admittance of the Jews that he is the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)
They planned between them that if he ruled with what was in
accordance to their desires (then) they would follow him, and
if not then they would reject it. And Allah dispraised them in
His Book due to this intention.

www.sunniconnect.com l 284

Narrated by Abu Hurairah,he said: A man and a woman from
Jews committed adultery. One of them said to the other, “Take
us to this Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
because he is a Prophet sent with ease. So if he gives us a
verdict other than stoning then we will accept it and we shall
use it as an argument with Allah we will say a verdict from a
Prophet from your Prophets.” The narrator said: They came to
the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while
he was sitting in the Mosque with his Companions. They said,
“O Abul-Qasim, what do you say with regard to a man and a
woman who committed adultery?” He didn’t say a word to
them until he came to the house of their learned. He stood at
the door and said, “I ask you by Allah, the One Who revealed
the Tawrah upon Moosa; what do you find in the Tawrah with
regard to the one who fornicates while he is married?” They
said, “His face is painted black and At-Tajbiyah is performed
on him and he is whipped. And At-Tajbiyah is to place the two
adulterers on a donkey back to back and then they are ridden
around.” The narrator said: A youth from them remained silent.
When the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
saw that he remained quiet he persuaded him to talk. He said,
“O Allah, as you have asked us to speak then we find in the
Tawrah stoning.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) said, “What made you make the command of
Allah lessened?” He said, “One of our kings’ cousins. He
delayed the stoning of him. A royal man fornicated with a
family member of the ordinary people and he wanted to stone
him. But his people intervened and said: Our companion won’t
be stoned until you bring your companion (his cousin) and
stone him. And they agreed upon this punishment between
them.” The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “I shall judge between you with what is in the
Tawrah,” so he ordered and then they were stoned.

www.sunniconnect.com l 285

Az-Zuhri said: It has reached me that this Verse was revealed
about them: Verily, We did send down the Tawrah (to Moosa),
therein was guidance and light, by which the Prophets, who
submitted themselves to Allah’s Will, judged for the Jews.
(Soorah Al-Ma’idah: 44). And it has supporting evidence in the
Saheehain from Ibn Umar.
We have mentioned earlier the Ahadith that have been narrated
in this context (while commentating) on Allah’s statement: O
Messenger (Muhammad)! Let not those who hurry to fall into
disbelief grieve you, of such who say: “We believe” with their
mouths but their hearts have no faith. And of the Jews are men
who listen much and eagerly to lies - listen to others who have
not come to you. They change the words from their places; they
say, “If you are given this, take it, but if you are not given this,
then beware!” (Soorah Al-Ma’idah: 41), i.e., flogging and
painting the faces which they agreed upon and invented by
themselves, i.e., if Muhammad rules with this, then accept it:
But if you are not given this, then beware!” (Soorah AlMa’idah: 41), i.e., if Allah doesn’t rule with that for you then
beware of his statement. Allah says: And whomsoever Allah
wants to put in error, you can do nothing for him against Allah.
Those are the ones whose hearts Allah does not want to purify;
for them there is a disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter
a great torment. (They like to) listen to falsehood, to devour
anything forbidden. So if they come to you (O Muhammad),
either judge between them, or turn away from them. If you turn
away from them, they cannot hurt you in the least. And if you
judge, judge with justice between them. Verily, Allah loves
those who act justly. Till he said: But how do they come to you
for decision while they have the Tawrah, in which is the (plain)
Decision of Allah; yet even after that, they turn away. (Soorah
AlMa’idah:41-43). Allah rebuked him due to their evil
intention with regards their belief in their book while therein is

www.sunniconnect.com l 286

Allah’s clear ruling of stoning. They also knew its authenticity,
but they turned away from it to what they invented from
flogging, blackening of the face and Tajbiyah.

Another Hadith
The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) stood
in front of the learned Jews and said: “O Jews, accept Islam. By
the One besides Whom there is no god except Him, you know
that I am the Messenger of Allah sent to you.” They said: “You
have conveyed your message, O Abul-Qasim.” He said, “That
is what I want (to convey the message.”)
That which is certain from the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of his Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
and also from the meaning is that the Prophets before the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) gave news about him and the followers of the Prophets
know that. However, most of them conceal and hide that fact.
Allah, the Most High, says: Those who follow the Messenger,
the Prophet, who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad)
whom they find written with them in the Tawrah (Deut, xviii,
15) and the Injeel (Gospel) (John xiv, 16), - he commands them
for AlMa’roof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam has
ordained); and forbids them from Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief,
polytheism of all kinds, and all that Islam has forbidden); he
allows them as lawful At-Taiyyibat ((i.e. all good and lawful)
as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods, etc.), and
prohibits them as unlawful Al-Khaba’ith (i.e. all evil and
unlawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods, etc.),
he releases them from their heavy burdens (of Allah’s
Covenant), and from the fetters (bindings) that were upon them.
So those who believe in him (Muhammad), honor him, help
him, and follow the Light (the Qur’an) which has been sent

www.sunniconnect.com l 287

down with him, it is they who will be successful. Say (O
Muhammad): “O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the
Messenger of Allah - to Whom belongs the dominion of the
heavens and the Earth. La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right
to be worshipped but He); It is He Who gives life and causes
death. So believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad),
the Prophet, who can neither read nor write (i.e., Muhammad)
who believes in Allah and His Words ((this Qur’an), the
Tawrah and the Injeel and also Allah’s Word: “Be!” - and he
was, i.e. ‘Eesa son of Maryam and follow him so that you may
be guided.) (Soorah Al-A‘raf: 157-158) He says: Those unto
whom We gave the Scripture (the Tawrah and the Injeel) know
that it is revealed from your Lord in truth. (Soorah Al-An‘am:
114) He says: Those to whom We gave the Scripture (Jews and
Christians) recognize him (Muhammad or the Ka’bah at
Makkah) as they recognize their sons. But verily, a party of
them conceals the truth while they know it – (i.e., the qualities
of Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him)
which are written in the Tawrah and Injeel). (Soorah AlBaqarah: 146) He says: And say to those who were given the
Scripture (Jews and Christians) and to those who are illiterates
(Arab pagans): “Do you (also) submit yourselves (to Allah in
Islam)? If they do, they are rightly guided; but if they turn
away, your duty is only to convey the Message. (Soorah Aal
Imran: 20) He says: This (Qur’an) is a Message for mankind
(and a clear proof against them), in order that they may be
warned thereby. (Soorah Ibraheem: 52) He says: That I may
therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach (Soorah AlAn‘am: 19) He says: But those of the sects (Jews, Christians
and all the other non-Muslim nations) that reject it (the Qur’an),
the Fire will be their promised meeting-place. (Soorah Hood:
17) He says: That he or it (Muhammad or the Qur’an) may give
warning to him who is living (a healthy minded the believer),
and that Word (charge) may be justified against the disbelievers

www.sunniconnect.com l 288

(dead, as they reject the warnings). (Soorah Yaseen: 70) Allah
mentioned his dispatch to the illiterate, the People of the Book
and the rest of the creation from the Arabs and the non-Arabs.
Everyone who the Qur’an has reached He is a warner to them.
The Prophet said, “By the One in Whose Hands is my soul, no
Jew or Christian shall hear about me from this Ummah and then
doesn’t believe in me except that he shall enter the fire.”
Narrated by Muslim.
In the Saheehain it is said, “I have been given 5 matters, none
from the Prophets before me have been given; I have been
assisted with fear (in the hearts of the enemy) for the distance
of one month journey, the war booty has been made permissible
for me, the ground has been made suitable for worship and the
soil a means of purification for me (for the prayer known as
Tayammum when water can’t be used for purification), and I
have been given the right of intercession, and the Prophets used
to be sent to his people and I have been sent to all the people.”
And also narrated in the Saheehain, “I have been sent to the
black and red people.” It has been explained as Arabs and non
Arabs
The point is that the news of his arrival are in the books that
have been inherited from the Prophets before him until the
Prophethood reached the last of the Prophets of the Children of
Isra’eel, and that was ‘Eesa and he mentioned this news to the
Children of Isra’eel. Allah told the story of that news, so He
says: And (remember) when ‘Eesa, son of Maryam, said: “O
Children of Isra’eel! I am the Messenger of Allah unto you
confirming the Tawrah (which came) before me, and giving
glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall
be Ahmad. (Soorah As-Saff: 6) So Muhammad’s informing
that his mention is in the previous books in that which he
brought from the Qur’an and that which has been narrated from

www.sunniconnect.com l 289

him in the authentic Ahadith as was mentioned earlier, and on
top of that he was the most intelligent of the creation by
agreement of those who followed and those who opposed is a
clear evidence that proves his truthfulness. Because if he wasn’t
certain of that which he spoke about then that would have been
the greatest repellent from following him and no sane person
would embark upon that. The point being that he was from most
intelligent of the creation even with those who opposed him;
rather he was the most intelligent of them at the same time. His
call (Da‘wah) spread to the East and the West and it
encompassed the state of his Ummah, the countries of the
horizons of the world in general which hadn’t occurred to a
nation from the nations before him. If Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) wasn’t a Prophet then his harm
would have been greater than anyone else and if the matter was
likewise then the Prophets would have warned against him in
the most severe manner and they would have caused the nations
to flee from him in the most severe manner. Verily, all of them
warned against the callers to misguidance in their books and
forbade their nations following and adopting their way. They
mentioned the (False Messiah) Dajjal, the one with one
defective eye, the liar. Even Nooh (Peace be upon him) warned
his people and he was the first of the Messengers and it is
known that none of the Prophets warned against Muhammad
nor did they discourage the people away from him nor any
news about him other than praise, news of his arrival, the order
to follow him, prohibition against opposing him and disobeying
him. Allah says: And (remember) when Allah took the
Covenant of the Prophets, saying: "Take whatever I gave you
from the Book and Hikmah (understanding of the Laws of
Allah, etc.), and afterward there will come to you a Messenger
(Muhammad) confirming what is with you; you must, then,
believe in him and help him.” Allah said: “Do you agree (to it)
and will you take up My Covenant (which I conclude with

www.sunniconnect.com l 290

you)?” They said: “We agree.” He said: “Then bear witness;
and I am with you among the witnesses (for this). Then
whoever turns away after this, they are the Fasiqoon
(rebellious). (Soorah Aal Imran: 81-82) Ibn Abbas (May Allah
be pleased with him) said: Allah didn’t send a Prophet except
that he took a covenant from him that if Muhammad was sent
when they were alive then they shall believe in him and follow
him. Narrated by Al-Bukhari.
I found the news of his arrival in the previous books and they
are more famous than to be mentioned and more than can be
restricted. We mentioned earlier before his birth a good portion
from that. We established in the book, Tafseer under the verses
that indicate that, many narrations. We shall narrate here some
of what is found in their books which they admit their
authenticity and accept as worship by reciting them from that
which the scholars have compiled, both recent and ancient from
those who believed from them and researched from the books
that are in their hands. In the first genesis of the Tawrah which
is in their hands in the story of Ibraheem Al-Khaleel (Peace be
upon him) what the meaning and translation is: Allah inspired
to Ibraheem (Peace be upon him) after he saved him from the
fire of Numrood: Stand and travel the Earth, its East and West
for your son. When he informed Sarah of this she wished that
would be her son from him and she tried to make Hajar and her
son distant. Al-Khaleel took them to the land of Hijaz and the
mountains of Faran. Ibraheem thought that this glad tiding
would be for his son Ishaq until Allah inspired to him that
which its meaning is: As for your son Ishaq, then he shall be
provided with a great offspring. And as for your son Isma‘eel
then I have blessed him, made him great, increased his
offspring and made from his offspring Madha Madha, i.e.,
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). I have
made 12 leaders (Imams) from his offspring and he shall have

www.sunniconnect.com l 291

a big Ummah and similarly I have given Hajar the glad tidings
when Al-Khaleel left her at the house (Ka‘bah). Then she
became thirsty and felt worried for her son, and the angel came
and made Zam Zam sprout (from the earth), and he commanded
her to look after this child because a great man shall be born
from him. He shall have an offspring like the number of the
stars in the sky.
It is well-known that nobody was born from the descendants of
Isma‘eel; rather the descendants of Adam greater in standing,
nor more wider in authority, nor higher in station, nor mightier
in position than Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him).
Similarly, in the story of Isma‘eel from the first exodus: The
son of Isma‘eel shall have his hand over all the nations and all
the nations are under his hand. He lives with all the households
of his brothers. This isn’t in conformity with anyone except
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
Also in the fourth exodus is the story of Moosa. Allah inspired
to Moosa (Peace be upon him): Say to the Children of Isra’eel:
I shall send to them a Prophet from their relations similar to
you, O Moosa, and I shall make My Revelation with his mouth
and you shall listen to him.
In the fifth exodus which is the exodus of the resurrection:
Moosa (Peace be upon him) addressed the Children of Isra’eel
toward the end of his life and that is in 39th year of their
banishment. He reminded them of the days of Allah and his
assistance of them and his goodness toward them. From what
he said to them was: Know, that Allah shall send a Prophet to
you from your cousins similar to whom he sent to you. He shall
command you with good and forbid you from evil. He shall

www.sunniconnect.com l 292

make good things permissible for you and make evil matters
impermissible for you. So whoever disobeys shall have
disgrace in this life and a punishment in the Hereafter.
Also in the end of the fifth exodus and that is the end of the
Tawrah which is in their hands: Allah came from the Mount
Sinai and (a light) shone from Sa‘eer and became visible from
the mountains of Faran: It became apparent from the hills of
the Quds (Jerusalem). On the right of him was a light, and on
the left of him was a light. Upon it the nations will gather and
upon it the people shall unite, i.e., the command of Allah and
his Shari‘ah came from Mount Sinai which is the mountain at
the place where Allah spoke to Moosa (Peace be upon him) and
it shone from Sa‘eer which is the mountain range of the sacred
land where ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was. His command
became apparent from the mountains of Faran which are the
mountains of Al-Hijaz (in Saudi Arabia without any difference
of opinion among the people of knowledge) and that was not in
the language of anyone except Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him). Then He mentioned these
three places based upon the order of events; He mentioned the
place of Moosa, then ‘Eesa and then the country of Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him). When Allah swore
by these places He mentioned the most virtuous of them first,
then the next best and then the next virtuous based on the rule
of the oath, so He said: By the fig and the olive (Soorah AtTeen: 1). And the meaning of it is the area of the Sacred Land
where ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) was (then he said): by Mount
Sinai. (Soorah At-Teen: 2) And that is the mountain that Allah
spoke to Moosa on (then he said): And by this city of security
(Makkah) (Soorah At-Teen: 3) And that is the country that
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) was
sent from (as) more than one of the commentators of the Qur’an
mentioned in explaining these noble Verses.

www.sunniconnect.com l 293

In the Psalms of Dawood (Peace be upon him) is the description
of this Ummah with (making) Al-Jihad and worship. And
therein is a proverb for Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) that he is the sealing wax of the constructed
dome just as has been mentioned in the Hadith in the
Saheehain, “My example and the example of the Prophets
before me is like the example of a man who built a house and
completed it except for the place of one brick. Then the people
passed by it and say: Only if that brick was placed?”Allah’s
statement is a testimony to that: But he is the Messenger of
Allah and the last (end) of the Prophets. (Soorah Al-Ahzab: 40)
Also in the Psalms is the description of Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) that his Prophethood and call
(Da‘wah) shall spread and his word shall reach from sea to sea.
And kings from all the countries shall come voluntarily with
gifts and presents, and that he shall save the compelled and
remove the harm from the Ummahs, and he shall save the weak
that has no helper and prayers will be made for him always, and
Allah shall bless him every day and his mention shall remain
forever. This is only in suitable to be mentioned about
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him).
In the scriptures of Sha‘ya in a lengthy statement therein is a
rebuking of the Children of Isra’eel and from it: Verily, I shall
send to you and the Ummahs an illiterate Prophet. He is neither
severe nor harshhearted, nor the one who shouts in the market.
I shall enable him to do every beautiful act and grant to him
every noble manner. Then I shall make tranquillity his clothing,
and goodness his moto, and Taqwa his heart, and wisdom his
thought, and fulfilling his nature, and justice his way, and truth
his Shari‘ah, and guidance his path, and Islam his religion, and
the Qur’an his book, his name is Ahmad. I shall guide with him
away from misguidance, and raise with him after lowliness, and
unite with him after disunity, and make harmony between the

www.sunniconnect.com l 294

different hearts with him, and make his Ummah the best nation
raised up for mankind, their sacrifices are their blood, their
Gospels are in their hearts, monks in the night, lions during the
day. That is the grace of Allah, He gives it to whom He wills.
Allah is the owner of the great bounty.
In the 10th section from the words of Sha‘ya: He shall tread on
the nations like the treading of the Bayadirs (container used to
hold dates till they dry) and he shall send misfortune to the
polytheist Arabs and they shall be defeated in front of him.
In the 26th section from it: The barren thirsty land shall become
happy and Ahmad shall be given the goodness of Lebanon and
they shall see the majesty of Allah in his heart.
In the scriptures of Ilyas (Peace be upon him): He exited with a
group from his Companions on a trip and when he saw the
Arabs in the land of Hijaz, he said to those who were with him,
“Look at them, for indeed they are the ones who shall own your
great fortress.” Then they said, “O Prophet of Allah, what shall
be their God.” He said, “They venerate the Lord of Honor
above every high hill.”
In the scriptures of Hizqeel: Verily, my slave is my best (slave),
I shall reveal to him my revelation, he shall show my justice in
the Ummahs. I have chosen him and preferred him for myself
and I have sent him to the nations with truthful regulations.
From the book, An-Nubuwwat by Ibn Taimiyyah: A Prophet
from the Prophets traveled to Madinah. When Banu Quraizah
and An-Nadeer tribes invited him (to their dwellings), and
when he saw them he wept. So they said to him, “What causes
you to weep, O Prophet of Allah?” He said, “A Prophet shall
be sent from the Sacred place (Haram of Makkah), he shall

www.sunniconnect.com l 295

destroy your houses and capture your women.” The narrator
said: Then the Jews wished to kill him so he fled from them.
From the words of Hizqeel (Peace be upon him): Allah says:
Before I formed you in the womb I made you sacred and made
you a Prophet and sent you to all the nations.
In the scriptures of Sha‘ya also is a proverb mentioned about
Makkah: Be pleased, O barren, with this child that your Lord
shall bestow upon you. For by his blessing the places shall be
widened and your pegs shall be fortified in the earth and the
doors of your dwellings shall be raised. The kings of the Earth
shall come to you from the right and left of you with presents
and gifts and this child of yours shall inherit all the nations and
conquer all the cities and districts. Do not fear and do not
worry, because no harm shall ever afflict you from an enemy
and all the days cause you to become a widow you shall forget
them. All of this only occurred upon the hands of Muhammad
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and the meaning
of barren is restricted to Makkah and it became as mentioned
in these words without a doubt. And whoever from the People
of the Book wants to interpret it as the Holy Land (Jerusalem)
then this doesn’t match with it from every angle. And Allah
(SWT) knows best.
In the scriptures of Armiya: A star became apparent from the
south, its rays are bolts of lightning, its arrows are penetrating
mountains are made powder by it. And the intended meaning
of this is Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him).
In the Bible ‘Eesa (Peace be upon him) says: I am going to be
raised to the highest levels in Paradise and I shall send to you
the criterion between right and wrong, the spirit of the Truth

www.sunniconnect.com l 296

(Truth; one of Allah’s Names). He shall teach you everything
and he shall not say anything from his own desires. The
meaning of the criterion is Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) and this is like what was mentioned earlier
from ‘Eesa that he when he said: And giving glad tidings of a
Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad.
(Soorah As-Saff: 6)
This is a very long chapter, if we were to mention everything
which the people have said it would be a very long section.

A Hadith about the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) answering
the question before hearing the questioner
ask
Narrated from Wabisah Al-Asadi, he said: I came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) and I wanted to not leave anything from righteousness and
sin except that I asked him about it while a group from Muslims
were around him asking him questions. I began to walk through
them and they said to me, “Stay away from the Messenger of
Allah.” I said, “Leave me, so that I can come close to him, for
he is the most beloved of people to me that I should come close
to.” The Prophet said, “Leave Wabisah, come close, O
Wabisah.” He said that twice or thrice. The narrator said: I
came close to him until I sat in front of him. Then he said, “O
Wabisah, shall I inform you or do you want to ask?” I said,
“No, rather you inform me.” He said, “You came asking about
righteousness and sin.” I said, “Yes.” He closed his fingers and
began to poke them in my chest and say, “O Wabisah, ask your
heart and ask your soul – three times – righteousness is what
your soul feels tranquil with and sin is what creates restlessness

www.sunniconnect.com l 297

in the soul and moves to and fro in the chest, even though
people give you their opinion (in your favour) and continue to
do so.”

What the Prophet foretold from the future
events in his lifetime and after it and then
occurred just as he mentioned exactly
This is a great chapter. It isn’t possible to gather everything
which is in it due to its vastness. However, we shall mention a
portion of that and with Allah is assistance. And that which
follows is taken from the Qur’an and Ahadith.
As for the Qur’an, Allah (SWT) says in Soorah Al-Muzzammil
which is from the first of those which were revealed in Makkah:
He knows that there will be some among you sick, others
traveling through the land, seeking of Allah’s bounty; yet
others fighting in Allah’s Cause. (Soorah Al-Muzzammil: 20)
It is known that Al-Jihad wasn’t revealed except in Madinah
after the migration.
Allah (SWT) says in Soorah Iqtarabat which is Makkan: Or do
they say: “We are a great multitude, and we shall be
victorious?” Their multitude will be put to flight, and they will
show their backs. (Soorah AlQamar: 44-45) This occurred in
the Battle of Badr and the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) recited it when he was leaving
the shade and threw a handful of soil at the enemy and then
there was victory and triumph and this was a confirmation of
that, i.e., the prophecy.
Allah says: Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab (an uncle of the
Prophet), and perish he! His wealth and his children (etc.) will
not benefit him! He will be burned in a Fire of blazing flames!

www.sunniconnect.com l 298

His wife too, who carries wood (thorns of Sa‘dan which she
used to put on the way of the Prophet, or use to slander him).
In her neck is a twisted rope of Masad (palm fiber) (Soorah AlMasad: 1-5) So he informed that his uncle Abdul-Uzza Ibn
Abdul-Muttalib nicknamed Abu Lahab shall enter the fire, he
and his wife. So Allah decreed that they would die upon their
polytheism, they didn’t embrace Islam not even apparently and
this is from the clear proofs of Prophethood.
Allah (SWT) says: Say: “If the mankind and the Jinns were
together to produce the like of this Qur’an, they could not
produce the like thereof, even if they helped one another.”
(Soorah Al-Isra’: 88) Allah says in Soorah Al-Baqarah: And if
you (Arab pagans, Jews, and Christians) are in doubt
concerning that which We have sent down (i.e. the Qur’an) to
Our slave (Muhammad), then produce a Soorah (chapter) of the
like thereof and call your witnesses (supporters and helpers)
besides Allah, if you are truthful. But if you do it not, and you
can never do it. (Soorah Al-Baqarah: 23-24) So He mentioned
that if all the creation were to gather, combine, help and assist
one another to produce something similar to the Qur’an in its
eloquence, sweetness, perfection of regulations, and a
clarification to the permissible and impermissible (matters) and
other than that from types of its miracles, then they couldn’t.
And they wouldn’t be able to, not even 10 Soorahs from it and
not even a single Soorah. He mentioned that they shall never
ever be able to. And (the particle in Arabic language used in
the Verse) Lan is to negate for eternity in the future. This type
of challenge, this certainty and firm mentioning only comes
from someone who has belief in what he says, knowing what
he says and is certain that nobody can oppose him and bring
something similar to what he has brought from his Lord, the
Greatest, the Almighty.

www.sunniconnect.com l 299

Allah (SWT) says: Allah has promised those among you who
believe, and do righteous good deeds, that He will certainly
grant them succession to (the present rulers) on the Earth, as He
granted it to those before them, and that He will grant them the
authority to practice their religion, that which He has chosen
for them (i.e. Islam). He will surely give them in exchange a
safe security after their fear. (Soorah AnNoor: 55) This is
exactly what occurred. Allah established this religion and made
it triumphant, and he raised it and spread it in all the countries
and he fulfilled it and made it continue. Many from the Salaf
interpreted this Verse as the Caliphate of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq
and there is no doubt in its inclusion (in the Verse). However,
it isn’t specific to it. Rather it encompasses it as it encompasses
other than it as has been affirmed in the Saheeh, “When Qaisar
(Caesar) perishes then there shall be no Qaisar after him, and
when Kisra (king of Persia) perishes then there shall be no
Kisra after him. By the One in Whose Hands is my soul, you
shall spend their treasures in the path of Allah (Jihad).” This
occurred in the era of the three Caliphs: Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman. Allah says: It is He Who has sent His Messenger
(Muhammad) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islam),
to make it superior over all religions even though the
Mushrikoon (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the
Oneness of Allah) hate (it). (Soorah AtTawbah: 33) This is
what occurred; this religion became triumphant, it overcome
and was superior over all religions in the East and the West of
the world. His Word was exalted in the era of the Companions
and those who came after them and all the countries submitted
to them and all their inhabitants were humiliated before them
with their different backgrounds. The people either became
believers in him from the religion or either in a truce offering
obedience and wealth or either waging war scared, distressed
from the power of Islam and its followers. It has been affirmed
in the Hadith: “Allah has showed me the East and West of the

www.sunniconnect.com l 300

Earth, and the kingdom of my Ummah shall reach that which
was shown to me from it.”
Allah (SWT) says: Say (O Muhammad) to the Bedouins who
lagged behind: “You shall be called to fight against a people
given to great warfare, then you shall fight them, or they shall
surrender.” (Soorah AlFath: 16) And it is all the same whether
those were the Hawazin or the followers of Musailimah (false
prophet) or the Romans because that (event described in the
Verse) happened.
Allah says: Allah has promised you abundant spoils that you
will capture, and He has hastened for you this, and He has
restrained the hands of men from you, that it may be a sign for
the Believers, and that He may guide you to a Straight Path.
And other (victories and much booty there are, He promises
you) which are not yet within your power, indeed Allah
compasses them, And Allah is Ever Able to do all things.
(Soorah Al-Fath: 20-21) And whether this other (Verse was
concerning) Khaiabr or Makkah then they were conquered and
taken (all the same) exactly as was mentioned in the promise
(prophecy).
Allah (SWT) says: Indeed Allah shall fulfill the true vision
which He showed to His Messenger, i.e., the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) saw a dream that he has
entered Makkah along with his Companions, having their heads
shaved or cut short in very truth. Certainly, you shall enter AlMasjid Al-Haram; if Allah wills, secure, (some) having your
heads shaved, and (some) having your head hair cut short,
having no fear. He knew what you knew not, and He granted
besides that a near victory. (Soorah Al-Fath: 27) This promise
was in the year of Al-Hudaibiyah Year 6 (Hijrah) and its
fulfillment occurred in the Year 7 (Hijrah), the year of Umratul-

www.sunniconnect.com l 301

Qada as mentioned earlier. We have mentioned there the
Hadith in full and therein Ibn Umar said: “O Messenger of
Allah, didn’t you tell us that we were going to come to the
Ka‘bah and make Tawaf of it?” He said, “Indeed, did I tell you
that you were going to come to it in this year?” He said, “No.”
The Prophet said, “Indeed you shall go to it and make Tawaf of
it.”
Allah (SWT) says: And (remember) when Allah promised you
(Muslims) one of the two parties (of the enemy, i.e., either the
army or the caravan) that it should be yours, you wished that
the one not armed (the caravan) should be yours. (Soorah AlAnfal: 7) And this promise was in the Battle of Badr, when the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) left Madinah to take the caravan complete with goods
from the Quraish, and news reached the Quraish about his
expedition to their caravan. So they grouped and set off with
approximately 1,000 fighters. When the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his
Companions were certain of the arrival of Quraishi army, Allah
promised him one of the two parties that he will be victorious
over; either the caravan or either the enemy. Many of the
Companions who were with him wanted the promise to be the
caravan because of the wealth there in and few guards, and they
didn’t want to meet the enemy because of their number and
preparation. Then Allah made them calm and executed His
promise to meet the enemy, so he unleashed upon them his
wrath which can’t be repelled. As many as 70 of their chiefs
were killed and 70 were captured and a big amount of their
wealth was seized. And he combined for them the good of this
world and the Hereafter and for this reason Allah said: But
Allah willed to justify the truth by His Words and to cut off the
roots of the disbelievers (i.e. in the Battle of Badr). (Soorah Al-

www.sunniconnect.com l 302

Anfal: 7) And this has been mentioned earlier in the “Battle of
Badr” chapter.
Allah (SWT) says: O Prophet! Say to the captives that are in
your hands: “If Allah knows any good in your hearts, He will
give you something better than what has been taken from you,
and He will forgive you, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.” (Soorah Al-Anfal:70) And this is what happened,
Allah recompensated those who embraced Islam from them
with the goodness in this world and the Hereafter. And also that
which Al-Bukhari narrated: Al-Abbas came to the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and said,
“O Messenger of Allah give me wealth because I sacrificed
myself and Aqeel.” He said to him, “Take.” So he took in a
cloth an amount which he couldn’t carry, and he removed some
amount from it time after sometime until he could carry it on
his shoulder. And he left with it, as we mentioned before in
detail, and this is a confirmation of this noble Verse.
Allah (SWT) says: And if you fear poverty, Allah will enrich
you if He will, out of His Bounty. (Soorah At-Tawbah: 28) And
this is what occurred, Allah replaced them from what came to
them with the polytheistic pilgrims, with what he legislated for
them by fighting the People of the Book. And he levied the tax
(Jizyah) upon them and he took the wealth of whoever was
killed from them upon disbelief, just as it happened to the
disbelievers of Sham and the Romans and the Magians of the
Persia in Iraq and other than it from the countries which Islam
spread on its corners and ruled its cities and wilderness. Allah
says: It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad) with
guidance and the religion of truth (Islam), to make it superior
over all religions even though the Mushrikoon hate (it). (Soorah
At-Tawbah: 33)

www.sunniconnect.com l 303

Allah (SWT) says: They will swear by Allah to you (Muslims)
when you return to them, that you may turn away from them.
So turn away from them. Surely, they are Rijsun (i.e. Najasun
or impure because of their evil deeds) (Soorah At-Tawbah: 95)
This is what occurred when they consulted another about him;
to help him, or kill him or banish him from them. Then the
decision was made to kill him. At that point Allah commanded
his Messenger (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to
leave them. So he left along with his ally Abu Bakr. Then they
hid in the cave of Thawr (mountain in Makkah) for three nights.
Later, they left as we mentioned earlier. And this is the meaning
of his statement: If you help him (Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him)) not (it does not matter), for
Allah did indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out,
the second of two, when they (Muhammad (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Abu Bakr) were in the
cave, and he said to his Companion (Abu Bakr): "Be not sad
(or afraid), surely Allah is with us." Then Allah sent down His
Sakeenah (calmness, tranquillity, peace, etc.) upon him, and
strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not, and
made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while
it was the Word of Allah that became the uppermost, and Allah
is All-Mighty, All-Wise. (Soorah At-Tawbah: 40) Also, this is
the meaning of His statement: And (remember) when the
disbelievers plotted against you (O Muhammad) to imprison
you, or to kill you, or to get you out (from your home, i.e.
Makkah); they were plotting and Allah too was planning, and
Allah is the Best of the planners. (Soorah Al-Anfal: 30) And
for this reason He said: And Verily, they were about to frighten
you so much as to drive you out from the land. But in that case
they would not have stayed (therein) after you, except for a
little while. (Soorah Al-Isra’: 76) And it took place just as He
had mentioned because the chiefs who consulted one another
upon that, didn’t wait long in Makkah after his migration until

www.sunniconnect.com l 304

he settled in Madinah and the Muhajiroon and Ansar followed
him. Thereafter, the Battle of Badr took place and those were
killed (the chiefs who planned to kill him) and those heads were
cut and he knew that before it occurred from Allah’s informing
of him about that. And for this reason Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh said to
Umayyah Ibn Khalaf, “Indeed I have heard that Muhammad
said that he is going to kill you.” He said, “Did you hear him?”
He said, “Yes.” He replied, “For, by Allah, he doesn’t lie.” And
the Hadith shall be mentioned in its appropriate place. We have
mentioned that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) began to point to his Companions to the places of
their deaths (of the chiefs) and none of them strayed away from
the places he pointed to.
Allah (SWT) says: Alif Lam Meem. (These letters are one of
the miracles of the Qur’an, and none but Allah, Alone, knows
their meanings). The Romans have been defeated. In the nearer
land (Syria, Iraq, Jordan, and Palestine), and they, after their
defeat, will be victorious. Within three to nine years. The
decision of the matter, before and after (these events) is only
with Allah, (before the defeat of Romans by the Persians, and
after, i.e. the defeat of the Persians by the Romans). And on that
Day, the Believers (i.e. Muslims) will rejoice (at the victory
given by Allah to the Romans against the Persians). With the
help of Allah, He helps whom He wills, and He is the Almighty,
the Most Merciful. (It is) a Promise of Allah (i.e. Allah will
give victory to the Romans against the Persians), and Allah
fails not in His Promise, but most of men know not. (Soorah
Ar-Room: 1-6) This prophecy took place as he mentioned. And
that is because when the Persians beat the Romans the
polytheists became happy and the Believers were saddened
with that result, as the Christians were closer to Islam than the
Magians. So Allah told his Messenger (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) that the Romans shall defeat the Persians

www.sunniconnect.com l 305

after that event by 3-9 years and Abu Bakr betted with the
polytheists that it will occur (defeat of the Persians by the
Romans) in this period (3-9 years) which is well-known as we
established in our book, Tafseer. And it occurred just as the
Qur’an informed, the Romans defeated the Persians after their
victory with a bigger victory, and their story about that is too
lengthy to be mentioned. And we have explained it in the
Tafseer which is sufficient as an explanation of the story.
Allah (SWT) says: We will show them Our Signs in the
universe, and in their own selves, until it becomes manifest to
them that this (the Qur’an) is the truth. Is it not sufficient in
regard to your Lord that He is a Witness over all things?
(Soorah Fussilat: 53) It occurred likewise; Allah showed from
His Signs and miracles in the souls of mankind, in the horizons
that which he caused from the people to the enemies of
Prophethood and the opponents of the Shari‘ah from those who
denied him from the People of the two Books (Jews and
Christians) and the Magians and the polytheists which proved
to the people with insight and intellect that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in truth. And that he brought the revelation from Allah
was the truth. He put fear, respect for him and dread in the
chests and hearts of his enemies as has been affirmed from him
in the Saheehain, that he said, “I have been assisted with fear
the journey of a month (his enemies would fear him that
greatly).” This is from aid and assistance which Allah gave to
him. His fear would fear him despite their being between him
and them the journey of a month. It has been mentioned: When
he decided to fight a people, they would fear him before he
would reach them and arrive by one month.
As for the Ahadith that prove that which prophesized events
which later occurred in their accordance then from that is what

www.sunniconnect.com l 306

we mentioned earlier in the story of the document that the
chiefs of Quraish agreed upon. They agreed that they wouldn’t
shelter Hashim and Al-Muttalib tribesmen, and they wouldn’t
allow marriages with them, nor would they trade with them
until they surrendered the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) to them.
The Quraish hung the document of leadership to the roof of the
Ka‘bah. Then Allah sent the earthworms to it and they ate the
Names of Allah from it in order for them not to be combined
with the injustice and sin on the sheet of paper. It has been said
that they ate everything except for the Names of Allah, the
Almighty. Thereafter, the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) informed his uncle Abu Talib
about that and Abu Talib went to the Quraish and said: My
nephew has told me about your document that Allah sent the
earthworms on it and that they ate everything except for the
Names of Allah on it – or words similar to that – so bring it.
And if it is as he said then I shall not give him up and if not
then I shall surrender him to you. So they brought it down and
opened it and it was just as the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) mentioned. Then at that
moment they broke that ruling and the tribe of Banu Hashim
and the tribe of Banu Al-Muttalib entered Makkah and they
returned to what they were on before that, as we mentioned
earlier.
Also the Hadith of Khabbab Ibn Al-Aratt when he and those
similar to him from the weak seeking help from the Prophet
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) and he was laying
on his robe in the shade of the Ka‘bah, in order that he would
pray for them due to the condition they were in from
punishment and humiliation. He sat with a red face and said,
“Those that came before you, one of them would be split in two

www.sunniconnect.com l 307

yet that wouldn’t steer him away from his religion. By Allah,
Allah shall complete this affair (religion). But you are hasty.”
Narrated by Abu Moosa, I saw him from the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say, “I saw
in my dream that I was migrating from Makkah to a land that
has date trees. I guessed that it was Al-Yamamah (in the center
of the Arabian Peninsula, Riyadh) and that was Yathrib (old
name for Madinah). I saw in this dream of mine that I jolted a
sword and its middle snapped, and that was what befell on the
Muslims in the Battle of Uhud. Then I shook it again and it
returned to a better state than it ever was, and that was what
Allah brought from the Conquest of Makkah and the
unification of the Muslims and I saw a cow and goodness
(slaughtered as is mentioned in other narrations, interpreted as
the death of some Muslims in Uhud) and they were the
Believers in Battle of Uhud. The goodness is what Allah
brought from goodness and the reward of truthfulness that
Allah gave us after the Battle of Badr.” From that is the story
of Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh with Umayyah Ibn Khalaf when he came
to Makkah.
Narrated by Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ood, he said: Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh
went to perform Umrah and stopped by Umayyah Ibn Khalaf,
Abu Safwan. When Umayyah went to Sham and passed
through Madinah, he would stay with Sa‘d. Then Umayyah
said to Sa‘d, “Wait till the middle of the day and the people are
not taking heed and make Tawaf.” So when Sa‘d was making
Tawaf, suddenly Abu Jahl appeared and said, “Who is the one
making Tawaf of the Ka‘bah?” Sa‘d replied, “I am Sa‘d.” Abu
Jahl said, “You perform Tawaf of the Ka‘bah when you have
given shelter to Muhammad and his Companions (i.e., in
Madinah)?” He said, “Yes.” They began to argue; Umayyah
said to Sa‘d, “Don’t raise your voice at AbulHakam (Abu Jahl’s

www.sunniconnect.com l 308

real nickname) because he is the chief of this valley (Makkah).”
Sa‘d said, “By Allah, if you prevent me from doing Tawaf of
the House then I shall stop your business in Sham.” Umayyah
began to tell Sa‘d not to raise his voice and grabbed him. Sa‘d
became angry and said, “Leave me alone because I have heard
Muhammad (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) say
that he is going to kill you.” He said, “Me?” He said, “Yes.” He
said, “By Allah Muhamad doesn’t lie when he speaks.” Then
he returned to his wife and said, “Do you not know what my
Yathribi brother said?” She replied, “What did he say to you?”
He said, “He claims that he heard Muhammad say that he is
going to kill me.” She said, “By Allah, Muhammad doesn’t tell
a lie.” The narrator said: When they went to Badr and the call
to fight was made, his wife said to him, “Do you not remember
what your Yathribi brother said to you?” The narrator added:
And he didn’t want to exit, then Abu Jahl said to him, “You are
from the chiefs of the valley so come along for a day or two.”
So he went with them and Allah killed him.
This Hadith was from the Ahadith that only Al-Bukhari
narrated and it has been mentioned earlier in more detail than
this mention.
Also from this category: The story of Ubayy Ibn Khalaf who
was feeding his horse and when he would meet the Messenger
of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) he would
say, “I am going to kill you on this.” The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) would reply to him,
“Rather, I am going to kill you by the will of Allah.” Then
Ubayy Ibn Khalaf was killed in the Battle of Uhud as we have
mentioned earlier in detail.
From that is his prophecy of the places where the people will
be killed in the Battle of Badr as was mentioned earlier in the

www.sunniconnect.com l 309

Saheeh that he began to point to its place before the battle and
say, “This is where so and so shall be killed tomorrow by the
will of Allah, and this is where so and so shall be killed.” The
narrator said: By the One Who sent him with Truth none of
them moved from the place where the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) had pointed.
From this: His statement to that man who didn’t leave anything
from the polytheists stray except that he followed it with his
sword and chopped it with his sword, and that was in the Battle
of Uhud - and it has been said Khaibar and that is correct and it
has been said that it was in the Battle of Hunain. Then the
people said: No one shall gain more today than so and so – it
was said he was called Qizman. So the Prophet said, “He is
from the people of the fire.” Then someone said: I shall follow
him and he followed him and he was injured (Quzman) and he
wanted to hurry death, so he put the point of his sword to his
chest then leaned on it till it penetrated him. That man returned
and said, “I bear witness that there is no god deserving of
worship except Allah and that you are the Messenger of Allah.”
So he said, “What is that for?” He said, “The man whom you
mentioned earlier, was from his affair.” Then he mentioned the
story as mentioned earlier.
From that is his prophecy concerning the conquest of the plains
of Kisra (Persian empire) and the castles of Sham and other
countries on the day the trench was dug (the Battle of
Khandaq), when he hit the rock with his noble hand and it split
with his strike and then another and then another as we
mentioned earlier.
And from that was his prophecy that the corn was poisoned and
it was as he mentioned. The Jews admitted that and the one who
ate with him, Bishr Ibn Al-Bara’ Ibn Ma‘roor died.

www.sunniconnect.com l 310

From that is what Abdur-Razzaq mentioned from Ma‘mar; it
had reached him that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said one day, “O Allah, save
the people of the boat.” Then he waited and said, “It has
continued.” And the complete Hadith is in Dala’il AnNubuwwah by Al-Baihaqi. That boat was about to sink while
in it were the Al-Ash‘ariyyoon who came to him when he was
in Khaibar.
From that is his briefing about the grave of Abu Rigal when he
passed by it while going to Ta’if and that it had a piece of gold.
They excavated it and found it just as he mentioned, narrated
by Abu Dawood from the Hadith of Abu Ishaq from Isma‘eel
Ibn Umayyah, from Bujair Ibn Abu Bujair from Abdullah Ibn
Amr.
From that is his statement to the Ansar when he addressed
them with that speech comforting them due to what fell into
the hearts of some of them when he favored others over them
in distributing the war booty, as he sought to gain the hearts of
the Arab chiefs and the leaders of the Quraish and others. He
said, “Are you not satisfied that the people leave with sheep
and camels and you return with the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) to your
dwellings?” He said, “You shall experience after me Athara
(i.e. inequality), so be patient until you meet me at the Pond
(in Paradise).”
He said, “The people are increasing and the Ansar are
becoming fewer.” He said to them in the sermon before this one
on Mount As-Safa, “Indeed life is with your life and death is
with your death.” All of this occurred exactly as he mentioned.
Narrated by Abu Hurairah he said, that the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “When Kisra
www.sunniconnect.com l 311

perishes then there shall be no Kisra after him and when Qaisar
perishes, there shall be no Qaisar after him. By the One in
Whose Hands is the soul of Muhammad, you shall indeed
spend their treasures in the path of Allah.” Narrated by Muslim.
Narrated by Jabir Ibn Samurah, he said from the Prophet (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him), “When Kisra perishes
then there shall be no Kisra after him and when Qaisar perishes,
there shall be no Qaisar after him.” He said, “You shall indeed
spend their treasures in the path of Allah.” Also Al-Bukhari and
Muslim have narrated it from the Hadith of Jareer, and AlBukhari and Abu ‘Awanah added from Abdullah Ibn Umair
with this Hadith. The actualization of it occurred following it
in the era of the three Caliphs: Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman.
These kingdoms fell to the Muslims and the treasures of Qaisar
and Kisra were spent in the way of Allah, based upon what we
shall mention afterward, insha’Allah.
In this Hadith there is a glad tiding for the Muslims and that is:
the kingdom of Persia shall cease to exist and shall not return
and the king of the Romans for Sham disappears and shall not
rule it after that and for Allah is all praise and grace. And also
in the Hadith is the legitimacy of the Caliphates of Abu Bakr,
Umar and Uthman and a testimony for their justice because the
war booty fortunes in their times were spent in the path of Allah
in a good manner.
Narrated by Adiyy Ibn Hatim, who said: When I was with the
Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) on an
occasion a man came to him and complained about poverty.
Then another came to him and complained about being
stranded (with no wealth/wayfarer). He said, “O Adiyy, have
you seen AlHeerah?” I said, “I haven’t seen it yet I have been
told about it.” The Prophet said, “If you live long, you shall see

www.sunniconnect.com l 312

the woman travel from Al-Heerah and perform Tawaf of the
Ka‘bah not fearing anyone except for Allah.” I said to myself:
Where are the mischief-makers of Tayy’ tribe who have
destroyed the lands? He said, “If you live long, you shall
conquer the treasures of Kisra.” I said, “Kisra Ibn Hurmuz?”
He said, “Kisra Ibn Hurmuz, and if you live long, you shall see
a man who will bring a handful of gold and silver and search
for someone to accept it from him, yet he won’t find anyone
who will accept it from him as charity. Indeed one of you shall
meet Allah on the day he shall meet Him without an interpreter
who shall interpret for him (i.e. without an intermediary). He
shall indeed say to him, 'Didn’t I send a Messenger to you and
he conveyed to you?' He will say: 'Indeed'. Then He shall say,
'Did I not give you wealth, children and bless you?' He shall
say: Indeed. He shall look to his right and he shall not see
anything except the Hell fire, and he shall look to his left and
he shall not see anything except the Hellfire.” Adiyy said: I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) say, “Save yourselves from the fire even if it is with
half a date in charity and if you can’t find that then with a good
word.” Adiyy said: Then I saw the woman travel from AlHeerah and perform Tawaf of the Ka‘bah and didn’t fear
anyone except Allah. And I was from those who conquered the
treasures of Kisra Ibn Hurmuz. And if you have a long life then
you shall witness what the Prophet Abul- Qasim said, “He shall
bring a handful
of...”
Narrated by Khabab, who said: We came to the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) while he was
lying on a robe of his in the shade of the Ka‘bah. We said, “O
Messenger of Allah, pray to Allah for us and ask for his help.”
The narrator said: The color of his face became red or changed.
He said, “Indeed, from those who came before you a man

www.sunniconnect.com l 313

would be brought and a ditch would be made for him. Then a
saw would be brought and placed on his head and it would be
cut yet that wouldn’t take him away from his religion. And his
flesh would be combed with an iron comb from his bones or
his skin would be combed or his flesh before the nerves yet that
wouldn’t take him away from his religion. And Allah shall
complete this affair to the extent that the rider shall travel from
San‘a to Hadramawt and he shall not fear except from the
wolves attacking on his sheep, but you are hasty.”
Al-Bukhari narrated in the book, Alamat An- Nubuwwah, from
Utbah, from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) that he exited one day and prayed upon the people
(martyrs) of Uhud, then he ascended the pulpit and said, “I am
Faratukum, and I am a witness over you and by Allah I can see
the Pond (in Paradise whiter than milk and sweeter than honey)
now. And I have indeed been given the keys to the treasures of
the world and by Allah I don’t fear that you shall commit Shirk
(acts of polytheism) after me, but I fear that you will compete
with one another in it (treasures of the world).”
In this Hadith are many matters and from them is that he told
those present that he was Faratukum, i.e., going to die before
them, and this is what happened. This was during the illness of
his death. Then he said that he was a witness over them even if
his death was to be before theirs. He mentioned that he was
given the keys to the treasures of the world, i.e., the countries
were conquered as in the Hadith of Abu Hurairah mentioned
earlier. Abu Hurairah said: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) has gone and you are now
conquering them Kafran Kafran, i.e., country after country. He
mentioned that his Companions shall not commit Shirk, and
this is what happened.

www.sunniconnect.com l 314

Narrated by Anas: The Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah
be upon him) was missing Thabit Ibn Qais when a man said,
“O Messenger of Allah, I shall find out about him for you.” He
went to him and found him sitting in his house with his head
lowered and said, “What is the matter?” He said: Evil, he used
to raise his voice above the voice of the Prophet (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and his actions are wasted and
he is from the people of the fire. Then the man came to the
Prophet and told him that he had said such-and-such. Moosa (a
narrator) said: He returned another time with a great glad
tiding. Then the Prophet said: Go to him and tell him: You are
not from the people of the fire; rather you are from the people
of Paradise. Only Al-Bukhari narrated this. And Thabit Ibn
Qais Ibn Shammas was killed as a martyr in the Battle of
Yamamah as shall be explained.
Similarly, it has been affirmed in the authentic Hadith glad
tidings for Abdullah Ibn Salam that he shall die upon Islam and
he shall be from the people of Paradise. And he died in the best
of ways and most beautiful and the people would bear witness
that he will be granted Paradise during his life because of the
briefing of the Truthful (the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him)) about him that he shall die upon Islam and
this is what occurred.
It has been affirmed in the Saheeh the news about the 10
Companions that they are from the dwellers of Paradise and
also it has been affirmed from him that no one who gave the
oath of allegiance under the tree shall enter the fire and they
were 1,400 in number and it has been mentioned that there were
1,500. It hasn’t been related from even one of them that he lived
other than praiseworthily and he didn’t die except upon
goodness, uprightness and success and for Allah is all praise

www.sunniconnect.com l 315

and grace. And this is from the prophecies of Prophethood and
signs of the message.

Past hidden and future foreseen matters
Narrated by Jabir Ibn Samurah, he said: A man came and said,
“O Messenger of Allah, so-and-so has died.” He said, “He
hasn’t died.” Then he returned a second time and said, “Indeed,
so-and-so has died.” Then he returned the third time and said,
“Indeed so-and-so slashed his own throat with a blade he had
with him.” The Prophet didn’t pray upon him (the funeral
prayer).
Narrated by Abu Shahm, he said: A girl passed by me in
Madinah and I grabbed her from behind. He added: The
Messenger of Allah began to take allegiance from the people.
He added: I went to him and he didn’t accept my allegiance and
said, “Are you the one who grabbed?” He said: I said, “By
Allah I shall not return (to that).” He said, “Then give me the
pledge of allegiance.”
Narrated by Abdullah Ibn Umar, he said: We used to refrain
from speaking and being open to our women in the time of the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) from fear that something will be revealed (from the
Qur’an) about us. When he died we spoke and were open.
Narrated by a man from the Ansar, he said: We left with the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) in a funeral prayer and I saw the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) advising the grave
digger, “Make it wider by his legs. Make it wider by his head.”
When he returned the invitation of a woman to eat awaited him.
So he went and the food was brought, he put his hand in it and

www.sunniconnect.com l 316

the others put their hands in it and they ate. Our fathers saw the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) chew a morsel of food and said, “I find that the sheep’s
meat was taken without the permission of its owner.” The
woman said, “O Messenger of Allah, I asked that a sheep was
bought for me from Al-Baqee‘ but there wasn’t any, then I
requested from a neighbor of mine, who had bought a sheep, to
send it to me for its price. But he wasn’t around. Then I asked
his wife so she sent it to me.” The Messenger of Allah (Peace
and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Feed it to the
captives.”

Section about the order of the unseen future
events after the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him)
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Al-Bukhari and Muslim,
narrated by Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman who said, “The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) stood on one occasion and he didn’t leave the event till
the last hour except that he mentioned it, the one who knows it
knows it and the one who is ignorant of it is ignorant of it. And
I would see something which I forgot and then I would
recognize it just like a man knows a man when he sees him.”
Narrated by Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman, he said: The people
would ask the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) about the good and I would
ask him about evil from fear that it would afflict me. I said to
the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him): "O Messenger of Allah We were living in ignorance and
in an (extremely) terrible atmosphere. Allah brought to us this
good (i.e., Islam); will there be any evil after this good?" He

www.sunniconnect.com l 317

said, "Yes." I said, “Will there be any good after that evil?" He
replied, "Yes, but it will be tainted (not pure.)'' I asked, "What
will be its taint?" He replied, "There will be people who will
guide according to other than my guidance. You will approve
of some of their deeds and disapprove of some others." I asked,
"Will there be any evil after that good?" He replied, "Yes, there
will be some people calling at the gates of the (Hell) Fire, and
whoever will respond to their call, will be thrown by them into
the (Hell) Fire." I said, "O Messenger of Allah, will you
describe them to us?" He said, "They will be from our own
people and will speak our language." I said, “So what do you
advise me if I reach that time?” He said, “Stick close to the
group of the Believers and their Imam.” I said, “If they don’t
have a congregation and an Imam?” He said, “Then leave all
those groups even if you have to bite on to the root of a tree
until death reaches you while you are upon that.”
Narrated by Hudhaifah, who said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) spoke to me about
what shall be until the last hour what the people of Madinah
shall cause the people of Madinah to exit from it.
In Saheeh Muslim narrated from Abu Yazeed Amr Ibn Akhtab,
he said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) told us about what occurred and what shall
happen till the Day of Judgment, so the most knowledgeable of
us is the one who was the best in memory.”
In Saheeh Muslim from the Hadith of Abu Nadrah from Abu
Sa‘eed, who said the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “This world is sweet and green and
Allah is going to leave you as successors of it and see that
which you do. So beware of the trials of this world and beware
of the trials of the women, because the first trial of the Children

www.sunniconnect.com l 318

of Isra’eel was in the women.” In another Hadith, “I haven’t
left after me a trial more harmful upon the men than the
women.”
In the Saheehain from Jabir, who said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Do you have
Anmat (type of expensive rug with thin fibres)?” The narrator
said: I said, “O Messenger of Allah, how can I possess Anmat?”
He replied, “You shall possess Anmat.” The narrator said: Now
I said to my wife, “Move your Anmat away from me.” She
would say, “Didn’t the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) say to you, ‘Indeed you shall
possess Anmat?’ So leave it.”
Narrated by Sufyan Ibn Abu Zuhair, he said: The Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said,
“Yemen shall be conquered and a people driving their camels
shall come (the word used in this Hadith is Yabisson, i.e.,
saying Bass, Bass to the camels so they speed up). And they
will call their families and those that obey them and Madinah
is better for them only if they knew. Ash-Sham shall be
conquered and a people driving their camels shall come (saying
Bass, Bass to them so they speed up). They will call their
families and those that obey them and Madinah is better for
them only if they knew. Iraq shall be conquered and a people
driving their camels shall come (saying Bass, Bass to them so
they speed up). They will call their families and those that obey
them and Madinah is better for them only if they knew.”
Narrated by Yazeed Ibn Khusaifah, Busr Ibn Sa‘eed told him
that he heard in a sitting of Makkans, them mentioning that
Sufyan told them, and he mentioned a Hadith from it: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said to him, “Ash-Sham shall be conquered soon, then

www.sunniconnect.com l 319

people will come to it from this country – i.e. Madinah – and
they will be amazed by its countryside and its ease of life, and
Madinah is better for them only if they knew then Iraq will be
conquered and a people driving their camels shall come (saying
Bass, Bass to them so they speed up). They will call their
families and those that obey them and Madinah is better for
them only if they knew.” Narrated by Ibn Khuzaimah from the
way of Isma‘eel, and Hafiz Ibn Asakir narrated it from the
Hadith of Abu Dharr from the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him) similar to that (Hadith mentioned earlier).
Similarly the Hadith of Ibn Hawalah, and the following is a
witness to that (i.e. evidence supporting the Hadith mentioned),
“Ash-Sham will refuse to give its Mudyun (45 lbs in weight)
and its Dinars, and Iraq will refuse to give its Dirhams and
Qafeez (approximately under 5kg), and Egypt will refuse to
give its Irdabb (measurement approximately 50 kg) and its
Dinars and you shall return just as you began (i.e. there will
come a time when the people of these countries will not give
the Jizyah and land taxation and Islam shall become strange
just as it began).” This is also in the Saheeh. Similarly, the
Hadith about the Meeqats (places where Ihram of Hajj or
Umrah is put on) for the people of Ash-Sham and Yemen (or
those that pass by them) and the Hadith is in the Saheehain. In
Muslim, is the place of the Meeqat for the people of Iraq and
this Hadith supports that also, “When Kisra perishes then there
shall be no Kisra after him. And when Qaisar perishes, there
shall be no Qaisar after him. By the One in Whose Hands is my
soul you shall spend their treasures in the way of Allah, the
Almighty.”
In Saheeh Al-Bukhari narrated by Awf Ibn Malik, who said:
The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said in the Battle of Tabook, “Enumerate six matters
before the last Hour.” He mentioned his death, the conquering

www.sunniconnect.com l 320

of Bait ul-Maqdis (Holy land of Kan‘an, Palestine), the death
and that is the plague, the abundance of wealth, the trial and
then the pact between the Muslims and the Romans.
In Saheeh Muslim narrated from Abu Dharr, who said: The
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “You shall conquer a land in its dealing with one
another called Qeerat (a portion of Dinar and Dirhams and
other than them). So, do good to its inhabitants because they
have a shield (of protection with the Muslims) and ties of
kinship (because the mother of Isma‘eel, Hajar, was from
there). So, if you see two men fighting over the place of a brick
then leave it.” The narrator said: Ibn Hasanah passed by
Rabee‘ah and Abdur Rahman Ibn Shurahbeel fighting over the
place of a brick (land dispute). He exited from it, i.e., the lands
of Egypt behind Amr Ibn Al-As in Year 20.
Ibn Wahb narrated from one of Ka‘b Ibn Malik’s sons that the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) said, “When you conquer Egypt, be good to its people
because they have protection and kinship.”
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal narrated from Sufyan Ibn Uyainah that he
was asked about his statement (in the Hadith), “protection and
kinship.” He said from the people are those that say that: The
mother of Isma‘eel, Hajar, was Egyptian. And from the people
are those that say: The mother of Ibraheem (was Egyptian).
I say: The correct view in which there is no doubt is that they
were (both) Egyptians as we have mentioned. And the meaning
of his statement, “protection,” is that the gift which the viceroy
gave to him and his acceptance of that from him, and that is a
type of shield and pact. And Allah (SWT) knows best.

www.sunniconnect.com l 321

It has been mentioned earlier that which Al-Bukhari narrated
from the Hadith of Muhill Ibn Khaleefah from Adiyy Ibn Hatim
about the conquering of Kisra’s treasures and the spread of
security and the abundance of wealth to the extent that no one
will accept the charity. In the Hadith, Adiyy witnessed the
conquest and saw the woman travel from Al-Heerah (a city near
Kufah in Iraq) to Makkah not fearing anyone except for Allah
due to the security. He said, “If you live long then you will
indeed see what Abul-Qasim (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) mentioned about the abundance of wealth to the
extent that nobody will accept the charity.”
Al-Baihaqi said, “And that occurred in the era of Umar Ibn
Abdul-Azeez.”
I say: It is possible that shall occur late till the time of Al-Mahdi
as has been mentioned in the description of him, or the time of
‘Eesa Ibn Maryam’s descent after he kills Dajjal. It has been
narrated in the Saheeh that he shall kill the pig, break the cross
and the wealth shall flow and will be plentiful to the extent that
nobody will accept it. And Allah (SWT) knows best.
In Saheeh Muslim narrated from Jabir Ibn Samurah, he said: I
heard the Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) say, “This religion shall remain established in the
time of the twelve Caliphs, all of them are from the Quraish.
Then liars shall appear before the Hour and a group of Muslims
shall conquer the white castle, the castle of Kisra and I shall die
to leave you until the Pond (i.e., till we meet at the Pond in
Paradise).”
The Hadith of Abu Hurairah was mentioned earlier, “When
Qaisar perishes there shall be no Qaisar after him, and when
Kisra perishes there shall be no Kisra after him. By the One in

www.sunniconnect.com l 322

Whose Hands is my soul, you shall spend their treasures in the
way of Allah.”
Al-Baihaqi said, “The meaning is the disappearance of Qaisar’s
kingdom from Sham and that it won’t stay like his kingdom
over Rome after the Prophet’s statement when he venerated the
note (that the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon
him) sent to him), “May Allah fortify his kingdom.” As for the
kingdom of Persia, it completely disappeared due to his
statement, “May Allah destroy his kingdom (because the king
tore the note the Prophet sent to him).”
Narrated by Umar Ibn Al-Khattab when the clothes of Kisra,
his sword, his belt, his crown and ornaments were brought, he
clothed Suraqah Ibin Malik Ibn Ju‘shum with them and said,
“Say all praise is due to Allah, the One Who clothed a Bedouin
from the nomadic land with the clothes of Kisra.”
Ash-Shafi‘i said: He only clothed him with that because the
Prophet said to Suraqah when he looked at his arms and said,
“It is as though I can see you wearing the two bracelet of
Kisra.” And Allah (SWT) knows best.
Narrated by Adiyy Ibn Hatim, he said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “Al-Heerah
was shown to me like the canines of dogs and you shall indeed
conquer it”. Then a man stood up and said: O Messenger of
Allah, give to me her daughter Buqailah. He said: “She is for
you.” So they gave her to him after that her father came and
said: Do you sell her? He said: yes, He said: for how much?
Judge what you want. He said: One thousand Dirhams. He said:
I take it. They said to him if you say thirty thousand, sure take
her. He said: Is its number more than one thousand.

www.sunniconnect.com l 323

Narrated by Damrah Ibn Habeeb that Ibn Zughb Al- Iyadi
informed him, who said that Abdullah Ibn Hawalah Al-Azdi
came to visit me and said, “The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) sent us round Madinah to get
some goods. We returned without gaining anything and he saw
the tiredness on our faces.” He stood and said, “Don’t make
them rely on me, then I become weak, and don’t leave them to
their own vices lest they and then they become tired of them,
and don’t make them rely on others for a living lest they feel
they have grace over them.” Then he said, “Ash-Sham, the
Roman and Persian empire will be opened for you and you shall
have such-and-such in number from camels and from cows
such-and-such in number, and from sheep such-and-such in
number and to the extent that one of you will be given 100
Dinars and he will hate it (i.e., to accept it).” Then he placed
his hand on my head or my forehead and said, “O Ibn Hawalah,
when you see that the Caliphate has descended on the Sacred
Land then earthquakes, trials and great matters will be near and
the last Hour will be closer to the people than this hand of mine
on your head.”
Narrated by Ibn Hawala that he said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “The affairs
in the future shall be to the extent that there will be combined
armies: an army will be in Ash-Sham, an army in Yemen and
an army in Iraq.” Ibn Hawalah said, “What do you advise me if
I reach that time.” He replied, “Go to Sham because it is the
best place of Allah on the face of Earth and the best of His
slaves come to it. And if you refuse, then go to Yemen and
drink from your ghudar (water passages) because Allah has
assured me with Ash-Sham and its people.”
Narrated by Abdullah Ibn Hawalah, he said: I came to the
Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon

www.sunniconnect.com l 324

him) while he was sitting in the shade of a tree and he had a
writer and he would dictate to him. He said, “Shall I not write
your name, O Ibn Hawalah?” I said, “I don’t know, whatever
Allah and his Messenger have chosen for me.” Then he turned
away from me. Isma‘eel said once in the first time, “Shall we
write your name, O Ibn Hawalah?” I replied, “I don’t know,
regarding what, O Messenger of Allah?” He turned away from
me and turned toward his writer and dictated to him. He said,
“Shall we write your name, O Ibn Hawalah?” I replied, “I don’t
know, regarding what, O Messenger of Allah?” He turned away
from me again and turned toward his writer and dictated to him.
The narrator said, “Then I looked and suddenly found Umar’s
name in the book, so I thought that Umar isn’t written except
in good acts.” The Prophet said, “Shall we write your name, O
Ibn Hawalah?” I replied, “Yes.” Then he said, “O Ibn Hawalah,
what will you do in a trial that exits from the surface of the
Earth as though it is the horns of a cow?” I said, “I don’t know,
whatever Allah and his Messenger have chosen for me.” He
said, “And what will you do in another trial that exits after it
the first of it is like a rabbits’ mound?” I replied, “I don’t know,
whatever Allah and his Messenger have chosen for me.” He
said, “Follow this.” The narrator said, “And he was a man who
was leaving at that time.” He added, “So I set off and hurried
and grabbed his shoulders and brought him to the Messenger
of Allah in person and said, 'This man?'” He replied, “Yes.” He
added, “And it was Uthman Ibn Affan.”
It has been affirmed in Saheeh Muslim, from Abu Hurairah
that: The Messenger of Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon him) said, “Iraq will refuse to give its Dirhams and
Qafeez, Ash-Sham will refuse to give its Mudyun and its
Dinars, and Egypt will refuse to give its Irdabb and its Dinars,
and you shall return just as you began (i.e., there will come a
time when the people of these countries will not give the Jizyah

www.sunniconnect.com l 325

and land taxation and Islam shall become strange just as it
began).” The flesh and blood of Abu Hurairah witnessed that.
Yahya Ibn Adam and others from the people of knowledge said:
This is from the signs of Prophethood because he told of what
Umar levied on the people of Iraq from Dirhams and Qafeezs
and that which he levied from Kharaj (land tax) upon Sham and
Egypt before it happened. The people have differed over the
meaning of his statement. “Iraq refuses....”, so it has been said
that it means that they will accept Islam (people of those
countries mentioned in the Hadith), then the taxes shall be
relieved from them and AlBaihaqi saw this as the stronger
opinion. It has also been said that they will disobey and not pay
the Kharaj levied on them and for this reason he said, “and you
shall return just as it (Islam) began,” i.e., you will return to your
previous state just has occurred in the Hadith in Saheeh
Muslim, “Islam began strange and it shall return to being
strange so Tooba (tree in Paradise) is for the strangers.”
That which Imam Ahmad narrated supports this opinion from
Jabir Ibn Abdullah, as he said the people of Iraq will not be
brought to them soon: Qafeez and Dirhams. We said, “Where
does that come from?” He replied, “From the non-Arabs. They
shall refrain from giving that.” He said, “The people of Sham
will soon not be brought to them Dinars and Mudyun.” We said
where does that come from?” He said, “From the Roman
Empire. They shall refrain from giving that.” He remained
silent for a moment said, The Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “There shall be a Caliph
in the end of my Ummah (i.e., end of time) who shall gather
wealth and not be able to count it.” Al-Jurairi said: So I said to
Abu Nadrah and Abul-Ala, “Do you think that is Umar Ibn
Abdul- Azeez?” They replied, “No.”

www.sunniconnect.com l 326

It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from more than one way
that the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) made Dhul-Hulaifah the
Meeqat for the people of Madinah, and AlJuhfah for the people
of Sham and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen. In Saheeh
Muslim, narrated from Jabir, the Prophet (Peace and Blessings
of Allah be upon him) said, “And Dhat Irq (Meeqat) for the
people of Iraq.” This is from the signs of Prophethood because
he foretold the Hajj of the people of Sham, Yemen and Iraq.
Narrated by Abu Sa‘eed, he said: The Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “There shall
come a time upon the people when a great congregation of
people shall go to battle and they will be asked, 'Is there anyone
from the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) with you?' It will be said, 'Yes.'
Allah will enable them to conquer it. Thereafter, there shall
come a time upon the people when a great congregation of
people shall go to battle and they will be asked, 'Is there anyone
from the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) with you?' It will be said, 'Yes.'
Allah will enable them to conquer it. Thereafter, there shall
come a time upon the people when a great congregation of
people shall go to battle and they will be asked, 'Is there anyone
from the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) with you?' It will be said, 'Yes.'
Allah will enable them to conquer it."
It has been affirmed in the Saheehain from Abu Hurairah, he
said: We were sitting with the Messenger of Allah (Peace and
Blessings of Allah be upon him) and Soorah Al-Jumu‘ah was
revealed to him: Also to others among them (Muslims) who
have not yet joined them (but they will come) (Soorah AlJumu‘ah: 3) A man said, “Who are they, O Messenger of Allah

www.sunniconnect.com l 327

(Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) ?” He placed his
hand on Salman Al-Farisi and said, “If faith (Eeman) was next
Ath-Thurayya (a star) then men from them (this group
mentioned in the Verse) would have reached it.” And this
happened just as he mentioned.
In Saheeh Al-Bukhari from Abu Hurairah, the Messenger of
Allah (Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him) said, “The
Prophets used to lead the Children of Isra’eel, each time a
Prophet would die another Prophet would succeed him. There
is no Prophet after me and there shall be Caliphs after me and
there will be many.” They said, “So with what do you order us,
O Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “With the first allegiance
the second one becomes false (i.e., the chosen leader is the one
who was given the allegiance first) and give them their rights
because Allah is going to ask them what he made them in
charge of.”