The Biography of

ABU
BAKR

AS-SIDDEEOQ

May Allah be pleased with him

Translated by Faisal Shafeeq

DARUSSALAM
كلام الله

Kalamullah.com

Dr. “Ali Muhammad Muhammad As-Sallaabee
Translated by

Faisal Shafeeq

lta

DARUSSALAM

DARUSSALAM

GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS

Riyadh, Jeddah, Sharjah, Lahore
London, Houston, New York

HEAD OFFICE

P.O, Box: 22743, Riyadh 11416 1.S.A Tek 00066-01-4093082/4043432 Fax: 4021659
E-maik rlyadh@dar-us-salam.com, darussalam@awalneLnet.sa Website: www.dar-lis-salam.com

HORNS KONG
¢ Peoowtech
AZ, SF Tsim Sha Mansion
Mable: ‏داب كمه‎

Wo. 400A, ‏ل‎ Jaan 882 21218, Damansara lama,
47400, Peinng Jaya, Selangor, Darul Ehsan, Malaysia
Yok 00609 710 9760 Faxc 803 7710 8

438, Bd de Méninontant- 75011 Paris
Té& C0330 238 99 6 AH BS

© 1018: PALA Flooy 185-474, Halden St.
Lakemba NSW 2195, Austyalia
Tel B0672 S748 4640 Feo 97 ‏قة‎ 4030

® ‘Musi Converts Association of Singapore
a2 Onen Read The Galaxy
Singapore- 624484
Fok 0065-440 8924, 348 Badd Fax: 440 8724
SRI LANKA
* Darul Kiab 6, Nimal Road, Colombo-4
Tak O004-1-589 038 Fax: 0084-74 722433

INDIA
« idanvc Dimensions
56/58 Tandel Street {North}
Dongri, Mumbai 4000 000 india
Tek 0091-22-3736875, Fen: 3730689
E-maitsalesg@iRr net

SOUTH AFRICA
e fsiarnic Da'wah Movemerd (IDM)
48008 Cruaibart 4078 Charan, South Advices
Fed: ‏ا ا‎
Pax: 1027 ‏اس‎ 2
E-mail: ldm@ion.coza

KSA. Barasselan Showroom:
Riyadh
Olaye pranet: Te! 09068-1461 4485 Fax: 4644645
Walaz branch: Tel O0986-1-4795220 Fax: 4730221
‏»م‎ Jetidah
Jet 00986-2-4879284 Fax S336270
a Madinah
Tek 00966-5004 17155 Fao: 04-8151127
‏ف‎ ~£)-Khobar
Tek 00988-3-2692000 Fan 601554
« Khamis Sushayt
Jer 00966-50017 0328
UAE
+ Darussalam, Shariah DAE
Yok (X97 1-8-4632623 Fax: SG22804
ShariehGider-us-salam.com.
e Daruseaiam, 36 8 Lower Mail, Lahore
Tek: 0062-42-726 G24 Fax 7354072
* Rehman Market, Ghazni Street
Urdu Bazar Lahore
Yat 0092-42-7 720054 Fax: 7320703
® Kargohd, Tek 009¢-21-4363936 Fax: 4393937
USA,
« Darussalam, ‏ابوه رس‎
P.O Box 78194 Tx 7727S
Teh 004-742-722 0419 Fax: 001-713-722 0434
&mait sslestidarus-salam.con
e Herpasslan, New York 491 Atlantic Ave, Brookiyn
New Yorke T1217, Tel: G01-748-G25 4925
Fax: 718-625 1
Emad: mewyork@ider-us-aalam.com,
iLK
‏كن‎ Perugeaten inter

Leyton Business Centre

Unit-17, Edios Road, Leyton, Lomdion, £10 FBT
Fel: G044 20 8638 4685 Fac 0044020 8499 4885
Mable: COM 7047 306 20

146 Perk Road,

Printed in Lebanon

اد
27

Contents

Contents.

Introduction. ._..... ee, oe

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg # in Makkah

© hapter vi

His Name, Lineage, Kunyah, Titles, Description, and Family; and His Life .

28
29

30

.. OL
31

32

33
34
35
35
36
41
42
43

. 44

49

. 9

. 54

First: His Name, Lineage, Kunyah, ai and Titles
1) Al Ateeq .
2) As-Siddeeq -
3) As-Saahib
4) Al-Atqaa
5) Al-Awwaah _...
Second: His Birth and His Physical Description

Third: His Family

1) Qateelah bint ‘Abdul- ‘Uzzah ibn As’ ad ibn Jaabir ibn Maalik

2) Umm Roomaan bint ‘Aamir ibn ‘Uwaimar % __

3) Asmaa bint “Umais ibn Ma’bad ibn Al-Haarith &
4) Habeebah bint Khaarijah ibn Zaid ibn Abu Zuhair &

Fourth: Abu Bakr’s Life Prior to the Advent of Islam
1} His Knowledge of Genealogy _..
2) His Business... /

3) The Degree to which the Quraish Loved Him ce.

Chapter 2

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam; the Trials He Endured_

First: His Islam. _.

Second: Abu Bakr «& Preaches the Message of islam 0
6 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Third: Trials and Tribulations 56

Lessons and Morals. ... 0 59

The Lessons and Morals of this Story . a 74

Seventh: Speaking to Representatives of Arab Tribes . 0 77

The Lessons and Morais of this Story — Ce . il
Chapter 3

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah #2to Al-Madeenah __.83
The Lessons and Morals of the Prophet #8 and Abu Bakr’s Migration to Al-Madeenah 92

1) The Disbelievers Expelled Him: 0 . 3

2( Abu Bakr # was the Sole Companion of the Prophet 2 . 93

3) He was the Prophet's Companion in the Cave: ... . 93

4) He was the Prophet's “Companion” in the Complete Sense of the » Word: _ 94

5) He Cared a Great Deal for the Prophet's Well-Being: . 94

6) He 4 was Blessed with Special Help from Allah @:  _ _... . . 95

7) Abu Bakr 2 was the only one Present with the Prophet #  . .. 96
Third: The Sincerity of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg®.. 2... .. 2 .. 103
Fourth: The ArtofLeading ‏علصمع2‎ 000000 ee .  . 105

Chapter 4

Abu Bala «onthe Battlefield ...... .... Leer ‏ااا‎ 109
First: Abu Bakr in the BattleofBadr... 0 eee ee eee es LL
1) His Moral Support during a Crucial War Council. 111

2) Accompanying the Prophet #2 m an Important Scouting Mission 101

3) Standing Guard for the Prophet #¢ in His Command Center. . 112

4) Abu Bakra is Giver Glad Tidings of Victory  —......... . . 43

5) The Prisoners of Badr . ‏ل ل ل ل‎ boc ee  .للْظ‎
Second: Uhudand HamraaAl-Asad 20 00 0 ‏ل‎ 2, . 118
Banu Al-Mustalig _ 0 . ... 124

At Al-Khandag and Banu Quraidhah _ re _  .425
Fourth: Al-Hudaibiyyah... 0 ‏له‎ oe. 125
Negotiations at Al-Hu daibiyyah a 126
Abu Bakr’s Stance Vis-a-vis the Treaty of Al-Hudaibiyyah . 128
Regarding Banu Fuzaarah 00000 ‏ل‎ -. 133
Sixth: The Compensatory “Umrah and Dhaat As-Salaasil ss . . 4
The Lessons and Morals of this 51011[ 0 ‏ل‎ 20000 1

Chapter 5

Life for Abu Bakr & in Al-Madeenah, and Some of His Praiseworthy Qualities. 155
First: Glimpses of His Lifein Al-Madeenah. .. 155

a) His Encounter with Finhaas, One of the Jewish Rabbis of Al-Madeenah 155
b) Preserving the Secret of the Messenger of Allah #2 . . 157

Contents

Second: Abu Bakr’s Most Distinguishing Qualities. |. 175
His Faith in Allah 88 _ Loe, 176
His Knowledge. 0 0 . 0
His Supplications . 184

2
The Death of the Prophet #¢ the Courtyard of
Banu Saa’idah, and the Army of Usaamah
Chapter I

The Death of the Prophet ®@ the Courtyard of Banu Saa’idah.. ...... .. 13

First: The Death of the Prophet #¢ | 193
The Final Illness of the Messenger of Allah 2 . 194

Third: the ‏كه سه ادام‎ Banu Saa’idaho ee 203

The Lessons and Morals of this Story . ..... oo, . 206
1) Abu Bakr’s People Skills. ....... 206
2) Both Abu Bakr 4 and ‘Umar # Shy Away from Being Nominated . 209
3) Sa’ad ibn “Ubaadah #&. 0 ae 213

. 4) An Alleged Disagreement Between ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 5 and. 215
5) The Hadeeth: The Leaders (of the Muslim Nation). 2 0.000 2. 217
6) Qur’anic Verses that Alluded to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. re 271
7) Ahaadeeth that either Directly or Indirectly Point to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate . 26
8) Ijmaa’, or a Universal consensus, is Arrived at Regarding 235
9) What is the Caliphate? And What Does the Term “Khaleefah” Signity?, 237

Chapter 2

The General Pledge of Allegiance, and Managing Domestic Affairs... 245

First: The General Pledge of Allegiance .. ... . 245
1) The Meaning of a Pledge of Allegiance (ie ‏رع‎ 00-7 Bai ‘ah). 7
2) Sources of Legislation During Abu Bakr’s Caliphate... 251
3) The Right of Citizens to Scrutinize their Leader and to Hold Him... 253
4) Establishing the Principle of Justice and Equality Among All Citizens. 255
5) Truthfulness Should be the Basis of All Dealings Between a Leader 263
6) An Announcement that Jihaad Did Not End with the Death... 264
7) Declaring a War Against Wickedness and Shameful Acts 265

| 3
Usaamah’s Army, and Abu Bake’s War Against the Apostates 00... 0... 311
Chapter l

Usaamah’s Army ‏ل‎ i ee ect . 313
1} Hardships do not Last and Should Not Weaken the Resolve of True Believers 328

2) The Forward Progress of Islam does not Stop with the Death ..... 331

3) Whenever Believers Disagree with One Another, They Must. 336

4) Speech Must be Accompanied by Action, and the Role. 338

8 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏حك‎

343

347
347
347

349
. 351

354

356

363

378

378
. 380
' 386

397
. 397

416
439

456

AP?
..., 89
ASL
. 482.

433
484

ABS

492

495
.. 497

497

497
. 499

5) The Etiquettes of War... ...
6) The Political Ramifications of Sending Out Usaamah’ 5 “Army

Chapter 2
Abu Bakr’s War Againstthe Apostates 0.0,

First: The Definition of Ar-Riddah (Apostasy), and Verses of the Our’a an,

1) The Definition of Ar-Riddah |...
2) Some Verses of the Noble Qur’an that Discuss Apostasy _

Second: The Causes of Apostasy and the Categories of Apostates

Third: Apostasy Rears Its Ugly Head during the Latter Stages ofthe. .......

Fourth: Abu Bakr’s Stance Vis-a-vis the Apostates ..
Tifth: Abu Bakr’s Plan to Defend Al-Madeenah.

Chapter 3
An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates .... ........ 0 0 ْ
First: An Official Response from the Muslim Government ee
1) Working from the Inside Out 0 a
2) Sending Out Well-Organized Armies ... ©... oo.
3) The Text of the Letter that Abu Bakr # Sent to the Apostates,
Second: Eradicating the Threats that were Posed by Al-Aswad
Al Ansee and Tulaihah Al-Asdee; and the Killing of Maalik ibn Nuwairah
1) Eradicating the Threat of Al-Aswad Al-’Ansee, and the |
Morals and Lessons ‏ل‎ | a
Lessons and Morals.
Lessons and Morals. eee

0 hapter 7
Mausailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe oo... 00

First: Some Background Information .. 1
The Banu Haneefah Delegates Return to Yamaamah.. ae
Musailamah’s Letter to the Messenger of Allah #6... _—
The Dangerous Mission of. Habeeb ibn Zaid Al-Ansaaree Be,
Ar-Rajjaal ibn “‘Unfuwah Al-Hanatee

Second: The Muslims of Banu Haneefah =. 0 ‏ا‎

Third: Khaalid ‏ذه‎ Leads His Army Towards Yamaamah

Mujaa’ah ibn Miraarah Al-Hanafee is Caphaired by the Muslim Army.

The Actual Battle is Preceded by Psychological Warfare .
Fourth: The Fighting Begins ae
Fifth: Rare Acts of Bravery . . ‏هم الوم ع عي‎ eee 1

_ 1} Al-Baraa bn Maalik ate : oe. re

2) The Death of Musailamah “The Liar” es

3) Abu ‘Ageel: ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn ‘Abdullah AL-Balwee AL.

500

_5O1
301
. 502

303

503
. O04

505

907
. 518

_... 523
. 523

525

O27
528

532

337
_ 541

5241

946

546
547

O47

551

555

525

- 259

565
566
569
5/1
574
576
587

Contents

4) Naseebah bint Ka’ab Al-Maaziniyyah ALAnsaariyyah ..
Sixth: Some of the Martyrs of the Battle of Yamaamah .
1) Thaabit ibn Qais ibn Shimaas ‏ذه‎ —— oo _
2) Zaid ibn Al-Khattaab ‏ا ...9 هك‎
3) Ma’an ibn ‘Adee Al-Balwee _
4) “Abdullah ibn Suhail ibn‘Amra | .....
3) Abu Dujaanah Simaak ibn Kharishah ‏فد‎
‎6) ‘Abbaad ibn Bishr & .. 0
7) At-Tufaal ibn ‘Amr Ad-Dausee AL-Agzdee ib
Ninth: Gathering the Noble Qur’an. ..
Chapter 5
The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars .. 7
First: The Prerequisites of Establishing a Stable and Strong Country

1) Taking Practical Steps to Achieve Victory
2) The Effects of Applying Islamic Law.

3) The Characteristics of Muslims from the First Generation of Islam .

Second: Muslim Society During the Caliphate of Abu Bakr
Third: How Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ Combated Negative External Influences..

Fourth: Some of the Results of the Apostasy Wars
1) Islam Became Distinguished from All Other Religi gions and Sets
2) The Importance of Both a Strong Core Croup of Muslims
3) Preparing a New Cadre of Fighters
4) The Islamic Laws that Pertain to Apostasy are Puti into Practice
5) “But the Evil Plot Encompasses only Him Who Makes It.) 1...
6) The Peninsula is Divided into Provinces

4

Abu Bakr’s Conquests, His Appointment of
‘Umar 2 as His Successor, and His Death
Introduction ... __........

The Conquestoffraqg. ‏ل ل ل‎
First: Abu Bakr 4 Paves the Way For Conquering Iraq
Important Lessons, Facts, and Morals Regarding the Previous Section

second; Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed’s Battles in Iraq.
1) The Battle of Dhaat As-Salaasil .
2) The Battle of Al-Madhaar (or Ath-Thanyee)
3) The Battle of Al-Waljah
4) The Battle of Ilyas
5) The Conquest of Al-Heerah.
6) The Conquest of Al-Anbaar

10 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

589
593
596

597

599
601

617
.. 620
624

633

647

_. 687
. 687
687

689
690
692

., 694

694

_ 697

698
698

699

700

7002

703
704

109

718

YX’

723
732
744

. 765

7) ‘Aim At-Tamr

8) Daumatul-Jandal

9) The Battle of Al-Haseed

10) The Battle of Al-Maseekh

11) The Battle of Al-Furaad.. .....

Third: Khaalid & Performs Hajj; Abu Bakr ‏هه‎ Orders Him to Go to Ash- Sham 00

Chapter 2
Abu ‏وتعتدظ‎ Conquests in Ash-Sham (Syria and Surrounding Regions) .
First: Abu Bakr’s Resolve to Attack the Romans
Second: Abu Bakr & Consults His Advisors and then Orders the People.
Third: Abu Bakr ‏هأ‎ Hands Out Banners to His Army Commanders
Fourth: A Crisis Develops in Ash-Sham

9 hapter 3
Important Lessonsand Morals. re
First: An Outline of Abu Baktr’s Foreign Policy .
1) Instilling a Sense of Awe and Fear in the Hearts of Foreign Leaders
2) Continuing the Expansion that had been Initiated by the Prophet #8.
3) Establishing Justice in Foreign Lands, and Treating Conquered ..
4 Granting Conquered Peoples Freedom of Religion
Second: An Outline of Abu Bakr’s Military Strategies |
1) Conquering Enemy Territory One City at a Time
2) Calling Muslims to Arms So. 0
‏ز3‎ Specifying the Goal of Wis Wars _.
4) Sending Soldiers to the Places They were Most Needed .
5) Replacing Arnvy Commanders
6) Communicating Constantly with Army Commanders,
Third: The Rights of Allah, of the Army's Leader, and .
1) The Rights of Allah 88 | 0
2) The Rights of a Leader .
3) The Rights of Soldiers
Fourth: Why Muslims Were Able to Defeat the Romans and Persians
Chapter 4
Abu Bakr ‏ذاه‎ Appoimts “Umar 4 as His Successor; And Abu Bakr’s Death
First: Abu Bakr Appoints “Umar 4% As His Successor .
second: The Time to Depart Draws Near
oummary
Bibliography

Introduction

Indeed, all praise is for Allah; we praise Him, repent to Him,
and seek His forgiveness and help. We seek refuge in Allah from
the evil of our own selves and of our wicked deeds. Whomso-
ever Allah guides, none can lead astray; and whomsoever Allah
leads astray, none can guide. And [ bear witness fhat none has
the right to be worshipped except Allah alone, and He has no
partner; and I bear witness that our Prophet Muhammad is His
slave and Messenger.

“O you who believe! Fear Allah as He should be feared. And die
not except in the state of Islam (as Muslims) unth complete
submission to Allah.” (Qur'an 3:102)
12 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

“O mankind be dutiful to your Lord, Who created you from a
single person (Adam), and from him He created his wife, and
from them both He created many men and women, and fear Allah
through Whom you demand your mutual (rights), and (do not
cut the relations of) the wombs (kinship). Surely, Allah is Ever an
All Watcher over you.” (Qur'an 4: 1)

5 Bat © Ge BUS a US ‏نذا‎ ft Cp
dike by shia eg de os es ‏ذ‎ OS ‏وتغفر‎

“O you who believe! Keep your duty to Allah and fear Him, and
speak (always) the truth. He will direct you to do righteous good
deeds and will foreive you your sins. And whosoever obeys Allah
and His Messenger, he has indeed achieved a great achievement
(i.e., he will be saved from the Hell-fire and made to enter
Paradise). (Qur’an 33: 70, 71)

Indeed, the most truthful speech is Allah's Book, and the best
guidance is that of Muhammad #%. The most evil of affairs are
newly invented ones (in the religion), for every newly invented
practice is an mnovation (Bid’ah), every innovation is misgul-
dance, and every misguidance is in the Fire.

Ever since 1 was a young child, the study of Abu Bakr’s
biography has been something of a passion for me. Then, years
later, Allah 38 blessed me with the honor of matriculating at the
Islamic University of Al-Madeenah Al-Munawwarah. One of the
courses I studied there was Islamic History, and as a part of that
course, [ studied the biographies of the four rightly-guided
Khaleefahs ~ Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ “Umar es, ‘Uthmdan ‏رح‎ and ‘Ali ‏.ف‎ Our
teacher demanded from us that we study not just the course
textbook — At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Mahmood Shaakir — but
also other mportant works, such as Ibn Katheer’s Al-Bidaayah
Wan-Nihaayah and Ibn Al-Atheer’s Al-Kaamuil. As a result, [had a
wide range of sources from which | could learn more and more
about the biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فك‎

lutroducHon 13

A few years later, when I matriculated at the University of
Umm Durmaan Al-Islaamiyyah, I proposed the following title for
my PhD. Thesis: “The Noble Qur’an’s Lessons on how to
Establish a Stable and Strong (Muslim Country) and the Effects
of those Lessons on the History of the Muslim Nation.” It was
agreed that my thesis would consist of three main chapters: 1)
Qur’anic Lessons of Establishing a Stable and Strong Country, 2)
Lessons from the Prophet's Biography on how to Establish a
Stable and Strong Country, and 3) Lessons from the Biographies
of the Rightly-Guided Khaleefahs on how to Establish a Stable and
Strong Country. In the end, after a long period of toil, my thesis
was more than 1200 pages long. Deeming my thesis to be too
jong, my research supervisor suggested that the scope of my
thesis be limited to the first of the three above-mentioned chapters
— Qus‘anic Lessons of Establishing a Stable and Strong Country.
The faculty of graduate studies at the university approved of his |
suggestion, and the matter was thus decided upon.

_ After I submitted my thesis and answered questions about it
before a team of professors, my research supervisor said some-
thing to me that had a profoundly deep impact on the following
years of my life. He suggested that 1 rewrite chapters two and
three of my original thesis and that I get them published in book
form. Chapter two — “Lessons from the Prophet's Biography on
how to Establish a Stable and Strong Country” — evolved into
As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah."! Chapter three — “Lessons from the
Biographies of the Rightly-Guided Khaleefahs” ~ had to be
broken. down into four separate books, one on each of the four
rightly-guided Khaleefahs.

As for this book that you have before you now — Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeq : His Character and His Life — the credit of its completion
goes first and foremost to Allah #, and then to my PH.D.
research supervisor and to a number of teachers and peers who
encouraged me to dedicate my life to the study of the lives of the

“I The translation of which has also been published by Darussalam Riyadh.

14 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #&

four rightly-guided Khaleefahs. One of them said something to me
that truly struck a chord with me and made me grasp the
importance of studying the lives of Abu Bakr a, “Umar &,
“Uthman +s, and ‘Ali 42 — and, for that matter, the lives of all of
the Prophet's Companions ‏.أ‎ He said, “There is now a huge gulf
that has developed between the lives of Muslims today and the
lives of the first generation of Muslims. People no longer know
their priorities: many students know more about the lives of
scholars than they do about the rightly-guided Khaleefahs, even
though the era of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs offers students a
rich source of knowledge about all of the Islamic sciences.” It was
during the era of the rightly-guided Khaleefuhs that all of the
foundations of a strong nation were established — and not just
established, but virtually perfected; and here I am referring to all
of the branches of government — legislative, judicial, economic,
political, and military. Never throughout history have Muslims
prospered as much as they did during the rule of the rightly-
euided Khaleefahs. It was an era during which Islam spread with
lightning-like speed throughout the world. With all of the
achievements of Muslims during that era, it is a wonder that
some students of knowledge spend more time shidying the lives
of second or third century scholars, or the lives of even more
recent scholars, than they do on the lives of Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ “Umar &,
‘Uthman a, and’Ali as.

From the time of this book’s conception until its completion,
Allah & both helped and blessed me, removing obstacles that lay
in my path, giving me the strength I needed to spend many a long
night in the throes of research, and helping me get to the reference
works that were indispensable to the completion of this book.
With Allah’s help, Ino longer cared about the obstacles that stood
in my way; instead, | worked tirelessly to overcome them.

The history of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs has not been an
easy subject-matter to master for one main reason: accounts of
their lives are scattered throughout many books, books on
history, Hadeeth, Figh, poetry, and Tafseer. The goal of this work

Introduction 15

— as well as my other books on ‘Umar ‏رذ‎ “Uthman 4, and “Ali
# -- was to gather all of those accounts into one book, to
organize them both chronologically and into topics, to ascertain
their level of authenticity, and, perhaps most importantly, to
analyze and discuss them. If the lives of the rightly-euided
Khaleefans are presented properly, they provide a great deal of
nourishment for the soul and crucial life lessons for each and
every Muslim.

We need to study the lives of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs &
and the lives of all of the Prophet’s Companions #, for they
belonged to a generation about whom Allah 3 said:

ow A hege “ Be, “ aN wo & ell Pa
greek ‏اتبعوهم‎ Gly ‏والأتصار‎ Spel ‏وَأَلْسَبعونَ الأولون من‎

‎of gp her he‏ 8 سجر 7 4% ‎we oH ot ea, 4 gu ash‏ سر
نض الله ‎pee‏ وَيطُوا عله ‎se ih Lisl‏ تبسر رى ‎PENT!‏

‎ual Seal ‏بدا كلِكَ‎ Ge Seas

‎“And the first to embrace Islam of the Muhajiroon (those who

‎migrated from Makkah to Al-Madinah) and the Ansaar (the

‎citizens of Al-Madinah who heiped and gave aid to the

‎Muhajirun) and also those who followed them exactly (in

‎. Faith). Allah is well-pleased with Him. He has prepared for
them Gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), to dwell

‎therein forever. That is the supreme success.” (Qur'an 9: 100)

‎And Allah 3 said:
FB adore 4 ‏سو‎ eae f os 1 ‏ص‎ rie .% Ste “ae aad
9 ges ‏ينيم‎ ole) 2 ‏عل‎ As 2 salma ly asst Ayr ay

‎“Muhammad 2% is the Messenger of Allah, and those who are
with him are severe against disbelievers, and merciful among
themselves. You see them bowing and falling down prostrate (in
prayer)...” (Qur'an 48: 29)

‎And it was about their generation that the Messenger of Allah
42 said, “The best of my nation is the generation to whom I have

16 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

been sent.” “Abdullah ibn Mas’ood as said about the generation of
the rightly-guided Khalecfahs, “Whoever wishes to follow a good
example, then let him follow the example of those who have
already died (.e., from the Prophet's Companions #). As for
those who are still alive, not a single one of them is guaranteed
safety from the trials and tribulations of life (Le., we know that the
Companions died upon Islam, but as for those who are still alive,
they might be Muslims now, but we do not know whether or not
they will die as Muslims). The former group to whom I am
referring consists of the Companions of Muhammad #2. By Allah,
they are the best people of this nation; they are the most pious at
heart, the most knowledgeable, and the least artificial of all
people. Allah chose them to be companions of His Prophet #% and
to establish His religion. So acknowledge their superiority and
follow their guidance. To the best of your ability, hold on to the
example of their manners and of their religion, for indeed, they
were upon upright guidance.”

Muslims must study their lives from authentic sources, for if
they don’t, the enemies of Islam’ will, and they will then distort
and manipulate some narrations and fabricate others — which is
in fact what they have done for centuries.. The enemies of Islam
understand the power of history and the potential it has to inspire
the masses. They have therefore worked tirelessly — while most
Muslims sleep — to instill doubts in people’s minds about the
moral rectitude of the Prophet’s Companions &.

Their efforts began at a very early stage, during the lifetime of
the rightly-guided Khaleefahs. Certain Christians, Jews, and
members of the Raafidah movement realized that they could, in
their efforts to wage war against Islam, achieve optimal results
not from the outside but from the inside, within the ranks of
Muslim society. And so they outwardly claimed to be Muslims,
while they inwardly harbored disbelief. Through plotting and the
spreading of false lies, they hoped to undermine the rule of the

11 Sharhus-Sunnah, by Al-Baghawee (1/214, 215).

Introduction 17

third Khaleefah of Islam, ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan 4». Their leader was
‘Abdullah ibn Saba’, a Jewish man who had pretended to enter
into the fold of Islam. With the help of his followers, “Abdullah
ibn Saba’ sowed dissension among the people, and their efforts
directly resulted in the assassination of “Uthman ibn ‘Affan ‏نف‎
‎Thereafter, they continued to sow dissension among the Muslims;
just one of their many achievements was that they successfully
orchestrated the events that led up to the Battle of Al-Jamal.

Those from later centuries who followed the example of
‘Abdullah ibn Saba’ worked to smear the character of certain of
the Prophet's Companions ‏.وا‎ They tried to achieve that end by
highlighting weak and fabricated narrations that are related in
the books of history; for example, in one of the narrations they
try to disseminate, greed and a desire for power are attributed to
one of the Prophet’s Companions ‏.أ‎ In a very cleverly devised
plan, they — Orientalists and others of their ik — attack Islam in
an indirect manner. Knowing that they cannot directly attack the
Qur'an and the Sunnah of the Prophet #8, they attack those who
conveyed to us those two divinely-revealed sources. For it was
the Companions 4 who conveyed the teachings of the Qur’an
and Sunnah to the next generation of Muslims; and so in order to
instill doubts into people’s minds about Islam, the enemies of
Islam instil doubts in their minds about the Prophet's
Companions ‏.كه‎ Just as Muslim scholars analyze and discuss in
detail the meanings of authentic narrations, Orientalists — and
others of their ilk — write long tracts about fabricated narrations,
tracts that consist of false interpretations and a great deal of
speculation.

Scholars among the enemies of Islam study the lives of the
Prophet’s Companions # not to learn about the truth, but instead
to serve their evil objectives. Sadly, some Muslim historians,
having studied Islam in western universities or at least western
sponsored universities, have followed in the footsteps of
Orientalist scholars — to the extent that, in the past few decades,
many history books by Muslim historians amount to nothing

18 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏تك‎

more than mere translations of works written by Orientalist
scholars from the past.

To write about Islamic history, one needs to have one aim in
mind: the truth. Muslim scholars need to counter the efforts of the
enemies of Islam by pointing out their lies, refuting their claims,
exposing their reliance on weak and fabricated narrations, and
writing history books that rely solely on authentic and acceptable
narrations.

And even after the plain facts of history are ascertained, they
should be presented to the reading public by a Muslim historian,
one who has Islamic values and appreciates the spirit of Islam. For
even if a non-Muslim historian is relatively fair, he will still
rewrite history based on his biases, his preconceived views, and
the false premise that Islam is not a divinely revealed religion. In
short, he will write from a secular and materialistic point of view.
The picture that such a historian presents to the reading public is
one that involves constant bloodshed among the Prophet's
Companions & and a strong desire among some of them to
achieve power and status — even though nothing could be
further from the truth. Even certain Muslim historians, who have
been influenced by their Orientalist counterparts, are guilty of the
same mistake. Either intentionally or inadvertently, they twist
facts and present a distorted picture of the lives of the Prophet's
Companions #. Such books have a domino-like effect on the
general masses of Muslims: They believe what they read, and they
develop a distorted view about Islam, conjuring up thoughts only
of bloodshed, deception, and greed when they think about the
generation of the Prophet's Comparions &.

For these reasons, Muslims are in dire need of books that
present not only the true events that took place during the lives of
the Prophet’s Companions ‏ره‎ but also a correct interpretation of
those events. By the grace and mercy of Allah #8, Muslim scholars
and historians have begun to write such books. This is not a
surprising development, for Allah 48 has always provided
protection for His religion. From the era of the Prophet's

Introduction 19

Companions onwards, Allah # has continued to bless this nation
with people who memorize His Book. When people first began to
fabricate Hadeeth narrations, Allah 3 sent geniuses who dedicated
their lives to purifying the authentic Sunnah from weak and
fabricated narrations. And whenever certain of Islam's enemies
try to distort the pristine teachings of Islam, He #% sends scholars
to refute their lies; the scholars and geniuses He sends are the men
of Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa‘ah.

In this work, [have tried my utmost to follow the methodology
of Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah. | have relied not only history books
— such as the ones that are authored by the eminent scholars At-
Tabaree, [bn Al-Atheer, and Adh-Dhahabee — but also on works
of Tafseer and Hadeeth, books that provide commentary for
Hadeeth compilations, works on Figh, and works that deal
specifically with the sciences of Hadeeth. | have found in these
latter kinds of works a rich source of historical information, much
of which cannot be found in history books that deal with the era of
the Prophet’s Companions &.

In writing about the rightly-guided Khaleefahs, 1 fittingly
began with Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s, for he is the chief of all
of the Prophet’s Companions ‏.كأ‎ In a saying that applies to
Abu Bakr #, ‘Umar 4, “Uthman 2, and “Ali 4, the Prophet 2¢
said, “You must follow my Sunnah (way) and, after me (.e.,
after my death), the Sunnah of the rightly-guided Khalee-
fahs.’"! And of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs, Abu Bakr # was
categorically the best, the noblest, and the most knowledge-
able. The Messenger of Allah ‏عله‎ said about him, “Were I to
take a Khaleel (Khaleel describes a relationship that involves the
highest form of love; Ibraaheem 2 was the Khaleel of Allah &,
as was the Prophet #2 — which is why the Prophet #¢ did not
take a Khaleel from among his Companions #), | would take
Abu Bakr # as my Khaleel; but since I will not do so {.e., since

Ul Sunan Abu Daawood (4/201) and At-Tirmidhee (5/44); this Hadeeth is Hasan
Saheeh.

20 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏نف‎

1 will not take a Khaleel from among my Companions #), he
(ie, Abu Bakr #) is my brother and my Companion.’""! The
Prophet #6 also said, “Follow those who will (rule) after me:

an}

Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.’

From the day he embraced Islam until the day he died, Abu
Bakres was the ideal Muslim, surpassing all other Companions &
in every sphere of life. During the Prophet's lifetime, Abu Bakr 2
was an exemplary soldier on the battlefield; upon the Prophet's
death, Abu Bakr # remained steadfast and, through the help of
Allah %, held this nation together. When others suggested
keeping Usaamah’s army back, Abu Bakr insisted — and
correctly so — that the army should continue the mission which
the Prophet #2 had in mind. When people refused to pay Zakaat,
and when the apostates threatened the stability of the Muslim
nation, Abu Bakr ¢ was the one who remained firm and took
decisive action against them. These are just some of the examples
of Abu Bakr’s many wonderful achievements throughout his life.
I have endeavored to describe all of the above in a clear and
organized manner. But more so than anything else, I have tried to
show how Abu Bakr’s methodology as a Muslim and as a ruler
helped establish the foundations of a strong, stable, and prosper-
ous country — one that began in Al-Madeenah, extended
throughout the Arabian Peninsula, and then reached far-off lands
outside of Arabia.

Throughout the brief period of his caliphate, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎faced both internal and external challenges; the former mainly
involved quelling the apostate factions of Arabia and establish-
ing justice and peace among the citizens of the Muslim nation;
and the latter mainly involved expanding the borders of the
Muslim nation by spreading the message of Islam to foreign
nations and conquering those nations that stood in the way of
the propagation of Islam.

(4 Bukhaaree, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues; Hadeeth number: 3656.
-l Saheeh Sunan At-Tirmidhee, by Al-Al baanee (3/200).

Introduction 21

During the era of his caliphate, Abu Bakr 4s sent out armies
that achieved important conquests; for example, under the
command of Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2, the Muslim army
gained an important victory in Irag. And the Muslim army
achieved other important victories under the commands of Al-
Muthannah ibn Haarithah # and Al-Qa’gaa ibn “Amr ‏.كك‎ In
short, the victories achieved during the era of Abu Bakr’s
caliphate paved the way for victories that later took place after
Abu Bakr’s death. 1 have tried to analyze the above-mentioned
conquests and to break down the reasons why they were such
monumental successes. I particularly pointed out Abu Bakr’s
contributions to those conquests: His military strategy, the
leaders he chose, the letters through which he communicated
with them, and so on.

The reader should get from this work a greater appreciation of
how Abu Bakr 2 was an exemplary Muslim in all aspects of his
life: in his Faith, his knowledge, his eloquence, and his manners.
He developed a lofty character based on his close adherence to the
example of the Prophet #2. To be sure, the Prophet's life was a
practical manifestation of the teachings of the Noble Qur‘an; to go
one step further, we could correctly say that Abu Bakr’s life —
and especially his rule over the Muslim nation — is the clearest
interpretation we have of the teachings of the Prophet #8, which is
why it is not surprising that the Prophet #@ said, “Follow those
who will (rule) after me: Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.”"!

1 do not make the claim that this work is free of mistakes, but |
do say this: To the best of my ability, I have tried to do justice to
the life of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg a. I have written this work,
seeking out nothing save Allah’s Noble Countenance, and
desiring nothing save Allah’s rewards. It is His help that I seek,
and it is He alone Who can answer the supplications of His slaves.

I have divided this book into an introduction and four main
sections, which are as follows:

‎Sahech Sunan At-Tirmidhee, by Al-Al baanee (3/200).‏ أذ

22 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

Section 1 is divided into five chapters:

1) His Name, Lineage, Kunyah, Titles, Description, and Family;
and His Life during the Pre-Islamic Days of Ignorance.

2) His Islam and His Preaching of Islam; the Trials He Endured;
and His First Migration.

3) His Migration with the Messenger of Allah #@ to Al-Madeenah.
4) His Efforts and Contributions on the Battlefield.

5) His Life in Al-Madeenah and Some of His Superior Qualities.

Section « 2: The Prophet s Death, and the

then took Place

Section 2 consists of two chapters:
1) The Prophet's Death and the Courtyard of Banu Saa’idah.

2) The Universal Pledge of Allegiance, and Taking Care of the
Internal Affairs of the Nation.

Abu Bakr’s Jihaad

Against the Apostates

Section 3 consists of five chapters:

1) The Army of Usaamah ‏ف‎

Introduction 23

2) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq’s Jihaad Against the Apostates.
3) A Large-Scale Attack on the Apostates.

4) Musailamatul-Kadddhaab and Banu Haneefah.

5) The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars.

Section 4: The Conquests of As-Siddeeq 4 and His
Khaleefah of M

Appointment of ‘Umarss as the Next Kh luslims

Section 4 consists of four chapters:

1) The Conquests of Iraq.

2) As-Siddeeq’s Conquests of Ash-Sham (Syria and Surrounding
Regions).

3) The Lessons and Morals of the Conquests that took Place
During the Period of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate.

4) Abu Bakr # Appoints “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab « to take His
Place as the Next Khaleefah of the Muslim nation, and Abu
Bakr’s Death

I completed the writing of this book after “Eesha prayer on
Priday, the 5. of Muharram, in the year 1422 H — which
corresponds to the 30" of March, 2001. lask Allah # to accept this
work from me, and to make us join the company of the Prophets,
the truthful ones, the martyrs, and the righteous ones. Allah 3%
said:

ay 2 a

‎ah 1‏ 6 0
فلا ‎je‏ لم من

‎8

‎Soak pee Beh oh ‏يي سال حصي‎ af 20 Ge
‏لها وما ميك‎ do ‏من تَحمَةٍ فلا‎ alll Ail ‏ما يفم‎

‎oe

‎“Whatever of mercy (1.e., of good), Allah may grant to mankind,
none can withhold it, and whatever He may withhold, none can
grant it thereafter. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.”
(Qur'an 35: 2)

24 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg a

All praise is for Allah 8%, Who alone helped and aided me
throughout this endeavor. I ask Allah % by His beautiful names
and perfect attributes to make this effort of mine be purely for His
Countenance; to benefit His slaves through this book; to reward
me for every letter I have written; to place this work on my scale
of good deeds; and to reward my brothers who helped me bring
this humble work to fruition. 1 ask every Muslim who reads this
work not to forget me in his supplications, for I am one who is
poor to Allah and who is in dire need of His forgiveness, mercy,
and good pleasure.

SOR% abe AO ee BOP ‏مر‎ ao we 27 ‏ير سر عير‎ os 2% oF > xf oo
‏أعمل‎ SI, oy ley Ue Coal gil Geos a 3 ey ‏رب‎
‎“My Lord! Inspire and bestow upon me they power and ability t that
I may be grateful for Your favours which You have bestowed on
me and on my parents, and that I may do righteous good deeds
that will please You, and 247/111 me by Your Mercy among Your
righteous slaves .’’ (Qur'an 27: 19)

How perfect You are, O Allah! All praise is for You. I bear
witness that none has the right to be worshipped but You. I ask
for your forgiveness, and I repent to You.

nh 25 oy Ac ‏أن‎ 23s Ne
“And the close of their request will be : Al-Hamdu Lillahi Rabb-il-
‘Alamin [All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of
‘Alamin (mankind, jinns, and all that exists)].” (Qur'an 10: 10)

One who is poor and is in desperate need of his Lord’s
forgiveness and good pleasure,

‘Ali ibn Muhammad Muhammad As-Sallaabee
5/1/1422 H

Chapter I

First: His Name, Lineage, Kunyah, and Titles
Many — especially those who do not speak Arabic and are not
familiar with Arab history and culture — will be surprised to learn
that the actual name of this book’s protagonist was not Abu Bakr
‏رن‎ but was infact “Abdullah. Abu Bakr was his Kunyah; a Kunyahis
a title by which one is ascribed to one’s son or daughter, or by
which one is associated with some place, idea, theme, or group of
people. A Kunyah is expressed in the form, “Abu so-and-so,” or,
“Father of so and so” (For women, “Umm so-and-so,” or, “Mother
of so-and-so”). When used literally, a Kunyah ascribes a person to
his son. So if one’s name is Abu ‘Abdullah, people would probably

28 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏نك‎

be right in guessing that he has a son named ‘Abdullah. But this is
not always the case; a Kunyah is often used figuratively as well; for
example, Hurairah means a small cat, and because one particular
Companion of the Prophet #2 always had with him a srmnall cat, he
was given the Kunyah, Abu Hurairah ‏.عق‎ As for Abu Bakr’s Kunyah,
Bakr literally means a young camel, but it also refers to a very large
Arab tribe. The following is Abu Bakr’s complete name and
lineage, and keep in mind that ‘ibn’ means ‘son of’: “Abdullah ibn
‘Uthman ibn “Aamir ibn “Amr ibn Ka’ab ibn Sa’‘ad ibn Teem ibn
Murrah ibn Ka’ab ibn Luaiy ibn Ghaalib Al-Qurashee At-
Teemee!) Al-Qurashee and At-Teemee are written at the end of
his lineage as a way of ascribing him to his tribes of the Quraish and
At-Teem. Abu Bakr’s lineage met up with that of the Prophet 2 at
the level of their forebear Murrah ibn Ka’ab.

In Arabic, if something or someone is known by many names, it
is often the case that that thing or person is important in some way;
hence the many names of the Day of Judgment and of the Prophet
‏.عه‎ In that spirit, Abu Bakr « was given many names or titles
throughout his life, and each one of them points to one or more of
his superior qualities; among those names are the following:

1) Al-‘Ateeq

Al-Ateeg has various shades of meaning in Arabic: It can mean
old or ancient; noble; or someone who has been freed either from the
bonds of slavery or from some unpleasant circumstances. Some feel
that Abu Bakr 4 was named “Ateeq based on the latter meaning, for
the Prophet ‏يل‎ once said to him, “You are the ‘Ateeq (the freed one) of
Allah from the Hellfire.””! According to the wording of ‘Aaisha’s
narration, the Messenger of Allah #8 said to Abu Bakr 4s, “Rejoice, for
you are the ‘Ateeq of Allah from the Hellfire.”

‎AL-Isaabah, by Tbn Hajr (4/144, 145).‏ لذأ
‎“I AL-Aihsaan Fee Tagreeb Saheeh Ibn Hibbaan (15/280), and the chain of the‏
‎narration is authentic.‏

‎Related by At-Tirmidhee in Al-Manaagih (3679), and Al-Albaanee declared it‏ ذا
‎to be authentic in As-Silsilah (1574).‏

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg in Makkah 29

Certain historians are of the view that Abu Bakr 4 was named
“Ateeq because of the handsomeness or the nobleness of his
features.'! And yet others say that he was named ‘Ateeg later on
in his life because he was known for his goodness for a very long
time (this is based on ‘Aieeq’s meaning of old or ancient)."”) It has
also been said that, whenever Abu Bakr’s mother had a child, he or
she would die almost immediately. But then when Abu Bakr &
was born, the same was not the case, and so his mother said about
him, “O Allah, this (child) is your freed one from death, so favor me
with him.”®! Ttis possible that Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was named ‘Ateeg for
more than one of the aforementioned reasons, for he did have a

noble countenance; he was known for his good character for many
years; and he was Allah’s freed one from the Hellfire. 714)

2) As-Siddeeq

As-Siddeeq, the most well-known of Abu Bakr’s titles, comes
from the word Sidg, which means truthfulness. The word As-
Siddeeg is meant to convey a meaning of intensiveness: a person
who is constantly truthful or who constantly believes in the
truthfulness of something or someone (in Abu Baktr’s case, in the
truthfulness of the Prophet #8). The title “As-Siddeeq’ was given to
Abu Bakr «& by none other than the Prophet #2. Anas + said,’ “The
Prophet #¢ climbed (Mount) Uhud in the company of Abu Bakr,
“Umar, and “Uthman. When Uhud began to shake while they
were on it, the Prophet # said (addressing the mountain),
‘Remain firm, © Uhud, for upon you are a Prophet, a Siddeeq
(truthful one), and two martyrs (‘Umar and ‘Uthman).’”P!

Gl AlMo’ jam Al-Kabeer, by At-Tabaraanee (1/52).
‏لكا‎ Al-Isnabah (1/146).

‎Al-Kuna Wal-Asmaa, by Ad-Doolaabee (1/6) and Khutab Abu Bakr, by‏ أذا
‎Muhammad Ahmad ‘Aashoor Jamaal Al-Koomee (Pg. 11).‏

‎[4] Tagreekh Ad-Da’wah Ilal-Islam Fee ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ay-Raashideen, by Dr.
Yusree Muhammad Haanee (Pg. 36).

‎Bukhaaree, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter, “The Superiority of‏ كا
‎Abu Bakr @ 6/11).”‏

30 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ك‎

Abu Bakr#s was named As-Siddeeg because of his constant and
unwavering belief in the Prophet #¢. ‘Aaisha % said, “(The night)
after the Prophet #@ went on his night journey to Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa, the people began to talk about it (being in doubt about the
possibility of the Prophet #¢ bemg able to travel to and from
Jerusalem in a single night). Some people apostatized (on that
day), having previously believed in the Prophet #8 and having had
faith in him. A number of men went to Abu Bakr and said, “Will
you not go to your companion? He claims that he went on a night-
journey last night to Jerusalem!’ He # responded, “And did he
indeed say that?’ They said, “Yes.’ He ‏ذه‎ said, ‘If he said that, then
he spoke the truth.’ They said, “And do you truly believe him when
he says that he traveled to Jerusalem last night and returned just
before the beginning of this morning?’ He ‏ها‎ said, “Yes, 1 ‏مل‎ indeed
believe him about matters that are even more amazing than that: I
believe him about news (i.e., revelation) that comes to him from the
heavens m the early morning or in the afternoon.’ And 11 15 because
of this incident that he was named Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq.”"!

“As-Saahib” literally means “the Companion,” a title that
Allah % gave to Abu Bakr #& in the Noble Qur’an. Allah gave him
that title because he was the Prophet's companion in the cave
during their migration to Al-Madeenah. Allah # said:

 Al-Haakim (3/62, 63), who declared it to be authentic; and Adh-Dhahabee

concurred.

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg in Makkah 31

“Tf you help him (Muhammad 8%) not (it does not matter), for
Allah did indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out,
the second of two, when they (Muhammad #2 and Abu Bakres)
were in the cave, and he #€ said to his companion (Abu Bakreds) :
“Be not sad (or afraid), surely Allah is with us.” Then Allah sent
down His Sakinah (calmness, tranquility, peace, etc.) upon him,
and strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not,
and made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while
it was the Word of Allah that became the uppermost, and Allah is
All-Mighty, All-Wise.”” (Qur'an 9: 40)

Scholars unanimously agree that “his companion” in this Verse
refers to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #. Anas a reported that Abu Bakr
# once said to him, “While the Prophet #2 was in the cave (with
me), I said to him, ‘If one of them were to look at his feet, he would
see us from underneath his feet.” The Prophet #¢ said, ‘O Abu
Bakr, what would you think about (the safety and well-being) of

two (people) when Allah is the third among them?”
4) Al-Atgaa

AL-Atgaa means the pious and righteous ones. In the following
Verse, Al-Atgaa refers primarily to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s:

# ‏نقى‎ i an |
“And Al-Muttaqun (the pious and righteous) will be far removed
from it (Hell).” (Qur'an 92:17) ~

That Al-Atqaa in this Verse refers to Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ is a matter
that we will further clarify (In Sha Allah) in our discussion of those
Muslims who were tortured and whose freedom was purchased
by Abu Bakr ‏ضف‎

There are at least two possible meanings of the word Al-Awwaah.
It can mean someone who supplicates to Allah # a great deal, and it

11 Bukhaaree, the Companions’ Virtues; Hadeeth number: 3653.

32 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

can also mean someone who is merciful and soft-hearted. [braaheem
An-Nakha’ee said, “Abu Bakr was named Al-Awwaah because of
his compassion and mercy (towards other people).

Second: His Physical Description

Scholars agree that Abu Bakr 4 was born after the Year of the
Elephant — the year during which Abraha marched towards
Makkah with his army ~ which means that he was younger than
the Prophet #2. Beyond that general agreement, scholars disagree
about the exact date.of his birth. Some scholars maintain that he
was born three years after the Year of the Elephant; others believe
that he was born two years and six months after the Year of the
Elephant; and yet others say that he was born two years and some
months after the Year of the Elephant.'?! Born and raised in a
house of noble lineage, Abu Bakr 4 was blessed with a very
respectful upbringing; from a very 4¥OUNB age, he gained the
honor and the respect of his people.

As for his physical attributes, he was white-skinned and skinny;
some historians have related narrations which indicate that the
white color of his skin was mixed with shades of yelow. His beard
did not grow very long on his cheeks, and his back leaned forward
to a certain degree. Because of his physical make-up — his
skinniness — his lower garment would not stay in place, but would
instead barely remain in place at the level of his hips. His face was
gaunt, and while his forehead protruded outwards, his eye-sockets
were deeply set in his face. And whereas his'calves were skinny, his
legs were muscular though lean. And after his hair turned white,
he would dye it with henna and Al-Katm (a kind of shrub that was
used for dyeing and that was very similar to henna). |

‎At-Tabagaat Al-Kubraa (3/171).‏ لذ

‎Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeg, by Majdee Fathee As-Sayyid (pg. 29); and‏ ما
‎Taareekh Al-Khulafaa (pg. 36).‏

‎3) Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Ilal-Islam Fee ‘Ahd AL-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen (pg. 30).

‎Bukhaaree (5895) and Muslim (2341) and Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq be, by Majdee‏ ذا
‎As-Sayyid (pg. 32).‏

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq in Makkah 33

Abu Bakr’s father was ‘Uthman ibn “Aamir ibn “Amr, and his
Kunyah — by which he was most famously known — was Abu
Quhaatfah ‏.فك‎ Abu Quhaafah « embraced Islam on the day of the
Makkah Conquest. By the time the Prophet #% returned
triumphantly to Makkah, Abu Quhaafah 4 had become a very
old man. When Abu Bakres took his father to the Messenger of
Allah #@ in order to announce his entry into the fold of Islam, the
Messenger of Allah # said, “O Abu Bakr, should you not have
left him where he was, so that I could have went to visit him.”
Abu Bakr 2 said, “O Messenger of Allah 2%, he has a greater duty
to come to you.” As we can clearly see from this narration, to
honor the elderly was the way of the Prophet #¢; and on another
occasion, the Prophet #% said, “He who does not honor the elderly
among us and does not show mercy to the young among us, is not
from us.”"! Abu Quhaafah 2 then officially announced his entry
into the fold of Islam and made a pledge to follow the Messenger
of Allah #¢.°! It is related that the Messenger of Allah ‏عه‎
‎congratulated Abu Bakr 4 for his father’s entry into the fold of
Islam and that he said to Abu Bakr 4s, “Change this (whiteness) in
his hair (to another color).” At the time, Abu Quhaafah’s hair was
compared to a Thughaamah - a white plant that was then
commonly compared to the whiteness in a person’s hair”!

As for the mother of Abu Bakr #, her full name was Salmah
bint Sakhr ibn ‘Amr ibn Ka‘ab ibn Sa’ad ibn Teem, and her
Kunyah was Umm Al-Khair. She 4 embraced Islam during the
earlier stages of the Prophet's Da’wah, a topic that we will Un Sha
Allah) discuss in more detail in a later section of this work.
Throughout his life, Abu Bakr 4 had a total of four wives, who

iN At Tirmidhee, the Book of Birr, chapter 15.
8 Al-Isaabah (4/375).
‏أذا‎ ALIsaabah (4/375).

34 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏يد‎

bore for him six children: three sons and three daughters. The
following were his wives:

1) Qateelah bint ‘Abdul-‘Uzzah ibn As’ad ibn Jaabir ibn Maalik

That Qateelah embraced Islam is not a point of agreement
among scholars"! , the main reason for that disagreement being
that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ had divorced her during the pre-Islamic days
of ignorance. Qateelah was the mother of two of Abu Bakr’s
children: ‘Abdullah 2 and Asmaa %. Although Qateelah did
not migrate to Al-Madeenah, she did go there to visit her
daughter, Asmaa. She brought with her gifts, some cream and
cooking fat, but Asmaa % refused not only to accept them for
her, but also to grant her entry into her home. Asmaa % felt
conflicted on the inside: on the one hand, she was a Muslim and
her mother was a polytheist; and on the other hand, her mother
had given her birth, raised her, and showered a great deal of
love upon her. As a polytheist, she was not deserving of
Asmaa’s respect and love; but as a mother, she had every right
to be loved and respected. Confused and uneasy about the
matter, Asmaa “% sent a message to ‘Aaisha %&, requesting her to
ask the Prophet # about her situation. The Prophet #@ gave this
reply: “She (Le., Asmaa) must grant her entry (into her home),
and she must also accept her gift.” And around the same time,
Allah 8 revealed the Verse:

‎XD‏ لي م ‎Shs‏ ف اي ‎SARS‏ يد يني 1د
إن ‎Cine 22 aif‏

‎“Allah does not forbid you to deal sustly and 4 kindly with those
who fought not against you on account of religion and did not
drive you out of your homes. Verily, Allah loves those who deal

‎with equity.” (Qur'an 60: 8)

‎fy At-Tabagaat, by Ibn Sa’ad (3/169), (8/249).

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg in Makkah 35

This Verse confirmed for believers that Allah % did not forbid
them from being kind and generous in their dealings towards
polytheists who had not persecuted them; furthermore, believers
were informed that they should act justly with them, for indeed,
“Allah loves those who deal with equity.”

2) Umm Roomaan bint ‘Aamir ibn ‘Uwaimar %

Umm Roomaan %& was from the Banu Kinaanah ibn
Khuzaimah tribe; her husband, Al-Haarith ibn Sakhbarah, died
in Makkah, after which time Abu Bakr 4 married her. She was
one of the early Muslims: she pledged to follow the Prophet #€ at
an early stage during his Da’wah, and she had the distinction of
having migrated to Al-Madeenah. She gave birth to two of Abu
Bakr’s children: ‘Abdur-Rahmaan 4 and ‘ Aaisha %. Having lived
a fruitful and blessed life, Umm Roomaan % died in AI-
Madeenah in the year 6 H.

3) Asmaa bint “Umais ibn Ma’bad ibn Al-Haarith ‏كك‎

Asmaa’s Kunyah was Umm “Abdullah, which perhaps refers to
a child she had with Ja’far 4. One of the first Muslims to perform
migration for the sake of Allah #, Asmaa embraced Islam at a
very early stage of the Prophet's Da’wah, even before the Muslims
turned the house of Al-Arqam into a secret meeting place. She
pledged to follow the Messenger of Allah #2, and then because of
the persecution that she and her husband Ja’far ibn Abu Taalib &
were afflicted with at the hands of the Quraish, they both
migrated to Abyssinia. At the behest of the Prophet 2%, they
stayed in Abyssinia for a number of years. Then, just before the
conquest of Khaibar, the Prophet #2 sent word to them that they
should return, and they performed migration for a second time —
this time, from Abyssinia to Al-Madeenah. Shortly thereafter,
Ja’far & was martyred on the Day of Mo’tah. Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ then
married her, and she later gave birth to one of his sons:
Muhammad. Asmaa 4 made important contributions towards
the preservation of the Prophet's Sunnah: She memorized sayings

36 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 4s

of the Prophet #8 and then passed thern on to others. Among the
Companions # who related narrations from her were “Umar &,
Abu Moosa #, “Abdullah ibn “Abbaas ‏رف‎ and Umm AI-Fad1 (the
wife of Al-’ Abbaas) ‏كه‎ One of things Asmaa % could be proud of
was the fact that she had such noble in-laws, such as the
Messenger of Allah #@, Hamzah #, and Al-“Abbaas 2.

4) Habeebah bint Khaarijah ibn Zaid ibn Abu Zuhair ‏كينا‎

Habeebah “ was a member of the Ansaar, and more
specifically, she was a member of the Khazraj tribe. It was shortly
after Abu Bakr & died that Habeebah %& gave birth to the last of
his daughters, Umm Kulthoom %. Abu Bakr # lived with
Habeebah & in As-Sunh, a district in Al-Madeenah that was
inhabited by the Banu Al-Haarith clan of the Khazraj tribe.

Abu Bakr’s Children

amaan ibn Abu Bakr ‏وك‎

1 ) ‘ Ab cu P= : «2 ni ١

When one studies the biography of the Prophet # — especially
the Makkan phase of his biography — one finds mary examples
of families in which parents remained disbelievers while their
children entered into the fold of Islam. Rare were the examples of
parents who embraced Islam while their children remained
disbelievers. Nonetheless, Abu Bakr # and “Abdur-Rahmaan
belonged to the latter category: Abu Bakr # was the first adult
male to embrace Islam, and ‘Abdur-KRahmaan remained a
polytheist for many years afterwards. The two of them even
had to face one another during battles that took place between the
Quraish and the Muslims.

The eldest of Abu Bakr’s sons, “Abdur-Rahmaan ‏ذه‎ embraced
Islam on the day of the Al-Hudaibiyyah Treaty. He then became a
good and practicing Muslim, and he tried in the years that
followed to constantly remain in the company of the Messenger of
Allah #2. Among his many accomplishments, he 2 quickly

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg in Makkah 37

became renowned for his bravery on the battlefield.!"

2) ‘Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr &

‘Abdullah # is perhaps best remembered for his important
contributions to the success of the Prophet’s migration to Al-
Madeenah. During the days that followed the Prophet's
departure from Makkah, “Abdullah 4 would stay in Makkah
and gather information from the Quraish about their plans to
capture the Prophet #§. And during each of those nights, he
would stealthily make his way to the cave in which the Prophet 2%
and Abu Bakr # were hiding, in order to convey to them the
information he had gathered. Years later, on the day of the siege
of At-Taaif, “Abdwlah # was hit with an arrow, which resulted in
a wound that continued to bother him until he died a martyr in
Al-Madeenah during the caliphate of his father ‏عله‎

3) Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr &

Son of Asmaa bint “Umais ‏ركذا‎ Muhammad 2 was born during
the year of the Farewell Pilgrimage. A Quraishee youth,
Muhammad was raised in the household of “Ali ibn Abee
Taalib ‏ذه‎ During the period of his caliphate, “Ali 4 appointed
Muhammad + governor of Egypt, and it was during his stay in
Fgypt that Muhammad was killed./*!

4) Asmaa bint Abu Bakr &

Older than ‘Aaisha ‏رك‎ Asmaa was given the name “The One
with the Band.” She #@ was named thus because, when the
Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr ‏اذ‎ were preparing to leave Makkah,
Asmaa % made a Sufrah (a mat that is used for eating) in a bag for
her father, and she then cut a piece of her band off and tied it to
the mouth of the bag. After she did that, the Prophet #8 gave her
the name, “The One with the Band.” Asmaa “& was married to

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/346).‏ لأا
‎Cl Nasab Quraish (pe. 277), and Al-Istee’aab (3/1366).‏

38 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

the eminent Companion Az-Zubair ibn Al-Awwaam a. And
when she migrated to Al-Madeenah, she was pregnant with
“Abdullah ibn Az-Zubair 2. She gave birth to him after she
arrived in Al-Madeenah, which was significant because “Abdul-
lah ‏ذف‎ was the first Muslim child to be born after the migration of
the Prophet ‏عه‎

Asmaa bint Abu Bakr % lived a productive and long life. Even
when she reached the old age of one-hundred, she still had her
teeth, and she was still as intelligent as ever, which is not
surprising considering the fact that she exercised her brain on a
daily basis. Whereas many old people find little to do with their
time, she benefited the Muslim nation, relating Nadeeth narrations
to students who visited her. Among the narrators who related
narrations from her were ‘Abdullah ibn “Abbaas 4; her children,
‘Abdullah, “‘Urwah, and “Abdullah ibn Abu Mulaikah; and others.
She made contributions to the Muslim nation not just with her
knowledge, but with her wealth as well, spending generous sums
of money on the poor and needy. Asmaa %& died in Makkah in the
year 73 H.

5) ‘Aaishah 4 —- the Mother of the Believers

One of ‘Aaishah’s titles was “The Truthful One, Daughter of
the Truthful One.” Her marriage contract with the Messenger of
Allah #@ was agreed upon when she was six years old, and their
marriage together was later consummated when she was nine
years old. The Messenger of Allah #¢ gave her the Kunyah Umm
‘Abdullah. ‘Aaishah & did not have any children, so the reader
would do well to ask why she was given a Kunyah — Umm
‘Abdullah, or, Mother of “Abdullah. It was a normal practice in
Arab culture and society for one to take on a Kunyah even though
one did not have any children; suffice it to say there are many
examples of this throughout Arab history.

Of all women throughout the history of Islam, ‘Aaishah ‏دلا‎ was,
without a doubt, the most knowledgeable. In regard to certain

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq im Makkah 39

aspects of the Prophet's life, she was even more knowledgeable
than the most learned of the Prophet’s male Companions ‏.أ‎ As
much as someone like Abu Hurairah # tried to adhere to the
company of the Prophet #, he had no access to the private, family
life of the Prophet 2%; what he knew about the Prophet's private,
family life he learned from the Prophet's wives. ‘Aaishah % had
complete access to the private, family life of the Prophet #2, and so
she was able to relate many Hadeeth narrations about that aspect
of his life, something that others were not able to do; in this
regard, she surpassed all of the Prophet’s wives. She was young,
intelligent, and blessed with an amazingly retentive memory.
And after the Prophet #¢ died, she dedicated the rest of her life to
disseminating the knowledge she had learned from the Prophet
‏عه‎ When the famous Taabi’ee Masrooq would relate a Hadeeth
narration on the authority of ‘Aaishah ‏رك‎ he would say, “The
Truthful One, Daughter of the Truthful One, whose innocence
was confirmed (by Allah through revelation), and who was the
beloved one of the one who was beloved to Allah ) ‏رع‎ the Prophet
#), related to me...,” and then he would proceed to relate the
narration. 2210 of “Aaishah’s narrations are recorded in Hadeeth
compilations; of those, Bukhaaree and Muslim are in agreement
about one-hundred and seventy-four Ahaadeeth; Bukhaaree
related an additional fifty-four Ahaadeeth from her, and Muslim
related another sixty-nine Ahaadeeth from her. Like her husband
#¢ and father # before her, ‘Aaishah % died at the age of sixty-
three. She died in the year 57 H, without ever having given birth
to a child. ©

6) Umm Kulthoom bint Abu Bakr ‏كك‎

Her mother was Habeebah bint Khaarijah ‏رك‎ and she was born
shortly after Abu Bakr 4 died. At the time of Abu Bakr’s death,
two of ‘Aaishah’s brothers were still alive, and her only sister,
Asmaa, was also still alive; so needless to say she was surprised

]11 Tahagaat ibn Sa’ad (8/58).

40 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

when her father, while on his deathbed, said to her, “They are
indeed your two brothers and your two sisters.” ‘Aaishah % said,
“Here is Asmaa. I know her, but who is my other sister?” Abu
Bakr ‏ف‎ said, “She is in the stomach of (Habeebah) bint Khaarijah.
It has been cast into my mind that that child (which is now in the
womb of Habeebah) is a baby girl.” His intuitive feeling came
true, for shortly after his death, Habeebah % gave birth to a baby
girl - Umm Kulthoom bint Abu Bakr ‏لكك‎

Talhah ibn ‘Ubaidullah 2 married Umm Kulthoom & but then
died on the day of Al-Jamal. During her period of waiting which
followed her husband’s death, she performed Hajj in the company

of ‘Aaishah 4.

These were the members of Abu Bakr’s blessed household — a
household of Islam and Eemaan (Faith). Abu Bakr’s family was the
only one that contained members of four different generations
who were Companions of the Messenger of Allah #¢. “Abdullah
ibn Az-Zubair #3; his mother, Asmaa ‏زو‎ her father, Abu Bakr &;
and his father, Abu Quhaafah ‏ذه‎ — these were all Companions of
the Messenger of Allah #%. Abu Bakr’s family consisted of four
generations of Companions # from another part of their family
tree as well: Muhammad ibn ‘Abdur-Rahmaan 4; his father,
‘Abdur-Rahmaan 4; his father, Abu Bakr 4; and his father, Abu
Quhaafah ‏.كف‎

‘The members of Abu Bakr’s household were all believers; not a
single one of them was a hypocrite. During the era of the
Companions ‏رو‎ it would be said: “Eemaan (Faith) has its
households, and hypocrisy has its households. One of the
households of Eemaan among the Muhaajiroon is the household
of Abu Bakr 2. Some of the households of Eemaan among the
Ansaar are those of the Banu An-Najjaar clan”!

‘Nh At-Tabagqaat (3/195).

‎Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq (1/280), by Muhammad Maalullah — in an extract‏ ذا
‎taken from Minhaaj As-Sunnah, by Ibn Taymiyyah.‏

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq in Makkah 4]

Fourth: Abu Bakr’s Life Prior to the Advent of Islam

We have hitherto established the fact that Abu Bakr # was a
member of Quraish’s nobility. But even within the ranks of
Quraish’s nobility, Abu Bakr # ranked very high, for certain
noblemen were given key, high-status positions, and Abu Bakr #&
was one of them. The following is a list of those high-ranking
noblemen:

1) Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed from the Banu Makhzoom clan; he was
in charge of certain matters that pertained to war.

2) Al-“Abbaas ibn “Abdul-Muttalib from the Banu Haashim clan,
who had the honour of providing drink to pilgrims during the
Hajj season — an honour that continued to remain his even
after the advent of Islam.

3) Abu Sufyaan ibn Harb from the Banu Umayyah clan; with him
was Al-’Iqaab, the war banner of the Quraish. The Quraish had
no overall chieftain, per say, but it was understood among
them that, if they could not agree upon a leader during
emergency situations, they would all compromise on choosing
Abu Sufyaan to lead them.

4) Al-Haarith ibn ‘Aamir from the Banu Naufal clan; it was his
responsibility to disperse charity money that the Quraish had
contributed for poor pilgrims or pilgrims who were cut off
from their journey, not having enough money to return to their
homeland.

5) “Uthman ibn Talhah ibn Zum’ah ibn Al-Aswad from the Banu
Asad clan; he was in charge of the governing council of the
Quraishn: Whenever the leaders of the Quraish consulted
among themselves about a matter, they would not make a final
decision. until they first discussed the matter with him.

42 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

6) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq # from the Banu Teem clan; he was in
charge of matters that pertained to debts and blood money. If
Abu Bakr # agreed to take responsibility — on his own behalf
and on behalf of the Quraish — of paying someone’s debt or
blood money, other members of the Quraish would help him.
{f someone else agreed to do the same, that person would
receive no help or encouragement whatsoever from other
members of the Quraish.

7) “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab from the Banu ‘Adee clan; he was the
chief ambassador of the Quraish during the pre-Islamic days of
ignorance.

8) Satwaan ibn Umayyah from the Banu Jumh clan; he was
recopnized as an authority in the matter of Al-Azlaam. Al-
Azlaam was a practice whereby, if one had to make a decision
about a matter, he would draw lots. One lot had written on it,
“Do”; another had written on it, “Don’t do”; and the third had
nothing written on it at all. So, for example, if a person wanted
to embark upon a journey, he would draw lots with AL-Azlaam
to help him decide whether or not he should go.

9) Al-Haarith ibn Qais from the Banu Sahm clan; he acted as a
kind of governor in Makkah, and he was in charge of the
money and wealth that people would give to their idols.

During the pre-Islamic days of ignorance, Abu Bakr 2 became
renowned for certain qualities and achievements, among which
are the following:

1) His Knowledge of Genealogy

Abu Bakr was the pre-eminent Arab genealogist of his time,
possessing expert knowledge not just of the history of the
Quraish, but also of the history of other Arab tribes. He went on to
become the teacher of many students who later became eminent
genealogists in their own right. And his knowledge of Arab tribes

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq in Makkah 43

and their lineages proved useful on various occasions after the
advent of Islam, such as when the Prophet #2 was seeking out the
help and protection of tribal chieftains prior to his migration to
Al-Madeenah. Even prior to the advent of Islam, Abu Bakr # had
a noble character and an upright disposition, traits that served
him well in society, as a businessman, and even as a genealogist.
For whereas other genealogists of his time mentioned the
shameful aspects of certain family trees, Abu Bakr 4 abstained
from doing the same: He knew both the good and shameful
aspects of the family trees of Arab tribes, but he would speak only
about the former to the exclusion of the latter. After the advent of
Islam, Abu Bakr # became the most knowledgeable Companion
regarding the teachings of Islam, but he was still recognized for
his knowledge of genealogy. ‘Aaishah “% related that the
Messenger of Allah #¢ said, “Verily, Abu Bakr is the most
knowledgeable person among the Quraish about the lineages of
the Quraish,’”"!

2) His Business

During the pre-Islamic days of ignorance, Abu Bak 2 was a
businessman. He would go on business trips to Busrah in Ash-
Sham (Syria and surrounding regions) and to other cities as
well. His initial investment capital was forty-thousand Dirhams.
A wealthy man, he would, even prior to the advent of Islam,
spend generously on the poor and needy. And if he was not the
richest Qurashee businessman, he was one of the most respected
of them, having had a reputation for faimess and generosity in
his business dealings. As a result of his reputation, profits
would come to him, and he did not have to run after profits. If
people feared being cheated in a business transaction, they
would take their business to Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ knowing fully well
that he would not cheat them, but would instead be fair and
true to his word.

[') Muslim (2490), and At-Tabaraanee in Al-Kabeer (3582).

44 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #
3) The Degree to which the Quraish Loved Him

Many people among the Quraish were born with noble
lineages, and even though a noble lineage guaranteed a person
a high ranking within the ranks of Quraishee society, it did not
guarantee that that same person would be loved and respected by
other members of the Quraish. That is because love and respect
are things that a person earns. With this understanding in mind,
one should not be surprised to learn that Abu Bakr + was
universally loved by all members of the Quraish ~— by the
nobility, by businessmen, by scholars, and by the poor and weak
alike. Everyone had reason to love him: The noblemen loved him
because he exemplified the wonderful characteristics of a true
Ouraishee nobleman; businessmen loved him because of his fair
and honest trade practices; scholars loved him because he was
one of the pre-eminent Arab scholars of his time; the poor and
needy loved him because of how generous he was with his
money; and all of the above-mentioned groups loved him because
of his generous hospitality, for he would often mvite many people
to his home to partake in meals with him.

Ibn Dughnah, the chief of the Qaarah tribe, knew Abu Bakr #&
during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance. The two of them had
not met one another for a very long time, but they then crossed
paths again when Abu Bakr decided to leave Makkah (this was
prior to his actual migration with the Prophet #). Once he was
outside of Makkah, he came across Ibn Dughnah, who, upon
learning of Abu Bakr’s plight and his forced departure from
Makkah, told him that he didn’t deserve to be expelled from
Makkah, for he was someone who “joined ties of family relations,
helped people who were afflicted with calamities, provided for
the needy, and was noble and upright in his dealings and
actions.’""! The most striking aspect of this narration, as Imam
lbn Hajar pointed out, is that [on Dughnah described Abu Bakr a
with almost the same words that Khadeejah % used when she

IN AL-Bukhaaree, The Book of Manaagib Al-Ansaar (3905).

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg in Makkah 45

described the Prophet #2 after he received revelation for the first
time; this proves that, prior to the advent of Islam, both the
Prophet #2 and Abu Bakr shared common values and had
similar qualities. It is not surprising, therefore, that they were
such close friends both prior to and after the advent of Islam.

Like the Prophet #@, Abu Bakr 2 never drank alcohol during
the pre-Islamic days of ignorance. It was not a matter of not liking
the taste of alcohol, but rather it was that Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ knew the ill-
effects of alcohol and wanted to preserve his dignity and honour
at all times. Yes, alcohol became forbidden in Al-Madeenah; but
back in Makkah, prior to the advent of Islam, Abu Bakr 4 forbade
himself from the act of drinking alcohol. It is related that he once
passed by a drunken man who had a piece of feces in his hand
and who was bringing it closer to his mouth, as if he were about to
eatit. In fact, in the drunken state he was in, he was about to eat it,
but as he brought it closer to his mouth, its foul smell awoke in
him the reality of what he was doing. Abu Bakr became
disgusted not just by the man but also by the actual practice of
drinking alcohol and becoming inebriated. Later on in his life, he
was once asked, “Did you ever drink alcohol during the pre-Islam
days of ignorance,” to which he responded, “I seek refuge in
Allah (we., nof).”” When asked why, he said, “I valued the idea of
preserving my honour and dignity, and I realized that a person
who drinks alcohol gives up his honour and dignity (by
perpetrating lewd and vile acts while he is in a drunken
state). According to another narration, ‘Aaishah % said,
“Both Abu Bakr and “‘Uthman abstained from drinking alcohol
during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance.”

Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was similar to the Prophet #¢ in another important
respect as well: Throughout his entire life, he never even once
performed prostration to an idol. This was an important
distinction since almost all of the other Companions of the

‎Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeq, by Majdee Fathee (pg. 34).‏ لذأ
‎Taareek Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 49).‏ ا

46 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏هد‎

Messenger of Allah #¢ were idol-worshippers prior to the advent
of Islam. When Abu Bakr # reached the age of puberty, his father
took him to a temple that was filled with idols. Pointing to the
idols, his father said, “These are your gods.” Abu Bakr x,
precociously intelligent as he was even then, decided to put the
matter to the test: He approached an idol and said, “Iam hungry,
so feed me.” When the idol did not respond, he said to it, “IT am
naked, so attire me in clothing.””’ When it did not respond again,
he threw a stone at it, and it fell down onto its face. Thus he came
to realize - without the help and guidance of a Prophet or of
revelation — that worshipping idols was an undignified and
senseless thing to do.

Considering his noble and virtuous disposition prior to the
advent of Islam, it is not surprising that he later became the best
and noblest of all of the Prophet's Companions #; after all, the
Prophet #2 said to his Companions ‏رك‎ “The best among you
during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance are the best among you
(now) in (their) Islam, if they develop an understanding (of the
religion).

One of the truly striking aspects of Abu Bakr’s character prior
to the advent of Islam was that he had neither a guide nor a
teacher to teach him right from wrong. We know that the Prophet
# was protected from evil prior to Islam because he was being
prepared for Prophethood; or in other words, that the Prophet 2
was saved from evil is something that one would expect from him
when one studies his biography. Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ on the other hand,
was a common man; and yet in many ways he was like a twin
brother of the Prophet #2 prior to the advent of Islam: almost
everyone else from the Quraish followed one way of life, while
the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr # followed a completely opposite
way of life. Their similar values and qualities made a deep and
lasting friendship between them an almost foregone conclusion;
then, with the advent of Islam, their ties of friendship and
brotherhood became stronger than ever before.

‎Taareekh Ad-Da'wah Fee ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen (pe. 43).‏ لأا

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq in Makkah 47

In regard to Abu Baktr’s life prior to the advent of Islam, it is
sufficient to say that he spent his time wisely, developing noble
traits and thinking out for himself the answers to many of life’s
important questions. Everyone who knew him respected him and
loved him dearly. Even after the advent of Islam, the Quraish
would find fault with or make fun of the Prophet’s Companions
ue, but they would not do the same with Abu Bakr #4; no, they
respected him too much, and so the sole thing they faulted him for
was the fact that he believed in Allah #% and His Messenger #é,
and that was enough to transform him in their minds from an
admired and beloved nobleman to a bitter and despised foe.

Ul Minhaaj As-Sunnah, by Ibn Taymiyyah (4/288, 289), and Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq
Afdalus-Sahaabah Wa-Ahaggihim Bil-Khilaafah, by Muhammad ‘“Abdur-Rah-
maan Qaasim (pgs. 18 and 19).

Chapter 2

First: 1

lis Islam

Islam was the beginning of a blessed and new life for Abu Bakr
# and the beginning of a productive and meaningful existence.
But in another very real sense, Islam represented the end for Abu
Bakr 2s — the end of a lifelong search for the truth. The Prophet #
taught us that every newborn child is born upon a sound and
inherently good nature; or im other words, every newborn enters
into this world as a Muslim. It is then his parents who turn him
into a Jew, Christian, Magian, etc. As for Abu Bakr 2, his inborn
sound nature remained strong with him for his first thirty-eight or
so years of his lite. Throughout that time, he was looking for the
truth — for the religion that was in harmony with his sound and
uncorrupted nature.

50 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قد‎

As a successful businessman, Abu Bakr «s traveled far and
wide throughout the Arabian Peninsula. He met with the
adherents of various religions, and he was particularly interested
in his Christian acquaintances and with those people who spoke
about monotheism, about the belief in the one true God. One
incident in particular had a profound impact on his thinking. He
was sitting down in the courtyard of the Ka’bah, when he heard
Zaid ibn “Amr ibn Nufail and Ibn Abee As-Salt engaged in a
conversation. He heard one of them say that the time was
drawing near when a Prophet would be sent to mankind. Abu
Bakr 4 later recounted what happened next: “Prior to that time, 1
had never heard about a Prophet that was about to be sent (to
mankind). I went to Waragqah ibn Naufal, a man who would
frequently stare at the sky and who would often whisper
(invocations) to himself. When | saw him, I accosted him and
told him about what I had heard. He said, ‘Yes, O son of my
brother. | am a person who is familiar with (revealed) books and
(divinely revealed) knowledge. Indeed, this Prophet. that is
awaited has the noblest lineage among all Arabs. I have some
knowledge about genealogy, and I know that your people have
the best lineages among all Arabs.’ I said, ‘O my uncle, what does
a Prophet say?’ He said, “He says what is spoken to him (by the
angel Jibreel). He does not do injustice; he does not help others
perpetrate injustice; and he does not tolerate injustice.’ Then when
the Messénger of Allah #¢ was sent, I believed him and had faith
in him.”

During the pre-Islamic days of ignorance, Abu Bakr # would
memorize the poems of poets who spoke about the theme of
Monotheism. One day the Prophet # asked his Companions,
“Who among you has memorized the speech (poetry) of Qiss ibn
Saa’idah, which he [recited] in the “‘Ukkaadh marketplace?” Here,
the Prophet #¢ was referring to an incident that had taken place
years earlier, prior even to the advent of Islam. All of his
Companions # remained silent except for Abu Bakr &, who said,
“Verily, [have memorized his poetry, O Messenger of Allah #2.”
He then went on to recite the poetry of Oiss, who — in front of an

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 51

audience of polytheists at the “‘Ukkaadh marketplace — had
sworn that “Allah has a religion that is more beloved to Him than
the religion that you (ie., the polytheists of the Quraish and of
other Arab tribes) are upon.” Abu Bakr 4 did not forget the
words of Qiss; in fact, he kept them with him for many years after
he heard them, and was able to recite them from memory to the
Messenger of Allah #8 and his Companions &.

The Prophet #¢ informed his Companions 4 that, whenever he
invited a person to Islam, that person would hesitate before
making up his mind to embrace Islam — except for Abu Bakr 2,
who neither hesitated nor wavered, but instead immediately
embraced Islam and believed in the Messenger of Allah #8. This
should not come as a surprise to those who are familiar with Abu
Bakr’s life prior to the advent of Islam: Just as the Prophet #¢ was
being prepared for the first 40 years of his life for the duties of
Prophethood, so too was Abu Bakr ‏ننه‎ being prepared for the first
38 years of his life for Islam and for becoming a Companion of the
Messenger of Allah #¢. Another incident attests to this reality:
During one of his journeys to Ash-Sham, Abu Bakr # met a monk
named Buhairah, whom he wanted to consult regarding a dream
he had seen. Buhairah asked, “Where are you from?” Abu Bakr 2
replied, “From Makkah.” Buhairah then asked him which tribe he
was from, and Abu Bakr # replied, “From the Quraish.”
Buhairah asked, “What is it that you do?” Abu Bakr ‏فك‎
‎answered, “I am a businessman.” Then, having listened to Abu
Bakr 4 as he related to him his dream, Buhairah said, “li Allah
makes your dream come true, a Prophet will be sent from among
your people; you will be his minister during his lifetime, and his
Khaleefah (successor) after his death.” Abu Bakr # then kept
Buhairah’s interpretation a secret, which he shared with no one.!?

Perhaps the main reason why Abu Bakr # did not hesitate
before he embraced Islam was that he was intimately acquainted
with the Prophet #¢ during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance.

Ul Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Mahmood Shaakir (pe. 34).

52 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Like every other member of the Quraish, Abu Bakr 2 knew that
Muhammad 2% was trustworthy and honest; but he knew him
more intimately than did other members of the Quraish, and he
came to know him for his other wonderful qualities as well. Abu
Bakr ‏يه‎ knew that Muhammad #@ was so honest that he would
not lie even about small matters, never mind about the honor of

other people; he 2 consequently knew that it was impossible for
Muhammad #€ to lie about Allah ag.

Upon inviting Abu Bakr 4: to Islam, the Messenger of Allah i
said, “Verily, lam the Messenger of Allah #2 and His Prophet. He
sent me (to invite others) to worship Allah alone, and He has no
partner. So worship Allah alone, and know that (your) loyalty is
based on obedience to Allah.” Abu Bakr ‏ين‎ responded by
immediately embracing Islam and pledging to help and support
the Messenger of Allah #2, a pledge that he then contmued to
fulfill until the end of his life. Years later, the Messenger of Allah
‏كيد‎ said to his Companions #&, “Verily, when Allah sent me to you,
you said (to me), “You are lying (here, the Prophet #¢ was of
course referring to those members of the Quraish who had
initially disbelieved in him)’; meanwhile, Abu Bakr said (about
me), “He has spoken the truth.’ He then consoled me by sacrificing
(for the cause of Islam) his self and his wealth. So will you not
then leave alone my companion for me (and abstain from
bothering or harming him)?” The Prophet #@ repeated these
words twice.”

Thus Abu Bakr # became the first free man to embrace Islam.
Ibraaheem An-Nakha’ee, Hassaan ibn Thaabit, [bn “Abbaas 4,
and Asmaa bint Abu Bakr & ~— each of them maintained that Abu
Bakr 2 was the first person to embrace Islam. And Yousuf ibn
Ya'qoob Al-Maajishoon said, “I would meet with my father and
our noble scholars: Muhammad ibn Al-Munkadir, Rabee’ah ibn
‘Abdur-Rahmaan, Saalaih ibn Kaisaan, Sa’ad ibn [braaheem, and

‎Taareekh Ad-Da'wah Fee ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon (pg. 44).‏ [ذا
‎Al-Bukhaaree, Kitaab Fadaail Ashaab An-Nabee (3661).‏ [ما

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 53

“Uthman ibn Muhammad ibn Al-Akhnas. And each one of them
did not have even the slightest doubt that the first person who
embraced Islam was Abu Bakr ‏لكأن‎ Also, Ibn ‘Abbaas 2 said,
“The first person to pray (other than the Prophet #2) was Abu
Bakr 4s.”

Nonetheless, the question of who was the first to embrace
Islam has remained a point of disagreement among historians
over the centuries. Some scholars — such as those that are
mentioned above — state positively that Abu Bakr ‏هه‎ was the first
person to embrace Islam; others are equally certain that “Ali
was the first person to embrace Islam; some say that Zaid ibn
Haarithah 2 was the first to embrace Islam; and yet others assert
that Khadeejah was the first person to embrace Islam. Imam
Ibn Katheer (may Allah have mercy on him) brought all of the
above-mentioned views into harmony when he wrote, “Khadee-
jah & was the first woman to embrace Islam; Zaid ibn Haarithah
‏ذه‎ was the first freed slave to embrace [slam; and “Ali ibn Abee
Taalib @ was the first child to embrace Islam — for he was a
young a child at the time: he had not even reached the age of
puberty. All of the above-mentioned people constituted, at the
time, the members of the Prophet’s household. And finally, Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذه‎ was the first free man to embrace Islam.”"!

The Prophet #2 was overjoyed when Abu Bakr # embraced
Islam. ‘Aaishah “& said, “After the Prophet #@ was done
presenting his message to Abu Bakr #, and after Abu Bakr «
embraced Islam, the Messenger of Allah #¢ walked away, happier
at that moment than anyone else in Makkah; and his happiness
stemmed from the fact that Abu Bakr # had just embraced
Islam.”! The early days of the Prophet’s mission were trying for
him, but Allah # helped him during those difficult days through
the encouraging words of Khadeejah % and Abu Bakr’s entry into

‎Sifatus-Safwah (1/237), and Ahmad in Fudaail As-Sahaabah (3/206).‏ ذا
‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (3/26, 28).‏ ]2[
‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (3/29).‏ اذا

54 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

the fold of Islam. The Prophet #¢ knew and appreciated Abu
Bakr’s worth: He was a paragon of virtue, and he was universally
loved and respected for his knowledge and noble characteristics.
His entry into the fold of Islam, therefore, was nothing short of a
great victory for the Prophet #@ and for Islam.

kr ‏وه‎ Preaches th

From the moment he embraced Islam, Abu Bakr a learned that
Islam was a religion not of stagnation, but of movement, action,
and struggle; and he learned that a person does not develop
complete Faith until he sacrifices his soul and all that he owns for.
the cause of Islam. Allah 4% said:

عل
‎ap ee 3 of‏ ل ‎ra ar‏ ع مد مم
‎és} Save‏ ف ‎a dees Slacks S285‏ رب العنلمين ‎ay‏ شربك له
‎a ACe OLE * ad‏
‎oul J UG 7 a} dS,‏

“Say (O Muhammad #8): “Verily, my Salat (prayer), my
sacrifice, my living, and my dying are for Allah, the Lord of the
‘Alamin (mankind, jinns, and all that exists). He has no partner.
And of this I have been commanded, and I am the first of the
Muslims.” (Qur'an 7: 162, 163)

With that understanding in mind, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ went out and
put into practice this Verse of the Noble Qur'an:

& shh pein anal ‏وَالْموعظة‎ ASK ‏دع ل سبل رَيْكَ‎
ate ‏ال‎ OO Ss fs ‏سل‎ %

حَسَنٌ إِنَّ ويك هو ‎SUN‏ يمن ‎JS‏ عن ‎CCE) MS SS‏

“Invite (mankind, O Muhammad 8%) to the Way of your Lord
)1 .6 . , Islam) with wisdom (1.e., with the Divine Inspiration and
the Qur'an) and fair preaching, and argue with them m a way
that is better. Truly, your Lord knows best who has gone astray
from His Path, and He is the Best Aware of those who are
guided.” (Qur'an 16: 125)

3}

3

ae

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 55

As I have hitherto mentioned, Abu Bakr # was universally
loved by the Quraish — by noblemen, businessmen, scholars, and
the poor. But perhaps he wielded his greatest influence on
scholars and on the intellectuals of society. The intellectual class of
Quraishee society consisted mainly of men between the ages of
twenty and forty; those men were usually from the nobility, for,
possessing status and wealth, they did not need to spend all of
their days on business, but could instead spend much of their time
on scholarly pursuits. Abu Bakr # went to such men and
presented the teachings of Islam to them, and his efforts reaped
wonderful fruits, for all of the following men — men who became
eminent Companions in their own right — embraced Islam at his
hands: Az-fubair ibn Al“Awwaam as, “‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan «,
Talhah ibn “Ubaidullah 2, Sa’ad ibn Abee Waqqaas ‏رن‎ “Uthmdan
ibn Madh’oon a, Abu ‘Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah «, ‘Abdur-
Rahmaan ibn ‘Auf #, Abu Salamah ibn ‘Abdul-Asad 4, and AL
Argam ibn Abee Al-Argam a. Each of them went and officially
embraced Islam in the presence of the Messenger of Allah #2, and
each of them then went on to preach the message of Islam to
others.

Abu Bakr # achieved success in his Da’wah efforts not just
among his circle of friends but also within his family. Each of the
following members of his household embraced Islam during |
those early days of the Prophet’s mission: Asmaa “%; ‘Aaishah %;
‘Abdullah ‏زا‎ Urmm Roomaan %; and Abu Bakr’s servant, ‘Aamir
ibn Puhairah 2s.

It is an understatement to say that Abu Bakr # was a
successful Daa’ee (caller to the message of Islam). But it is not
surprising that he was so successful as a Dau’ee if one considers
the qualities he possessed: sincerity, a noble character, generosity,
truthfulness, modesty, gentleness, affability, and the list goes on
and on. Every Muslim who invites others to embrace Islam would
do well to keep in mind the qualities and traits that made Abu
Bakr # such a successful Daa’ee.

56 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg ‏د‎

Third: Trials and Tribulations

True, weak Companions # and slaves were the most
susceptible of all Muslims to persecution and torture at the hands
of the Quraish, but even Muslims from the upper classes of
Makkah were not saved from one form of persecution or another.
Abu Bakr & was no exception: In fact, on one occasion, Abu Bakr
# was beaten so badly that he almost died as a result.

When there were only 38 male Muslims, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ urged the
Messenger of Allah #8 to openly preach the message of Islam, but
the Prophet #@ responded by saying, “O Abu Bakr, we are (as of
yet) few in number.” Abu Bakr 2 continued to urge the Prophet
#% to openly preach until, one day, the Muslims spread out in
different parts of the Masjid, with each man remaining in the
midst of his clan. Abu Bakr ¢ then stood up to deliver a sermon,
while the Messenger of Allah # remained seated. On that day,
Abu Bakr 2 became the first person (from this nation) to deliver a
sermon in which he invited people unto Allah #% and His
Messenger #%. The polytheists did not idly listen to his sermon;
instead, they became enraged and charged towards Abu Bakr &
and the other Muslims. In various parts of the Masjid, the Quraish
were giving a severe beating to the Muslims. Abu Bakr 4 was
both trampled upon and beaten severely; using his shoes, the
evildoer ‘Utbah ibn Rabee’ah began to viciously strike Abu Bakr
‏ذه‎ on his face. So severely was Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ beaten, and so much
blood flowed down his face, that it became difficult to discern
between his face and the back of his head.

Had the beating continued, Abu Bakr might have died; in
fact, even as matters stood, he es did almost die. But his fellow
clansmen from Banu Teem came, although somewhat belatedly,
to defend him. They pushed the attacking mob away and carried
Abu Bakr 2 to his home, feeling certain that he # had died.
Members of the Banu Teem clan then returned to the Masjid and
proclaimed, “By Allah, if Abu Bakr dies, we will indeed kill

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 57

‘Utbah ibn Rabee’ah.” They then returned to Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ and
Abu Quhaafah — Abu Bakr’s father ~ as well as other members
of Banu Tameem tried to speak to him until he finally revived at
the end of the day and spoke to them. But rather than answer their
questions, and rather than worry about his own condition, Aba
Bakr # asked them how the Prophet #2 was doing. Since they
were not Muslims, and since they cared about Abu Bakr’s welfare
particularly because he was from their clan — as opposed to the
Prophet # — they were rather upset by what Abu Bakr 4 had
said, and they reproached him, reminding him that he should be
wortied about staying alive, for though he had regained
consciousness, he was still extremely weak and bruised from
the beating he had taken. His fellow clansmen urged his mother,
Urom Al-Khair, to give him food and drink. And when the two of
them were then left alone together, Umm Al-Khair implored Abu
Bakr ‏ذل‎ to partake of some nourishment, but Abu Bakr # kept
asking about the Prophet 8. It wasn’t surprising that no one from
Banu Teem knew how the Prophet #2 was doing, since it was hard
to make out what had happened during the chaotic violence that
had just taken place, and since the Prophet # was, like Abu Bakr
‏رحن‎ being taken care of by his fellow clansmen, the men of Banu
Hashim.

“By Allah, I have no knowledge of your companion (i.e., of
how he is doing now),” said Umm Al-Khair. Abu Bakr # said,
“Go to Umm Jameel %, daughter of Al-Khattaab (and brother of
‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏رز‎ and ask her about him.”

Umm Al-Khair likely had a sense of how Abu Bakr 4 valued
the Prophet's life more so than his own, and so she acquiesced and
went out in search of Umm Jameel %. Upon finding her, Umm ‏لذ‎
‎Khair said, “Verily, Abu Bakr asks you about (how) Muhammad
ibn ‘Abdullah #¢ (is doing).”

Umm Jameel %& said, “I know neither Abu Bakr nor
Muhammad ibn “Abdullah, but if you want, I will go with you
to your son.”” Umm Al-Khair said, “Yes,” and the two of them
returned to Abu Bakr «. They found him to be seriously ill, and

58 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏مك‎

they suspected that he was on the verge of dying. Seeing Abu
Bakr’s weak condition, Umm Jameel “ approached him and
yelled out loud, saying, “By Allah, those who have done this to
you are indeed the people of wickedness and disbelief. Indeed, I
hope that Allah takes revenge on them for you.” Abu Bakr # then
asked how the Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ was doing, to which Umm
Jameel % responded, “Here is your mother, listening (to us).”
Abu Bakr # reassured her that she % had nothing to worry about
regarding his mother.

“He is safe and sound,” said Umm Jameel &. Abu Bakr ‏كك‎
‎asked, “Where is he?’ She answered, “In the House of ‏حلم‎
‎Argam.” Despite his own weakness and need for rest and
nourishment, Abu Bakr # then made an oath that he would
neither eat nor drink before first going to the Messenger of Allah
#% and making sure that he was well. But both Umm Jameel &
and.Umm. Al-Khair delayed him, for they thought it was best to
wait for the situation to calm down in the streets. When things did
finally calm down, they led Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ to the House of Al-
Argqam, and since he 4 couldn’t walk on his own, he was leaning
on them for support. As soon as they entered, the Messenger of
Allah ‏عله‎ hurried towards Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ and kissed him; the other
Muslims that were there also hurried to meet Abu Bakr 4. The
Messenger of Allah #2 was greatly moved by Abu Bakr’s
condition. Knowing that the Prophet #@ was worried about him,
Abu Bakr 2 said, “ May my mother and father be held ransom for
you, O Messenger of Allah. The only hurt I feel is a result of the
blows that Al-Faasiq (the evildoer, ie., “Utbah ibn Rabee’ah)
delivered to my face. And here (with me) is my mother, who is
faithful to her son. And you are blessed, so invite her unto Allah,
and supplicate to Allah for her, for perhaps, through you, Allah
will save her from the Hellfire.” The Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎
‎supplicated for her and invited her unto Allah #, and she &
responded to his invitation by embracing Islam."!

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by bn Katheer (1/439-441), and Al-Bidaayah Wan-‏ أذا
‎Nihaayah (3/30).‏

Eis islam and Fis Preaching of Islam 59
Lessons and Morals

1) These days, one might hesitate to propagate Islam to non-
Muslims, fearing mockery and insults. Abu Bakr # probably
knew that, beyond mere verbal insults, he would be subjected
to a physical attack. Yet he 4 was courageous enough to
overlook that outcome, considering it of utmost importance to
openly preach Islam to non-Muslims. Some people ask
themselves what it was that made Muslims so successful in
spreading Islam during the Prophet's lifetime; the answer is
not beyond our grasp when we reflect on Abu Bakr’s sacrifice
—his own sub-tribe thought that he 2 had died from the
beating—and the many sacrifices he # and _ other
Companions made throughout their lives.

2) Rarely in history has anyone shown as much love for another
person as did Abu Bakr 2 for the Prophet #¢. Abu Bakr’s own
life was on a precarious footing; his wounds were life-
threatening, and he 4 needed rest and nourishment; yet
upon regaining consciousness he asked not about his own
condition, but about the well-being of the Messenger of Allah
#2. Annoying his fellow clansmen who were worried about
him only, Abu Bakr #& kept asking about the Prophet #8; he ‏ضف‎
‎even took an oath to neither eat nor drink until he ‏كك‎ first saw
him. Abu Bakr 4 was in no condition to get up, never mind
walk, yet with his determination and profound love for the
Messenger of Allah ‏كل‎ such difficult obstacles were easily
overcome. May Allah 8 be pleased with him and with all of
the Prophet’s Companions #.

3) Tribal loyalty, which was a predominant characteristic among
Makkah’'s mhabitants, greatly influenced how people treated
one another, and at times even took precedence over religious
loyalty. Most of the members of Abu Bakr’s sub-tribe were
non-Muslims, yet they threatened to exact revenge against a
co-religionist, namely ‘Utbah, if Abu Bakr 4 were to die.

60 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

4) Even during the early days of Islam, the Prophet's
Companions # showed good sense in assessing a situation
and then in acting cautiously when they sensed danger. Umm
Jameel %& displayed these qualities a few times in the above-
mentioned story. First, knowing that the situation in Makkah
was rife with tension and that the Muslims had just been
physically assaulted, Umm Jameel % answered Umm Al-Khair
by saying that she didn’t know either Abu Bakr & or
Muhammad ibn “Abdullah #@. This was a wise move on her
part, for Umm Al-Khair was not a Muslim and might have
wanted to act as a spy on behalf of the Quraish; also, Umm
Jameel & kept secret the fact that she had embraced Islam.

Second, based on the above-mentioned facts, Umm Jameel ‏ذيكا‎
‎wanted to directly convey news to Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ and so she wisely
made an overture to Umm Al-Khair, offering to go with her to her
son.

Third, Umm Jameel %& probably did so at an unconscious level,
but she certainly gained Umm Al-Khair’s appreciation when she
yelled out on her son’s behalf: “By Allah, those who have done
this to you are indeed the people of wickedness and disbelief.”
Earlier, Umm Jameel & showed similar solicitude for Umm Al-
Khair’s son when she said, “If you want, 1 will go with you to
your son.” To be sure, gaining Umm Al]-Khair’s trust made it
easier for Umm Jameel & to meet and speak with Abu Bakr 4.

Fourth, once she reached Abu Bakr ‏را‎ Umm Jameel & was
especially careful not to let any non-Muslim overhear their
conversation. She still didn’t completely trust Umm Al-Khair,
who was after all still a polytheist. Only after Abu Bakr # told her
that she could speak freely in the presence of Umm Al-Khair ‏ذا‎
‎did Umm Jameel % tell him about the Prophet #; and even still,
she did not say where the Prophet # was staying. She finally did
say where the Prophet #¢ was staying when she was forced to do
so through a direct question from Abu Bakr &. Throughout the
Makkan period of the Prophet's biography, all Muslims were
similarly careful, which of course contributed to the fact that the .

His fslam and His Preaching of Islam 61

Ouraish never found out about the exact location of the secret
meeting place of the Muslims.

Fifth, when Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ asked Umm Jameel “& to take him to
the House of Al-Argam, she did not immediately agree to do so;
instead, she waited until the tense situation outside calmed down,
so as to decrease the chances of being seen.

5) Hard work, affliction, trials, and ordeals — these are followed,
as a general rule in life, by reward. After suffering a difficult
ordeal at the hands of the Quraish, Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ asked the
Prophet # to invite his mother, Umm Al-Khair ‏وق‎ to Islam,
and to supplicate for her. And so the ordeal ended with Umm
Al-Khair 4 embracing Islarn.

6) Because of his special relationship with the Prophet #¢ and
because he would stick close to the Prophet #¢ during the most
dangerous of situations, Abu Bakr 4 was — despite having the
protection of his clan, and despite being, at least prior to Islam,
a high-ranking member of Quraish society — one of the most
persecuted of the Prophet's Companions #.

Fourth: How He « would
Strive to D

efend the Prophet 2

In addition to all of his other wonderful qualities, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎was brave, fearing none but Allah &. In the early days of Islam,
some Muslims kept their Islam a secret from their relatives,
fearing persecution and torture at their hands; that they kept their
Islam a secret was not held against them, since staying alive was a
major objective for Muslims at the time. Abu Bakr ‏رذ‎ on the other
hand, was not secretive about his Islam; instead, he openly
proclaimed that he was a follower of the Prophet #8. ‘Ali ‏كل‎ later
spoke highly about Abu Bakr’s bravery and liked to compare Abu
Bakr # to the believing man in the Pharaoh's household who kept
his Islam a secret. Once during his caliphate, “Ali ibn Abee Taalib

62 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #&

# stood up before the people and delivered the following sermon:
“O people, who is the bravest of all people?” Those that were
present answered, “You are, O Leader of the Believers.” ‘Ali 2
said, “Lo, I never entered into a duel with another man except that
J came out victorious over him. And yet the bravest of all people
was none other than Abu Bakr ¢s. We once built a command
center for the Messenger of Allah #¢, and we said, “Who will stay
with the Messenger of Allah h 3s, 50 as to ' prevent the polytheists

‎volunteer for the job) except for Abu Bakr 2, who, with his‏ م
‎sword unsheathed, stood over the head of the Messenger of Allah‏
‎then fought against anyone whi tried to attack‏ كه ‎Abu Bakr‏ .عي
‎the Messenger of Allah #¢, and so, yes, he was the bravest of all‏
‎people. [remember the time wher [ saw the Quraish opposing the‏
‎Prophet 3 and physically shaking him violently, and all the while‏
‎they were saying to him, ‘Have you taken our gods and made‏
‎them into one God!’ By Allah, not a single one of us stepped‏
‎who struggled‏ رف ‎forward (to defend him) except for Abu Bakr‏
‎against and struck one man and pushed violently another, and all‏
‎the while he was saying (to them), “Woe upon you, are you‏
‎fighting against a man because he says: My Lord is Allah’?” ‘Ali‏
‎then lifted the robe he was wearing, and he began to cry until‏ دي
‎his beard became soaked in tears. He then continued, “Task you‏
‎by Allah, was the believer from the family of the Pharaoh better or‏
‎Abu Bakr?” The attendees of the gathering then began to cry‏
‎along with “Ali 4, who said, “By Allah, Abu Bakr for an hour is‏
‎better than the believer of the family of the Pharaoh even if clones‏
‎of him were to fill the entire earth: the latter kept his faith a secret,‏
‎while the former openly proclaimed his faith.” Decades after‏
‎the persecution and the torture in Makkah, “Ali # still‏
‎remembered Abu Bakr’s bravery, and the memory of Abu Bakr’s‏
‎noble sacrifices were powerful enough in the mind of “Ali 2 to‏
‎make him cry and to inspire tears in others.‏

‎Uy AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (3/271, 272).

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 63

‘Urwah ibn Az-Zubair related that he once asked [bn “Amr ibn
Al-‘Aas to inform him about the worst thing that the polytheists
ever did to the Prophet 8%, and Ibn “Amr replied, “While the
Prophet #§ was once praying in the Hijr (one of the sides) of the
Ka’bah, “Uqbah ibn Abee Mu’eet approached him, wrapped his
‘ clothing around his neck, and began to violently choke him. Abu
Bakr raced to them and used his shoulder to push “Ugqbah away
from the Prophet #¢."! And Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ then said, ‘Are you
fighting a man just because he says: My Lord is Allah?”

According to a narration that was related by Anas 4, the
polytheists of Makkah once beat up the Prophet #£ until he lost
consciousness. Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ then stood up and began to call out,
“Are you fighting a man just because he says, “My Lord is
Allah?” It should be understood that, on these particular
occasions, others did not stand up and speak out against
Quraish’s vile treatment of the Prophet #¢. Up until that time,
fighting had not been legislated in Islam. And knowing that
simply speaking out was inviting torture and perhaps even death,
some Muslims kept their Islam a secret from the Quraish, while
others, fearing for their lives, did not always speak out. Yes, on
many occasions they did speak out and openly proclaim their
faith; but in the most dangerous of situations — the ones that took
place in the very early days of Islam and that are described in the
above-mentioned narrations — it was Abu Bakr # who alone
stood up and defended the Prophet 2%.

After the Messenger of Allah #2, Abu Bakr # was the first
person to be harmed in the way of Allah; he was the first to
defend the Messenger of Allah #2; and he was the first to invite
others to the way of Allah &. Throughout his entire life, Abu Bakr
a> was like the right hand of the Messenger of Allah ‏كذ كل‎
successful businessman prior to the advent of Islam, Abu Bakr 2
freed up his entire schedule and dedicated all of his time to the
cause of Islam: to accompanying the Prophet #¢ and helping him

Ul AL Bukhaaree (3856).

604 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏د‎

with his knowledge, experience, wealth, and time. Much of his
time was spent on helping the Prophet #2 to train, console, and
teach other Companions &. When Abu Dharr & embraced Islam,
it was Abu Bakr ‏ههه‎ who said, “O Messenger of Allah ‏يي‎ allow me
to provide his meal for the night,” and he then fed him expensive
raisins from Taaif.“! This is just one of many examples which
establish Abu Bakr’s concern not just for the safety of the Prophet
‏روه‎ but also for the well-being of the Prophet’s Companions. It is
related that the Prophet # said, “Verily, the most merciful person
from my nation towards (the people of) my nation is Abu Bakr.”

le & Spent to
Purchas tl

‎Freedom of Muslim Slaves‏ عد

‎As their frustration increased, the Quraish began to persecute
the Muslims more and more severely, often reaching savage
levels of cruelty. Their victims of choice, or rather of convenience,
were weak Muslims — those who had no protection and were not
rank and file members of the nobility, and also slaves, ‏قلفلا‎
‎being a member of the latter category. In punishing the weak, the
Quraish had more than one goal in mind. First, they wanted to
use torture to make Muslims abandon their religion. Second, they
_ wanted to set an example of weak Muslims, so as to frighten
Muslims who had some form of protection. And third — which
isn’t as much of a goal as itis a reason — they wanted to vent their
anger and frustration.

‎‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ood 2 said, “The first group to openly
proclaim their Islam consisted of seven people: The Messenger of
Allah #@ Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ ‘Ammaar #; “Ammaar’s mother,
Sumayyah %; Suhaib ‏زف‎ Bilal #; and Al-Migdaad #. As for the
Messenger of Allah #¢, Allah protected him through his uncle,
Abu Taalib. And as for Abu Bakr 4, Allah #§ protected him

‎[I ALFath (7/213), and Al-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Yahya Al-Yahya (pg. 156).

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 65

through his people (Abu Bakr’s clan). And as for the rest of them,
the Quraish took them, attired them in armor made of tron and
melted them in the sun. Each of them gave them (i.e., their
torturers) what they wanted (Le., they uttered words of disbelief,
though they did so under duress, and their hearts were at rest
with faith), except for Bilal 4, for losing his life for Allah 4 was an
easy matter for him (when it came to choosing between death and
uttering words of disbelief), and it (killing him) became easy for
his people (.e., they had no qualms about torturing him to the
point of death). They gave him to children, who went around
with him in the valleys of Makkah. And all the while, he
continued to say: “One, One (ie., Allah is One; none has the right
to worshipped but Allah, ‏للا عه‎

Bilal 4 had no family to protect him. In fact, Bilal 4 was hardly
considered a human being; his only purpose, according to the
mindset of the Quraish, was to serve and obey, to be bought and
sold like livestock. That he should have an opinion in important
matters was considered ludicrous, which is why the Quraish,
fearing a change in their way of life, became outraged when Bilal
# and other slaves embraced Islam.

Let it not said, or for that matter thought — as many opponents
of Islam say and think — that slaves embraced Islam in order to
improve their lot in Meccan society. The message of the Prophet
#% reached the inner depths of Bilal’s heart, as well as the hearts of
other slaves that embraced Islam. For how did embracing Islam
improve the position of slaves in society? Any slave who
embraced Islam was not given a free pass to join parties that
were thrown by the nobility; to the contrary, they were tortured,
whipped, and taken out to the hot sands of the desert to be melted
and crushed by rocks. It stands as a fact, therefore, that, like other
better-off Companions #, slaves who embraced Islam did so
because faith had entered their hearts. And to uphold their faith,
they were willing to sacrifice everything, even their very lives.

‎Musnad Ahmad (1/404), with a chain that is Hasan (acceptable).‏ ذا

66 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeegq a

Bilal ss in particular decided to be tortured to death rather than to
utter words of disbelief, even though doing so is permissible, so
long as one is forced to do so, and so long as one is at rest with

faith in his heart, both of which conditions Bilal 4s had fulfilled.

When Bilal’s owner, Umayyah ibn Khalaf, found out about
Bilal’s entry into the fold of Islam, he threatened him, and when
that didn’t work, he offered him incentives to abandon his faith.
But Bilal 2; remained steadfast, refusing to return to disbelief and
misguidance. Furious at the idea of a slave thinking that he had
the right to choose his own faith, Umayyah decided to teach Bilal
# a painful lesson and to make him an example for other
Muslims. Having prevented Bilal 4 from eating any food or
drinking any water for an entire day, Umayyah took him out to
the hot sands of the desert. Then, placing Builal’s bare back on top
of some burning hot sand, Umayyah ordered his other servants to
carry a huge stone and place it over the chest of Bilal 4, whose
hands were meanwhile tied down so that he could not move.
When the brutal deed was done and Bilal ‏كه‎ lay there in extreme
pain, Umayyah said, “You will remain upon this condition until
you either die or disbelieve in Muhammad and instead worship
Al-Laat and Al-Uzzah.” Rather than complain about his
predicament or give in to the demands of Umayyah, Bilal #
simply answered in a dignified tone, “One, One.”

Umayyah and his minions continued to torture Bilal 4s in this
manner until one day, Bilal # was tortured so severely that his
torturers realized that he was too weakened from their constant
beatings to be of any more use to them. Abu Bakr 2 then walked
by and addressed Ummayyah ibn Khalaf, Bilal’s owner, saying,
“Will you not fear Allah regarding this poor person? Until when
(will you continue to persecute him)!”

“You are the one who corrupted him,” said Ummayyah, “So
you save him from his present condition.”

“T will do so,” said Abu Bakr as. “I have a black slave who is
stronger than him and firmer than him upon your religion. I will
trade you him for Bilal.”

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 67

“Tindeed accept (your offer),” said Ummayyah. Once the trade
was completed, Abu Bakr 4 declared that Bilal 4 was now a free
man."! But according to another narration, Abu Bakr 4 did not
trade his own slave for Bilal ‏ره‎ but instead purchased him for
either 7 Awaagin {a measurement used for gold) or 40 Awaagin of

gold.)

After every trial, there is a payoff, a reward of some kind. After
suffering cruel and inhuman torture at the hands of the Quraish,
after having almost died from that torture, Bilal 4 was not only
purchased by a caring and benevolent Muslim, but he # also
became a free man at the same time. From that time onward, Bilal
& showed the same dedication to Islam as a free man as he did
when he ‏ك‎ was a slave. In fact, he 4 was able to do more. Being a
free man, he was able to dedicate all of his energies to the service
of Islam. Bilal 2 continued thereafter to adhere closely to the
company of the Messenger of Allah #2, who, upon his death, was
pleased with Bilal ‏رق‎ and who, during his lifetime, once said to.
Bilal #&, “Indeed, last night, I heard the sound of your footsteps
ahead of me in Paradise.””! As for Bilal’s ranking among the
Prophet’s Companions #, “Umares would say, “Abu Bakr is our
chief, and he has freed our chief (i.e., Bilal ‏لزه‎

One of the greatest problems the Companions #& faced was the
constantly increasing frequency and intensity of the torture
sessions to which poor and weak Muslims were subjected. Not
that they could do much, for all Muslims, both rich and poor,
were being subjected to persecution to at least some degree.
Nonetheless, Abu Bakr 4 found a way to help some slaves that
were being tortured; he purchased them and then freed them,
regardless of the cost.

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by ton Hishaam (1/394).‏ أذا
‎At-Tarbiyyah Al-Qiyaadiyyah (1/140).‏ لكا

‎31 Saheeh Muslim, “The Book of Virtues”; chapter, “The Virtues of Bilal ‏“ده‎
‎Hadeeth number: 2458.

‎At-Tabagaat Al-Kubra, by Ibn Sa’ad (3/232). All of the narrators of this Hadeeth‏ ذا
‎are trustworthy.‏

68 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeq #

One of the slaves Abu Bakr # freed was ‘Aamir ibn Fuhairah
2, who later participated in the battles of Badr and Uhud and was
then later martyred on the day of Bair Ma’oonah; two others were
Umm ‘Ubais ‏كذ‎ and Zimneerah %. Upon being set free, Zinneerah
& lost her eyesight; of course, the Quraish took the opportunity to
say, “It was none other than Al-laat and Al-‘uzzah (two of their
idols) who took away her eyesight.” Zinneerah ‏و‎ did not waive
in her faith, but instead said, “They have lied....Al-laat and Al-
‘Uzzah can neither harm nor benefit.” Allah 8 then gave her back
her eyesight."

Abu Bakr 2 also freed An-Nahdiyyah %& and her daughter %.
Both mother and daughter belonged to a woman from the Banu
‘Abd-ud-Daar clan. On the day they were set free, Abu Bakr &
passed by them; they were carrying flour for their mistress. Abu
Bakr # then went to speak to their mistress, asking her to set them
free, but she refused, saying, “By Allah, I will never free them.”
Abu Bakr # asked her to take back her oath, and she agreed to do
so, but then said, “You are the one who corrupted them, so you
set them free (i.e., buy them from me and then set them free).”

“How much will you sell them for?” asked Abu Bakr ‏.ذه‎ After
she told him their price, Abu Bakr # said, “Then I have taken
them, and they are now free (women). He 2 then went back to
An-Nahdiyyah & and her daughter % in order to tell them the
good news. “Give her back her flour,” he 4 added. They said, “O
Abu Bakr, shall we not first finish (doing what was required of us
regarding this flour) and then return it to her?” He 2 said, “If you
want, you may do ‏”.وو‎

Observe how Islam set the two women % and Abu Bakr « on
an equal footing; they addressed him not as one would address
one’s master, but as one would address one’s equal. Also, observe
how Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was humble enough to agree to their decision,
even though he # had just done them a tremendous service by

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Ibn Hishaam (1/393).‏ لذأ
‎I As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Ibn Hishaam (1/393).‏

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 69

freeing them. And observe how Islam polished the manners of
An-Nahdiyyah % and her daughter %; they could have just left
the flour where it was, or they could have simply returned it, but
they insisted upon finishing the task that was assigned to them
and then returning the flour to their former mistress.

Abu Bakr # also purchased and then freed a young female
slave from the Banu Muammil clan. After she became a Muslim,
“Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏روف‎ who was still a polytheist at the time,
physically beat her, in order to make her renounce her faith.
During a given torture session, ‘Umar # would stop hitting her
and say, “1 apologize to you (for stopping); it is only boredom that
has made me stop (hitting you).’”” Not allowing him to have the
satisfaction of such an insult, she said, “It is indeed Allah # Who
made you become bored (so you would stop hitting me),”4

Abu Bakr’s heart flowed with sympathy and compassion for
the weak. He ‏يه‎ spent a great deal of his wealth on setting slaves
free, doing so even before Verses of the Qur'an were revealed on
the topic — Verses that exhorted Muslims to free slaves and that
promised a great reward for those who did so.

Most people among the Quraish made fun of Abu Bakr 4s,
deeming it a waste of money to spend so much on the poor and
weak. Even his father, who was still a polytheist, discouraged him
from setting slaves free, considering the act of doing so to be a
fruitless venture. One day, he said to Abu Bakr ‏ركه‎ “O my son, |
see that you are freeing weak slaves. If you have to do what you
are doing, then you should at least free strong men who can
protect and defend you.” Abu Bakr 4 answered, “My father, lam
domeg this for Allah ‘Azza Wa-Jall (the Possessor of Might and
Majesty) only (and for no other purpose).” In Abu Bakr’s mind,
Muslim slaves were his equals and his brothers in faith; for that
matter, all of the polytheists on the earth were not, in his mind
(and in reality), equal in value to a single Muslim slave. It is no
wonder, therefore, that Allah 4 revealed Verses about Abu Bakr’s

11 As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Ibn Hishaam (1/393).

70 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضه‎
‎generosity that will be recited until the Last Day. Allah #8 said:

KEEGKO <b ‏سير‎ © ht ‏وَصَدَقَ‎ © &% oe iy tp
7 ‏إن‎ He BOO wl ‏سَيْييْرٌُ‎ 0( sal ‏وَكُدَبَ‎ 0( gap

a

De fe mA ‏مس‎ @ ed eye te eae eae g
GIS YQ bb ‏نا‎ 3 WO ING BM 0 3@ Ai ‏عيَنَا‎ tde 8 @)

SK 56 3B MO GNC IG Of sl © BN I

78 od Co OD "Eee wt ed

EEO wl ‏مجه ريد‎ TO : ee Eo ple oY WIC)

awe

“As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to Allah
and fears Him, And believes in Al-Husna [the Best (i.e., either
La ilaha ila Allah : none has the right to be worshipped but Allah)
or a reward from Allah (.e., Allah will compensate him for what
he will spend in Allah’s Way or bless him with Paradise)]. We
wil make smooth for him the path of ease (goodness). But he who
is greedy, miser and thinks himself self-sufficient, And gives the
he to Al-Husna. We will make smooth for him the path for evil.
And what will his wealth benefit him when he goes down (in
destruction). Truly, Ours it is (fo give) guidance. And truly,
unio Lis (belong) the last (Hereafter) and the first (this world).
Therefore | have warned you of a Fire blazing fiercely (Hell).
None shall enter 1t save the most wretched, who denies and turns
away. And Al-Muttaqun (the pious and righteous) will be far
removed from it (Hell). He who spends his wealth for crease in
self-purtfication, and have in his mind no favor from anyone for
which a reward is expected in return, except only the destre to
seek the Countenance of his Lord, the Most High. He surely will
be pleased (when he will enter Paradise).”” (Qur'an 92: 5-21)"

To be sure, Muslims desperately need to revive the deeds of
Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq - in order to bring unity to a nation whose
people are constantly being subjected to persecution, torture, and
death at the hands of Islam’s enemies.

“I Seerah Ibn Hishaam (1/319), and Tafseer Al-Aloosee (80/152).

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 71

Sixth: Abu ba 5 rs Fir st IVI

ligration, and
His Meeting with [bn Ad-Dughnah

When Muslims could no longer endure the torture that was
being meted out to them on a daily basis, the Messenger of Allah
#@ granted them permission to migrate to Abyssinia: That
country, he told them, was ruled by a king in whose dominion
no man was wronged. Many of the weak and oppressed
Companions of the Prophet #% rejoiced at this news, and they
began preparations for the long and arduous journey to
Abyssinia. We can gain an appreciation of how bad the situation
had become in Makkah when we consider that even Abu Bakr 2
decided to leave Makkah and to start a new life in Abyssinia.
Unlike other Companions ‏رك‎ Abu Bakr # had the protection of
his clan — the children of Teem. He was not put to trial in his
religion as much as other Muslims were put to trial in their
religion; even still, he was not spared the brutal punishment of the
Quraish (we have hitherto seen how he was once beaten almost to
the point of death), and so, like many others, he resolved to leave
his beloved homeland and to start a new life elsewhere. “Aaishah
gave a detailed account of Abu Bakr’s planned migration to
Abyssinia. She % said, “From the time I was old enough to
understand what was happening around me, my parents have
been Muslims. And on every single day that passed by, the
Messenger of Allah #@ came to us at the two extremes of the day:
the early morning and the end of the afternoon. When the
Muslims were put to trial (in their religion), Abu Bakr & left
(Makkah), having decided to migrate towards the land of
Abyssinia. When he reached Bark Al-Ghimaad (which is about
five-days traveling distance from Makkah), he met a man named
fbn Ad-Dughnah, who was the chief of Al-Qaarah (Al-Qaarah is a
subdivision of the Banu Al-Haun ibn Khuzaimah tribe). Ibn Ad-
Dughnah asked, “Where are you headed towards, O Abu Bakr?’
Abu Bakr 2 said, ‘My people have forced me to leave (Makkah),
and I now want to travel freely on earth and worship my Lord.’

72 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

Ibn Ad-Dughnah said, ‘Someone of your ranking and character
does not leave and should not be forced to leave: For indeed, you
provide for the needy, you join ties of family relations, you
support the weak, you honor your guests, and you help others to
rise above the vicissitudes of life. L, then, will provide you with
protection. Return and worship your Lord in your homeland.’
Abu Bakr & returned, and Ibn Ad-Dughnah accompanied him.
(After they arrived tn Makkah) fbn Ad-Dughnah spent the entire
night visiting the various noblemen of the Quraish. And to each
one of them he said, “Verily, someone of Abu Bakr’s ranking and
character does not leave (his homeland) and should not be forced
to leave. Will you expel (from Makkah) a man who provides for
the needy, joins ties of family relations, supports the weak, honors
his guests, and helps others to rise above the vicissitudes of life?’
The leaders of the Quraish accepted Ibn Ad-Dughnah’s guarantee
of protection, but they did say to him, ‘Order Abu Bakr to
worship his Lord in his home, to pray in his home, and to recite
whatever he wants to recite in his home. He must not harm us
with those acts by coming out and performing them openly, for
we fear that our women and children will be put to trial (Le., that
they will become attracted to his religion).’ Ibn Ad-Dughnah
conveyed their stipulations to Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ who then began to
worship his Lord in his home. He abstained from praying in front
of others, and he recited the Qur’an in his home but nowhere else.
Abu Bakr # then had an idea (which he immediately put into
action): He built a Masjid in the courtyard that was adjacent to his
house. Inside of that courtyard, he would pray and recite the
Qur’an. Women polytheists and their children would gather
around him. Impressed by him (Le., by his prayers and recitation
of the Qur’an), they would gather around and simply watch and
observe him. Abu Bakr 2 was a man who cried frequently, a man
who was not able to hold back his tears when he recited the
Qur'an. The leaders of the Quraish began to panic (fearing that
their women and children would become Muslims), and so they
summoned [bn Ad-Dughnah to come to them. When Ibn Ad-
Dughnah went to them, they said, “Verily, we guaranteed the

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 73

safety of Abu Bakr based on your guarantee of protection, and
based on the condition that he would worship his Lord in his
home and nowhere else. He has transgressed the bounds of that
condition: He has built a Masjid in the courtyard of his house, and
there he prays and recites the Qur’an out in the open. And verily,
we fear that he will tempt our women and children (towards his
religion), so torbid him (from continuing to practice his religion
out in the open). If he agrees to limit his worship of his Lord to his
home, then that is fine; but if he refuses and is determined to
openly practice his faith, then ask him to return back to you your
guarantee of protection. For indeed, we do not want to deceive
you by violating your guarantee of safety, but at the same time,
we will not allow Abu Bakr to openly practice his faith.” And so
Ibn Ad-Dughnah went to Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ and said, “You know what
we agreed upon (that you will limit your religious activities to
your home), so either you follow the terms of our agreement, or
you return to me my guarantee of protection, for | do not want
other Arabs to find out that my guarantee of safety for aman was
ignored and violated (for that will bring shame upon me).’ Abu
Bakr # said, “Then | return to you your guarantee of safety, and I
am satisfied and pleased with the protection of Allah, the
Possessor of Might and Majesty.”"! After he was no longer
under the protection of Ibn Ad-Dughnah, Abu Bakr - went out
and was heading towards the Ka’bah when he was met by a fool
from the fools of the Quraish - a fool who proceeded to pour dirt
over the head of Abu Bakr #. Abu Bakr # then passed by ‏على‎
‎Waleed ibn Al-Mugheerah (or Al-’Aas ibn Al-Waail) and said,
“Do you not see what this fool has done (to me)?’ Al-Waleed (or
Al-‘Aas) said, ‘It is you who have done this to yourself (by
refusing to abandon your religion).’ Abu Bakr 4 then repeated
this phrase three times: ‘My Lord, how forbearing and clement

لاب وبرج ‎You‏

.)274 / 7( وم إيبجتزوم أذا
‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah G/ 95).‏ ]2[

74 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &
The Lessons and Morals of this Story

1) In this story, Ibn Ad-Dughnah confirmed the lofty standing of
Abu Bakr # within the ranks of Makkan society. Were one to
read about the Quraish’s treatrnent of Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎ after the
advent of Islam, without knowing how they treated him prior
to Islam, one would think that Abu Bakr 24 was not a man of
high-ranking among the Quraish. But the opposite was the
case: He 2 was, prior to the advent of Islam, a chieftain and
nobleman of high-standing among the Quraish. All of the
other noblemen loved and respected him, which is why Ibn
Ad-Dughnah exclaimed, “Someone of your ranking and
character does not leave and should not be forced to leave:
For indeed, you provide for the needy, you joi ties of family
relations, you support the weak, you honor your guests, and
you help others to rise above the vicissitudes of life.” This
proves that, by entering into the fold of Islam, Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ was
not seeking out power or prestige, but instead the good
pleasure of Allah 38 — a goal for which he was willing to leave
his homeland, his family, and his wealth, so that he could
wander the earth as a stranger and worship Allah % without
the fear of being persecuted as a result. May Allah be pleased
with him and with all of the Prophet's Companions.

2) The focus or foundation of Abu Bakr’s application of Islam was
the Qur'an: He recited it, contemplated its meanings, and put
its teachings into practice. His close attachment to the Noble
Qur’an reaped wonderful fruits in his Da’wah efforts, tor his
close relationship with the Noble Qur’an instilled in him
eloquence, profound thinking, and the ability to present
knowledge in a logical manner. The Qur’an is Allah's speech,
and with His speech, Allah 3 knew best how to attract the
hearts of men. To be sure, since Abu Bakr # studied Allah’s
speech day and night, he learned the same methods of
attracting men to the truth that Allah # employed in the
Qur'an. It isno wonder, therefore, that many people embraced
Islam at his hands.

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 75

As far as Muslims as a group are from the Qur'an today, they
could stand to learn a lot from Abu Bakr’s relationship with the
Qur'an. Verses of the Qur’an would move him to tears. His tears
attested to his understanding of the Qur’an and to his strong faith,
for a person cries for one of two reasons: either he is extremely sad
or tremendously happy. The true believer — and Abu Bakr & was
indeed a true believer — sways between two states: one of
happiness, for having been guided by Allah # to the Straight
Path; and one of fear and sadness, fear of deviating from the
Straight Path and sadness on account of his sins. Also, the Noble
Qur'an constantly reminds the true believer about the account-
ability, punishments, and rewards of the Hereafter. Reminded
about such matters whenever he recited the Qur’an, Abu Bakr «
was not able to hold back his tears. And when Abu Bakr & would
recite the Qur’an and cry during his recitation, he would move to
tears those that were with him; as a result, the leaders of the
Quraish feared for their women and children, who would eagerly
crowd around Abu Bakr # and observe him as he prayed and
recited the Qur’an. The end result of watching and observing Abu
Bakr 4s, the leaders of the Quraish feared, would be their women
and children entering into the fold of Islam.

Abu Bakr’s lifelong attachment to the Qur'an was truly
amazing; he memorized the Noble Qur'an, contemplated its
meanings, and applied its teachings; and he never spoke about the
Qur'an without knowledge. If he was asked about the meaning of a
Verse, and if he knew that particular Verse’s meaning, he would
answer by imparting the knowledge he had; but if he didn't know
the meaning of a particular Verse, he would reply, “What earth will
carry me and what sky will give me shade if I say about the Book of
Allah a meaning that Allah did not intend.’”"!

Also, when he didn’t know the meaning of a particular Verse,
he would ask the Prophet #¢ about it, making sure all the while to
be polite and respectful. For example, Allah % said:

iN At-Taareekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 117); the chain of this particular
narration is disconnected. -

76 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~-Siddeeq *

مه ‎hk an‏ اسم سرصم لاسي 8 ‎Be‏ بيسن ‎a‏ ا
#لَيْس بأمانيكم ‎ES A Seal SABES‏ سو ‎MOS‏ 52 را
‎“Tt will not be accordance with your desires (Muslims), nor those‏
‎of the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), whosoever‏

works evil, will have the recompense thereof, and he will not find
any protector or helper beside Allah.” (Qur'an 4: 123)

oo A ‏سمي عر‎
١ ‏من دون‎ Ade

When this Verse was revealed, Abu Bakr & asked, “O
Messenger of Allah...and who among us has not perpetrated an
evil act?” Abu Bakr feared that punishment for his sins was
guaranteed. The Prophet #8 then reassured Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ saying,
“O Abu Bakr, do you not get tired? Do you not become sad? Are
you not afflicted with misfortune?” The Prophet #¢ then informed
him that such afflictions would offset his sins.

In another Verse, Allah 38 said:

7 RE 5 See ‏وه حمر‎ A, ¢he Se
Noe th sgt SSS ‏أستَصموا‎ baal ‏رسا‎ Ye ‏الذمت‎ Sy
< As Ge cept 8 Che oR wr ee A ees
diyices SAS ‏الى‎ dh ‏وأشِروا‎ BSA ‏ولا‎ tS

“Verily, those who say: “Our Lord is Allah (Alone),” and then
they Istagamu , on them the angels wall descend (at the time of their
death) (saying) : “Fear not, nor grieve! But receive the glad tidings
of Paradise which you have been promised!” (Qur'an 41:30)

Si

4

Clarifying the intended meaning of ‘those’ in this Verse, Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ said, “They are those who do not turn away from Him
towards the right or towards the left: They do not turn with their
hearts to anyone other than Allah ~ not with their love, fear, and
hope; not with their supplications for help; and not with their
complete trust, which they place exclusively upon Him. Rather,
they love only Allah, and they do not love partners alongside Him.
“Ahmad (1/11), and Ash-Shaikh Shaakir said, “The chains of this narration are

weak.’” Nonetheless, by dint of other narrations that attest to it, this Hadeeth is
authentic. Musnad Al-Imam Ahmad (68).

لت

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam

When they seek out a benefit or want to ward off some harm, they
love to ask for help from none but Him. They fear none — no matter
who he is — but Him. They ask for help from no one but Him. They
hope with their hearts for help from no one but Him.”

Those who invite others to Islam would do well to follow Abu
Bakr’s methodology of being in constant company with the Noble
Qur’an, for only when they apply the same methodology will
they be able to reach out to others and help them appreciate the
miracles of the Noble Qur’an. In the very early days of Islam, Abu
Bakr ‏ذا‎ knew that reciting the Qur'an within the earshot of others
was in and of itself a wonderful way of inviting others to Islam.

Seventh: Speaking to Representatives of Arab Tribes

When the situation in Makkah became almost unbearable for
Muslims, the Prophet # set his sights elsewhere, looking for a
tribe that was willmg to welcome him and his Companions @ and
to defend Islam against his enemies. He #£ tried to win over the
leaders of At-Taaif, but they rejected his message and treated him
in a despicable manner, sending out their children and foolish
ones to chase him #% out of At-Taaif. Then the Prophet #2 took
advantage of the Hajj season to meet with the representatives of
the various tribes of Arabia in order to present the message of
Islam to them and to gauge their level of willingness to help the
cause of Islam. Accompanying the Prophet #¢ during his visits to
various tribal delegates was Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ا‎ who was
especially useful, since he + was perhaps the most
knowledgeable man alive regarding the genealogy and. history
of Arab peoples; with that knowledge, he ‏ذه‎ knew the strong and
weak points of each tribe. His knowledge helped the Prophet 2
learn more about the tribes he was visiting, which in turn would
help the Prophet #2 choose the best tribe to bear the duties of
spreading Islam to the rest of Arabia and beyond.

‎Al-Fataawah (28/22).‏ 1لا
‎l Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Al-Islaamiyyah Fee ‘Ahd Al-Khulafan (pg. 95).‏

78 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ف‎

‘Aliibn Abee Taalib 4 said, “When Allah #8 ordered His Prophet
# to present himself to Arab tribes, he left (to go and visit one of
them), and I went with him....Then we went to another gathering,
over which there was an aura of calmness and gravity. Abu Bakr &
came and extended greetings of peace, after which he ts said, “Who
are these people?’ They (i.e., those whom he asked) said, “(The tribe
of) Shaibaan ibn Tha’labah.’ Abu Bakr 2: turned to the Messenger of
Allah #8 and said, “May my mother and father be sacrificed for you;
these are the noblest of people, and among them is Mafroog, who is
best among them in speech and in looks.’ Mafroog had two braids
that fell down to (his upper chest). Of all his people, Mafrooq was
seated closest to Abu Bakr #. Abu Bakr & said, ‘How many are
you?’ Mafroog said, ‘We are more than one thousand in number,
and (an army of) one thousand is not defeated because it is lacking in
numbers.’ Abu Bakr # said, ‘And how strong are you (in battle)’
Mafroog said, ‘We are never as angry as we are when we meet (our
enemy for battle), and we never fight as fiercely as we do when we
are angry. We prefer good horses to children, and weapons to
pollen. As for victory, it comes from Allah: He 4 grants it to us one
time, and He 3 grants it against us (i.e., to our opponents) the next
time. Perhaps you are the brother of Quraish?’ Abu Bakr 4s said, ‘Tf it
has reached you that he is indeed the Messenger of Allah, then here
he is.” Mafroog said, ‘O brother of Quraish, to what do you invite
us?’ The Messenger of Aliah #8 said:

“ ca
a Bo“ ‏سر هم‎ AS ‏أن‎

آي ‎yy‏ لله وَحْدَهُ لا صَرِيِكَ لَه وَأَنَي عَبْدُ

ا
5
م ‎3S‏

33
الله 4255 وَإِلَى أنْ ‎obs‏ وَتَنْصْرُونِي ‎Sits BES OB‏
‎be‏ الله ‎C555‏ ¢ رَسُولَةٌ وَاسْتَعْنَتْ بِالبَاطِل عن ‎5A OIG Go‏ الغَنِئُ

‘l invite you to testify that none has the right to be worshipped but
Allah alone, Who has no partner, and that 1 am indeed the slave of
Allah and His Messenger. I also invite you to grant me shelter
and to support me. For indeed, the Quraish has united against
(the religion of) Allah, and has disbelieved in Allah’s Messenger

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 79

i: “Having renounced the truth, they have taken to falsehood
alone. And Allah is the All-Rich, Al-Hameed (the One Who is
deserving of all praise) .'

Matroog said, ‘O brother of the Quraish, to what else do you
invite? For by Allah, [have not heard speech that is better than this.’

The Messenger of Allah #2 then recited this Verse:

ba, i 7A C4 A Sen Joe 42 oo

# oes, oe 0 wt 7 4 ‏ع‎

- chy Ip cd ‏ألا ششمد‎ ane wi) ‏م‎ ow ‏أتل‎ | ia ‏موقل‎
‎8 A Sor ae be wd aoe ae » ‏لد عر سر ص‎
‏قحك‎ es oll 38 3 ‏للد‎ arr NG ‏ل مسد‎ Jolly
(eS re ‏وَل‎ che Kas Gin 56Gb 7 Sosy err 5

Siok Xd ‏بو‎ KAS SS EI Vy ai Ae ‏لق‎ ae

geet

“Say (O Muhammad #@): “Come, I will recite what your Lord
has prohibited you from : Jon not anything in worship with Him ;
be good and dutiful to your parents; kill not your children
because of poverty — We provide sustenance for you and for
them; come not near to Al-Fawahish (shameful sins, illegal
sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed openly or secretly,
and kill not anyone whom Allah has forbidden, except for a just
cause (according to Islamic law). This He has commanded you
that you may understand.” (Qur'an 6: 151)

‘

Ee
re
os

ms

ns

Mafrooq said, ‘By Allah, you have invited to the noblest of
manners and the best of deeds. Those people that have
disbelieved in you and have united against you have lied and
are false.” Mafrooq then returned the matter (ie., the decision
thereof) to Haani ibn Qabeesah, saying, “And this is Haani, our
Shaikh (leader), and the one among us who is responsible for our
religion.’ Haani then said, “1 have heard your speech, O brother of
Quraish. Yet I indeed feel that us leaving our religion and
following your religion after a single meeting you have had with
us, is to take a shameful view of things, and shows short-
sightedness concerning the outcome (of that decision). Indeed,
stumbling (and erring) is the concomitant of hastiness. And we do
indeed dislike forcing an agreement on those (among us) we have

80 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg

left behind. So instead, we will return (to our people), and you
will return (to yours), and we will study the matter.’ As if he
wanted the participation of Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah, Haani
said, ‘And this is Al-Muthannah, our Shaikh, and the one who is in
charge of us during war.’ Al-Muthannah — who later embraced
Islam — said, ‘I have indeed heard your speech, © brother of
Quraish. My answer concerning what you said — concerning us
leaving our religion and following yours — is the same answer
that Haani gave. We chose as our home territory that lies between
two As-Sariyyaan; one of them is Al-Yamaamah, and the other is
As-Simaamah.’ The Messenger of Allah 8¢ said to him, “What are
these two As-Sariyyaan?’ Al-Muthannah said, “The rivers of Kisrah
(Kisrah was the emperor of Persia) and the waters of the Arabs.
As for our territory that les beside the rivers of Kisrah, then
anyone who makes a mistake there (i.e., a mistake against the
emperor) is not forgiven, and his excuses are not accepted. The
only reason why we are allowed to reside there is that Kisrah has
taken a covenant upon us: We may not do anything new (that
displeases him), and we may not give refuge to someone (whom
he deems to be) subversive. And, O brother of Quraish, I feel that
this matter which you are inviting us to is one that kings detest. If
you want us to give you shelter and support you in the territory
that lies along the waters of the Arabs, then we will do so.’ The
Messenger of Allah ‏عله‎ said:

‎odo . 2% 5 5 238 6 7‏ بي الى 2 2 4 ,@ ~ @ .0
«مَا ‎GLa‏ فِي ‎ooh‏ إذ أَفصَحْتَمٌ بالصَّدّْقء وَإِنْ ‎Gap‏ الله ‎Fé‏ وَجل لنْ
‎a ge.‏ ( و ‎a‏ “ 3

‎me Se

‎727
‏كي‎ eo

‎ofa ‏صم‎ “ a BF “ aw
aslo ‏جميع‎ Oe ‏إلا مَنْ خاطه‎

‎Pa ~~" 8
‏في‎ ” oF

‎|

‎&
‎a “ a YL 2 “7 Ay ‏م‎ wy 7
‏ويفرشكم‎ easy ‏الله تعالى أرضهم‎ og orb

‎“You have not answered in an ill manner, for you have spoken
with truthful eloquence. Verily, the religion of Allah % will be
supported only by those who guard tt from all directions. Now,
suppose that only a short period of time passes before Allah ‏قله‎
‎makes you inherit their (1.e., the people of Persia) lands and

His Islam and His Preaching of Islam 81

homes, and makes you take to bed their women — will you then
glorify, worship, and exalt Allah?”

An-No’maan ibn Shareek said, “We will at least grant you
that’)

The Lessons and Morals of this Story

1) Abu Bakr # benefited the Prophet #¢ more so than any other
Companion #. He 4 was blessed in many ways — with his
wealth, his knowledge, and his talents. Throughout history,
other people were also blessed with similar things, but Abu
Bakr ¢ was better than all of them because he held nothing
back, using all of his talents and resources to further the cause
of Islam. The wealth he had he used to feed the poor and to free
Muslim slaves. The talents he had he used to help the Prophet
#¢; for example, in the above-mentioned story, he used his
eloquence and good manners to introduce the Prophet #€ to
the representatives of a foreign tribe. And he also used his
knowledge by accompanying the Prophet #¢ during Haj
season and providing him with important information about
the strengths and weaknesses of various tribes.

2) Although he probably did not know it at the time, Abu Bakr
was being trained to rule the Muslim nation after the death of
the Prophet #. By accompanying the Prophet #€ as he visited
the representatives of various tribes, Abu Bakr # learned
many valuable lessons about how a true leader should be
farsighted in his strategy and how he should deal with the
leaders of foreign tribes and countries; one of those lessons is as
follows: The Prophet #2 was not looking for just anybody to
protect and support him. He #% wanted a tribe that was not
restricted by a treaty with a foreign power, especially one that
ran contrary to the principles and goals of Islam, and one that
exposed Islam, Muslims, and the tribe in question to near

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (3/142, 143, 145), and in it are additions that are not‏ أذ
‎recorded by As-Saalihee, in Subul-Ar-Rashaad (2/596, 597).‏

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ل‎

certain destruction. After all, in the case of Banu Shaibaan,
their treaty was not with a tribe of lesser, equal, or slightly
greater strength, but rather with one of the superpowers of that
era, the Persian Empire. And at any rate, partial protection
would not have solved anything. For if Kisrah were to try and
capture the Prophet #¢ or send forces to fight him and his
Companions ‏را‎ Banu Shaibaan was not willing to stand up to
Kisrah and fight against his forces.

True, Banu Shaibaan did not in the end provide shelter for the
Prophet #&; nonetheless, they acted truthfully and honorably
and respectfully, which is much more than can be said about the
other tribes the Prophet # visited. The leaders of Banu Shaibaan
spoke candidly, telling the Prophet # about the forces they had
at their disposal. And rather than cover up their true motives by
showing disdain for the Prophet's message, they calmly told the
Prophet #¢ their weak and vulnerable situation vis-a-vis the
Persian Empire. Allah 8 decreed that, about 10 or more years
later, it would be the Banu Shaibaan tribe who, after they
became Muslims, would be the first to fight against the very
kings they once feared. During the caliphate of Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeq 4, it was Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah ‏ذه‎ who led the
Muslim armies that conquered brag. And Muthannah’s people
— Banu Shaibaan — were among the bravest fighters in the
wars that took place against the Persians. When they were non-
Muslims, the people of Banu Shaibaan feared the Persians a
great deal — so much so that they never even thought about
fighting them. And it was their fear of the Persians that made
them reject the Prophet's Da’wah, even though they were
convinced of its truthfulness. In this context, we should
appreciate the greatness of Islam, through which Allah 8
raises true Muslims in this world, making them leaders on earth
and dwellers of Paradise in the Hereafter.

82

Chapter 3

As days and months went by, the Quraish became more and
more brutal in their policies towards the Muslims. As a result,
some Muslims migrated once or twice to Abyssinia, while the
others continued to patiently endure oppression at the hands of
the Quraish. When life became completely unbearable for
Muslims in Makkah, relief came to them from Allah & by way
of the native inhabitants of Al-Madeenah, who embraced Islam
and pledged to follow and defend the Messenger of Allah #&. The
Prophet's Companions # then made their way to Al-Madeenah
individually and in small groups. But when Abu Bakr 4 asked for
permission to leave Makkah, the Prophet #8 asked him to wait
awhile, saying to him, “Do not rush, for perhaps Allah will
provide you with a companion.’ The Prophet ‏عله‎ didn’t explain

11 Yaareekh Ad-Da'wah al-Islam (pg. 107).

84 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2%

what he said in more detail, but Abu Bakr # understood, or at
least hoped, that the Prophet #2 was intimating to him that they
would travel to Al-Madeenah together. From that day onward,
Abu Bakr # waited eagerly for the Prophet # to inform him
about his plans for leaving Makkah; and in the meanwhile, Abu
Bakr ‏وق‎ kept two riding animals ready for his pnpending journey
to Al-Madeenah, one for himself, and the other for his travel
companion, who he hoped would be the Prophet #8.

ed

‘Aaishah ‏رذ‎ the Mother of the Believers, said, “The Messenger
of Allah #¢ would unerringly come to the house of Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ at
one of the two ends of the day, either in the morning or in the
evening; that is, until the day on which the Messenger of Allah ‏كل‎
‎was given permission to migrate and to leave Makkah and its
inhabitants. The Messenger of Allah #2 came to us at noon-time, -
at an hour during which he #2 would normally not come to us (it
was the time of the day during which people would customarily
take a nap). When Abu Bakr # saw him, he ‏ذه‎ said, ‘The
Messenger of Allah #2 didn’t come to us at this hour except
because of something (important) that has happened.’ When the
Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ entered, Abu Bakr 2 moved back and gave
him space to sit on his bed. The Messenger of Allah #8 sat down,
and at the time, no one was there with Abu Bakr # except me and
my sister, Asmaa Bint Abu Bakr %. The Messenger of Allah ‏كه‎
‎said, “Remove from my presence those that are with you.” Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ said, ‘OQ Messenger of Allah, they are none other than my
two daughters. What is the matter? May my father and mother be
sacrificed for you!’ He #% said, “Verily, permission has been
granted to me to leave and migrate.” Abu Bakr # said,
‘Companionship, O Messenger of Allah (Le., does this mean that
Twill be your companion for the migration).’ The Prophet # said,
‘Companionship.’ Before | saw Abu Bakr & cry that day, I never
thought that anyone cried out of happiness. Abu Bakr 2 then
said, ‘O Prophet of Allah, verily here are two mounts; I have
indeed prepared them for this very occasion.’ They hired
Abdullah ibn Uraigat — a man from Banu Ad-Dail ibn Bakr,
who was a polytheist, and whose mother was a woman from

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah 2% 85

Banu Sahm ibn “Amr — to be their guide during the journey. They
gave him their mounts, which remained with him, while he
prepared them for the appointed time (of handing them over to
the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakras).”"!

In a long Hadeeth that is recorded in Bukhaaree, “Aaishah %&
said, “One day, while we were seated in the house of Abu Bakr ‏رك‎
‎someone said to Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ at high noon, “Here is the Messenger
of Allah #2 with his head covered; it is an hour during which he
has not previously come to us.’ Abu Bakr 4 said, “May my father
and mother be sacrificed for him! By Allah, nothing other than an
important matter has brought him to us at this hour.’ The
Messenger of Allah #¢ said to Abu Bakr &, “Remove (from here)
those that are with you.’ Abu Bakr 2s said, “They are none other
than your family.” The Prophet #¢ said, “Verily, permission has
been given to me to leave.” Abu Bakr 4 (expectantly) said,
‘Companionship, may my father be sacrificed for you, O
Messenger of Allah!’ The Messenger of Allah #& said, “Yes.” Abu
Bakr # said, “May my father be sacrificed for you, O Messenger of
Allah! Then take one of these two mounts that belong to me.’ The
Messenger of Allah #¢ said, ‘For its price (1.e., | will only take it if
you allow me to pay you its price). So we prepared the mounts
for their journey as quickly as we could, and we made for them a
sufrah (a mat that is used for eating) in a bag. Asmaa Bint Abu
Bakr “ cut a piece of her band off and tied it to the mouth of the
bag, which is the reason she was named, “The One with the
Band.” Then the Messenger of Allah #% and Abu Bakr went toa
cave in Mount Thaur, where they remained in hiding for three
nights. Abdullah, the son of Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ who was a young boy
_endowed with intelligence and understanding, would spend the
nights with them. He would leave them at early dawn, so that in
the morning he would be with the Quraish in Makkah, acting as if
it he had spent the night there. He would not hear of any plot that
was contrived against them except that he absorbed it and went
with news of it to them (i.e., to the Prophet #2 and Abu Bakr 2)

UT As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Tbn Katheer (2/233-234).

56 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مد‎

when darkness mixed (in the sky). Aamir ibn Puhairah, the
servant of Abu Bakr 4, would herd a Minhah of sheep (a Minhah
refers to an animal that is borrowed for the benefit of its milk), and
bring the herd to them (i.e., to the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr 2)
one hour after “Eesha. They would have the benefit of Kis! at night
— the milk of the said herd and its Radeef — until Aamir [bn
Fuhairah steered them away with a call during the last part of the
night, when the darkness of the night mixes with the light of the
morning. He did this on each of the three nights. The Messenger
of Allah ‏يل‎ and Abu Bakr # hired a man from Banu Ad-Dail; he
was from Banu Abd bin Adee, and he was a guide and a Khireet —
a Khireet is an expert guide. He had an alliance with the family of
Al- Aas bin Waail As-Sahmee, and he was upon the religion of the
disbelieving Quraish. But still, they trusted him and handed over
to him their mounts, and made an appointment to meet him at the
cave of Thaur after the passing of three nights. So on the morning
following the third night he was to come with their mounts.
Travelling with them (on their journey) were Aamir bin Fuhairah
and their guide, who led them along the pathways of the
seaside."

Other than ‘Ali ibn Abee Talib ‏رأ‎ Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq # and
the family of Abu Bakr 2, no other person knew that the
Messenger of Allah #8 left when he did. After they met at an
appointed time, the Messenger #2 and Abu Bakr 4 left from a
small opening behind Abu Bakr’s house. Here we see yet another
example of how the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr # took all possible
pains to keep their journey a secret, so as to avoid being followed
by the Quraish and prevented from their blessed journey. Three
nights after they arrived at the cave they had an appointment
with their guide, Abdullah bin Uraigat. When he #¢ was about to
leave Al-Hazwarah in the marketplace of Makkah, the Messenger
of Allah 8¢ stopped and said:

11 Bukhaaree, the Virtues of the Ansaar, chapter “The Hijrah (Migration) of the
Prophet # and the Companions & to Al-Madeenah”; Hadeeth number:
3905.

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah # 87

41 Tote 0 1 5 ‏ع مس 2 عه‎ a Loe ov é we Ey
‏أَرْض الله إلى ال وَلَوْلَا أنى‎ Css ‏«وَالل إنْكِ 255 أَرْض الله‎
oe Pal ” Pal ‏و‎

‎os Sf‏ 2 ره اه حمر
| حت منك ‎Us‏ لخي حلت

‎“By Allah, you are indeed the best of Allah's lands, and the most
beloved of Allah’s larids fo Allah. And had I not been expelled
from you, I would not have left (you).

‎Imam Ahmad related from Ibn ‘Abbaas # that, “The
polytheists followed the trail of the Messenger of Allah #8.
Then when they reached the mountain — Mount Thaur — they
became confused, and so they climbed the mountain (to search it
and to gain a better view of surrounding lands). Upon passing
the cave (wherein the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr .& were hiding),
they saw upon its door a spider’s web. And they said, “Had he
entered here, a spider would not have woven (a web) over its
‏ا يموق‎ Allah’s ‘soldiers’ work against falsehood and for the
truth; and the danger of one of those ‘soldiers’ is not known by
its size, for consider the spider in this story, the small birds that
destroyed the army of Abraha, or even the small microbes that
the eye cannot see but that can destroy an entire population.
Allah 38 said:

‎Coo] BS SE He ‏وما‎
‎“And none can know the hosts (armies, troops, soldiers) of your
Lord but He.” (Qur'an 74: 31)

‎Despite all of the material steps that the Messenger of Allah ‏كه‎
‎took to ensure secrecy for his migration, he #2 m1 no way
depended or relied upon the efficacy of his own efforts; to the
contrary, he #& relied and depended completely upon Allah &,
hoping for His help and support. Allah 4 said:

‎Ul AtTiymidhee, the Book of Virtues, chapter “The Superiority of Makkah” (5/
722).

‎2) Musnad Imam Ahmad (1/348).

58 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

“3% 5 vaty 7 7 red 35 ‏إن ان‎ av of ~ re a Go Fe
‏و نك‎ J ‏صدق الجعل‎ (um eur ‏صدف‎ hohe gles ‏اوقل ب‎
02 6 ‏يي‎
‎9 «4
# ‏نير‎

“And say ))0 Muhammad ®&): My Lord! Let my entry (fo the
city of Al-Madinah) be good, and (likeunse) my exit (from the city
of Makkah) be good. And grant me from You an authority to help
me (or a firm sign or a proof).” (Qur'an 17:80)

When the pursuing polytheists surrounded the cave, the
Prophet # and Abu Bakr # could see them from where they were
hiding. The Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ then comforted Abu Bakr ‏كله‎
‎and informed him that Allah & would help them get out of their
difficult situation. Abu Bakr # later said, “While I was in the cave,
1 said to the Prophet ##, ‘If one of them were to look underneath
his feet, he would see us.’ He #@ said, ‘What do you thmk, O Abu
Bakr, about two, when Allah is their third?’” The following is
related in another narration: “Be quiet, O Abu Bakr, two and
Allah is their third.”

Allah 3 said:

ee ‏يد اس ساح | اليس‎ aA 9 ive ~ yr ho?
‏معنا‎ al SEL OY ‏يَقول إصحبه.‎ 3) I . 3 ‏إذ هما‎
oe 8 ae fer ae hy ra

7 7 “aii | ao

Sars ‏ترؤها‎ A opey ‏وَأيكَدَمٌ‎ ate wis
i 7

o «4
ww

“Tf you help him (Muhammad ‏ليله‎ not (it does not matter), for
Allah did indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out,
the second of the two; when they (Muhammad ®@ and Abu Bakr
>) were in the cave, he # said to his companion (Abu Bakras) :
“Be not sad (or afraid), surely, Allah 1s with us.” Then Allah

11 Bukhaaree, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter “The Superiority and
Virtues of the Muhaajiroon’’, Hadeeth mumber: 3653.

Abu Bakr’s Migration unth the Messenger of ‏كل لتالف‎ 89

sent down his Sakinah (calmness, tranquillity, peace) upon him,
and strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not,
and made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while
the Word of Allah that became the uppermost; and Allah is All-
Mighty, All-Wise.”” (Qur'an 9:40)

Three nights after they entered the cave, the Messenger of
Allah #¢ and Abu Bakr # exited from it and began their journey
towards Al-Madeenah. By that time, very few polytheists were
still searching for the Prophet #, for most of them assumed that
he #2 was already beyond their reach. Hitherto we mentioned that
the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr # hired a man from Banu Ad-Dail,
whose name was Abdullah ibn Uraigat. Although he was a
polytheist, they had trusted him with their mounts and had made
an appointment to meet him at the cave three days after they had
first entered it. True to his word, he showed up at the appointed
time and then proceeded to lead them along roads that were
unknown and unused, thus making it less probable for them to be
apprehended by the disbelieving Quraish.

On his way to Al-Madeenah, the Prophet #¢ passed by Umm
Ma’bad in Qudaid. Umm Ma’bad’s full name is ‘Aatikah bint
Ka’ab Al-Khuzaa‘iyyah, and Qudaid was an area in which the
Khuzaa’ee tribe lived. Umm Ma’bad’s brother was Khunais ibn
Khalid Al-Khuzaa’ee; it was he who related Ummm Ma’bad’s story.
His narration of her story is related by many narrators, and thus
has been recorded in many books of Seerah. In regard to Umm
Ma’bad, Ibn Katheer said, “Her story is well-known and is related
through many chains that strengthen one another.”

Throughout the gathering places of Makkah, the leaders of the
Quraish announced that they were offering a reward for anyone
who brought back the Prophet #, dead or alive. The reward that
they offered was no paltry sum; it was one-hundred camels,
which in those times was considered a great deal of wealth. News
of the reward spread not. only throughout the precincts of
Makkah, but also to the many tribes that lived in areas close to
Makkah. As soon as he heard about the said reward, Suraaqah ibn

90 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

Maalik ibn Jo’shum decided to do whatever he could to find and
apprehend — and kill, if necessary — the Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎
‎He was, however, not the only one who was looking to gain the
said reward; many others also joined in the hunt, which is why it
was of course wise for the Prophet # to remain in the cave of
Thaur for a number of days. Little did Suraagah know that,
although he went out seeking the blood of the Prophet ‏وه‎ he
would return as a follower of the Prophet #£, doing all that was in.
his power to protect him from the Quraish.

After hearing about the Messenger of Allah’s departure from
Makkah, Madeenah’s Muslim population would go out every
morning to wait for him at Al-Harrah, Al-Harrah being a land
that borders Al-Madeenah and that is known for its rocky
terrain, Every morning, they would continue to wait for him
until the heat of high-noon forced them to return to their homes.
On the last of those days, after they had waited for the entire
morning, they returned to their homes. Meanwhile, a Jewish
man noticed something in the distance while he was perched
above one of the castles of the Jews. What he saw in the distance
was the travelling party of the Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ each
member of which was wearing a white garment. The Jewish man
knew that he was seeing people, for as they advanced, mirages
were disappearing. Not being able to control himself, the Jew
said as loud as he could, “O group of Arabs, here comes your
erandfather whom you have been waiting for.” The Muslims
raced to their weapons and then set out to meet the Messenger of
Allah #@ in the open terrain of Al-Harrah. He led them towards
the right, until he stopped with them in the district of the ‘Amr
ibn ‘Auf clan. This was on a Tuesday in the month of Rabee ‘Al-
Awwal. Abu Bakr 2 stood up for the people, and meanwhile,
the Messenger of Allah ‏وَل‎ sat down and remained quiet. The
people of the Ansaar - specifically those who had never before
seen the Messenger of Allah #2 — began to greet Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎(thinking that he was in fact the Messenger of Allah #8). But then
when the sun came over the Messenger of Allah ‏يل‎ so that he
was no longer protected by shade, Abu Bakr # went and shaded

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah 2 91

him with his robe. Everybody then knew which of the two the
Messenger of Allah # was.

It was a day of happiness and joy, a day that was
unprecedented in the history of Al-Madeenah. People attired
themselves in their best clothing, as if it was a national holiday; in
fact, it was a holiday and a day of exuberant celebration, for it was
the day on which Islam physically moved from its narrow sphere
in Makkah — narrow not because of the city but because of its
inhabitants — to the spaciousness of Al-Madeenah, from which it
soon spread to the various corners of the globe. The people of Al-
Madeenah graciously received Allah’s great favour upon them.
They were thankful that their land was being appropriated for the
service of Islam. It was with the knowledge of these blessings that
the people of Al-Madeenah left their homes in a state of joy and
happiness, all the while saying, “O Messenger of Allah, O
Muhammad, © Messenger of Allah.’“"! At the conclusion of this
universal welcome, the Messenger of Allah # went to Abu
Ayyoob Al-Ansaaree’s house and stayed there as a guest”! ‏ب‎
‎meanwhile, Abu Bakr # stayed as a guest in the home of
Khaarijah ibn Zaid Al-Makhrajee Al-Ansaaree 4.

This marked the end of the migration of the Prophet #4 and his
Companions to Al-Madeenah. But the migration of the Prophet
# did not mark the end of the goals and purposes that the
migration itself signified. The Prophet's safe arrival in ‏علخ‎
‎Madeenah was a harbinger of good things to come. His arrival
signified the end of one phase of his Da’wah and the beginning of
an entirely new phase. The establishment of a Muslim country,
which was realized with the migration of the Prophet 2, enabled
the development of a wonderfully civilized and advanced society,
one that was established upon faith, piety, goodness, and justice.
Because this new country was established on these principles, it
was soon able to overcome the two greatest empires of the time:
the Persian and the Roman Empires.

LI Al-Hijrah Fil-Qur’an Al-Kareem (pg. 353).
‏أخا‎ AL-Hijrah Fil-Qur’an Al-Kareem (pg. 354).

92 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏نك‎

More so than any other Companion, Abu Bakr 4 was being
trained by the Prophet #§ for the future — for taking over the reins
of the Muslim nation when the time came for the Prophet 2% to
depart from this world. Very quietly and humbly, Abu Bakr ‏ذل‎
‎was growing as a person and as a believer with the passing of
every minute he spent with the Prophet #2. And a part of his
training took place as he migrated to Al-Madeenah, a journey
during which he had the honour of being the sole companion of
the Prophet 28.

The Lessons and Morals of the Prophet ® and Abu Bakr’s

KB 5 ‏روه‎ AA

1

“Tf you help him (Muhammad #8) not (it does not matter), for
Allah did indeed help htm when the disbelievers drove him out,
the second of two, when they (Muhammad # and Abu Bakr ps)
were in the cave, and he ®@ said to his companion (Abu Bakr as) :
“Be not sad (or afraid), surely Allah ts with us.” Then Allah sent
down His Sakinah (calmness, tranquility, peace, etc.) upon him,
and strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not,
and made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while
it was the Word of Allah that became the uppermost, and Allah is
All-Mighty, All-Wise.” (Qur'an 9: 40)

From this Verse alone, one can infer seven ways in which Abu
Bakr ‏كله‎ was superior to other Companions of the Prophet ‏يكل‎

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah # 93
L) The Disbelievers Expelled Him:

Abu Bakr # had the honor of leaving Makkah for the sake of
Allah #¢, and of being driven out of Makkah by the polytheists,
the latter honor being one that he shared with the Prophet ‏عله‎
‎Allah 8 said, “When the disbelievers drove him out, the second of
two,” and so He # must have been referring to the Prophet #¢ and
Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ since, by the unanimous agreement of the people of
knowledge, it was Abu Bakr 4 who accompanied the Prophet #¢
during his migration to Al-Madeenah.

2) Abu Bakr - was the Sole Companion of the Prophet ‏علد‎
‎During His Migration to Al-Madeenah:

Every Companion — and every Muslim for that matter —
would have loved to have been singled out for the honor of
accompanying the Messenger of Allah #¢ during his migration to
Al-Madeenah. But only Abu Bakr « was singled out with that
honor; he was “the second of two,” and there was no third person
with them. Throughout the Prophet's lifetime, whenever only one
of the more eminent Companions was with the Messenger of
Allah #@, that companion was Abu Bakr a — such as when he
accompanied the Prophet #@ during his migration to ‏لذ‎
‎Madeenah; when, on the Day of Badr, he alone was with the
Prophet # in the command center that had been built for him, or
when Abu Bakr # accompanied the Prophet #2 while he went out
to meet the delegates of foreign tribes, in order to invite them to
Islam.

3) He was the Prophet’s Companion im the Cave:

From the above-mentioned Verse it is clear that Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎was being blessed with a great honor by being chosen to be with
the Prophet #2 in the cave. And in an authentic Hadeeth Abu Bakr
# said, “While I was in the cave, I said to the Prophet 2¢, ‘If one of
them were to look underneath his feet, he would see us.’ He ‏كلخ‎
‎said, ‘What do you think, O Abu Bakr, about two, when Allah is
their third?’” The following is related in another narration: “Be

74 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2
quiet, O Abu Bakr, two and Allah is their third.”"

4) He was the Prophet’s “Companion” in the Complete Sense of
the Word:

Based on the wording of the above-mentioned Verse ‏ب‎

‎IAS 31}‏ إصحبه.#

‎“and he #8 said to his companion (Abu Bakr #&)”

‎— one is made to understand that Abu Bakr # wasn’t merely
the Prophet’s companion in the cave; rather, he was the Prophet's
companion, period — having helped him and made sacrifices for
his cause more so than any other person.

‎5) He Cared a Great Deal for the Prophet’s Well-Being:

‎The above-mentioned Verse makes it clear that Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎cared a great deal for the Prophet #%. How so? Well, the Prophet
#¢ said to Abu Bakr #, “Be not sad (or afraid),’” and so we know
that Abu Bakr 4s was sad and afraid while he was in the cave with
the Prophet #¢. The question then arises, why was he sad and
afraid? We can be certain that he wasn’t sad or afraid on account
of his own safety, for we know that Abu Bakr 4 was, throughout
his life, willing at a moment’s notice to sacrifice his life for the sake
of Allah #. It is clear, therefore, that he was sad and afraid for
another reason — sad because the Prophet #g was in such a
desperate situation, and afraid that the Prophet ‏يله‎ would be
killed and that revelation would then cease to descend.

‎It is for the same reason that, during the journey to Al-
Madeenah, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ would remain vigilant, making sure that
no one would succeed in attacking the Prophet #8 by surprise.
_ Abu Bakr # would sometimes walk in front of the Prophet 2%;
and at other times, behind him. When the Prophet ‏عيذ‎ asked him

‎iN Bukhaaree, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter “The Superiority and
Virtues of the Muhaajiroon”’; Hadeeth number: 3653.

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah 88 $5

why he kept changing positions, Abu Bakr # responded, “When I
think about someone waiting to ambush you, I walk in front of
you; and when I remember that people are pursuing you, I walk
behind you.’”"! And when they entered the cave, Abu Bakr %
saw a hole in it; he then insisted upon entering first, for if the hole
was inhabited by a poisonous animal, he would rather die himself
than place the Prophet #@ in harm’s way.”

6) He « was Blessed with Special Help from Allah %:
While in the cave, the Prophet #2 said to Abu Bakr #:

1 AM ‏#إرك‎

a

“Surely Allah is with us.”

The honor of Allah being ‘with us’ was, on this occasion,
exclusive to the Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr ‏.ف‎ What that meant was
that Allah was with them with His help against their enemies; so
it was as if the Prophet #2 was saying to Abu Bakr 4, “O Abu Bakr,
Allah will indeed help us overcome our enemies.’ In a similar vein,
Allah % said:

‎et Gy}‏ رُملنا ‎fee lh‏ فى ‎i GAT al‏ يموع

‎€IGENi
‎“Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and
those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah ~ Islamic
Monotheism) in this world’s life and on the Day when the

‎witnesses will stand forth, (i.e., Day of Resurrection) .” (Qur’an
40:51)

‎Commenting on the above-mentioned Verse from Chapter
“At-Taubah,” Dr. Abdul-Kareem Zaidaan said, “In this Verse,
Allah % relates that the Prophet # said:

‎‘Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq Afdalus-Sahaabah Wa-Ahaggihim Bil-Khilaafah (pg.
43),
4) Minhaaj As-Sunnah (4/263).

96 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏نك‎
‎61S Ei OL
“Surely Allah is with us.”

In another Verse, in the course of discussing those who fear
Allah and are good-doers, Allah # said:

a of De 2

‎all ae‏ ممَ ‎Oil Lal Gu‏ هُم ميث و

‎“Truly, Allah ts with those who fear Him (keep their duty unto
Him), and those who are Muhsinun (good doers).”’ (Qur'an
16:128)

‎In the latter Verse, Allah 32 mentions that He is with those
who fear Him and those who are good-doers, but in the former
Verse no similar stipulation of a quality or of a deed — fearing
Allah, doing good deeds, etc. — is made. Therefore, Allah being
with the Messenger #2 and his Companion * is of a higher
level than Allah # being with those who fear Him and those
who are good-doers. That Allah & is with the Messenger ‏كل‎
‎and his Companion # means that He helps them with signs
and miracles.’

‎7) Abu Bakr 2 was the only one Present with the Prophet ‏كله‎
‎when Calmness, Tranquility, and Peace Descended upon Him:

‎Allah & said:
“Then Allah sent down His Sakinah (calmness, tranquility,

‎peace, etc.) upon him, and strengthened him with forces (angels)
which you saw not.”” (Qur'an 9: 40)

‎Al-Mustafaad Min-Qisas-ul-Qur’an (2/100).‏ لذا

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah #2 97

Second: A Mi Duty to Plan and

luslim’s D

e Action to Achieve |

When one studies the migration of the Prophet #¢ to Al-
Madeenah, one is struck by two important aspects of his journey:
First, the detailed planning behind the Prophet's departure from
Makkah and journey towards Al-Madeenah; and second, the
practical, necessary actions that the Prophet :8¢ took to make sure
that he achieved his goal of safely arriving in Al-Madeenah.
Therefore, one should understand that planning is a part of the
Prophet's Sunnah, which means that a Muslim should have an
effective and practicable plan for everything that is required of
him in life. Those who do not plan the affairs of their lives, but
rather pride themselves in their spontaneity and impulsiveness,
end up hurting themselves as well as other Muslims.

In regard to when the Prophet #% began to prepare for his
journey to Al-Madeenah, one should notice the tollowing: To make
sure that he would safely arrive in Al-Madeenah, the Prophet #2
made a detailed plan for his trip. In fact, every aspect of the
Prophet's journey was well-planned in advance; for example:

a) The Prophet #¢ visited Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ at that part of the day when
it is hottest, a time during which people normally do not come
out of their homes. He # came at that time so as to avoid being
seen by Quraish’s leaders or their spies.

b) So as to avoid being recognized, the Prophet #@ concealed his
identity while he was going to Abu Bakr’s house. In one
narration, it is mentioned that the Prophet #¢ had wrapped his
head and most of his face up in some cloth.

c) The Prophet #¢ ordered Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ to remove from his
presence anyone that was inside of his house. And then when
he #8 spoke, the only thing he mentioned was that they were
going to depart for Al-Madeenah; he #2 made no mention of
the direction or the roads they were going to take to complete
their journey.

98 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-~Siddeeq ‏دك‎
‎d) They left during the night, from the back door of Abu Bakr’s house.

e) One of the main precautions that the Prophet #2 took was that
he travelled by unused and unknown roads. In doing so, he
sought the help of one who had expert knowledge about desert
pathways. The person the Prophet #@ hired was a polytheist;
nonetheless, the Prophet #£ knew that he could be trusted. This
proves that as long as an expert in a given area of knowledge
was trustworthy, the Messenger of Allah #2 did not hesitate to
rely on his knowledge, regardless of his faith. As long as one has
good reason to trust a particular disbeliever, one may receive his
help. The Prophet #¢ and Abu Bakr 2 hired a polytheist to be
their guide. They entrusted him with their riding animals and
made an appointment to meet him three days later at the Thaur
cave. To be sure, they had entrusted him with very sensitive
information; therefore, it was obvious that the Prophet #¢ and
Abu Bakr 4 trusted him implicitly, in spite of his faith.

Some disbelievers and sinners can be trusted with one’s
private affairs based on some quality that they possess. For
example, a Muslim might trust a disbeliever because he is a close
relative, because he has known him for a long time, because he is a
good neighbour, because he is morally upright, or because of any
other similar reason. Basically, it is a matter of judgement that is
left to the intelligence and intuition of the individual Muslim who
is seeking help from a particular disbeliever.

As soon as Abu Bakr 2 became a Muslim, he began with his
family, inviting his wife, his children, and even his servant to
embrace Islam; and he was blessed with success, for all of the
members of his household entered into the fold of Islam. But he
didn’t stop there; he knew that his responsibility towards his
family did not end with their entry into the fold of Islam; he knew
that he had to spiritually train them and motivate them to
dedicate their lives to the service of Islam. And in these regards,
he was successful as well, as is clear from the story of his
migration to Al-Madeenah: Each member of his household

Abu Bakr’s Migration uith the Messenger of Allah #8 99

played a pivotal role in ensuring the safe and successful
conclusion of his blessed migration to Al-Madeenah.

1) ‘Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr’s Role and Contribution

was in the ‘cave with Abu Bakr Bb, Abdullah Bs gathered
intelligence and kept a close eye on the movements of the enemy.
Throughout the years that he raised “Abdullah ‏رق‎ Abu Bakr #&
instilled in him a deep love for his religion. Given ‘Abdullah’s
righteous upbringing, it is not surprising that he developed
characteristics that were very similar to those of his father —
intelligence, wisdom, sincerity, and a desire to make sacrifices for
the cause of Islam. His father outlined for hun the role that he
needed to play in order to ensure that the Prophet #¢ arrived
safely at his destination. In short, “Abdullah's role was as an
intelligence officer: during the day, he would have to attend the
gatherings of the Quraish in Makkah in order to hear what the
leaders of the Quraish had to say about their pursuit of his father
and the Prophet #. And then at night, he would have to carefully
make his way to the cave, using his intelligence and discretion to
make sure that no one was following him — after all, since he was
the son of Abu Bakr # it was very likely that his movements were
being closely watched; and then, before sunrise, he had to
stealthily make his way back to Makkah, acting as if he had spent
the night in his home. “Abdullah « performed his task with great
skill: Never mind the fact that no one caught him; no one was
even remotely suspicious of him.

2) The Roles of ‘Aaishah & and Asmaa “> in General

‘Aaishah summarized their role when she said: “So we
prepared the mounts for their journey as quickly as we could,
and we made for them a Sufrah (a mat that is used for eating) in a
bag. Asmaa bint Abu Bakr & cut a piece of her band off and tied it
to the mouth of the bag, which is the reason she was named: The
One with the Band.”

100 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #
3) Asmaa’s Contribution in Particular

In regard to the Prophet's migration to Al-Madeenah, Asmaa
Dhaat ‘An ‘Nitaaqain % deserves special mention, for it was she
who went with food and drink to the cave, and as a result
endured physical harm for the cause of Islam. She & herself
related a part of that story: “When the Messenger of Allah #¢ and
Abu Bakr # left, a group of people from the Quraish came to us,
and among them was Abu Jahl bin Hishaam. They stood at the
door of Abu Bakr’s home, and I went out to meet them. They said,
‘Where is your father, O daughter of Abu Bakr?’ I said, ‘By Allah, I
do not know where my father is.’ Abu Jahl — who was evil and
wicked — struck me with a hard slap on my face, which resulted
in my earrings falling off. Then they left.”

In the way that she preserved the Prophet's secret and in the
way she remained firm and steadfast in the face of an oppressive
tyrant, ‘Asmaa % taught a profound lesson to all Muslim men and
women. Her steadfastness did not stop there, however; when her
grandfather, Abu Quhaafah, later visited her, he said, “By Allah, I
indeed think that he (i.c., Abu Bakr #) has caused you grief by
taking along with him all of his wealth.” Abu Quhaafah was
blind, and so Asmaa % said to him, “No, indeed! O my father,
place your hand on this wealth.” Upon placing his hand on the
object she put before him, he said, “That is fine then. If he has left
this for you, then he has indeed done well by you.” When she
later recounted this incident, Asmaa & said, “No, by Allah, he did
not leave anything for us; I did that simply because I wanted to
appease the old man.” ‘Asmaa ‏كك‎ had placed stones in front of
Abu Quhaafah, so that when he placed his hands on them, he
would think that he was touching gold.

With a single stroke, “Asmaa ‏كك‎ was able to cover for her father
# and console the heart of her blind grandfather, all without

1 AL-Hijrah An-Nabawiyyah Al-Mubaarakah (pg. 126).

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by lon Hishaam (2/102). The chain of the narration‏ ذا
‎is authentic.‏

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah #8 101

lying, for her father had in fact left behind for her the said stones,
so that she could use them to comfort her grandfather. But he had
left behind more than the stones: he had left behind Eeman (Faith)
in Allah, which not even mountains could have managed to have
shaken. Both father 4 and daughter % were at a level of faith that
was not affected by either paucity or abundance of wealth. Abu
Bakr instilled into his family a desire and determination for
higher purposes, so that they cared not for trifling things. It was
thus that he established a model Muslim household, one that has
rarely, if ever, been paralleled throughout the annals of history.

Asmaa %& and her sisters % remained for a while in Makkah,
without in the least complaining about their poor financial
situation. Then the Prophet #§ sent Zaid ibn Haaritha # and Abu
Raafai’ # to Makkah, having given them two camels and five
hundred Dirhams for the journey. They ended up bringing back to
Al-Madeena Fatimaah & and Umm Qulithum ‏را‎ two of the
Prophet's daughters; Sawdaah bint Zum’‘ah %; Usamaah ibn Zaid
4 and his mother Baraakah ‏رك‎ who is known by the Kunyah,
Umm Aiman ‏نك‎ and joining them on the journey were also
Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ and the family of Abu Bakr 2, among
whom were ‘Aaishah ‏كه‎ and Asmaa %. When they arrived in AL
Madeenah, they were provided with accommodations in the
house of Haarithah ibn An-No’maan 4s.

4) ‘Aamir ibn Fuhairah ‏كه‎

In many Muslim countries, people keep servants in their
homes; most of those servants are imported from other countries
and not all of them are Muslims. Sadly, some Muslims exploit
their servants, and many of those who don't exploit their servants
at least take them for granted, expecting work from them, but not
caring about their spiritual and material well-being. Islamically, a
man is responsible for the well-being of everyone in his home ‏ب‎
‎his wife, his children, and even his servant. Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎understood his responsibilities towards his servant “Aamir ibn
Fuhairah # and fulfilled his duties towards him by inviting him

102 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

to Islam. That did not mean simply lecturing him, for in that case
‘Aamir 4 would not have become impressed enough by Abu
Bakr # to embrace his religion. It also meant setting a good
example within his home and dealing with others — including
his servants — with polite and refined manners. Suffice it to say
‘Aamir & was impressed by Abu Bakr « and took from him his
love for Allah # and His Messenger #¢. Thus we learn that, if
one of us does have a servant in his home, he should view him
as a human being first and foremost and as a potential convert to
the religion of Islam. If one sees his servant im this light, it
follows that one should treat him with kindness and generosity
and respect, just as one would do were one to invite any other
person to Islarn.

Having confidence in “Aamir’s trustworthiness and level of
competency, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ assigned him with two important tasks:
First, ‘Aamir would have to ~ casually and without attracting
anyone’s attention — pass by the cave with his herd of sheep, so
that the Prophet #§ and Abu Bakr ‏فأ‎ could have some meat to eat
and some milk to drink. And second, ‘Aamir # would, in the
morning, have to lead his sheep along the trail that “Abdullah ibn
Abu Bakr 2s followed to and from the cave, in order to cover up
his footprints.

Both the Prophet #2 and Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ did whatever they could
to ensure the success of their migration. Anything they could have
done, they did do, leaving no room for mistakes. We should learn
from their meticulous planning and deliberate execution that it is
compulsory in Islam for one to do all that is Islamically lawful in
order to achieve one’s goals. This does not mean, however, that
one will actually end up achieving all of one’s goals, since success
is ultimately in Allah’s hands. So in addition to the physical steps
one takes in order to achieve one’s goals, one must place one’s
complete trust upon Allah #. Taking reasonable, practical steps
and depending upon Allah: these are the two ingredients of
success, and if a person is lacking in either of them, his level of
Tawokkul (trust in Allah #2) is deficient.

Abu Bakr’s Migration with the Messenger of Allah #8 103

The Messenger #¢ did all that was humanly possible when he
prepared for his migration to Al-Madeenah; at the same time,
however, he depended completely upon Allah #, invoking Him
and asking Him to make his journey a successful one. Then the
Prophet’s prayers were answered: the polytheists could not see
him in the cave, Suraagah 4 was prevented from approaching
him, and so on from the various ways in which Allah % protected
him #2.

Third: T] of Abu Bakr

ie Sincerity As-Siddeeq ‏فك‎

The Prophet’s exemplary training of his Companions & can
clearly be discerned in the actions and character of Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeq #. When Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ infended to migrate to AL
Madeenah, the Messenger of Allah #§ said to him, “Do not rush,
for perhaps Allah will provide you with a (traveling) compa-
nion.” What effect did these simple words have on Abu Bakr .4s?
Well, after Abu Bakr 4 left the Prophet's company, he began to
plan and prepare for the impending migration to Al-Madeenah.
He bought two riding animals, kept them in his home, and fed
them well in preparation for the upcoming long and arduous
journey. The following is related in the narration of Al-Bukhaaree,
“And he fed the two mounts that were with him with leaves of
As-Sumor (a kind of tree) for four months.”"! With his
characteristic far-sightedness — and we must remember that he
was being trained to be the leader of the Muslims after the
Prophet's death — Abu Bakr # knew that the actual migration
was going to be fraught with difficulties. He also knew that he
could be ordered to leave at a moment's notice, and for this
reason. he made the necessary preparations, in terms of arranging
for riding animals and provisions. When the Messenger of Allah
#¢ finally came and informed him that Allah 88 had given him
permission to leave and migrate to Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr &

11 Bukhaaree (3905).

104 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قاد‎

became so happy that he began to cry. ‘Aaishah %& later said: “By
Allah, before that day, on which Abu Bakr « cried, I never
thought that anyone actually cried from being happy.” For
someone to become so overjoyed and so happy that he begins to
cry is indeed the pinnacle of happiness for any human being.

Abu Bakr # became overjoyed because he understood the
implications of being the Prophet’s companion on his journey to
Al-Madeenah: Of all human beings, or more particularly of all of
the Prophet's Companions, Abu Bakr 4 was going to have the
honour of being the sole companion of the Prophet # for at least
the thirteen to nineteen days it was going to take to complete the
journey. He also knew that it was going to be a very dangerous
mission and that he was going to have the sole honour of
sacrificing his life if any opportune situation were to arise. What
greater honour could one hope for in this world?

When Abu Bakr # was afraid in the cave of Thaur, he was
showing his sincere love for Allah and His Messenger #¢. He
feared that the polytheists would see them, being afraid not for his
own life, but for the life of the Prophet #¢. Had Abu Bakr feared
death, he would not have accompanied the Prophet #¢ on so
dangerous a trip, in which it was more likely than not that the
Prophet 8 would be captured by the enemy. If such an outcome
were to come to pass, he a knew that at the very least his
punishment at the hands of the polytheists would be death. So
Abu Bakr 4 was afraid not for himself, but for the life of the
Prophet #2 and for the future of Islam.

During the migration journey, Abu Bakr # had other occasions
to show his loyalty, foresightedness, and obedience. They were
met on the way by a man who asked, “Who is this man that is
with you?” Abu Bakr # quickly answered, “He is a guide: He is
guiding me to the way.” The questioner of course assumed that
Abu Bakr # meant that he was guiding him through the
pathways of the desert, and that is what Abu Bakr wanted
him to understand from his statement. What he really meant was
that the Prophet # was guiding him to the way of goodness. By

The Causes of the Spread of Idol Worship 105

using this play on words, Abu Bakr # was trying to conceal the
identity of the Prophet #8, for he of course knew that the
polytheists were trying to locate him and capture him. In using a
play on words, Abu Bakr # managed to maintain the secrecy of
their mission, and he also managed to avoid lying, for the Prophet
#2 was truly his guide to the ways of goodness.

h: The Art

of Leading People

In the previous section, we saw just how much Abu Bakr &
loved the Messenger #&; the rest of his Companions loved himina
similar manner. Their love flowed forth from their hearts and was
not corrupted by hypocrisy or any desire for worldly benefit. One
of the reasons they loved him so much was his character and his
qualities of leadership. He stayed awake so that they could sleep,
he worked hard so that they could rest, and he stayed hungry so
that they could have their fair share of food. If they had cause to
be happy, he would be happy for them; and if they had cause to
be sad, he would be sad for them. If one deals with people in the
same manner that the Prophet #¢ dealt with his Companions &,
one will not only get reward for following the Sunnah of the
Prophet #¢, but also one wul earn the love of people, especially if
he is a leader or a person of authority in the Muslim Ummah
(nation). A true leader is not one who is merely able to physically
force people to do what he wants them to do, but rather he is one
who, before anything else, leads the souls of people and is able to
deal with them in a good manner. Therefore, the goodness of the
followers of a leader is proportionate to the goodness of the leader
himself. And the more a leader sacrifices for his followers, the
more they will love him. The Prophet #2 was both merciful and
compassionate to his followers. He #¢ migrated to Al-Madeenah
only after most of his Companions # had already migrated, and
the only people who still remained behind were those who were
weak, those who were put to trial in their religion, and those who
had specific duties related to the mission of the Prophet's
migration.

106 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

It is important to distinguish between loving a person for the
sake of Allah #, and loving someone based on any other motive.
On the one hand, we have the example of Abu Bakr 2, who
sincerely loved the Prophet # for the sake of Allah ‏قة‎ and on the
other hand, we have the example of Abu Taalib, who also loved
the Prophet 2¢, but not for the same reason: he loved him as an
uncle loves his nephew, albeit to a greater degree. The important
thing to understand here is that he did not love the Prophet # for
the sake of Allah 4. As for Abu Bakr 2, Allah & accepted his
deeds and revealed the following Verse about him:

قير 2

Bo the NO ‏للك بون مل يلك‎ © BN God
45, SLO WF 5 LIAO ee

“And Al-Muttagun (the pious and righteous) will be far
removed from it (Hell). He who spends his wealth for increase
in self-purification. And have in his mind no favour from
anyone for which a reward is expected in return, except only
the desire to seek the Countenance of his Lord, the Most High.
He surely will be pleased (when he will enter Paradise).”
(Qur'an 92: 17-21)

But as for Abu Taalib, Allah 88 did not accept his deeds.
Rather than grant him entry into Paradise, Allah $ admitted him
into the Hellfire, stnce he associated partners with Allah # im
worship.

upon Arri

The migration of the Prophet #2 and his Companions # from
their homeland to another city was, to be sure, a great sacrifice —
a sacrifice that is deeply felt in these words of the Prophet #&: “By
Allah, indeed you (here the Prophet #¢ is addressing the city of
Makkah) are the best part of Allah’s earth, and the most beloved
part of Allah’s earth to Allah. And had I not been expelled from

The Causes of the Spread of Idol Worship 107

you, | would not have left (you).

In a narration that is related by Bukhaaree, “Aaishah %& said,
“At the time when the Messenger of Allah #% arrived in Al-
Madeenah, it was that part of Allah’s earth which was most
afflicted by fever, and impure water flowed in its valley. And so
his Companions # (here referring to those that had migrated
from Makkah) became afflicted in Al-Madeenah with hardship
and disease, yet Allah # protected his Prophet #% from all of that.
Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ Aamir ibn Fuairah 4, and Bilal ‏رذ‎ all of whom were
staying in the same house, became afflicted with fever. asked the
Messenger #8 for permission to visit them, and he granted me
permission. I entered upon them to visit them — and this was
before H1jab was made obligatory upon us — and I found them to
be afflicted with a fever whose degree of severity none knows
about but Allah #¢.” ‘Aaishah “% related that she then asked each
of the three sick patients how he was doing, and each one of them
gave an answer in which he expressed the pain he was feeling.
After she left them, ‘Aishah ‏و‎ informed the Messenger of Allah ##
about their condition. He #@ said, “O Allah, make Al-Madeenah
beloved to us, just as you have made Makkah beloved to us, or
even more so. And transfer its fever to Johfah (the name of a place
that is situated somewhere between Makkah and Al-Madeenah),
© Allah, bless us with its Mudd and Saa’ (Mudd and Saa’ are two
measurements that were used for buying and selling in Al-
Madeenah; one Mudd is equal to two handfuls, and it takes four
Mudds to make up a Saa’).”!

Allah # then answered the supplication of His Prophet ‏له‎
‎Muslims were thereafter protected from the fever that was
particular to Al-Madeenah, and Al-Madeenah became an
excellent, healthy, and disease-free place for those who visited it
or migrated to it.

11 At-Tirmidhee, the Book of Virtues 6/722), chapter “The Superiority of
Makkah”; Hadeeth number: 3925.

4) Bukhaaree, the Book of Supplications, chapter “The Supplication to Remove
Plague and Pain’; Hadeeth number: 6372.

108 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏د‎

As soon as he settled down in Al-Madeenah, the Messenger of
Allah ‏يله‎ began the important task of establishing the foundations
of a strong nation; thus he established bonds of brotherhood
between the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar, took immediate steps to
help the poor and needy in Al-Madeenah, built his Masjid, entered
into an alliance with the native Jews of Al-Madeenah, and sent out
military missions to deal with Quraish’s acts of aggression. The
Prophet # now ruled over an actual country, and he worked hard
to address important economic and security issues; at the same
time, he continued to spiritually train his Companions # and to
teach them about their religion. In order to fulfill all of these
duties, the Prophet 22 knew that he could always rely on the help
of his most trusted advisor, Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #. Whether it
was in the Masjid or on the battlefield, Abu Bakr « was always
present in the company of the Prophet #2, learning, contributing,
working, and — very importantly — undergoing the training he
needed in order to later become the leader of all believers once the
Prophet #¢ departed from this world.

Chapter 4

Historians agree that Abu Bakr # did not miss out on a single
expedition or battle in which the Prophet #€ took part. When most
people fled from the battlefield on the Day of Uhud, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎stood firmly and bravely alongside the Messenger of Allah #2.
And on the day of Tabook, the Prophet #2 handed him the black
flag which was the flag not just of a single battalion or regiment,
but of the entire Muslim army. Az-Zamakhsharee said, “Abu
Bakr's name will be juxtaposed alongside that of the Messenger of
Allah #¢ until the end of time. When he was young, Abu Bakr ‏فك‎
‎was a close friend of the Prophet 8; and when he grew older, he
spent his wealth on him, providing him with — among other
things — the riding animal and provisions he needed to complete
his migration to Al-Madeenah. And as the years went by, he
continued to spend on the Prophet #¢, and he even married his
daughter off to him. Both when the Prophet #{ was away on a
journey and when he was home in Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr ‏عه‎

110 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كه‎

adhered closely to his company. Finally, when the Prophet #8 died,
he was buried in the apartment of Abu Bakr’s daughter, “Aaishah
— who was the most beloved of women to the Prophet # (Gust as
Abu Bakr was the most beloved of men to the Prophet #2).

To be sure, Abu Bakr @ was the most superior of all of the
Prophet's Companions; he surpassed them in his sincerity, in his
knowledge, and in his deeds. It is not surprising, therefore, that,
along with his other superior qualities, he was also a paragon of
bravery on the battlefield. That Abu Bakr # was soft-hearted
might lead some to suppose that he was also fainthearted or that
he was physically weak, but nothing could be further from the
truth. On the battlefield, he did not merely occupy space or stand
in the last row, out of harm’s way; he stuck around to fight when
others fled, and he volunteered for dangerous missions when no
one else did. He was even a general on the battletield, for Salamah
ibn Al- Akwa a said, “I fought in seven battles alongside the
Prophet #8, and I went out on nine other military expeditions.
During one of those expeditions, Abu Bakr # was our
commander; and during another of those expeditions, Usaamah
# was our commander.” In this chapter, we will focus on Abu
Bakr’s military achievements during the lifetime of the Prophet
#% so that we can gain a better understanding of how Abu Bakr #
was willing to sacrifice everything — his time, his wealth, and his
very life — for the sake of the religion of Islam.

First Abu Bakr 2: in the E

Baar

The Battle of Badr took place in the year 2 H. Many pious
Muslims remained behind in Al-Madinah, thinking that the
expedition was simply going to involve the overtaking of an
enemy trading caravan, it did not even cross their minds that an
all-out, epic battle was going to take place. Even though such
Muslims were not faulted for having remained behind — for the
very reason mentioned above — those that did participate in the
battle earned an important distinction, one for which they were
honored for the rest of their lives. Years later, if someone

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 111

mentioned that such and such person was a Badree, everyone
automatically understood that that person had taken part in the
Battle of Badr and that he was one of the most eminent of all of the
Prophet’s Companions *. Yes, being a participant at Badr was a
great honor that Allah # bestowed on only slightly more than 300
of the Prophet's Companions #, and among that elite group Abu
Bakr # was at the forefront, having made various important
contributions both before and during the actual battle.

1) His Moral Support during a Crucial War Council

When the Prophet ¢ found out that Abu Sufyaan’s trading
caravan had escaped and that the leaders of the Quraish were
determined to fight him, he consulted his companions, primarily
to gauge their willingness to engage in their first major battle
against the enemy. Setting the tone for the others, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎stood up to speak; and he spoke well — encouraging the Prophet
#@ to do as he saw fit and motivating everyone to follow the
command of the Prophet # — as did "Umar # after him.

2) Accompanying the Prophet ‏كل‎ in an Important Scouting
Mission

The Prophet #@ set out with Abu Bakr 4, seeking to gather
intelligence about the army of the Quraish. As they were
patrolling the area, they came across an old Arab man. The
Messenger of Allah #¢ asked him about Quraish’s army, about
Muhammad 2#€ and his Companions &, and about the news he
heard concerning both groups. The old man said, “I will not tell
you until you first tell me who you are from?” The Messenger of
Allah ## said, “When you inform us (about what Lasked), we will
inform you (about what you asked).” The old man said, “So is ita
trade (of information), this for that?” The Prophet 28 said, “Yes.”
The old man said, “It has indeed reached me that Muhammad 2¢
and his Companions *& have left (Al-Madeenah) on such and such
day. And if the one who informed me about that was truthful,
then they are today in such and such place,” which in fact was

112 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #&

where the Muslim army was on that day. “And it has reached me
that the Quraish have left (Makkah) on such and such day. And if
the one who informed me thereof was truthful, then today they
are in such and such place,” which in fact was where the army of
the polytheists was on that day. The old man then said, “I have
informed you about what you wanted to know, so now you tell
me who you are from?” The Messenger of Allah #£ simply
replied, “We are from water,” after which he #¢ and Abu Bakr »
forthwith left the old man, who remained where he was,
confused, saying to himself, “....From the water of Iraq?’

3) Standing Guard for the Prophet #¢ in His Command Center

Once the rows of the Muslim army were lined up at Badr, the
Prophet #@ returned to his command post, a makeshift structure
which was located on a hill that overlooked the battleground.
Accompanying the Prophet #@ was Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ as well as a
number of young men from the Ansaar; under the authority of
Sa’ad ibn Mu’aadh 4s, those brave young men stood guard outside
of the Prophet's command post.'”! Years later, ‘Ali 4 recalled Abu
Bakz’s exceptional level of bravery on that day. In a sermon he
delivered during his caliphate, “Ali ibn Abee Taalib ‏كذ‎ said: “O
people, who is the bravest of all people?” Those that were present
answered, “You are, O Leader of the Believers.” ‘Ali 4s said, “Lo, I
never entered into a duel with another man except that I came out
victorious over him. And yet the bravest of all people was none
other than Abu Bakr ‏.ف‎ We once built a command center for the
Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ and we said, “Who will stay with the
Messenger of Allah #8, so as to prevent one of the polytheists from
attacking him?’ By Allah, not a single one of us approached (to
volunteer for the job) except for Au Bakr ‏رك‎ who, with his sword
unsheathed, stood over the head of the Messenger of Allah #2. Abu
Bakr # then fought against anyone who tried to attack the
Messenger of Allah 2%, and so, yes, he was the bravest of all people.

[| Seerah ibn Hishaam (2/228).
) Seerah ibn Hishaam (2/233).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 113

4) Abu Bakrs is Given Glad Tidings of Victory

While in his command post, the Prophet #8 turned with his
heart to Allah $8, supplicating to Him and invoking Him 4 to
deliver the help that He had promised. The Prophet #¢ said in
his supplication, “O Allah, carry out for me that which You have
promised me. O Allah, bring forth that which You have
promised me. O Allah, if you destroy this group from the
people of Islam, you will not be worshipped on earth.” The
Prophet #@ continued to invoke his Lord, facing the Qiblah, and
with his hands extended, unt! his robe fell down from his
shoulders. Abu Bakr 2 went to him, took his robe, and placed it
back on his shoulders; he then embraced the Prophet # from
behind and said, “O Prophet of Allah, you have sufficiently
invoked your Lord (regarding this matter), for He will indeed
carry out for you that which He has promised you.’"! Allah a%
then revealed the Verse:

Ar te ht Beige ‏حر‎
‎*# ‏لحك‎ OUELE ‏ربكم‎ Sha ‏#إذ‎
‎“(Remember) when you sought help of your Lord and He
answered you.”

According to the narration of Bukhaaree, the Prophet #¢ was
invoking Allah 4 for help, when Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ took him by the -
hand and said, “That is sufficient for you.” The Prophet #8 then

went out, saying:

ey Be ” ey 7 a 2
ON 9 i 3B fi one 5
“Their multitude will be put to fit. and 7 wul show their
backs .”” (Qur'an 54: 45)

It is related that, while he was in his command post, the

Prophet #2 momentarily passed out; when he #¢ regained

‎Muslim, the Book of As-Siyar, chapter “Help from the Angels During the Battle of‏ لذأ
‎Badr, and the Permissibility of Taking Spoils”; Hadeeth number: 1763.‏

114 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

consciousness, he #@ said, “Rejoice, O Abu Bakr, for Allah’s help
has come to you. Here is Jibreel, taking hold of the reins of his
horse. He is riding it (so fast) that its front tooth is covered in
dust.” The Messenger of Allah #¢ then went out and roused the
Muslims to fight bravely and patiently on the battlefield“!

All of the members of the Muslim army were lined up in rows
on the battlefield; meanwhile, only Abu Bakr 4 was with the
Prophet #§. In the nerve-racking moments that precede a battle,
the leader of an army reveals his true character to those that are
with him. What the Prophet #8 revealed to Abu Bakr # just prior
to the Battle of Badr was his sincerity and complete trust in Allah
a. He #§ did all that was humanly possible to ensure a positive
outcome to the battle, but he #¢ did not forget that victory is
ultimately in the hands of Allah 4%, Who grants it to whomsoever
He pleases. Abu Bakr # watched closely as the Prophet 2
supplicated to Allah 8 with ali of his heart and soul, to the point
that Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ feeling compassion towards and love for his
Prophet and leader, pleaded with him to stop, reassuring him
that his supplications were surely going to be answered on that
day.

To be sure, the memory of the Prophet # supplicating in his
command post remained firmly ingrained in the memory of Abu
Bakr ‏وه‎ for the rest of his life. What he observed on that occasion
certainly taught him important lessons about sincerity and At-
Tawakkul (placing one’s complete trust on Allah), lessons that he
kept with him for the rest of his life and that helped him through
difficult moments when he found himself to be the leader of, and
thus responsible for, the entire Muslim nation.

When the fighting began in earnest, the Messenger of Allah #8
left his command post and descended to the battlefield. Rousing
his troops to fight bravely, the Messenger of Allah #2 proceeded
to set an example for them by entering into the thick of the

IN” As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Ibn Hishaam (2/457), and Taareekh Ad-Da’wah
(pg. 125).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 115

battle. He #& fought intensely on that day, and throughout the
duration of the battle, Abu Bakr + remained close by his side,
eager to fight any polytheist that appeared before him, even if
that meant fighting against his own son. For on that day, his son
‘Abdur-Rahmaan was fighting alongside the polytheists. Hap-
pily for ‘Abdur-Rahmaan, however, his father did not see him
that day on the battlefield. Later on, when he embraced Islam,
‘Abdur-Rahmaan # said to his father, “You appeared before me
as a clear target on the Day of Badr. But I veered away from you,
opting not to kill you.” Abu Bakr ‏كن‎ replied, “But had you
appeared before me as a clear target, I would not have veered
away from you.”!!

5) The Prisoners of Badr

‘Ibn ‘Abbaas 2 said, “When the prisoners were taken (at Badr),
the Messenger of Allah # asked Abu Bakr ¢ and ‘Umar 4, ‘What
do you think should be done regarding these prisoners?’ Abu
Bakr & said, ‘O Prophet of Allah, they are (our) cousins and
fellow clansmen. I think that we should take ransom money from
them, that way, we will (with the money we gain) become strong
vis-a-vis the disbelievers. And perhaps Allah will guide them to
Islam.’ The Messenger of Allah #& said, ‘O son of Al-Khattaab,
what 15 your view (regarding this matter)?’ “Umar # replied, “By
Allah, no, O Messenger of Allah: 1 do not agree with Abu Bakr.
Instead, I feel that you should give us authority over them, so that
we can strike them in their necks (with our swords, with each one
of us being responsible for the execution of his disbelieving
relative). Thus allow “Ali to strike the neck of “Ageel, and allow
me to strike the neck of so-and-so (from my clan). For these are the
chiefs and leaders of disbelief.’”’

“Umar 2 later recounted what happened next: “The Messenger
of Allah #¢ was inclined to follow not my opinion, but the opinion
of Abu Bakr. On the following day, ] came across the Messenger

‎Tagreekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 94).‏ ذا

116 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

of Allah #@ and Abu Bakr ‏را‎ both of whom were sitting down and
crying. I said, “O Messenger of Allah, tell me why you and your
companion are crying. And if I am able to cry, [ too will cry
(alongside you); otherwise, [ will feign to cry as a show of
solidarity to you because of the way both of you are crying.’ The
Messenger of Allah 28 said: |

Pea ok ‏مِنْ‎ Sl ve reer

“lam crying because of what your companions proposed to me, in
terms of accepting ransom money (from the prisoners). Indeed, I
was shown their punishment, which is closer (to them) than ts
this tree (to me (he 8 was pointing to a tree that was very close to
where he #2 was sitting)).”

Allah, the Possessor of Might and Majesty, then revealed:

ME Obs ‏إلى‎ . . desl AKG A ‏«إما كانت‎
‏عرس‎

نا >

a

“Tt is not for a Prophet that he should have prisoners of war (and
free them with ransom) ...So enjoy what you have gotten of booty
111 war...”

“And Allah made lawful for them the spoils of war.”

According to another narration, “Abdullah ibn Mas’ood #
said, “The Messenger of Allah #¢ said on the Day of Badr, ‘What
do you all have to say about these prisoners?’ Abu Bakr « said, 0
Messenger of Allah, they are your people and your relatives. Keep
them alive, and deal patiently with them, for perhaps Allah will
(guide them to the truth and) accept their repentance.’ ‘Umar ‏كك‎
‎said, “O Messenger of Allah, they forced you to leave (your
homeland), and they disbelieved (in you). Bring them closer so

(I Muslim, the Book of Jihaad and As-Siyyar (1763).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 117

that I can strike their necks.’ “Abdullah ibn Rawaahah # said, 0
Messenger of Allah, find a valley that is replete with firewood.
Then make them enter it and set fire to them.’ Al-‘Abbaas 2 (who
was one of the prisoners) shot back, ‘(by saying that) you have
broken family ties.’ The Messenger of Allah #8 entered (his home
or tent), without having said anything in response (to their
suggestions). Some people said, “He # will take the opinion of
Abu Bakr.’ Others said, “He will take the opinion of “Umar,’ and
yet others said, ‘He will take the opinion of ‘Abdullah ibn
Rawaahah.” The Messenger of Allah # then went out to them and
said, “Verily, Allah softens the hearts of certain men until those
hearts become softer than milk. And verily, Allah hardens the
hearts of certain men until those hearts become harder than
stones. Indeed, your example, O Abu Bakr, is the example of “Hesa
ge, When he said:

4250 Gal ‏أن‎ G68 ‏لهم‎ BS ols Be eb eS oy}
“If You punish them, they are Your slaves, and if You forgive

them, verily You, only You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.”
(Our’an 5: 118)

And your example, O “Umar, is the example of Noah 2, when
he said:

4055 GST G BNI ‏لا َرٌ عَلَ‎ SG SG

“And Nuh (Noah) said: “My Lord! Leave not one of the
disbelievers on the earth!’ (Qur'an 71: 26)

And your example is (also) like the example of Musa 33%, when
he said:

Al ‏فى‎ WH ay SG ea Ce EO SS IS
Sess & EN; ae Ke ‏اليش‎ Cue ‏عن‎ WL gen

wr
3 AAG thee Ge Pk ‏سس اله‎

RAY ‏الْعَدَابَ‎ YS FSB ‏قلا‎

118 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

“And Misa (Moses) said: “Our Lord! You have indeed bestowed
on Fir’aun (Pharaoh) and his chiefs splendor and wealth in the life
of this world, our Lord! That they may lead men astray from Your
Path. Our Lord! Destroy their wealth, and harden their hearts,
so that they will not believe until they see the painful torment.”
(Qur'an 10: 88)

Thus we see that, when the Messenger of Allah #¢ would
consult his Companions ‏رك‎ Abu Bakr # would be the first to
speak. And if anyone else then offered another opinion, the
Prophet #€ would follow not that person’s opinion but the
opinion of his most trusted advisor, Abu Bakr as.

Second: Uhud and Ham

On the Day of Uhud, the Prophet's Companions learned an
important lesson the hard way: After some of them disobeyed the
Prophet’s command, their situation on the battlefield took a turn
for the worse. Previously having a clear upper hand over the
polytheists, they now were surrounded by the enemy and were
on the verge of utter defeat. Each one of them was fleeing to save
himself, and the Prophet #§ was left virtually all by himself,
vulnerable to enemy attacks. But then a number of Companions
# fought their way towards the Prophet #8, in order to protect
him and steer him towards safety. It should come as no surprise
that the first Companion to reach the Prophet # was Abu Bakr ‏رطا‎
‎who was then joined by Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah ‏رذ‎ “Ali ‏ره‎
‎Talhah ‏ره‎ Az-7Zubair ‏رن‎ “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab as, Al-Haarith ibn
As-Summah ‏رق‎ Abu Dujaanah ‏رك‎ Sa‘ad ibn Abee Waqqaas 4,
and others — may Allah be pleased with them all. These brave
men led the Messenger of Allah # towards one of the mountam
passes of Mount Uhud, hoping that others would join them there
so that they could regroup their forces and regain their strength
and confidence.

 Musnad Ahmad(1/373) and Tafseer ibn Katheer (1/325).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 119

Upon reaching the Prophet #¢, Abu Bakr # saw that the
Prophet's skin was cut open on his face and that his front tooth
was broken; furthermore, two of his helmet’s rings penetrated his
skin and were lodged in his face. Abu Bakr «4 was quickly joined
by Abu “Ubaidah ‏رذ‎ and the Messenger of Allah #8 said to them
both, “Go to your companion.” He #8 was referring to Talhah «a,
who had suffered a great many wounds as he attempted to
protect the Prophet #%. Being more concerned for the welfare of
the Prophet ‏َه‎ Abu Bakr # stayed where he was and made a
move to dislodge the rings from the Prophet's face; but Abu
“‘Ubaidah ‏كك‎ insisted that he should be the one who dislodged the
rings, and Abu Bakr # yielded to his request. Not wanting to hurt
the Prophet #¢ further, Abu ‘Ubaidah 2 decided to use not his
hands but his mouth to remove the rings, and in the process of
removing the rings, he lost one of his own front teeth.

After having tended to the immediate needs of the Prophet 2,
Abu Bakr # and Abu “Ubaidah « executed the Prophet's
command, going out to look for Talhah ‏.نه‎ They soon found
him lying down in a ditch. They saw that he had been afflicted
with more than seventy wounds, some of which were caused by
arrows; others, by spears; and yet others, by swords.

On the Day of Uhud, it was perhaps Abu Sufyaan’s attitude
more so than anything else that confirmed the high-ranking of
Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #. With an air of triumph, Abu Sufyaan
looked in the direction of the mountain pass wherein the Muslims
were regrouping and said, “Is Muhammad among you?” He
repeated this question three times but received no reply because
the Prophet #2, having clearly heard his question, forbade his
Companions & from answering. Abu Sufyaan then called out, “Is
{Abu Bakr) ibn Abee Quhaafah among you?” He repeated this
question three times, and then asked three times as well, “Is
(Umar) ibn Al-Khattaab among you?” Abu Suyfaan then turned
towards his companions and said, “As for these three, they were
killed.”"! If not anything else, Abu Sufyaan was a shrewd and

Ul AL-Fath (6/188, 7/405).

120 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ول‎

intelligent leader; and with his questions, he showed that he
clearly understood that the pillars and most important members
of the Muslim community in Al-Madeenah were the Messenger of
Allah #@, Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ and “Umar «&.

The polytheists departed from the battleground of Uhud and
made their way back to Makkah. Fearing that they were not
heading back to Makkah but perhaps that they were regrouping
in order to completely destroy all Muslims in Al-Madeenah, the
Messenger of Allah #€ ordered the Muslims, in spite of their
injuries, to give chase to the army of the Quraish. Both
psychologically and physically the Muslims were spent, and yet
they answered the Prophet's call to arms and found the energy
they needed to pursue their enemies. Allah 8 said:

5
‏سل ارام‎ = | - & POLIO 9 te, tw _ 0 ‏قم‎ on 2 Bae
a yaar 77 ‏رت‎

“Those who answered (the Call of) Allah and the Messenger
(Muhammad 82) after being wounded; for those of them who
did good deeds and feared Allah, there is a great reward.”
(Qur'an 3: 172)

Years after the Battle of Uhud had taken place, ‘Aaishah &
discussed this Verse with ‘Urwah ibn Az-Zubair. She “%& said to
him, “O son of my sister, your two fathers, Az-Zubair and Abu
Bakr, were among them. When the Messenger of Allah #& was
afflicted with the hardship he was afflicted with on the Day of
Uhud, and after the polytheists departed (from the battlefield), he
#@ feared that they would return. And so he said, “Who will go
(with me) in order to give chase to them?’ Seventy Companions

volunteered for the mission, and among them were Abu Bakr and
Az-Zubair/”!

11 Muslim (2417).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 121

Thi

When the Prophet #¢ completed his blessed migration, one of
his first acts as leader of Al-Madeenah was to sign a comprehen-
sive peace treaty with the three Jewish tribes of Al-Madeenah —
Banu An-Nadeer, Banu Qainoogaa’, and Banu Quraidhah.
According to the terms of that treaty, Jews had the right to
practice their faith; Muslims were required to protect the Jews
against external enemies; and Jews were required to remain loyal
to their Muslim neighbors in Al-Madeenah. One of the specific
clauses of the treaty stipulated that, if a Muslim killed someone
from a foreign tribe, the Jews would help their Muslim neighbors
to pay blood money to the victim's fellow clansmen. It should
therefore come as no surprise that, when “Amr ibn Umayyah ‏ذه‎
‎killed two men from the Banu “Aamir tribe, the Prophet #¢ headed
towards his neighbors from the Banu An-Nadeer tribe, in order to
ask them to contribute towards the payment of the victims’ blood
money.

The death of the two men resulted from a grave misunder-
standing, and no fault was imputed to “Amr ibn Umayyah 4. Led
by a power-hungry, renegade member of the Banu “Aamir tribe, a
group of criminals slaughtered a number of Muslim delegates
from Al-Madeenah. ‘Amr ibn Umayyah 4, one of those delegates,
managed to escape, and on his way back to Al-Madeenah came
across two men from the Banu “Aamir tribe. “Amr a did not know
that the actual leader of the Banu ‘Aamir tribe did not sanction the
slaughter of the Muslim delegates, nor-that the Banu ‘Aamir
tribesman who was responsible for the slaughter was seeking his
own gain and was acting against the orders of his leader.
Imputing blame to the entiré Banu ‘Aamir tribe, “Amr ibn
Umayyah « waited until the two men fell asleep and then killed
them. Little did ‘Amr # know, however, that those two men were
returning from Al-Madeenah, having just agreed to a peace treaty
with the Prophet 2&.

122 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

The confusion which resulted left the Prophet 8% in a difficult
situation. But just and fair as he was, he #@ did not hold the entire
Banu ‘Aamir tribe responsible for the actions of just one of their
members, especially considering the fact that that member was a
traitor to his leader and fellow tribesmen. The Prophet #2 decided
that, in order to avert further bloodshed, he had no choice but to
pay blood money for the killings that were perpetrated by ‘Amr
ibn Umayyah -&. And in order to achieve that end, the Prophet #
went to the district of Banu An-Nadeer, seeking financial
assistance from the leaders of the Banu An-Nadeer tribe —
assistance that, as per their treaty with the Muslims, was their
duty to give.

Upon the Prophet's arrival in the district of Banu An-Nadeer,
the Jewish leaders of Banu An-Nadeer welcomed him with
smiling faces and sweet words — a welcome befitting a long lost
friend. And upon hearing his request for financial assistance, they
said, “Yes, O Abul-Qaasim, we will help you in any way you
please.” But to the degree that they externally manifested joy and
happiness, they internally harbored malice and hate towards the
Prophet #¢ and his Companions ‏حك‎

Asking him to wait for a short while so that they could return
with the money he requested from them, the Jewish leaders of
Banu An-Nadeer convened an emergency meeting, during which
they made a rash decision that led to their ultimate demise: They
unwisely decided to make an attempt on the Prophet's life. As
soon as they were alone with one another, they said, “We will
never again find him to be m such a vulnerable position (for here
he is, in our very midst, with only a few of his companions to
protect him).” The Prophet #2 was seemingly vulnerable to an
assassination attempt, for he was waiting for them underneath
one of the walls of their houses, and yet he was not really
vulnerable since he was being divinely protected by Allah #.

The Jewish leaders of Banu An-Nadeer said to one another,
“Who will climb (the wall of) this house, cast down a large stone
onto him, and thus spare us the trouble of ever having to deal

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 123

with him again.” “Amr ibn Jihaash ibn Ka’ab quickly volunteered
for the vile deed, saying, “I am the man for this job.” ‘Amr ibn
Jihaash forthwith climbed the wall; meanwhile, the Prophet 2%
was sitting on the other side of the wall, and with him were some
of his Companions ‏رذ‎ among whom were Abu Bakr as, “Umar ‏رف‎
‎and “Ali ‏.كك‎ News of what the leaders of Banu An-Nadeer plotted
was revealed to the Prophet #, who stood up to leave before
‘Amr could execute his mission.

After the Prophet #@ returned safely to Al-Madeenah, his
Companions # gathered around him, and he #@ informed them
about Banu An-Nadeer’s treacherous plans. Prior to this incident,
the leaders of Banu An-Nadeer had shown time and time again
that they were enemies of the Prophet #%; and on more than one
occasion, they violated the terms of their treaty with the Muslims.
But this time they had gone too far; this time the punishment had
to fit the crime: The Prophet #¢ ordered Muhammad ibn
Maslamah. ‏كل‎ to go to them and to order them to evacuate their
homes and leave Al-Madeenah for good.

The leaders of Banu An-Nadeer were left with a very difficult
decision. On the one hand, they were strongly attached to their
land and homes, and they desperately wanted to inflict harm on
the Prophet #¢ and on the other hand, they knew that they did
not have the military might to withstand the strength of the
Muslim army. In spite of their weakness vis-a-vis the Muslim
army, they decided to stay, mainly because the hypocrites of Al-
Madeenah sent word to them, promising to fight alongside them
and to defend them against their Muslim counterparts.

The first grave mistake of the leaders of Banu An-Nadeer was
to make an attempt on the Prophet's life, and the second was to
trust the false promises of the hypocrites — for one of the main
characteristics of hypocrites is that they never keep their
promises. Thus deciding to fortify themselves in their homes,
they sent word to the Prophet #8, proclaiming that were declaring
war on him #@ and that they were definitely not leaving their
homes.

124 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

What followed was a tense military confrontation that lasted
for all but fifteen days, during which time the Muslim army
besieged the district that was inhabited by Banu An-Nadeer.
Making it clear that the people of Banu An-Nadeer had no life left -
to live in Al-Madeenah, the Prophet #@ ordered for some of their
trees to be cut and for others to be burned down to the ground.
Having received no help from their hypocrite allies, the leaders of
Banu An-Nadeer lost all hope and conceded defeat. The Prophet
#@ then ordered them to evacuate their homes, mercifully
allowing them to take with them all of the wealth they could
load onto their camels, except for weapons. Upon the conclusion
of this confrontation, chapter Al-Hashr was revealed.”

Banu Al-Mustaligq

The tribe of Banu Al-Mustaliq planned to invade Al-
Madeenah. Having received news of the intentions of Banu Al-
Mustaliq’s leaders, the Prophet #£ set out with a small army to
attack them before they could attack him and his Companions&.
Upon arriving in Banu Al-Mustaliq territory, the Prophet ‏له‎
‎handed over the banner of the Muhaajiroon to Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeq #; according to certain accounts, however, the Prophet
#% gave it not to Abu Bakr ‏كاه‎ but to “Ammaar ibn Yaasir #. The
Prophet #¢ then handed the banner of the Ansaar to Sa’ad ibn
‘Ubaadah 4. That day, ‘Umar # spoke on behalf of the Prophet
#6, inviting Banu Al-Mustaliq’s tribesmen to proclaim the
Testimony of Faith: None has the right to be worshipped but
Allah. If they complied, “Umar # informed them, their lives and
their wealth would remain safe. But they refused, answering not
with the Testimony of Faith, but instead with a volley of arrows.
The Prophet #é then ordered his Companions ‏كأ‎ to fight as if they
were a single man — such was the harmony and unity with which
he expected them to go to battle. The Companions & of course

‎Al-Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee, chapter, “The Hadeeth of Banu An-‏ لذأ
‎Nadeer.””. (5/217); also, refer to Maghaazee Al-Waagidee (1/363) and to Al-‏
‎Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (4/86).‏

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 125

answered the Prophet's call, and only a short time transpired
before the opposing army was defeated. So resounding was the
defeat, in fact, that not a single Banu Al-Mustalig tribesman
escaped; rather, ten of them were killed and the rest were taken as
prisoners; meanwhile, on the Muslim side, only one man died.4!

At Al-Khandagq and Banu Quraidhah

In both expeditions, Abu Bakr # adhered closely to the
company of the Prophet #¢. Abu Bakr’s efforts on the Day of Al-
Khandaq were especially noteworthy; he 4s, like the rest of the
Prophet’s Companions ®, worked diligently to dig trenches
along the northern border of Al-Madeenah, so as to prevent the
confederate army, led by Abu Sufyaan and the Quraish, from
entering upon the streets and homes of Al-Madeenah’s inhabi-
tants. Time was of the essence, for the confederate army was fast
approaching; sensing the urgency of the situation, Abu Bakr «
filled not just his hands with dirt from the trenches, but his
pockets as well. As a result of his efforts and the efforts of all of the
Prophet's Companions ‏رذ‎ the digging of the trenches was
completed on time, and the army of the confederates was
prevented from entering Al-Madeenah.

Fourth: Al-Hudaibiyyah

In Dhil-Qai' dah, of the year 6 H, the Prophet # set out with 1400

of his Companions ‏,ذا‎ intending to perform the rites of “Umrah and
to visit the Inviolable House of Allah. Taking along sacrificial
animals, the Prophet #¢ and his Companions # attired themselves
inthe clothing of pilgrims, sending a clear signal to the Quraish that
their intention was not to fight, but instead to perform “Umrah and
to honor Allah’s Inviolable House in Makkah. The Prophet ‏كله‎
‎ordered a man from the Khuzaa‘ah tribe to go out as a scout and to
find out if the road ahead of them was safe. The Khuzaa’ee scout

11 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (4/157).

126 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏نه‎

soon returned with some unwelcome news: The Quraish was
mobilizing an army to go out and intercept the Muslims and to
prevent them from entering Makkah.

Faced with this grim news, the Prophet #& consulted his
Companions , saying to them, “Advise me, O people.” Abu
Bakr « then imparted wise counsel, saying, “O Messenger of
Allah, you have come with the intention of visiting this House
(i.e., the Kabah), and it is neither war nor the killing of anyone
that you desire. So head in the direction of this House (.e., deviate
your course away from Quraish’s army, making it clear that you
do not want to fight). And if anyone then tries to prevent us (from
entering Makkah), we will fight him.” Agreeing with the clear
wisdom of Abu Bakr’s counsel, the Prophet #% then said to his
Companions 4, “Proceed upon the name of Allah.”

The leaders of the Quraish were furious, and they swore that
the Messenger of Allah #8 would not enter Makkah by force. And
yet they were faced with a very difficult situation; after all, they
were considered by all Arabs as caretakers of the inviolable city of
Makkah, and as generous hosts to anyone who wanted to visit
Makkah — and particularly to those who wanted to honor the
sanctity of the Ka’bah. In short, therefore, they had no right —
according to the norms of Arab traditions ~— to prevent the
Prophet #¢ and his Companions & from entering Makkah,
especially considering the fact that they were not carrying any
weapons. Nonetheless, the leaders of the Quraish were in such a
fit of rage that they cared not about what other Arab tribes
thought about them, but only about preventing the Prophet 2
and his Companions 4s from performing ‘Umrah.

In the end, however, war was averted, and the leaders of the
Quraish realized that their only choice was to negotiate terms
with the Messenger of Allah #8.

Negotiations at Al-Hudaibiyyah

The negotiation process was wrought with difficulties, and a
number of delegates from the Quraish went to Al-Hudaibiyyah in

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 127

those delegates was Budail ibn Warqaa, who was followed by
Mikraz ibn Hafs, who was then followed by Al-Hulais ibn
‘Tigimah. And Al-Hulais was followed by “‘Urwah ibn Mas’ood
Ath-Thagqafee.

When “Urwah went to the Muslim encampment, the Prophet
2 repeated to him what he #% had previously said to Budail.!
‘Urwah replied, “O Muhammad, suppose you eradicate the affair
(the religion, the lives) of your people, have you ever heard of a
single person before you from the Arabs who destroyed his
people? And if it is the other outcome (ie., and if the Quraish
defeats you), then by Allah, | do not see faces; instead, I see a
congregation of people from different tribes (.e., your Compa-
nions) who are worthy of fleeing and of abandoning you.” “Urwah
was suggesting that people of the same tribe stick together until
the end, since their relationship towards one another is strong; but
that, since the Prophet’s Companions 4 were from different
tribes, their loyalty to one another would not last long, and they
wottld flee as soon as they saw the might of the Quraish. Little did
“Urwah know that the bonds of faith are much stronger than the
bonds that are established through tribal loyalty.

Upon hearing “Urwah’s vile claim, Abu Bakr # silenced
him immediately by saying to him, “Suck on the Badhr (the
piece of skin that is cut off from female genitals when a girl is
circumcised) of Al-Laat (the idol that “‘Urwah worshipped).
Will we flee from him and abandon him {as you claim; no,
that will never happen, In Sha Allah)?” Here we see the
permissibility of using offensive language to silence someone
who is disrespecting the religion of Islam. “Who is that?”
‘Urwah asked. The people around him said, “That is Abu
Bakr.” Directing his voice at Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ “Urwah said, “Lo!
By the One Who has my soul in His Hand, had it not been for
a favor you gave to me (during the pre-Islamic days of

Ul Bukhaaree, the Book of Stipulations in Jihaad (3/236); Hadeeth number: 2732.

128 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

ignorance, Abu Bakr 4 once helped “Urwah pay off some kind
of a debt) and which I never repaid, | would have now
answered (your insult with one of my own).”

When “Urwah spoke earlier about the Companions ‏كأ‎ fleeing,
he was trying to weaken the resolve of the Muslims and cause
intemal discord among their ranks — and specifically between
the leadership and the common ranks of Muslims. On the one
hand, he alluded to the strength of the Quraish; and on the other,
he claimed that the Companions # would flee since they were not
loyal to one another or to their leader. With a strong show of
confidence, he tried to convince the Muslims that a confrontation
with the Quraish was not in their best interests. His efforts, as he
soon realized, were in vain; the faith of the Companions & was
too strong for “Urwah’s words to have an effect on them.

The above-mentioned account proves that one may, under
certain very limited circumstances, use vulgar language to
describe the private parts of human beings; regarding the case
in question, Abu Bakr 2 used such strong language to achieve a
psychological advantage over “‘Urwah and to dampen his spirits.
Abu Bakr & took a firm stance against ‘Urwah, speaking with the
honor and dignity of true Faith, about which Allah 3 has said:

Cie AS ‏إن‎ SENT fel IA VG 18 ‏ولا‎

“So do not become weak sais your enemy), nor be sad, and

you will be superior (in victory) if you are indeed (true)

believers.” (Qur'an 3: 139)

Abu Bakr’s Stance Vis-a-vis the Treaty of Al-Hudaibiyyah

Suhail ibn ‘Amr was the last of Quraish’s delegates to visit the
Prophet #2 at Al-Hudaibiyyah, and it was with him that a treaty
was finally agreed upon. Based on the apparent implications of
the treaty, the leaders of the Quraish were getting the better of
the Prophet # and his Companions. According to the terms of
the treaty, the Muslims were to leave Makkah that year without
performing “Umrah; they could, however, return the following

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 129

year to perform ‘Umrah. Furthermore, it was agreed that if a
Muslim left Makkah in order to migrate to Al-Madeenah, it
would be binding upon the Prophet # to prohibit that Muslim
from entering Al-Madeenah; on the other hand, if a polytheist
wanted to leave Al-Madeenah and emigrate to Makkah, the
leaders of the Quraish reserved the right to welcome him and to
allow him to reintegrate into Makkan society. These terms
certainly seemed unfair, but in the end the treaty worked at once
to the benefit of the Muslims and to the detriment of Quraish’s
leaders.

But because the Treaty contained certain clauses that were
seemingly unjust and disadvantageous to the cause of Islam,
some Muslims, at least at first, voiced their opposition to it. One
such Muslim was ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏ذه‎ who, it is related,
actually went to the Prophet #¢ to voice his objection to the Treaty.
He #& said to the Prophet #¢, “Are you not the Messenger of Allah
#?’”" to which the Prophet #2 responded, “Yes (i am the
Messenger of Allah #8).” ‘Umar # asked, “And are we not
Muslims?” to which the Prophet #¢ responded, “Yes (you are
Muslims).” “Umar # asked, “Are they not polytheists?’”’ The
Prophet #8 responded, “Yes (they are polytheists).” “Umar ‏كه‎ said,
“Then why are we accepting to be humiliated in our religion?” To
end the argument and to make it clear that ‘Umar + was not
correct in his objections, the Prophet #¢ said, “Verily, I am the
Messenger of Allah, and I do not disobey Him.’”"! According to
another narration, the Prophet #€ said to ‘Umar as, “Iam the slave
of Allah and His Messenger; I will not act contrary to His
command, and He will not neglect me (or cause me to waste away
or to be ruined).”"! ‘Umar 2 was not doubting the Prophet's
wisdom; he # was simply asking for an explanation regarding
something he did not understand, and what he did not under-
stand was the wisdom behind agreeing to terms that apparently
were in favor of the Quraish. ‘Umar # also said, “Did you not say

{Min Ma’een As-Seerah (pg. 333).
Pl Taareekh At-Tabaree (2/643).

130 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

to us that we would come to the House (the Ka’bah) and perform
Tawaaf (circuits) around it?” The Prophet #€ said, “Yes, but did I
inform you that we would come to it this year?” ‘Umar 2 said,
“No.” The Prophet #¢ said, “Indeed, you will come to it and
perform Tawaaf around it.”

‘Umar # had two problems with the treaty: he did not
understand the wisdom behind agreeing to it, and he could not
bear the thought that the Prophet #2 and the Muslims were going
to accept humiliation at the hands of the polytheists; hence his
concern was genuine and for the welfare of all Muslims. ‘Umar ‏ذه‎
‎then went to Abu Bakr 2 and said to him, “O Abu Bakr, is he not
the Messenger of Allah?” Abu Bakr # said, “Yes (he is the
Messenger of Allah).” “Umar # said, “ And are we not Muslims?”
Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ responded, “Yes (we are Muslims).” ‘Umar 2 said,
“And are they not polytheists?” Abu Bakres said, “Yes (they are
polytheists).” ‘Umar # said, “Then why are we accepting to be
humiliated in our religion?” Abu Bakr # knew that ‘Umar & was
sincere but wanted himself to be sincere to ‘Umar # and to give
him good advice. And so he 4 said to “Umar as, “Adhere to the
Prophet’s command. For I bear witness that he is indeed the
Messenger of Allah and that the truth is what he commands. And
he will never act contrary to Allah’s command, and Allah will not
neglect him (or cause him to waste away or to be ruined).”"! That
Abu Bakr ‏أ‎ gave exactly the same reply that the Prophet #8 gave
to ‘Umar #:, attests to Abu Bakr’s superior faith, knowledge, and
understanding. While ‘Umar ‏ذه‎ was not able to understand the
wisdom behind the treaty, Abu Bakr # clearly comprehended, if
not that wisdom, then at least the best and only course of action
for himself, for ‘Umar ‏رق‎ and for all of the Companions ‏,كذ‎ and
that was to trust in Allah 38 and to obey the command of the
Messenger of Allah #¢, who spoke from revelation and not from
desire.

IN Bukhaaree, the Book of Stipulations; Musnad Imam Ahmad (in the beginning of
the Musnad of Al-Koofiyyoon); and As-Seerah An-Nabawtyyah, by Ibn Hishaam
6/346).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 13]

The Treaty of Al-Hudaibiyyah seemed unfavorable to the
interests of the Prophet's Companions, but in the end it proved to
be a great victory for them and for the religion of Islam. Abu Bakr
# later said, “Throughout the history of Islam, there has been no
victory that has been greater than the victory (notice how he 4
used the word “victory, and not ‘treaty’) of Al-Hudaibiyyah.
Nonetheless, on the day (of the signing of that treaty), people
remained shortsighted, not realizing what was happening
between Muhammad and his Lord. The slaves of Allah hurry
matters, but Allah does not rush (matters) as they do; instead, He
allows tor matters to reach the conclusion that He intended (for
them to reach). During the farewell pilgrimage, [ saw Suhail ibn
“Amr (the same negotiator who arrived at an agreement with the
Prophet #@ at Al-Hudaibiyyah) standing beside the spot that was
designated for the slaughtering of sacrificial animals, and I saw
him proffering such animals to the Messenger of Allah 2;
meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah #8 was slaughtering those
animals with his own hand. The Messenger of Allah #¢ called for
the barber, who then came and shaved his head. And I then saw
Suhail picking up pieces of the Prophet's hair, after which I saw
him placing those strands of hair over his eye (so as to seek
blessings thereby). (That was Suhail on the Day of the Farewell
Pilgrimage.) And then I remember how, back on the Day of Al-
Hudaibiyyah, Suhail refused to write ‘In the name of Allah, the
Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful...’ Having remembered that, I
praised Allah, Who guided Suhail to Islan.”

One of the direct results of the Battle of the Confederates was
the conquest of Khaibar, a city that was inhabited by many Jews.
Among them were Jewish leaders who had been banished from

‎Kanzul-‘Uimmaal (30136), and Khutab Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Muhammad‏ ذا
‎Ahmad ‘Aashoor (pg. 117).‏

132 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Al-Madeenah, leaders who had financed and had been behind the
invasion of Al-Madeenah by the Confederate armies.

Upon arriving at Khaibar, the Muslims were not met by any
immediate resistance, for the habitants of Khaibar, having been
informed of the impending attack upon their city, shut themselves
up in their fortresses. Khaibar was known perhaps as much for its
fortresses as it was for its many date-palm trees. Because Khaibar
contained many fortresses that were scattered throughout the
city, the Muslims were left with no choice but to lay siege to a few
fortresses at a time; or in other words, once one particular fortress
was conquered, they moved on to the next. The first set of
fortresses proved especially difficult to conquer. In order to force
the defenders of those fortresses to surrender, the Prophet #¢ sent
a contingent of fighters and appointed Abu Bakr 2s as their leader.
Abu Bakr # and his men fought all day long, but returned to the
Prophet #2, without having achieved their goal. On the following
day, the Prophet #¢ sent another battalion, appointing a new
leader, ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏ركف‎ to lead the men of that battalion
into battle. ‘Umar # also returned without having achieved
victory. The Prophet #¢ then said, “Tomorrow, 1 will indeed give
the banner (of the army) to a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger.” That man was none other than “Ali ibn Abee Taalib
#, who led the following day’s contingent of fighters into battle,
and later returned victorious."

During the course of the siege of Khaibar, some of the
Prophet's Companions suggested that they should cut down
some of the local date-palm trees, thus destroying the trees and
weakening the spirits of the enemy. Upon seeing that the Prophet
#6 was pleased with their suggestion, some of the Companions &
hastened to cut down some of Khaibar’s trees. Abu Bakr ‏وف‎ who
witnessed what was happening, went to the Prophet #2 and
advised against the cutting down of trees; he 4 pointed out that
the destruction of Khaibar’s trees was detrimental to the interests

1 Eutooh Al-Buldaan (1/26).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 133

of Muslims, regardless of whether Khaibar was conquered by
force or through peaceful means. Appreciating the soundness of
Abu Bakr’s reasoning, the Prophet #¢ ordered his Companions &
to desist from what they were doing, and they of course
immediately obeyed |!

Regarding Banu Fuzaarah

Salamah # gave an account of the Banu Fuzaarah expedition.
He ‏ذه‎ said, “We set out with Abu Bakr ibn Abee Quhaatah 4s,
whom the Prophet #¢ appointed as our leader, and our goal was
to invade the Banu Fuzaarah tribe. When we drew near to water,
Abu Bakr # issued a command, and we made camp. Then, after
we performed the morning prayer, Abu Bakr 4 gave the order,
and we began to attack, fighting alongside the water against all
those who came before us. 1 looked towards the mountain and
saw a party of people, among whom were women and children. |
fired an arrow in their direction, and it landed between them and
the mountain. Having succeeded in capturing them, I steered
them towards Abu Bakr &....Among the prisoners was a woman
who had upon her a Qasha’ (some kind of garment) made of
leather. With her was a young woman who was among the most
beautiful of all Arabs. Abu Bakr # gave her to me as my share of
the spoils. 1 did not remove her clothing (Le., I did not engage in
any sexual activity with her) until T reached Al-Madeenah. | spent
my first night there, still not having removed her clothing. Upon
later meeting me in the marketplace, the Messenger of Allah #¢
said to me, ‘O Salamah, give the woman to me asa gift,’ to which I
replied, ‘By Allah, O Messenger of Allah, I like her, and I have still
not removed her clothing.’ The Messenger of Allah #g remained
silent, leaving me alone until the following day, when he #2 again
met me in the marketplace and said to me, ‘O Salamah, give the
woran to me as a gift.’ I said, ‘By Allah, O Messenger of Allah, I
have still not removed her clothing; even so, I grant her to you, O
Messenger of Allah.’ The Messenger of Allah #¢ then sent her to

UT Al-Maghaazee, by Al-Waaqidee (2/644).

134 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

the people of Makkah, who had with them some Muslim
prisoners. The Messenger of Allah #¢ granted the (Fuzaaree)
woman to the Quraish in return for the Muslim prisoners.”

: The Compensatory ‘Umrah and Dhaat As

a) The Compensatory ‘Umrah

One year after the signing of the Treaty of Al-Hudaibiyyah, the
Prophet #2 and his Companions # returned to Makkah in order
to make up for the ‘Umrah that they were not able to perform
during the previous year. This time around, the people of the
Quraish, instead of preventing the Muslims from performing
“‘Limrah, lett them alone and essentially vacated Makkah for three
days, during which time the Muslims performed the rites of
‘Umrah. And, of course, Abu Bakr 4 was among the Muslims who
performed “Limrah that year.

The Dhaat As-Salaasil Expedition

In regard to this expedition, Raafai’ ibn “Amr At-Taaee & said,
“The Messenger of Allah # appointed ‘Amr ibn Al-Aas & as the
leader of the Dhaat As-Salaasil army. (Dhaat As-Salaasil is the
name of a place that is situated just on the other side of the Al-
Qurs valley; it took one ten days to travel from Al-Madeenah to
Dhaat As-Salaasil.) The Prophet #% sent along with him Abu Bakr
‏,نه‎ “Umar #, and others among the most eminent of his
Companions ‏كه‎ (all of whom were to act as common soldiers
under the command of ‘Amr 4s). When they reached Mount Taiy,
‘Aror 4 said, “Find me a man who knows the way and who can
act as our guide.’ His soldiers responded, ‘The only man we know
of who is worthy of that task is Raafai’ ibn “Amr, for he was a
highway robber during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance (and is
therefore surely knowledgeable regarding the road that lies ahead
of us). When we completed the invasion, and when we returned
to the place from whence we began our journey, I fixed my gaze
upon the countenance of Abu Bakr #, who was wearing a

Abu Bakr on the Battlefield 135

Fadakiyyah robe (i.e., a robe from Fadak, which was one of the
vi ages of Khaibar). When Abu Bakr # mounted his riding

nimal, he held its two ends closed together, using a tooth-stick.
And when he descended from his riding animal, he spread his
robe out again. | went to him and said, “O possessor of a tooth-
stick, among all of your companions I have singled you out. So
inform me about something — something that, if [ retain it in my
memory, I will be like all of you. But do not be long-winded, for
then I might forget what you have to tell me.’ He ‏كه‎ said, “Can you
remember your five fingers?’ I said, “Yes.” He ‏د‎ said, “Bear
witness that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and
that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger; establish the five
prayers; if you have wealth, give Zakaat (obligatory charity) from
it; perform Hajj (pilgrimage) to the House (Le., the Ka’bah); and
fast the month of Ramadan. Have you retained these matters in
your memory?’ I said, “Yes.’ He 4 said, “And there is something
else: Never become leader over any two people.’ I said, ‘And is
not leadership restricted to you people, the people of houses (.e.,
of cities)?” He ‏كه‎ said, “The time draws near when the retms of
leadership will spread, to the point that positions of leadership
will reach you, as weil as those who are below you (in status)....
Verily, when a man is a leader (over a people), when the people
wrong one another, and when he does not establish justice among
them, Allah will exact vengeance upon him...”

The Lessons and Morals of this Story

1) One appreciates from this story the importance of worship.
Abu Bakr ‏هه‎ limited himself to mentioning only five matters,
matters that had to be comprehensive in their scope and that
had to summarize the teachings of Islam. And after
mentioning the Testimony of Faith, he went on to mention
prayer (which is the backbone of Islam), Zakaat, fasting, and
Hajj.

2) One should never aspire to become leader over a people, for on
the day that one becomes a leader, one is held accountable not

136 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مف‎

just for himself, but for the people under his command as well.
Discussing the issue of leadership, the Messenger of Allah 2%
once said to Abu Dharr Al-Ghaffaaree -&, “Verily, it is a trust;
and verily, it is disgrace, ignominy, and regret on the Day of
Resurrection, except for those who take it (a position of
leadership) and fulfill its obligations (Le., the obligations and
duties of leadership).”"! Abu Bakr # understood these words
very clearly, for it is related that he himself once said, “If one
becomes leader, he will be held accountable for a longer time
than anyone else, and he will be punished more severely than
anyone else. And if one is not a leader, he will be held least
accountable among the people, and of all people he will be the
least punished.” Such was Abu Bakr’s understanding of the
duties of leadership, an understanding that carried on into
action when he became Khaleefah — working tirelessly both
day and night to establish justice and to improve the lives of
the people over whom he ruled.

3) During the Dhaat As-Salaasil expedition, Abu Bakr ‏هاه‎ showed
a wonderful display of humility. The best of all of the Prophet's
Companions #&, Abu Bakr # could have thought that he was
worthiest to become their leader. But when the Prophet ‏علد‎
‎appointed “Amr ibn Al-‘Aas to lead the Dhaat As-Salaasil
expedition, Abu Bakr « neither complained nor felt that he
was being wrongly overlooked for the job; to the contrary, he
not only obeyed the Prophet’s command, but also believed
from the bottom of his heart that ‘Amr 4s was appointed leader
for a good reason. ‘Abdullah ibn Buraidah ‏ذه‎ related that when
the Muslim army reached their destination, ‘Amr ‏ف‎ issued a
decree, forbidding his soldiers from lighting any fires. As cruel
as this decree might have seemed to some — for it was a very
cold night — it was necessary, since ‘Amr ‏وا‎ wanted to prevent
any of his men from being seen and attacked by the enemy,
and to catch the enemy unawares on the following morning.

“I Muslim, the Book of Leadership (1825).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields | 137

Not appreciating the reasoning behind “Amr’s decree, and
seeing the harsh conditions that his fellow soldiers had to
endure on that chilly night, “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab « became
furious and had the mind to disobey ‘Amr’s orders and to
speak harsh words with him. But Abu Bakr ¢ prohibited him
from doing anything of the like, informing him that “It is only
because of “Amr’s knowledge of warfare that the Messenger of
Allah #8 has appomted him as your leader.” Hearing these
words, ‘Umar 2 calmed down and refrained from showing
any anger towards ‘Amr ‏كه‎ and from disobeying his decree.""!

th: The Conquests of
akkah, Hunain, and At-Taaif

Detailing the events that led to the conquest of Makkah, ibn
Ishaaq related the following. When the Treaty of Al-Hudaibiyyah -
was being signed and agreed upon, it was declared that parties
other than the Prophet #¢ and the Quraish had the right to become
participants in the treaty, so long as they agreed to live up to its
terms and clauses. The people of Khuzaa’ah, who were allies of
the Muslims, declared that they wanted to become participants in
the treaty. And the people of Banu Bakr, who were ailies of the
Quraish, did the same. What this meant was that neither Banu
Bakr nor the Quraish had the right to attack etther the Muslims in
Al-Madeenah or the people of the Khuzaa’ah tribe; and
conVersely, neither the Muslims in Al-Madeenah nor the
Khuzaa’ah had the right to attack either the Quraish or the
people of Banu Bakr. This was especially significant since, just as
the Quraish and the Muslims of Al-Madeenah were enemies, so

‎Al-Haakim’s Al-Mustadrak. And Al-Haakim said about this Hadeeth: “Its chain‏ لذأ
‎is authentic, despite the fact that neither Bukhaaree nor Muslim related it.”‏
‎And Adh-Dhahabee said: “It is authentic.” Kiteab Al-Maghaazee 3/42).‏

136 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg a

too were the people of Khuzaa’ah and the people of Banu Bakr.

All parties lived up to the terms of the treaty for about
seventeen or eighteen months. But then the people of Banu Bakr
made a rash choice, deciding one night to attack the people of
Khuzaa’ah beside the Al-Wateer stream — which was situated
very close to Makkah. The leaders of the Quraish made even a
rasher decision, feeling that they could act with impunity — that,
since the attack was to take place during the night, they could
provide military support to the treacherous tribesmen of Banu
Bakr, without arousing the suspicion of the Muslims in Al-
Madeenah. And so they not only provided weapons to Banu Bakr,
but also fought alongside them as they ruthlessly attacked
members of the Khuzaa‘ah tribe.

Much to the chagrin of the Quraish, however, one of the
attacked members of the Khuzaa’ah tribe escaped, made his way
to Al-Madeenah, and informed the Prophet #¢ about the brutal
attack that had been launched against his people and about the
complicity of Quraish’s leaders in the affair. His name was ‘Amr
ibn Saalim, and the Prophet #¢ responded to his words by
reassuringly saying, “You will indeed be helped, O ‘Amr ibn
Saalim.”" |

The Prophet 8 proceeded to immediately mobilize a huge
army, keeping his intended destination a secret, telling not even
his own soldiers about his intentions to conquer Makkah. He #€
invoked Allah # to blind the Quraish, so that the arrival of his
army in Makkah would be a complete surprise for them.

The Quraish feared for the worst: That ‘Amr ibn Saalim had
reached Al-Madeenah and informed the Prophet ‏عله‎ about their
direct involvement in Banu Bakr’s brutal slaughter of Khuzaa’ee
tribesmen. Abu Sufyaan was at once angry and afraid — angry at
his fellow tribesmen for having participated in such a foolhardy
enterprise, and afraid that the Prophet #@ and his Companions 4
would exact revenge on the Quraish. And so ina complete state of

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Tbn Hishaam (4/44).‏ أذ

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields. 139

panic, Abu Sufyaan went to Al-Madeenah, headed straight
towards the Messenger of Allah #8, and said to him, “O
Muhammad, make firmer our treaty and extend its term for
us.” The Prophet #€ said, “Is that why you came? Did you do
anything (that gives you cause to worry)?” Abu Sufyaan replied,
“T seek refuge with Allah. We are upon our covenant, and we are
abiding by the terms of the treaty we agreed upon on the Day of
Al-Hudaibiyyah. We are not changing or modifying the terms of
our agreement.” When he didn’t receive the response he wanted
from the Prophet #¢, Abu Sufyaan went to the Prophet's
Companions , hoping to win favor with some of them and
thus avert an utter catastrophe for his people."

Abu Bakr 2 and Abu Sufyaan

Abu Sufyaan went to Abu Bakr 4, hoping to gain his
sympathy, but receiving instead a taste of his anger and wrath.
Abu Bakr # said to him, “He whom the Prophet #¢ defends I will
defend. By Allah, were I to find a small ant that was fighting
against you, 1 would help it against you.”

A Discussion Between ‘Aaishah ‏كك‎ and Abu Bakr «

still before the departure of the Muslim army, Abu Bakr 4
entered upon ‘Aaishah ‏رك‎ who was busy sifting wheat. The
Prophet #@ had instructed her to prepare food for his impending
journey towards Makkah and to keep what she was doing a secret
from others. His curtosity aroused, Abu Bakr asked, “O
‘Aaishah, why are you preparing this food?’’ She % remained
silent. Her silence gave her away. “Does the Messenger of Allah
#2 intend to attack (another people)?” Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ asked. Her
silence continued. “Perhaps he intends to attack the Romans,”
Abu Bakr 2 surmised. Still, she did not respond. “Perhaps he
wants to attack the people of Najd?’” She & persisted in her
silence. “Maybe he wants to attack the Quraish,” Abu Bakr ‏ف‎

خف ‎At-Tuareekh As-Siyaasee Wal-Askaree, by Dr. ‘Alee Mo’tee (pg. 365), and‏ أذا
‎Tabaree (3/43).‏

140 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏م‎

said. Again, she did not respond. Either she didr/t know herself,
or she simply wanted to preserve the secret of the Prophet #¢. Abu
Bakr’s curiosity, however, did not remain unsatisfied for long.
The Messenger of Allah 8 soon entered, and Abu Bakr asked
him, “O Messenger of Allah, do you intend to go out (in order to
attack the enemy)?” |

fe

Yes,” the Prophet #2 replied. “Perhaps you intend to attack
the Romans,” Abu Bakr 4 surmised, indicating he had little idea
about the true intentions of the Prophet #¢. The Prophet 2
replied, “No.” Abu Bakr 2 asked, “Do you intend to attack the
people of Najd?” The Prophet #2 replied, “No.” A little confused,
and running out of guesses, Abu Bakr 2 said, “Then perhaps you
want to attack the Quraish.” The Prophet 2 replied, “Yes.” Abu
Bakr 2s said, “O Messenger of Allah, is there not a fixed term to
the treaty that was enacted between you and them?” The Prophet
# said, “Has not news reached you regarding what they (i.e., the
Quraish) did to Banu Ka’ab (i.e., the Khuzaa‘ah)?” Hearing about
what the Quraish had done, Abu Bakr # understood that it was
time for the Quraish to pay for their treachery. A massive army
was then mobilized for the expedition to Makkah, an army that
consisted not just of the inhabitants of Al-Madeenah, but of
members of other tribes as well. As for Al-Madeenah, it was left
virtually empty, for not a single member of the Muhaajiroon or the
Ansaar was absent from the expedition.

Abu Bakr « Enters Makkah

On the Day of the Makkah Conquest, the Prophet #8 strove to
enter from Kidaa, from the uppermost part of Makkah; he #¢
hoped thereby to fulfill the promise of Hassaan ibn Thaabit ‏رك‎
‎who informed the Quraish in a satirical poem that the army of
Allah 4% would enter Makkah from Kidaa. One of the Verses of
Hassaan’s poem described how women would strike the
advancing horses with veils. When the Prophet #¢ actually saw

(4 Tuareekh Ad-Da’wah Al-Islaamiyyah (pg. 145).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields 141

that happening as he #@ was about to enter Makkah, he #8 smiled
at Abu Bakr « and asked him, “O Abu Bakr, what did Hassaan
say,” and Abu Bakr 4 repeated the Verse for him.@!

At Hunan

The Muslims learned a stern lesson on the Day of Hunain,
having to endure defeat and many losses during the earlier stages
of the battle. The surprise attack of the enemy was so terrifying
that almost all Muslim soldiers began to flee from the battlefield.
It was a scene of utter chaos, with each man having no thought in
his mind but that of saving his own life.!*!

The Messenger of Allah #2, who bravely remained steadfast
where he was on the battlefield, called out, “O people, where are
you? Come (back) to me. I am the Messenger of Allah. I am
Muhammad ibn “Abdullah...0 people of the Ansaar, 1 am the
slave of Allah and His Messenger.” Standing nearby was his
uncle, Al-’ Abbaas 4s. Since Al Abbaas «= was blessed with a loud,
thunderous voice, the Prophet #2 said to him, “O ‘Abbaas, call
out: O people of the Ansaar, O people of As-Samurah (the name of
a tree under which Muslims pledged to obey and follow the
Prophet ‏ذا ريه‎

Such was the state of the Muslims during the early stages of
the battle: Everyone, save the Prophet #2 and a small number of
his Companions, was in a state of panic and was fleeing from
battle. Of the minority who remained steadfast alongside the
Prophet #¢, Abu Bakr & was at their forefront. Shortly thereafter,
Allah’s mercy descended upon the believers: Those who had fled
returned, and Allah $ blessed them with a decisive victory.

‎Maghaazee Al-Waagidee (2/831) and Kanzul-'Ummaal, by Al-Muttagee Al-‏ أذا
‎Hindee, chapter, “The Battle of the Makkah Conquest.”‏

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (3/74).‏ لا

‎Muslim, the Book of Jihaad and As-Siyyar; chapter, “The Battle of Hunain.” (3/‏ أذا
ش .1775 ‎Hadeeth number:‏ — )1398

142 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Abu Bakr & Issues a Legal Ruling in the Presence of the
Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎

On the Day of Hunain, Abu Qataadah # saw a Muslim
engaged in man-to-man combat with an enemy soldier; mean-
while, he ‏ذه‎ also saw another polytheist sneaking behind the same
Muslim in order to kill him. Reacting as quickly as possible, Abu
Qataadah # went after the second man — the one who was
sneaking behind the Muslim soldier. The man saw Abu Qataadah
‏د‎ coming and raised his sword to strike him. Abu Qataadah #
was too fast, however, and delivered a blow first, one that
completely severed the hand of the enemy fighter. The man then
drew closer to Abu Qataadah ‏فك‎ and got him into a bear hug; he
was squeezing so hard that Abu Qataadah # began to fear that it
was the end for him. But just before the man managed to squeeze
the very life out of Abu Qataadah, he knelt to the ground, having
become very weak because of the effort he was exerting and
because of the wound that Abu Qataadah ‏ذف‎ had inflicted upon
him. Not wanting to lose the opportunity that was just afforded to
him, Abu Qataadah # pushed the man away and killed him.

Later on, the Messenger of Allah ‏وَل‎ said to the people,
“Whoever proves that he killed someone becomes owner of his
things (i.e., the things that are with the dead enemy soldier when
he dies).” In the hope of finding someone who would bear
witness to the aforementioned incident, Abu Qataadah 2 stood
up; no one, however, testified on his behalf. He & sat down, and
then deciding not to give up so easily, he ‏ذه‎ told his story to the
Prophet #2. A man from the Quraish who was present and who
paid close attention to Abu Oataadah’s detailed account said,
“The weapons of the dead person he mentioned are with me,” but
he then asked to be allowed to keep them. Abu Bakr said,
“Never! Let him not give it to a weak person from the Quraish
while he leaves a lion from the lions of Allah (ie., Abu Qataadah
#) who fought for Allah and His Messenger #2.” The Messenger
of Allah 2% stood up and gave the weapons to Abu Qataadah &,
who used them to buy a garden. He ‏كه‎ later said, “Tt was the first

143

reid]

wealth [ acquired (while fighting) for the cause of Islam.

This story highlights the superior qualities of two
Companions #: First, of Abu Qataadah Al-Ansaaree & who
risked his life to save a fellow Muslim who was about to be
attacked from behind; and second, of Abu Bakr #, who was so
fair and just that he # argued on behalf of a man from the Ansaar
against a man from his own tribe, the Quraish; this is because he
# was primarily concerned not with tribal loyalty, but with
upholding truth and justice.

The Prophet #2 was the most eloquent of all Arabs; he #@ was
not, however, a poet; in fact, his knowledge of poetry was weak
relative to that of other Arabs. His knowledge of poetry was weak
for a reason: It refuted Quraish’s claim that the Prophet #@ was not
a Messenger sent by Allah ‏رق‎ but was instead a mere poet. This
point is illustrated in the following story.

After the spoils of Hunain had been gathered and distributed,
aman named Al-‘Abbaas ibn Mirdaas composed a poem in which
he not only complained, but also reproached the Prophet #& for
having given him only a small portion of the spoils. Having heard
ibn Mirdaas’s angry poem, the Messenger of Allah #& said to his
Companions &, “Go to him and cut off his tongue for ‏“عمط‎ The
Prophet #¢ did not mean what he said literally; rather, he #2 was
merely signaling to his Companions ‏كا‎ that they should silence
ibn Mirdaas by giving him a larger share of the spoils. And that in
fact is what they did: They gave him so much that he could not
find the words with which he could express his joy. Later on, ibn
Mirdaas went to the Messenger of Allah #2, who asked him
whether he was the composer of the angry poem that had recently
_ been conveyed to him. The Prophet ‏ييه‎ then quoted one

Ll Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee, Hadeeth mumber: 4322; and Muslim,
chapter, “The Right (During War) of the Killer to Take what is Found with the
Person He Killed.”

2! At-Taarkeeh Al-Islaamee, by Al-Humaidee (8/26).

144 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

particularly offensive line of the poem, thus helping ibn Mirdaas
recall his own words. In quoting the poem, the Prophet #¢
mistakenly changed the order of the last two words of one of its
lines. Perceiving the Prophet’s mistake, Abu Bakr « corrected
him. The Prophet # responded to Abu Bakr’s correction by
saying, “Both (the wording I used and the wording you used)
amount to the same thing.” In this instance, the Prophet #€ did not
seem to grasp the fact that, when the positions of two of its words
were altered, the poem was no longer metrical — i.e., it no longer
followed its intended pattern. The Prophet's innocence regarding
the matter seemed to have amused Abu Bakr 4s, who said, “I bear
witness that you are indeed as Allah described you to be,” upon
which he # proceeded to recite the following Verse:

8 A aes 4 17 ‏ل‎ oe 0000 ee
tong ‏وَفرَعَانُ‎ 8 Yi D OL - gs leg al | avizle a5}
“And We have not taught him (Muhammad #8) poetry, nor is it
meet for him. This is only a Reminder and a plain Qur’an.”

(Qur’an: 36: 69)

At-Taaif

Unlike previous occasions ~ such as the sieges of Banu An-
Nadeer and Khaibar — the Muslims were not able to convert a
prolonged siege at At-Taaif into a decisive victory. The Muslim
army made many attempts to penetrate the gates of At-Taaif's
fortresses, but to no avail; the fortresses were impenetrable. In
fact, more than a few Muslim soldiers were injured as they tried to
gain entry into the fortresses; and at least some Companions &
were killed. One of the martyrs of that day was Abu ‏و كلد‎ son,
‘Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr #. Hit by an arrow, “Abdullah ‏نك‎
‎survived for a while and even managed to make his way back to
Al-Madeenah. But the wound he was inflicted worsened rather
than healed, and he & died m Al-Madeenah shortly after the
death of the Prophet 8.

The Prophet #2 was faced with two choices: Either he #§ could
prolong the siege, in which case the people of At-Taaif would

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields 145

eventually be forced to come out of their fortresses, since they
were completely cut off from supplies and from the outside
world. Or the Prophet #% could leave At-Taaif and abandon the
siege, a seemingly disadvantageous option, but one that actually
made a lot of sense. By the time the siege took place, At-Taaif
was an island of disbelief in a sea of Islam. Makkah had just been
conquered; the Quraish had entered into the fold of Islam, as did
the members of other neighboring tribes. In essence, therefore,
the people of At-Taaif were harmless and posed absolutely no
threat to the Muslims. The Prophet #2 realized that if he left them
alone, they would eventually have to face the reality that Islam
was now the dominant religion of the region. And face the
reality they did, for a short while later At-Taaif’s leaders went as
a delegation to Al-Madeenah, in order to announce their entry
into the fold of Islam.

When the Thageef delegation of At-Taaif was nearing Al-
Madeenah, Abu Bakr # and Al-Mugheerah saw them, and they
both immediately perceived the reason for their visit. They then
competed with one another to be the first to convey the good
news to the Prophet #¢. Abu Bakr 4 was the one who reached the
Prophet 2 first, and he proceeded to immediately convey to him
the good news.

Shortly thereafter, the delegates of Thaqeef met with the
Prophet # and announced their entry into the fold of Islam.
They even stayed in Al-Madeenah for a number of days, m
order to learn as much as they could about the religion of Islam.
And when it was time for them to return to their homeland, the
Prophet #@ wanted to send with them an official letter, in which
he wanted. to announce his appointed leader over the Thaqeef
tribe. Abu Bakr # suggested that “‘Uthman ibn Abul-Aas &
should be appointed as their leader, an ostensibly strange
choice, considering the fact that “Uthman # was the youngest
and least experienced of At-Taaif’s delegates. Nonetheless, Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ believed that he was the best man for the job, discerning
sincerity and enthusiasm for Islam. For while the other

146 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏له‎

delegates took their day nap, “Uthmdan ibn Abul-’Aas 4 would
— without letting the other delegates know — go to the
Messenger of Allah #% in order to gain knowledge about Islam,
the Qur'an, and Islamic jurisprudence. And on a given day, if he
a saw that the Prophet #2 was sleeping, he would go Abu Bakr
a and learn from him. His enthusiasm impressed both Abu
Bakr # and the Prophet #4, who #€ readily agreed to Abu
Bakr’s suggestion, and thus appointed “Uthman « as the new
governor of At-Taaif.

After the Prophet #¢ died, another group of delegates from
At-Taaif visited Al-Madeenah. Their arrival was welcome news,
but it did bring back sad memories for Abu Bakr 4 — the death
of his son, “Abdullah 3 Although “Abdullah’s death was a sad
event, Abu Bakr’s attitude regarding it illustrated the true depth
of his Faith. Al-Oaasim ibn Muhammad said, ““Abdullah ibn
Abu Bakr # was hit with an arrow on the Day of At-Taaif, and
he died as a result of that injury forty days after the death of the
Messenger of Allah #@. After “Abdullah died, a delegation of the
Thaqeef tribe visited Abu Bakr 4 in Al-Madeenah. Abu Bakr &
still had with him the arrow that had killed his son, and he took
it out in the presence of the delegates and said to them, “Does
anyone among you recognize this arrow?’ Sa’eed ibn “Ubaid, the
brother of Banu ‘Tjlaan, said, “Yes, I sharpened this arrow, fixed
its feather onto it...and fired it.” Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ (turned to him and)
said, “Verily, this is the arrow that killed “Abdullah ibn Abu
Bakr. And all praise is for Allah, Who has honored him by your
hand, and Who has not humiliated you by his hand (Le., Who
did not allow ‘Abdullah to kill you during the siege of At-Taaif,
but instead kept you alive long enough for you to embrace
Islam). Indeed, He has made matters spacious and easy for the
both of you.)

‎Khutab Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Muhammad Ahmad ‘Aashoor (pg. 118).‏ ا
‎It should be duly noted, however, that the narration is partly‏
‎disconnected.‏

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields 147

The Tabook Expedition, Hajj in th
H, and the Farewell Pilgrimage

With virtually the entire Arabian Peninsula under the control
of the Muslims, the nearest, and most dangerous, threat to them
was the Roman Empire towards the north. On more than one
occasion, the Romans evinced a hostile intent towards Muslims,
raiding nearby Muslim lands as well as persecuting and killing
any of their direct or indirect citizens who dared to forsake
Christianity and enter into the fold of Islam.

The Romans posed a new kind of threat to the Muslims, an
external one that threatened the very existence of the Muslim
nation; after all, the Roman Empire was one of the two
superpowers of the day. In response to that threat, the Messenger
of Allah #@ mobilized an army of thirty-thousand strong,
signaling that, even though all of Arabia was under the control
of Muslims, there was no time to rest. The grave threat towards
the north had to be dealt with, and the Muslims had to assert their
strength if they hoped to deter the Romans from attacking them;
furthermore, as bearers of the divine truth, the Muslims needed to
pave the way to the spreading of Islam outside of Arabia.

In this, as in all previous, expeditions, Abu Bakr 2 played an
important role. When the Muslim army reached Thantyyatul-
Wadaa’, the Messenger of Allah #¢ chose his commanders for the
expedition and handed out banners to them. And he #& gave the
greatest banner to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 4, clearly indicating that
Abu Bakr 4 was his chief commander for the expedition.

Various accounts of the expedition contain the name of Abu
Bakr 2, with some of them pointing to his superior qualities, and
others at least indicating the fact that, throughout the expedition,
he 2, in the capacities of a commander, advisor, and close friend,

[0 Sifatus-Safwah (1/243).

148 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ف‎

always adhered closely to the company of the Prophet #%. For
example, ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ood 4 said, “I woke up in the middle
of one particular night while I was with the Messenger of Allah ‏كك‎
‎in the Tabook expedition. I saw a flame to one side of the
encampment, and so | followed it to see what was there. When I
reached it, 1 saw the Messenger of Allah #¢, Abu Bakr 2, and
“Umar ‏.يك‎ There too was ‘Abdullah Dhul-Byaadain Al-Muzanee
(i.e., his corpse), and he was dead.... The Prophet #% said (to Abu
Bakr # and “Umar 4), ‘Bring closer your brother.’ They did so,
and when the Prophet #2 prepared to place him in the side
compartment of his grave, he #8 said, ‘O Allah, I am this night
pleased with him, so be pleased with him as well.”” The narrator
of this Hadeeth related that ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ood 4 then said,
“Oh, would that I was the dweller of this grave.”"! Incidentally,
itis related that, whenever Abu Bakr 2 would place a corpse in its
grave, he & would say, “In the name of Allah, upon the religion of
the Messenger of Allah #£, and with complete faith in
Resurrection after death (do I bury this dead person’s body).”

At least once during the expedition, the Muslims completely
ran out of water; their situation became desperate; they became so

thirsty, in fact, that they thought their necks would crack open as
a result of the dryness. Also, at least one of them slaughtered his
camel so that he could squeeze out and drink any water that he
could find in its stomach. Abu Bakr 4 then said to the Prophet 2%,
“O Messenger of Allah, Allah has made you accustomed to

supplicate in a good manner, so invoke Allah (for help).”
The Prophet #¢ said, “Would you love for me to do that?”

Abu Bakr 2 said, “Yes.” The Prophet ‏ع‎ then raised his hands
to invoke Allah 8 for help, and did not lower them until the color

11 Saheeh As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah (pg. 598); to Al-Isaabah, by Yon Hajar, who
said, “ Bukhaaree related it in its entirety with the same narrators. Although it is
true that the men who narrated this Hadeeth are all trustworthy, the chain of
the narration is disconnected.”

‎Musannaf ‘Abdur-Razzaag (3/497) and Mausoo’atu FighisSiddeeg (pg.‏ ما
.)222

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields 149

of the sky changed; a cloud then came and shaded the Muslims,
and rain began to pour down from it. The Muslims in the
encampment filled all of the contamers they had with them; some
of them walked around the perimeter of the encampment and
were amazed to see that it had rained throughout the encamp-
ment but nowhere outside of it.

The expedition of Tabook was a mammoth undertaking that
required a great deal of financial backing. In order for an army of
thirty-thousand men to travel for many days across the desert,
large quantities of supplies were needed: food, horses, mules,
camels, weapons, and armor. Moderate donations would not be
enough to finance the expedition, which is why the Messenger of
Allah #2 exhorted his Companions & to donate generously. And
they all responded enthusiastically to his appeal, with each
person giving according to his means. Especially noteworthy in
this regard was ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan ‏ره‎ who contributed perhaps
more so than anyone else.

As for ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 2, his sights were set on
outdoing Abu Bakr ¢s for once in the performance of good deeds.
This time around, he 2 truly thought that he was going to outdo
Abu Bakr « by donating one-half of his wealth to the Muslim
army. Umar & later said: “One day (prior to the Tabook
expedition), the Messenger of Allah #@ ordered us to give charity;
the timing of his request happily coincided with me having a
(sufficient) quantity of wealth. I said (to myself), ‘If there is any
day on which I will outdo Abu Bakr, it will be this day.” I then
went with one-half of my wealth, and the Messenger of Allah ##
asked, “What did you leave for your family?’ I said, ‘An amount

‎Related by Ibn Hibbaan in the Book of fihaad, chapter, “The Tabook‏ أ
‎Expedition,” Hadeeth number: 1707, to Kanzul-’Ummaal, by Al-Muttagee Al-‏
‎Hindee, chapter, “Miracles and Signs of Prophethood’; to Dalaail An-‏
‎Nubuwwah; to Mustadrak, by Al-Haakim, who said, “This Hadeeth is authentic‏
‎and fulfills the conditions of both Bukhaaree and Muslim, though neither of‏
‎them related it.”‏

‎1 As-Seerah An-Nabawtyyah Fee Dau Al-Masaadiy Al-Asliyyah (pg. 615).

150 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏قف‎

that is similar to this.” Abu Bakr & then came with all of his
wealth, and the Messenger of Allah #¢ asked him, “What did you
leave for your family?’ He said, ‘T left for them Allah and His
Messenger #8.’ And I said to him, ‘I will never outdo you in
anything.’”"!

Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ is Put in Charge of the Pilgrimage (Hajj) that
Muslims Performed in the Year 9 H

In past years, Hajj was not performed by Muslims; the
inhabitants of Makkah prevented them from entering Makkah
and performing the rites of Hajj; the situation changed for
Muslims after Makkah was conquered. In the year 8 ‏بط‎ ‘Attaab
ibn Usaid # was charged with the duty of leading the pilgrims in
their rites of Hajj. At the time, the rites of Hajj for Muslims were
not all that different from the rites of Hajj for polytheists.”!

With the approach of the Hajj season in the year 9 H, the
Messenger of Allah #¢ wanted to perform Hajj, but decided not to
and explamed the reason why when he #£ said, “Verily, the House
(.e., the Ka’bah) is visited by polytheists who, while they are
naked, perform Tawaaf (i.e., walk circuits) around it. Therefore, Ido
not wish to perform Hajj until that no longer takes place.”
Although it was true that the Muslims had full control of Makkah,
they had signed various treaties with non-Muslim tribes, tribes
that soll enjoyed the privilege of performing Hay.

It was not befitting for the Messenger of Allah #2 to perform
Hajj alongside naked polytheist pilgrims, and so he #¢ ordered
Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq # to lead the Muslim pilgrims that year.
Abu Bakr & left Al-Madeenah for Hay, and was accompanied by
a large number of Companions ‏رك‎ who took along with them
animals that they intended to sacrifice.

‎Sunan Abu Daawood, the Book of Zakaat (2/312, 313), Hadeeth number: 1687;‏ ذا
‎and to At-Tirmidheee in the chapter of Al-Manaagib. And lmam At-Tirmidhee‏
‎said, “This Hadeeth is Hasan Saheeh.”‏

‎PI As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Abu Shohbah (2/536) and Ad-Diraasaat Fee ‘Ahd
An-Nubuwwah, pg. 222.

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields 151

A little while after Abu Bakr # departed from Al-Madeenah,
chapter “ Baraa’ah (which is also called chapter, “At-Taubah’)’” was
revealed. It contained important legislations that pertained to
dealings between Muslims and polytheists; in essence, those
legislations called for the severing of all ties between the two
groups. Since both non-Muslim and Muslim pilgrims came from
all over the Arabian Peninsula to perform Hajj, it was an
opportune occasion for those new legislations to be announced
and heard by pilgrims who could then go back to their fellow
tribesmen and convey the gist of the armouncement to them. With
that purpose in mind, the Prophet #¢ ordered “Ali 4 to ride out
towards Makkah and catch up with Abu Bakr ‏نك‎

The pilgrims had not traveled very far, and “Ali 4 was able to
catch up with them at Dhil-Hulaifah. When Abu Bakr 4 saw ‘Ali
& approaching, he ¢ asked, “Are you sent to lead (us) or to bea
follower.” Abu Bakr 2 needed to know who was in charge of the
pilgrims, now that ‘Ali & had come. ‘Ali ‏ننه‎ responded, “Rather, |
have come as a follower (of you).”

They then proceeded onward to complete their rites of Hajj.
Abu Bakr # led the pilgrims along the same route that they had
followed during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance; nonetheless,
Hajj took place that year in the month of Dhil-Hijah, and not, as
has been claimed by some, in Dhil-Qafdah.

On various occasions during the pilgrimage, Abu Bakr
delivered sermons to the pilgrims and educated them about the
rites of Haj. And ‘Ali 4 was constantly beside him and would
add to Abu Bakr’s sermons: He 4 would recite for the people the
beginning of chapter “Baraa’ah,” and then he 2s would make the
following four pmportant announcements:

1) None will enter Paradise save the believers.

2) No one would ever again be permitted to be naked while
performing Tawaaf (i.e., to walk circuits) around the Ka’bah.

3) Any treaty that had been agreed upon with the Messenger of

152 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

Allah #¢ would remain valid until its expiry date, but would
not be extended after that.

4) After that year, never again would polytheists be allowed to
perform Hajj."

It was ‘Ali’s duty to make these announcements to the
pilgrims. It was not easy to be heard by the many thousands of
pilgrims who came to perform Hajj that year, and so Abu Bakr &
formed a team of men whose job it would be to help ‘Ali 2 to
convey the said announcements to all of the pilgrims.

The Prophet # sent ‘Ali ‏كه‎ not to lead the pilgrims, for that was
Abu Bakr’s job, but to make important announcements to the
pilgrims who represented the various tribes of Arabia; the most
important of those announcements was that each of their treaties
with the Prophet # would be valid until the end of its term, at
which point it would not be renewed. It was customary among
Arabs that, when a tribal chieftain wanted to announce the
continuation or cancellation of a treaty, either he would have to
personally make the announcement or he had to appoint a family
member to make the announcement on his behalf. Since this
custom was not contrary to the teachings of Islam, the Prophet #2
chose his cousin, “Ali 4, to announce the cancellation of all
treaties with polytheists on his behalf. This clearly explains why
‘Ali «3 was chosen to make the aforementioned announcements;
Shiites falsely claim that the Prophet #¢ chose him as a way of
announcing that he was more deserving of the caliphate than was
Abu Bakr #. Yet somehow — and I don’t know how — they
overlook the fact that, when Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ asked ‘Ali 4 whether he
was sent to lead or to follow, ‘Ali 45 answered that he was sent to
follow him. And it is beyond me to understand how a follower
could be said to be more deserving of the caliphate than a leader
— a leader, mind you, who was appointed to that position by

[ An-Nasaaee, the Book of the Rites of Hajj; Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah, by Tbn
Katheer; and to Saheeh As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah (pg. 625).

Abu Bakr on the Battlefields 153

none other than the Messenger of Allah we 1

Abu Bakr’s Haj that year paved the way for the farewell
pilgrimage of the following year. During Abu Bakr’s Hay, it was
announced for all to hear that the era of idol-worship was now
completely over; and a new era, one of pure Islamic Monotheism,
was being inaugurated. People had two simple choices: They
could submit to the religion of Islam, or they could enter into an
all-out war with the Muslims. The delegates of the various tribes
of Arabia who came to perform pilgrimage that year returned to
their tribes and conveyed to their fellow tribesmen the gist of
‘Ali's announcements; everyone thus came to know that the
Muslims were very serious and determined about the matter and
that the era of polytheism in the Arabian Peninsula had truly
come to end. The matter did not require much thought or
discussion; tribal chieftains realized that the path that lay ahead of
them was clear and had been paved for them. Thereafter, the
various tribes of Arabia began to send delegates to the Messenger
of Allah ##, ordering them to announce on behalf of those behind
them their entry into the fold of Islam. The year in which this took
place fittingly became known as “The Year of the Delegations.’

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Abu Shohbah (2/540).‏ أذا

Chapter 5

First: Glimpses of Hi

a) His Encounter with Finhaas, One of the Jewish Rabbis of Al-
Madeenah

One day, Abu Bakr # entered what was known asa Midraas, a
kind of Jewish temple that was specifically used for the recitation
of the Torah. Having entered the Midraas, Abu Bakr 4 saw a
group of people gathered around a man named Finhaas, who was
one of their foremost scholars; and seated beside Finhaas was
Ashya’, who was also a Jewish scholar. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ approached
the gathering and said to Finhaas, “Woe upon you! Fear Allah,
and embrace Islam. For by Allah, you indeed know that

uhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and that he has come to

156 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فد‎

you with the truth from Allah. And you have that truth written
down with you in the Torah and the Injeel.” Finhaas said, “By
Allah, O Abu Bakr, we are not needy to Allah, but rather it is
Allah Who is needy to us. We do not supplicate to Him as He
supplicates to us; in fact, whereas we do not need Him, He needs
us. Had He not needed us, he would not have asked to borrow
our weaith (ie., the distribution of charity to the poor) — which
(i.e., the borrowing of wealth for the distribution charity) is what
your companion claims. Furthermore, Allah has prohibited you
from usury, whereas He has granted it to us. Had He been All-
Rich, He would not have given us permission to deal in usury.”
Furious at Finhaas’s impudence, Abu Bakr « struck him with a
sharp blow to his face, and then said, “By the One Who has my
soul in His Hand, had it not been for the covenant that was agreed
upon between us and you, I would have struck off your head, O
enemy of Allah.” Finhaas then went to the Messenger of Allah #2
in order to complain: “O Muhammad,” he said, “look at what
your companion did to me!”

The Messenger of Allah #% asked Abu Bakr 2s, “What made you
do this?” Abu Bakr # replied, “O Messenger of Allah, verily the
enemy of Allah spoke awful and blasphemous words: He claimed
that Allah is poor and that they are rich. When he said that, | became
angry for the sake of Allah, which led me to strike him across his
face.” Finhaas, though a purported man of faith, lied, denying that he
ever said such words.as Abu Bakr 4 was then ascribing to him. Allah
&s then revealed a Verse in which he at once exposed Finhaas’s lie and
confirmed the truthfulness of Abu Bakr 4:

GSE AGE 25 Sal a TE st OS it ‏سيم‎ Gl

wn a

raed vd

€ Si NSE NBA ‏تَقُولُ‎ Sy > ae Ao aoe (MG
“Indeed, Allah has heard the statement of those (the Jews) who

say: “Truly, Allah is poor and we are rich!’" We shall record
what they have said in their killing of the Prophets unjustly, and
We shall say: “Taste you the torment of the burning (Fire).”

(Our‘an 3: 181)

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah | 157

And in regard to Abu Bakr’s show of anger, Allah & revealed
the following Verse:

“You shall certainly be tried and tested 1801 your wealth and
properties and in your personal selves, and you shall certainly hear
much that will grieve you from those who received the Scripture
before you (Jews and Christians) and from those who ascribe
partners to Allah, but tf you persevere patiently, and become Al-
Mauttagun (the pious) then verily, that will be a determining factor
in all affairs, and that is from the great matters, (which you must
hold on with all your efforts).’” (Qur'an 3: 186)

b) Preserving the Secret of the Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎

When his daughter Hafsah & became a widow, ‘Umar #
wanted her to remarry, and so searched out for a suitable match
for her. Her deceased husband’s name was Khunais ibn
Hudhaafah #, a noble man who had had the honor of
participating in the Battle of Badr. When Hafsah’s period of
mourning came to an end, “Umar ‏هه‎ met “Uthman ibn ‘Affan 2
and said to him, “If you want, I will marry you off to Hafsah.”
‘Uthman 2 responded, “I will see,” and when the two of them
met again later on, “Uthman 4 said, “I have come to the
conclusion that I do not want to get married at the present time,”
which was a polite way of refusing “Umar’s proposal. “Umar ‏يك‎
‎then met with Abu Bakr # and proposed to him on behalf of his
daughter. Without apparent reason, and in a gesture that stung
“Umar’s heart, Abu Bakr # remained silent, giving no response
whatsoever to ‘Umar’s proposal. ‘Umar « later admitted, “I was
more hurt by Abu Bakr’s response than I was by “Uthman’s.”
“Umnar # then recounted, “After a number of nights went by, the
Messenger of Allah #8 proposed to marry her, and so 1 married
her off to him. Afterwards, Abu Bakr met me and said, ‘Perhaps

158 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

you became angry at me when [1 did not answer you.’ I said, “Yes,
indeed.’ He said, “The only thing that stopped me from answering
you was my knowledge of the Prophet #¢ having mentioned her
(Le, having mentioned his intention to marry her). And so (J
remained silent because) I did not want to divulge the secret of the
Messenger of Allah ‏.عل‎ (But just so that you know:) Had he not
taken her, I would have married her ‏لكا‎

Abu Bakr 2 and the Verse about Jumu’ah Prayer

Jaabir ibn ‘Abdullah ‏ذه‎ said, “While the Prophet 8 was once
delivering his Friday sermon, a caravan (of goods) arrived in Al-
Madeenah. The Companions of the Messenger of Allah #@ raced
towards it, until only twelve men remained with the Prophet #6.”
When this occurred, Allah % revealed the Verse:

> oe“ 7 ‏د م‎ “lee ‏ا‎ ml ‏اا اك ال‎ Be te
os ‏حير‎ ail be ‏َل ما‎ AE ASS Sy Creat ‏أو هوا‎ apse ‏#وَإِذًا رَأوَأ‎
Bye ber ght Gee ete
Gayl HE Ai, Soul ‏ومن‎ all
“And when they see some merchandise or some amusement
(beating of Tambur (drum) etc.) they disperse headlong to it, and
leave you (Muhammad #£) standing (while delivering Jumu’ah’s
religious talk (Khutbah)). Say, “That wich Allah has 1s better

than any amusement or merchandise! And Allah ts the Best of
providers.” (Qur'an 62: 11)

Jaabir 4 said, “Among the twelve who remained firm in the
company of the Messenger of Allah #2 were Abu Bakr 4s and
‘Umar as.”

The Messenger of Allah #¢ Declares Abu Bakr

of the Vile Characteristic of Conceitedness

‎be Innocent‏ عاذ

‎‘Abdullah ibn “Umar as related that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “If one drags his garment (on the ground) out of

‎1١ Al-Fath (9/81) and At-Tabaqaat Al-Kubraa (8/82).
71 Muslim (863) and Al-Aihsaan Fee Taqreeb Saheeh ibn Hayyaan (15/300).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 159

conceitedness, then Allah will not look at him on the Day of
١ Resurrection.” Upon hearing his warning, Abu Bakr #4» said,
“Unless I continually hold it up, one of the two sides (of my
garment) hangs low (i.e., so does the said warning apply to me?).”
The Messenger of Allah #2 said, “But you do not do that out of
conceitedness,”“¥!

Abu Bakr’s Strict Adherence to Lawfully Derived Sustenance

One does well when one avoids that which is unlawful in
Islam; such, in fact, is required of every Muslim. Every Muslim
should also avoid that which is doubtful; some pious Muslims
go even further — most such pious Muslims were from the early
centuries of Islam — avoiding anything that, though lawful in
itself, might lead to that which is unlawful; or anything
regarding which one has the least shred of doubt. This last
quality is known, in Arabic, as Wara’; and Abu Bakr #, to be
sure, was a paragon of Wara’.

Giving an account of a story that illustrates the Wara’ of Abu
Bakr ‏ره‎ Qais ibn Abu Haazim said, “Abu Bakr had a servant,
and whenever that servant brought any food, Abu Bakr would
not eat until he first asked him about it.” Or in other words,
Abu Bakr # asked whether or not the food had been lawfully
derived. Then, if he was satisfied with his servant’s answer, he
would eat; otherwise — if he had the least bit of doubt
regarding whether the food had been lawfully procured — he
would abstain from eating. Qais continued: “One night, Abu
Bakr forgot, eating the food that his servant brought to him
without asking him about it. Only afterwards did Abu Bakr ask
him. about the food. His servant informed him about it, telling
him that which he disliked (Le., Abu Bakr had doubts regarding
whether the food had been lawfully derived). Right then and
there Abu Bakr mserted his hand deep into his mouth and
induced vomiting. And he continued to do so until he became

11 Bukhaaree (3665).

160 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

certain that none of the food he had eaten was still inside of
him.”"! Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ thus surely appreciated the strong link
between lawfully derived sustenance and having one’s suppli-
cations answered, a link that is clearly established in the
following Hadeeth. The Prophet #2 said regarding a disheveled
and dust-covered man, “He raises his hands in the direction of
the sky and says, ‘O my Lord,’ and yet his food is Haram
(unlawful), his drink is Haram, and his clothing is Haram. He is
nourished by that which is Haram, so how likely is it that his’
supplications will be answered!”!

“Allow Me to Join in Your Peace, Just as You Allowed Me to Join
im Your War” :

One day, as he was visiting the Prophet’s home, Abu Bakr #
heard his daughter ‘Aaishah ‏ذا‎ speaking in a loud voice. He
hurried towards her in order to grab her, and all the while he was
saying, “Am I seeing you raise your voice while you are speaking
to the Messenger of Allah!” He was even about to strike her on her
face, but the Prophet #¢ prevented him from doing so by standing
in between him and ‘Aaishah %. Abu Bakr « left in an angry state
of mind, after which the Prophet #€ said, “Did you see how I
saved you from him?” A number of days passed by before Abu
Bakr 4 visited again, and when he did, he # was happy to see
that their dispute had been resolved. And so he # playfully said
to them, “Allow me to join in your peace, just as you allowed me

to join in your war.” The Prophet #% responded, “We indeed do
[3]
SO.

Ul Az-Zuhd, by Imam Ahmad (110); and At-Teareekh Al-Islaamee, by Al-
Humaidee (13/19).

‎Muslim (2/703). |‏ خا

‎Seevatus-Siddeeq, by Majdee As-Sayyid (pg. 136); and Sunan Abu Daawood‏ أخا

‎(4999). It should be noted, however, that Al-Albaanee, in Da’cef Sunan Abu
Daawood, ruled that this Hadeeth is weak.

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 161
Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil

One the Day of ‘Eed, Abu Bakr # visited ‘Aaishah ‏رز‎ and
much to his chagrin, she had in her company two young girls who
were singing. Upon seeing and hearing them, he # exclaimed, “Is
the flute of Shaitaan (the Devil) being played in the house of the
Messenger of Allah ##?’’ Meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah #8,
who was home at the time, had his face turned towards the wall
and away from the young girls. He #2 said to Abu Bakr &, “Leave
both of them alone, O Abu Bakr: For indeed, each nation has a
holiday, and this is our holiday, (the holiday of) the people of
Islam.”

Based on the context of this Hadeeth, it is clear that singing,
even when practiced by young girls, was unheard of in Al-
Madeenah — which is why Abu Bakr # referred to their singing
as the flute of Shaitaan. The Prophet #8 allowed the girls to sing
because it was the Day of ‘Eed, a day during which young
children should be allowed to play and to enjoy themselves. In
another narration, the Prophet #2 gave another reason why he
was allowing the two young girls to sing: “In order for the
polytheists to know that there is spaciousness (allowance to do
things, to relax on occasion, etc.) in our religion.” 7!

Honoring His Guests

When the Prophet #¢ arrived in Al-Madeenah, he #€ was faced
with an immediate economic crisis. Many Muslims were
migrating to Al-Madeenah, and most of them were coming
without any money. True, a number of them had been wealthy;
but, due to the circumstances under which they left Makkah, and
due to the cruelty of the Quraish, they were not able to take along
with them any of their wealth. The Prophet #2 took a few key
steps to alleviate the problem: First, whenever a new Muhaajir
(one who migrated from Makkah to Al-Madeenah) arrived in Al-

"Muslim (892).
‏ذا‎ Al-Fataawaa (11/308) and Musnad Ahmad (6/116, 233).

162 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2s

Madeeenah, the Prophet #¢ appointed for him a host from the
Ansaar (the Ansaar were the native inhabitants of Al-Madeenah).
That host would then provide his Muhaajir guest with accom-
modations and food. But then when the number of Muhaajiroon
(plural of Muhaajir) increased beyond a level that could be
accommodated by the households of the Ansaar, another solution
was needed. And so the Prophet #£ started to provide newly
arrived Muhanjiroon with accommodations in the back part of his
Masjid; there they could at least have a roof over their heads until
they properly integrated, in terms of earning money, into their
new environment. Such people became known as the “people of
Suffah.” As for their nourishment, the Prophet #¢ exhorted his
Companions # to host dinners for them.

‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Abu Bakr 4 reported that the Messenger
of Allah #@ once said, “Whoever has enough food for two, then let
him take a third person (from the people of Suffah) with him. And
whoever has enough food for four, then let him take a fifth person
with him (to his home).” In response to this appeal, Abu Bakr 4
invited three of the people of Suffah to dinner. Charging his wife
and son, ‘Abdur-Rahmaan a, with the task of feeding his guests,
Abu Bakr # had dinner with the Messenger of Allah #@. Later on,
when he returned to his home, his wife asked him, “What kept you
away from your guests?” Abu Bakr & replied with a question of
his owm: “And what did you feed them?” She % said, “They said
that they would not eat until you came. Food was offered to them,
but they persisted in their refusal to eat.” Meanwhile, “Abdur-
Rahmaan ‏رك‎ who was overhearing this conversation, feared that
his father would blame him for not feeding their guests, and so he
hid himself. Abu Bakr & found him and said, “O wicked one,”
after which he spoke even more harsh words at his son. He &
could not believe that his guests still had not eaten anything. He ‏كه‎
‎was angry not only at his son, but at himself and at his guests as
well. He # asked them to eat, and he was so frustrated that he said,
“By Allah, I will never eat (this food).” In response to Abu Bakr's
oath, one of the guests swore that he would not eat the food that
was presented to him until Abu Bakr ate first.

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 163

At that point, Abu Bakr # came back to his senses, realizing
that he should not have spoken so rashly. Regarding his oath, he
‏كه‎ then said, “It was from the Devil”; or in other words, | was
wrong to have taken such an ill-advised oath. He # then
proceeded to eat, as did his guests, all of whom were amazed to
witness the miracle that then occurred. “Abdur-Rahmaan 4 later
described that miracle when he said, “By Allah, whenever we
took a morsel of food (from the tray or dish), a quantity of food
greater than what we took appeared beneath it. In the end,
everyone was full, and yet there was more food left (on the tray)
than there had been to begin with.” Abu Bakr ‏ذل‎ turned in
astonishment to his wife and said, “O sister of Banu Faraas, what
is this!” She 4% said, “No (I do not know myself), but what I am
seeing is indeed the delight of my eye! There is three times more
food now than there was to begin with.”

Abu Bakr # carried the remaining food towards the Prophet
‏.عه‎ The food was then distributed among twelve groups of men —
it appears from the narration that each group consisted of many
men ~ and they all ate from the blessed food!!!

In the course of the events that took place in this story, Abu
Bakr 2 was forced — for the very first time in his life — to break
his oath. “Aaishah & said, “Verily, Abu Bakr # never broke an
oath until Allah revealed the decree that there is an atonement
that one can make when one breaks one’s oath.” Abu Bakr # later
said, “If 1 ever took an oath (to do something or to avoid doing
something) and later saw that another course of action was better,
I would take that better course of action, and I would make
atonement for my broken oath.”!*! Regarding the case in
question, Abu Bakr & took an’ oath not to eat the food that had
been offered to his guests. After he took this oath, he realized that
it would be better to honor his guests by eating with them. He
proceeded to eat with them, and he later made atonement for his
broken oath.

‎Muslim, the Book of Drinks (2057).‏ لا
‎Sunan Al-Baihagee (10/34), and Mausoo’ah Figh Abu Bakr (pg. 240).‏ ]2

164 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

This story illustrates Abu Bakr’s generosity; we should
remember, after all, that Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ was also a Muhaayjir and
that he too had left the bulk of his wealth back in Makkah.
Therefore, he 2% was not really in a position to feed others; and yet
no sooner did the Prophet #2 make an appeal on behalf of the
people of As-Suffah than Abu Bakr # invited three of them to his
home. It should not come as a surprise, then, that such a
wondertul miracle occurred in his house — a miracle that
confirms Abu Bakr's lofty status, for such miracles (known as
Karaamaat) are bestowed, by the permission of Allah, upon the
obedient and pious slaves of Allah.

“This is Not the First Blessing that has Occurred at Your Hands,
O Family of Abu Bakr”

On a journey during which she accompanied the Messenger of
Allah #8, ‘Aaishah % became the center of everyone’s attention
when, at a place called Al-Baidaa (or Dhaatal-Jaish), her necklace
broke off. Not being able to find it, she informed the Messenger of
Allah #¢ about it, and he #¢ started to look for it. And everyone
else joined in the search. Meanwhile, another problem arose:
interrupted in their journey, the travel party had no water with
them, and were stuck in a place that was void of any water source.
As a result, no one was able to perform ablution. Some of them,
who were deeply upset about the situation, went to Abu Bakr 4
and said, “Do you not see what ‘Aaishah has done? She has forced
the Messenger of Allah #%, and everyone else along with him, to
stop (here and search for her necklace}; meanwhile, there is no
water source here, and we do not have any water with us.” Abu
Bakr ‏يه‎ betook himself in the direction of his daughter; when he
reached her, he saw that the Messenger of Allah 8 was sleeping,
with his head resting on the thigh of ‘Aaishah %. Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ said
to ‘Aaishah ‏رك‎ “You have held back the Messenger of Allah #¢
and everyone else at a place that is bereft of any water source; to
make matters worse, we do not have any water with us.” Abu

11 Al-Fataawah (11/152).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 165

Bakr 4 continued to reproach her, and he # even began to poke
her on her waist. ‘Aaishah % later recounted, “The only thing that
prevented me from moving (at all while he was poking me) was
the fact that the Messenger of Allah #2 was sleeping with his head
on my thigh 0. ‏,.ع‎ [did not want to wake him up).” The Messenger
of Allah #£ continued to sleep until the morning, at which time he
needed to perform ablution for the morning prayer — but there
was no water with which he could perform ablution. That is when
Allah 8 revealed the Verse of “Al-Tayammum,’ At-Tayammum
being an alternate form of purification that one may resort to —
using dirt — in the absence of water. Allah # said:

“Perform Tayammum with clean earth.” (Qur'an 4: 43)

The revelation of this Verse was a great blessing from Allah %&,
for it guided Muslims to an easy alternative to the standard
ablution in situations wherein water is not available. Recognizing
this great blessing, Usaid ibn Hudair said to Abu Bakr 4, “This
is not the first blessing that has occurred at your hands, O family
of Abu Bakr.” ‘Aaishah & later said, “We then sent forth the
camel upon which I was seated, and when it got up, we found the
necklace underneath it.”

The Prophet #¢ Defends Abu Bakr 2

It is established through authentic Ahaadeeth that the
Messenger of Allah #@ would forbid his Companions 4 from
arguing with Abu Bakr # and from harming him in any way
whatsoever. According to one such Hadeeth, Abu Ad-Dardaa #
described how, one day, he 4 was sitting with the Messenger of
Allah # when he # saw Abu Bakr # approaching in the
distance. Clearly upset about some matter, Abu Bakr # was
holding up the sides of his garment, so that he could walk faster
as he approached the Prophet #%. Knowing his close friend and
companion so well and for such a long time, the Prophet #2 was
certain that something was wrong. As Abu Bakr # drew nearer,

166 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قد‎

the Prophet #¢ said to those that were with him, “As for your
companion (i.e., Abu Bakr #), he has just returned from a heated

argument.”

Abu Bakr # extended greetings of peace, after which he « said,
“C) Messenger of Allah, (Umar) ibn Al-Khattaab and | disagreed
about something, and I was quick to say something to him that I
then immediately regretted. | asked him to forgive me, but he
refused. And so that is why I have come to you.” The Prophet #@
then said to him three times, “May Allah forgive you, O Abu Bakr.”

‘Umar # soon regretted his role in the argument, and so he &
went to Abu Bakr’s house, hoping to make peace with him.
Having been told that Abu Bakr was not home, ‘Umar ‏ذه‎ knew
where he could find him. ‘Umar 4s, certain that Abu Bakr & was
with the Prophet #¢, was probably afraid that Abu Bakr # had
informed the Prophet # about what had happened. And he #&
certainly had every reason to be afraid, for he had just offended
the most eminent of all of the Prophet's #¢ Companions and the
most beloved of them to the Messenger of Allah #@. As he ‏كه‎
‎approached the Prophet's gathering, ‘Umar + could not have
been unaware of the fact that the Messenger of Allah's face was
dark with anger.

Looking back and forth between the Prophet #¢ and ‘Umar &,
Abu Bakr # felt sorry for ‘Umar ‏.ل‎ His pity towards “Umar 4s, as
well as his regret for having been the first to speak harsh words
prompted him to bend down on his knees and say, “O Messenger
of Allah, by Allah, [ was more in the wrong than he was,” after
which he # repeated this phrase for a second time. The Prophet #
then said the following not to ‘Umar # in particular but to all of
his Companions #: “Verily, when Allah sent me to you, you said
(to me), “You are lying; meanwhile, Abu Bakr ‏أ‎ said (about me},
‘He has spoken the truth. In addition to that, he comforted me
(and helped me) with his self and his wealth. So, for my sake, will
you not leave my companion alone?” To add emphasis to his
point, the Prophet ## then repeated these words for a second time.
Thereafter, the narrator of this story affirmed, Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ was

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah | 167

never again harmed by any of the Prophet’s Companions."!

This story highlights a key difference between our generation
and that of the Prophet’s Companions #: Whereas most of us will
catry ona dispute for days, months, or even years, the Prophet's
Companions #, even though they did get into arguments with
one another, were quick to resolve their differences. It was only a
matter of seconds before Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ regretted the harsh words
he used when arguing with ‘Umar # — which is why he
immediately asked for forgiveness. And it was only a matter of
minutes before ‘Umar ‏هه‎ regretted his role in the dispute — which
is why he went to make peace with Abu Bakr ‏كك‎

Say: “May Allah Forgive You, O Abu Bakr’

One day, the Messenger of Allah #¢ gave Rabee’ah Al-Aslamee
# a plot of land, and he #€ gave an adjacent plot of land to Abu
Bakres. After some time passed, Rabee’ah #& and Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎disagreed about a date-palm tree that was on the boundary of
their two respective properties. Rabee’ah 4 said, “Tt is on my side
of the property line,” and Abu Bakr # said, “It is on my side of the
property line.” In the heat of the argument that ensued, Abu Bakr
# said something negative that he quickly regretted. He # then
said, “O Rabee’ah, say the same to me, and that way we will be
even.” Rabee’ah & said, “I will not do so,” to which Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎responded, “Either you will say (what I ask you to say) or 1 will
ask the Messenger of Allah ‏وك‎ to help me against you.” Not
wanting to say anything negative about Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ Rabee’ah #s
refused, saying, “No, I will not do so.”

Abu Bakr # declared that he was giving up his right to the
disputed piece of land, after which he + headed in the direction of
the Prophet #2; and Rabee’ah followed close behind.

Rabee’ah’s fellow clansmen from the Aslam tribe soon got
wind of what had happened, and so they went to Rabee’ah # and
said, “May Allah have mercy on Abu Bakr! He was the one who
said something inappropriate to you, so why is he asking the

‎Bukhaaree (3661).‏ أذ

168 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كد‎

Messenger of Allah ## for help against you?” Rabee’ah as replied,
“Do you know who he is? He is Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, the second
of two (in the cave of Thaur) and the most eminent of all Muslims.
So beware: Do not let Abu Bakr & see you taking my side against
him, for he might become angry as a result. Then he will go to the
Messenger of Allah #%, who will become angry because of Abu
Bakr’s anger; and then Allah — the Possessor of Might and
Majesty — will become angry because of their anger. And as a
result of that, Rabee’ah will become destroyed.” His fellow
clansmen asked, “So what do you command us to do?” Rabee’ah
a replied, “Go back.”

Rabee’ah « then followed Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ all by himself. When
the two of them reached the Prophet #@, Abu Bakr # gave an
account of what had happened. When Abu Bakr # stopped
talking, the Prophet #2 raised his head towards Rabee’ah 4 and
said, “O Rabee’ah, what has happened between you and As-
Siddeeq?” Rabee’ah #& gave a similar account, after which he #&
said, “Abu Bakr said something to me that he quickly regretted,
and he then said to me, ‘Say to me what I said to you, so that we
will then be even.’ But I refused to fulfill that request.” The
Messenger of Allah #¢ said, “Yes, indeed. And do not say similar
words to him, but instead say: ‘May Allah forgive you, O Abu
Bakr.””” Rabee’ah « then said, “May Allah forgive you, O Abu
Bakr.” The narrator of this story said that Abu Bakr # then turned
around and left, and he # was crying as he walked away."

What did Abu Bakr 2s say that made him feel so much regret?
To be sure, he did not curse or utter any vile words; after all, his
manners were too lofty for him to have resorted to foul language.
In fact, even during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance, he never
spoke in a profane manner. We can be certain, therefore, that,
when he was arguing with Rabee’ah 2, he said something that, at
the very worst, was borderline harsh. Yet even that bothered him,
for he # feared Allah & a great deal; it bothered him so much that
he asked Rabee’ah 4 to say the same to him. When Rabee’ah ‏ذه‎

[1] Musnad Ahmad (4/38, 59).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 169

refused, he ‏ب‎ went to the Prophet #¢. And when Rabee’ah ‏كه‎
‎asked Allah # to forgive Abu Bakr #4, and when the matter was
thus concluded, Abu Bakr # was still not satisfied and continued
to feel remorse for what he did, to the point that he cried as he
walked away from the Prophet 4% and Rabee’ah as. Most people
quickly forget their major sins; Abu Bakr 4 could not forgive
himself for his minor ones. So preoccupied was Abu Bakr 4 with
his mistake that he « forgot about his disputed property and
cared only about being forgiven by Rabee’ah ‏.كه‎ Abu Bakr &
understood all too well that the only way in which one can undo
the wrong one does to another person is to seek out his
forgiveness.

This story attests to the superior faith not just of Abu Bakr 2,
but of Rabee’ah ‏ذف‎ as well. Rabee’ah 4 refused Abu Bakr’s request
only because he honored him, respected him, and abhorred the
idea of speaking harsh words to him. Furthermore, he + forbade
his people from taking his side, knowing fully well that Abu Bakr
& was the better person and that he deserved nothing but respect
and love.

Yes, the Companions # got into arguments at times, but they
didn’t use profane language against one another; they didn’t
harbor ill feelings towards one another; and they quickly and
politely resolved their personal differences. May Allah be pleased
with Abu Bakr, Rabee’ah, and all of the Prophet's Companions.

Racing to Perform Good Deeds

This life is truly short, and one’s greatest asset is one’s time.
The things one can do today, one might not be able to accomplish
tomorrow. These might seem like self-evident truths, but most
people take time for granted, saying that they will perform better
deeds tomorrow, next week, or when they grow older. But what
guarantee do they have that they will be able to perform better
deeds later on in ther lives. Abu Bakr « lived in the moment,
using every second of his time to better himself as a Muslim. That
he « used his time well in this life, without letting a minute go by

170 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

without performing a good deed, is clearly established in the
following Hadeeth. Abu Hurairah 2 reported that, one day, the
Messenger of Allah #8 said to his Companions, “Who among you
has woken up this morning with the intention of fasting?’” Abu
Bakr ‏ذاه‎ said, “Me.” The Prophet ‏عه‎ then asked, “And who among
you has accompanied a funeral procession?” Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ said,
“Me.” The Prophet #2 asked, “Then who among you has fed a
poor person (today)? Abu Bakr # said, “Me.” The Prophet #
said, “And who among you has visited a sick person today?”” Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ said, “Me.” The Messenger of Allah # finally said,
“Whenever these (the performance of these deeds) are combined
in a person, then it means that that person will enter Paradise.’

How He ‏وو‎ Would Hold Back His Anger

Abu Hurairah related that a man cursed Abu Bakr # ina
gathering in which the Messenger of Allah #2 was present. As the
man continued to curse, the Prophet #¢ began to smile and to
show an expression of happy surprise on his face. When the man
had gone too far, Abu Bakr 4 responded by repeating to the man
some of what he had said to hmm. At that potnt, the Prophet 2¢
became angry, stood up, and walked away. Abu Bakr # caught
up to him and said, “O Messenger of Allah, when he was cursing
me, you remained seated. But when he went too far, and when [
said to him some of the things that he was saying to me, you
became angry, and you stood up.” The Prophet # said:

<3 S38 Gal ae ‏فلم رَهَدْتَ‎ ELE 345 J ‏كَانَ مَعَكَ‎ Zp
LE LS Ol ‏يا أ‎ db A ee ee ‏العاف‎
‎Ibe ds at ills (1b ste ‏حَنّ: ما مَا من عم‎ 3s
Ny ‏لد‎ Le ‏بها‎ hag tad OU AS ‏وما فح‎ cod ‏ف بها‎ ١ si
513 ob ‏ونا قتع جل بات مشأ ثرا به‎ a gay

الله بها ‎Cs‏

fo eX

OT Muslim (1028).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 171

“Verily, there was an angel with you who was answering (him)
on your behalf. But when you repeated some of the things that he
said, the Shaitaan (the Devil) came down, and tt was not befitting
for me to sit down with the Shaitaan .” The Prophet 2% continued,
“O) Abu Bakr, I will tell you about three matters, all of which are
true : If any slave (of Allah) is wronged, and if he then overlooks
(and forgives) the wrong that was done to him, Allah will honor
him and help him because of that. If someone opens the doors of
giving (gifts and charity), seeking thereby the joining of family
ties, Allah will increase for him his sustenance. And if someone
opens the doors of asking (and begging for help from other
people), seeking thereby an increase (in sustenance), Allah will
increase him (in his suffering) by giving him less.”

Abu Bakr # was both patient and forbearing, qualities he
displayed when he refrained from answering the insults of the
man who was cursing him. It was only when the man had gone
way beyond the bounds of common decency that Abu Bakr ‏ضف‎
‎responded, and he did so only because he hoped to silence the
man. The Prophet #% then explained to him that it would have
been better for him to have continued to remain patient, since
patience and restraining one’s anger are qualities that raise one’s
status with Allah 3.

Throughout his life, Abu Bakr « was known for his gentleness,
patience, and affability. This does not mean, however, that Abu’
Bakr did not become angry at times. But when he did become
angry, he did so not on account of himself, but for the sake of
Allah a. So, for instance, if he saw someone blatantly violating
the commands of Allah 88, he # would become very angry as a
result. In regard to anger and his overall character, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎understood and applied the teachings and commands of the
following Verses of the Noble Qur’an:

‎Ad-Dur Al-Manthoor, by As-Suyootee (2/74) and Majma’ Az-Zawsaid (8/190).‏ لذأ
‎This Hadeeth, however is Mursal.‏

172 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeq ‏مله‎

A ett 2 pwd “bet were os 22 a ‏عي‎ (re ‏ال‎
‏عرضها َلْسَموتٌ وَالارض‎ Anam ‏و حك ل و‎ ee mi ‏وستارعوا‎
‎ce 7 Ao 7 et ‏خخ مر 8 صمي‎ 2 “ ae a“ eae

ا ‎Baht‏ ©© الْذِن سَفِفُون فى ‎EST‏ والصضراء وَالكطين ‎GION‏

» ‏المخييري‎ 22 8G Ol ‏عَنِ‎ Sata
“And march forth in the way (which leads to) forgiveness from
your Lord, and for Paradise as wide as are the heavens and the
earth, prepared for Al-Muttaqun (the pious). Those who spend
(in Allah’s Cause — deeds of charity, alms, etc.) in prosperity
and in adversity, who repress anger, and who pardon men:

verily, Allah loves Al- Muhsinun (the good-doers).“ (Qur'an 3:
133, 134) :

“Indeed, by Allah, | Do Love that Allah Should Forgive Me”

Abu Bakr 4 was generous towards everyone, but particularly
so towards his relatives. One of his relatives, Mistah ibn
Uthaathah ‏رق‎ had no means of earning a living, and so Abu
Bakr # would routinely provide him with spending money.
Their relationship changed, briefly, when the chief of Al
Madeenah’s hypocrites, “Abdullah ibn Ubai, accused “Aaishah
of wrongdoing. The other hypocrites of Al-Madeenah sided
with ‘Abdullah ibn Ubai; sadly, even some sincere Muslims
gave credence to his accusation — one such Muslim being
Mistah. Soon thereafter, Allah 3864 exonerated ‘Aaishah ‏رك‎
‎declaring her innocence in the Noble Qur’an. Although
‘Aaishah’s ordeal had come to an end, Abu Bakr «as had ill-
feelings towards Mistah 2» — for obvious reasons, of course —
and he consequently swore by Allah % that he would never
again provide Mistah 2 with financial assistance. [It was then
that Allah @ revealed this Verse:

Si, Gal ‏أل‎ GE ‏أن‎ Be aa Ke Quali UI SE SG}

we

“oO” 4s ‏رع سر‎ vad 47 ‏عرس‎ per ed ‏و مط‎ me
Sai as ‏د ل أت ولسوا ولصفحواأ | لا صون أن‎
G BAM gore

وألله غقور >= ‎&e‏

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 173

“And let not those among you who are blessed with graces and
wealth swear not to give (any sort of help) to ‏بتع‎ kinsmen, Al-
Masakin (the poor), and those who left thetr homes for Allah's
Cause. Let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love that Allah
should forgive you? And Allah is Oft-Forgtving, Most
Merciful.”” (Qur'an 24: 22)

Upon hearing this Verse for the first time, Abu Bakr 2s said,
“Indeed, by Allah, I do love that Allah should forgive me.” He ‏ف‎
‎not only forgave Mistah 4, but continued to spend on him as he
had done before. He # even said, “By Allah, I will never stop
spending on him.’”"! The implications of the Verse were clear to
Abu Bakr ‏ننه‎ If he forgave others for their misdeeds in this life,
Allah & would forgive him in the Hereafter.

Doing Business in Ash-Sham (Syria and Surrounding Areas)

During the lifetime of the Prophet #2, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ went ona
business trip to Basrah, which is from the lands of Ash-Sham
(Syria and surrounding areas). He # loved the Prophet ‏د وله‎ great
deal, desiring nothing more than to spend time in his company,
and yet his profound love did not stop him from going out on a
business trip to Ash-Sham. The Prophet #% also loved Abu Bakr ‏قله‎
‎a great deal, loving his company more so than the company of
any other companion, and yet he did not prevent Abu Bakr 2
from leaving.” That they were both resigned to the necessity
Abu Bakr’s journey establishes the importance of earning a living,
of not having to depend on charity or help from others, and of
having enough money to be able to provide help and assistance to
poor and needy people.

Abu Baker’s Sense of Decency and Modesty

Even before the legislations of Hyaab and of segregation
between the sexes were revealed, Abu Bakr # had a profound

"I Bukhaaree (4750).
Cl Fathul-Baaree (3/357) and Al-Khilaafah Ar-Ranshidah Wad-Daulatul-Amawiyyah
(pg. 163).

174 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏وف‎

sense of decency and modesty, not just for himself, but for his
wives as well. ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr ibn Al’ Aas ‏ذه‎ said, “A number
of people from the Banu Haashim clan visited Asmaa bint “Umais,
who was, at the time, married to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg. When
Abu Bakr # entered and saw them, he hated the fact that they
were there (with Asmaa).” A short while later Abu Bakr «4
informed the Prophet #2 about what had happened, and the
Prophet #¢ declared Asmaa’s innocence in the matter. The
Prophet #¢ then went to his pulpit and delivered a sermon,
during the course of which he #¢ said:

ek, oF Bae Bee ees ie es ES 1
(OLS) ‏ومعه وجل أو‎ Vj ks ies ‏«لا يدل رجل بعد يَوْمِي هذا عَلَى‎
“After this day let ne man enter upon a woman whose husband is

absent, unless he has with him another man or two other
men ‏نذا"‎

His Fear of Allah 3

When one truly and sincerely fears Allah 4, one will carefully
avoid perpetrating sins, and one will act based on his knowledge
that Allah %& sees him both when he is out in public and when he
is alone in private. Allah % ordered believers to fear Him when
He 88 said:

Se al wip toh Ke Sai gil Ge UST bo gs

Rosie Gis

“O Children of Israel! Remember My Favor which I bestowed
upon you, and fulfill (your obligations to) My Covenant (with
you) so that I fulfill (My Obligations to) your covenant (unth
Me), and fear not but Me.” (Qur'an 2: 40)

In another Verse, Allah 8€ said:

‎Ar-Riyaadh An-Nadhrah Fee Manaagib AL’Asharah, by Abu Ja’far Ahmad At-‏ ذا
‎Tabaree (pg. 237}.‏

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 175

r

م

7 3 7 120 ‏و وهر‎ a “ o pe gy oe ey
#45 ‏يما حت‎ ail ‏نوا‎ Wy EE SE ‏ومن‎ SEIS cally

oe

“So stand (ask Allah to make) you (Muhammad #&) firm and
straight (on the religion of Islamic Monotheism) as you are
commanded and those (your companions) who turn in repentance
(unto Allah) with you, and transgress not (Allah's Legal Limits).
Verily, He is All-Seer of what you do.” (Quran 11:112)

And Allah 4% promised a tremendous reward for those who
fear Him:

ا ”0

“Ge rn ae
6 ‏سآن‎ eds 3 ‏ماق مقام‎ cls

oe

“But for him who (the true believer of Islamic Monotheism who
performs all the duties ordained by Allah and His Messenger
Muhammad #8, and keeps away (abstain) from all kinds of sin
and evil deeds prohibited in Islam and) fears the standing before
his Lord, there will be two Gardens (1.e., in Paradise.) (Qur'an
55: 46)

Without a doubt, Abu Bakr « feared Allah 4 a great deal.
Muhammad ibn Seereen said, “With the exception of the Prophet
#2, no individual was more fearful (of Allah)...than Abu Bakr 2.”
QOais said, “I once saw Abu Bakr # holding on to the edge of his
tongue, and all the while he was saying, “This is what has placed
me in so many difficult situations”! Abu Bakr 2 once
summarized the importance of fearing Allah 3 when he ‏ذه‎ said,
“Cry, and if you are not able to cry, then at least feign to cry.”71

istinguishing Qualities

Second: Abu Bakr’s Most

During the pre-Islamic days of ignorance, Abu Bakr # shined
as a person, displaying all of the qualities of a modest, decent,

Ul Sifatus-Safwah (2/253).
‏اذا‎ Az-Zuhd, by Imam Ahmad, chapter, “The Zuhd of Abu Bakr” (pg. 108).

178 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

people in attendance exclaimed, “How perfect Allah is indeed, is
there a cow that speaks?” The Prophet ## said, “Verily, 1 believe in
this (.e., in the story I have related to you), as do Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, even though both of them were not present when the
incident occurred.” He #@ then told them about a man who was
among his sheep when a wolf attacked the flock and then took
away with it a single sheep. The shepherd pursued the wolf, and
just as he was rescuing his sheep, the wolf said, "You have saved
this one from me, but who will protect it on the day of As-Saba’
{i.e., the day on which shepherds will abandon their flocks of
sheep), the day on which there will be no shepherd for it other
than me?” The Prophet’s Companions # asked in astonishment,
“How perfect Allah is, and is there a wolf that speaks?’ The
Prophet #8 said, “Verily, 1 believe in this (story), as do Abu Bakr
and “Umar, even though both of them were not present when it
occurred.””4J

Tt was because of Abu Bakr’s strong and unwavering Faith that
the Messenger of Allah #2 loved him so much — loved him, in
fact, more than any other companion. “Amr ibn Al-’Aas &
reported that he once asked the Messenger of Allah #¢, “Who
among people is most beloved to you?” He #8 said, “Aishah.”
‘Amr # asked, “And among men?” The Prophet #2 responded,
“Her father.” “And who is next?” “Amr # asked. The Prophet ‏يكل‎
‎said, “"Umar ibn Al-Khattaab,” after which he #¢ went on to
enumerate a number of other companions.”

And it was because of Abu Bakr’s strong faith that he deserved
Paradise and the honor of being invited to enter it from all of its
gates - as opposed to others, most of whom will be invited from
specific gates only. Abu Moosa Al-’Asharee ‏ذف‎ related that, one
day, he performed ablution in his house, after which he went out
and said to himself, “This day, I will remain with and adhere
closely to the company of the Messenger of Allah.’”’ When he went
to the Masjid and saw that the Prophet # was not there, he was

Muslim (2388).
‏أخا‎ Bukhaaree (3662).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 179

told that the Prophet #@ had left a short while ago. Having been
informed about which direction the Prophet #2 was heading
towards, Abu Moosa ‏كذ‎ went out to look for him, and caught up
with him just as he was about to enter an enclosed area, inside of
which the Arees well was situated.

Abu Moosa 4 sat at the gate and waited until the Prophet #2
had finished both relieving himself and performing ablution. He
4# then went inside and extended greetings of peace to the
Prophet #¢, who was seated along the edge of the structure, with
his legs hanging down inside of the well. Returning to the gate,
Abu Moosa 2 said, “Today I will be the gatekeeper of the
Messenger of Allah.” When, after a short while later, Abu Bakr &
came and pushed open the gate, Abu Moosa # asked, “Who is
it?” After Abu Bakr & identified himself, Abu Moosa 2 said,
“Hold on (a minute),” after which he went inside and said, “O
Messenger of Allah, here is Abu Bakr, asking permission to
enter.” The Prophet #2 replied, “Grant him permission, and give
him glad tidings of Paradise.” Abu Moosa 4 returned to the gate
and said, “Enter, and the Messenger of Allah gives you glad
tidings of Paradise.” Having entered inside of the enclosed area,
Abu Bakr 4 sat down to the right of the Messenger of Allah 2,
and he too extended his legs, so that they were hanging down
inside of the well. The narration then goes on to mention how
‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 4s and “Uthman ibn ‘Affaan 4 also visited
the Prophet #% a short while thereafter."

In another Hadeeth, Abu Hurairah # reported that the
Messenger of Allah ‏عله‎ said, “Whoever spends two of the same
thing in the path of Allah will be invited from the gates of
Paradise as follows: “O slave of Allah, this is good.” Whoever is
from the people of prayer will be invited from the gate of prayer.
Whoever is from the people of Jihaad will be invited from the gate
of Jihaad. Whoever is from the people of fasting will be invited
from the gate of Ar-Rayyaan. And whoever is from the people of

١1 Bukhaaree (3674).

180 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

charity will be invited from the gate of charity.” Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎asked, “And is there anyone who will be invited from all of those
gates?’” The Prophet #% said, “Yes, and I hope that you will be one
of them, O Abu Bakr.

His Knowledge

That Abu Bakr ‏مهد ل‎ the most superior of the Prophet's
Companions & is a fact that is well known to every Muslim — to
the scholar and layman alike, as well as to the old and young
alike. But the average Muslim might be surprised to learn that he
a was also the most knowledgeable of them as well, a distinction
that, although relatively unknown among the common masses of
Muslims, is a point of agreement among the scholars of Ahlus-
Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah |!

That he excelled so much in knowledge is clearly attributable
to the fact that he spent more time with the Prophet 4¢ than did
anyone else from among the Prophet’s Companions ‏.كك‎ Whether
it was day or night, in Al-Madeenah or away on a journey, Abu
Bakr 2 was likely — other than when he had personal business to
take care of — in the company of the Messenger of Allah #%. Even
after “Eesha prayer, it was often Abu Bakr « alone who remained
in the company of the Prophet # and discussed important affairs
that pertained to the welfare of the Muslim masses. The Prophet
#@ was the source of divine knowledge on earth, and Abu Bakr ‏دك‎
‎was almost always there to learn directly from him.

As a result of his profound knowledge, Abu Bakr 4 was the
most trusted of the Prophet’s advisors. When the Prophet #¢
would consult his Companions 4 about a matter, very often it
was Abu Bakr # who spoke first, and it was not uncommon for
him. to be the sole companion to offer a suggestion. Whenever
Abu Bakr 4 suggested a course of action, the Prophet #% agreed
and followed his wise counsel. And if someone offered a
suggestion that was contrary to the one offered by Abu Bakr ‏رك‎

‎Bukhaaree (3666).‏ ذا
‎Al Fataawah (13/127).‏ كا

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 181

and the Prophet #% was left with a difficult choice to make, he 6
invariably followed Abu Bakr’s advice.

ee

When the Prophet #2 had to appoint a leader of the pilgrims
who performed Hajj in the year 9 Ti — which was the first Hay
that was ever performed from Al-Madeenah — he #¢ chose Abu
Bakr 4 for the job, a job that was especially difficult since Hajj is
composed of a detailed set of rites. The Prophet #2 was
confident that Abu Bakr 2 was an expert scholar in regard to
those rites and.that he could properly lead the pilgrims to
perform them. Similarly, when the Prophet # fell ill during the
latter weeks of his life, he 8 appointed Abu Bakr 4 to lead his
Companions # in prayer. As for the declaration of charity,
which contains in it detailed rulings about Zakaat (obligatory
charity), Anas’s narration from Abu Bakr # regarding it is the
most reliable of all narrations that deal with the topic."
Throughout the centuries, Islamic jurists have relied on that
narration to learn not just about the basic rulings of Zakaat but
also about its more detailed rulings that have to do with the
important topic of abrogation.

Abu Bakr 2 issued a number of legal rulings, and not a single
one of them ran contrary to the implications of a revealed text;
what this means is that, as far as we know, it is not recorded
anywhere that he made a mistake regarding a legal ruling. This
was not true for other Companions ‏رك‎ for whom it was not out of
the ordinary to issue a mistaken ruling.!!

What was truly amazing about Abu Bakr’s knowledge and
about the Prophet's implicit trust m his capability as a jurist was
that Abu Bakr 4 issued legal rulings even in the presence of the
Prophet #¢. When he ‏ذه‎ would issue such rulings, the Prophet 2
would confirm the correctness of them -— which, as we have
already seen, is what occurred regarding Abu Qataadah’s share of
the booty on the Day of Hunain.

‎Bukhaaree (1448).‏ أ
‎“Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq: Afdalus-Sahaabah Wa-Ahaggthim Bil-Khilaafah (pg. 60).‏

182 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

It was after the death of the Prophet #¢, more so than at
anytime else, that Abu Bakr # established himself as the pre-
eminent scholar of the Muslim nation. For every crucial issue that
arose, Abu Bakr ‏كله‎ was the only one who had a clear and correct
answer. When the Prophet #¢ died, for example, only Abu Bakr &
was cognizant of the reality of what was happening, and it was
him alone who guided the rest of the Prophet’s Companions * to
the same level of awareness. He achieved this end by quoting for
them Verses which clearly indicated the imevitability of the
Prophet's death. Then, during the early days of his caliphate, he &
was faced with at least two crucial decisions: Whether or not to
fight the apostates, and whether or not to send out Usaamah’s
army, an army that had been mobilized a short while earlier by
none other than the Prophet #&. Others, ‘Umar # included,
faltered, offering reasons for why the Muslims should not fight
the apostates and for why Usaamah’s army should not be
dispatched for the mission for which the Prophet #8 mobilized it
in the first place. But Abu Bakr # knew better, and he neither
faltered nor wavered, but instead followed a clear course of
action. Furthermore, it was Abu Bakr # who told the
Companions 4 where the Prophet #¢ should be buried, and he
clarified for them important rulings that pertained to the caliphate
and to the estate of the Prophet 2.

The Messenger of Allah #6 once saw a dream that attested to
the profound knowledge of Abu Bakr ‏.ف‎ “Abdullah ibn “Umar 4s
reported that the Messenger of Allah #8 said, “It was as if I was
being given a large, filled glass of milk. 1 drank from it until |
became full. I then saw that milk flowing through my veins,
between my skin and my flesh. Some milk was still left (in the
container), and I gave it to Abu Bakr.” The Companions & said,
“O Messenger of Allah, this is knowledge that Allah has given to
you, and when you were filled with it, and some amount was still
left over, you gave it to Abu Bakr.” The Prophet #8 said, “You are
correct (i.e,, you have correctly interpreted my dream).”!

11 Al-Aihsaan Fee Tagreeb Saheeh ibn Hibbaan(15/269).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 183

One area of particular interest to Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was the
interpretation of dreams. In the mornings, he ‏مف‎ would say to his
companions, “If someone among you has seen a good dream,
then let him relate it to ‏“.كنا‎ The dreams of righteous people, Abu
Bakr 2 believed, frequently imparted good and true meanings. It
is related that he #s once said, “For a Muslim, particularly one
who performs ablution well, to see a good dream is more beloved
to me than such and such.”

Ibn “Abbaas # reported that a man went to the Messenger of
Allah #@ and said, “Verily, last night I saw a dream. In it, a cloud
was raining down (cooking) fat and honey, and | watched as
people gathered what was raining down with their hands. Some
took a lot, while others took only a little. Then a rope appeared —
one that reached from the ground all the way up until the sky. I
saw you take hold of it and climb up. Next, another man took
hold of it, and it then broke, but it was then rejoined again.” Abu
Bakr # said, “O Messenger of Allah, may my father be sacrificed
for you. By Allah, you will grant me permission, and I will
interpret it.” The Prophet #¢ said, “Go ahead and interpret.” Abu
Bakr 2 said, “As for the cloud, it is Islam; and that which was
raining, in terms of (cooking) fat and honey, represented the
Qur’an and its sweetness pouring down. Some were taking a lot
from the Qur'an, whereas others were taking only a little. As for
the rope that was connected from the sky to the earth, it is the
truth that you are upon. You take hold of it, and Allah raises you
(in ranking). Then, after you (i.e., after your death), another man
will take it and climb it. Then yet another man will take it and
climb it. O Messenger of Allah, may my father be sacrificed for
you, inform me: Am I correct, or am I mistaken (in my
interpretation of this dream)?” The Prophet #¢ said, “You are
correct regarding part of it, and you are mistaken regarding part
of it.” Abu Bakr & said, “Then by Allah, you will inform me about
the part regarding which I was mistaken.” The Prophet #2 said,
“Do not swear (i.ec., do not swear that [ will inform you, for I will

LY Khutab Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq (pg. 155).

184 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2%

not do so),

According to another narration, “Aaishah 4 saw a dream in
which it was as if three moons had fallen into her home. She gave
an account of her dream to Abu Bakr 2s, who said, “Tf your dream
will come true, three of the best inhabitants of earth will be buried
in your home.” Later on, when the Prophet #¢ died, Abu Bakr #
reminded ‘Aaishah % of her dream by saying, “O ‘Aaishah, here
(i.e., the Prophet #2) is the best of your moons.””! Her dream
became completely fulfilled when Abu Bakr ‏فض‎ and then “Umar ‏نك‎
‎were buried in her house. After the Prophet 8, Abu Bakr 2 was
the best interpreter of dreams from the entire Muslim Ummah
(nation). |

Despite his profound knowledge, or perhaps more correctly
because of his profound knowledge, Abu Bakr # carefully
avoided speaking when he did not know the answer to a
question. [braheem An-Nakha’ee reported that, on one particular
occasion, Abu Bakr & recited the following Verse:

01, ES}
“And fruits and Abba (herbage, etc.)’’ (Qur'an 80: 31)
Someone asked, “What does Abba mean?” Others attempted to
interpret the word, but not so Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ who instead said,
“Verily, this (Le., speaking without knowledge) is posturing.

What earth will carry me and what sky will give me shade if I say
about the Book of Allah that which I do not know?’®!

His Supplications

Supplication is a door that leads to much goodness. If a
believer enters the door of supplication, he will be showered

"") Bukhaaree (7046).
‏لما‎ Taareekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 139).

‎Fathul-Baaree (13/285). It should be noted, however, that, between Ibraaheem‏ اذا
‎An-Nakha’ee and Abu Bakr, the chain of the narration is disconnected.‏

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 185

with a great many blessings both in this life and in the
Hereafter. It is for this reason that Abu Bakr 4 strove to invoke
Allah #8 often and to thus establish a firm connection with Him.
Allah 38 said:
a Cae ‏اسل‎ a Ag ae ek ‏ى الى‎ he ‏م‎
‎SiGe ‏الذيت سَتَكْرونَ عَنَ‎ OS ‏أسْنَحِبَ‎ Geet ats ‏#وَهَالَ‎
‎y ber £48 ‏ل سي سي‎
Opals ‏مسي ل حلون جحهم‎
“Your Lord said: “invoke Me, (1.e., believe in My Oneness
(islamic Monotheism)) (and ask Me for anything) I will respond
to your (invocation). Verily! Those who scorn My worship (1.€.,
do not invoke Me, and do not believe in My Oneness, (Islamic
Monotheism)) they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!”
(Qur’an 40: 60)

And in another Verse, Allah 3€ said:

A beg

gall $565 Col C3 Ob EF wake IIS yop

& ix
€ 9355 ‏مله‎ < Fe 555 J Is ~ i

“And when My slaves ask you (O Muhammad 2) concerning
Me, then (answer them), I am indeed near (to them by My
Knowledge). I respond to the invocations of the supplicant when
he calls on Me (unthout any mediator or intercessor). So let them
obey Me and believe in Me, so that they may be led aright.”
(Qur'an 2: 186)

dot fe 2
‏دعأن‎ |

The Prophet #@ invoked Allah both day and night, even
though he had been forgiven for his past and future mistakes.
This impressed upon Abu Bakr #, who was frequently in the
company of the Prophet #, the importance of supplication. Abu
Bakr « strove not just to invoke Allah 3% frequently, but also to
invoke Allah $ with the same beautiful invocations that he heard
from the Prophet #8. It is true that one may supplicate to Allah 3%
extemporaneously and with one’s own wording, so long as the
meaning of what one says is correct. And yet it is equally true that
the best wordings of invocations were those that were uttered by

186 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

the Prophet #2; no one can invent wordings that are better than
those used by the Prophet 2, who knew best what to ask from
Allah 8 and how to ask for it. Especially during prayer one
should try to limit oneself, as much as possible, to the Prophet's
invocations, which is why Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ once asked the Prophet 28,
“O Messenger of Allah, teach me a supplication with which I can
invoke Allah during my prayer.” The Prophet #8 = responded’

‎pal ny‏ | ني ظَلَمْتُ تفسِي ‎Ub‏ كَثيرًا ‎Spill ja V5‏ إلا

‎gaa a au) eer ‏وَأ‎ Nike ‏قَاغفة لي معفرة مر‎ oi

‎“Say: ‘O Allah, verily, I have wronged myself very frequently,
and no one can forgive sins except for You ; so forgive me with a
forgiveness from Yourself, and have mercy on me. Verily, You
are Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.’ a

‎On another occasion, Abu Bakr # said, “O Messenger of Allah,
teach me a supplication that I can use to invoke Allah in the
morning and the evening.” The Prophet #8 said:

‎wo

‎SNUG ‏فَاطِرَ السَّمَّاوَاتِ‎ Se |:

‎i

‎rey BEEN 25 ‏الم‎

‎“Say: ‘O Allah, Knower of the unseen and the seen, Creator of
the heavens and the earth, Lord and Sovereign of all things, I bear
witness that none has the right to be worshipped except You. |
take refuge in You from the evil of my soul and from the evil and

‎LS Muslim (2705) and Bukhaaree (843).

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 187

Shirk (To associate others with Allah in those things which are
specific to Him) of the devil, and from committing wrong against
ny soul or bringing such upon another Muslim.’ Say this in the

morning, in the evening, and when you lie down on your
bed 0

Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ learned from the Prophet # that no one is exempt
from the need to constantly repent and ask for forgiveness from
Allah $8. Allah 3 said:

i ed

GUN ye &

det
ed vor a & a ‏سن مود‎ 7

39 oe 4 Ee 4pm FRE ‏ساس‎ ge Fw,
‏المتتفقين‎ ail ‏ظلوما جهولا 09 ليعذب‎ of aa) Quy! Gd: 3 ‏ا‎
‎&

3
=
h
C.,
98
5
eh ON
3
orm
5

4

BOR SEG be ki ait
Ql) ‏عُفورا‎

“Truly, We did offer Al-Amanah (the trust or moral
responsibility or honesty and all the duties which Allah has
ordained) to the heavens and the earth, and the mountains, but
they declined to bear tt and were afraid of tt (t.e., afraid of Allah’s
Torment). But man bore it. Verily, he was unjust (to himself)
and ignorant (of its results), So that Allah will punish the
hypocrites, men and women, and the men and women who are
Al-Mushrikun (polytheists, idolaters, pagans, disbelievers, in
the Oneness of Allah, and His Messenger Muhammad #8). And
Allah will pardon (accept the repentance of) the true believers of

the Islamic Monotheism, men and women. And Allah is Ever
Oft-Foretwing, Most Merciful.” (Qur’an 33: 72, 73)

mr

Man is in constant need of Allah’s mercy, which is why one
should frequently invoke Allah for guidance, help, mercy, and
forgiveness. In a Hadeeth that is related both in Bukhaaree and
Muslim, the Messenger of Allah 28 said:

‎Abu Daawood (5067) and At-Tirmidhee (3529).‏ لذأ

158 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

ve BLE Bey > 5 ‏ده‎
‎(glo ‏يدخل الجنة أحد‎
“No one will enter Paradise by dint of ms deeds.”

The Companions # asked, “Not even you, O Messenger of
Allah?” The Prophet 2 replied:
(ey ‏أنا إلا أن يَتَعْمدَنِيَ الله‎ Vp
“Not even me, unless Allah covers me with His ‏لكأ رم رمرم‎

This Hadeeth does not contradict the saying of Allah:

acai Ni ‏ف‎ Sal & tee Yt Kp

“Eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent on before you
in days past!.”” (Qur'an 69: 24)

In this Verse, Allah 28 established a cause and effect link
between performing good deeds and entering Paradise. And in
the above-mentioned Hadeeth, the Prophet #@ made it clear that
Paradise is greater than what is deserved through the perfor-
mance of good deeds and that it is therefore through Allah’s
mercy alone that one will enter Paradise and enjoy its blissful
existence.

Incidentally, the statement “If Allah loves a slave, sins will do
him no harm’ simply means that, if Allah loves one of His slaves,
He will inspire him to repent and to ask for forgiveness for his
sins. Regarding such a person, he will not persist in perpetrating
sins. Therefore, one is truly misguided if one thinks that a person
who persists in perpetrating sins will not be harmed as a result of
them. In short, we should all be clear on the following: Whoever
performs an atom’s weight of good will see it (on the Day of
Resurrection). And whoever performs an atom’s weight of evil
will see it (on the Day of Resurrection).

‎Bukhaaree (6463).‏ ذا

Life for Abu Bakr in Al-Madeenah 189

Abu Bakr 4 placed his complete trust on Allah, supplicating to
Him and asking for His help and guidance throughout his entire
life. Following are a few of the invocations that have been
ascribed to Abu Bakr 4s:

1) “(O Allah) 1 ask You for complete blessirigs in all things, as L ask
You to make me thankful for those blessings until You are pleased
with me, and even after You become pleased with me..."

2) “O Allah, lask You for that which is best for me in the end....O
Allah, make the last thing You give me from goodness be Your
Pleasure and the highest of stations in the gardens of bliss.”

3) “O Allah, make the best of my life be the end of my life; the best
of my deeds the last of them; and the best of my days the day
upon which I will meet ‏لقا ”.بولا‎

4) If he # heard anyone praise him, he 2 would say, “O Allah,
You are more knowledgeable regarding me than I am myself,
and | am more knowledgeable regarding myself than other
people are. O Allah, make me better than what they think
(about me), forgive me for that which they do not know (about
me), and do not hold me accountable for that which they say
(about me)”

These, in brief, are some of Abu Bakr’s noble qualities. It was
these qualities, along with his other honorable characteristics, that
enabled him, after the death of the Prophet 2, to steer the ship of
Islam through violent winds, turbulent waves, and dark trials to
the shores of safety.

‎Ash-Shukr, by Ibn Abee Ad-Dunyaa (109) and to Khutab Abu Bakr (pg. 39).‏ اذا
‎“I Khutab Abu Bakr As-Giddeeg (pg. 139).‏

‎Kanzul-‘Amaal (5030) and Khutab Abu Bakr (pg. 39).‏ اذا

‎Asadul-Ghaabah (3/324).‏ أذا

Chapter 1

mic

Banu Saa’ idah

First: The Death of the Prophet ‏كه‎

Through the grace and permission of Allah, people who have
pure souls are sometimes able to see glimpses of things on the
other side of the curtain that separates the seen world from the
unseen world. People with pure hearts sometimes have the
prescience to make educated guesses about the future. And people
who have minds that radiate with the light of faith sometimes are
so tuned in to what happens around them and to the universal
laws by which Allah & governs this uniVerse that every day events
of life-reveal to them things that others are blind to. These were all
qualities that the Prophet ‏بي‎ g possessed i in ample degree. a

Ag Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Abu Shohbah (2/587).

194 The Biography of Abu Baky As-Siddeeq #

Certain Verses of the Qur'an confirm the humanness of the
Prophet #¢, making clear that, like all other human beings,
previous Prophets 2 included, he would taste death and
experience its painful pangs. The Prophet # sensed from
certain Verses of the Qur'an that were revealed late in his life
that the time of his death was approaching. And in certain
authentically related Ahaadeeth, the Prophet #¢ referred to his
death, sometimes explicitly and other times only implicitly. When
he # implicitly referred to his death, only a few Companions 4,
such as Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ Al-Abbaas ‏رذن‎ and Mu’aadh 4, understood
that he #2 was alluding to his death.

The Final Illness of the Messenger of Allah ‏كه‎

Upon returning from his Hajj in the month of Dhil-Hijjah, the
Messenger of Allah # remained in Al-Madeenah for the rest of the
month and for the months of Al-Muharram and Safar of the year 10
H. He #€ quickly began to mobilize a huge army, and he #8 appointed
Usaamah ibn Zaid ibn Haarithah ‏ما‎ be its leader, ordering him to
lead his army to the lands of Al-Balqaa and Palestine.

Many prominent Companions # from both the Muhaajiroon
and the Ansaar were a part of Usaamah’s army. Some people in
the army took issue with the Prophet's appointment of Usaamah
‏كف‎ as their leader; at the time, Usaamah 4 was only eighteen years
old. They were not content that such a young and inexperienced
person ~— not to mention the fact that he was the son of a freed
slave, which was still an issue for some who had only recently
embraced Islam — was leading them, when more prominent
members of the Muhaajiroon and Ansaar would be common troops
under his command. In regard to their complaining, it should be
noted that the likes of Abu Bakr # and “Umar & were also
members of the army.

The Prophet #¢ did not accept their arguments, explaining to
them that their complaints were unfounded. He 8 said, “If they
call into question his leadership, then they had previously called
into question the leadership of his father: And by Allah, he was

The Death of the Prophet #¢ 195

most worthy and deserving of assuming his role as leader; and he
was among the most beloved of people to me. And verily, with
him gone (for Zaid # died in the Battle of Mo’tah), his son is now
among the most beloved of people to me.” As the members of
Usaamah’s army were preparing for the upcoming expedition,
the Prophet #@ became sick with an ailment that was to be his last
in this world.

From the time the Prophet 2 fell ill until the time he died, a
number of events occurred. For instance, the Prophet 8 visited the
graves of Uhud’s martyrs and prayed over them; he # decreed that
all polytheists should be expelled from the Arabian Peninsula, at the
same time making it clear that their delegations could still come fora
visit; and he #@ forbade Muslims from turning graves into Masjids.
When his condition worsened, he #¢ asked to be taken care of in
“Aaishah’s house. In the speeches he #@ gave during his final days, he
#2 advised people to have good thoughts about Allah; to perform
prayer properly, consistently, and on time; and to treat the people of
the Ansaar with the respect they deserved; furthermore, he #8
informed them that the only thing that remained from the glad
tidings of prophethood was the true dream. The Prophet #2 was
referring to how there are various aspects of Prophethood —
revelation being the most prominent one; and to how, of all of those
aspects, all that remained was the true dream. What this meant was
that, with his death, revelation would cease to descend; nonetheless,
righteous people could still see true drearns — L.e., dreams in which
one sees something that later on occurs in real life.

Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudree 4 gave an account of a sermon that
the Prophet ‏عله‎ delivered during the illness that ended with his
death. In that sermon, the Prophet #¢ said, “Verily, Allah gave a
servant of His a choice between this world and what He has with
him (in terms of rewards), and that servant chose what is with

‎Bukhaaree, the Book of the Virtues of the Prophet’s Companions, chapter, “The‏ لذأ
‎Virtues of Zaid ibn Haarithah,” Hadeeth mamber: 3730; and Muslivm, the‏
اه ‎Virtues of the Companions, chapter, “The Virtues of Zaid ibn Haarithah‏
‎and Usaamah ibn Zaid 2.‏

196 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

Allah.” Abmost nobody in the audience recognized the fact that
the Prophet #£ was referring to himself: he #g was the servant in
the story. 1 say almost nobody because there was one person who
did understand the implications of the story, and that was Abu
Bakr ‏.ها‎ When the Prophet #¢ said that the servant chose what is
with Allah, Abu Bakr 2 began to cry. And everyone around him.
couldn’t understand why he # had suddenly become so
melancholy. Abu Sa’eed « later mused, “The Messenger of
Allah #@ was the one who was being given the choice, and Abu
Bakr # was the most knowledgeable person among ‏ترون‎

On one of the days of his final illness, the Prophet ‏يله‎ became so
sick that, when it was time for prayer, and when Bilaal 4s made
the call to prayer, the Prophet #@ said, “Order Abu Bakr to lead
the prayer.” It was said, “Verily, Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted
person who is prone to extreme sadness. So if he stands in your
place, he will not be able to lead the people in prayer.” The
Prophet #£ repeated the command, and they repeated the same
answer; and then for a third time, the Prophet 8% repeated the
command, and they still gave him the same response. ‘The people
who gave him the above-mentioned response were all women; he
# said to them, “Verily, you are like the female companions of
Yusuf! Order Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.”

After Abu Bakr 2 went out to lead the prayer, the Prophet #¢
regained a feeling of liveliness, and so he #2 went out to attend the
congregational prayer; and he walked to the prayer with the help
of two men, one to his right and the other to his left. The narrator of
this story said, “It was as if I saw his legs dragging along on the
ground as a result of the extreme weakness he was feeling.” Abu
Bakr ‏كه‎ wanted to step back, so that the Prophet #€ could lead the
people in prayer; but the Prophet £ signaled to him that he should
remain where he was. The Prophet #¢ was still being helped along
until he #¢ sat down beside Abu Bakr ‏.ف‎ Al--Amash, one of the
narrators of this story, was asked, “So the Prophet #¢ was praying,

‎Bukhaaree, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, Hadeeth mamber: 3654; and‏ لذأ
‎Muslim, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, Hadeeth number: 2382.‏

The Death of the Prophet ‏يك‎ 197

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ was followmg his prayer, and the people were
following the prayer of Abu Bakr?’ Al--Amash nodded his head,
indicating that, yes: that is exactly how it happened.

Abu Bakr # continued to lead the people in prayer until

apartment just as the Muslims were busy lining up for prayer.
While they were praying, he # lay there, watching them and
appreciating how far they had come in recent years. Just as a
carpenter gives his work a final look of appraisal, the Prophet #¢
was looking at the finished products of his many years of toil and
sacrifice. And what he #2 saw pleased him a great deal, for he #¢
was looking at people who devotedly performed congregational
prayer, regardless of whether he was there to supervise them or
not. The Prophet's heart was content, for he #2 achieved with his
people that which no other Prophet had achieved before him.

Thus the Prophet ‏عله‎ became reassured that, once he 2 died,
his Companions & would continue where he #€ left off. Such
thoughts filled the Prophet #2 with joy, made his face radiate with
happiness, and gave him the strength he needed to stand up.
Meanwhile, the Companions & said, “The Prophet ‏وَل‎ has
removed the screen of ‘Aaishah’s apartment and is looking at
us while he is standing up.’ Furthermore, they saw that the
Prophet #@ was smiling and laughing. Out of love for the Prophet
‏ركه‎ some people mistook that as a sign of his recovery. They
thought that he #2 was coming out to lead them in prayer, but he
‏ود‎ signaled to them that they should complete their prayer. He #¢
then entered the apartment and lowered the screen."

After the prayer was completed, some Companions ‏نك‎
‎returned to their daily work and responsibilities. As for Abu
Bakr ‏ره‎ he entered upon his daughter ‘Aaishah 4 and said, “I feel
for certain that the Messenger of Allah’s sickness has now
gone.’””7! Inspired by love for the Prophet ‏له‎ Abu Bakr spoke
these words, but he 4 was of course mistaken. The Prophet #¢

‎Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee, Hadeeth number: 4448.‏ لذأ
‎I Refer to As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Abu Shohbah (2/593).‏

198 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏لد‎

was fatally ill and would soon begin to experience the pangs of
death, after which he #¢ would embark upon his journey to his
Lord, the Sublime.

The intensity with which the Prophet #€ felt the pangs of death
was great indeed. As the Prophet #2 was experiencing some of
that pain, Usaamah ibn Zaid 2 entered wpon him. Not able to
talk, the Prophet 4% began to raise his hands towards the sky and
then placed them on Usaamah #, who understood that the
Prophet 8¢ was supplicating for him.

“Aaishah ‏وك‎ took hold of the Prophet #¢ and made him rest his
head below her neck. ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ then
entered with a Siwaak stick in his hand. Noticing that the Prophet
#@ was looking at the Siwaak stick, ‘Aaishah % asked, “Shall I take
it for you,” and the Prophet #@ nodded, indicating that, yes, he
wanted it. ‘Aaishah & took it from her brother and began to chew
on it in order to soften it, and she 4 then gave it to the Prophet 28,
who began to clean his teeth with it in a very complete and
beautiful manner. And he #£ continued to repeat the words, “The
most exalted companionship on high”!

While he # lay there, with his head resting on “Aaishah ‏ره‎ he
‏ويد‎ would insert his hand in a container of water and then wipe his
wet hand over his face, all the while saying, “None has the right to
be worshipped but Allah. Verily, death has its agonies.” Then,
raising and extending his hands to supplicate, he #2 would say,
“The most exalted companionship on high,” until his soul was
taken.”! According to one account, the Prophet #¢ would say, “O
Allah, help me (patiently) endure the agonies of death.)

‎Bukhaaree (4437) and Muslim, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter,‏ ألا
‎“Some of the Virtues of ’Aaishah 4.”‏

‎Bukhaaree (4437) and Muslim, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter,‏ خا
‎“Some of the Virtues of ‘Aaishah %.”‏

‎At-Tirmidhee, the Book of Funerals, Hadeeth number: 978; to Ibn Maajah,‏ اذا
‎chapter, “What Has Been Mentioned about the Sickness of the Messenger of‏
‎Allah 2; to the Musnad of Ahmad; and to Mo’jam Al-Kabeer, by At-Tabaraanee.‏

The Death of the Prophet ‏كلد‎ 199

And according to another account, “Aaishah ‏كك‎ listened
carefully, trying to catch the final words of the Prophet 82 as he
died; and she %& heard him say, “O Allah, forgive me, have mercy
on me, and admit me into the company of the most exalted
companionship on high.”

It is also related that Faatimah ‏كذ‎ said, “Oh! The distress of my
father!’ And he #% said to her, “Your father will experience no
distress after this day.” And when the Prophet #2 was being
buried, Faatimah ‏ذه‎ said to Anas 2, “How can you all be content
to pour dirt over the Messenger of Allah!!!

When the Messenger of Allah #2 parted from this world, he
ruled over the entire Arabian Peninsula, and the kings and rulers
of foreign lands feared him. His Companions 4,-who numbered
in the high thousands, were willing to sacrifice themselves, their
children, and their wealth for his cause — the cause of Islam.
One might suppose then that he #¢ left behind many assets that
had to be distributed among his inheritors, but nothing could be
further from the truth. The Prophet #¢ parted from this world,
without leaving behind even a single Deenar or Dirham, or a male
or fernale servant. In fact, the complete list of his assets was short
indeed: his white mule, his weapons, and a piece of land that he
had given away as charity."! And his armor was left as
collateral with a Jewish man from whom he was forced to
borrow thirty Sa’as {a single Sa’a is equal to el ht handfuls of
something) of barley in order to feed his family. That was how
the Prophet #2 died, even though he could have, had he wanted,
ordered for castles to be built for him and for huge quantities of
wealth to be given to him from the Muslim treasury. Had he ‏يه‎
‎asked for any of those things, his Companions & would have

‎Buldaree (4440) and Muslim, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter,‏ لذأ
ل ‎“The Virtues of ‘Aaishah‏

‎FP! Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee (4462).
‏ذا‎ Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee (4461).
[IN As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by An-Nadawee (pg. 403).

200 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeq

been more than happy to give them to him. But the Prophet #¢
was not seeking this world or its trifling things; no, he #2 longed
only for the Hereafter.

The Prophet #¢ died after midday on Monday, the twelfth of
Rabee’ul Awwal, inthe year 11 H."! He #¢ died at the age of sixty-
three.”! The day of his death was the darkest and saddest day that
the Muslims had ever witnessed, just as the day of his birth was the
happiest day since the first time the sun had shined on earth.”!

Anas 4 said, “On the day the Messenger of Allah #¢ arrived in
Al-Madeenah, all things in it became illuminated. And on the day
he died, all things in it became dark.” After the Prophet #@ died,
Umm Aiman %& cried and was asked why she was crying. She ‏و‎
‎said, “Verily, 1 knew that the Messenger of Allah #2 was going to
die (one day); the only reason why I am now crying is that
revelation (which would descend upon the Prophet #@) has been
lifted from us.””"*!

Second: The Lnexpected 3 Shock

Ibn Rajab (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “When the
Messenger of Allah #@ died, the Muslims became shocked,
bewildered, and confused. Some of them were stunned and became
perplexed; others sat down and were not even able to stand; others
lost their ability to speak; and yet others were in complete denial,
refusing to believe that the Prophet #¢ had really died (and among
this last group was ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab a).” ‏ذا‎

‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (4/223).‏ لذأ

‎Pl Bukhaaree, the Book of Virtues, chapter, “The Death of the Prophet #¢’; and
Muslim, the Book of Virtues, chapter, “How Old the Prophet # was on the
Day He #6 Died,” Hadeeth numbers: 2348 and 2349.

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by An-Nadawee (pg. 404).‏ اذا

‎Muslim, the Book of the Companions’ Virtues, chapter, “From the Virtues of‏ لكا
‎Umm Aman 2s, Hadeeth number: 2454.‏

‎Latanif Al-Ma’aarif (pg. 114).‏ أخا

The Death of the Prophet ‏يي‎ 201

Imam Al-Ourtubee (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “One
of the greatest afflictions a person can suffer is an affliction in
matters that pertain to religion. The Messenger of Allah #2 said,
‘When one of you is afflicted by a calamity, then let him remember
how he was afflicted with my death, for indeed, that is the
greatest of all calamities.’ Indeed the Prophet #£ spoke the truth.
Until the Day of Resurrection, no Muslim can be afflicted with a
calamity that is greater than that of the Prophet's death: revelation
ceased to descend to earth, and Prophethood became a thing of
the past (Le., no other Prophet would be sent to mankind). After
the Prophet’s death, the first appearance of evil was the apostasy
of many Arabs — an event that signified...the first decline (of the
Muslim nation (a decline that “Umar # referred to when he «
said, “Whenever something reaches completion, it has nowhere to
go but down.)

Perhaps no one was in more denial than was “Umar ibn Al-
Khattaab 4. He # began to threaten anyone who claimed that the
Prophet #2 had died. He ‏يه‎ said, “He has not died, but rather he
has gone to his Lord, just as Moosa ibn “‘Umraan #8 went,
remaining absent from his people for forty nights, after which he
#8 returned to them. By Allah, the Messenger of Allah #¢ will
indeed return (to us), just as Moosa ¥& returned (to his people),
and he #€ will cut off the hands and legs of those men who
claimed that he ‏يله‎ had died”!

When Abu Bakr heard about the news of the Prophet's
death, he mounted his horse and rode from his house until the
Masjid. And without saying a single word to anyone, Abu Bakr &
entered the Masjid, and then entered upon ‘Aaishah & in her
apartment. He #¢ then headed straight for the Messenger of Allah
‏ريه‎ who was covered in a garment. Removing the part of the
garment that covered the Prophet's face, Abu Bakr # leaned
down, kissed the Prophet #&, and began to cry. He # then said,

‎Tafseer Al-Qurtubee (2/176).‏ ذا
‎Ll As-Seerah An-Nabawi yyah, by Abu Shohbah (2/594).‏

202 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏فك‎

“May my father and mother be sacrificed for you. By Allah, Allah
will not combine two deaths upon you. As for the death that was
decreed for you, you have just died it.”" When Abu Bakr 2 said,
“ Allah will not corabine two deaths upon you,” he 4 was refuting
‘Umar a, who was claiming that the Prophet #¢ would come back
to life. Abu Bakr « knew that, even if that was the case, the
Prophet #6 would still have to die again, which meant that he ‏كل‎
‎would have to die a total of two deaths; and Abu Bakr «
understood that the Prophet #% enjoyed too high of a ranking with
Allah #§ for that to happen to him.

As Abu Bakr # came out of the Masjid, “Umar 4 was speaking
to the people, and was still in a fit of rage. Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎ said, “O
‘Umar, sit down,” after which he g stood up to deliver a sermon
to the people. He 4 praised Allah, glorified Him, and then said,
“To proceed: Whosoever used to worship Muhammad, then
indeed Muhammad has died. And whosoever worships Allah,
then Allah is alive and does not die.” He « then recited this Verse
of the Noble Quran

A oe wg Ae as 530 © ‏سي‎ 3 seg 2
js ‏مَاتَ أوْ‎ a ‏سول قد خآ , الرسل سل‎ SA G5}

aw) as
“hes 21

“Muhammad  )ةللَو(‎ is no more than a Messenger, and indeed
(many) Messengers have passed away before him. If he dies or is
killed, will you then turn back on your heels (as disbelievers)?
And he who turns back on his heels, not the least harm will he do
to Allah, and Allah will give reward to those who are grateful.”
(Quran. 3: 144)

“Umar ‏ذه‎ later said, “By Allah, no sooner did I hear Abu Bakr
recite that Verse, than I fell down to the ground, for my two legs
could no longer carry me. And I came to know that the Messenger

١١ Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee (4452).

The Death of the Prophet ‏ع‎ 203

of Allah #6 had indeed died. vt]

Imam. Al-Qurtubee (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “This
Verse (as well as this incident) is the strongest proof of Abu Bakr’s
bravery, if bravery is defined as having a firm and steadfast heart
during times of hardships and calamities. And there was no
calamity that was greater than the death of the Prophet #8.... The
people said, ‘The Messenger of Allah # has not died,’ and among
them was ‘Umar ‏.ف‎ “Uthman # lost the ability to speak, and ‘Ali
& went into seclusion. Utter chaos was on the verge of breaking
out, but Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ brought calm to the situation with this
Verse.) ‘Aaishah ‏ذا‎ said, “By Allah, it was as if people didn’t

know that Allah revealed this Verse until Abu Bakr es recited
it.”

May Allah have mercy on Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏,رط‎ who
helped save this nation from many hardships, who solved many
of the problems that afflicted Muslims, and who understood the
truth on occasions when no one else did ~— not even “Umar a. As
Muslims, we should know the status that Abu Bakr 2 deserves,
and we should love him dearly, for loving him is a characteristic
of faith, and hating him is a characteristic of hypocrisy.

Third: the Courty

When the Companions * knew for certain that the Messenger
of Allah #¢ had indeed died, the Ansaar gathered in the courtyard
of Banu Saa’idah on the very same day, which was Monday, the
12th of Rabbee’ul Awwal, the year 11 H. The purpose of their
meeting was to choose someone among them to be the first caliph
of the Muslim nation.)

‎Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee (4454).‏ للا
‎Tafseer Al-Qurtubee (4/222).‏ 3

‎Gl Bukhaaree (1241, 1242).

‎Maradun-Nabee 8% Wa-Wafaatihi (Pg. 24).‏ لكا

‎At-Taareckh Al-Islaamee (9/21).‏ اذا

204 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq -&

The people of the Ansaar gathered around the leader of the
Khazraj tribe, Sa’ad ibn “Ubaadah #. Meanwhile, the people of
the Muhaajiroon were gathered elsewhere with Abu Bakr 4, and
the purpose of their meeting was the same: they wanted to
appoint a caliph from among themselves. But before they arrived
at a decision, they remembered their brothers from the Ansaar,
and they said to one another, “Let us go to our brothers from the
Ansaar, for they have the right to help us arrive at a decision
regarding this matter.’

‘Umar 4 said, “So we left, intending to go and meet with them.
As we drew near to their place of meeting, we were met by two of
their righteous men, who informed us about what their people
had agreed upon doing. The two men said to us, ‘O people of the
Muhaajiroon, where are you going?’ We said, “We are heading
towards our brothers from the Ansaar.’ They said, “You will not be
doing wrong if you do not approach them (now that you know
what they have agreed to do). Decide then what you will do.’ I
said, “By Allah, we will indeed go to them.’ When we reached
them in the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah, I saw in their midst a man
who was wrapped up in clothing, and Lasked, “Who is that?’ They
said, “That is Sa’ad ibn “Ubaadah.’ I said, ‘What is the matter with
him (i.e., why is he wrapped up thus)?’ They said, ‘He has a fever
and is experiencing a great deal of pain.’ A short while after we
had sat down (in their midst), their speaker (stood up and)
proclaimed the Testimony of Faith and praised Allah as He
deserves to be praised. He then said, ‘To proceed: We are the
helpers of Allah and the army of Islam; meanwhile you — O men
of the Muhaajiroon — are a small group of people. A party among
your people has come here, wanting to deprive us of the right to
take over the reins of leadership.’ When he fell silent, I wanted to
speak, for 1 had thought up beautiful words to say... but when I
was about to speak, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ said, “Take it easy,’ and so [
remained silent, not wanting to arouse his anger. Abu Bakr ‏عه‎
‎then spoke. He was more forbearing than I was, and he had a

سم

1١ “Asrul-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Al-’Umaree (pg. 40).

The Death of the Prophet ‏يذ‎ 205

more dignified comportment. By Allah, as for all of the wonderful
things that I had thought of saying, he said them in a similar or
better manner, until he was finished speaking and fell silent. He
said, “You (O people of the Ansaar) are worthy of all of the good
things you have said about yourselves. Nonetheless, only the
people of the Quraish have a right to the caliphate: they are the
best among all Arabs in terms of both their lineage and their
homeland. (As a leader) for you all [ am pleased with either of
these two men, so pledge allegiance to whichever of them you
want.’ He then took the hand of Abu "Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah,
who was also seated among us.... Abu “Ubaidah said, “By Allah,
for me to have my neck struck (with a sword), so long as that does
not make me sinful, is more beloved to me than for me to become
leader over a people who have in their midst Abu Bakr & ~—
unless my soul, at the moment of death, whispers evil thoughts to
me (thoughts of my life being spared, so that I can remain alive
and become the first caliph of the Muslim nation), thoughts that I
do not have right now.’ Someone from the Ansaar said, ‘I am a
person who is recognized for my sound views, and 1 am well
respected among my people (so listen to what I have to say): let us
choose a leader from among us, and a leader from among you, O
people of the Quraish.” People began to argue and voices were
raised. In order to quell their disagreement, I said, “Extend your
hand, O Abu Bakr.” He extended his hand, and | pledged
allegiance to him. The Muhaajiroon also pledged to follow him,
after which the Ansaar did the same.”"!!

According to the narration of Ahmad, Abu Bakr # said, “And
you indeed know that the Messenger of Allah #@ said, “Were the
people to travel through one valley, and were the Ansaar to travel
through another valley, I would travel through the valley of the
Ansaar.” And you indeed know, O Sa’ad, that the Messenger of
Allah 2% said while you were sitting down {and listening to him),
“The people of the Quraish are in charge of this matter (.¢., of the
caliphate): all righteous people are followers of them righteous

‎Bukhaaree (6830).‏ أذا

206 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

people, and all evildoers are followers of their evildoers." Sa’ad
# said, “You have spoken the truth. We are your ministers, and
you are our leaders.”

The Lessons and Morals of this Story

1) Abu Bakr’s People Skills

When the representative of the Ansaar made the position of his
people clear — that they wanted the first caliph of Islam to be one of
them — ‘Umar # wanted to speak. He a had thought out very
clearly what he wanted to say, and he later admitted that he was
somewhat impressed with the speech he wanted to give. But before
he could utter even.a single word, Abu Bakr 4 asked him to remain
silent, making it clear that he himself wanted to speak on behalf of
the Muhaajiroon. Why was this so significant? Abu Bakr # knew
‘Umar # very well and perhaps felt that “Umar ‏عن‎ lacked the
gentleness and leniency that was called for considering the tense
situation. Yes, the Muhaayiroon were in the right — for the Prophet
‏علد‎ had made it very clear that the leaders of the Muslim nation
should be from the Ouraish — but at the same time the Ansaar,
despite the fact that they were wrong to want a leader from among
themselves, were sincere Muslims. Their feelings and emotions
had to be taken into consideration, and so it was only right that
they should not only be informed that the caliph had to be a man
from the Muhaajiroon, but also that they should be praised and
appeased and reminded about their good qualities, so as to win
over their hearts and make them feel good about themselves.

Certainly the best man to achieve those goals was not ‘Umar
‏رن‎ but Abu Bakr 2s. In fact, “Umar # later acknowledged that
point, saying, “Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ then spoke. He was more forbearing
than I was, and he had a more dignified comportment. By Allah,
as for all of the wonderful things that I had thought of saying, he
said them in a similar or better manner, until he was finished
speaking and fell silent.”

"I Musnad Ahmad (1/5), and AL-Khilaafah Wal-Khulafaa (pg. 50).

The Death of the Prophet #§ 209

members of other tribes in Arabia would object to his appoint-
ment. Similarly, tf a member of any other tribe were to be
nominated to the position of the caliphate, members of other
tribes would vehemently object to his nomination. Everyone felt
that their tribe was superior to other tribes in the region, but the
one thing they could all agree upon was that Allah # blessed the
Quraish in ways that no other tribe in Arabia was blessed: They
were the descendents of Ibraaheem 3%; they resided in the
inviolable city of Makkah; and Allah # chose one of their own to
be the seal of all Prophets.

After Abu Bakr & presented these cogent arguments to them,
the people of the Ansaar yielded to Abu Bakr's better judgment in
the matter. One of their chiefs, Sa’ad #, magnanimously
proclaimed that the Muhaayiroon should be the leaders of the
Muslim nation and that, as during the lifetime of the Prophet 2,
the Ansaar would be more than happy to act as their sincere
advisers, ministers, and helpers. And thus with the clarity and
justness that resonated from Abu Bakr’s words on the one hand,
and the magnanimity.and humbleness of the Ansaar on the other
hand, unity was achieved in a matter of minutes, and shortly
thereatter the caliph was both nominated and agreed upon by
everyone that was present in the gathering.

Nominated

# and ‘Umar ‏نه‎ Shy Away from Being

As a general rule, those that aspire for positions of leadership
are the least deserving of candidates. Such people usually want to
become a leader for personal gain, prestige, or power. The best
candidates for leadership positions are those who do not want to
become leaders. They are loath to becoming leaders of other
Muslims because they understand that leadership is not a
privilege, but a responsibility and a burden, for which one will
be held accountable on the Day of Resurrection. The average

11 Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/24).

210 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

individual, for the most part, is responsible for his own well-
being; true, he has duties that he must fulfill towards his family,
the community, and the Muslim nation as a whole, but those
duties are limited in scope. A leader, on the other hand, is
completely responsible for the well-being of his people: He must
rule justly over them and redress grievances, and he must make
sure that they all have the necessities of life. While others rest, a
leader must work and plan for their benefit. It is for these reasons
that neither Abu Bakr 4 nor “Umar # wanted to take over the
reins of leadership after the Prophet’s death ~ even though they
were more deserving of the job than anyone else. In the courtyard
ot Banu Saa’idah, Abu Bakr 4 nominated two candidates that he
felt were most deserving of the job: “Umar ‏ف‎ and Abu “Ubaidah
‏.نه‎ Expressing his disagreement with Abu Bakr’s nominations,
“Umar # said, “By Allah, for me to have my neck struck (with a
sword), so long as that does not make me sinful, is more beloved
to me than for me to become leader over a people who have in
their midst Abu Bakr 4s.”

Knowing for certain that Abu Bakr 2 was the only deserving
candidate, ‘Umar #& said to him, “Extend your hand,”
immediately after which ‘Umar # pledged to follow him.
According to one narration, ‘Umar # said, “O people of the
Ansaar, do you not know that the Messenger of Allah #¢ ordered
Abu Bakr # to lead the people (in prayer), so (with that
knowledge) which one of you would be content in his soul to
be placed ahead of Abu Bakr?” The people of the Ansaar replied,
“We seek refuge with Allah from any one of us being placed
ahead of Abu Bakr”!

Of everyone that was present in the courtyard of Banu
Saa‘idah, ‘Umar 4% seemed to be the only one who initially picked
up on the point that, although the Prophet #¢ did not explicitly
name the first caliph of the Muslim nation, he did imply on
various occasions that Abu Bakr 4 was the right man for the job.

11 Musnad Ahmad (1/21). Ahmad Shaakir ruled that the chain of this narration is
authentic (1/213).

The Death of the Prophet 8 211

For example, during his final illness, the Prophet # appointed
Abu Bakr # to lead the people in prayer. And when certain
people suggested that — because of his soft heart and because he
could not hold back his tears — Abu Bakr # was not a good
choice to lead the people in prayer, the Prophet #2 became angry
and insisted that no one should lead in prayer in his place other
than Abu Bakr xs.

As soon as “Umar # pointed out the reality of the situation,
everyone realized that, yes, Abu Bakr 4 was the most deserving
candidate for the caliphate. Everything then happened so quickly
that Abu Bakr a never got a chance to turn down his nomination.
Even though that was the case, he did, im subsequent speeches,
make it clear that he never wanted to become a leader m the first
place; in fact, on a few occasions he even tried to step down, so
that someone else could take his place — but to no avail, since by
then everyone became certain that, with the Prophet #¢ dead, Abu
Bakr # alone deserved to take his place.

In one particular sermon, Abu Bakr said, “By Allah, on no
day or evening of my life did I ever aspire to become a ruler (over
a group of people). [never desired any such position, and I never
invoked Allah, either out in the open or secretly, to make me a
leader (over a group of people). laccepted your appointment only
because I feared the onset of strife and discord (had you
continued to disagree with one another over who should be
appointed to the caliphate). As a leader, [ know neither peace nor
comfort, for [have been charged with a tremendous duty, which I
will never be able to fulfill unless Allah, the Possessor of Might
and Majesty, strengthens me. And I would love it if the strongest
of people (Le., “Umar 4 or Abu “‘Ubaidah #) were to take my
place"!

[t is authentically established that Abu Bakr # also said, “As
for the day we met in the Banu Saa’idah courtyard, I hoped to

‎Al-Mustadrak (3/66). Al-Haakim said, “This Hadeeth is authentic,” and Adh-‏ أذا
‎Dhahabee concurred.‏

212 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 4

hand over the reins of leadership to either of these two men: Abu
“Ubaidah ‏ذه‎ or ‘Umar ‏.نه‎ I had hoped for one of them to become
the leader of the believers and for me to become his minister.”

On at least one other occasion, he openly tried to resign from
his position, saying, “O people, this is your matter to decide upon,
so appoint anyone you want to be your leader; and then I will be
like one of you.”’ But everyone gave the same reply in chorus: “We
are indeed pleased to have you {as our leader), for indeed you
were the second of two with the Messenger of Allah #8 (while he
was in the cave).’”4!

And when he pleaded with the people, asking them to step
forward if they regretted their decision to appoint him as their
leader, only one person stepped forward. And that person was
‘Ali ibn Abee Taalib &, who stepped forward not to express his
dissatisfaction with Abu Bakr’s appointment, but to clarify that
no one else was deserving of the job and that he was vehemently
opposed to the idea of Abu Bakr # resigning from his post as
leader of the Muslim nation. With his sword unsheathed, ‘Ali «
made his way to the foot of the pulpit, placing one foot on the first
step and the other on the ground. He # then said, “By Allah, we
do not ask for your resignation, nor will we accept your
resignation. The Messenger of Allah ‏ول‎ placed you ahead of
everyone else, so who is it that will make you go back (or down in
ranking)?” It is important to note that Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ was not the
only one who felt aversion towards the idea of assuming the role
of leader; instead, it was a sentiment that pervaded the ranks of
the Prophet's Companions &.

Willing to go to any length to distort history, the enemies of
Islam try to insinuate that the Muhaapiroon and the Ansaar became
divided on the day they met in the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah. Of
course, they have no proofs to support their insinuation, but that
does not stop them from spreading their lies. The fact is that

(tl ALAnsaar Fil-’Asr Ar-Raashidee, by Haamid Muhammad AJ-Khaleetah (pg.
108); and Taareekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 91).
‏ذا‎ Al-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Al-’Umaree (pg. 13).

The Death of the Prophet #8 213

people of the Ansaar cared only about the future prosperity of the
Muslim nation and about what contributions they could make to
ensure a bright future for all Muslims. That is why they did not
hesitate to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr # once “Umar #&
announced his candidacy. If, as the enemies of Islam like to claim,
the Ansaar were not pleased with Abu Bakr’s appointment, and if
a rift occurred between the Ansaar and the Muhaajiroon, why
didn’t the Ansaar prevent his appointment from taking place?
They outnumbered the Muhaajiroon, and they had more weapons;
they could have simply forced the Muhaajiroon to accept one of
them as the overall leader of all believers. But none of these things
happened because there was an air not of resentment but of
mutual love and cooperation in the courtyard of Banu Saa‘idah.
The Ansaar were one-hundred percent behind Abu Bakr’s
nomination, and they proved their sincerity towards him by
backing all of his initial policies: sending out the army of
Usaamah ‏فك‎ and waging war against the apostates. The bonds of
brotherhood between the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar remained as
strong as ever. And finally, one of the most telling aspects of Abu
Bakr’s caliphate is that not a single member of the Ansaar refused
to pledge allegiance to him once he was appointed the first

Khaleefah of Islam.
3) Sa’ad ibn “‘Ubaadah ‏كه‎

Certain fabricated and weak narrations indicate that there was
a serious crisis and power struggle that occurred in the courtyard
of Banu Saa’idah. Based on authentic narrations, however, we
know that no crisis or power struggle took place; rather, in a very
short span of time everyone came to a unanimous agreement that
Abu Bakr 4s should become the Leader of the Believers.

So in spite of what is claimed m certain false narrations, Sa’ad
ibn “‘Ubaadah # was among the first to pledge allegiance to Abu
Bakr ‏.حك‎ Yes, it is true that, prior the arrival of Abu Bakr 4 and
‘Umar # to the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah, Sa’ad 4 did imdicate
that he should be appointed ruler of the Muslim nation. But no
sooner did Abu Bakr # remind him of what the Prophet #§ had

214 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Stddeeq ‏د‎

said about the matter than Sa’ad & yielded and said, “You are the
leaders, and we are your ministers.” Also, I should point out that
Abu Bakr #&, ‘Umar ‏رق‎ and Abu ‘Ubaidah # did not conspire
among themselves to make sure that one of them would be
appointed the Khaleefah of the Muslim nation. 1 mention such les
only because they are mentioned in false accounts that are related
in certain history books.

Some historians paint an unfair and dark picture of Sa’ad ibn
‘Ubaadah 2, claiming that he plotted against the Muhaajiroon, so
as to prevent them from taking away his right to the caliphate.
The claims such historians make are founded upon accounts that
are not only fabricated, but that also contradict Sa’ad’s past and
lifelong dedication to the cause of Islam. To be sure, Sa’ad « was
among the best of the Prophet's Companions #: he participated
in the Second Pledge of Al’Aqabah; he was perhaps the sole
native inhabitant of Al-Madeenah that was tortured in Makkah
because of his beliefs; he took part in the Battle of Badr; and he
was a paragon of generosity and righteousness. The Prophet 2%
depended on his counsel, as well as the counsel of Sa’ad ibn
Mu’aadh ‏رك‎ during the Battle of Al-Khandaq, and with the
counsel they gave the Prophet #& they both proved their
willingness to make sacrifices for the cause of Islam. It is
inconceivable that a man with such a past could have had
rekindled feelings of xenophobic tribalism, resenting the fact that
the leader of all believers was chosen from a different tribe.

The false narrations I am referring to state that, after Abu Bakr
‏ده‎ became Khaleefah of the Muslim nation, Sa’ad 4 refused to pray
behind Abu Bakr 2s, acting as if he was completely withdrawing
himself from Muslim society. This is categorically false. It is
clearly mentioned in authentic narrations that Sa’ad ‏ذه‎ pledged
allegiance to Abu Bakr # and that, when Abu Bakr 2 said to
Sa’ad ‏,كك‎ “And you indeed know, O 5a’ad, that the Messenger of
Allah ‏كل‎ said while you were sitting down (and listening to him),
“The people of the Quraish are in charge of this matter (.e., of the
caliphate): all righteous people are followers of their righteous

The Death of the Prophet ‏يل‎ 215

people, and all evildoers are followers of their evildoers,”’ Sa’ad
& replied, “You have spoken the truth. We are your ministers,
and you are our leaders.”"

One cannot rely on a false narration that smears the reputation
of Sa’ad # and ignore many authentic narrations that remind us
of the many sacrifices that Sa’ad #5 made for the cause of Islam. As
for the aforementioned false narration, we know that it is false for
two main reasons: First, its narrator was one of the people of
desires, and his narrations were universally rejected by the
scholars of Hadeeth."1 As Imam Adh-Dhahabee said about his
narration, “As you can clearly see, its chain is utterly weak’!
And second, the actual text of the narration contradicts every
piece of information we know about Sa’ad ibn “Ubaadah
regarding his upright character and his lifelong dedication to
promoting the cause of Islam.

4) An Alleged Disagreement Between ‘Umar ibn Al-Kh
and Al-Hubaab ibn Al-Mundhir &

attaab 2s

It is related that, during the course of the meeting that took
place in the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah, ‘Umar # got into a
heated argument with Al-Hubaab ibn Al-Mundhir As-Sullamee
Al-Ansaaree -; the facts, however, indicate otherwise. In fact, itis
safe to say that no such argument occurred, for “Umar 2 had
previously made a vow to never say a disrespectful word to Al-
Hubaab ‏.كه‎ It is true that Al-Hubaab « suggested appointing two
leaders: one from the Muhaajiroon, and the other from the Ansaar;
it is equally true that this was a misguided proposition, but “Umar
# did not argue with or scold Al-Hubaab #. We know this
because “Umar « himself later said, “When it was Al-Hubaab ibn
Al-Mundhir who answered me, I realized that I had no right to
say anything in response to him. This is because we had a

‎Musnad Imam Ahmad (18). This narration is authentic by dint of other‏ أذ
‎narrations that strengthen it.‏

‎2) Meezaan Al-‘Aitidaal Fee Nagd Ar-Rijaal, by Adh-Dhahabee 6/2992).
‏أذا‎ Siyyar ‘Alaam An-Nubalaa (1/277).

216 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

disagreement with one another during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah ‏ولة‎ and the Messenger of Allah #¢ forbade
me from arguing with him a. When that occurred, I swore never
to speak an unkindly word to him, nor one that would cause him
the least bit of grief”!

In regard to the alleged dispute between Al-Hubaab & and
‘Umar .&, some strange sayings have been falsely ascribed to Al-
Hubaab ‏.ل‎ I say ‘falsely’ because they are contrary to everything
that we know about Al-Hubaab #, who was both wise and
intelligent, and who chose his words very carefully. It was, after
all, Al-Hubaab’s wise counsel that the Prophet #¢ acted upon both
at Badr and Khaibar.”!

Yes, during the course of the meeting, Al-Hubaab ‏د‎ did say,
“There should be a leader from among us (the Ansaar), and a
leader from among you (the Muhaafjiroon),” but he 2 said this for
an understandable reason: he 4 was concerned that the wrong
kind of people would vie for positions of leadership and that
those people would act unjustly towards the Ansaar. He # himself
explained his position when he said: “By Allah, we are not
competing with you (the people of the Muhaajiroon) over this
matter (i.e., the caliphate); rather, we simply fear that the people
who will assume power will be the very same people whose
fathers and brothers we fought against (in previous wars that
were waged between the Muslims and the people of Mak-
kah).”"! The Muhaajiroon knew that Al-Hubaab & was wrong,
but they understood his point of view, and they found no fault
with him as a result, for they too had fought against the
polytheists of Makkah during previous wars - nonetheless, the
Prophet’s command was clear and had to be followed: the
Khaleefah of the Muslim nation should always be from the

Quraish.

Wl AtAnsaar Fil-‘Asr Ar-Raashidee (pg. 100).
I Thid.
Fl ‏1ط‎
‏كا‎ Tid.

The Death of the Prophet ‏كل‎ 217

5) The Hadeeth: ““The Leaders (of the Muslim Nation) are (or
should always be) from the Quraish”

The Hadeeth which states that the overall leader of the Muslim
nation should always be from the Quraish is not only related in
Bukhaaree, Mushm, and various other Hadeeth compilations; it is,
moreover, expressed in various ways, thus leaving no room for
ambiguity or false interpretations. For example, in Saheeh
Bukhaaree, Mu’aawiyah # reported that the Messenger of Allah
#2 said:

te

‎Wa op‏ الأمْرَ فِي ‎AB‏ لا يُعَادِيهِمْ
‎“Verily, this affair (1.e., the caliphate) is restricted to the‏
‎Quraish. As for any person who shows enmity towards them,‏
‎Allah will cast him onto his face in the Hellfire — that is, so long‏
‎as they (i.e., the leaders of the Quraish) establish and apply the‏

‎(laws of the) religion .“™!

‎And necorane to a narration that is related in Saheeh Muslim:

‎“Islam will continue to remain honored ‘and a stable and powerful)
through Khaleefahs, and all of them are from the Quraish.”""'

‎‘Abdullah ibn “Umar as related that the Messenger of Allah ‏كل‎
‎said:

‏نقَى

‎Gn ‏في‎ YI a Og ‏دلا‎

‎“This affair (1.e., the caliphate) will stay with the Quraish as ong
as at least two of them remain alive’!

‎(OE wee ‏قي‎

‎Ul Bukhaaree, the Book of Rulings (7139).
‏لما‎ Muslim, the Book of Leadership (1821).
‏اذا‎ Bukhaaree, the Book of Rulings (7140).

218 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كه‎

The Messenger of Allah #8 also said:

‎a -‏ م ‎od‏ في هَذَا ‎agate o UN‏ لِمُسْلِمِهِمَ وَكَافْرهمْ
‎(na pd‏

‎“People are followers of the Quraish in this regard : The Muslim
from the former category is a follower of the Muslim from the
latter category, and the disbeliever of the former category is a
follower of the disbeliever from the latter category.’"!

‎Bukair ibn Wahb Al-Juzaree reported that Anas ibn Maalik ‏علخ‎
‎Ansaaree « once said to him, “I will relate to you a Hadeeth that I
do not relate to just anybody. We were in one of the homes of the
Ansaar, when the Prophet # came, stood (in front of the house),
and took hold of the two nes ° of the door. He #@ then said:

‎SL
‎vee

‎ER

‎“The Imams (rulers of the Muslim nation) are from the Quraish.
They have a right over you, and you similarly have a right over
them : If they are asked to show mercy, they should show it; if
they make a covenant, they should fulfill it; and if they render
judgment (regarding any given matter), they should be just.’"!

‎In Fathul-Baaree, Ton Hajar related manyAhaadeeth under the
chapter title, “The Rulers (of this nation) are from the Quraish”; he
took those narrations from various kinds of Hadeeith compilations
— what are known as “As-Sunan,” “Al-Masaaneed,”’ and, “Al-
Musannafaat.’”! Rare, in fact, is the Hadeeth compilation that
contains no mention of a narration that refers to Quraish’s right to

‎Ul Muslim, the Book of Leadership (7140).
‏أ‎ Al-Musannaf, by Abu Shaibah 6 / 544).
‏أذا‎ Al-Ansaare Fil-‘Asr Ar-Raashidee (pg. 111).

The Death of the Prophet #8 219

the caliphate. The wordings of such narrations might differ, but
they all convey the same clear and emphatic message: In any
given era, the Khaleefalt of the Muslim nation should be a man
from the Quraish. This ruling applies to the caliphate only, and
not to other lesser positions of leadership — positions that may be
held by any qualified candidate.

Even though many Ahaadeeth make it clear that the leaders of
this nation are from the Quraish, the same Ahaadeeth clearly forbid
Muslims from blindly following Quraish’s leaders. The people of
the Quraish have the right to lead this nation only if they establish
Allah's divinely revealed laws, a ruling that we have come across
in the Hadeeth of Mu’aadh 2, and that is corroborated by Anas’s
narration as well:

2 ” ° ” at ‏ل ا ص شر‎ 0 Pod B oo 3 ‏و 2ه‎ 1 9
pe ‏إن‎ are) ‏إن استر حموا فرحمو|» وإن عاهدوا‎
55 2 Pa 3 a wa oo Pad 3 a ad 2
“ -“ oF 4 ow ‏بي‎ “ayer a ow" 8 a “3 ‏هم‎ $e 4 0 “ae 8 ao“.
‏وَالناسس أجمعين»‎ ASS Gs ‏لعنة الله‎ aled ‏فَمَنْ لم يفعل ذلك منهم‎

“Tf they are asked to show mercy, they should show it; if they
make a covenant, they should fulfill it; and if they render
judgment (regarding any given matter), they should rule justly.
Whoever among them does not do all of that, then upon him 1s the
curse of Allah, of the angels, and of all of mankind.”

So the same Ahaadeeth that instruct us to follow Quraish’s
leaders warn us against obeying them when they do not rule by
that which Allah 8 has revealed to the Prophet #6. When a man
from the Quraish becomes leader of this nation, and when he
rules in a merciful and just manner, he becomes a blessing for his
people. But when he does otherwise, when he rules in an tnjust
manner, he becomes a clear and present danger to the nation — he
becomes a man that must be avoided like the plague. The Prophet
WE said:

wey

3 a“
al

& - wf
po" 6 2 ww Z£ wo Eee 3B a4 5 3-1 ‏عل‎
‏متّى رؤوس اعيلمة سههاءً من فريش)‎ 2

=
52
لصي
6

‎Musannaf ibn Abee Shaibah (5/544).‏ لذأ

220 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

“Verily, the root of destruction, or the corruption, of this nation
will be the leaders of foolish youths from the Quraish.“™3

When he #2 was then asked, “Then what do you command us
to do (when they appear)?” he # replied:

‎Fone 3 3‏ نرم

‎(oR gh cpt ‏أن‎ si
“Only if the people would them stay away from them (by not
participating alongside them in their evil activities, and by not
fighting their wars).

‎Based on the above-mentioned narrations, the people of the
Ansaar submitted to their counterparts from the Quraish. At first,
they thought that they were justified in choosing a leader from
among themselves. But then no sooner were they reminded of
Quraish’s right to the caliphate than they forgot their claim and
pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏كف‎

‎Thus the process of choosing a Khaleefah was not one that was
characterized by haphazardness or an arbitrary set of rules;
instead, it was based on divinely revealed texts and mutual
consultation. Because such a process was followed, everyone was
satisfied in the end, and not a single person from the Ansaar was
left with any doubt in his mind about Quraish’s — and in this
case, Abu Bakr’s — right to the caliphate.

‎The clear facts of the situation notwithstanding, some of
Islam’s enemies try to paint an altogether different picture of what
happened, claiming that the Hadeeth about the Imams — about
their being from the Quraish -- was a saying not of the Prophet
#, but of Abu Bakr 4. They claim that he # used the saying as a
slogan to ensure that the caliphate would remain in the hands of
the Quraish. But, of course, nothing could be further from the
truth. For, as we have seen, a number of authentic Ahaadeeth

‎Bukhaaree, The Book of Trials (7058).‏ !ذا

‎Dalaail An-Nubuwwah, by Al-Baihagee (6/464), and Al-Aihsaan Fee Tagreeb‏ ذا
‎Saheeh ibn Hibbaan (6713).‏

The Death of the Prophet ‏يك‎ 221

establish the right of the Quraish to the caliphate. Both the people
of the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar were pleased with that ruling,
and they left the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah with contented and
united hearts.

6) Qur’anic Verses that Alluded to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate

There is not a single Verse in the Qur’an which explicitly states
that Abu Bakr # was to be the first Khaleefah of the Muslim nation;
nonetheless, there are a number of Verses that implicitly point to
his caliphate ~ and to the fact that, of all of the Prophet's
Companions ‏ب‎ he 4 was the most deserving candidate to rule
the Muslim nation after the Prophet's death. Those Verses are as
follows:

a) Allah 4 said:

Pt ae wv”

Ze ke CI Osi ‏صرّط‎ OL oa 2a)

or oa ww “a a ‏ماهو‎

“Guide us to the Straight Way. The Way of those on whom You
have bestowed Your Grace, not (the way) of those who earned
Your Anger (such as the Jews), nor of those who went astray
(such as the Christians).”” (Qur'an 1: 6, 7)

These are Verses that every Muslim reads at least 17 times a
day, and in them Allah 8 orders Muslims to ask for the following:
To be guided to the path of “those on whom You have bestowed
Your Grace.” Who are “those on whom You have bestowed Your
Grace’? Allah & answered this question in Chapter “An-Nisaa”
when He #8 said:

SSE ‏يِنَّ‎ fle Ot at Gi & ISK IAAG ‏أله‎ os ‏ومن‎

ve pe KEK Sa?
bys bah es Seb ICBG Gah ost

“And whoso obeys Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad #8),

then they will be in the company of those on whom Allah has

222 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

bestowed His Grace, of the Prophets, the Siddiqun (those followers
of the Prophets who were first and foremost to believe in them, like
Abu Bakr As-Siddig #), the martyrs, and the righteous. And how
excellent these companions are!” (Qur'an 4: 69)

One of the categories of those “on whom You have bestowed
Your Grace” consists of Siddigun, or the truthful ones; and the
Prophet #8 informed us that Abu Bakr 4 is one of the Siddigun ; in
fact, he 4 is the best of them.

Since all Muslims — from the time of the Prophet #2 onwards
— ask Allah & to guide them to the way of Abu Bakr # and
others like him, it should come as no surprise that, with the death
of the Prophet #2, Abu Bakr # was more deserving than anyone
else to assume the reins of leadership over the Muslim nation.

As Muhammad Al-Ameen Ash-Shingeetee aptly put it, “We
should take away from this Verse a clear understanding that Abu
Bakr 2 was deserving of the caliphate, for he is alluded to in
Chapter ‘Al-Faatihah.’ In “Al-Faatihah, we ask Allah to guide us to
the way of a certain group of people, and so it is established that
that group of people is upon the Straight Path. Allah # said:

a"
5

‎fle CS) nl Wola) Lol b>‏ غير
‎CMGI, Geko Stl‏

‎“Guide us to the Straight Way. The Way of those on whom You
have bestowed Your Grace, not (the way) of those who earned
Your Anger (such as the Jews), nor of those who went astray
(such as the Christians) .”’

‎Elsewhere, Allah 4 made clear the identities of ‘those on
whom You have bestowed Your Grace,’ informing us that among
them are the ‘Truthful Ones.’ And the Prophet 2¢ informed us that
Abu Bakr . is one of the “Truthful Ones.’ It ts clear, therefore, that
Abu Bakr ‏وف‎ was one of those ‘on whom You have bestowed Your
Grace,’ one of those whose example we must follow if we are to be
saved in the Hereafter. So yes, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was on the Straight

The Death of the Prophet #8 223

Path; and yes, he was deserving of the caliphate.”

b) Allah said:

aa on ar) é a That “ A Go se 32 ‏ل‎ 7 ee whe
Ay = As 3 0 , 78 5 4 ae : 8
‏رقف 0 عن 9 نف »> فسو في فَ يأ الله شوو رم‎ cy ‏ءامنواً‎ “yl (ls
we ey ad ae oa 28 oy At a “if a ‏ل هر‎
1 ١

Wo ‏سيل أله‎ gS Ge ' ‏عل‎ pel Gu! ‏علّ‎

بم

ذلك

& #2 حم
‎By‏ كلِكَ ‎a Mt AS‏ من ‎Zac + huss iy AE‏ #

a

“O you who believe! Whoever from among you turns back from
his religion Islam), Allah will bring a people whom He will love
and they will love Him; humble towards the believers, stern
towards the disbelievers, fighting in the Way of Allah, and never
afraid of the blame of the blamers . That is the Grace of Allah which
He bestows on whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for
His creatures’ needs, All-Knower .” (Qur'an 5: 54)

This Verse was, of course, revealed during the lifetime of the
Prophet #2, and yet it alluded to something that was to occur after
the Prophet’s death. Immediately after the Prophet #% died, many
people apostatized, rejecting faith after having believed. Allah %
had previously warned them that, if they were ever to fur away
from their religion, He & would “bring a people whom He will
love and they will love him — humble towards the believers,
stern towards the disbelievers, fighting in the Way of Allah, and
never afraid of the blame of the blamers.”’ Those people, it turned
out, consisted of Abu Bakr 4 and the members of his army who
fought against the apostates. That Allah % lavished such praise
upon Abu Bakr # and those under his command confirms Abu
Bakr # as the rightful Khaleefah after the Prophet's death. Allah’s
promise in the above-mentioned Verse came true: Abu Bakr
and those under his command fought against the apostates, doing
so for the sake of Allah 3%, and fearing no human being that stood
in their way. Abu Bakr’s army defeated the apostates, an event
that, when juxtaposed with the aforementioned Verse, leaves us

‎Adwaa Al-Bayaan (1/36).‏ أذا

224 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s

with a clear message: No one deserved to be the first Khaleefah of
the Muslim nation more so than Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq did —
may Allah be pleased with him and with all of the Prophet's
Companions #.

c) Allah 3% said:

Ca ih OL BY te JAS NG ‏د هُمَا ف‎

“Tf you help him (Muhammad #€) not (it does not matter), for
Allah did indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out,
the second of two, when they (Muhammad #2 and Abu Bakr a»)
were in the cave, and he #€ said to his companion (Abu Bakr a):
“Be not sad (or afraid), surely Allah is with us.” Then Allah sent
down His Sakinah (calmness, tranquility, peace, etc.) upon him,
and strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not,
and made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while
it was the Word of Allah that became the uppermost, and Allah is
All-Mighty, All-Wise.” (Qur'an. 9: 40)

The logical connection between this Verse and Abu Bakr’s
rightful place as the first Khaleefah of the Muslim nation is more
subtle than it was in the aforementioned Verses. Here, Abu Bakr
# is referred to as being “the second of two.” Imam Al-Qurtubee
(may Allah have mercy on him) wrote that certain scholars said
that Abu Bakr 4 was not only “the second of two” ithe cave, but
also “the second of two” in the ranking of this nation’s members.
Abu Bakr & was the “second of two” in another sense as well: The
Prophet #¢ was the first to invite people to. embrace Islam and to
fight those who attempted to hinder the progress of Islam's
propagation, and — in the capacity of the new overall leader of

7
ات

The Death of the Prophet #8 225

a

the Muslim nation after the Prophet’s death — Abu Bakr 4 was
the second to do those very same things.

d) Allah & said:

ae rec ees Ae ae oh 7 ee ‏سل سام و م‎ Se Me eee
‏الصّدلحلت إستشلفنهر في الارض صكما‎ Ices Ks ‏له الزين عامنوا‎ Sey
4 6 “ 3 oe
eae ‏م3‎ aS A lee Ca We ‏أ ما‎
: ‏و لمم تمر كم 2م لد أرتصيل‎ or ‏لك الور‎ pall ‏تخلف‎ |

CY ae

“bee AS 1 AS Or 2 2 + ‏بيد‎ ar ‏ل‎
‏ومن‎ ES gy She ‏أمنا يعيدونق لا‎ age ‏من بعد‎ A,

~ ‏سم‎ 3 we.

va

tipi ‏هم‎ Agi Os ie Ae
“Allah has promised those among you who believe, and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the earth, as He granted tts
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority to
practice their religion, that which He has chosen for them (1.e.,
Islam). And He will surely give them in exchange a safe security
after their fear (provided) they (believers) worship Me and do not
associate anything (in worship) with Me. But whoever
disbelieved after this, they are the Fasiqun (rebellious,
disobedient to Allah).’’ (Qur’an 24: 55)

Based on the events that occurred durimg the thirty or so years
after the Prophet's death, this Verse from Chapter “An-Noor’
clearly applies to the caliphates of Abu Bakr ‏هه‎ “Umar &,
“Uthman as, and ‘Ali 4. Al-Haafidh ibn Katheer (may Allah have
mercy on him) related that one of the emiment scholars from the
early generations of Islam said that the caliphates of Abu Bakr #
and “Umar 4 are referred to in the Book of Allah 3%, after which he
proceeded to recite the above-mentioned Verse.

e) Allah % said:
ot Cae ‏رم مكعم‎ > 7 Be 7 ‏عرصم | عه‎ Ao
Ga ‏فضلا‎ Gye PON yay way ‏من‎ Vaal ‏المهاجريت الذين‎ jill }

we

‎ae‏ م ‎fre‏ مسومو ‎Ste‏ مدعو ‎ye A GRO‏ شام
الله رضنا ونتصيرون الله ورسولهمع أؤلقيك هم أَلْصَدْدِفونَ 4 :

226 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قله‎

“(And there is also a share in this booty) for the poor emigrants,
who were expelled from thetr homes and their property, seeking
Bounties from Allah and to please Him. And helping Allah (1.e.,
helping His Religion) and His Messenger (Muhammad 88). Such
are indeed the truthful (to what they say).” (Qur'an 59: 8)

In this Verse, Allah 88 said that those who migrated from
Makkah to A-Madeenah — and at their forefront was Abu Bakr
a, Who had the sole honor among them of making that journey in
the blessed company of the Prophet #2 — were “indeed the
truthful (ones).”” As such, Allah 88 bore witness to the truthfulness
of Abu Bakr #; therefore, neither Abu Bakr # nor the other “poor
emigrants’ who pledged allegiance to him could have been false
or untrue to themselves or to others when they appointed Abu
Bakr 2s to lead them, and when Abu Bakr « accepted their
nomination and pledges of allegiance.

Ahaadeeth that either Directly or Indirectly Point to Abu
Bakr’s Caliphate

The Ahaadeeth that allude to Abu Bakr’s caliphate are so
numerous and are related by so many narrators that it is
impossible — even for the people of innovations — to give any
plausible reason to reject them. Those that do reject such
Ahaadeeth do so only out of intransigence and because of a
perVerse, deep-rooted hatred towards the Prophet's Compa-
nions @."! Some of those Akaadeeth refer directly to Abu Bakr’s
caliphate, while others do so only in an implicit manner. Here,
then, are some examples of those Ahaadeeti.

a) Jaabir ibn Mut'im & said, “Once, when a woman went to the
Prophet #8, he #@ ordered her to come back to him at a later
time. She & said, “Suppose that I come and do not find you.’ It
was as if she was hinting to the Prophet's death. He #& replied:

‎‘Ageedah Abhlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa‘ah (2/538), by Naasir Hasan Ash-‏ لا
‎Shaikh.‏

The Death of the Prophet ‏يل‎ 227

“Tf you do not st fid me, then ¢ go to Abu 1 Bakr.’

Commenting on this Hadeeih, ibn Hajar (may Allah have mercy
on him) said, “This Hadeeth retutes the Shiites, who claim that the
Prophet #2 appointed “Ali & and ibn “Abbaas ‏قف‎ to rule over the
Muslim nation after his death.”

b) Hudhaifah 2 said, “We were sitting down in the company of
the Prophet #% when he said:

Pal
a
a ‏لعا‎ &

“ ee

Verity, I do not know how much ‘longer Tunll be among you, so
follow those who come after me,”

and he ## then pointed in the direction of Abu Bakr # and "Umar
a.’P! Or in other words: follow those who will come after me:
Abu Bakr 4 and "Umar ‏رك‎ who will rule over you when I am
gone.

c) Abu Hurairah # reported that the Messenger of Allah 2%
Said:

tp

: تأ ي أنِْعٌ عَلَى حَوْضِي أشقي ‎SN‏

بكر ‎LEU‏ الدَأوَ مِنْ يَدِي ‎SIU £58 HS‏ وَفِي 2

ضعف ‎(Be Jeb obs? “pl els bal 7 a3 ONG‏ رَ مَرْعَ وَجْلٍ

Se yl dl GI veo

* Pea

ore
oh

دك

a

Re LHL a. fa

CS OWE ‏وَالحَوْضٌ‎ JE 36 Ee ‏أَقْوَى‎ IS

“While I was sleeping, I saw myself removing water from my
Basin (on the Day of Resurrection) and providing people with

IN Muslim (4/1856, 1857) and Bukhaaree (3659).
‏اا‎ Fathul-Baaree (7 /2A).
31 Sitsilatul-Ahaadeeth As-Saheehah, by Al-Albaanee (3/233, 236).

228 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

drink. Abu Bakr ‏هف‎ then came to me, took the bucket from my hand
— in order to allow me to rest — and took out two bucketfuls (of
water). The way in which he drew out water was characterized by a
degree of weakness, and may Allah forgive him. Then ibn Al-
Khattaab came and took the bucket from him. I never saw anyone
who drew out (water) with greater strength than “Umar. This
continued until the people turned around and left, and yet (t.e.,
even though many people drank from the basin) the basin was still
full, and was still gushing forth with ‏لكا" رماو‎

Commenting on this Hadeeth, Ash-Shaafi’ee (may Allah have
mercy on him) said, “The dreams of Prophets are (a form of)
revelation.” When the Prophet # said: “The way in which he
drew out water was characterized by a degree of weakness,” he
a was referring to the short duration of Abu Bakr’s caliphate, to
his imminent death, and to the war he would fight in against the
apostates — a war that would divert him from conquering new
lands and expanding the borders of the Muslim nation. These
were feats that ‘Umar ‏كه‎ was able to accomplish due to the long -
duration of his caliphate.'7!

d) ‘Aaishah & said, “During his (final) sickness, the Messenger
of Allah #¢ said to me:

ao
a

«اذْعِي لي أبَا بَكْرء ‎SEG‏ حَنَّى ‎CBI‏ كِتَابًا ‎GE! SG‏ أنْ ‎ES‏

مُتَمَنّ وَيَقُولٌ قَائِلٌ : أَنَا 2 ‎tt ots‏ وَالمُوْمِبُونَ إلا ‎CX i‏

“Call Abu Bakr and your brother for me, so that I can write a
letter (confirming Abu Bakr’s caliphate). For I fear that one (1.e.,
an undeserving person) will become hopeful (of becoming leader),
and someone will say, ‘I will assume power.’ But Allah and the
believers will refuse to have anyone other than Abu Bakr (as the
leader of the Muslims).

‎Muslim (4/1861, 1862).‏ أذا
‎Al Aitiqaad, by Al-Baihagee (pg. 171).‏ ]2[
‎B! Muslim (4/1857).‏

The Death of the Prophet #8 229

The Prophet # alluded here to how he expected some
disagreement over the caliphate after his death, but at the same
time made it clear that that disagreement would not last for long
since the believers would, to be sure, refuse to have anyone other
than Abu Bakr # as their leader and Khaleefah. In the end, what
iranspired in the courtyard of Banu Saa‘idah corresponded
exactly to what the Prophet # said in the aforementioned
Hadeeth: People disagreed with one another for short while, but
then that disagreement was quickly followed by a unanimous
decision to appoint Abu Bakr # as their Khaleefah.

2) "Ubaidullah ibn’ Abdullah said, “I entered upon‘ Aaishah & and
said, “Will you not speak to me about the (final) illness of the
Messenger of Allah ##?’” ‘Aaishah ‏ذا‎ responded, “Yes. When
the Prophet's limbs became stiff (because of his illness), he #¢
asked: “Have the people been led in Prayer?’ We said, “No, but
they are waiting for you, O Messenger of Allah.’ He #8 said:

,$7 وس اء 4

اضعوا لى ‎EUs‏ فى المخضب)
‎“Pour some water for me into the container (so that I can perform‏
‎ablution) .”‏

We did as he asked, and he washed himself. He then stood up
to leave, but was prevented from doing so when he passed out.
Upon regaining consciousness, he #% asked, “Have the people
performed prayer?’ We said, ‘No, and they are waiting for you, 0
Messenger of Allah.’ He #8 said, “Pour some water for me into the
container.’ After we did as he asked, and after he washed himself,
he got up to leave, but again he passed out. When he regained
consciousness, he #2 asked, ‘Have the people performed prayer?’
We said, “No, and they are waiting for you, O Messenger of
Allah.’ The people were gathered in the Masjid, and they were all
waiting for the Messenger of Allah #8 to come out and lead them
in the late-nigh ‘Eesha prayer. (Realizing that he was not able to go

Ol “Ageedah Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa‘ah Fis-Sahaabah (2/542).

230 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذف‎

out,) the Messenger of Allah #% sent word to Abu Bakr ‏به‎
‎ordering him to lead the people in prayer. When the messenger
came to us and said (to my father), “Verily, the Messenger of Allah
orders you to lead the people in prayer,’ Abu Bakr 4, who was a
gentle-hearted man, said, ‘O ‘Umar, lead the people in prayer.’
‘Umar # responded, ‘You are more deserving of that (honor).’
During the days that followed, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ led the people in
prayer. When the Messenger of Allah #@ then found in himself a
renewed feeling of energy and vigor, he went out, but (not being
able to walk on his own) he had to be helped by two men, and one
of them was Al-Abbaas #. This happened during the Dhuhr
prayer. By the time the Prophet #¢ went out, Abu Bakr 2 had
already commenced the prayer. Upon seeing the Prophet #¢, Abu
Bakr # made it clear that he was moving back (to the first row of
the congregation, so that the Prophet #2 could lead the prayer),
but the Prophet #% signaled to him that he should not move back.
The Prophet #€ then said to his two helpers, ‘Seat me by his side.’
They helped him sit down beside Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ who then
proceeded, while remaining in a standing position, to follow the
prayer of the Prophet #2, who was sitting down; meanwhile, the
people were following the prayer of Abu Bakr.”

“Ubaidullah, the narrator of this Hadeeth, said, “1 then visited
‘Abdullah ibn “Abbaas & and said to him, ‘Shall 1 not present to
you what ‘Aaishah 4 related to me in regard to the (final) illness
of the Messenger of Allah #&.’ He # said, “Yes, do so.’ I presented
the Hadeeth to him, and he did not reject (or correct) anything that
I said; however, he did say, “Did she name the other man who was
with ‏“لذ‎ Abbaas (i.e., the other man who was helping the Prophet
#€ to go from his home to the Masjid)?’ I said, “No.” He ‏نه‎ said, ‘He
was ‘Ali’!

This Hadeeth proves that, of all of the Prophet’s Companions
#, none was better than Abu Bakr ‏زه‎ given that he # was better
than any other Companion, it follows that he was most deserving

Ul Muslim (418) and Bukhaaree (687).

The Death of the Prophet #8 231

of the caliphate. Incidentally, we learn from this Hadeeth that, if for
whatever reason the Imam of a Masjid is not able to attend a
specific prayer, he should appoint someone to take his place. And
finally, this Hadeeth establishes the superiority not just of Abu
Bakr ¢, but of ‘Umar 2 as well — since ‘Umar # was the only
person Abu Bakr 4 turned towards when he wanted someone to
lead the people in his stead."!

4 ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ood ‏ع‎ reported that, when the Messenger of
Allah #¢ died, the people of the Ansaar said, “Let there be two
rulers: one that will be chosen from among us (the Ansaar), and
one that will be chosen from among you (Le., from among the
Muhaajiroon).”” “Urnar 4 went to them and said, “O people of
the Ansaar, don’t you know that the Messenger of Allah #8
ordered Abu Bakr 2 to lead the people in prayer. So which one
of you would be pleased with himself if he were to be placed
ahead of Abu Bakr (in ranking or status)?” The people of the
Ansaar responded, “We seek refuge from being placed ahead
of Abu Bakr.””!

g) ibn Sa’ad reported that “Ali # said, “When the Prophet 2% died,
we reflected on our situation, realizing that the Prophet #¢ had
put Abu Bakr & forward for prayer. And so we were pleased
to choose for our worldly affairs the same man that the
Messenger of Allah #@ was pleased to choose for our religious
affairs. Thus it was that we put Abu Bakr forward for the
caliphate’!

To be sure, Abu Bakr 2 was the right and only candidate for
the caliphate. As Abul-Hasan Al’Asharee put it, “That the
Prophet 8% placed Abu Bakr ahead of all of his Companions is
something that every Muslim is required to know. It proves
beyond a doubt that, of all of the Prophet’s Companions, he was

‎Sharh An-Nawawee (4/137).‏ لذأ
‎Fl Al-Mustadrak (3/67).‏
‎At-Tabagaat, by ibn Sa’ad (3/183).‏ اذا

232 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq »

the most knowledgeable, and he knew the most Qur’an. In a
narration that is not only authentic, but is also agreed upon by all
scholars, the Messenger of Allah #% said, “The one who leads the
people should be he who knows the most from the Book of Allah.
If more than one of them are equal tn recitation, then it should be
the most knowledgeable regarding the Sunnah. If they are equal
regarding their knowledge of the Sunnah, then it should be the
eldest among them. And if they are equal in age, it should be the
first of them to have accepted Islam.” ibn Katheer (may Allah
have mercy on him) said, “This sayimg of ‏“لم‎ Asharee, may Allah
have mercy on him, is something that should be written down
with gold ink. We should remember that the qualities that are
mentioned in the Hadeeth he quoted are all qualities that were
possessed by Abu Bakr a.”

The people of the Sunnah have two opinions regarding the
caliphate of Abu Bakr 2. One group of scholars say that the
Prophet #@ only alluded to Abu Bakr’s caliphate; or in other
words, he #¢ did not order his Companions to appoint Abu Bakr
‏هن‎ as their Khaleefah, but instead merely indicated that they should
do so. Another group of scholars maintain that the Prophet ## not
only alluded to Abu Bakr’s rightful place as the first Khaleefah of
the Muslim nation, but also made that point clear with the use of
clear and unequivocal language. The former opinion has been
ascribed to the likes of Al-Hasan Al-Basree (may Allah have
mercy on him), Imam Ahmad (may Allah have mercy on him),
and a number of other scholars from the People of Hadeeth."! To
prove the correctness of their view, such scholars cite the Hadeeth
in which the Prophet 2 ordered Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ to lead the people in
prayer, as well as the Hadeeth in which the Prophet #¢ ordered for
all of the Masjid’s doors to be blocked except for the door of Abu
Bakr 2.

The proponents of the second view consist of another group of

IN Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (5/265).
Pl Minhaaj As-Sunnah, by ibn Taymiyyah (1/134, 135).

The Death of the Prophet ‏يل‎ 233

scholars from the People of Hadeeth'! as well as the likes of
Muhammad ibn Hazm Adh-Dhaahiree.”! They cite as evidence
various narrations, such as the Hadeeth in which the Prophet 2¢
said to the woman who visited him, “If you do not find me, then
go to Abu Bakr.” They also cite the Hadeeth in which the Prophet
2% said to ‘Aaishah ‏نف‎

=“

K ‏الل وَالمُوْمُِونَ إلا أب‎ ols SIT UT ‏وَيقُولَ قَائِلُ:‎ Be
“Call Abu Bakr and your brother for me, so that I can write a letter
(confirming my appointment of Abu Bakr as my Khaleefah). For
indeed, I fear that one will be hopeful (.e., some undeserving
person will aspire to become Khaleefah) and that someone

will say, “1 will assume power.” And yet Allah and the
believers will refuse to have anyone other than Abu Bakr.”’

Sel ot bis CBI ‏حَنَّى‎ SEI ‏«اذعِي لي أبَا بَكْرِء‎

Coy

Finally, they cite the Hadeeth in which the Prophet 2¢ related a
dream to his Companions #; in it, he is standing over “his Basin
and providing drink to the people; then Abu Bakr # comes and
takes the bucket from his hand in order to allow him to rest.

Based on all of the aforementioned proofs, lam convinced that
the Prophet #¢ clearly ordered Muslims to appoint Abu Bakr a as
their Khaleefah; that order, however, was given in an indirect
manner. The reason why the Prophet #¢ did not give a direct
command was that he knew, based on what Allah informed him
of through revelation, that the Muslims would choose Abu Bakr
#, knowing fully well that no one among them was more
deserving of the position than he was.)

Ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “In
conclusion, it is clear that, through his sayings and deeds, the

Ol “Ageedah Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah Fis-Sahaabah (2/547).
7) Al-Fas! Fil-Milal Wal-Ahwaa Wan-Nihal (4/107).
‏اذا‎ “Ageedah Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah (2/548).

234 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg -%

Prophet #¢ indicated on many occasions that his Companions &
should choose Abu Bakr 4 as the first Khaleefah of the Muslim
nation.... The Prophet #@ intended to write a letter confirming his
decision, but then he came to know that the Muslims would
choose Abu Bakr anyway, and so, based on that knowledge, he
decided not to write the letter. Had there been any doubt in his
mind regarding whether or not his Companions ‏وك‎ would choose
the right candidate, he #2 would have made the matter crystal-
clear for them; instead, he knew that they would make the right
decision, and so he deemed it sufficient to indicate to them on

numerous occasions and in many ways that Abu Bakr 4 was his
choice to be the Khaleefah after his death.”

Ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him) went on to
mention a good reason why the Prophet 8 did not give a clear
and direct command to his Companions concerning Abu Bakr’s
appointment to the caliphate. Had the Prophet #¢ given such a
command, ibn Taymiyyah explained, Abu Bakr’s caliphate
would have been confirmed through revelation only ~— that is,
through Verses of the Qur’an and sayings of the Prophet #2. But
as matters stood, or in other words, since the Prophet #¢ did not
give a direct command, Abu Bakr’s caliphate was confirmed not
only through revelation — Verses of the Qur’an and sayings of
the Prophet that alluded to Abu Bakr’s caliphate — but also
through Ijmaa’, or the consensus of the Muslim nation. Therefore,
it was not only Allah Who chose Abu Bakr - which He in fact
did through His Divine Preordainment, and through Verses of
the Qur’an that alluded to Abu Bakr’s caliphate; nor was it the
Prophet #¢ alone who chose Abu Bakr 4 — which he in fact did
through indirect means; but it was also the believers who chose
him. This amounted to a triple honor for Abu Bakr 2s: He was
chosen by Allah, His Messenger #8, and the believers. Therefore,
the Prophet #2 came to the correct conclusion that no specific
appointment letter was required."!

UW Minhaaj As-Sunnah (1/139-141) and Majmoo’ Al-Fataawah 935 / 47-49),

The Death of the Prophet ‏له‎ 235

8) Ijmaa’, or a Universal consensus, is Arrived at Regarding
the Caliphate of Abu Bakr &

The scholars of Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah, both from the past
and present, all agree that, after the death of the Prophet #2, Abu
Bakr ‏كه‎ was more deserving than anyone else to become the
overall ruler and Khaleefah of the Muslim nation. Not a single
Companion abstained from making a pledge to recognize Abu
Bakr # as his leader and Khaleefah. This is significant in that it
establishes the clear validity of Abu Bakr’s caliphate, since Allah
would not unite the Companions upon misguidance. lt is further
clear that not a single Companion objected to Abu Bakr's
appointment.!! When Sa’eed ibn Zaid was asked, “When was
Abu Bakr confirmed by the people?” he said, “The day on which
the Messenger of Allah #8 died; they disliked for even a part of a
day to pass by without them being united as a group (with a
leader to rule over them).”! Following are some examples of
what the scholars of Ahlus-Sunnah have said regarding the
caliphate of Abu Bakr 4s.

a) Al-Khateeb Al-Baghdaadee (may Allah have mercy on him)
said, “The Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar unanimously agreed to
appoint Abu Bakr as their Khaleefah. They said to him, 0
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah.’ It is interesting to note
that they did not call anyone after him by the name Khaleefah. It
has been said that the Prophet #¢ left behind 30,000 Muslims,
and each one of them said to Abu Bakr, ‘O Khaleefah of the
Messenger of ‏لخ طم الم‎

b) Abul-Hasan Al-Ash’aree (may Allah have mercy on him) said,
“Allah — the Possessor of Might and Majesty ~— praised the
Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar in many Verses of the Noble

Ul ‘Ageedah Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah Fis-Sahaabah (2/550).
21 Abaateel Yajibu An-Tamuhhu Mimat-Taareekh, by lbraaheern Shu’ oot (pg. 101).
©) Tgareekh Baghdad (10/130, 131).

236 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

Qur'an. In the following Verse, He 4 particularly praised those
among them who made the Pledge of Ar-Ridwaan:

455i CB AGB 3 ‏المؤميين‎ ge Ant ‏وس‎ SE
“Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they gave

their Bai’a (pledge) to you (O Muhammad #8) under the tree”
(Qur’an 48: 18)

The very same people that Allah & praised in this and other
similar Verses were unanimous in their decision to appoint Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeg # as their leader: They all pledged allegiance to
him, and each and every one of them called him by the title, “The
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah.” Furthermore, they all lived
up to their pledge, recognizing his superior qualities and
remaming obedient to him throughout the duration of his
caliphate.”4!

c) ‘Abdul-Malik Al-Juwainee said, “The caliphate of Abu Bakr a
was ratified through the consensus of the Prophet's
Companions ‏را‎ all of whom submitted to his authority and
obeyed his commands.... As for the Raafidah’s (the Shiites’)
claim that ‘Ali 4 was aVerse to the idea of pledging allegiance
to Abu Bakr #, what they say is a blatant lie. Yes, “Ali « did
not attend the meeting that took place in the courtyard of Banu
Saa’idah, but that was because he had gone into seclusion,
having become overwhelmed with grief and sadness upon
learning of the Prophet's death. What is important here is the
fact that he later came out and, in the presence of a great many
witnesses, pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏تأر‎

d) Abu Bakr Al-Baagaalaanee said, “When Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ said,
‘Make me resign, for 1am not the best among you,’ the Leader

‎Al-Ibaanah ‘An Usool Ad-Diyaanah (Pg. 66).‏ ذا

‎! Kitaab Al-Irshaad (361).

The Death of the Prophet ‏يد‎ 237

of the Believers ‘Ali # said, “We will neither depose you nor
ask you to resign. The Messenger of Allah #¢ put you forward
(ahead of all of us) for our religious affairs; should we not then
be pleased with you for our worldly affairs?’ Here, “Ali 4 was
referring to when the Prophet #2 ordered Abu Bakr # to lead
the pilgrims during the Hajj of 9 H, and to when the Prophet 2
(during his final illness) ordered Abu Bakr to lead the people
in prayer. Indeed, Abu Bakr « was the best of this nation,
being blessed with the strongest faith, the most knowledge,
and the deepest understanding of the religion.”"!

What Does the Term “Kh

There has always been a universal consensus among Muslims
that the caliphate-based system of rule is the only correct and
legal system of governance in the Muslim nation. It is through the
office of the caliphate that the affairs of the nation are managed.
The role of the Khaleefah is, simply put, to apply the Shariah, to
manage the affairs of the Muslim nation, and to take care of the
needs of his people.

When the Prophet #@ died, the Companions ‏ذأ‎ were faced with
a difficult situation. They had to take immediate and decisive
action, or suffer the consequences of inaction: division, weakness,
and chaos. Sensing what was at stake, the Companions of the
Prophet #¢ understood the need for a leader under whose rule
they could unite; they knew that they had to choose a Khaleefah,
which is why they did not delay the process of choosing one once
the Prophet #£ died.

( Refer to Al-Insaaf Feema Yajibu ‘Aitiqaaduhu Wala Yajoozul-Jahl Bihi (pg. 65). 1
should point out that what I mentioned in terms of the Verses of the Qur’an,
sayings of the Prophet 2%, and other narrations that prove the validity of Abu
Bakr’s caliphate, are all texts that I have summarized from the mvaluable
work “Ageedah Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah Fis-Sahaabah Al-Kiraam, by Dy.
Naasir ibn “Aaidh Hasan Ash-Shaikh.

238 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كا‎

The caliphate-based system of rule is based on the teachings of
the Our’an and Sunnah, and both of these sources teach us that
there are two basic pillars of applying that system: mutual
consultation and Bai’ah (pledging allegiance to the Khaleefah; or in
other words, pledging to obey him).

Through the caliphate-based system. of rule, the person that is
chosen to lead the Muslim nation is known as the Khaleefah. Other
words that are sometimes used interchangeably for Khaleefah are
“Imam” and “Ameer.” Muslim scholars unanimously agree that it
is the obligatory duty of Muslims of any given era to appoint
someone to be their Khaleefah. It then becomes that Khaleefah's
duty to oVersee the affairs of his nation, to apply the teachings of
Islam among his people, to establish justice throughout his realm,
to provide for the needs of his people, to establish the
geographical boundaries of his nation, to defend those bound-
aries against foreign empires and countries, and to spread the
message of Islam to foreign peoples.

The Qur'an, the Sunnah, and [jmaa’ (consensus of the scholars
of any given generation) — these Islamic legislative sources all
confirm the collective obligation of Muslims to appoint a Khaleefah
to rule over them, and to then obey him. Allah # said:

eA aoe 4, ‏ف هع سد‎ Face ‏ا‎ ag
» ‏وك‎ ANT ‏وول‎ Sa ALS SAL ae Ball Ge}
“O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey that Messenger
(Muhammad #@), and those of you (Muslims) who are in
authority.” (Qur'an 4: 59)

And Allah #¢ said:
wo BL ol & Sb pel ‏في‎ AGG cll. BL 3310s
١ ‏إن‎ A als oe 5-6 ‏الهو‎

a

Pa po ‏سوأ‎ ty ‏سَدِيد‎

“O Dawud (David)! Verily! We have placed you as a successor
on earth, so judge you between men in truth (and justice) and

The Death of the Prophet #2 241

learning from the Prophet 2g and gaining knowledge with the
passing of every minute.

©» Abu Bakr ‏كله‎ was more concerned about the well-being of
Islam than other men are about their honor, their wives, their
mothers, and even their children. When Islam and Muslims
were in danger, Abu Bakr # was a steadfast defender of his
religion, allowing nothing — neither threats nor fear nor the
hurt feelings of his closest relatives - to stand in the way of
his mission to uphold justice on earth.

@ It was clear that Abu Bakr 4 was not going to invent a new
way of ruling the Muslim nation; rather, he 4 was going to
adhere closely to the blueprint that was left behind by the
Prophet # — his sayings, deeds, and legal rulings. This might
be obvious, but the point is that Abu Bakr 4s did not deviate
from the Prophet’s methodology by more than even the span
of the hand or, for that matter, the width of a strand of hair.
This is why we find that, during the early days of his rule, Abu
Bakr ‏كف‎ made key decisions that were exactly in keeping with
the methodology and known wishes of the Prophet # — such
as Abu Bakr’s decision to send out Usaamah’s army, and his
decision to go to war against the apostates.

@ Perhaps one of Abu Bakr’s best qualifications was his
unmitigated unworldliness — which, in degree, was second
only to that of the Prophet #¢. Abu Bakr 2 was not prompted
by a desire for worldly pleasure or gain; nor was he ambitious
for power; nor yet was he desirous of establishing a kingdom
for himself. He 4s merely wanted to live up to his purpose in
life: To worship Allah 38 through each breath he took, every
word he spoke, and every movement he made. The custom at
the time was for a king or ruler to develop his kingdom or
dominion in such a way that both he and his family would
continue to prosper and gain more power. This was true in the
Arabian Peninsula, in Rome, in Persia, and elsewhere. But
Abu Bakr ‏كله‎ - who appointed not his son but instead “Umar
to replace him after his death — wanted to extend only the

202 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

dominion of Islam; and he looked not to his own prosperity or
to that of his family, but to the prosperity of Islam and all
Muslims. Like the Prophet ‏و‎ Abu Bakr was a selfless
leader who was truly merciful towards those over whom he
ruled.

Because Abu Bakr 4s possessed all of these qualifications, those
that were present at the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah did not
require much convincing when it came time to pledging
allegiance to him. And when they later on nominated Abu Bakr
#, before the general public, everyone supported his nomination
and pledged allegiance to him.

Just as the choosing of Abu Bakr # made clear some of the
necessary qualifications of an aspiring leader, so too did the
meeting in the courtyard of Banu Saa‘idah provide a basic
blueprint for how Muslims should go about choosing a leader.
Some of the principles we can derive from that meeting are as
follows:

~ There must be some process of choosing a leader.

~ That process must involve Bai’ah, or the pledge to obey the
chosen leader.

- Those that are involved in the nomination process should
choose the best candidate — the one with the strongest faith
and the best ability to manage the affairs of the nation.

~ Nepotism has no place in the choosing of a Khaleefah. The
caliphate, as opposed to a kingdom, is not something that is
mbherited through familial ties.

- During the nomination process, people should be allowed to
express their views, so long as they do not transgress the
proper bounds of propriety in Islam.

‎AL-Khilaafah Wal-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon (pgs. 66, 67).‏ ذا

The Death of the Prophet #2 243

~ Even though people may discuss the merits of various
candidates, they should, in the end, base their final decision
on the teachings of Islam and on clear Islamic proofs. Yes, the
Ansaar did argue their point for a while, but no sooner was
proof presented to them regarding the validity of Abu Bakr’s
nomination than they submitted to the truth and agreed
wholeheartedly to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr as.

~ A leader should be chosen through the process of mutual
consultation, a process that is promoted in Verses of the
Qur'an, that was exemplified through the methodology of the
Prophet #£, and that was then applied by the Companions & in
the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah.

The process of choosing a Khaleefah in the courtyard of Banu
Saa’idah did not end with the nomination of Abu Bakr as; it did
not end when the attendees of the meeting pledged allegiance to
Abu Bakr 4; and it did not even end when the general public
pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ on the following day, when
they all were gathered in the Masjid of the Messenger of Allah #€.
Instead, the process ended only when Abu Bakr 2 accepted his
nomination and the people’s pledges. And even then, he # did so
only after he stipulated certain conditions, conditions that he
mentioned during his acceptance speech and that we will discuss
in more detail in the following pages of this work, In Sha Allah
(Allah Willing).

Chapter 7

First: The General

: legiance

The nomination of Abu Bakr 4 in the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah
— as well as the pledges that were made to him on that day — wasa
private affair. In order to confirm Abu Bakr’s appointment, the
general public’s participation was required. And so on the
following day, the general masses of Muslims gathered together
in order to pledge their allegiance to Abu Bakr a.

Anas ibn Maalik # reported that, on the day after the meeting
took place in the courtyard of Banu Saa’idah, Abu Bakr 4 sat
down on the pulpit. As he ‏كا‎ was seated thus, ‘Umar ‏ذه‎ stood up

Ul ‏روم‎ Al-Khulafaa Ay-Raashideen, by Dy. Fathiyyah An-Nibraawee (pg. 30).

246 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2%

and addressed the people. He & began his speech by praising and
glorifying Allah 4%, after which he went on to say, “O people,
indeed I said something to you yesterday which is not from that
which is found in the Book of Allah; nor was what I said
something that the Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ promised to us (here,
“Umar 2 was perhaps referring to how, on the previous day, he
publicly denied the possibility that the Prophet #2 had died). It
was just that I felt that the Messenger of Allah #¢ would outlive us
all. Nonetheless, Allah has left among you His Book, through
which He guided His Messenger #8. If you adhere to the same
Book, Allah will guide you upon the same path that He guided
His Messenger #¢. Now indeed Allah 8 has brought you together
and united you under (your new leader); he is the best among
you; he is the companion of the Messenger of Allah #%; and he was
the second of two when they were in the cave. So stand up and
pledge your obedience to him.” The general population of
Muslims then pledged allegiance to him, just as, on the previous
day, a select group of Muslims did the same.

Abu Bakr # then addressed the people in what was to become
one of the most memorable and moving speeches in the history of
the Muslim nation. As ‘Umar # did before him, Abu Bakr ‏نه‎
‎began by praising and glorifying Allah 3%. He # then said, “To
proceed: O people, I have indeed been appointed over you,
though 1 am not the best among you. If I do well, then help me;
and if Lact wrongly, then correct me. Truthfulness is synonymous
with fulfilling the trust, and lying is tantamount to treachery. The
weak among you is deemed strong by me, until I return to them
that which is rightfully theirs, In Sha Allah (Allah Willing). And
the strong among you is deemed weak by me, until [ take from
them what is rightfully (someone else’s), In Sha Allah. No group of
people abandons Jihaad in the path of Allah, except that Allah
makes them suffer humiliation. And wickedness does not become
widespread among a people, except that Allah inflicts them with
widespread calamity. Obey me so long as I obey Allah and His
Messenger. And if I disobey Allah and His Messenger, then I have
no right to your obedience. Stand up now to pray, may Allah have

The General Pledge of Allegiance 247

mercy on you.” Itis related that ‘Umar # said to Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ at
the beginning of that day, “Climb the pulpit.” “Umar 4 continued
to plead with him until he finally gave in and climbed the pulpit.
Then, the narration goes on to mention, the general population of
Muslims pledged their allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏لكاي‎

Brief as it was, Abu Bakr’s speech is considered to be one of the
most important speeches that have ever been given in the annals
of Islamic history. In a speech that amounts to no more than one
paragraph on paper, Abu Bakr 4s outlined his methodology of
governance. He & highlighted the importance of justice and
mercy in dealings that take place between a ruler and his citizens,
and he stressed the point that a leader's right to his people’s
obedience hinges upon his obedience to Allah and His Messenger
#. Furthermore, Abu Bakr 4 focused on two important matters,
one related to external affairs, and the other to domestic, societal
affairs. As for the former, he 4 made it clear that his people would
have to be prepared to bear arms and to fight if they were going to
succeed in protecting their nation against external threats, and if
they wanted their nation to gain a degree, if not of supremacy,
then at least of stability on the world stage. On a domestic note,
Abu Bakr « warned his people against allowing the spread of
wickedness and lewdness. The results of widespread wickedness,
he warned them, are tribulations and calamities that destroy a
nation at its roots.

Abu Bakr’s speech and the events that followed the Prophet's

death give us the following insights into the early days of Abu
Bakr’s caliphate and into Abu Bakr’s methodology of governance.

1) The Meaning of a Pledge of Allegiance (i.e., The Bai’ah)

The term Bai’ah is difficult to translate into English for the very
reason. that scholars give various definitions of the word in
Arabic. They do not disagree over the meaning of the term in as

‎Al-Bidnayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/305, 306), and the chain of this Hadeeth is‏ لذأ
‎authentic.‏

‎I Bukhaaree (7219).

248 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4

much as they use different terminology to define it. Often
throughout this work the term “pledge of allegiance’ is used to
translate Bai'ah, a translation that is based on this definition of
the word ‘allegiance’: The tie or obligation of a subject to his or
her government. The choice of the word ‘allegiance’ is more a
matter of necessity than one of finding the exact right word,
since no single word in English carries all of the connotations of
the term ‘Bai’ah’ — which is not surprising since “Bat‘ah’ is a term
that is nuanced in meaning and that is exclusive to the religion of
Islam. We would do well, therefore, to at least briefly examine its
meaning as defined by Muslim scholars. ion Khuldoon gave this
definition for ‘Bai’ah’: “The covenant one takes to obey the one
who has authority (over the people).’"! Others have said,
“Bai’ah is to make a pledge to apply the teachings of Islam,’”’"!

When the Muslims would pledge allegiance to their leader, they
would place their hands over his hand, in order to confirm their
covenant with him and add emphasis to their promise to obey
him. This action of shaking hands resembled. what a buyer and
seller would do to finalize their transaction; this gave the air of a
contractual agreement to the Bai’ah. Incidentally, this is the
reason why the act of pledging obedience was called “Bai’ah,’ a
word that is derived from the Arabic word for a business
transaction: ‘Bai’’®!

Abu Bakr’s nomination process teaches us that, if the people of
knowledge and wisdom choose a candidate and pledge obedi-
ence to him, and if that candidate possesses the necessary
qualifications for the job, the general masses of Muslims must
unite around that candidate and oppose all who rebel against
him. They must do this in order to preserve the unity of the
Muslim nation, and to stand firmly together against both internal
and external enemies.

11 Al-Mugaddimah (pg. 209).
2! Jaamai’ Al-Usool Fee Ahaadeeth Ar-Rasool (1/252).
‏أذا‎ Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fil-Islam, by ‘Aarif Abu ‘Eed (pg. 284).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 249

The Prophet # said:

(ls Le Se BY a2 ‏وَلَبْسَ في‎ SE ْنَم١‎
“Whoever dies without having a Bat'ah over his neck dies the
death of (pre-Islamic) ignorance .“"!

This Hadeeth contains a clear warning to those who abstain
from making a pledge of allegiance to the overall leader of the
Muslim nation. If a person does not make such a pledge to the
Khaleefah, he lives a life of misguidance; and if he dies without
having made it, he dies a death of misguidance.!

Uniting upon a leader is so important that, in Islam, one is
commanded to kill anyone who attempts to stage a rebellion or
coup against the Khaleefah or Imam of the Muslims. Such attempts
at rebellion threaten the stability of a nation and almost always
lead to trials, tribulations, and a great deal of bloodshed. The
Prophet #% said:

‎al og)‏ إما ما ‎od as whl‏ ده دمر كليو يف ما مَا اسْتَطاعَ
‎Ge fel ele ae‏ الآخر «
‎“Whoever pledges allegiance to an Imam, having given him the‏
‎transaction of his hand (1.e., a shake-of the hand to confirm his‏
‎pledge) and the fruit of his heart (1.e., his sincere loyalty), then let‏
‎him obey that Imam as much as he is able to do so. And if another‏
‎person comes to challenge him (and his right to lead), then strike‏
‎the neck of that other person.”‏

‎Ig pols ab 5G

‎People who live in the capital city should pledge allegiance
directly to the Khaleefah. As for those who live in the various
provinces and cities of the Muslim nation, they may pledge
allegiance directly to the Imam if he is among them or to his

‎"Muslim (1851).
Pl Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fil-Islam (pg. 250).
‏اذا‎ Muslim (1852).

250 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فد‎

representative if he is somewhere else. ‘These rulings are based on
the caliphate of Abu Bakr ‏.هه‎ The inhabitants of Al-Madeenah
pledged allegiance to him and placed their hands on his hand;
meanwhile, the inhabitants of Makkah and At-Taaif made their
pledges to Abu Bakr’s governors.

Making a direct pledge to the Khaleefah is only obligatory upon
leaders in society and the people of knowledge and wisdom; as
for all other people, it is sufficient for them to enter into the
pledges of their governors, leaders, tribal chieftams, or represen-
tatives. Nonetheless, even if leaders and the people of knowledge
pledge allegiance to a leader, others from the general population
of Muslims should not be prevented from doing the same."!
There are, however, some scholars who say that it is compulsory
for all Muslims to make a pledge to the Khaleefah, and not just a
pledge to enter into the pledge of someone else. They base this
view on the fact that Abu Bakr & did not begin to take on his
duties as the Khaleefah until the general masses of Muslims
pledged allegiance to him in the Prophet’ 5 Masjid. 2

A Bat'ah, in this specific sense of the word (in the sense of the
Bai‘ah that was given to Abu Bakr 2), should be given only to the
overall ruler of the Muslim nation. It should not be given to
anyone else, regardless of whether a Muslim country exists on
earth or not; such pledges should not be made because of the
difficult inyplications and obligations that result from a pledge of
allegiance.

In ‘short, therefore, a Bai’ah means pledging loyalty and
obedience to a Khaleefah, who in turn must then rule based on
that which Allah & has revealed. In essence, a Bai‘ah is a
contractual agreement between two parties: the Khaleefah and the
citizens of the Muslim nation. When they make their agreement,
the Khaleefah pledges to base his rule on the Qur'an and Sunnah

‎Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fil-Islam (pg. 253).‏ لذأ

‎Vl Fighus-Shoorah, by Dr. Ash-Shaawee (pg. 439) and ‘Asr Al-Khulafaa ‏جف‎
‎Raashideen (pg. 30).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 251

and to submit completely to Islamic law — in terms of beliefs,
legislations, and an overall way of life. For their part, the citizens
of the Muslim nation pledge to submit to and obey their Khaleefah
as long as their obedience remains within the bounds of the
teachings of Islam.

The term Bat'ah, as well as its application in life, is something
that is specific to the Islamic system of government; and it is
foreign to all other forms of government. The main implication of
the Bai’ah is that the Khaleefah and his people pledge to follow the
laws of Islam in their entirety. Neither of the two parties of that
pledge has the right to act contrary to Islamic law. By being guilty
of acting contrary to Islamic law, one declares war against the
Islamic system of governance; what is worse, one is stripped of
the quality of having faith in Islam, a consequence that is made
amply clear in this Verse of the Noble Qur’an:

“But no, by your Lord, they can have no Faith, until they make

you (O Muhammad ®&) judge in all disputes between them, and

find in themselves no resistance against your decisions, and

accept (them) with full submission.” (Qur'an 4: 65)

we
5
32
lean
van
6
=”
2-7

2) Sources of Legislation During Abu Bakr’s Caliphate

During his acceptance speech, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ said, “Obey me so
long as I obey Allah and His Messenger. And if I disobey Allah
and His Messenger, then I have no right to your obedience.” As
Abu Bakr # clearly mentioned in his speech, and as is clear from
the methodology of governance he then followed, the sources of
legislation during his caliphate are as follows:

a) The Noble Qur’an

said:

252 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4%

bi AIG wil ee Ka Hh ‏الكتب‎ Ly UA Bp
‘eZ Encnsleall 5

“Surely, We have sent down to you (O Muhammad ‏2ه‎ the Book
(this Qur'an) in truth that you might judge between men by that
which Allah has shown you (1.e., has taught you through Divine
Inspiration), so be not a pleader for the treacherous.” (Qur'an 4:
105)

This primary source for all Islamic legislation contains rulings
for issues that relate to all spheres of life.

b) The Sunnah of the Prophet 2

The Sunnah is the second source of Islamic legislation, and it is
in the Sunnah that one is able to see the practical application of the
Our’an’s laws and legislations.

In the caliphate of Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ if a ruling could be found in the
Qur’an and Sunnah, all other opinions and theories were
completely disregarded. Thus we see, from Abu Bakr’s mode of
governance, that the nation of Islam is not a nation that can
accommodate secular or man-made laws, but is instead a nation
that is already blessed with religious laws and a divinely revealed
constitution. Any person who becomes leader of the Muslim
nation is restricted in the way he can govern. He is not endowed
with the right to invent new legislations; rather, his role is simply
to apply the laws of Islam to the letter"! In Abu Bakr’s world,
and in the world of the Companions #, Islamic law reigned
supreme, and no one was above that law — not the citizens of the
Muslim nation, and not their ruler. It is for this reason that Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ stated very clearly that he deserved the obedience of the
people only if he remained obedient to Allah # and His
Messenger #. After all, the Messenger of Allah #€ said:

a

ell Vy

1

‎ia Cra ao 35‏ 3 .2 3 بحل 0 م
4 المعصِيةٌ ‎Las}‏ الطاعة ‎Ls‏ المعروف»)

‎١١ Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fil-Islam (pg. 228).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 253

“There ts no obedience when it comes to sinning; obedience 8
restricted to Al-Ma’roof (Al-Ma’roof is a comprehensive term that
covers anything that is considered good and noble and acceptable
in Islam) ‏لأ"‎

3) The Right of Citizens to Scrutinize their Leader and to Hold
Him Accountable for His Deeds

Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ said, “If I do well, then obey me. And if I act
wrongly, then correct me,’”"! Here, Abu Bakr # affirmed the
right of individual citizens to hold their leaders accountable for
their actions. They should forbid him from perpetrating evil and
force him to do what is right, and what is in accordance with the
teachings of Islam.°! At the beginni ng of his speech, Abu Bakr 2s
pointed out the P hibitey of all rulers. From his time onwards, he
made it clear, every leader was susceptible to making mistakes,
since the era of Prophethic infallibility and divine revelation had
just come to an end. The Prophet #¢ was given authority over his
people because he received direction and guidance through
divine revelation. Any leader who was to come after him, Abu
Bakr # included, would be fallible in his judgments, which is why
he was required to follow the teachings of the Qur’an and Sunnah
to the letter.

In Abu Bakr’s mind, the individual citizens had a vital and
active role to play in the affairs of the Nation, a role that involved
supporting their leader, advising him, scrutinizing his actions,
and correcting his mistakes. And they had to choose from these
various actions based on the situatiom: If their leader was ordering
them to bear arms and to defend their lands, they were required
to support him. Also, so long as he applied the teachings of Islam,
it remained their duty to honor him — for, in honoring him, they
would be honoring the religion that he was defending. The

Ol Bukhaaree (7140).
I Al Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/305).
3] Fighus-Shoorah Wal-Istishaarah (pg. 441). -

254. The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ف‎

Messenger of Allah #8 said:

Pe

UE ‏المُسْلِمء وَحَامِلٍ‎ LEN ‏إِكْرَامَ ذي‎ : JUS ‏الله‎ JOE] ‏مِنْ‎ op

غير ‎JA‏ فيه وَالجَانِي ‎cee‏ وَإِكْرَامَ ذِي ‎GULLS‏ الْمقْسِط)

ao

“Verily, from the glorification of Allah $8 ts honoring the elderly
Muslim ; the bearer of the Qur'an, the bearer who does not exceed
iis proper bounds and who is not negligent regarding tits
teachings ; and (another means of glorifying Allah %& is) honoring
the just leader”)

In another Hadeeth, the Messenger of Allah #8 said:

A. “a at
‏النصيححة)»‎ Fy 55)
“Religion is sincerity,”’

and he ‏يله‎ repeated this phrase three times. His Companions &
asked, “Sincerity towards whom, O Messenger of Allah?” He #¢
said:
5 2 aan 2? 2 3 ‏سوس ير‎ etc Yee oe é
‏الله -َعَرْ وجل- ولكتابه ولرسوله ولائمة المسَلمين وَعَاميَهِم)‎

“To Allah (the Possessor of Might and Majesty), to His Book, to

His Messenger, to the Imams of Muslims, and to the common

masses of Muslims .’"*!

In this Hadeeth, sincerity carries a different meaning for all who
were mentioned by the Prophet 2 sincerity towards the Imams of
Muslims — which is what concerns us in this section — means the
following: helping them fulfill their duties, uniting under their
rule, pointing out their errors, and correcting their mistakes in an
honorable manner. In so many words, therefore, Abu Bakr 4 was
saying during his acceptance speech that the uprightness of the
nation depended greatly on the uprightness of its leaders, which

(4 Saheeh Sunan Abu Daawood )3504(
2! Muslim, the Book of Eemaan, chapter, “Religion is Sincerity.” (55).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 255

is why citizens have so many obligations vis-a-vis their rulers.
Abu Bakr’s point was heeded by the Companions ‏را‎ who
proceeded to advise him, provide him with important informa-
tion that he needed to make right decisions, help him manage the
day-to-day affairs of his government, and so on.

It is truly sad that, in the times we live in, the idea of holding
leaders accountable for their actions is virtually dead in many
Muslim countries. There remains no real link between individual
citizens and their rulers;.instead, we are left with brutal
dictatorships and tyrannical policies. The individual, rather than
being an active advisor and helper of his leader, sits at home,
fearful of domg anything that might even remotely be deemed as
being political. Whether it is the fault of our leaders only or the
fault of both leaders and citizens, there needs to be a mutual
_contract and understanding between them. Success will come
only when such a mutual contract exists, and only when a leader
rules by the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet 2 while
his people stand by his side, actively supporting him when he
deserves support, and correcting him when he needs to be
corrected. A nation that applies these principles is one that can, by
the permission of Allah, achieve stability and success on earth.

4) Establishing the Principle of Justice and Equality Among All

Citizens

Abu Bakr a said, “The weak among you is deemed strong by
me, until 1 return to them that which is rightfully theirs, In Sha
Allah (Allah Willing). And the strong among you is deemed weak
by me, until I take from them what is rightfully (someone else’s),
In Sha Allah.’?) Some of the key foundations ~ or perhaps even
the most important foundations — of a truly Muslim country are
justice and equality for all. In fact, a country that is bereft of justice
and equality, though it may be inhabited by Muslims, is not really
a Muslim country at all.

1 ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/305).

256 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏نك‎

Applying justice throughout society is not a voluntary
endeavor on the part of the leader, whereby he applies justice
based on his mood or whims; rather, applying justice is one of the
most sacred of duties in Islam. For as Al-Fakhr Ar-Raazee (may
Allah have mercy on him) said, the scholars of this nation
unarumously agree that it is obligatory for a ruler to establish
justice in his realm."

Verses of the Qur'an and sayings of the Prophet #@ confirm the
fact that one of the primary goals of establishing a country for
Muslims is establishing justice and equality on earth. A truly
Muslim. country must fight against and eradicate injustice in all of
its forms and guises. The goal of such a nation is to spread justice
to the point that every person — be he rich or poor, male or
female, black or white or brown, young or old — can express his
grievances to the appropriate authority without having to spend
money or expend an unreasonable amount of energy to get what
is rightfully his.

In Islam, a leader must establish justice among the people,
without taking into consideration the status of those who come
forth or are brought forth for litigation. Disregarding the status,
language, nationality, and financial standing of the litigants that
come before him, a Muslim leader or judge must judge between
them based on the truth. It makes no difference to a Muslim judge
whether he renders judgment against a friend or foe, against a
rich man or poor man, or against a landowner or a mere laborer;
what matters to him is that he renders a just and fair judgment.
Allah 88 sai

\l Tafseer Ar-Raazee (10/141).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 257

“O you who believe! Siand out firmly for Allah and be just witnesses
and let not the enmity and hatred of others make you avoid justice.
Be just : that ts nearer to piety, and fear Allah. Verily, Allah is Well-
Acquainted with what you do.” (Qur'an 5: 8)

A paragon of virtue and fairness, Abu Bakr 4 captured the
hearts of his people. He # viewed justice not just as a duty, but
also as a means of spreading the message of Islam through his
practical example. If wealth found its way into the Muslim
treasury, he would divide it among the people in a completely fair
manner. He # even put himself on an equal level with the
common masses of Muslims. ‘Abdullah ibn Al-’Aas # reported
that Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #& stood up one Friday and said,
“Tomorrow morning bring with you camels that are meant for
charity, and we will then distribute them (among the deserving).
But let no one enter with us (into the barn or stable that contains
the camels) without first gaining (our) permission.” Upon hearing
Abu Bakr’s speech, a woman said to her husband, “Take this
bridle (the gear by which a camel is controlled and guided), for
perhaps Allah will provide us with a camel (tomorrow morning).”’

On the following morning, the man went out to see whether he
would be given a camel, but he found that Abu Bakr # and “Umar xs
had entered the enclosed area that contained the camels. In spite of
Abu Baktr’s instructions of the previous day, the man entered
without obtaining anyone’s permission. Turning around and seeing
the man, Abu Bakr asked, “Why have you entered here with us.”
He 4 then took the man’s bridle and hit him with it.” After he
finished distributing the camels, Abu Bakr 4 summoned the man,
gave him his bridle back, and said, “Exact retribution (for what I did
to you).” As the leader of the nation and the man who was
responsible for the camels, Abu Bakr 2; had to make sure that the
camels would be distributed in a fair and organized manner. That is
why he forbade people from entering with him; therefore, he had
every right to punish the man for disobeying him. Nonetheless, he
feared Allah & so much that he later regretted the punishment he
meted out to the man and wanted the man to hit him back.

258 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذل‎

“Umar #, who was shocked to hear Abu Bakr’s unusual
request, said, “By Allah, he will not exact retribution. Do not
make it a Sunnah {i.e., do not make hitting a ruler a precedent for
those who come after you).”” Abu Bakr 2 responded, “Then who
will protect me from Allah on the Day of Resurrection?” ‘Umar &
said, “Then instead make him happy (Le., instead of allowing him
to hit you back, give him something to make him happy).” Abu
Bakr «, giving in to ‘Umar’s suggestion, called his servant and
ordered him to give the man a riding camel, its saddle, some
velvet, and five Deenars,” and with those gifts the man of course
was well pleased and satisfied."!

Also in his acceptance speech, Abu Bakr 2 affirmed the
principle of equality for all, a principle that is made clear in the
Noble Qur'an:

7 ot mete ‏سم الي‎ ١ ‏سه هر 37 را ل ير مي‎ a 2 Gate
i) Hotel AUS ‏ملي شعويا‎ Bh S 3 Sale G 20 ‏ها‎ ay
“ ca 57 2 =A 2 ‏شر‎

مم عند 4 ‎Sal sil‏ إن ‎es a ١‏ ش

“O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female,
and made you into nations and tribes, that you may know one
another. Verily, the most honorable of you with Allah is that
(believer) who has At-Tagwa (i.e., one of the Muttaqun

(pious). Verily, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware.”’ (Qur'an
49: 13)

In Islam, all people — the ruler and common citizens, men and
women, Arabs and foreigners, the white and black — are equal.
As did the Prophet #¢ before him, Abu Bakr # applied the
teaching of equality in practice, and he # announced that he
would do that when he said, “O people, I have indeed been
appointed over you, though I am not the best among you. If I do
well, then help me; and if I act wrongly, then correct me.
Truthfulness is synonymous with fulfilling the trust, and lying is
tantamount to treachery. The weak among you is deemed strong

11 "Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Hal-Islam Fee ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa (pg. 410).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 259

by me, until [return to them that which is rightfully theirs, I Sha
Allah (Allah Willing). And the strong among you is deemed weak
by me, until I take from them what is rightfully (someone else's),
In Sha Allah.”

During Abu Bakr’s caliphate, the principle of equality
extended even to the distribution of the nation’s wealth — which
was a policy that bothered some Companions & who felt that
those who had made a greater sacrifice for the cause of Islam
deserved a greater share of wealth. At first, the Muslim treasury
was situated in the district of As-Sunh, which is where Abu Bakr
& lived. No one guarded the treasury, which prompted some
people to ask Abu Bakr # why he didn’t appoint a guard to
protect the nation’s wealth. Abu Bakr 2s told the questioner he
had nothing to be afraid of and that the wealth was safe. He ‏ذه‎
‎said this because the treasury always remained empty. And it
remained empty not because the Muslims were going through
tough economical times, but because wealth would no sooner
find its way into the treasury than Abu Bakr 4 distributed it
among the poor and needy. He 2 disliked for wealth to be stored
for extended periods of time, when it could instead be used to
take care of the needs of his people. When Abu Bakr « moved to
the center of Al-Madeenah, the treasury moved along with him; in
fact, the treasury became part of the home in which he 4s lived.

Free men and slaves, men and women, the young and the ald
— everyone received an equal share of the nation’s wealth.
‘Aaishah ‏كا‎ said, “During the first year (of his caliphate), he gave
ten (deenars or dirhams) to a free man, and ten to a slave; also, he
gave ten to a woman, and ten to her female servant. Then during
the second year (of his caliphate), he gave each person twenty
(thus increasing each person’s share of weaith).”

As I mentioned earlier, this policy of equal distribution
bothered some Muslims, who complained, “O Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah, in your distribution of this wealth you have
indeed given everyone equally. And yet there are those who are
superior (because of their long years of service to the religion of

260 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

Islam), those who were the first (to do good deeds), and those
who embraced Islam before others did. Would that you had given
them more than you gave to others!” Abu Bakr #& responded, “As
for the groups of people you mentioned — those who are
superior, those who were the first (to do good deeds), and those
who embraced Islam before others did — [am very well aware of
what they did (and of what they sacrificed for the cause of Islam).
But the reward for what they did can be found only with Allah ~
countless are His praises; what we are dealing with here is
livelihood [in this worldly realm (i.e., so it is not for me to hand
out rewards for the performance of good deeds)j. in this regard,
setting an example (by earning one’s livelihood and by making
sacrifices for others) is better than selfishness.”

‘Umar ‏أ‎ was among those who disagreed with Abu Bakr’s
policy of equal distribution. He # voiced his disagreement when
he said, “Are you giving equally among those who performed
both migrations (to Abyssinia and then to Al-Madeenah), those
who performed prayer to both Qiblahs (to Jerusalem and to
Makkah), and those who embraced Islam (as late as) the year of
the Makkah Conquest?”

“They {ie., the people of the first two categories) worked for
the sake of Allah,” Abu Bakr # responded. “Therefore, their
reward can be found only with Allah. And the world is nothing
more than a means of conveyance for a rider (who is traveling to
the eternal abode of the Hereafter).”’

‘Umar was not convinced, which is why, when he became
Khaleefah, he shifted policy, giving a greater share of wealth to
those who embraced Islam early and those who were among the
first to fight alongside the Prophet #2 in battle. Nonetheless,
‘Umar ‏كه‎ later regretted his earlier policy and came to the
conclusion that Abu Bakr ¢ had been right all along. Towards the
end of his caliphate, ‘Umar # acknowledged, “If I had the chance
to do it all over again, | would have applied the system of Abu

Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by At-Tantaawee (pgs. 187, 188) and Ibn Sa’ad (3/193).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 261

Bakr # by giving everyone an equal share of (the nation’s)
wealth.” This admission spoke volumes at once about the
humility of “Umar ¢ and the wisdom and superior judgment of
Abu Bakr és.

Abu Bakr # used a portion of the treasury’s wealth to
purchase camels, horses, and weapons for war. And one
particular year, during the harsh cold of the winter, he bought

Al-Madeenah. It is estimated that, during the entirety of Abu
Bakr’s two-year caliphate, approximately two-hundred thousand
(Deenars or Dirhams) was collected in the Muslim treasury; and
Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ spent all of that money on good causes.!*!

It was clear to Abu Bakr 4 that honor and dignity for both the
leader and the led could only be achieved through the application
of universal justice and equality. This Verse, therefore, was of
particular significance to Abu Bakr’s understanding of sound
governance:

‎RS allo Ga oa Jill Db ail op‏ عَنٍ

‎O5S% » 3d 4 47 ear ‏لْمَحٍََ وله ىر‎
“Verily, Allah enjoins Al-‘Adl )1 ‏ر. ع.‎ justice and worshiping none
but Allah alone ~ Islamic Monotheism) and Al-Ihsan (1.e., to be
patient in performing your duties to Allah, totally for Allah’s sake
and in accordance with the Sunnah (legal ways) of the Prophet £%
ina perfect manner), and giving (help) to lath and kin (1.e., all
that Allah has ordered you to give them e.g., wealth, visiting,
looking after them, or any other kind of help, etc.) : and forbids
Al-Fahsha (i.e., all evil deeds, e.g., illegal sexual acts,
disobedience of parents, polytheism, fo tell lies, io give false
witness, to kill a life without right, etc.), and Al-Munkar (ie.,
all that is prohibited by Islamic law: polytheism of every kind,

‎AL-Ahkaum As-Sultaaniyyah, by Al-Maawardee (pg. 201).‏ لذأ
‎I Teareekh Ad-Da’wah Ial-Islam(pg. 258).‏

262 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg as

disbelief and every kind of evil deeds, etc.), and Al-Baghy (i.e.,
all kinds of oppression), He admonishes you, that you may take
heed.”” (Qur'an 16: 90)

Abu Bakr + understood that, in order to become a truly just
and fair leader, he had to rise above his personal desires. He ‏كه‎
‎denied himself even the most basic of necessities and devoted
himself wholly to the cause of Islam. As such, he became sensitive
to the needs and feelings of others — to the harsh circumstances of
the poor, to the sense of helplessness of the weak, and to the
hunger of the starving. In short, Abu Bakr # brought himself
down to the level of the poorest of the poor — even though he was
the leader of an entire nation — so that he could feel their pain,
provide for their needs, and impartially apply justice among all of
his people. Not caring about a comfortable life for himself, his
children, and his family, Abu Bakr  vigilantly oversaw the
governance of his people, paying attention to both large and
seemingly small matters.

To be sure, the banner of justice and equality was raised during
the caliphate of Abu Bakr #. The poor, weak, and needy were
secure in the knowledge that their rights would not be trampled
upon; in a very significant sense, therefore, the weak became
strong through the rights they enjoyed; and the strong became
weak when what they wrongfully took frorn the poor was seized
from them.

There was no exception to the rule of the law, for neither status
nor power nor wealth could fend off the application of justice
during the rule of Abu Bakr #. Beautiful indeed were these words
of the noble scholar ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on
him): “Verily, Allah helps a just country even if it is a disbelieving
one, and He does not help a wrong-doing country even if it is a
Muslim one. It is through justice that men are made noble and
wealth is made abundant.”4!

Ly As-Siddeeq, by Haikal Baashah (pg. 224).
1 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/305).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 263

5) Truthfulness Should be the Basis of All Dealings Between a
Leader and His People

During his acceptance speech, Abu Bakr 4 said, “Truthfulness
is synonymous with fulfilling the trust, and lying is tantamount to
treachery.” He #4 thus announced that truthfulness has to be the
basis of all dealings between a leader and his people. This needs to
be the case if the people are to develop a sense of trust in their
leader. When Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ said the above-mentioned words, it is
not unlikely that he recalled the saying of the Prophet #%:

7 at ro Ga 8 cS Gt widen ‏يَوْمَ‎ a ‏يرو و‎ 1
‏إليهم‎ “yas ‏وَلا‎ wees ‏الله القسامة‎ a Nit
deat "piss le Susy 915 £3 wf cu
“As for three specific (categories of) people, Allah will not speak to
them on the Day of Resurrection ; nor will He purify them; nor
will He (even) look at them. And they will have a painful

torment. They are the old man who fornicates , the king who is a
liar, and the poor person who is arrogant. a

Incidentally, in each of these cases, the person specified has
little reason to perpetrate the evil for which he is guilty. So yes, a
young person is sinful if he fornicates, but an old person who
fornicates is more sinful, since, with a decreased sexual drive, he
has less reason to seek out illicit means of satisfying his sexual
desires. Similarly, a rich person is sinful if he is arrogant, but a
poor arrogant person is more sinful, since, with neither money
nor property to boast about, he has less of a reason to be arrogant.
And finally, the common man is sinful if he is a liar, but usually
such a person lies in order to gain more wealth or a higher ranking
in society - though, of course, these reasons do not justify his lies.
A king, on the other hand, is more powerful and wealthy than
anyone else in his kingdom; therefore, he has no need to lie, which
is why a king who is a liar is more sinful than a common man who
is guilty of the same sin.

‎Muslim, the Book of Eemaan (172).‏ اذا

264 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

In his speech, Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ equated lying with treachery. These
words, coming from a leader of a country, conjured up meanings
of high treason. In short, therefore, Abu Bakr 4 was pointing out
to his people that a liar was the greatest enemy to the nation.

The aforementioned words of Abu Bakr 4 had a further
benefit as well. They helped bridge any gap that might exist
between Abu Bakr # and the common masses of Muslims, and
they imbued the latter with a feeling that they could have
confidence in their leader and place their complete trust in him.
Such feelings are a stark contrast to the feelings of distrust and
disillusion that are common among the masses of today’s
Muslims, who witness their leaders lying with almost every
word they speak.

6) An Announcement that Jihaad Did Not End with the Death
of the Prophet 2

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ said in his acceptance speech: “A people do not
abandon Jihaad in the way of Allah except that Allah abandons
them, leaving them to be humiliated.’”"! While it is true that, by
the time the Prophet # died, the Muslims had gained control over
the entire Arabian Peninsula, the need for an armed struggle did
not end with the Prophet’s death. Rather, both external and
internal enemies threatened the stability of the Muslim nation. As
for the former, the Romans and the Persians had their sights set on
destroying what they perceived to be an upstart nation. And as
for the latter, the apostates abandoned their religion, refused to
pay Zakaat, and followed — at least some of them — false
prophets and liars, the most dangerous of them being Musaila-
mah “the Liar.”

The importance of military ability, if not supremacy, was not
lost on Abu Bakr ‏رقف‎ who had participated in many important -
battles alongside the Prophet #§. Without a doubt, Abu Bakr’s
warning must have been inspired by the saying of the Prophet 2%:

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/305).‏ ذا

The General Pledge of Allegiance 265

an Pa
& “ 2 te ‏أل 25م‎

ioe rH) ae oe ‏بالعينة؛‎ waits Isp
“5 Sle ‏الله‎ Llc cal ges S55

دييكا

“When you buy and sell with Al-’Eenah (a specific form of trading
that is prohibited in Islam) , when you take to the tails of cows (1.e.,
occupy yourselves completely with taking care of your fields),
when you are pleased with farming, and when you abandon
Jthaad, Allah will place over you (a cover of) humiliation, and he
will not remove it until you return to your religion ‏لكأ‎

13
3
Ni

Because of the grave consequences mentioned in this Hadeeth,
Abu Bakr 2, in order to preserve the strength of his nation, made
armed struggle against the enemy one of the key themes of his
caliphate. The people responded well to his appeals, with many
volunteering to fight in order to defend the weak, grant freedom
to the oppressed, and provide the necessary means for spreading
Islam to foreign lands and other peoples.

7) Declarmg a War Against Wickedness and Shameful Acts

Abu Bakr also said during his acceptance speech, “And
wickedness does not become widespread among a people, except
that Allah inflicts them with widespread calamity.” As with all of
the other pithily expressed statements of his speech, this one had a
basis tn the Sunaht of the Prophet #£. It was as if Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ as
he was standing on the pulpit and addressing the people, recalled
these words of the Prophet 2:

الم ‎le‏ القَاِمَةُ في كَوْمٍ قط ‎Ge‏ يُعْلُوا ‎ra ap‏
الطَاعُونُ وا لأَوْجَاعٌ ‎Las KES al‏ في أشلافهم ‎Bl‏

a

مَِضِوًا.. .)

‎Sunan Abu Daawood (3426). Al-Albaanee declared this Hadeeth to be authentic.‏ لذ

266 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg ‏مك‎

“Wickedness does not appear among a people, to the point that
they perform wicked deeds openly, except that plagues and
diseases become rampant among them — plagues and diseases
that did not exist during the lifetimes of their forebears...”""!

The spread of lewd acts and wicked deeds represents perhaps
the most malignant disease that can afflict a society. It is a disease
that has a weakening and debilitating, and ultimately destructive,
impact on society. What is worse, it leads to plagues and illnesses
— perhaps AIDS being the most recent example — that were non-
existent in previous generations.

Abu Bakr # understood that the material well-being of his
nation depended upon its spiritual well-being. He then
implemented policies — policies which, of course, had been
implemented during the lifetime of the Prophet #8 — that ensured
the preservation of the moral fabric of society. A strong nation,
Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ pronounced, was one that was not preoccupied with
desires and lusts; a strong nation, rather, was one that was
productive, and one that was a benefactor to all of mankind.

The link between good morals and the establishment of strong
and powerful civilizations is at once strong and undeniable. If the
people of a nation become il-mannered, and if they perpetrate
vile and lewd acts out in the open, they are headed down the
certain path of destruction. Conversely, nations prosper when
they espouse good morals, a pattern that was clearly discernable
to Abu Bakr .& given his knowledge of past nations; hence the
prosperous civilizations that existed during the era of Daawood
x (David), Dhil-Oarnain, and many other leaders and peoples
who adhered to noble values and sound morals. Such civiliza-
tions remained strong as long as they did not turn away from
those values and morals. But when they then changed their ways,
submitting to the whispers of the Devil and replacing thankful-
ness to Allah with disbelief, their prosperity was in turn replaced

[lth Maajah (4019) and Saheeh Al-Albaanee (2/370).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 267

with diseases, trials, tribulations, plagues — and, in some of the
more severe cases, complete destruction.

The Messenger of Allah #& taught his Companions & about
some of the immutable laws by which Allah & governs the
universe. One of those laws we have already come across in the
saying of Ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him): “Allah
helps a just nation even if it is a disbelieving one, and Allah does
not help a wicked nation even if it is a Muslim one.” What we are
discussing in this section — that good morals lead to a prosperous
society, and that widespread wickedness leads to diseases, trials,
plagues, and destruction — is another of those laws; it is a law
that the Prophet # taught his Companions #, and it is a law that
Abu Bakr # took to heart. Allah 8 said:

oO ee ‏امار‎ oni oe ‏اي‎ aad & “el ee

2S Jal Ge Ss ‏فيا‎ A ‏مترفها‎ OA ae SO >

“And when We decide to destroy a town (population), We (first)
send a definite order (to obey Allah and be righteous) to those
among them (or We (first) increase in number those of tts
population) who are given the good things of this life. Then, they
transgress therein, and thus the word (of torment) 1s justified
against it (them). Then We destroy it with complete
destruction.” (Qur’an 17: 16)

The above-mentioned translation is based on the most famous
recitation of this Verse. According to another recitation, the
wording of the Verse is ‘Ammarrnaahum/"! and not ‘Amarnaa-
hum.’ The latter means to ‘send a definite order’; the former means
‘to make as their leaders.’ Therefore, according to the former, part
of this Verse means: ‘And when We decide to destroy a town
(population), We make the leaders of that town those who are
given the good things of this life.’ Incidentally, even though the
word “Taraf (which is used in one of its forms in the above-

‎Tafseer ibn Katheer (5/58).‏ أذا

208 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏اد‎

mentioned Verse)’ literally means ‘having a great deal of wealth,’
it carries the extra connotation of not bemg upright upon the
truth. Therefore, in Arabic, not all forms of “Tharaa (richness)’ are
synonymous with ‘Taraf’/3

Any wise ruler would do well to follow the example of Abu
Bakr « by establishing a morally upright society. It is truly a
foolish leader who decides not only to allow widespread
wickedness, but to actually defend and promote it ~ thus
allowing his nation to become like the one that is described in this
Verse of the Noble Qur’an:

oe Aw ‏ا‎ ase eo ee wae see soe rege

oe 55 ‏رذفها‎ Gal ‏مثلا 305 كانت ءامنّة : مُطمَيِنَةٌ‎ AIT OFS,
a ae 1 4 a a nd Ase ae ‏عر‎ oS
‏يما‎ abl ‏الجوع‎ Ss SACS AM GOSS BS gl Spies ‏كل مَكان‎

و ‎ah‏ ساح سر 3

“And Allah puts for the example of a township (Makkah), that
dwelt secure and well content; its provision coming to it in
abundance from every place, but it (its people) denied the Favors
of Allah (with ungratefulness). So Allah made 11 taste the extreme
of hunger (famine) and fear, because of that (evil, 1.e., denying

Prophet Muhammad #) which they (its people) used to do.”
(Qur'an 16: 112)

The foregoing discussion amounts to a brief analysis of Abu
Bakr’s acceptance speech, a speech that outlined the policies Abu
Bakr 2 planned to follow, and actually did follow, throughout the
duration of his caliphate. It was a speech that defined the roles of
the leader and of the led and that clearly delineated their duties
and mutual responsibilities towards one another. Furthermore,
Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ presented to his people a recipe for being successful
as a society and as a leader of the world’s nations. In short, he ‏نه‎
‎told his people that the system of law that was applied during the
lifetime of the Prophet #¢ had to continue to be implemented

 Manhaj Kitabaatut-Taareckh Al-Islaamee, by Muhammad Haamil (pg. 65).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 269

during his rule. Yes, the Prophet #¢ had died, Abu Bakr +
informed his audience; but he left behind a religion and a Book for
them to follow. As long as they followed the teachings of the
Qur'an and Sunnah, Abu Bakr #& intimated to them, they would
remain successful and upon true guidance. This was the message
that Abu Bakr es presented to the people. That they unanimously
agreed to his appointment as their leader points to the fact that
they too ardently wanted to continue to follow the system of law
that was taught to them by the Prophet #¢!" Appreciating the
historical significance of Abu Bakr’s carefully chosen words on
the day the people pledged allegiance to him, Imam Maalik (may
Allah have mercy on him) said that no person can truly be the
Imam (leader) of this nation unless he applies the teachings that
Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ presented during his acceptance speech.'”!

Second: Taking Control of
Affai the Domestic Front

Knowing fully well that he could not implement his policies all
on his own, Abu Bakr 2 sought the help of the Prophet's
Companions ‏.كه‎ Thus he placed Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah &
— who was known as “The Trustworthy One of this nation” — in
charge of the Muslim Treasury. Also, he appointed ‘Umar ibn Al-
Khattaab as a judge; nonetheless, he also presided over certain
cases. And he # put Zaid ibn Thaabit ‏هه‎ in charge of writing
down official letters; on occasion, however, other Companions #
— such as ‘Ali ibn Abee Taalib # and “Uthm4n ibn “Affaan & —
would also write for him.

As stated earlier, the Muslims gave Abu Bakr # the title, “The

Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #8.” The people not only
trusted Abu Bakr # implicitly, but needed him as well, requiring

11 Diraasaat Fil-Hadaarah Al-islaamiyyah, by Ahmad Ibraaheem Ash-Ghareef (pgs.
210, 219).

2) Taareekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 92).

270 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

his services all the time. The only problem, however, was that he
was not available to them all of the time — at least not during the
early days of his caliphate. After all, Abu Bakr # was a
businessman, and he needed to go to the marketplace on a daily
basis in order to provide for the basic needs of his family.

It is related that, shortly after he was appointed Khaleefah, Abu
Bakr #& could be seen heading towards the marketplace, carrying
a bundle of garments which he intended to sell. “Umar ‏أ‎ and Abu
“Ubaidah # accosted him and said, “Where are you going, 0
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah?’ Abu Bakr replied, “The
marketplace.” They said, “To do what? You have been put in
' charge over the affairs of the Muslims.” Abu Bakr es said, “Then
how will I feed my family?” They said, “Come with us, and we
will allot for you a stipend.” He # went with them, and they
conchided that, every day, he should receive a portion of a
sheep.) |

In another narration that is recorded in Ar-Riyaadh An-Nadirah,
it is related that the stipend they agreed to give him consisted of
250 Deenaars a year and certain parts of a sheep. That amount was
to be taken from the Muslim Treasury. It was, however, a paltry
sum, which was not enough to provide for his and his family’s
needs. Because of his dire circurnmstances, Abu Bakr « went out
one day to Al-Baqee’ in order to do business; meanwhile, “Umar
‏ركه‎ as he was walking outside, came across a group of women
who were sitting down on the ground, and he asked them, “What
is the matter with you?” They said, “We want to meet with the
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, for we want him to judge
between us (regarding a dispute that has arisen among us).”
“Umar # went out to look for Abu Bakr 4 and was surprised, and
somewhat frustrated, to find him in the marketplace. He 4 took
Abu Bakr #& by the hand and said, “Come here,” to which Abu
Bakr # replied, “I have no need to be in charge of your affairs.
You have given me that which is not sufficient for my needs and

‎Ay-Riyaad An-Nadirah Fee Manaagib Al-‘Asharah (pg. 291).‏ لذأ

The General Pledge of Allegiance 273
1) Abu Bakr 2: The Ideal Member of Society

Abu Bakr 2 was fully aware of the fact that, as the Khaleefah of
the Messenger of Allah #£, he had to carry on his shoulders more
responsibilities than any other member of society. Every second
that passed by, and every breath he took was of great value to
him; and to be sure, the lessons he learned from the Prophet #
about the importance of using one’s time to the utmost were not
lost on him. Rarely did a moment pass by wherein he was not
educating the people, promoting good, forbidding evil, or
contributing in some way to the well-being of his people. And
yet, as great as his responsibilities were towards the entire
Muslim nation, Abu Bakr .& did not forget to do the little things
that made him deserving of the caliphate in the first place. Here
are some examples of how Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ remained unchanged —
in a good way, of course — even after he became leader of an
entire nation.

a) Milking Goats, Helping an Old Blind Woman, and Visiting

Prior to becoming Khaleefah, Abu Bakr # would milk the goats of
the women who lived in his district of As-Sunh. After the people
pledged allegiance to him in the Prophet's Masjid, one of the girls of
his district said, “From now on, he will never again milk our goats for
us.” Upon hearing her words, Abu Bakr 4s said, “T will indeed milk
them for you. And I certainly hope that my new job will not change
me..." Abu Bakr # then continued to milk their goats for the six
months he remained in As-Sunh; after that, however, he moved to
another district, to the center of Al-Madeenah."!

This narration attests to Abu Bakr’s humbleness and lofty
manners, for here was a man who was the most respected
member of society, who was well advanced in his years, and who

‎Tbn Sa’ad Fit-Tabagaat (3/186). By itself, this narration is not very strong. But it‏ أذا
‎reaches the grade of Hasan (good or acceptable) by dint of other narrations‏
‎that attest to and strengthen it.‏

274 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2s

was the leader of an entire nation; yet in spite of his status, he did
not allow his new job to change the way in which he would deal
with people in the past. He continued to help others, even
though doing so took away from him the time he needed to do
other important things. That Abu Bakr 4 and other Companions
uw dedicated their valuable time to performing seemingly minor
good deeds shows us the value they placed in helping others and
taking care of the weaker and poorer members of society."! Abu
Bakr 4 was a man who, with his good leadership skills and
strong character, brought back peace and justice to the Arabian
Peninsula (with the defeat of the apostates); who, as a brave and
wise general, fought against the two superpowers of his era — the
Roman and Persian Empires — and, to boot, actually managed to
defeat them; and yet there he was milking the goats of his
neighbors’ goats, all the while saying, “I hope that my new job
wil not change me.” His new job, mind you, was not a simple
one; its duties entailed ruling over all Arabs, leading armies that
went out to fight the Persians and Romans, and establishing the
safest, most just, and most prosperous civilization on earth. Yet in
spite of all of that, he hoped to remain unchanged, and he did not
allow any of his manifold duties to prevent him from milking the
goats of his neighbors.'!#!

The most salient characteristic that Abu Bakr 2 continued to
maintain even after he became Khaleefah was his humbleness. If
his camel's bridle would fall to the ground, he #& would descend
to pick it up himself. When this happened on one occasion,
someone said to him, “Had you ordered us, we would have
handed it to you (so that you wouldn't have had to get off of your
camel).” Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ responded, “The Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎
‎ordered us not to ask people for anything.”"! In remaining
humble, Abu Bakr # remembered lessons such as the one that is
taught in the following Verse:

u At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (8/19).
2) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq , by At-Tantaawee (pg. 186).
‏أذا‎ At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Mahmood Shaakir (pg. 8).

the General Pledge of Allegiance 275

rad

لمانا 52

للضي

‎Od er‏ ا ال ‎CA‏ ا الس ا ا م 57 7 رس
‎Bis pages ASEM &‏ في ‎ici‏ فأنظرز ‎GS‏ مكارت ‎hae‏
‏ف
‏|

‎“So We seized him and his hosts, and We threw them all into the
sea (and drowned them). So behold (0 Muhammad #4) what was
the end of the Zalimun (wrong-doers, polytheists and those who
disbelieved in the Oneness of their Lord (Allah), or rejected the
advice of His Messenger Musa (Moses) #8). (Qur'an 28: 40)

‎Arrogance, Abu Bakr 4% understood very clearly, is the path to
self-destruction. Also, it is certain that the following saying of the
Prophet #2 had influenced Abu Bakr’s continuing effort to remain
humble:

‎2 é ‏سم‎ Fae Bye wt pee “ 06 Bie. o oT ye
‏بعفو إلا عرّاء وَمَا‎ Ie ‏وَمَا رَادَ الله‎ cde ‏مِنْ‎ Bie ‏نقَصَتْ‎ ba

‎Pal
‎do. 537

‏َوَاضَعَْ أَحدٌ لله إلا رَفَعَهُ ‎Ch‏

‎“Charity does not cause one’s wealth to decrease. When a slave

‎(of Allah) forgives (others for the wrong they did to him), Allah

‎increases him in nothing save honor and dignity. And whenever

‎anyone becomes humble for the sake of Allah, Allah raises him (in
ranking, honor, dignity, etc 2)

‎Abu Bakr’s humbleness prompted him to serve other Muslims,
especially those among them who were weak or poor. Abu Saaleh
Al-Ghifaaree reported that ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab # would take
care of an old, blmd woman who lived on the outskirts of Al
Madeenah. He # would go to her at night, provide her with
drink, and generally maintain her home for her. But when he
went to her one night, he found that someone had beaten him to
her: that someone had already come and taken care of her. On
more than one occasion thereafter, ‘Umar 4 would try to go
earlier, so as not to be beaten by his mysterious competition; but
each time he would come too late. Well, one day, he decided to go

‎Muslim, the Book of Al-Birr, As-Silah, and Al-Aadaab (2588).‏ لذا

206 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 4:

very early, to hide somewhere behind the blind woman’s home,
and to see who it was that was coming to take care of her. As
‘Umar ‏كه‎ waited patiently in his place of hiding, a figure appeared
to be coming nearer, and, lo and behold, it was none other than
Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ who was, at the time, the Khaleefah of the Muslim
nation.4!

Anas ibn Maalik 4 reported that, shortly after the Messenger
of Allah #@ died, Abu Bakr # said to ‘Umar #, “Come with me us
so that we can visit Umm Aiman together, just as the Messenger
of Allah #@ would visit her (when he was alive).” When they
entered her home, they found that she was crying, and so they
asked, “Why are you crying? (Don’t you know that) what is with
Allah (in terms of rewards) is better for the Messenger of Allah 2
(than for him to have remained among us).’”’ She %& said, “Iam not
crying because of my knowledge that what is with Allah is better
for the Messenger of Allah #8; rather, I am crying because
revelation has ceased to descend from the sky.” With these words,
Umm Aiman “ aroused the emotions of Abu Bakr # and ‘Umar
‏رك‎ both of whom began to cry along with her.’

b) His Advice to the Woman Who Vowed Never to Speak

Abu Bakr 4 forbade people from returning to the deeds of pre-
Islamic ignorance and from introducing newly-invented matters
into the religion — matters that had no precedence in the Sunnah
of the Prophet #¢ and he ‏نه‎ ordered people to adhere to the
Sunnah as closely as possible.'*! Qais ibn Haazim reported that
Abu Bakr ‏ذل‎ entered upon an Ahmassi woman whose name was
Zainab. Abu Bakr # noticed that she didn’t speak at all, and so he
asked what the matter was with her. Someone told him that she
made an intention to speak not a single word throughout her
pilgrimage to Makkah. To be sure, she did so out of desire to

'! Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Tantaawee (pg. 29).

‎Muslim (2454).‏ لكا

‎I! Saheeh At-Tawtheeg Fee Seerah Hayaat As-Siddeeg (pg. 140), by Majdee Fathee
As-Sayyid.

The General Pledge of Allegiance 277

please Allah ‏قل‎ and to be more spiritual, but in reality she was
simply turning away from the Sunnah of the Prophet #¢, which is
why Abu Bakr 2 reproached her, saying, “Speak, for what you
are doing is not permissible, and is from the deeds of pre-Islamic
ignorance.”

The woman then spoke, asking Abu Bakr 4 who he was. He ‏فك‎
‎responded, “I am one of the Muhaajtroon.”” She asked, “Which
Muhaajtroon?” He a said, “From the Quraish.” She said, “From
which Quraish do you belong?” He ‏كه‎ said, “Verily, you ask a
great many questions. | am Abu Bakr.” Finally realizing who it
was that she was speaking to, the woman said, “O Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah, for how much longer will we remain upon
this goodness (Le., upon Islam, and upon uprightness as a nation)
which Allah has brought to us after we had been in a state of
complete ignorance?” Abu Bakr 4 said, “You wil remain upon
this affair as long as your Imams remain upright.” The word
“Imam,” even though it was an Arabic word, was new to the
woman, who then asked, “ And what are the Imams?”” Abu Bakr ‏له‎
‎said, “Among your people, did you not have leaders and people
of high standing im society, people who gave orders to their
people, and who were obeyed by them?” She said, “Yes.” Abu
Bakr 2 said, “Then the Imams bear the exact same relationship
with the people (i.e., they lead and give commands, and the
people follow them and obey their commands).”!"!

Making a vow of silence was as much an innovation as it was a
return to the pre-Islamic days of ignorance. For, as Al-Khattaabee
(may Allah have mercy on him) put it, “One of the acts of worship
during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance was making and
adhering to a vow of silence. One of the people from those days
would stand in the same place during both the day and night (in
order to perform worship) and would remain silent.” ‏ا‎ And
Imam ibn Hajar (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “As for the
Ahaadeeth that extol the virtues of silence, they do not contradict

‎Bukhaaree (3834).‏ ذا
‎I Fathul-Baaree (7/150).‏

278 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

this narration.... For the silence that is recommended (in Islam)
involves the avoidance of false speech and of any kind of lawful
speech that may lead to that which is unlawful. ConVersely, it is
forbidden to remain silent when one has the opportunity and the
ability to speak the truth; similarly, it is not lawful to forsake
inocuous lawful speech (i.e., speech which is neither obligatory
nor sinful) altogether. And Allah knows best’

‎Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil‏ ل

‎The Messenger of Allah #¢ taught us that each one of us is a
shepherd and that each one of us is responsible for his flock. So,
for example, a man is responsible for the members of his
household. It is his responsibility to feed them, protect them,
and provide them with shelter and clothing; but most of all, it is
his responsibility to look after their spiritual well-being — or, in
short, to order them to do good, and to forbid them from
perpetrating evil. Such are the grave responsibilities of a man who
has a small number of people living under his roof; imagine, then,
the responsibilities of a man who is the leader of an entire nation
and whose “flock” consists of ail of the individuals who live
under his rule. Such was the situation of Abu Bakr # in the past,
as well as of today’s leaders — the difference being, however, that
Abu Bakr ‏ده‎ lived up to his responsibilities, taking advantage of
every opportunity he had to teach others about their religious
duties.

‎Some Muslims mistakenly think that they do not have the
obligation to educate others about their religious duties; they feel
that it is their duty to become good Muslims themselves without
actively encouraging others to do the same. But they are wrong.

‎Perhaps they base their view on an incorrect understanding of
this Verse:

‎RO wee ef a dyer ‏بد‎ OR was Awe Shae « we ZB we
' ‏أقستف نسو‎ IS LS ‏من‎ Sia ‏أنفسكم لا‎ Sle Late call GAS &

‎() Fathul-Baaree (7/151).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 279

“O you who believe! Take care of your ownselves (do righteous
deeds, fear Allah much (abstain from all kinds of sins and evil
deeds which He has forbidden) and love Allah much (perform all
kinds of good deeds which He has ordained)). If you follow the
right guidance and enjoin what is right (Islamic Monotheism and
all that Islam orders one to do) and forbid what is wrong
(polytheism, disbelief, and all that Islam has forbidden) no hurt
can come to you from those who are in error.” (Qur'an 3: 105)

On one occasion, Abu Bakr 4s read this Verse and then said:

(lass ‏يعيروه عَمَهُمَ الله‎ oli ke ‏إِذَا رَأَوَا‎ begat op

“O people, I hea he the Messenger of Allah 8% say, “If a people see
evil but do not change it, Allah will inflict them all with
punishment .”””

According to another account of the same incident, Abu Bakr
# said, “O people, you recite this Verse but understand it
incorrectly. Verily, I heard the Prophet #¢ say:

‎Sp‏ الئاس )1 رَأُوا الظَّالِمَ 8 ‎ok‏ عَلَى ‎cos‏ أَوْشَكَ أَنْ يَعْمَهُُ
‎ai |‏ 4 بعقَاب)

‎“O people, if they (the people) see a wrongdoer but do not take
hold of him (1.e., prevent or forbid him from perpetrating evil),
the time will have drawn near for Allah to inflict them all with
punishment’)

‎Imam An-Nawawee (may Allah have mercy on him) shed
further light on the meaning of the above-mentioned Verse when
he said: “As for the saying of Allah, “Take care of your ownselves,’
it does not contradict the fact that it is obligatory (apon Muslims)
to enjoin good and forbid evil. The correct interpretation of this
Verse, the one that is held by trusted scholars who have weighed

‎1 Hadeeth Sahech Sunan Abu Daawood (4338).

280 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

all pertinent proofs, is as follows: If you do what you have been
commanded to do, you will not be harmed (or negatively
impacted) by the shortcomings of others. This is similar in
meaning to another Verse of the Qur’an:

0 ‏يقر مل سوق مير‎ a
area 2g bly ap YS}
“And no bearer of burdens shall bear another’s burden.” (Qur'an
35: 18)

Among the things a Muslim is “commanded to do’ is enjoining
good and forbidding evil. If he obeys that command, and if the
people he tries to educate do not then respond to his appeals, he
will not be held accountable for their wrongdoing, since he did his
duty of conveying (the truth).”7)

As the reader will see in the following examples, Abu Bakr ‏ا‎
‎availed of every opportunity that presented itself to educate
others, to promote good, and to eradicate evi. Maimoon ibn
Maihraan reported that a man approached a group of people who
were gathered together. Saying nothing to anyone else, the man
turned to one particular attendee of the gathering — Abu Bakr ‏كك‎
‎— and said, “Peace be upon you, O Khaleefah of the Messenger of
Allah.” Reproaching the man for singling him out and for not
extending greetings of peace to anyone else, Abu Bakr 4s said,
“Me only, and what about everyone else who is here!!!

In certain instances Abu Bakr # deemed it sufficient to educate
others not by way of words, but by way of his actions. And in
very rare instances, Abu Bakr & would educate others by way of
his inaction. [am referring here to how Abu Bakr # would avoid
performing a Sunnah (Le., non-obligatory deed) because he feared
that someone would see him performing it, and would think that
it was an obligatory deed. For instance, Hudhaifah ibn Usaid «&
related that he watched on as Abu Bakr 2 and “Umar 4 made ita

“Aun Al-Ma’bood Sharh Sunan Abu Daawood (11/329).
Pl Al Jaamai’ Li-Akhlaag Ar-Raawee Wa-Aadaab As-Saamai’, by Al-Khateeb (1/172)
(255).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 281

point not to sacrifice animals (during the Hajj season), not
wanting to make the act of doing so a precedent for others,
whereby they would consider it to be an obligatory act of
worship.

Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ was respectful towards his father. Once, when he
approached his father, who got up to meet him, Abu Bakr # got
off of his riding camel in a rushed manner and hurried to go to
him as a show of respect and obedience. And as for his sons, he 2
would — as do all pious fathers — advise them to apply the
teachings of Islam. On one occasion, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ came across his
son ‘Abdur-Rahmaan #, who had gotten into a dispute with his
neighbor and was arguing with him. Abu Bakr - said to “Abdur-
Rahmaan ‏رقف‎ “Do not say vile things to your neighbor, for such
speech will remain even though the people will have de-
parted.’ What this means is the following: everything in this
worldly life is impermanent: all things and even all people will
depart from this world, but what will remain from it are your
deeds, for which you will be held accountable on the Day of
Resurrection.

In spite of his manifold duties, prayer remained a central part
of Abu Bakr’s life. lam speaking here not only about performing
prayer or, for that matter, performing it on time; instead, lam also
referring to how Abu Bakr # would remain focused during
prayer, always trying to perform it in the best way possible. Years
after his time, the people of Makkah would say, “ibn Juraij
learned how to pray from ‘Ataa; ‘Ataa learned how to pray from
ibn Az-Zubair; ibn Az-Zubair 4 learned how to pray from Abu
Bakr &; and Abu Bakr 4 learned how to pray from the Prophet
#¢. And “Abdur-Razzaaq would say, ‘I have never seen anyone

perform prayer in a better manner than ibn Juraj’

When people were faced with hardships and personal
calamities, Abu Bakr 4 would at once console them and remind

iN Az-Zuhd, by ‏مط[‎ Al-Mubaarak (1/551).
‏انا‎ Fadanil As-Sahaabah, by Imam Ahmad (1/254).

282 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

them of the Hereafter. So, for instance, if a person's loved one died,
Abu Bakr # would say to him, “Where there is consolation, there is
no calamity; and when one is overcome by a feeling of restlessness,
one benefits nothing as a result. Death is easier than that which
comes before it (for the believer; so here Abu Bakr 4 is instilling
hope into the heart of someone who has lost a loved one), and it is
harsher than what comes after it. Remember how you lost the
Messenger of Allah #¢ (when he died), and in doing so, your
calamity will become lighter (and easier to bear). And may Allah
increase your rewards (for you).’”""!

Abu Bakr 4 would admonish individuals in person, and the
general public from the pulpit. His speeches were brief — not the
needlessly long sermons that are more common in today’s age —
and yet full of profound meanings. For example, Abu Bakr « once
delivered this pithy sermon: “There are five dark matters and five
lamps (to iluminate them (or in some cases, to counteract them)).
Love of this world is darkness, and Ai-Tagqwa (piety, right-
eousness, the fear of Allah #¢) is its lamp. Sin is darkness, and its
lamp is repentance. The grave is darkness, and its lamp is (the
phrase) ‘None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.’ The Hereafter is darkness,
and its lamp is the good deed. The Siraat (the bridge over the
Hellfire that every person will have to cross in the Hereafter) is
darkness, and its lamp is certainty of Faith.””!

It was especially on the pulpit during his Friday sermons that
Abu Bakr # would display his capability of being a sincere and
moving speaker. Ausat ibn Ismaa’eel (may Allah have mercy on
him) reported that, one year after the Prophet's death, he heard
Abu Bakr 2 deliver the following sermon: “The Messenger of
Allah #@ stood among us the previous year just as | am standing
here before you today.” Abu Bakr # then began to cry; according
to one account, he cried so uncontrollably that he was not able to
speak for a while. Finally, after a long pause, Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎

Ul Uyoon AL-Akhbaar (3/69, 70).
Ul Faragid Al-Kalaam Lil-Khulafaa Al-Kiraam, by Qaasim ‘Aashoor (pe. 29).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 283

continued, “O people, ask Allah for well-being (physical, but
especially spiritual, well-being; and also, well-being in the
Hereafter), for with the exception of certainty of Faith, there is
nothing better that He 8 gives to anyone than well-being. Always
be truthful, for truthfulness is the companion of piety — and both
of them are in Paradise (i.e., the truthful and pious person is in
Paradise). And beware of lying, for it is indeed the companion of
wickedness, and both of them are in the Hellfire. Do not break off
ties of family relationships; do not plot against one another; do
not despise one another; do not be jealous of one another — but
instead be slaves of Allah, brothers unto one another.”

Abu Bakr 2 tried to instill into others a quality that he
possessed in ample degree himself: the quality of being modest
and shy. Az-Zubair ibn Al-Awwaam . reported that Abu Bakr
‏دي‎ said during one of his sermons, “O group of Muslims, be shy of
Allah (the Possessor of Might and Majesty), for by the One Who
has my soul in His Hand, I seek cover when I go out to relieve
myself in the wide-open desert by using my robe as a veil. 1 do so
out of shyness to Allah, the Possessor of Might and Majesty.”

‘Abdullah ibn Hakeem reported that Abu Bakr 4 delivered the
following sermon: “To proceed, | indeed advise both myself and
you to fear Allah, to praise Him as He deserves to be praised, to
combine hope and fear, and to unite persistency with supplication
{and prayer). For indeed, Allah praised Zakariyyah and the
members of his household by saying:

Bo te fe

MO ge te toe, Ba Ae o£
‏ويتعوسنا رعبًا ورهيا‎ OSI ‏سترعوت في‎  اوناكسم‎ hy

- ل ‎“eos‏ 7
وحكانوا ‎U‏ خلشعيت ©

“Verily, they used to hasten on to do good deeds, and they used to
call on Us with hope and fear, and used to humble themselves
before Us.” (Qur’an 21: 90)

(I Saheeh At-Tawtheeg Fee Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeg (pg. 179).
I Saheeh Al-Tawtheeg Fee Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeg (pg. 179).

284 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

And know, O slaves of Allah..that Allah has taken covenants
from you, and that He has purchased (from you) that which is
little and fleeting for that which is plentiful and everlasting. Here
among you is the Book of Allah, whose wonders never run out,
and whose light never extinguishes. Believe in Allah's speech, be
sincere to His Book, and seek light from it for the Day of Darkness.
Indeed, you have been created only to worship (Allah). And Allah
has entrusted to you noble scribes (the blessed angels who record
our deeds) who know what you do. Also know, O slaves of Allah,
you come and go (on this earth) for an appointed time, and when
it is that your time will come you do not know. If you are able to
coincide your appointed time with a deed that you are
performing for the sake of Allah, then do so. But you will not
be able to do so except with Allah’s help.... There are people who
spent their lives for others, all the while forgetting themselves
(i.e., their duties towards their Lord); I forbid you from becoming
like them. So hasten, hasten (to perform good deeds), and then
there will be salvation, salvation! Verily, you are being pursued
from behind by that which travels with great speed {i.e., the time
of your life).”” According to another account, Abu Bakr 4 also
said, “Where are the brothers you once knew? Where are the
companions you once knew? They have reached where they were
meant to go, having been met by the deeds they performed in
their days gone by. They reside there (in the Hereafter) either in
misery or in happiness. Where are the arrogant tyrants who built
the townships and encircled them with walls? They are now
underneath stones and wells. Where are those whose faces were
beautiful and full of light, those who were impressed by their
youth? Where are the kings? Where are those who were granted
victory on the fields of war? Time has caused them. to decay, and
they are now in the darkness of their graves. There is no goodness
in saying that which is not spoken for the countenance of Allah.
There is no goodness in wealth that is not spent in the path of
Allah. There is no goodness in a person whose ignorance has
overcome his forbearance. And there is no goodness in a person
who, when it comes to doing something for the sake of Allah,

The General Pledge of Allegiance 285

fears the blame of a blamer. Between Allah and any person there
is no familial relation, and so none can hope to receive anything
from Him through such a relationship (.e., since no one is related
to Allah, none can hope for the kind of help they receive from
relatives on this earth based on family loyalty and love), nor can
one hope that Allah will save him from evil (based on the same
reason). He gives goodness and saves from evil only through
obedience to Him and the following of His commands. There is no
such thing as something that is good if it leads to the Hellfire, and
there is no such thing as something that is evil if it leads to
Paradise.... Because you are needy and poor (to Allah), [ advise
you to fear Allah, to praise Him as He deserves to be praised —
and to ask for His forgiveness; for indeed, He is oft-forgiving. I
have said what [ needed to say, and I ask Allah for forgiveness, for
both myself and you.’”"!

2) The Judiciary During the Caliphate of Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎

The judicial system during the caliphate of Abu Bakr 4 — as
well as of the caliphates of all of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs —
was nothing more than an extension of the judicial system that was
applied during the lifetime of the Prophet #2. Each and every part
of that system remained completely mtact and unchanged. In fact,
the two most salient aspects of the judicial branch of government
during the era of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs are as follows:

a) In the issuing of judgments, complete adherence to revealed
texts from the time of the Prophet #% — Verses of the Qur’an,
sayings of the Prophet ‏روه‎ judgments that had already been
issued by the Prophet #8.

b) The creation of an organizational scheme that could help Abu
Bakr # to apply the Islamic judicial system in an ever-

‎The chain of this narration receives a Hasan (good, acceptable) grading not‏ لذأ
‎because of its inherent strength, but because of other narrations that attest to‏
‎and strengthen it. It is related in Musannaf ibn Abee Shaibah (7/144). Refer to‏
‎Saheeh At-Tautheeg Fee Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeg (pg. 181).‏

286 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

expanding country and to deal with diVerse and new issues

and circumstances."!

If a case was presented before him — or, if two litigants
appeared before him — Abu Bakr # would often render
jadgments himself. But that was not always the case, for even in
Al-Madeenah he needed help, since many more disputes existed
after the Prophet's death than they did when the Prophet #¢ was
alive. It is perhaps mainly for this reason that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎appointed ‘Umar 4 as a second judge — him being the first — in
Al-Madeenah. As for governors and judges working outside of Al-
Madeenah, Abu Bakr # reappointed almost all of those who had
been appointed to those positions by the Messenger of Allah ‏عله‎

As for the sources of judicial law during Abu Bakr’s
caliphate, they are as follows:

1) The Noble Qur’an.

2) The Sunnah of the Prophet #@, which includes previous
yadgments rendered by the Prophet #8.

3) Al-limaa’ (consensus of the scholars of any given era), which
Abu Bakr -& arrived at by consulting the scholars of his era.

4) Personal opinions and judgments, which were resorted to only
when a judge could find nothing specific to rule by in the
Qur'an, Sunnah, or Fimaa’ ‏لخ[‎ |
So, for instance, if a case was brought before Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ he

would look in the Book of Allah. If he found in it something to

rule by, ‏فط‎ would do so. If he found nothing in the Book of Allah
that provided him with a clear judgment, he would look into the

Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah #8. If he found something in the

Sunnah based upon which he could render a ruling, he would do

١11 Taareekh Al-Qadaa Fil-Islam, by Az-Zuhailee (pgs. 83, 84).
‏اا‎ Wagaa’ai Nadwah An-Nudham Al-Islaamiyyah (1/390).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 287

so. lf not, he would ask the people: “Do you know whether the
Messenger of Allah #2 rendered a judgment regarding this issue?”
Perhaps someone would stand up and say, “The Messenger of
Allah #¢ rendered such and such judgment regarding this issue,”
in which case Abu Bakr would render the exact same judgment;
and he # would say, “All praise is for Allah, Who has placed
among us someone who has memorized from our Prophet.” If
still he found nothing to help him arrive at a judgment, he would
summon the people of knowledge among the Prophet's
Companions #, and he would consult them about the case. If
they unanimously agreed about a particular ruling, he would
apply their ruling.) Thus it appears that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ thought
that, if the scholars he consulted agreed about a specific judgment,
it became binding upon him to uphold their decision.

If a witness came forward, claiming that he heard a judgment
from the Prophet #% concerning a given matter, Abu Bakr &
would seek out other witnesses in order to make sure he was
receiving correct information. For example, Qubaisah ibn Dhuaib
reported that a woman whose grandchild had died went to Abu
Bakr ‏ركه‎ demanding a share of her dead grandchild’s estate. Abu
Bakr « knew that a father and mother inherit part of the wealth
left behind from a dead child’s estate, but he never heard the
Prophet #@ say that a grandmother also inherited a share of that
child’s estate. And so he 2 said to the woman, “1 do not find a
share for you in the Book of Allah #. And as far as I know, the
Messenger of Allah 2 did not mention anything in regard to you
receiving a share (of your grandchild’s estate).” Not being sure
about the matter himself, Abu Bakr # asked the Prophet's
Companions # for their advice and help. Al-Mugheerah 4 said,
“IT was present when the Messenger of Allah #®€ gave a
grandmother one-sixth (of her deceased grandchild’s estate).”
Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ said, “Is there anyone with you who can bear witness
to the same?” ibn Muslimah 4: bore similar testimony, as a result
of which Abu Bakr ¢ accepted what they said and gave a share of

‎Mausoo’ah Figh Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Qal’ajee (pg. 155).‏ أذا

288 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ف‎

one-sixth to the woman who had come to him.) Even when it
came to himself, Abu Bakr # was of the view that his testimony
was not enough and that he needed someone else to corroborate
his information, especially regarding cases that involved corporal
punishment. It is related that Abu Bakr # once said, “If I saw a
man who was doing something that made him deserving of
corporal punishment, | would not punish him until clear proofs
were established against him, or at least until there was a second
witness to corroborate my testimony.” Following are some
examples of the judgments that were issued during the caliphate
of Abu Bakr as.

a) The Case of Retribution

‘Ali ibn Maajidah As-Sahmee said, “As I was fighting with a
man, 1 cut off part of his ear. This incident coincided with the
arrival of Abu Bakr #, who had come to perform Hajj. My
opponent and I presented our case to him, and he said to “Umar
‏,مله‎ ‘Look and see whether the damage (done to his ear) warrants
retribution.’ ‘Umar « said, “Yes, bring a cupper (a person who is
skilled in the procedure of drawing blood by applying a heated
cup to the scarified skin.” When ‘Umar 2 mentioned the word

‘cupper,’ Abu Bakr 2 said that he had heard the Messenger of
Allah #8 say:

Ue ES 2k; ‏(إني‎

“Verily, I gave a young servant boy to my aunt (mother’s
sister) as a gift. I hope that he will be a blessing for her, and I
forbade her from turning him into a cupper, a butcher, or a
craftsman”?!

‎Tadhkiratul-Haafidh, by Adh-Dhahabee (1/2).‏ لذأ

‎Turagth Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen, by Dr. Subhee Mahmasaanee (pg. 186).‏ لكا

‎Akhbaar Al-Qadaa, by Wakee’ (2/102) and Taareekh Al-Oadaa, by Az-Zuhailee‏ أذا
‎(pg. 136).‏

The General Pledge of Allegiance 289
b) A Child’s Duty to Cover His Father’s Basic Expenses

Qais ibn Haazim reported that he was in the company of Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeq 4 when a man said to him, “O Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah, this Gman (he was pointing to his father))
wants to seize and take all of my wealth.” Abu Bakr # turned to
the father and said, “You can only take from his wealth an
amount that is enough for you (.e., for your day-to-day expenses;
enough for your upkeep).”” The father said, “O Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah #@, did not the Messenger of Allah ‏كل‎ say,
“You and your wealth belong to your father’’? Abu Bakr ‏قله‎
‎responded, “Be pleased with what Allah is pleased with.”
According to another narration, he 2 said, “What he (Le., the
Prophet #@) meant by that was one’s expenses.”"! Or in other
words, a father may take what is enough to cover his expenses,
but no more. And Allah knows best.

c) The Case of Self-Defense

Abu Maleekah reported from his grandfather that a man bit
another man on his hand and that the second man, acting in self-
defense, pulled out the first man’s front tooth. When the case was
brought before Abu Bakr #, he ‏كه‎ ruled that there was to be no
retribution and that the second man was to pay no penalty for the
incident.!*!

d) The Punishment of Flogging

Imam Maalik related the following narration from Naafai’, who
related it on the authority of Safiyyah bint Abu ‘Ubaid. A man
was arrested and brought before Abu Bakr 4, and he was accused
of having fornicated with a young woman and of impregnating
her. No witnesses were needed in the case, since the man

Cl As-Sunan Al-Kubraa (7/481) and Taareekh Al-Qadaa, by Az-Zuhailee (pg. 136).
This narration is extremely weak and might even be fabricated. Refer to Al-
Albaanee’s Irwaa (3/329).

ll Taareekh Al-Qadaa, by Az-Zuhailee (pg. 137}.

290 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ط‎

confessed his crime. Because he had never been previously
married, Abu Bakr 2 ruled that, instead of being stoned to death,
he should be flogged. The punishment was applied, and the man
was then banished to Fadak.!4 According to another narration,
Abu Bakr & neither flogged the young woman nor banished her
since she was loathe to having sex with the man — although it
appears, and Allah knows best, that some guilt was attributed to
her. Afterwards, Abu Bakr # married the guilty man off to the
very same woman. And when Abu Bakr # was asked about a
man who fornicated with a woman and who then wanted to
marry her, he # said, “There is no repentance that is better (for
him) than for him to marry her. In so doing, the two of them will
have left illicit sex and replaced it with lawful marriage.”

5) A Divorced Woman Has the Right to Raise a Child as Long as
She Does not Remarry

“Umar ibn Al-Khattaab # divorced an Ansaaree woman who
was the mother of his son, ‘Aasim. A short while after the divorce,
he met both mother and son at Muhassir, which is situated
between Makkah and ‘Arafah. ‘Umar # was pleased to see that
the child had been weaned off of breastfeeding, and that he was
now walking. ‘Umar 4 attempted to pick up the child, and to thus
take him away from the mother, but she held on tightly to the boy,
refusing to let go. A brief tug of war ensued; the boy felt pain as he
was being pulled in two different directions, and he began to cry.
“Umar # said, “I have more of a right to my son than you do.”
They brought the matter before the attention of Abu Bakr ‏ركه‎ who
ruled that the mother had the right to keep and raise the child. In
pronouncing his judgment, Abu Bakr & said, “Her smell, her lap,
and her furnishings (Le., the atmosphere of her home) are better
for him than you are. Then when he becomes a young man, he can

")_Al-Muwattah, the Book of Corporal Punishrnents (834).

"I Musannaf ‘Abdur-Razzaaq (12796). It should be noted, however, that the
narration contains an unknown narrator.

The General Pledge of Allegiance 29]

choose for himself.”"! According to another narration, Abu Bakr
a said, “She is more kind, loving, compassionate, and gentle; and
she is more deserving of her son, as long as she does not get
married (again).

The foregoing were some of the jadgments that Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎
‎had rendered during the period of his caliphate. During Abu
Bakr’s caliphate, the judiciary was marked by the following
characteristics:

a) In both methodology and application, the judicial system was
an extension of the one that was applied during the lifetime of
the Prophet ‏يله‎

b) Judgments that were rendered during Abu Bakr’s caliphate
became of great importance to jurists and judges of ensuing
generations. Judges often based their legal views on rulings
that were rendered by Abu Bakr & or by one of his judges.

c) The judiciary branch of government was not yet separated
from the overall leadership of the country, for Abu Bakr 2
acted as both leader and judge.

d) During the lifetime of the Prophet #&, the sources of law were
few in number: The Qur'an, the Sunnah, and the legal
judgments of the Prophet #¢. Because revelation was stil
descending from the heavens, people did not need to rely on
personal, legal opinions. But after the death of the Prophet Xé,
the situation changed, and new sources of judicial law
appeared, sources that were an extension of the ones that
existed during the lifetime of the Prophet #%. So yes, the Qur'an
and Sunnah remained the main sources of judicial law, as were
previous judgments that had been rendered by the Prophet #¢;
but there were now additional sources as well: [ymaa’
(consensus), Qiyaas (analogy), opinions that were arrived at

‎Musannaf ‘Abdur-Razzaag (7/54) (12601).‏ لذأ
‎Musannaf ‘Abdur-Razzaag (7/54) (12600).‏ 21

202 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏نه‎

after a process of legal reasoning (jiihaad), and judgments that
were agreed upon through mutual consultation.

e) The judicial system was based on the principles of protecting
the weak; helping the oppressed; and giving equal treatment to
all litigants, without showing extra favor to the rich and noble
classes of society.

f) For the most part, a judge would execute his judgment himseif
if the litigants refused to apply it voluntarily themselves. Also,
the application of justice was quick, in that a ju dgment would
be executed immediately following its rendering."

3) Appointing Governors for the Various Provinces of Muslim

Lands

During the latter years of the Prophet's life, the territory of the
Muslim nation began to expand at a very fast rate, which is why
the Prophet #€ felt the need to appoint governors to rule over each
province and, in some cases, each city. The duties of a governor
were manifold — such as keeping the peace, collecting and
distributing Zakaat funds, administering justice among the
people, delivering Friday sermons, educating the people about
their religion, etc. - which is why the Prophet #8 strove to choose
the most qualified people he knew, people who were at once
pious, knowledgeable about their religion, and competent in their
ability to lead others. In choosing his own governors, Abu Bakr ‏ضاه‎
‎followed a similar methodology; and so it is not surprising that he
#, reappointed each and every governor that had been appointed
by the Prophet #¢ and that was stil on the job when the Prophet
#e died. He ‏يه‎ did not remove a single one of them from office;
yes, he did seemingly dismiss a few of them, but he did so only
because he wanted to appoint them to govern elsewhere — ina
city or province where their services were more urgently

11 Tyareekh Al-Qadaa Fil-Islam (pgs. 157, 158).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 293

required. This, for instance, is exactly what happened in the case
of ‘Amr ibn ‏“لخ‎ Aas ‏لكان‎

The following, in summary, 1s a list of the main duties and
responsibilities of Abu Bakr’s governors:

a) Establishing the prayer: One of the primary duties of a
governor was to establish congregational prayer and to lead
the people in all of the compulsory prayers. A governor was
not merely a political administrator; he was also a religious
leader, scholar, and preacher. This is why we find that it was
the governors of the various provinces who not only led all of
the congregational prayers, but also delivered the all-
important Friday sermon. Incidentally, the role of leading
prayers was assigned not only to governors of provinces, but
also to leaders of armies and battalions that were sent out to
fight wars or to carry out certain missions.

b) OVerseeing the Muslim army: This was especially the duty of
those governors who lived along the borders of Muslim lands
and who were fighting wars against the peoples of
neighboring lands. Such governors lived in provinces that
were distant from Al-Madeenah, and so it became difficult for
them to remain in constant, real-time communication with the
overall Muslim leadershtp in Al-Madeenah. As a result, they
had to make many key decisions on their own, decision that
had to do, for instance, with the treatment of prisoners, the
distribution of the spoils of war, negotiating treaties with the
enemy, and so on.

c) OVerseeing the governance of newly conquered lands: This
duty fell particular on the shoulders of those governors who
lived along the borders of Muslim lands. When their armies
conquered a neighboring land, that land became theirs to
govern, as such, it was their responsibility to ensure the safety

‎ALWilaayah ‘Alal-Buldaan, by ‘Abdul- Azeez Tbraaheem Al-’Umaree (1/55).‏ ذا

204 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

of the citizens that lived there. And so they had to appoint
governors and judges in order to ensure a smooth transition
towards the application of Islamic law in that land. Eventually,
their appointment of governors and judges had to meet with
the approval of Abu Bakr 4; and in certain instances, it was
Abu Bakr # himself who appointed them, sending word of his
appointees to the governor that had been responsible for the
conquering of the new land.

d) Taking pledges for the Khaleefah: When Abu Bakr # was
chosen as the Khaleefah ot the Muslim nation, the people of Al-
Madeenah pledged allegiance to him, but to demand the same
from those who lived in other cities and provinces would be
asking too much of them. After all, it couldn't be expected of all
Muslims to travel to Al-Madeenah in order to pledge
allegiance to their new leader. The solution to this problem
was simple: the governors of Yemen, Makkah, Taait, and other
places took pledges to obey Abu Bakr # from the people who
lived in their lands.

e) Taking charge of the Muslim treasury: There were a number of
financial responsibilities that fell under the purview of
eovernors, the main one being taking Zakaat wealth from the
rich and distributing it among the poor. Additionally, it was
their responsibility to take the fizyah tax from non-Muslims
and to then properly disperse the funds that were received
from that tax.

© Maintaining the peace: One of the main duties of governors
was to establish justice and ensure the safety and security of
their constituents. This meant that they had to make the roads
safe by arresting and punishing highway robbers; also, they
were responsible for court proceedings and for the execution of
judgments that were rendered by judges — which sometimes
involved the application of corporal punishment. At times,
when there was no revealed text they knew of to deal with a

The General Pledge of Allegiance 295

specific case, they were forced to form legal opinions based on
their knowledge of general principles of Islamic law. Such a
situation arose, for instance, when Al-Muhaajir ibn Abu
Umayyah had to deal with the case of two women who sang
songs in which they insulted the Messenger of Allah ‏وَل‎ and
expressed joy over his death. We will discuss this particular
case in more detail, In Sha Allah, in our discussion of Abu
Bakr’s war against the apostates.

‎Educating the people: Perhaps the most important role of‏ رع
‎governors was to teach the people about their Religious‏
‎duties. It is for this reason that the Prophet #6, as well as Abu‏
‎Bakr # after him, chose governors who were not only‏
‎competent leaders and administrators, but also eminent‏
‎scholars and jurists. Their role as teachers was of vital‏
‎important because many of the lands over which they ruled‏
‎were recently conquered, which meant that people required‏
‎Islamic education if Islam was to truly gain a strong footing in‏
‎those lands. Applying the Sunnah of the Prophet #¢, many‏
‎governors would sit in Masjids in order to teach people about‏
‎the Qur’an and Islam. One historian noted, “When Ziyaad —‏
‎one of the Prophet’s governors who was reappointed to his‏
‎job by Abu Bakr & — would wake up, he would teach the‏
‎Qur’an to the people, just as he would do in the past (i.c., just‏
‎as he would do when he was one of the Prophet's‏
‎governors).‏

‎Because of their responsibilities as educators and preachers,
governors played a crucial role in spreading Islam to the far
corners of the provinces over which they ruled. They helped
solidify the roots of Islam not just in newly-conquered countries,
whose recently-converted inhabitants required a sound Islamic
education; but also in provinces wherein people had apostatized
after the death of the Prophet #2, for once Abu Bakr # regained

‎11 AL-Wilaayah ‘Alal-Buldaan (1/60).

296 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

control of those provinces, the apostates who returned to Islam
required education and spiritual guidance.

Each governor was of course directly responsible for the
province over which he ruled; when a governor was away ona
journey, however, he would appoint someone to govern the :
people in his absence. For instance, Al-Muhaajir ibn Abee
Umayyah was appointed by the Prophet #¢ to govern the
province of Kindah. After the Prophet #¢ died, Abu Bakr &%
reappointed Al-Muhaajir, who, at the time, was away from
Kindah. Having received orders to return to his duties as
governor, Al-Muhaajir packed up his things for his return trip
to Kindah, which was situated in Yemen. He was delayed on the
way because of an illness, and so he sent word to Ziyaad ibn
Labeed, ordering him to assume his duties until he got better and
would be able to complete his journey. Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ who was
apprised of the situation, approved of Al-Muhaajir’s decision to
appoint a temporary replacement. Similarly, during his governor-
ship of Irag, Khaalid « once had to appoint a temporary
replacement to take over his responsibilities while he was away
on an important tip.

Prior to appointing a new governor, or even a leader of an
amy, Abu Bakr # would consult many of the Prophet's
Companions #, asking them about the qualities and
qualifications of potential candidates. The people whose advice
he trusted most in this regard were the more eminent of the
Prophet's Companions #, the likes of ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏فك‎
‎and ‘Ali ibn Abu Taalib ‏للا‎ Also, before he would make final
any decision, Abu Bakr # would consult the person he wanted
to appoint, especially if he wanted to transfer a governor from
one province to another. This occurred, for instance, when Abu
Bakr # wanted to transfer ‘Amy ibn Al-’Aas 2 from the province
to which he had been sent by the Prophet #@ to an army that was
headed towards Palestine, an army that desperately needed a
competent and experienced leader. It was only after Abu Bakr ‏نك‎

1١ 4l-Wilaayah ‘Alal-Buldaan (1/55).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 297

consulted ‘Amr # and ascertained his willingness to be
transferred that he made his final decision. On another occasion,
Abu Bakr # gave Al-Muhaajir ibn Umayyah # the choice
between governing Yemen and Hadramoot; Al-Muhaajir 2
chose Yemen, and Abu Bakr appointed him as its new
governor. |

In appointing governors, Abu Bakr # followed the Sunnah of
the Prophet #§ in another way as well: In choosing a governor of a
province, he #2 would sometimes appoint one of the people of
that province if he found someone among them who possessed all
of the requisite qualities of a good leader. So, for instance, the
leader of At-Taaif was chosen from among At-Taaif’s inhabitants;
and similarly, the leaders of certain tribes were chosen from
among the members of those tribes. To be sure, it is almost always
the case that any given group of people will be more receptive to a
new leader when he is one of their own; that being said, Abu Bakr
#, resorted to this policy only when he was certain of the sincerity,
knowledge, trustworthiness, and ability of the person he ‏ف‎
‎wanted to appoint.

And in certain instances, Abu Bakr 2 would merge two
provinces into one, especially if doing so served an important
purpose. He # resorted to this policy mainly in the wake of the
apostate wars. So, for instance, Kindah and Hadramoot, which
were initially two separate provinces, were merged into one. Abu
Bakr 4 appointed the former governor of Hadramoot, Ziyaad ibn
Labeed Al-Biyaadee, to govern the newly unified province which
now consisted of the lands of Hadramoot and Kindah.”!

Abu Bakr’s relationship with his governors was marked by a
high degree of mutual respect. All governors, irrespective of how
far away they lived from Al-Madeenah, remained in constant
communication with Abu Bakr #. Correspondences between
governors and Abu Bakr # mainly had to do with administrative

11 Al-Wilaayah ‘Alal-Buldaan (1/55).
2) 4)-Wilaayaat ‘Alal-Buldaan (1/56).

298 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

issues; concerning a wide array of problems, governors would
frequently write official letters to Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ asking for his
advice or, depending on the situation, his orders. One of the main
aspects of Abu Bakr’s day-to-day governance involved replying
to those letters and sending out orders to governors. For these
purposes, as well as for the purpose of bringing news to the
Khaleefah about the progress of wars that were being waged by the
Muslims, official messengers were employed. And other than
asking for advice, governors would send progress reports to Abu
Bakr ‏را‎ in order to keep him up-to-date about what was going on
im each particular province.

Governors would also communicate among themselves; this
was especially the case among governors of neighboring
provinces. There was an air of cooperation among Abu Bakr's
governors, who understood that, by working with neighboring
governors, they could achieve certain aims that would benefit all
parties concerned. After all, their goals and aims were the same:
They all wanted to strengthen and protect their ever-expanding
nation. In keeping in touch with one another, governors would
write letters, but, at times, they would also meet one another in
person. The respective governors of Yemen and Hadramoot, for
instance, would often have occasion to work with one another.
The Muslims in charge of the lands of Ash-Sham (yria and
surrounding regions) also kept in close contact with one another.
Most of those leaders were not in fact governors, but instead
generals of armies, and they often had to meet with one another in
order to come up with a collective strategy in the wars that were
taking place in the region.

As for Abu Bakr’s constant communication with his governors,
many of his letters to them had nothing to do with administrative
affairs per say, but instead with the advice that they should do
two things: seek only a little from this world and work tirelessly
for the Hereafter.

During Abu Bakr’s caliphate, the Muslim nation consisted of
the following provinces:

The General Pledge of Allegiance 299

1) Al-Madeenah — the capital city of the nation, and the city in
which the Khaleefah, Abu Bakr #, resided.

2) Makkah: Its governor was ‘Uttaab ibn Usaid ‏ره‎ who had
been appointed to his governorship by the Prophet #, and
who was then reappointed to his office by Abu Bakr 4s.

3) At-Taaif: [ts governor, ‘Uthman ibn Abul-‘Aas &, also was
appointed both by the Prophet #¢ and then later by Abu
Bakr a.

4) As-San/’aa: It was conquered by the Muslim army during the
apostate wars. The leader of the conquering army, ‏علط‎
‎Muhaajir ibn Abu Umayyah, was appointed as As-San‘aa’s
new governor.

5) Hadramoot: Its governor was Ziyaad ibn Labeed.

6) Zabeed and Raqa’: The governor of these two provinces was
Abu Moosa Al-Ash’aree 4s.

Khaulaan: Its governor was Ya’la ibn Abu Umayyah.

لق تن

Al-Jund: Its governor was Mu’aadh ibn Jabal ‏ذه‎

\O
“nome hoc”

Najraan: [ts governor was Jareer ibn “Abdullah 2.
10) Jursh: Its governor was ‘Abdullah ibn Noor.
11) Bahrain: Its governor was Al-’Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee.

12) Iraq and Ash-Sham: Both Iraq and Ash-Sham were in the
process of being conquered. And so the Muslims in charge
were not governors but instead the leaders of the armies that
were sent to conquer both countries.

13) ‘Ammaan: Its governor was Hudhaifah ibn Maihsan.

14) Al-Yamaamah: Its governor was Sulait ibn Qais.4!

‎Ad-Duwal Al-Arabiyyah Al-Islaamiyyah, by Mansoor Al-Hiraabee (pgs. 96 and‏ لذأ
.)97

300 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎
‎4) ‘Ali « and Az-Zubair’s Reaction to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate

Much has been made — primarily by the Raafidah sect —
concerning narrations which describe how both Az-Zubair ibn
Al“Awwaam 4 and ‘Ali 4 delayed pledging allegiance to Abu
Bakr #. Almost all of those narrations, however, are not
authentic; the one exception is a narration that was related -by
ibn “Abbaas ‏ره‎ who said, “Verily, “Ali, Az-Zubair, and others
who were with them stayed behind in the house of Faatimah bint
Rasoolullah %.”"! They were there for a reason: A number of
people from the Muhaajiroon — and “Ali ibn Abee Taalib 2 was
one of them — were in charge of making preparations for the
burial of the Messenger of Allah #s. Their primary duties involved
washing the Prophet #£ and wrapping him up in a shroud. This
information is based, not on mere conjecture, but on a narration
that was related by Saalim ibn ‘Ubaid #. According to that
narration, Abu Bakr «> said to “Ali 2 and to the other members of
the Prophet's household, “Busy yourselves with (the affair of (Le.,
the burial preparations)) your companion.” Abu Bakr # then
ordered them to wash the Prophet's body.

It is important to understand that the Prophet #¢ had just died.
And so, yes, some people had to concern themselves with the
future course of the Muslim nation; but others had to busy
themselves with making preparations for the Prophet's burial. As
a result, it was on the day after the Prophet’s death — which was a
Tuesday — that Az-Zubair ibn Al--Awwaam & and “Ali ibn Abee
Taalib # pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏.ذه‎ Abu Sa’eed Al-
Khudree # said, “When Abu Bakr 4 climbed the pulpit, he
looked at the faces of the people who were before him. Not
finding Az-Zubair ibn Al--Awwaam anywhere among the crowd,
Abu Bakr « summoned for him to come. When Az-Zubair ‏ذه‎
‎came (a short while later), Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ said to him, “O cousin and

(I Saheeh At-Tawtheeg Fee Seerah Wa Hayaat As-Siddeeg (pg.98).

1 Saheeh At-Tawtheeg Fee Seerah Wa Hayaat As-Siddeeg (pz. 98).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 301

helper of the Messenger of Allah, do you want to break the stick of
the Muslims (i.e., do you want to be the cause of disunity)?” Az-
Zubair # said, “There is no blame upon you (for what you say), 0
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah,” after which he 4: stood up
and pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏.كه‎ Abu Bakr 4 then looked
in the faces of the crowd, and, not finding ‘Ali ibn Abee Taalib
anywhere among them, summoned for him to come. When ‘Ali 4
came (a short while later), Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ said, “O cousin of the
Messenger of Allah...do you want to break the stick of the
Muslims (i.e., do you want to be the cause of disunity)?” ‘Ali 4s
responded, “There is no blame upon you (for what you say), O
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah,” after which he # stood up
and pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏لكايه‎

This authentic narration was deemed so important by Imam
Muslim ibn Al-Hajjaaj — the compiler of the second most
authentic Hadeeth compilation, Saheeh Muslim — that he went to
his Shaikh, Imam Al-Haafidh Muhammad ibn Ishaaq Al-
Khuzaimah, and asked him about it. ibn Al-Khuzaimah wrote
out the Hadeeth for him and read it for him. Speaking figuratively,
Imam Muslim said, “This Hadeeth is worth a Badanah (a large cow
that is slaughtered in Makkah (i.e., this Hadeeth is something of
great value)).” Ibn Khuzaimah responded, “This Hadecth is not
equal to a Badanah only (but rather it is worth more); instead, it is
equal to a Badarah (a bag that contains 1000 or 10, 000 Deenars; or
in other words, this Hadeeith is a priceless treasure of great
importance).”” Commenting on Abu Sa’eed’s above-mentioned
narration, [bn Katheer Gnay Allah have mercy on him) said, “The
chain of this narration is both authentic and correctly memorized.
And the Hadeeth imparts very important information: hither one
or two days after the Prophet's death, ‘Ali # pledged allegiance to
Abu Bakr 2. And this is certainly true, for (throughout the
duration of Abu Bakr’s caliphate) “Ali 4 always remained in the

‎In AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (5/249), Ibn Katheer ruled that this Hadeeth is‏ انا

‎authenh.

302 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

close company of Abu Bakr ; in fact, he never missed
performing a single Prayer behind him."

According to another narration, Habeeb ibn Abu Thaabit said,
” Alee ibn Abu Taalib 4 was in his house when a man went to him
and said, “Abu Bakr has sat down in order to take pledges of
allegiance (from the people).’ At that very moment, “Ali # was
(dressed casually) wearing only along shirt, with no lower garment
or robe above it. But he was in a rush, for he did not want to delay
pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr #; and so, without bothering to
put on the rest of his attire, he 45 went out the Masjid. Once there, he
sat down and asked someone to bring his robe for him. Some people
brought it for him, and he wore it over his shirt.”

According to yet another account, ‘Amr ibn Hareeth asked
Saeed ibn Zaid 4, “Did you witness the death of the Messenger
of Allah?”

“Yes,” Sa’eed te replied.

“When were pledges of allegiance made to Abu Bakr?” ‘Amr
asked.

“The day on which the Messenger of Allah ## died,” Sa’eed &
said. “The Muslims disliked for even a part of a day to pass by
without them being united as a group (under a leader).”

“Did anyone abstain from pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr?”
“Amr asked.

“No,” Sa’eed #& said. “The only people who abstained from
pledging allegiance to him were the apostates or those who were
on the verge of apostatizing. Allah saved the Ansaar (from that
fate) and united them under him (Abu Bakr #). And they pledged
allegiance to him.”

“Did anyone from the Muhaapiroon abstam from pledging
allegiance to him?” “Amr asked.

11 ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (5/249).
2! Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Al-Khaalidee (pg. 56).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 303

“No,” said Sa’eed. “The people of the Muhaajiroon came in
eroups, one after the other, in order to pledge allegiance to
him 7

As tor “Ali 2, he remained loyal and sincere to Abu Bakr &
throughout the duration of his caliphate; he 4 was always there
to offer his sincere counsel and assistance. Ibn Katheer (may
Allah have mercy on him) and many others from the people of
knowledge are of the view that “Ali 4 renewed his pledge of
allegiance to Abu Bakr 4 six months after the Prophet #2 died
— or in other words, just after the death of Faatimah ‏.كا‎ This
second pledge of allegiance is related in various authentic
narrations. 4!

‘Ali # strove not to further his personal interests, but the
interests of all Muslims. As such, he sincerely wanted to help Abu
Bakr .4 in any way possible. Furthermore, ‘Ali 4 understood that,
as long as Abu Bakr 4 was in charge of the Muslim nation,
Muslims would continue to enjoy safety and prosperity. “Ali 2
displayed his sincere and loyal feelings when the Muslim army
went out to fight the apostates at Dhil-Oissah, which was situated
a few leagues away from Al-Madeenah. Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ was
determined to take the fight to the apostates, and he resolved
not just to direct the overall war effort against them, but to also go
and fight them himself at Dhil-Qissah. It goes without saying that
his participation in the impending battle at Dhil-Qissah endan-
gered his life in a very real way; nonetheless, he was determined
to go. ibn “Umar ‏ذه‎ reported that when Abu Bakr # arrived in
Dhil-Qissah and was seated upright on his riding animal, “Ali ibn
Abu Taaltb # took hold of the camel’s reins and said, “Where are
you going, O Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah? 1 will say to you
what the Messenger of Allah #@ said on the Day of Uhud: “Pull in
your sword, and do not bereave us of yourself; and return to Al-
Madeenah. For, by Allah, if we become bereaved of you, Islam

IN Al-Khulafan Ar-Raashidoon (pg. 56).
1 AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (5/49).

304 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg -&

will never have a system of rule (on earth (perhaps what ‘Ali
meant by this is that, if Abu Bakr died, the apostates would come
out victorious in their war against the Muslims)).” Heeding ‘Ali's
words, Abu Bakr 4; returned to Al-Madeenah."! The point here is
that, had “Ali 4 not been happy with Abu Bakr’s appointment to
the caliphate, and had he been coerced into pledging allegiance to
him, he had just come across the perfect opportunity to rid himself
of him. He # could have left well enough alone and allowed Abu
Bakr to do what he wanted; chances were that Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎
‎would have died, and the seat of the caliphate would be there for
the taking. But the foregoing is nothing but a flight of fancy; ‘Ali ‏نه‎
‎was too noble and pious to have had such thoughts. What ‘Ali ‏كه‎
‎wanted most was the prosperity of the Muslim nation, and he ‏نك‎
‎knew maximum prosperity was going to be achieved only with
Abu Bakr # at the helm of the nation, which is why he did his
utmost to advise Abu Bakr # and to protect him from harm. May
Allah be pleased with Abu Bakr as, “Ali 4, Az-Zubair 4, and all of
the Prophet’s Companions.

5) “We, as a Group of Prophets, are not Inherited From; Rather,
What We Leave Behind is Charity”

Speaking about what happened after the death of the Prophet
‏,عد‎ ‘ Aaishah ‏كو‎ said, “Faatimah % and AJ-‘Abbaas went to Abu
Bakr ‏رن‎ seeking out their share of inheritance from the (estate of
the) Messenger of Allah #¢. During that particular visit, they were
demanding their lands in Fadak, as well as their share of the spoils
from Khaibar. Abu Bakr # said to them: [ heard the Messenger of
Allah #8 say:

ii

a” oe 5 007 ‏ور 7 رق عر 2 ا ل رقع ع‎ L 3 a
‏المال)‎ mes 2 ‏محمد‎ J Sk ‏يل 43 6 إنمأ‎ LS ‏تور نت 6 مأ‎ Y)

“We are not inherited from; rather, what we leave behind is
charity”!

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/314, 315).‏ ذا
‎Pl Bukhaaree (6726).‏

The General Pledge of Allegiance 305

According to one account, Abu Bakr # said, “There is nothing
that the Messenger of Allah #% applied (during his lifetime),
except that | applied it as well. [ fear that if | were to abandon even
a single thing that he did, 1 would end up going astray.”

In another narration, one that is also related in Bukhaarec,
‘Aaishah “& said, “When the Messenger of Allah #¢ died, his
wives wanted to send ‘Uthrnan ibn ‘Affaan 4 to Abu Bakr 4, so
that he could ask him for their share of the Prophet's estate.” It
appears, based on the wording of the narration, that “Aaishah %
was there when “Uthman « visited Abu Bakr 4, for it is
mentioned in the narration that she & said, “Did not the
Messenger of Allah #8 say :

“ - تر 2 ل مر | ‎Bee‏
‎VW‏ نورث ما تركنا ‎(ie‏

“We are not inherited from; rather, what we leave behind is
charity.”

It was magnanimous and selfless for ‘Aaishah % to have said
these words, for she ‏رذ‎ being a wife of the Prophet #¢, stood to
gain a great deal if relatives were allowed to inherit from the
‘Prophet #. In yet another narration, Abu Hurairah 2 reported
that the Messenger of Allah # said: :

sole Boy Gli Gas ‏بَعْدَ‎ ESSE be 355 EY

(BLS 585

“Let not my inheritors distribute even a single Deenaar (among
themselves). Whatever remains after my wives’ expenses and mry
worker's"! provisions are taken care of, is for charity.”""|

DT Muslim (1759).
‏[3ا‎ Bukhaaree (6730) and Muslim (1758).
Ol There are various interpretation of the word ‘worker's’ in this Hadeeth; some

scholars say it refers to the Khaleefah; others say it refers to a man who was
looking after certain date-palm trees. And Allah 8 knows best.

“| Bukhaaree (6729).

306 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

Abu Bakr #& was not trying to deprive Faatimah % of what was
rightfully hers; to the contrary, he 4 simply wanted to do what
was right, and in this case that meant following the command of
the Messenger of Allah # and distributing the remainder of his
estate not to his bereaved family members, but to charitable
causes.

After Abu Bakr 4 backed up what he said with a clear proof —
the Hadeeth in which the Prophet #¢ clearly stated that no one was
to inherit his wealth — Faatimah % desisted from arguing or from
pursuing the matter any further. Instead, she % accepted the truth
and submitted to the Prophet's command. For as ibn Qateebah
put it, “No fault should be imputed to Faatimah % for having
argued with Abu Bakr # about the estate of the Prophet #¢,
especially considering the fact that she had no knowledge about
what the Messenger of Allah ‏يله‎ had said regarding the matter.
She knew that children inherit from their parents, and she had no
reason to think that she was an exception. But then when Abu
Bakr «& informed her about what the Prophet # had said, she held
back (her tongue) and desisted from arguing the matter any
further.”“" Al-Qaadee ‘Iyaadh added: “When Faatimah &
learned of the Hadeeth and was explained its meaning, she
abandoned her previous view (that she had the right to inherit
from the Prophet's estate). And it is important to note that, after
this incident occurred, neither she & nor her children & ever
repeated their demand that they should be given a share of the
Prophet's estate. Years later, “Ali 4 (Faatimah’s husband) became
Khaleefah of the Muslim nation, and it is a very telling fact that he
did not change Abu Bakr and “Umar’s policy regarding the
Prophet's estate (for it proves that he # was in complete
agreement with them).

Hammaad ibn Ishaaq wrote, “In regard to this issue, it is
important to understand that Abu Bakr 4 and ‘Umar ‏هق‎ stood to

1 Taweel Mukhtalaful-Hadeeth (pg. 189).
‏اذا‎ Sharh Sahech Muslim, by An-Nawawee (12/318).

The General Pledge of Allegiance 307

gain the most if they agreed to distribute the Prophet's estate. This
is because both of their daughters, ‘Aaishah ‏كا‎ and Hafsah %,
were married to the Prophet #&, and both of them would have
received a handsome share of the Prophet's estate. But rather than
going after personal gain, Abu Bakr ‏ذاه‎ and “Umar 4 preferred
obeying the command of Allah # and His Messenger #2, and so
they forbade ‘Aaishah ‏رذ‎ Hafsah ‏ذا‎ and others from taking a
share of the Prophet's estate. Had Abu Bakr # and “Umar 4
decided to distribute the Prophet's estate, both of them would not
only have gained monetarily; but also, both of them would have
been able to proudly say, “Our daughters are the inheritors of
Muhammad # (and what honor could be greater than that! And
so their having refused to distribute the Prophet's estate was a
testament to their sincerity and integrity).”

Some people have made the claim that, once Abu Bakr ‏فل‎
‎refused to distribute the Prophet's estate, Faatimah % became so
angry that she refused to speak to him until she % died. This claim
is a far-fetched one for two main reasons:

1) Having lost her father and the noblest human being to have
ever lived, Faatimah %& was overcome with grief, which is not
surprising considering the fact that all calamities pale in
comparison to the death of the Prophet #%. Furthermore,
Faatimah “& fell ill and was confined to her bed. Her illness
took up all of her time; as a result, she was not able to
participate in affairs that affected herself and her family; it goes
without saying, therefore, that she did not have the energy or
time or ability to go out and meet the Khaleefah, whom she
knew had not a moment to spare since he was so busy looking
after the affairs of the nation and overseeing the war against
the apostates. Faatimah ‏كك‎ knew that she was going to die
sooner rather than later, for the Messenger of Allah #¢ had
informed her that she would be the first among his relatives to
catch up with him. A person who knows that she is about to

iV Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (5/252, 253).

308 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏لد‎

die is unlikely to think about worldly matters. And as Al-
Mulahhab put it, “No one has related that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ and
Faatimah ‏ذا‎ met and then refused to extend greetings of peace
to one another. The two of them were not purposely avoiding
one another; instead, they did not meet often because Faatimah
was confined to her home (because of her illness).

2) Al-Baihagee related by way of Ash-Sha’bee that Abu Bakr &
visited Faatimah & during the period of her illness. When he 2s
went to pay her a visit, “Ali # said, “Here is Abu Bakr, asking
permission to enter upon you.’ She %& said, ‘Would you like for
me to grant him permission?’ “Ali 2 said, “Yes,” upon which
she announced that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ could enter. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ then
entered and continued to say conciliatory things to her until
she became pleased,””7! No one should have any doubts,
therefore, concerning Faatimah’s attitude towards Abu Bakr
#; and one should keep in mind that it was Abu Bakr ‏كل‎ who
said, “By Allah, it is more pleasing to me to keep good relations
with the relatives of the Messenger of Allah # than to keep
good relations with my own relatives.)

It is an established historical fact that, throughout the duration
of his caliphate, Abu Bakr ‏ذل‎ would give the members of the
Prophet's household their full due from the spoils of war, as well
as from the wealth of Fadak and Khaibar. The only occasion on
which he seemingly shortchanged them was when he refused to
distribute the Prophet's estate, and even that he did so based on
what he heard from the Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ The following
statement has been related from two prominent members of the
Prophet's household, Muhammad ibn “Ali ibn Al-Husain (who
was well-known by the name, Muhammad Al-Baaqir) and Zaid
ibn ‘Ali: “(Concerning his dealings with our fathers) Abu Bakr ‏له‎

‘I Abaateel Yajib An Tumha Minat-Taareekh (pg. 108).
‏خا‎ Abaateel Yajib An Tumha Minat-Taareekh (pg. 109),
‏أذا‎ ALBukhaaree (4036).

Lhe General Pledge of Allegiance 309

was not known to have wronged or shortchanged them in the
least; nor were they (our fathers) even remotely suspicious that he
was guilty of any unfairness or wrongdoing.”

According to the most famous of accounts, Faatimah % died
six months after she became bereaved of her father #¢. On his
deathbed, having told her that she would be the first to catch up
with him in the world of the Hereafter, the Prophet #@ consoled
her, saying:

(25 ‏تكوني سَيِّدَةَ نِسَاءِ أَهْل‎ Ol ‏مَا تَرْضَيْنَ‎
“Are you not pleased to be the chief of the women dwellers of
Paradise?’ ”)

sip

The Prophet # said this to her on the evening of Monday, the
4'" of Ramadan, in the year 11 H. It is reported that ‘Ali ibn ‏علخ‎
‎Husain said, “Faatimah died between Al-Maghrib and Al-
‘Eesha. Present by her side were Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ “Umar #, “Uthmdan
zs, Az-/ubair #, and ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn “Auf ‏.من‎ When her
body was placed in preparation for her Funeral Prayer, “Ali «
said, “Step forward, O Abu Bakr (and lead us in her Funeral
Prayer).’ A humble gesture on the part of “Ali 4, and one that was
reciprocated by Abu Bakr 4s, who said, ‘Shall I do so while you
are present, O Abul-Hasan?’ ‘Ali ‏ذه‎ said, “Yes, step forward. For
by Allah, none other than you shall pray over her.’ And so Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ prayed over her, and she was buried during the night.”
According to one particular account, Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a
prayed over Faatimah bint Rasoolullah and said Takbeer (ie.,
‘Allahuakbar, Allah is the greatest) over her four times.”!!
According to the narration of Muslim, however, it was ‘Ali ibn
Abee Taalib ‏ا‎ who led Faatimah’s funeral prayer.

11 Al-Murtada, by Abul-Hasan An-Nadawee (pgs. 90, 91) and Nahj AL-Balaaghah
Sharh Abul-Hadeed.

PI Al-Murtada, by An-Nadawee (pg. 94).
‏اذا‎ Al-Murtada, by An-Nadawee (pg. 94) and At-Tabayaat Al-Kubraa (7/29).
‏لكا‎ Muslim (1759).

310 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

Without a doubt, Abu Bakr’s relationship with the members of
the Prophet’s household was best described as one of mutual love
and respect — as was befitting of both them %& and him a. He 4s
had an especially loving and trusting relationship with “Ali ibn
Abee Taalib 4s, who, one should not be surprised to learn, named
one of his sons, Abu Bakr.@! And after Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2%
died, ‘Ali 48 took his son, Muhammad 4, into his household,
raising him and taking good care of him. Upon becoming
Khaleefah himself, ‘Ali # selected Muhammad to be one of his
governors, a decision for which ‘Ali 4 paid a heavy price and was
greatly criticized.”

() Al_-Murtada, by An-Nadawee (pg. 98).
 Al-Murtada, by An-Nadawee (pg. 98).

Chapter I

During the lifetime of the Prophet 82, there were two major
empires that bordered the Arabian Peninsula: The Roman Empire
and the Persian Empire. As for the former, it controlled large areas
of land in the northern part of the Peninsula. The rulers of those
areas acted as viceroys for the Roman emperor: They were
appointed by the Empire and were completely under the
Empire’s control.

The Romans had a very low opinion of the Arabs who lived in
the peninsula; they didn’t even deern it worth their while to seize
control of the entire peninsula. So they were somewhat annoyed
when they heard what was taking place: Arabs were getting
organized under the banner of the same religion. Wanting to
teach a lesson to what they considered to be an upstart nation, the
Romans made certain incursions towards the south.

314 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

Meanwhile, the Prophet # sent messengers towards the
northern areas of the peninsula, areas that were collectively
known as the region of Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding
regions). For example, he # sent Dahiyyah Al-Kalbee a with a
letter to Haraql, the emperor of Rome; in it, the Prophet #¢ invited
Haraql to embrace Islam. To his own discredit, Haraq! turned
away from the truth, refusing to accept that invitation.

The Messenger of Allah #@ was faced with a difficult situation:
Arabs were entering into the fold of Islam in droves, and yet
almost all Arabs felt the same way about the Romans — they were
terrified of them. The Roman Empire was, after all, one of the only
two superpowers of the era. The Prophet's strategy for dealing
with the widespread fear of the Roman Empire was clear: To
imbue the hearts of Muslims with a sense of confidence, he ‏عل‎
‎took to the offensive against the Romans, which had the twofold
effect of making the Romans doubt themselves and their control
over the region, and of making Muslims believe that they had it in
them — with the help of Allah # — to stand up to their Roman
neighbors.

The Prophet #2 began by sending out armies to attack the
northern areas of the peninsula, lands that were under the control
of Romans but that were inhabited by Arabs. In the year 7 H, the
Messenger of Allah #2 sent out an army that clashed with a force
that consisted of Romans and Christian Arabs. The battle that
ensued became known as the Battle of Mo’tah, and during the
course of its events martyrdom was achieved by all of the Muslim
army’s appointed leaders: Zaid ibn Haarithah ‏رك‎ Ja’far Ibn Abee
Taalib #, and “Abdullah ibn Rawaahah #. When the last of them
died, the “Sword of Allah,” Khaalid tbn Al-Waleed # took
control of the army and, against tremendous odds, was able to
return with almost all of his soldiers back to safety in Al-

-Madeenah An-Nabawiyyah."!

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah As-Saheehah, by Al-/Umaree (2/ 467-470).‏ ذا

Usaamah’s Army 315

Then in the year 9 H, the Messenger of Allah #¢ set out with a
huge army towards Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).
The army reached Tabook,"! but no fighting took place between
the Muslims and the Romans; nor did any fighting take place
between the Muslims and the Arab tribes that inhabited the
region. Instead, the rulers of nearby cities decided to sign peace
treaties with the Prophet #%, and as a result of those treaties, they
agreed to pay the Jizyah tax to the Muslims. The journey was
fruitful in many other ways as well: for example, the Muslims
were able to put on a strong show of force against the Romans,
who were unwilling to fight against the Prophet #£ and his army.
Also, during the course of the long and arduous journey from Al-
Madeenah to Tabook, the Muslims were being trained for future
battles against the Romans, battles that would take place after the
Prophet's death. After having spent 20 nights at Tabook, the
Muslim army embarked upon their return journey to Al
Madeenah.

And finally in the year 11 H, the Prophet #2 informed his
Companions # that he 8 would be sending out an army to fight
the Romans in Al-Balqaa and Palestine. Among those who were
prepared to go were the most eminent members of the
Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar, and, in a decision that was surprising
to a great many of them, the Prophet #g appointed the very young
Usaamah ibn Zaid ‏قف‎ to lead the army.’ Al-Haafidh ibn Hajar
(may Allah have mercy on him) wrote: “It is reported that
Usaamah’s army was completely ready on Saturday, two days
before the Prophet #@ died. But the actual preparations of the
expedition began much earlier, prior even to the final illness of the
Prophet ‏.يله‎ In fact, it was at the end of the month of Safar that the
Prophet #& first exhorted his people to get ready to attack the
Romans. Later on, the Prophet #¢ summoned for Usaamah # and
said to him, “Go to where your father was killed and trample them
(the enemy) down with your horses; for indeed, I have placed you

‎Muslim, (4/4784).‏ لذأ
‎Qissah Ba’th Jaish Usaamah, by Dr. Fadl laahee (pg. 8).‏ 1

316 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

in charge of this army.”"! Some people voiced their skepticism
over Usaamah’s appointment to lead the army; he was, after all,
young and relatively inexperienced; furthermore, the army
consisted of men who had participated alongside the Prophet
# in many previous battles, and who had more than proven their
worth on the battlefield. Even Abu Bakr 4 and “Umar # were a
part of the army, so why, some people asked, was Usaamah ‏نه‎
‎being chosen to lead them? What they did not understand was
that it was not their place to question the Prophet #8 once he made
a final decision. And he # made that point amply clear when he

‎SAKE: |‏ *
إن نوا ف هذ مق في إت د أبه من ‎GB‏ الله !
‎OL ene‏ كان لمن ‎Ja ON Ey le Sot‏ هذا

‎“If you are critical of his leadership, well then you were also
critical of his father’s leadership in the past. By Allah, he was
indeed worthy of being a leader, and he was among the most
beloved of peaple to me. And now that he has departed (from this
world (for Zaid # had been martyred in a previous batile)), this
one ( eur Usaamah) is among the most beloved of people to
me’

‎Two days after the preparations of Usaamah’s army had
commenced, the Prophet 2¢ fell ill. This, a pomt that was clear to
all observers, was not a mild case of a cold or fever. No, this was
different: The Prophet 2 was seriously ul, and the pain he felt,
rather than subside, increased in intensity. Everyone was worried,
and the situation even affected the Prophet’s plan to attack the
Romans, for, given the situation, Usaamah’s army, rather than
head out towards Ash-Sham, remain encamped at Al-Jurf .—

‎11 Fathul-Baaree (8/152).
‏خا‎ Bukhaaaree (4469).

Usaamah’s Army 317

which was situated only three miles north of Al-Madeenah. And
after the Prophet # died, Usaamah ‏ا‎ understandably returned to
Al-Madeenah.

With the death of the Prophet #8, the situation for Muslims
changed completely. 1 am not referring here to the sadness they
felt upon the Prophet's death; instead, I am pointing to how a
great many Arabs in neighboring lands apostatized. Some of
them outright apostatized, becoming followers of false prophets;
and others did so by refusing to pay Zakaat (obligatory charity;
one of the five pillars of Islam). ‘Aaishah % described the chaos
that ensued: “When the Messenger of Allah ‏يل‎ died, all Arabs

descended upon me (according to another narration, she didn’t
say, ‘me,’ but rather, ‘my father’! was such (i.e., was so severe)
that, were it to descend upon firm and unshakeable mountains, it

would have crushed them.”?!

With so many apostates to deal with throughout the peninsula,
the Muslims had to ask themselves whether they could afford to
send out Usaamah’s army to Rome. Despite the Muslims’ need for
extra fighters, Abu Bakr « asked a man to make the following
announcement only three days after the Prophet #2 died: “Let
Usaamah’s army go out and complete its mission. Lo! Let no
member of Usaamah’s army spend this night in Al-Madeenah;
instead, let each one of them leave immediately for his
encampment in AL-Jurf.”2!

After this announcement was made, Abu Bakr +: stood before
the people, praised Allah # and glorified Him, and then said, “O
people, lam like you. And I do not know, perhaps you will heap
upon me responsibilities which only the Messenger of Allah ‏كه‎
‎was able to do bear. Verily, Allah chose Muhammad from among
all living beings, and He # protected him from defects and errors.

‎Taareekh Khaleefah ibn Khayyaat (pg. 102).‏ أذا
‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/309).‏ )2
‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/309).‏ ]3[

318 The Biography of Abu Bakr ‏29ع100ك-مف‎

As for me, | am not an innovator; rather, lam nothing more than a
follower. If I become upright (in my affairs and in the way I rule
over you), then follow me. But if I go astray, then correct me.
When the Messenger of Allah #% died, not a single person from
this nation was able to claim that the Prophet #¢ had wronged
him in the least.... Lo! Indeed the Shaitaan (the Devil) attacks me.
So when he comes to me, stay away from me....Verily, there are
some people who have forgotten their appointed terms (their
deaths) and have worked for others (instead of doing deeds for
hard! Work hard! Be quick! Be quick! Seek out safety! Seek out
safety! For behind you is a quick pursuer (time or death). Be
vigilant and ready for death. And learn from the lessons of your
fathers, sons, and brothers,”"! |

Abu Bakr 4 also stood up and, having praised and. glorified
Allah 8, said, ” Allah accepts only those deeds that are done for
the sake of His Countenance, so perform your deeds for Allah. Be
sincere for the time when you will be poor and needy (Le., when
you will be in need of rewards in the Hereafter). O slaves of Allah,
learn a lesson from those among you who have died, and reflect
on those who came before you. Think: Where were they
yesterday? And where are they today? Where are the tyrants
who...were renowned for victories in the wars they waged? Time
has caused them to waste away, and now their bodies are rotten
and decayed.... And where are the kings who more than anything
else were enamored with lands and with buildimgs on those
lands? They are far away now, and no one remembers them; it is
as if they are non-existent. But they are not really non-existent, for
Allah, the Possessor of Might and Majesty, has kept alive for them
the consequences of their actions, though He has cut off from
them their desires. Now that they are gone, their deeds remain
theirs, though the world (which they once claimed to own) has
fallen into the hands of others. Now here we are as their
successors on earth. If we truly learn from them, we will be saved.

‎ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/307).‏ لذ

١ Usaamah’s Army 319

But if we sink (to their depths and ways), we will be just like them.
Where are the beautiful-faced ones who were so enamored with
their youth? They have become dust, and the things regarding
which they were negligent have become a cause of misery for
them. Where are the kings who built cities, fortified them will
walls, and built wondrous things inside of them? They have left
all of that for those who came after them. Their homes are empty,
while they are now in the darkness of their graves.

whe pea 2 ys Be a4 oY BORD Poh ge ‏رح‎
‏أو تسمم لهم‎ do ‏أ‎ Gb ‏فبلهر من فَرَنِ هَل نحش متهم‎ Sal. ‏لومم‎
‎bo aor

“And how many a generation before them have We destroyed!
Can you (O Muhammad 88) find a single one of them or hear even
a whisper of them?” (Qur'an 19: 98)

Where are the ones you knew from among your fathers and
brothers? Their terms (on earth) have ended, and they are now
sent back to face that which they had sent forward (when they
were alive)... Having died, they are headed either towards
happiness or misery. Lo! Allah has no partner, and there is no
family relationship between Him and anyone from among His
created beings. And so He does not give anyone good things or
protect anyone from evil based on such a relationship — since
such a relationship is non-existent (.e., in this world, we can
expect a family member to give us out of a sense of familial love
and loyalty, but smce no such relationship exists between us and
Allah — we are only His slaves and created beings — we cannot
expect to receive help from Allah for the same reason). What
Allah has (in terms of rewards) is achieved (by us) only through
our being obedient to Him.”

The preceding sermon contains many important lessons, a few
of them being as follows:

Ul AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/305).

320 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2s

a) Abu Bakr # made it clear that he was a mere common human
being and that he, like others, and unlike the Prophet #8, was
prone to failing into error. The difference between the Prophet
#¢ and Abu Bakr # is clear from their titles: The former is the
Messenger of Allah #&, and the latter is the Khualeefah of the
Messenger of Allah #¢; the former is described with his title as
having a direct link with Allah; the latter is described as having
a direct link with the Messenger of Allah #%. Being a mere
human who was not protected from falling into error, Abu
Bakr a told his audience that he would not invent new ways of
governing his people, but would instead follow and
implement the methodology of governance that was laid out
in the Sunnah of the Prophet #.

b) So as to preserve the Islamic identity of his government, Abu
Bakr & informed his audience that they were responsible for
holding him accountable for his deeds and for making sure
that he remained upright and upon the truth. .

c) During his sermon, Abu Bakr & said two very interesting
things that require some explanation: “When the Messenger of
Allah # died, no one from this nation was abie to clarm that
the Prophet #¢ had wronged him in the least,” and, “Lo!
Indeed the Shaitaan (the Devil) attacks me. So when he comes
to me, stay away from me.” What did Abu Bakr 4s mean when
he uttered these statements? Well, Abu Bakr # wanted to
make it clear that, because the Prophet #¢ was protected from
falling into error, he never wronged anyone in the least. But
Abu Bakr 4 was not protected from falling into error, and
there was the off chance that he might wrong someone in a
moment of anger — for it is when one is angry that one is most
likely to harm others. So in essence, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was at once
warning his people and asking for their help. He 4 warned
them to stay away from him when he became angry — when
the Shaitaan (the Devil) carne to him — so that he could be
saved from harming others, for what he most ardently wanted
was to follow the Sunnah of the Prophet #2 and to thus steer
clear of harming others even in the smallest of ways.

Usaamah’s Army 324

Abu Bakr # understood all too well that the Shattaan (the
Devil) came to him on a frequent basis, just as the Shaitaan comes
to every human being. After all, Allah has entrusted to every
human being a companion from the angels and a companion from
the jinns; what is more, the Shaitaan flows through the son of
Adami like the flowing of blood. The Messenger of Allah #€ said:

كه مده : 88 اس روسوى سرد ‎Sh fe‏ اس ‎v‏

(asl Ge ‏وقرينه‎ BE Ge ws ‏وكل به‎ BS YP
“There is no one except that Allah has entrusted to him a
companion from the angels and a companion from the jinns.”

Someone asked, “And even you, O Messenger of Allah?” He
we said:

ey

Pd a a wot ‏عير‎ g- a ” 2 0 o “E
Oo, pA. + ca a an & a *? ‏لمم 3 وأ سم مر‎
‘yes ‏إلا‎ isl “WS oe ‏عليه‎ gle | di | ‏أن‎ Y! G1)

“Even me, except that Allah has helped me to overcome him (1.2.,
my companion from the finns), as a result of which he embraced
Islam. And so he orders me only to what is good ei

It is reported in another Hadeeth that, one night as he was
walking with Safiyyah &, the Messenger of Allah ‏يله‎ passed by
two people from the Ansaar. Rather than continue on his way, the
Prophet #@ called out to the two men:

0 # * & ‏ل ل ريش‎ 5 a
(Fim ‏رسلكماء إنها صفية بنت‎ jer
“Slow down. She is Saftyyah bint Huyai.”
He ‏عله‎ then said:

ey

”

الشيْطَان

0

0 نُ

‎i‏ بس
2 ”

‏م

‏2 4 4 & ؟ مه يت 1 ; 0 72 2 تك

‎7 LS ‏قلويكما‎ ose ‏تا أن 20001 الخسطان‎ Ls
ex s al - a ‏م‎ au

‎ao oo awe

‎7

‏يَجْرِي من ابْنٍ ‎pl‏ مَجَرَى الدم)

‎Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Muhammad Maalullah (pg. 196).‏ لذأ
‎I Muslim (4/2167, 2168).‏

522 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeq 2s

“Verily, I feared that the Shaitaan (the Devil) would cast
something into your hearts (i.e., that, for example, he would
make you think that I was walking with a stranger woman),
for indeed, the Shaitaan flows through the son of Adam like
the flowing of blood.”

In short, Abu Bakr 2 meant to say that, unlike the Prophet #,
he was not protected from falling into error, and that was
absolutely true for him, for the rest of the Prophet's Companions
&, and for all other human beings.!7

d) In all of his sermons, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ strove to advise Muslims and
remind them about death. In the foregoing sermon, his words
were filled with images of people who were once on this earth,
but who then died, taking with them nothing but their deeds.
Abu Bakr’s use of imagery and eloquent speech show us what
a powerful speaker he 4 was; in fact, it is safe to say that he
was the most eloquent speaker among all of the Prophet's
Companions ‏.أ‎ He # had the rare ability of saying a great
deal with only a few simple words. Consider just a few of his
famous sayings: “Seek out death, and you shall be granted
life’; “The most truthful form of truthfulness is
trustworthiness; and the worst kind of lying is treachery”;
and, ” Patience is half of Eemaan (Faith), and certainty is Eemaan
in its entirety.” These are the sayings of a man who was wise
and who had the ability of expressing his wisdom with an
economical and downright frugal use of words. Flowery,
elaborate speech might have its place in poetry or literature;
but no sermon is as beautiful as the one that imparts much
meaning but that is sparing im its use of words. Some of today’s
speakers and preachers would do weil to compare their one-
hour long sermons with the at most ten-minute foregoing
sermon that was delivered by Abu Bakr ‏.كك‎ The claim is often
made that, in these times, people need more explanation and

‎Bukhaaree (4/124).‏ لذا
‎Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Muhammad Maalullah (pg. 197).‏ 41

Uisaamah’s Army 323

clarification regarding Verses of the Qur’an and sayings of the
Prophet #2, and so sermons need to be longer. This claim,
though it has some validity to it, should certainly not be used
as an excuse for long-windedness and over-elaboration; hence
the importance, for both preachers and Imams, of both gaining
Islamic knowledge and learning how to become an effective
and ctoquent speaker.

5 Regarding

Some of the Prophet’s Companions # suggested to Abu Bakr
# that he should call off the expedition and keep the men of
Usaamah’s army close by in Al-Madeenah. “These men make up
the majority of all Muslims,” they argued, “for the Arabs, as you
can clearly see, have shaken free of you (and are plotting to
destroy you and all Muslims). So it is not wise to allow a group of
Muslims (who are needed for fighting) to leave you.”"! The
Prophet's Companions ‏أ‎ were united on this issue, and they had
every reason to fear for the safety of Abu Bakr # and of the
Muslims who lived in Al-Madeenah. Apostasy was not a limited
phenomenon; rather, it was a widespread problem that atflicted
most areas of the peninsula. Al-Madeenah was under direct threat
of an attack, and all available fighters were needed to defend it.
Given the bleak situation, it did not make sense to many of the
Companions * to send out an army to a foreign country when it
was needed to defend the homeland.

Yes, everything they said made complete sense, but they were
forgetting one important factor: lt was the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎who had ordered Usaamah & to lead an army to attack the
Romans. Had the army been mobilized by any other person, Abu
Bakr 4 would certainly have disbanded the army and used its

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/308).‏ لذأ

324 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قد‎

soldiers for his war against the apostates. But given the reality of
the situation, his conscience forbade him from acting contrary to
what the Prophet #@ had originally wanted from Usaamah’s
army. And so he # stood alone, opposite to the rest of the
Prophet’s Companions 4, who unanimously agreed that it was
best to use Usaamah’s soldiers not to attack the Romans, but for
the upcoming war against the apostates.

From his encampment in Al-Jurf, Usaamah 4 sent “Umar ibn
Al-Khattaab # on his behalf, asking permission to return with his
soldiers to Al-Madeenah. His message to Abu Bakr # was as
follows: “T have with me not only the best of Muslims, but also the
majority of all Muslims (since many in the peninsula have
apostatized). And I fear for the safety of the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah #8, of the mviolable city of the Messenger of
Allah ‏رول‎ and of all Muslims. I fear that each of the foregoing will
be attacked by the polytheists.’¥!

But Abu Bakr insisted that the army continue on tts course
towards Ash-Sham. Come what may, Abu Bakr 2 insisted, he
was not going to swerve away from what had already been
planned by the Prophet #¢. The Companions # began by politely
suggesting that he change his mind, but then they implored him
to do so over and over again; and yet they could not convince him
- to follow their advice. Abu Bakr ‏حك‎ knew that he was in the right,
but he could not simply refuse to listen to “Umar # and the other
Companions #; he felt that he had to give them the opportunity
to discuss the matter in further detail with him, and so he invited
the people of the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar to hold a meeting
with him. During the course of that meeting, a long discussion
took place between Abu Bakr ‏كن‎ and other Companions of the
Prophet #&. The most vociferous opponent of Abu Bakr’s planned
course of action was ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏ره‎ who expressed his
fear that the Khaleefah, the city of Al-Madeenah, and all of its
inhabitants were in danger of being captured or destroyed by
apostate Arabs.

[3] Al-Kaamil, by ibn Al-Atheer (2/226).

Usaamah’s Army 325

Abu Bakr 4 listened carefully to what everyone had to say.
When the meeting was concluded, Abu Bakr ‏أ‎ decided to give
others the opportunity to voice their opinions once more, and so
he called for a second meeting that was to take place in the
Prophet's Masjid. In that meeting, he # asked the Companions #
to forget the idea of canceling the mission of Usaamah’s army, a
mission that was planned and organized by none other than the
Prophet #& himself. Leaving no room for further discussion, he
told them that he was going to send out Usaamah’s army, even if
doing so meant that the apostate Arabs would seize control of AL
Madeenah. And he 2 stood up and delivered the following
sermon to the Prophet’s Companions ‏:مق‎ “By the One Who has the
soul of Abu Bakr in His Hand, had I thought that wild predatory
animals would make off with me, I would still send out
Usaamah’s army in accordance with what the Messenger of
Allah #6 commanded Usaamah 2 to do. And even if I were the
last person to remain in these cities, I would still do the same.”

Yes, Abu Bakr « was, from a-purely moral standpoint,
absolutely right, for it was his duty to execute the orders of the
Messenger of Allah ##; what is more, he 4 was proven right from
a practical point of view: The results of his decision were
favorable for the Muslim nation, and the Muslims came out
victorious over all of their enemies.

Even after the other Companions # capitulated to Abu Bakr’s
final decision, some of them, particularly certain members of the
Ansaar, still had misgivings about Usaamah # being in charge of
their army. They wanted someone older and more experienced,
and so they sent “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 2 to bring up the matter
before Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #. “Umar ‏ذا‎ said to Abu Bakr 4,
“Verily, the people of the Ansaar are demanding someone who is
older than Usaamah.” No sooner did ‘Umar # utter these words
than Abu Bakr # jumped up from where he was sitting and took
hold of “Umar’s beard; he 4 was, to be sure, very angry. “May

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/45).‏ لأا

326 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

your mother be bereaved of you, O son of Al-Khattaabl’”’ he ‏ذه‎
‎exclaimed. “It was the Messenger of Allah #@ who appointed him,
and now you are ordering me to dismiss him (from his position as
leader of the army).’""! Feeling ashamed for what he had just
asked for, “Umar # went outside in a dejected mood. His
companions, who had been waiting for him to come out, asked,
“What did you do?” He # responded, “Go away, may your
mothers be bereaved of you! See what treatment I received from
the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah 2% because of youl”!

Later on, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ went out in order to bid the men of
Usaamah’s army farewell, and to walk alongside them for a short
while. Upon reaching Usaamah’s soldiers, Abu Bakr 4 gave them
a look of appraisal and then walked alongside them as they
departed for their expedition. “Abdur-Rahmaan ibn “Auf « steered
Abu Bakr’s riding animal, since Abu Bakr # had chosen to walk.
Usaamah #, who was seated on his riding animal, turned to Abu
Bakr # and said, “O Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #2, by
Allah, you will indeed ride or I will come down (and walk
alongside you).”” Abu Bakr # responded, “By Allah, you will not
descend. And by Allah, I will not ride. For what harm will it do me
to get my feet covered in dust as I walk in the way of Allah?!

Abu Bakr « knew he had made the right decision, but, as he
walked alongside Usaamah #, there was one thing that was
bothering him. One of the soldiers in Usaamah’s army was ‘Umar
ibn Al-Khattaab #«, Abu Bakr’s most trusted advisor. Yes, “Umar
# had disagreed with Abu Bakr # about sending out Usaamah’s
army, but that was what made him such a valuable advisor: He ‏كه‎
‎was sincere and was always willing to speak his mind. And given
the outbreak of apostasy in the region, Abu Bakr 4 needed ‘Umar
‏ذه‎ by his side now more so than at any other time; also, perhaps
there was something else in Abu Bakr’s mind as well: Perhaps he
was looking to the future and wanted to keep ‘Umar 4 by his side

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/46).‏ لذأ
‎Yhid..‏ }2
‎B! Thid..‏

2 Army 327

in order to give him the ‏عصتصتمط‎ he needed to replace him as the
next Khaleefah of the Muslim nation. Whatever the case, Abu Bakr
‏ذه‎ said to Usaamah ‏ركه‎ “If you think it is okay to provide me with
‘Umar’s services (by discharging him from your army), then do
so.” Usaamah a granted him his request, after which Abu Bakr
As-Siddeeq 2 faced the soldiers and said, “O people! Stop, so that
I can advise you regarding ten matters. Memorize them from me:
Do not be treacherous; do not wrongly take from the spoils of war
(before they are properly distributed); do not deceive; and do not
mutilate (fallen enemy soldiers). Do not cut down a tree that bears
fruit. Do not slaughter a sheep, a cow, or a camel, unless you do so
in order to feed yourselves. Verily, you will pass by a people who
have completely dedicated their lives to living In monasteries;
leave them alone, and let them continue doing what it is they have
dedicated themselves to doing. Also, you will come across a
people who will come to you with a dish that contains in it many
colors of foods. If you eat something from it and then eat
something else from it, mention the name of Allah over it. And
you will also meet a people who have shaved the centers of their
heads, and have left everything around the center of their heads in
such a way that they look like headbands (or perhaps braids?).
Use all of your strength to fight them with your swords. Go forth,
in the name of Allah."

Having advised the soldiers of the army, Abu Bakr # addressed
Usaamah 4 specifically, telling him to follow the Prophet's
instructions to the letter. Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ said, “Do what the Prophet of
Allah #% ordered you to do: So begin with the lands of Qudaa’ah,
and then go to Aabil (today, Aabil is situated in the southern part of
Jordon). And do not be negligent regarding anything the
Messenger of Allah #2 commanded you to do, so do not be ina
rush (to get back), but instead make sure you carry out all of his
orders (before you embark upon your return journey).
Usaamah 4 then departed with his army, and when he ‏ذه‎

(I Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/46).
2) Toareekh At-Tabaree (4/47).

328 The Biography of Abu Bakr ‏طله 104220ك-عم‎

reached his intended destination, he sent out horses to attack the
tribes of Qudaa’ah and Aabil. The expedition was a resounding
success: Usaamah # and his men completed their mission, were
unharmed in the process, and took back with them much in terms
of spoils of war. The entire expedition — both the journey to Ash-

Sham and the return journey — lasted for forty days."

Haraq], the Emperor of Rome, learned in. a single message both
about the death of the Messenger of Allah #€ and the arrival of
Usaamah’s army. The Romans, shocked at the sheer audacity of
the attack on their lands, exclaimed, “What is the matter with
them? Their companion dies and then they attack our land?’
And the Arabs in the region said, “If they were not powerful, they
would not have sent this army (against us).” Thus the Arab
Christians and Romans of the region were made to believe that
the Muslims were quite powerful, when in fact Abu Bakr #& and
the rest of the Muslims were struggling to regain control of the
Arabian Peninsula. As a result of that false impression, the
Romans refrained from attacking the Muslims as much as they
had intended to do prior to the arrival of Usaamah’s army.! This
consequence by itself proves that Abu Bakr # made the right
decision in sending out Usaamah # and his men to Ash-Sham.

Third: The Lessons and Moral

1) Hardships do not Last and Should Not Weaken the Resolve of

True Believers

One’s situation in life can change in an instant; this is a life law
that is universally accepted but that few people are able to live in
harmony with. How perfect Allah is indeed! He % brings about
changes in our lives in whatever way He pleases.

‎Taareekh Khaleefah ibn Khayyaat (pg. 101) and Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/47).‏ [ذا
‎Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen, by Adh-Dhahabee (pg. 20).‏ م 2
‎Al-Kaamil, by Ibn Atheer (2/227).‏ أذا

Usaamah’s Army 329

‎Jey‏ لما بريد

‎“He does what He intends (or wills).”” (Qur'an 86: 16)

‎Beak afr Bere fe Bess 7
# ‏يفعل وهم ستلوت‎ Ue Sey YH
“He cannot be questioned as to what He does, while they will be
questioned .”” (Qur’an 21: 23)

‎That change is a constant reality in life applies both to
individuals and nations. Consider how, in the year 9 H, many
delegates visited the Prophet ‏يل‎ in Al-Madeenah in order to
announce, on behalf of their people, their entry into the fold of
Islam. So many delegations came, in fact, that the year 9 H was
called “The Year of the Delegations.” Now move forward only
two years later: The Arabs who had sent delegations apostatized,
and it was feared that they would attack the Muslims and take
control of Al-Madeenah, the capital city of Islam.’ Upon
comparing the situation of Muslims in the year 9 H with their
situation after the Prophet's death, one should not be surprised in
the least, for it is one of the universal laws by which Allah governs
this universe that nations do not remain unchanged with the
passing of years. To the contrary, nations experience periods of
ease that are followed by periods of difficulty, and vice-versa. If
wealth is the hands of one nation today, it will fall into the hands
of another nation tomorrow. That is why empires have come and
gone throughout the centuries. If an empire rose, it most definitely
fell; it is never a matter of whether an empire will fall, it is always
a matter of when it will fall. Allah 8 said:

‎Cet ome th 2 wk eee
{ABI SE GNIS GENT G5}

‎“And so are the days (good and not so good), We give to men by
turns .”” (Quran 3: 140)

‎Oissah Ba’ath Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pe. 18).‏ لا

330 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg +

In his famous Tafseer, Ar-Raazee wrote, “One day, a person is
happy, while his enemy is in misery; but on another day, the
opposite holds true.”"! As Al-Qaadee Abu As-Sa’ood pointed
out, the present tense in;

Anes
“We give,”

in the above-mentioned Verse is used for an important reason: it
indicates that Allah gives to men in turns in all eras and centuries
and that it is a universal law that applies to all nations of the past,
present, and future.

Abu Bakr & understood this universal law and did not allow a
temporary change of circumstances to overwhelm him; instead,
he practiced and preached patience, reminding his people that
victory would come through patience and that it was wrong to
lose hope in Allah’s mercy.

“Surely, Allah’s Mercy is (ever) near unto the good-doers.”
(Qur'an 7: 56)

In another Verse, Allah ‏قن‎ said:

(3 SES © ‏الثتر خا‎ G

“So verily, with the hardship, there 1s relief. Verily, with the
hardship , there 15 relief (1.e., there is one hardship with two reliefs,
so one hardship cannot overcome two reliefs) .” (Quy an 94: 5, 6)

Abu Bakr 4 was aware of the implications of these Verses, just
as he clearly understood the meaning of the saying of the
Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎

(" Tafseer Ar-Raazee (9/15).
‏ذا‎ Tafseer Abu As-Sa'‘ood (2/89) and Rooh Al-Ma’aanee, by Al-Aaloosee (4/68).

Uisaamah’s Army 331

“Wondrous ts the affair of the believer. His affair in its entirety ts
good, and this is a state of being that is specific to a believer. If
happiness befalls him, he is thankful, and that is good for him.
And if harm afflicts him, he is patient, and that is good for
him

2) The Forward Progress of Islam does not Stop with the Death
of Anyone, and the Importance of Following the Prophet #¢

In sending out Usaamah’s army, Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ sent a clear
message to all Muslims: The forward march of Islam should not,
must not, and will not stop as a result of the death of the Prophet
#¢ Or in other words, the forward progress of Islam does not
depend on any single person; it should always be the case that if
one leader dies, another rises to take his place. Yes, the Prophet #¢
had just died, and his death represented the greatest calamity that
had ever befallen — and that ever will befall — the people of this
nation. But his death in no way meant that Muslims no longer had
the duty to spread the message of Islam to others; to the contrary,
with the death of the Prophet #2, Muslims bore more
responsibilities than ever before. Since the Prophet #2 was no
longer among them, it became their duty to continue to do the job
of the Messenger of Allah #2 — to spread the message of Islam to
all of mankind. Understanding this reality, Abu Bakr 4: did not
fall into a period of inactive mourning following the Prophet's
death; rather, only three days after the Prophet #¢ died, he made
the brave decision to send out Usaamah’s army — brave because
it left him and the other Muslims in Al-Madeenah vulnerable to

attacks by the apostates. Just after the people pledged allegiance

‎Muslim (4/2295).‏ أذا

332 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مف‎

to him, Abu Bakr 2 made it clear in a speech that he delivered to
them that he was determined to continue to struggle and work
hard to serve the religion of Islam in any and every way possible.
According to one narration, he said, “O people, fear Allah and
hold on closely to your religion. And place your trust in your
Lord, for indeed, the religion of Allah will remain established (on
earth), and the Word of Allah is complete. Verily, Alah will help
those who help Him and who strive hard to honor His religion. By
Allah, we do not care about how many of Allah's created beings
come to attack us, for the swords of Allah are unsheathed; and we
have not laid those swords to rest. And we will contimue to
struggle against those who oppose us, just as we used to struggle
alongside the Messenger of Allah #2. And no one does wrong
except against himself.”

Sending out Usaamah’s army was important in another sense
as well: it established the importance of following the commands
of the Prophet #¢ both in times of ease and in times of hardship.
For Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ stated that, in sending out Usaamah’s army, he
was trying his best to adhere closely to the Sunnah of the Prophet
#%. Regardless of the dangers that both he and the Muslims faced,
Abu Bakr « stated in no uncertain terms that his primary goal
was to execute the orders of the Messenger of Allah 6
Throughout the brief period during which Muslims discussed
whether or not they should send out Usaamah’s army, Abu Bakr
a, repeatedly highlighted, both in speech and in action, the
importance of following the commands of the Prophet #¢. The
following examples illustrate this point:

a) When the Muslims — based on the difficult turn of events that
came about as a result of the apostates — asked Abu Bakr es to
bring home Usaamah’s army, Abu Bakr # responded, “By the
One Who has the soul of Abu Bakr & in His Hand, had I
thought that wild predatory animals would snatch me away, I
would still send out Usaamah’s army in accordance to the

[1] Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (5/213, 214).

Usaamah’s Army 333

command of the Messenger of Allah #¢; and I would still send
out his army even if I was the last person who remained in
these cities,”

‎When Usaamah # — fearing for the lives of Abu Bakr 4 and‏ زط
‎the inhabitants of Al-Madeenah — asked for permission to‏
اه ‎leave Al-Jurf and to return home with his army, Abu Bakr‏
‎refused his request. To Abu Bakr 2, staying alive was not as‏
‎important as obeying the Prophet’s command. Throughout the‏
‎m his athhuide,‏ — ون ‎entire crisis, therefore, Abu Bakr‏
‎demeanor, and actions — represented a practical application‏
‎of the following Verse:‏

‎wl AAS AA ‏وسو‎ Ol oY LE yh OF >
Fo & 2rr % 4 ‏ومو ان‎

‎“Tt is not for a believer, man or woman, when Allah and His

‎Messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option

‎in their decision. And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger,

‎he has indeed strayed in a plain error.” (Qur'an 33: 36)

‎BAS ai ae ‏أمرهم و ومن‎ &

‎c) Not only was Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ unyielding in his decision to send
out the army that the Prophet #§ had put together; he # was
also adamant about keeping the same leader that was chosen
and appointed by the Prophet #%. For when ‘Umar 4 went to
him and asked him, on behalf of certain members of the
Ansaar, to appoint someone who was older than Usaamah 4,
he # became furious. Hardly believing that “Umar # was
capable of making such a request, Abu Bakr « grabbed
‘Umar's beard and said, “May your mother be bereaved of
you, O son of Al-Khattaab! The Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎
‎appointed him, and you are asking me to dismiss him!’””!

‎Ul Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/45).

‎]2 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/46).

334 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏تك‎

d) Throughout the Prophet's lifetime, Abu Bakr # paid close
attention to everything the Prophet # did. Because he was
familiar with even the smallest details of the Prophet's Sunnah,
Abu Bakr 2 was able to apply the Sunnah in its entirety once he
became Khaleefah of the Muslim nation. In fact, almost
everything he did during his rule seemed to be an exact
imitation of what the Prophet #¢ had done when he was alive.
For example, Abu Bakr 4 bade farewell to the soldiers of
Usaamah’s army by walking alongside them as they departed
for their expedition. This was exactly what happened some
time earlier, when the Messenger of Allah #2 sent Mu’aadh ibn
Jabal # to Yemen. For as Mu’aadh & was leaving Al-Madeenah
for his mission, the Messenger of Allah #¢ accompanied him for
a short while and advised him. Mu’aadh & rode as the Prophet
#2 walked underneath his riding animal’s saddle!"!
Commenting on this incident, Ash-Shaikh Ahmad Al-Bannah
said, “Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ did the exact same thing with Usaamah ibn
Zaid 2 (bestowing a great honor upon him) even though the
latter was very young. Just before he died, the Prophet #£ gave
Usaamah ‏عطاك‎ banner of his army (indicating that he was to be
the army’s leader), but Usaamah # was able to embark upon
his expedition only after the Prophet #2 died. And so Abu Bakr
# bade him farewell, walking alongside him as he rode. In so
doing, Abu Bakr 2 wanted to follow what the Prophet # had

done with Mu’aadh ‏كاري‎

e) As he was bidding farewell to the men of Usaamah’s army,
Abu Bakr # delivered a speech in which he imparted
important commands. This too was in accordance with the
Sunnah, for the Prophet #¢ would deliver speeches to the men
of departing armies. What is more, almost everything Abu
Bakr ‏ذا‎ said to the men of Usaamah’s army was taken from the

[0 ALFath Ar-Rabbaanee Li-Tarteeb Musnad Al-Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal Ash-
Shatbaanee (21/215).

1 Buloogh Al-Amaanee (21/25).

Usaamah's Army 335

speeches that the Prophet #¢ had delivered to soldiers during
his lifetime.

In regard to Usaamah’s army, Abu Bakr ‏لله‎ followed
commands of the Messenger of Allah ‏وَل‎ both in speech and
deed, and he # ordered Usaamah « to do the same. He ‏نه‎
‎instructed Usaamah 2 to follow the exact plan that had been laid
out for him by the Prophet 2% during the final days of his life. Abu
Bakr # said, “Do what the Prophet of Allah commanded you to
do: So begin with the lands of Qudaa’ah, and then go to Aabil.
And do not be negligent regarding anything the Messenger of
Allah #¢ commanded you to do.” According to another narration,
Abu Bakr # said, “O Usaamah, head out in the direction the
Messenger of Allah #@ ordered you to go towards, and attack the
places the Messenger of Allah #& ordered you to attack. 50 go
towards Palestine and attack the people of Mo’tah. As for the
people you leave behind, (you need not worry about them, for)
Allah will take care of them’!

While it is true that the Companions # initially disagreed with
Abu Bakr 4, they obeyed him in the end; and what is more, Allah
4 opened their hearts, so that they were able to clearly see that
Abu Bakr # was in the right and that, no matter what the risks
and dangers, it was their duty to obey the commands of the
Messenger of Allah #¢. The odds were against them, but that only
made them work harder: Those who stayed behind in Al-
Madeenah fought hard against the apostates, and the men of
Usaamah’s army fought with a sense of urgency, knowing that
they needed to achieve the goals of their expedition quickly so
that they could return to the peninsula and help their Muslim
brothers in their war against the apostates. As a result of their
Faith and positive attitudes, Allah 3 on the one hand blessed
them with spoils of war, and on the other instilled fear into the
hearts of their enemy.

Ul Oissah Ba’ath Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pe. 32).
‏اما‎ “Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Adh-Dhahabee (pg. 20).

336 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏يك‎

The Western scholar Thomas Arnold spoke of the great
significance of sending out Usaamah’s army: “After Muhammad
#@ died, Abu Bakr 4 sent out the army that the Prophet 8@ had
wanted to send to Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).
Abu Bakr 2 made the decision to send out the army im spite of the
opposition he faced from some Muslims, and in spite of the
unstable situation in Arab lands. Abu Bakr # silenced his
opponents by saying, ‘I have before me a decision that has already
been made by the Messenger of Allah ‏.كله‎ And were [ to think that
wild predatory animals would snatch me away, J would still send
out Usaamah’s army in accordance with the command of the
Prophet #¢.”’ Thomas Arnold went on to say, “This was the first
in a series of ultimately successful military expeditions that
targeted Syria, Persia, and Northern Africa. As a result of those
expeditions, the Muslims completely destroyed the Persian
Empire and were able to take away from the Roman Empire
some of its most beautiful and prized provinces.”

From the very early days of his caliphate, Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ taught
Muslims that success for this nation is inextricably linked to
following the commands of the Prophet #2. Whenever Muslims
obey the Prophet #%, Allah 3% blesses them with victory, success,
prosperity, and stability on earth; but when they disobey the
Prophet #§, Allah % inflicts them with widespread defeat and
humiliation,”

3) Whenever Believers Disagree with One Another, They Must
Make Judge Over Their Disputes the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ‏كلد‎

The issue of whether or not the Companions # thought it best
to send out Usaamah’s army teaches us an important lesson: yes,
on occasion, they did disagree with one another; but they would
quickly resolves their disagreements by seeking a clear judgment

BT Ad-Da’wah Ial-Islam (pe. 63).
“I Oissah Ba’ath Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pg. 39).

Usaamah’s Army 337

in the Noble Qur’an and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah 2.
In the difficult period that followed the death of the Prophet #&,
the Companions # disagreed not only about whether or not they
should send out Usaamah’s army, but also about whether
Usaamah # was the appropriate leader of that army. They
were at odds with one another over these issues, but, as a result of
their differences, they did not hate one another, fight against one
another, or even harbor ill feelings towards one another. And
those that were in the wrong were men enough to admit their
errors once clear proofs were presented to them by Abu Bakr 4s.
After Abu Bakr # pointed out that it was not befitting for him to
bring back an army that had been sent out by the Prophet #2, or
for him to dismiss a leader that had been appointed by the
Prophet #¢ the Companions # realized their error in judgment
and submitted wholeheartedly to Abu Bakr’s point of view.
Their disagreement teaches us another important principle
that has far-reaching implications in matters that pertain to
Islamic law in general. That principle, simply stated, is as follows:
The majority is not always m the right; or in other words, an
opinion that is held by the majority of scholars is not necessarily
right. Regarding the case in question, the majority of
Companions & — among whom were some of their more
eminent scholars — believed that they should bring back
Usaamah’s army. They & argued that the apostates were
getting ready to attack the Muslims and that it was not wise to
send soldiers abroad when they could be used to defend the
homeland."! This opinion was not held by common men; rather,
it was held by the Prophet's Companions ‏ب‎ the best people to
have ever walked the earth with the exception of Prophets 4 and
Messengers 3%. It would certainly have been politically safe for
Abu Bakr 4 to have agreed with them, but he did not want to
make a mistake that could have had negative repercussions for
the Muslim nation to an epic degree. And so he # pointed out to

 Taareekh Khaleejfah ttn Khayyaat (pg. 100).

338 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

them that the command of the Messenger of Allah #@ was more
worthy to be followed than all of their opinions put together. The
minority in this issue — which consisted, so far as we know, of
Abu Bakr 4 - was in the right. Similarly, when the Prophet 2
died, the majority of the Companions # believed that the Prophet
zi had not died, while only a small minority — a member of that
small minority was Abu Bakr 2s — maintained that the Prophet 2
had in fact died. The majority relied on their emotions, while the
minority relied on revealed texts which made it clear that every
created being, the Prophet #2 mcluded, has to die, 4

In Al-Fathul-Baaree, Al-Haafidh Ibn Hajar (may Allah have
mercy on him) established a clear link between the above-
mentioned incident and the principle I mentioned at the
beginning of this section: “In matters that pertain to [jthaad
(scholars studying various proofs to arrive at a ruling regarding a
given issue), it is possible for the minority (of scholars) to be right,
and for the majority to be wrong. It is therefore incorrect give
preference to an opinion simply because it is held by the majority
(of scholars).”! In other words, that the majority of scholars hold
an opinion does not conclusively prove that that opinion is
correct.

4) Speech Must be Accompanied by Action, and the Role of
Young People in Serving Islam

When Usaamah ‏كه‎ was appointed to lead an army that was to
attack the most powerful superpower of the world, he was only
20 years old, and according to certain accounts, 18 years old.
Because of Usaamah’s relative lack of experience on the battle-
field, but especially because of his age, a number of Companions
# were uncomfortable with his appointment. Their feelings were,
if not justified, then at least understandable. Many soldiers of
Usaamah’s army were veterans of many battles; some of them

I! Oissah Ba’ath Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pg. 44).
7) Eathul-Baaree (pg. 45).

Usaanah’s Army 339

had fought in such epic battles as Badr and Uhud; many of them
were more than 50 years old; and some of them were among the
most trusted advisors of the Messenger of Allah ‏قله‎ — the likes of
Abu Bakr 2. (who was a part of the army before he became
Khaleefah) and ‘Umar #. And many of them did not feel
comfortable taking orders from someone who was only 20 (or
18} years old; they wanted a leader who had earned, over the
years, the respect of all of the soldiers. The only problem was that
they were being tested, for it was none other than the Prophet #2
who had appointed Usaamah ‏ما‎ lead the army. Therefore, they
had no right to argue, to feel slighted, or to harbor any ul feelings
whatsoever; it was their duty to submit to the Prophet's
appointment and to obey Usaarmah # as they would any other
leader. These points Abu Bakr 4 made amply clear to them, but
he didn’t merely admonish them with speech; he # translated his
words into action. So if they were going to have to humble
themselves to a 20 year-old, he 4 was going to do the same; and
he 2 did so in two ways:

a) He as, the leader of the entire Muslim nation, walked humbly
alongside Usaamah ‏رك‎ who was mounted on his riding animal.
Usaamah ‏ذه‎ was 20 (or 18) years old, and Abu Bakr « was more
than 60; nonetheless, even after Usaamah ‏ذه‎ pleaded with him
to mount his riding animal, he refused to ride, and he forbade
Usaamah ‏ذل‎ from coming down and walking. He ‏ذا‎ did this
within the eyeshot of the other soldiers, as if to announce that,
young though Usaamah ‏كه‎ was, he was the Prophet's choice to
lead the army, and he deserved the respect and obedience of
each and every member of his army. In fact, itwasas if Abu Bakr
# Was saying to them, “O Muslims, look at me: Even though I
am the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #, lam walking in
order to honor the leader of this army, the leader, mind you,
who was chosen by the Messenger of Allah #¢. How, then, can
you dare to criticize his having been chosen to lead you.”

“I Ojissah Ba‘ath Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pg. 66).

340 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

b) Given the difficult circumstances in Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr «&
needed his most trusted advisor, ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏نا‎
‎The only problem was that ‘Umar 4 was a common soldier in
Usaamah’s army. As the Knhaleefah of the entire nation, Abu
Bakr 4 could simply have ordered Usaamah ‏ما‎ discharge
‘Umar # from his army, but instead he # humbled himself
before Usaamah 2 by asking him to allow “Umar ‏ذه‎ to stay
behind in Al-Madeenah. To be sure, when the members of
Usaamah’s army saw Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ asking Usaamah 4
permission to keep “Umar # in Al-Madeenah, they
understood the message that Abu Bakr # was sending to
them: Usaamah 2 was their leader and, like any other leader,
he 4s deserved their complete respect and obedience.

In the foregoing two ways, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ translated his speech
into action. In speech, he + ordered the Companions #& to humble
themselves by accepting Usaamah 2 as their leader. And then in
practice — even though he didn’t have to — he did the same,
humbling himself before Usaamah #. Abu Bakr # understood
that if is not enough to talk and that one has to accompany one’s
words with action. For Allah $ said:

fp ee www 3
‏مو‎
‎we

0 7 Se ‏يي‎ ew Joe ah Ge oe Ae cae ce att para. 9 ive
$i sas ‏أقلد‎ XS) 55 reals cil ‏ودنسون‎ Ay ‏الشأس‎ ‘sats ©

بر

“Enjoin you Al-Birr (piety and righteousness and each and every
act of obedience to Allah) on the people and you forget (to practice
it) yourselves, while you recite the Scripture (the Taurat
(Torah))! Have you then no sense?” (Qur’an 2: 44)

Without a doubt, the story of Usaamah’s army underscores the
role that young people can and should play in serving Islam.
Mind you, the Messenger of Allah #¢ appointed a 20 (or 18) year-
old not to attack a small tribe, but the most powerful superpower
of that era. That young leader proved his mettle on the battlefield
and returned home a short while later, having achieved both
victory and the spoils of war. Were one to study the Makki and
Madanee phases of the Prophet's life, one would certainly find

Usaamah’s Army 341

many other examples of how young people were leaders and
contributors, and of how they played important roles in helping
to establish the foundations of the Muslim nation for those who
came after them.”

5) The Etiquettes of War

War, by its very nature, is both ugly and brutal, even though it
is sometimes necessary. A nation that conducts war has to be
lethal and effective, but it does not have to be brutal and barbaric.
Sadly, most wars that have been waged over the centuries have
been nothing if not barbaric. Even in the many wars that have
been waged over the last 50 years or so, nations have resorted to
unnecessarily barbaric means to destroy the enemy, to wipe out
the infrastructure of enemy lands, to kill women and children
indiscriminately, to humiliate enemy soldiers, to maim the dead,
and so on. Many of these travesties have been perpetrated by so-
called civilized countries.

The notion that mankind has advanced and has unshackled
itself of its violent and brutal history is a great lie, and the idea
that warfare in Islam is worse or at least no better than that of
other nations is even a bigger lie. Yes, war was necessary during
the lifetime of the Prophet #¢ and the rightly-guided Khaleefahs,
and yes, war is necessarily a bloody affair; nonetheless, the
Prophet #¢ and the rightly-guided Khaleefahs & transformed
warfare — im as much as it is possible to do so — into a noble,
civilized, and merciful enterprise. Consider the advice that Abu
Bakr # gave to Usaamah’s soldiers as they prepared to depart for
Ash-Sham: “O people! Stop, so that I can advise you regarding ten
matters. Memorize them from me: Do not be treacherous; do not
wrongly take from the spoils of war (before they are properly
distributed); do not deceive; and do not mutilate (fallen enemy
soldiers). Do not cut down a tree that bears fruit. Do not slaughter
a sheep, a cow, or a camel, unless you do so in order to feed

Ul Oissah Ba'ath Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pg. 70).

342 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏واد‎

yourselves. Verily, you will pass by a people who have
completely dedicated their lives to living in monasteries; leave
them alone, and let them continue doing what it is they have
dedicated themselves to doing.”

This speech was not a unique occurrence in Islamic history; to
the contrary, the Prophet #2 delivered many similar speeches to
departing armies during his lifetime.' And in those speeches, as
well as in the above-mentioned speech by Abu Bakr as, the
primary goal of warfare in Islam is made clear — it is to spread
the message of Islam to other nations. In order to achieve this
noble and higher goal, Muslim armies and soldiers must,
according to the teachings of Islam, adhere to the following
principles:

a) They must be honorable, and not treacherous; they must fulfill
the terms of the treaties they sign with other countries; and
they must not steal from the wealth of foreign citizens or
wrongfully seize their property.

b) It is forbidden for Muslim soldiers to mutilate the bodies or
faces of fallen enemy fighters.

c) According to the teachings of Islam, Muslim soldiers are strictly
forbidden from harming innocent children, the elderly, and
women. Not only is it forbidden for them to kill women, but
also they may not harm or violate women in any way
whatsoever.

d) Unlike what is common in today’s wartare, Islam forbids
destroying the infrastructure and riches of enemy lands. For
this reason, the Prophet #¢ forbade Muslim fighters from
destroying crops, date-palm trees, gardens, or fields. Also,
Muslim soldiers were forbidden from slaughtering sheep,
cows, or camels — the primary wealth of most people of that
era — unless they did so for the purpose of eating.

١١ Ojissah Ba’th Abu Bakr Jaish Usaamah (pg. 70).

Usaamah’s Army 343

e) In Islam, Muslim armies are required to respect the beliefs of
previously revealed religions and to refrain from harming
people who have dedicated their lives to worshiping in
monasteries. This policy highlights the civilized and decent
nature of warfare in Islam. Muslim soldiers are instructed to
fight against, not monks, but instead those who oppose the
truth and who spread injustice and wrongdoing throughout
the earth.

The foregoing begs the question: do any of today’s armies
come even close to following the above-mentioned principles?
The answer is obvious: No. In this day and age, many women and
children are killed, but the travesty of their deaths is sanctified by
such terms as “collateral damage.” Infrastructures of countries
are completely destroyed, to the point that what is left behind
after war is simply a vast wasteland.

Study any of the so-called mini-wars that have been waged in
the last 20 years or so, and you will come across horrors that will
make your skin crawl — and sadly, because of the state of our
nation, the vast majority of the victims of such wars have been
Muslims. It is important to note that Abu Bakr’s advice to the
soldiers represented not just mere words, but instead a policy that
was applied by Muslims both during his era and afterwards, a
point that will become clearer in later sections, In Sha Allah (Allah
Willing).

6) The Political Ramifications of Sending Qut Usaamah’s Army

The main reason why Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ sent out Usaamah’s army
was to accomplish a project that had been initiated, planned out,
and organized by the Prophet #%. The Prophet ‏يي‎ wanted
Usaamah’s army to attack specific areas that were under the
control of the Roman Empire, but the Prophet #2 did not live long
enough to see that mission completed; nonetheless, he #@ did live
long enough to mobilize the army and to send it on its way
towards Ash-Sham — when he #¢ died, the army was encamped
at Al-Jurf, which was situated a few miles outside of Al-

544 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

Madeenah, on the road that led to Ash-Sham (Syria and
surrounding regions). How, then, would Abu Bakr # have felt
had he dismantled the army and recalled the soldiers to Al-
Madeenah? To be sure, he would have felt that he was betraying
the Prophet #8, which is why he did the opposite: He # finished
off what the Prophet ‏وله‎ started by sending out the army and
ordering Usaamah # to carry out the Prophet's instructions to the
letter.

Therefore it is true that Abu Bakr’s main, and perhaps sole,
motive of sending out the army was to execute the commands of
the Prophet #@. It was quite possible that there was no other
reason, since, aS was agreed upon by almost all of the Prophet's
Companions ‏,كك‎ Usaamah’s army was needed to quell the
growing unrest in the peninsula.

And yet sending out Usaamah’s army was, in fact, a brilliant
strategic maneuver that reaped amazing results for the Muslims.
In short, by sending out Usaamah’s army, Abu Bakr # succeeded
in projecting a sense of power; or in other words, sending out
Usaamah’s army gave the enemies of Islam — both from without,
in terms of the Romans, and from within, in terms of the apostates
— the impression that the Muslim nation was very powerful. This
had the two-fold effect of instilling fear into the hearts of the
Romans and making the apostates think twice about attacking ‏لذ‎
‎Madeenah. Arabs in the northern area of the peninsula began to
say, “They must be powerful if they are sending out such an army
at this juncture (i.e., now that their Prophet #2 has died).” And the
Romans said, “What is the matter with them? Their companion
dies and then they attack our land!”"! Usaamah’s army achieved
its goals more through its reputation — in terms of the terror it
inspired into the hearts of the enemy — than through its strength,
weapons, and numbers. Some apostates who had thought about
attacking Al-Madeenah were overcome by a sense of fear, and so
they either held back or signed peace treaties with the Muslims.

") Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Mal-Islam (pg. 270).

Usaamah’s Army 345

And so the Apostate Wars were not as bad as they could have
been had Abu Bakr # not sent out Usaamah’s army.

Sending out Usaamah’s army had the further effect of
weakening the enemy’s resolve in the northern lands that
bordered the Muslim nation. This perhaps is part of the reason
why defeating those lands in subsequent conquests was a
relatively easy feat for Muslim armies.

The results of sending out Usaamah’s army were favorable,
but the risks were seemingly great as well. The Muslims needed a
resolute and wise leader, and they were blessed with a leader who
possessed those qualities and much more. No matter how bleak
things looked, Abu Bakr 2 always remained steadfast and firm.
And his ability to make key decisions under difficult circum-
stances was impeccable.

The long-term benefits of the expedition were incalculable; as
for short-term benefits, Usaamah 4 and his men & defeated the
enemy and returned to Al-Madeenah with booty that they won
during the course of their expedition. Then, as Usaaamah 4 and
his men # were coming home as victors, Abu Bakr &,
accompanied by a number of prominent members of the
Muhaajiroon # and the Ansaar &, went out to welcome them
back home; and all the while they were exclaiming, “None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah.” The inhabitants of Al-
Madeenah also welcomed the returning soldiers, outwardly
displaying happiness and amazement and inwardly holding
them in high esteem. As for Usaamah ‏رف‎ the first thing he did
upon entering Al-Madeenah was to enter the Masjid of the
Messenger of Allah #£ and pray to Allah &, thanking Him for the
blessings He bestowed upon him and upon all of the Muslims.
May Allah be pleased with Abu Bakr 4s, Usaamah#&, and all of
the Prophet’s Companions #.

Chapter 7

First: The [ Definition n of Ar-Riddah (Apostasy),

1) The Definition of Ar-Riddah

Ar-Riddah, or apostasy, basically means to exit from the fold of
Islam. after first having been a Muslim. But apostasy is not a light
matter; it is not a small thing to call a Muslim an apostate or a
disbeliever. It is, in fact, a very grave sin to call a Muslim an
apostate or a disbeliever. Therefore, one needs to be very careful
regarding this matter; one needs to be certain that someone has in
fact exited from the fold of Islam before calling him an apostate or
a disbeliever. Sadly, some Muslims today are quick to pounce on
the faults of other Muslims, claiming that, because of their sins,
they have exited from the fold of Islam, when that is not really the

548 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeegq ‏ذه‎

case. It is because of this problem that scholars have given very
precise and detailed definitions of the word, Ar-Kiddah. For
example, Imam An-Nawawee (may Allah have mercy on him)
gave the following definition: “Tt is to cut oneself off from Islam,
either by intention, by action, or by a word of disbelief, regardless
of whether one utters that word believing in it, out of a sense of
stubbornness, or for the purpose of mocking (Islam, the Prophet
#2, Muslims, etc.). A person has disbelieved if he rejects the
Creator or the Messengers or disbelieves im a Messenger; if he
deems lawful something that is forbidden through [jmaa’ (the
consensus of the scholars), such as fornication, or the opposite
Gi.e., if he deems forbidden something that is lawful through
Iimaa’); if he rejects what, through Ijmaa’, is compulsory in the
religion, or vice-versa; and if he makes a firm intention to
disbelieve, or even if he is thinking about disbelieving (i.c., if he is
wavering).

‘Alish Al-Maalikee (may Allah have mercy on him) gave this
definition for Ar-Riddah: “Tt is for a Muslim to disbelieve either
with clear-cut words or with words that entail disbelief: or with
an action that entails disbelief.”"! And in his definition of Ar-
Riddah, ibn Hazm Az-Zaahiree (may Allah have mercy on him)
said, “An apostate is any person who had actually been a Muslim
— one who was completely unaffiliated to any religion other than
Islam — but then it became established that he turned away from
Islarn and became an adherent of one of the religions of the People
of the Book, or an adherent of any other religion, or a follower of
no religion at all.”

The foregoing were legal or religious definitions of Riddah. As
for its original meaning in the Arabic language, it means, as
“Uthman Al-Hanbalee pointed out, to return or to turn back.
Consider the following Verse, which contains a word that is

MT Muhammad Az-Zahree Al-Ghamraawee's Sharh ‘Ala Matn Al-Minhaaj, by Sharaf
Ad-Deen An-Nawawee (pg. 519).

Vl Ahkaam Al-Murtadd, by As-Saamaraaee (pg. 44).
Ol Al-Muhallah (11/188) (the Al-Manbariyyah Edition, 1352 H).

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 349

derived from Riddah (Tartaddoo) and that means, “To turn back’:

Aye yf ee a Beer te
CAF de bo GP
“And turn not back (in flight).”” (Qur'an 5: 21)

A person becomes an apostate, based on the aforementioned
definitions, when he rejects something that every Muslim is
required to know — such as prayer, Zakaat, the Prophethood of
Muhammad #@ and other Prophets, and the duty to be loyal to
other believers. Also, one becomes an apostate when one says or
does something that clearly entails disbelief; and by the word
‘clearly,’ I mean there is no other possible meaning for what he
said or did.

2) Some Verses of the Noble Qur’an that Discuss Apostasy

In the Noble Qur'an, Allah 8 has discussed apostasy in
various Verses, and has warned Muslims not to turn away from
their religion. For example, Allah & said:

‎Ban ait Blep‏ إن ‎Aas‏ ارت ‎teak WS‏ علخ
‎(GES Kad‏ خَيِرِين»

‎“O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will
send you back on your heels, and you will turn back (from faith)
as losers .”” (Qur'an 3: 149)

‎In another Verse, Allah 48 said:
3 ‏ال 020 عه‎ By Pa atod “ ro pt gs oo & 4 - Ga “BE y
‏لما 2 شل أن‎ bs oy Le uals Cas ‏لذن ونوا‎ 5 oy

‎wg (© 0 7 7 we, aoe qo,
563 ciel carl TIS ck SiG,

‎a

‎Pall
‎4 fe ae oer S sho ow

‎al ‏قل‎

‎3

‎01 Harakatur-Riddah, by Dr. ‘Alee Al-’Utoom (pg. 18). This book is among
the most important works: that have been written on the topic of
apostasy.

350 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

“O you who have been given the Scripture (Jews and Christians)!
Believe in what We have revealed (to Muhammad 8&) confirming
what is (already) with you, before We efface faces (by making
them like the back of necks ; without nose, mouth, eyes, etc.) and
turn them hindwards, or curse them as We curse them as We
cursed the cursed Sabbath-breakers. And the Commandment of
Allah is always executed.” (Qur'an 4: 47)

And in yet another Verse, Allah 88 said:

woe 5 ‏حر د‎ Ke wee ‏عر ب ع صر ده‎ Me ‏معدل‎ oe
‏وَحَوههم مقر بعد‎ CoS gaol ‏وجوة فاما الذين‎ Syudy ca Lad one
v pd tm ‏ا 21 عش‎ 0
‏تَكتروة»‎ ES ‏يما‎ CVT ‏إيمنيك كَدوقوأ‎

“On the Day (1.e., the Day of Resurrection) when some faces will
become black ; as for those whose faces will become black (to them
will be said) : “Did you reject Faith after accepting it? Then taste
the torment (in Hell) for rejecting Faith.”” (Qur'an 3: 106)

Al-Qurtubee related that Qataadah was of the view that this
latter Verse was revealed for the apostates. Similar to the meaning
of the above-mentioned Verses, the following Hadeeth describes
what will happen to apostates when Muslims will go the Prophet
‏عله‎ on the Day of Resurrection in order to drink from his basin.
Abu Hurairah & reported that the Messenger of Allah #% said,
“On the Day of Resurrection, a group of people from my
companions will come to the basin, but they will be driven away
from it. I will say:

ايا £5 أَصْحَابِيء  ‎Gh di‏ لَاعِلْمَ لَكَ بِمَا أَحْدَنُوا ‎Ey Ba‏
154551 عَلَى ‎ysl‏ المَهْعَرَى)

“O my Lord, they are my companions,’ and He will say, ‘Verily,
you do not know what they did after you (died) ; iney walking
backwards, turned back on their heels (in flight).’”

‎Tafseer Al-Qurtubee (4/166).‏ لذأ

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 351

In another narration of the same Hadeeth, ibn “Abbaas &
reported that the Messenger of Allah #8 said:

‎al i Sle» 2 les)‏ بي ‎ES‏ بهم 28 ‎sd ape ‘oe!‏ أَصْححابي
‎Oe) ES‏ لا َذْرِي ما “ | ‎BAK‏ فَأَقَولُء ‎GU US‏ العَيْدُ

‎ES «S555 EB ar oe oa Us 4 ‏ول علوم نبا‎ oe
Seg

‎a%

‏كت

‎Men from my nation will be brought, and they will be taken
from the right (i.e., away from the Prophet’s Basin). And I will
say, ‘My companions,’ and tt will be said, ‘Verily, you do not
know what they did after you (died).’ And I will say as the
righteous slave (before me) said, ‘I was a witness over them as

‎. long as [ remained among them. But then when You caused me to
die, You were ever-watchful over them.’ Then 1t will be said,

‎‘Verily, ever since you departed from them, they have continued
to turn back on their heels.’

‎second: The Causes of Apostasy

‎and the Categories of Apostates

‎The people who apostatized after the death of the Prophet 2
did so for varying reasons. Even though it is true that the
Prophet's death was the main cause of all of their apostasy,
various groups among them had other underlying reasons why
they apostatized; so the Prophet's death simply acted as a trigger
to set off their disbelief. For some, it was their weak faith and lack
of understanding of religious texts that took them over the edge,
so that they fell into the abyss of disbelief; for yet others, it was a
deep-seated love of pre-Islamic practices that made the idea of

‎11 AL-Khasaais Al-Kubraa, by As-Suyootee (2/456).

332 The Biography of Abu Bakr ‏1ك-عك‎ 24620 2

apostatizing appealing to them; for others, tribal loyalties turned
them away from the idea of remaining a part of a religion that
strove to eradicate the tribal xenophobia that pervaded societies
during the days of pre-Islamic ignorance. And for those who were |
ambitious, greedy, or power-hungry — or all three of those
combined — the Prophet's death signaled a vacuum of power in
the region, and thus seemed like the perfect opportunity to try
and grab as much power and wealth as possible. Finally, some
Muslims apostatized because they came under the influence of
foreign peoples — Jews, Christians, and Magians. In the following
sections, we will discuss all of these causes in more detail, In Sha
Allah (Allah Willing).

Just as there were varying causes of apostasy, so too were there
various categories of apostates. One category consisted of those
who, both in general beliefs and in everyday practices, aban-
doned Islam altogether and returned completely and wholly to a
life of paganism and idolatry. Another smaller category consisted
of those who claimed to be prophets, and their followers consisted
of a larger third category. A fourth category consisted of those
who stated that Prayer was no longer necessary; a fifth category
consisted of people who, while they outwardly accepted Islam
and prayed, refused to pay Zakaat. One group consisted of people
who took pleasure in the Prophet's death — most likely because
they were hypocrites all along ~ and were eager and happy to
return to their pre-Islamic practices and beliefs. And yet another
group consisted of people who were confused about everything
that was happening all around them, and so they, seeking out
their own best interests, wanted to wait and see what the
aftermath of the wars would be so that they could side with the
victors. In books of Figh and Seerah, scholars have discussed the
various categories of apostates in great detail.

Not all scholars agree on exactly how many categories of
apostates there were following the death of the Prophet 28. This is

1 Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-“Utoom (Pg. 20).

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 353

because some scholars divided two different kinds of apostates
into separate categories, whereas other scholars, noticing an
overall similarity between the two kinds, joined them together
into the same category. Here, I will focus on the categorization of
three scholars: Al-Khattaabee, Al-Qaadee ‘lyaadh, and Dr.
‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Saaleh Al-Mahmood.

AlL-Khattaabee said, “There were two categories of apostates.
The first consisted of those who turned away from the religion,
abandoning Islam altogether and returning to disbelief. The
people of this category can be divided into two sub-divisions: The
first sub-division consists of the followers of Musailamah — the
people of the Banu Haneefah tribe as well as others who believed
his claim of prophethood — and the companions of Al-Aswad ‏لذ‎
‎‘Ansee, as well as his followers from Yemen and elsewhere.
Everyone from this category disbelieved in the Prophethood of
Muhammad #& and claimed prophethood for someone else.... As
for the people of the second category, they were those who
distinguished between prayer and Zakaat, recognizing the
importance of prayer and rejecting the beliefs that Zakaat is
compulsory and that it must be paid to the Imam (the Khaleefah or
the overall leader of the Muslim nation)."! It should be noted,
however, that some people were actually willing to pay Zakaat,
but their leaders prevented them from doing so.”

Al-Qaadee ‘Tyaadh classified the apostates in a similar manner,
except that he divided them not into two, but three categories. The
members of the first category returned to the worship of idols.
Those of the second category followed either Musailamah or Al-
Aswad Al’Ansee — each of whom claimed to be a prophet. As
for the members of the third category, they continued to believe in
Islam, but they denied the compulsory nature of Zakaat and
falsely interpreted Zakaat as being something that was specific to
the lifetime of the Prophet #@. So in a way, they believed that
Zakaat was a tribute tax that was specific to the Prophet #%, and
not a compulsory tax that was meant to alleviate the harsh

"l Sharh Saheeh Muslim, by An-Nawawee (1/202).

354 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

conditions of the poor and needy and that was used for other
noble purposes as well.

And Dr. ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Saaleh Al-Mahmood classified
apostates into four categories: The first consisted of people who
returned to the worship of idols; the second, of people who
followed false prophets - Al-Aswad Al-’Ansee, Musailamah,
and Sujaah; the third, of people who denied the fact that Zakaat
was compulsory; and the fourth, of those who did not deny the
fact that Zakaat was obligatory, but who nonetheless refused to
pay it to Abu Bakr a,

Third: Apostasy Rears Its Ugly |

lead during

the Latter Stages of the Prophet's Life

The year 9 Hi, or the Year of the Delegations, was the year
during which the reins of leadership in the Arabian Peninsula
were handed over to the Prophet #. It was, however, also the
year during which the shameful blight of apostasy first stained
the people of the Peninsula. Still, it was a minor problem, and not
a widespread phenomenon. Then at the end of the year 10 H —
which was the year during which the Prophet #8 performed his
farewell pilgrimage and began to feel the symptoms of the illness
that later led to his death ~ the most dangerous of all apostates
openly began to disseminate their poisonous and false messages. |
am referring here to the false prophets of that era, Al-Aswad ‏لذ‎
‎‘Ansee in Yemen, Musailamah “The Liar” in Yamaamah, and
Tulathah Al-Asdee in the lands that were inhabited by his
people!) The former two posed the greatest threat, as they were
determined in their desire to achieve their goals, not to mention
the fact that they had many followers who were willing to take up
arms on their behalf.

01 Al-Hukm Bi-Ghairi Maa-Anzalallah, by Dr. ‘Abdur-Rahmaan Al-Mahmood (pg.
239).

‎Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 66).‏ ذا

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 355

Nonetheless, their audacity did not perturb the Prophet 2, for
Allah 8 showed him a dream in which he was informed of their
imminent demise. One day, as he was delivering a sermon from
his pulpit, the Messenger of Allah #& said,:

Oi a

3 a abe ‏ل‎ 4 a g2 a niet 3 see 2 4 co ak
‏فِي‎ G29 ‏أنسيتهاء‎ dal A ‏«أَيُهَا الثامن» إني قد رَايْت‎
0 ‏ل ل‎ a 7 BAS oe a a ‏اسم سر ع ”سه‎
‏ذرَاعي سِوَارَيُن مِنّ ذهب فكرهتهمًا فنفختهًا فطاراء فاولتهُمَا‎

س5 عر قير ل

“O people, Ihave been shown the ‘Night of Al-Qadr (Power), but I
was then made to forget it (so that I do not know exactly which night
it is). And I was shown two gold bracelets on my arms ; disliking
them, I blew on them, and they flew away. I interpreted those
bracelets to mean the two liars : The one of Yemen (i.e., Al-Aswad
Al-‘Ansee), and the one of Yamaamah (i.e., Musailamah) 7A

The people of knowledge have given a detailed interpretation
of this dream. They say, for example, that the Prophet's blowing
on the bracelets, proves that they were to die simply by his breath,
which signifies that others were going to kill them. And that is
what happened, for the Companions & fought against Al-Aswad
and Musailamah after the Prophet #§ died. That the bracelets
covered the Prophet's hand meant that Al-Aswad and Musaila-
mah would cause problems for the Muslims for at least a short
while.

Dr. “Ali Al-Utoom said, “That the bracelets flew away simply
by an action of blowing proves that, as great a threat as Al-Aswad
and Musailamah seemed to pose, they were, in reality, weak and
vulnerable to attack.” Dr. ‘Ali also said, “That the bracelets were
made of gold meant that the sole purpose of both Al-Aswad and
Musailamah was to gain worldly riches.... And the bracelets being
wrapped around the Prophet’s hands indicated that it was their

‎Bukhaaree (3621) and Muslim (2273).‏ ذا
‎Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 66).‏ 1

396 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فد‎

plan to surround the Muslims from all directions — just as a
bracelet surrounds a wrist.”

Fourth: Abu Bakyr’s Stance Vis-a-vis the Apostates

If anyone had thought that Abu Bakr 4 was going to stand by
and do nothing as the apostates wreaked havoc on the region,
they soon learned otherwise when Abu Bakr 2 stood up before
the people and delivered the following sermon. Having praised
and glorified Allah &&, he said, ” All praise is for Allah, Who has
been enough (for us as a Helper, Protector, etc.), Who has given,
and Who has made rich (His believing slaves). Verily, Allah sent
Muhammad at a time when knowledge was a homeless entity,
and when Islam was strange and driven away (from the lands):
Islam’s rope was cut short, its garment was tattered, and its
people had strayed from it. And Allah despised the People of the
Book. If He gave them good things, it was not on account of any
eoodness mn them. And if he diverted evil away from them, it was
not on account of any evil in them (ie, they were a forsaken
people). They changed their books and added to them that which
did not belong in them. As for the Arabs, they felt safe, thinking
that they were safe from Allah; and they neither worshipped Him
nor supplicated to Him. Allah made their lives weary for them...
But then Allah gave them a good ending, making them the most
just nation. He & helped them by providing them with followers,
and He # helped them against their enemies. They continued
upon that (blessed) state until Allah caused His Prophet 28 to die,
at which time the Shaifaan (the Devil) came down upon them,
took them by their hands, and plotted their demise.

A ‏ماس نر‎ va hun 7 ‏سرح بن كله‎ ae 5 Bee ope
J 4h Cla : oat ‏قبله الرسل ل‎ Aj. tale ‏فل‎ O35 ‏إلا‎ Aw Les
a ae
Le be “a 208 ‏زر‎ Ae 2 ‏م‎ ve ae “7% Ad os elas’

") Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 66).

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 357

“Muhammad (#8) is no more than a Messenger, and indeed
(many) Messengers have passed away before him. If he dies or 5
killed, will you then turn back on your heels (as disbelievers)?
And he who turns back on his heels, not the least harm will he do
to Allah, and Allah will give reward to those who are grateful.”
(Qur'an 3: 144)

“Verily, all around you are Arabs who have refused to hand
over their sheep and camels (1.e., the sheep and camels they were
supposed to pay as Zakaat). If they have indeed returned fo their
old religion, they were never poorer than they are today, and you
have never been stronger than you are today — which is as a
result of what has happened earlier from the blessings of your
Prophet (1.e., as a result of all of his past efforts to make you reach
this stage of stability and strength). He has entrusted you to your
Lord, Who is All-Sufficient — Who had found him astray, and
then guided him; and Who had found him poor, and then made
him rich.

woke KIN ES aS es Sisle a Se gt EG
Bo oe bebe
HOE MS

“And you were on the brink of a pit of Fire, and He saved you
from 1t. Thus Allah makes His Ayat (proofs, evidences, Verses,
lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) clear to you, that you may be
guided,” (Qur'an 3: 103)

“By Allah, I will never stop fighting upon the command of
Allah until Allah completes His promise and fulfills for us His
covenant; until the martyrs from the people of Paradise are killed,
and those who remain behind on earth are their successors and
offspring. Allah’s judgment is true, and His speech is not taken
back.” Abu Bakr 2 then recited this Verse:

9 أ نذا ‎ESI oes eX‏ 9 الأ سكه

‎oy Pd‏ ع
» : لمر

358 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

BE CEES Oe hin
“Aliah has promised those among you who believe, and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the earth, as He granted it
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority to
practice their religion, that which He has chosen for them (i.e.,
Islam). And He will surely give them in exchange a safe security
after their fear (provided) they (believers) worship Me and do not
associate anything (in worship) with Me. But whoever
disbelieved after this, they are the Fasiqun (rebellious,
disobedient to Allah).”’ (Qur’an 24: 55)!

While the Prophet's Companions & agreed that fighting the
followers of Musailamah and Al-Aswad was the right thing to do,
some of them felt that it was not prudent or necessary to fight
against those who were refusing to pay Zakaat. The main
proponent of this latter view was ‘Umar 2s, who suggested that
it was better to propitiate them, in the hope that their Faith
(Eemaan) would increase as time went by and that they would
soon agree to pay Zakaat. But “Umar’s suggestion was outright
rejected by Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ who did not feel that making
compromises was an option in dealing with the apostates. To
Abu Bakr «, there was no point to distinguishing between
different kinds of apostates, since all apostates had one abhorrent
crime in common: They all, after having been Muslims, exited
from the fold of Islam.

According to a narration that is related in Saheeh Bukhaaree,
Abu Hurairah # said ,’’When the Messenger of Allah #€ died and
Abu Bakr a became leader (of the Muslim nation), some Arabs
apostatized. And “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ¢ said to Abu Bakr ‏رك‎
‎‘How can you fight against the people (i.e., the people who

‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/316).‏ نا

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 359

refused to pay Zakaat but who still professed to be Muslims) in
spite of what the Prophet #€ said: ‘I have been ordered to fight
against the people until they say: None has the right to be worshipped
but Allah. lf anyone says that, then his wealth is protected from
me, and so is his life, unless it is by some right (i.e., unless he
does some other crime — such as murder another Muslim — that
makes him deserving of losing his life) and his accountability is
with Allah.” Abu Bakr 2 said, “By Allah, 1 will fight against
anyone who distinguishes between the prayer and Zakaat, for
indeed, Zakaat is the right of wealth. By Allah, were they to refuse
to give me even a small female goat, one that they used to give to
the Messenger of Allah #%, I would fight them for having refused
to give it.” According to another narration, he # said, “By Allah,
were they to refuse to give me a camel’s headband, which they
used to give to the Messenger of Allah #€, I would fight them for
having refused to give it.”

As soon as Abu Bakr « said these words, “Umar 4s realized
that he had been in the wrong, a point that he a later made clear
when he said, “By Allah, I came to understand what had really
happened: Allah had opened up Abu Bakr’s chest (to what was
right), and it was then that I realized that he was upon the truth
(in his decision to fight all of the apostates).”") And ‘Umar
later confessed, “By Allah, in Abu Bakr’s decision to fight against
the apostates, it became clear that Abu Bakr’s Faith (Eemaan)
outweighs the Faith of everyone from this nation put to-
gether.” 7] |

Abu Bakr clarified something that had previously been a
point of confusion for “Umar 4: The very Hadeeth ‘Umar ‏وف‎ cited
as proof to back his claim that they shouldn’t fight some of the
apostates, actually, when understood correctly, proved the
opposite — that it was their religious duty to fight all apostates.
‘Umar # initially said that they should not fight the apostates

‎Bukhaaree (6924) and Muslim (20).‏ لأا
‎Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Muhammad Ahmad Baashmeel (pg. 24).‏ 1(

360 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4

who refused to pay Zakaat because the Prophet #% had said:

a at. ‏م امكو‎ 2 we Boe ‏سم‎ ee aT
(gases ‏وَأَمْوَالهُمٌ إلا‎ partes ‏عَصَمُوا مني‎ a Jb ‏(فإذا‎
‎“Tf they say it (1.e., the Testimony of Faith), their blood and their
lives are protected from me, except if there is a right.”

INS

And there is a right and obligation upon every Muslim to pay
Zakaat, for Zakaat, like prayer, the Testimony of Faith, Hajj, and
Fasting, is one of the five pillars of Islam. By rejecting any one of
those pillars, one exits from the fold of Islam.

In the end, Abu Bakr # made the right decision. In fact, had he
made any other decision, the Muslims would have suffered
disastrous consequences. Had it not been for Allah # and then the
firm resolve of Abu Bakr 4, corruption would have become
rampant throughout the earth, and the inhabitants of the Arabian
Peninsula would likely have returned to what they had
previously believed in during the pre-Islamic days of ignor-
ance,|!!

It was as if the weight of the world was being placed on Abu
Bakr’s shoulders. He # had to make a crucial decision, only a
brief period after he made the important, and at first unpopular,
decision of sending out Usaamah’s army. As matters stood, the
Muslims were being threatened by the followers of Musailamah
and Al-Aswad, and so some Companions 4 began to ask
themselves whether ‏كز‎ was wise to create even more enemies.
After all, those who were refusing to pay Zakaat were still openly
professing their belief in, “None has the right to be worshipped
but Allah.” As unpopular as his decision might have potentially
been, Abu Bakr 2 wanted to live up to his duties as the Khaleefah
of the Messenger of Allah #g. As such, he understood that the
religion was complete; it had already been revealed in its
entirety, so it was not his place to change or modify it in the
least.

"! Ash-Shoorah Bainal-Asaalah Wal-Mu‘aasirah (pg. 86).

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 36]

When certain Companions # came to him in order to convince
him that he should not wage war against the people who refused
to pay Zakaat, Abu Bakr # gave not a sermon in response, but a
single sentence that had the same impact and effect as a long and
eloquent sermon. He 4% said, “Revelation has ceased to descend,
and the religion is complete. Shall I allow it to decrease (Le., to be
changed and modified) while I am alive?’! According to
another narration, ‘Umar said, “O Khaleefah of the Messenger of
Allah, unite the people, appease them, and be gentle with them,”
to which Abu Bakr # replied, “Were you strong during the days
of pre-Islamic ignorance only so that you can become a coward in
Islam? Revelation has ceased to descend; the religion is complete,
so shall I allow it to decrease (i.e., to be changed and modified)
while I am alive?’?!

Before making a final decision, Abu Bakr 2 listened to the
various opinions and suggestions of the Prophet's
Companions ‏.يق‎ Only after clearly hearing them out did he
announce his final decision. But even though he did consult the
Companions & — which was in keeping with the Sunnah of the
Prophet #2 — one thing is for sure: Once he made a final decision,
which he arrived at quickly, he became firm and resolute. His
decision confirmed, he did not waver or have doubts about what
course of action he should take. The quality of not wavering was
one for which Abu Bakr # was known throughout his life. In the
end, when Abu Bakr # announced his final decision, all of the
Companions 4 who initially disagreed discarded their previous
opinions and gave their complete support to Abu Bakr’s decision,
both recognizing and acknowledging the fact that he was in the
right. All alone did Abu Bakr @ stand in the face of initial
disagreement, both regarding the decision to send out Usaamah’s
army and the decision of waging war against all of the apostates.
And on both occasions, Abu Bakr 2 was right, while everyone

Ml Al-Murtadah, by Abul-Hasan An-Nadawee (pg. 70).
"I Mishkaat Al-Masaabech (6034).

362 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذه‎

else was wrong. It is for this reason that Sa’eed ibn Al-Musayyib
(may Allah have mercy on him) said, “Abu Bakr was the most
knowledgeable person among them (Le., among the Prophet's
Companions), and he was unsurpassed among them at arriving at
the best decision (regarding any given matter, but especially
regarding matters of some importance)”

To be sure, it was Abu Bakr’s superior Faith that allowed him
to see through a seemingly complicated issue and to then arrive at
a correct conclusion. As such, he # alone was able to see that
Zakaat could not be separated from the Testimony of Faith, for if
one believes in the Oneness of Allah 38, one must accept the rights
Allah 8 made binding upon mankind. And Allah's right over
one’s wealth is Zakaat that one has to pay to the deserving and
needy; after all, one’s wealth ultimately belongs not to one’s own
self, but to Allah %. In short, Abu Bakr « made it clear that,
without Zakaat, the Testimony of Faith has no value in the lives of
people. Therefore, as leader of the Muslim nation, it fell upon his
shoulders to fight against those who refused to pay Zakaat, just as
it was his duty to wage war against those who refused to say,
“None has the right to be worshipped but Allah.” This under-
standing of the religion, Abu Bakr 4s informed the Companions
‏رك‎ was true Islam. Abu Bakr was of course right, for Allah %
gave a clear and stern warning to those who believed in a part of
the Book while they disbelieved in other paris of it:

er ” wt pet og a ed BAe Le a“ id 3244
oe ‏ل‎ od yw o 7 on a
6 4 ‏الْفَسَمَةَ رون‎ P23 feat weit 3 3 oe 4; ae, 5 OE

4 ‏مَْمَلُونَ‎ EE Jad 2G EG
“Then do you believe in a part of the Scripture and reject the
rest? Then what is the recompense of those who do so among
you, except disgrace in the life of this world, and on the Day of
Resurrection they shall be consigned to the most grievous

Ul ALBadr Wat-Taareekh, by Al-Maqdasee (5/153).

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 363

torment. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.” (Qur'an
2: 85)

Abu Bakr’s uncompromising stance against the apostates was
inspired by Allah; of that, there is no doubt. The credit of
preserving the sanctity of Islam following the Prophet's death
goes to Allah $8, and then to Abu Bakr 2. After all was said and
done, after the Muslims met the apostates on various battlefields,
and after the dust of war had settled, people truly appreciated
what Abu Bakr # had done to defeat the apostates. His stance
was similar to the ones taken by the Prophets and Messengers of
previous eras, which should come as no surprise, since he was not
merely a Khaleefah; but rather, he was the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah #@. He # lived up to his role, and he will
continue to deserve the praise, respect, and supplications of all
Muslims until Allah 384 inherits both the earth and those that are
on it?

Fifth: Abu Bakr’s Plan to D

efend Al-Madeenah

The various tribes that refused to pay Zakaat sent delegations
to Al-Madeenah in order to meet with Abu Bakr # and negotiate
terms of peace with him. Yes, they wanted to make peace, but
they were adamant in their decision to refuse to pay Zakaat. But
once they witnessed firsthand Abu Bakr’s uncompromising
resolve, they realized that there no longer remained any point
to further negotiations, and so they packed up their things and left
Al-Madeenah. Before leaving, however, they arrived at two
conclusions concerning their situation. First, since the Islamic
ruling regarding the payment of Zakaat was clear, it was pointless
to hope that the Khaleefah of the Muslims would compromise and
negotiate terms with them, especially considering the fact that all
of the Muslims in Al-Madeenah became convinced of the
soundness of his firm stance and decided to stand firmly and

‘5 Al-Murtaduh, by An-Nawawee (pg. 72).

364 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

loyally by his side against all enemies. And second, it was very
important to take advantage of the weakness — or perceived
weakness — of the Muslims, who, because of Usaamah’s
expedition, were few in number. This meant that they had to
attack Al-Madeenah with all of their might, in the hopes af
bringing down the caliphate and destroying the religion of
Islam.

While the apostate delegates were, on the face of it, negotiating
terms of peace, Abu Bakr 2 cast penetrating glances at their facial!
expressions, and what he saw alarmed him. Certain believers are
blessed by Allah # with the ability of reading the faces of people;
this talent is not magical in nature, but instead is derived froma
profound faith in Allah 3, wisdom, and other similar qualities.
Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ truly blessed in this regard, read these qualities in
the faces of the apostates: treachery, baseness, and wickedness. So
as soon as the delegates left, Abu Bakr # said to his companions,
“Verily, the delegates perceive that you are few in number;
therefore, you cannot be certain about whether they will come
during the day or during the night (but rather what is certain is
that they will surely make an attempt to take Al-Madeenah)....
They hoped that we would agree to a truce with them, but we
rejected their offer...so be ready and get ready (for war).”""!

Abu Bakr 4 took the following steps in order to secure Al-
Madeenah from attack and to launch a successful campaign
against all apostates in the region:

a) He # ordered the inhabitants of Al-Madeenah to spend their
nights in the Masjid, so that they could constantly be vigilant
and ready to defend the Prophet's city.

b) He # placed groups of guards at the various entry poimts of Al-
Madeenah; it was their job to spend each night at those points
and defend their city from enemy attacks.

‎Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Mal-slam (pe. 280).‏ !ذأ
‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/64).‏ 1"

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 365

c) Over each set of guards Abu Bakr appointed battle-tested
and brave leaders: ‘Ali ibn Abee Taalib ‏ركه‎ Az-Zubair ibn AI-
‘Awwaam 4s, Talhah ibn ‘Ubaidullah ‏ا‎ Sa’ad ibn Abee
Waqaaas 4, ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn “Auf #, and ‘Abdullah ibn
Mas’ood yt

d) Me ‏يه‎ requested the help of neighboring tribes. Happily for the
Muslims, various neighboring tribes did not apostatize, but
instead remained firm upon Islam; [ am referring here to the
tribes of Aslam, Ghifaar, Muzainah, Ashja’, Juhainah, and
Ka’ab. Abu Bakr 2 sent messages to the leaders of those tribes,
ordering them to join in his fight against the apostates. They
answered his call, filling Al-Madeenah’s streets with their
soldiers, who brought along with them horses, camels, and
weapons, all of which were under the direct control of Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeq #.'"! The reinforcements were at once much-
needed and of great practical value; the tribe of Juhainah alone
sent 400 of its men to Abu Bakr ‏رةه‎ along with a number of
horses and camels. Also, ‘Amr ibn Murrah 4 of the Juhainah
tribe brought with him 100 camels in order to help his Muslim
brothers. And Abu Bakr & then distributed those camels
among the people.”!

e) Abu Bakr # was concerned not only about apostates who lived
relatively near to Al-Madeenah, but also about apostates who
lived in far-off lands. The latter did not pose a direct or serious
threat to Al-Madeenah, but they did pose a dangerous threat to
the region in general. Abu Bakr .& knew that, sooner or later,
he would have to deal with them, and he #4 chose to deal with
them immediately. He # did so by sending out letters to
Muslim governors in distant provinces — just as the Prophet

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/64).

“I Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam Ayyaam Fitnatur-Riddah, by Dr. Mahdee Rizquifah
(pg. 21).

‎Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam Ayyaam Fitnatur-Riddah, by Dr. Mahdee Rizqullah‏ اذا
‎(pg. 21).‏

306 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

#@ had done when he was alive — ordering them to fight
against the apostates in their respective regions. For example,
he ‏كه‎ sent a letter to the people of Yemen, since Yemen was the
stronghold of the false prophet Al-Aswad Al-’Ansee and his
followers. In the letter he sent, Abu Bakr # informed the
people of Yemen that he was appointing Fairooz as their leader
and that they should all obey his commands and fight
underneath his banner."! Muslims of Persian descent united
around their leader, Fatrooz, and their Arab Muslim brothers
joined in their cause. Together, under the overall leadership of
Fairooz, they tirelessly waged war against Al-Aswad and his
followers. The Muslims came out victorious in the end, and in
stages they were able to restore complete Islamic rule to the
region.”

f) In spite of the difficult circumstances that were being faced by
the Muslims of Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr « decided that it was
necessary to wage an all-out war against nearby apostates —
such as the members of the ‘Abs and Dhibyaan tribes. But first
Abu Bakr # gathered the women and children of the city into
the safety of fortresses and nearby mountain passes; with the
women and children safe from the treacherous hands of the
apostates, the Muslims were able to focus their energies on the
war they needed to wage.

Sixth: The Apostates F ail i in their

The apostates did not wait long before they put their nefarious
plans into action. Only three days after the apostate delegates
departed from Al-Madeenah, an attempt on Al-Madeenah was
made. The attack consisted of fighters from the Asad, Ghatfaan,

‎AL-Bad’u Wat-Taareekh, by Al-Maqdasee (5/157).‏ لأا
‎l Haraqatur-Riddah (pe. 174).‏

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 367

‘Abs, Dhibyaan, and Bakr tribes. These tribes sent only some of
their fighters; the rest they stationed at a place called Dhee Husaa,
where they were to act as reinforcements.

The outer guard units of Al-Madeenah learned of the
impending attack and sent news to Abu Bakr # about the
situation. He 4 sent a message back to them, instructing them to
remain where they were. Then Abu Bakr 4 and the men who had
been with him in the Masjid rode out to the outskirts of Al-
Madeenah, in order to fight alongside the outer guard units
against the attackers. The enemy had not been expecting much in
terms of resistance, and so they were shocked to see many Muslim
fighters defending the outskirts of Al-Madeenah. During the brief
fighting that ensued, enemy fighters became scattered and
confused, and were forced to retreat. Muslim riders pursued the
enemy all the way until Dhee Husaa, but the reinforcements were
waiting there, and in order to avert a complete disaster, they set
traps for the camels upon which Muslim soldiers were riding. The
camels went wild, but not wild enough to throw off their Muslim
riders. The camels eventually calmed down, and the Muslims
rode them back to Al-Madeenah, without having incurred any
fatalities or casualties.)

In general, the apostates made the fatal mistake of under-
estimating their Muslim counterparts. They thought that the
Muslims were weak — given the outbreak of apostasy, the
departure of Usaamah's army, and the small number of Muslims
that remained in Al-Madeenah — but they were dead wrong. For
example, some of the apostates sent word to the inhabitants of
Dhil-Qissah — a people who had also apostatized — informing
them that the Muslims were weak and could be easily defeated.
Based on this false information, the inhabitants of Dhil-Oissah set
out towards Al-Madeenah, completely unaware of the fact that
Allah 88 had other plans for them. As they were marching
towards Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr # was leaving Al-Madeenah,

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/65).‏ اذا

368 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏يك‎

but he was not alone: He 2 had with him an army of soldiers.
Over the right flank An-No’maan ibn Mugarrin was placed in

charge; and over the left flank, “Abdullah ibn Mugarrin. And
Suwaid ibn Mugarrin was placed in charge over the foot soldiers.

Before the break of dawn, the two opposing forces drew near
to one another. The apostate soldiers, brimming with confidence,
did not expect to face any resistance until they reached AI-
Madeenah, and even there, they expected to achieve a swift
victory. The Muslim soldiers, on the other hand, were cautious
and vigilant, and they knew that they were about to come across
the opposing army. They thus decided to lower their voices and to
make as little noise as possible, so that they could take the enemy
by surprise. And a tremendous surprise it certainly was for the
apostate soldiers, who heard not even a whisper from the
oncoming Muslim fighters until it was too late — and until their
bodies were being penetrated by swords.

The sun did not rise until the enemy had been routed: Most
apostate soldiers fled the scene, while many of their riding
animals were taken as booty by the Muslims. During the course of
the fighting, Hubaal, brother of Tulaihah Al-Asdee, was killed.
Abu Bakr 4 pursued the enemy until Dhil-Oissah; once there, he
stationed An-No’maan ibn Mugarrin # and a contingent of
soldiers to guard the area, Then he #, along with the rest of his
fighters, returned to Al-Madeenah.

The rest of the apostates became furious when they learned
about their humiliating defeat. And in their madness and rage, the
leaders of the Banu Dhibyaan and “Abs tribes killed those of their
fellow tribesmen who were still Muslims; and other apostate
tribes soon followed their example. Upon learning about their
dastardly deeds, Abu Bakr # swore that he would attack the
guilty tribes and kill a number of their men that was equal to or
greater than the number of Muslims that they had brutally
executed.

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/66).‏ [ذا

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 369

Abu Bakr # was determined to avenge the deaths of his
Muslim brothers and to teach a stern lesson to the leaders of the
apostate tribes. As a result of his firm resolve, Muslims who were
members of apostate tribes became more steadfast upon their
religion than ever before; and the apostates were beginning to
face more and more humiliating defeats at the hands of their
enemies. Many apostates were now terrified of the Muslims, and
so they decided to make peace by sending Zakaat wealth to Al-
Madeenah. In a single night, Zakaat wealth reached Al-Madeenah
from Safwaan, Az-Zabbarqaan, and ‘Adee.""! And during the
course of one particular evening, Zakaat wealth was sent from six
different Arab tribes.

Each time a Zakaat collector approached Al-Madeenah, people,
upon seeing him in the distance, said, “Here comes a warner,” or
in other words: “Here come someone who is bringing news of an
impending attack by the enemy.” Every time this happened, Abu
Bakr ‏كه‎ would respond, “Rather, he is a bearer of glad tidings.” In
the end, it always turned out to be someone who was bringing
with him a loadeof Zakaat wealth on behalf of the members of his
tribe. 2

While all of this was happening, Usaamah ibn Zaid «& returned
victoriously from his expedition. He # and his soldiers # did all
that the Messenger of Allah #¢ had ordered them to do, and they
succeeded in following Abu Bakr’s instructions to the letter.!*
Their mission completed, it was time for them to rest for a short
while. Abu Bakr # was leading a contingent of fighters who were
going out to attack apostate tribes; prior to leaving, he placed
Usaamah ibn Zaid # in charge of Al-Madeenah, and he 2s said to
both Usaamah ‏ف‎ and the members of Usaamah’s army, “Rest,
and give your riding animals a chance to rest.’"!

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/66).‏ لذأ
‎“I As-Siddeeq Awwalul-Khulafaa, by Ash-Shirqaawee (pg. 75).‏
‎“I At-Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/37).‏

370 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Abu Bakr # headed out with his men towards Dhil-Oissah,
even though many Muslims, fearing for Abu Bakr’s life, implored
him to stay in Al-Madeenah. They said to him, “We ask you by
Allah, O Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, do not expose
yourself to such dangers! If something happens to you, the people
will no longer have a government or system of rule. Your staying
here is of greater significance than is the enemy, so send another
man in your place, so that if he is killed, you can appoint another
man to take his place as the leader (of the Muslim army).” Abu
Bakr 4 replied, “No, by Allah, 1 will not do so; but rather 1 will
console you with my own self ‏رع.1)‎ whatever happens to us, you
can be comforted by the fact that I sacrificed my life for our cause,
the cause of Islam).”

It is relatively easy to show outward signs of bravery and piety
and steadfastness during times of ease and comfort, but it is in
harsh circumstances that the true mettle of men is ascertained. In
times of hardship and severe persecution, some men abandon
their principles, morals, beliefs — and even their religion. If that is
the case, then we can learn a lot about the character of Abu Bakr
‏رق‎ for he lived through not one difficult situation, but a great
many. And through it all — both during the Prophet's lifetime
and afterwards — he remained steadfast and firm, and even that
is an understatement. He was, m fact, as solid as the firmest and
most unshakeable of mountains.

The threat that was posed by the apostates was grave indeed;
in fact, it seemed likely to some that the Muslims were so greatly
outmumbered that they would not be able to defeat the apostates.
And yet through the-entire ordeal — from the moment the
Prophet #¢ died until all of the apostates were defeated — Abu
Bakr # remained a paragon of bravery and patience. Setting an
example for others, which is the responsibility of any Muslim
leader, Abu Bakr & was willing to sacrifice his life so that the lives
of other Muslims would be spared. His bravery had the effect of
motivating other Muslim soldiers and encouraging them to wage
war against their enemies; thus they answered his call to arms, not

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 371

with an attitude of resignation, but one of enthusiasm and
eagerness to achieve one of two goals: martyrdom or victory.

When Abu Bakr # arrived with his men at Dhee Husa, he met
with An-No’maan 2, “Abdullah 2, and Suwaid 4, all of whom
were guarding the area on behalf of Abu Bakr 4. Seeing that
things were going well at Dhee Husa, Abu Bakr 2 traveled on
towards the inhabitants of Ar-Rabdhah at Al-Abraq. As a result of
the battles that ensued, Al-Haarith and ‘Auf were defeated, and
Al-Hateeah was taken captive; what is more, the tribes of “Abs
and Banu Bakr were forced to flee the area. Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ then
made camp at Al-Abrag for a number of days.

Soon peace would be made with those apostates that were not
killed during battle, and who decided to return to the fold of
Islam; nonetheless, tn certain instances, Abu Bakr ‏فك‎ was
unwilling to return their former lands to them. He # conquered
Banu Dhibyaan territory and expelled the members of the Banu
Dhibyaan tribe from the region. He 2s then said, “Tt is prohibited
for Dhibyaan to take ownership of these lands, for Allah 38 has
given these lands to us as war booty.” When the apostates were
delivered a final lethal blow and their war with the Muslims came
to an end, and when many apostates returned to the fold of Islam
and were forgiven for their past transgressions, the people of
Banu Tha’labah returned to their previous lands in order to settle
down once again in their former homes. Being told that they did
not have the right to live there, they went to Abu Bakr ‏د‎ in Al-
Madeenah and said to him, “Why are we being prevented from
settling down in our lands?” Abu Bakr ‏أ‎ responded, “You have
lied, for you do not have any land that belongs to you. Rather, the
lands to which you are referring are for me to give (to
whomsoever I please); they are lands that I have saved from the
enemy ‏,.ع.1)‎ you, when you apostatized and declared war upon
Muslims).”

Based on the above-mentioned events, one should notice a
clear difference between Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ (as weil the other rightly-
guided Khaleefahs) and the leaders of later generations —

372 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

including those of today’s generation. If any worldly blessing was
there for the taking, Abu Bakr a did not desire it for himself, but
instead wanted his people to be blessed with it. Others who came
after him — and after the other rightly-guided Khaleefahs — saw a
position of leadership as a means of gaining status and power and
wealth; or if not any of these, then at least a means of gaining
comfort and security. They would be willing to make announce-
ments on loudspeakers, but it was their people, the common
citizens, who had to make actual sacrifices by fighting in wars.
From their palaces or central command stations, they controlled
the actions of others but refused to take direct part in the affairs of
the nation. But that was certainly not the case with Abu Bakr 4,
who, as we have hitherto seen, led the Muslim army in three
dangerous battles against the apostates; what is more, the reader
should keep m mind the fact that Abu Bakr # was rushing into
battle not as a young man in his twenties or thirties, but as an
aged man who was more than sixty years old. To be sure, his mere
presence on the battlefield — not to mention his actual
participation in the fighting — inspired all of the soldiers who
were under his command."

Abu Bakr # was brave, but his bravery alone does not explain
why he was so willing to sacrifice his life for the cause of Islam,
nor why he was willing to thrust himself into the most dangerous
of situations. Rather, it was, more than anything else, his
profound faith in Allah 3% that inspired him to achieve great
feats on the battlefield. It was this essential quality, and not actual
deeds — for many Companions & were also known for their
prolific acts of worship — that made him better than all other
Companions #. The outbreak of apostasy threatened the lives of |
all Muslims, and yet Abu Bakr # remained firm, steadfast, and
resolute, leading the Muslims’out of danger by waging an all-out
war against the apostates. Someone later said to Abu Bakr &, “In

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Al-Humaidee (9/48).‏ [ذا

Abu Bakr’s War Against the Apostates 373

regard to the crisis you faced, had it descended upon mountains,
it would have crushed them.... And yet we did not see you
become weak (or irresolute or fearful).” Abu Bakr & replied,
“Terror has not entered my heart ever since the night of the cave
(the night during which the Prophet #6 and Abu Bakr 4 spent the
night in the cave as they were migrating to Al-Madeenah). When
the Prophet #¢ saw how sad I was, he said, “There is no need to
worry, O Abu Bakr, for indeed, Allah has guaranteed that this
matter (i.e., Islam) will reach its completion.””"! Thus he always
believed with certainty that Allah # would help the believers.
And it was because of that profound faith and certainty that he
was umperturbable and composed even in the face of the most
terrifying of dangers; and it was by dint of that faith and certainty
that he # was superior to all of the Prophet's Companions &.

‎Bakr As-Siddeeq: Afdalus-Sahaabah Wa-Ahagquhum Bil-Khilaafah (pg. 69).‏ بام لذأ

Chapter 3

Every Muslim had an important role to play in the war against
the apostates. But perhaps most underrated of all was the role of
Muslims who lived among apostate populations. One must
understand that it is not completely accurate to describe the tribes
who fought against Abu Bakr 4 as “apostate tribes,” since some
of their members remained steadfast upon Islam. It is true that the
leaders of most of those tribes were apostates, as were the
majority of the tribes’ members; nonetheless, there were some
who did not apostatize and who had an important role to play in
the war against the apostates.

As in the Makkan phase of the Prophet’s biography, Muslims
who lived under the rule of apostate chieftains were persecuted
because of their Faith; and like the Muslims who had been
persecuted by the Quraish, they did not have the numbers or the
strength to oppose their chieftains. Another similarity between
both groups is that they — both the Muslims who lived among
the Quraish, and the Muslims who lived under the rule of
apostate chieftains — used speech to both oppose and admonish

3/6 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2%

their leaders. Words and speech are not to be taken lightly, for
they can have a profound influence on the members of any given
society. The leaders of the apostate tribes — like the leaders of the
Quraish before them — understood the power of words, which is
why they persecuted their fellow tribesmen who refused to
forsake Islam. ~

It is likely that every tribe that apostatized contained some
members that remained steadfast upon their religion, refusing to
exit from the fold of Islam. Such people openly proclaimed their
Faith and warned their people of the awful destination that
awaited them if they continued upon their present course. In
payment of their sincere efforts to advise their fellow tribesmen,
they were mocked and ridiculed; some of them were banished
from their cities; and yet others were killed. And yet some of them
— such as “Adee ibn Haatim # and Al-Jaarood a — succeeded in
convincing their people to return to Islam (we will discuss their
stories in more detail in the following sections of this work, In Sha
Allah ~ Allah Willing).

Some Muslims, having failed in their attempts to convince
their people to return to the fold of Islam, formed small groups
and took other appropriate steps against their apostate relatives.
For example, some of the youth in Yemen secretly planned the
assassination of the false prophet Al-Aswad Al-Ansee, a topic we
will discuss in more detail later on in this work, In Sha Allah (Allah
Willing}.

For the most part, however, Muslim minorities were only able
to declare their Faith verbally, and that in itself was no small
achievement, for it represented a brave and dangerous act of
defiance. Each person who declared his Faith then faced a very
difficult test: Either apostatize like everyone else in the tribe, or
face harsh persecution while remaining firm upon Islam.

it is related that either Mas’ood or Masrooq Al-Qaisee ibn
“Aabis Al-Kandee advised Al-Ash’ath ibn Qais in an attempt to
convince him not to apostatize. A long discussion ensued
between the two men, and their argument became so heated that

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 377

mutual threats were exchanged. In the end, discussions such as
that one resulted in many people returning to the fold of Islam;
and at the very least, such discussions made easier the task of
Muslim armies to eradicate apostasy from the region."

The role that Muslim minorities played in helping to defeat the
apostates highlights an important point: Apostasy was not as
widespread a phenomenon as many: historians have led us to
believe. Part of the misunderstanding results from the fact that the
disease of apostasy afflicted a large geographical region, namely,
the entire Arabian Peninsula. That being the case, some historians
have simply assumed that almost everyone apostatized in the
region — but that is simply not true.

A more correct assessment of the situation following the
Prophet's death points to the reality that various groups, tribal
chieftains, and individuals apostatized in the Arabian Peninsula;
but at the same time various groups, tribal chieftains, and
individuals held on tightly to their religion and refused to
apostatize. If apostasy appeared among the people'of'a given
tribe, there were some among them who did not exit from the fold
of Islam."

Dr. Mahdee Rizqullah Ahmad studied the apostate wars in
detail, focusing his efforts on answering the .question: Was
apostasy during the caliphate of Abu Bakr # a widespread
phenomenon, encompassing every Arab tribe, as well as all
chieftains and tribe members who had once been Muslims? Or
did the disease of apostasy afflict certain tribes, certain chieftains,
and only certain groups of individuals that were spread out
throughout the vast region of the Arabian Peninsula? After
conducting painstaking research, Dr. Mahdee concluded, “The
first thing I realized after having delved through all of the
reference material | have hitherto alluded to, is that I found

“Wl Divaasaat Fee ’Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah (pg. 314).
‏لخا‎ Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam Ayyaam Fitnatur-Riddah (pg. 4).

378 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

nothing to indicate that all tribes, chieftains, and individuals
abandoned Islam, which is contrary to what has been mentioned
by authors that we took as models (of good and sound research
methods). Rather, what I found was that the Muslim
government (led by Abu Bakr 45) relied heavily on a strong
cadre of groups, tribes, and individuals who remained firm upon
Islam. It was these people who worked throughout the peninsula
to quell the apostate movement, and who represented the main
bulwark of Islam (during the crisis that was brought about by the
‏لخأ" لمع هزوم مج‎

‎from the Vi‏ عقسمروع؛؟

‎First: An

‎1) Working from the Inside Out

‎As | hinted to earlier, Abu Bakr & did not begin an all-out
military offensive against the apostates immediately; instead, he
first took steps to garner support from within the tribes that had
apostatized. He # sent letters to individuals who did not
apostatize, as well as messages to the leaders of tribes, In sending
out letters and messages throughout the peninsula, Abu Bakr &
tried to turn people away from abandoning their religion;
furthermore, he # instructed Muslim individuals to gather into

‎“I Here, Dr. Mahdee is referring to the following works and authors: At
Taareekh As-Styaasee Lid-Daulah Al-‘Arabtyyah, by Dr. ’Abdul-Mun’im Maajid
(pe. 146); At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee Al-’Aam: Al-Jaahiliyyah, Ad-Daulah Al-
‘Arabiyyah, Ad-Daulah Al-’Abbaasiyyah, by Ibraaheem Hasan (pg. 219);
Faareekh Ad-Daulah Al-‘Arabiyyah, by As-Sayyid Al Azeez Saalim (pg. 432);
Jaulah Taareekhiyyah Fee ‘Asr Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Dr. Muhammad
As-Sayyid Al-Wakeel (pg. 21); Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Muhammad
As’ad Tals (pg. 20); Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by “Alee At-Tantaawee (pg. 16);
iimaam Al-Wafaa Fee Siyyar Al-Khulafaa, by Muhammad Al-Khidree Beek (pg.
21); “Asr-As-Siddeeq, by Sheebeer Ahmad Muhammad ‘Alee Al-Baakistaa-
nee (pg. 159); Dhaahiratur-Riddah Fil-Mujtama’ Al-lIslaamee Al-Awwal, by
Muhammad Breeghas (pgs. 100, 101); and As-Siddeeq Abu Bala, by
Muhammad Husain Haikal (pg. 173).

‎2) Ath-Thaabition ‘Alal-Islam Ayyaam Fitnatur-Riddah (pg. 19).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 379

groups, so that they could effectively take steps to oppose their
tribal leaders who had apostatized.

In short, Abu Bakr 4 was making preparations for an all-out
offensive, one he was hoping to put on hold until Usaamah ‏ذه‎
‎returned with his army. In sending out letters and messages to the
Arabs of the Peninsula, Abu Bakr # was, among other things,
buying time until Usaamah’s army returned.

As for the Muslims with whom he was corresponding, Abu
Bakr # instructed them to gather into groups, to go to places that
he specified for them, and to then await his further instructions.
Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was thus preparing for the next stage of his military
confrontation with the apostates."! The Muslim dissenters who
had gathered into groups were able to thwart the nefarious plans
of Qais ibn Makshooh Al-Muraadee, and they also achieved
similar victories against other tribes in Tihaamah, the lands of As-
Suraat, and Najraan.

During these early stages of his confrontation with the
apostates, Abu Bakr # achieved a number of important aims,
among which are the following:

1) Abu Bakr 2 managed to send a clear message to all Arabs,
warning them not to join forces with the apostates and not to
abandon their Religon. This stage of diplomatic efforts —
which consisted of sending out letters and messengers to the
Arabs in the region — was a prelude to the all-out military
campaign he « was about to inaugurate in a short while.

2) Dissenting Muslims gained valuable training and experience,
which had the effect of preparing them to become leaders of
the Muslim armies that would later conquer many foreign
lands. A notable student of this period of training and learning
was ‘Adee ibn Haatim At-Taaee 4s, who would later go on to
become one of the leaders of the Muslim armies that
conquered Iraq.

‎Diraasaaat Fee ‘Ahd An-Nubuwwah, by Ash-Shujaa’ (pg. 319).‏ ذا

380 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

3) Abu Bakr ‏و‎ succeeded in gathering groups of Muslims at
specific locations; such Muslims later joined the Muslim armies
that passed by them on the way to attacking apostate enemies.

4) Certain strongholds of the apostate movement were defeated.
Even though such victories — which took place, for instance,
in the southern part of the Arabian Peninsula — were minor
and limited in scope, they had the desired effect of boosting the
morale of all Muslims in general, and of Muslim soldiers in
particular.

2) Sending Out Well-Organized Armies

Two months after their departure from Al-Madeenah (some
historians believe it was not two months but forty days),
Usaamah # and his men returned, having achieved the aims of
their mission, not to mention a considerable amount of war booty.
While the men of Usaamah’s army took some much-needed rest,
Abu Bakr 2 led a contingent of Companions # towards Dhil-
Qissah, which was about one-day’s traveling distance from Al-
Madeenah. The purpose of their expedition was to fight the
apostates and those who had rebelled against the Muslim
government.

Abu Bakr 4 was more valuable as a commander-in-chief in Al-
Madeenah than he was as a military commander on the
battlefield, for if he were to die in battle, the Muslims would be
lacking in the leadership they needed to come out victorious in
their war against the apostates. And so some Companions &
politely suggested to Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ that he appoint someone else to
lead the expedition and that he remain behind in Al-Madeenah.
Their polite suggestion soon transformed into desperate pleading,
so sure were they that it was wrong for Abu Bakr 4s to risk his life
during those troubling times; they needed him alive and well, so
that he ‏ا‎ could steer the nation in the right direction.

Tt is related that ‘Aaishah & said, “My father went out with his
sword unsheathed; he was mounted on his riding animal, and he

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 381

was heading towards the valley of Dhil-Qissah. “Ali ibn Abee
Taalib ‏يه‎ came, took hold of the reins of Abu Bakr’s riding animal,
and said, “Where are you going, O Khaleefah of the Messenger of
Aliah?’” The question was rhetorical, for “Ali ‏ذه‎ knew very well
that Abu Bakr # planned to lead his army into battle. “I will say
to you what the Messenger of Allah #8 said on the Day of Uhud,”
‘Ali 42 went on. By this statement, “Ali ‏وق‎ was referring to what
had happened on the Day of Uhud: When Abu Bakr wanted to
engage in a duel-to-the-death with his son ‘Abdur-Rahmaan (who
was, as of then, still a disbeliever), the Prophet #¢ ordered him to
draw back his sword and to return to his place.

‘Ali # went on to say, “Draw back your sword and do not
bring upon us the tragedy of your death. For by Allah, if we
become bereaved of you, (the nation of) Islam will not have an
organized system of rule (rather, due to the apostate problem,
chaos will break out).”” Abu Bakr 2 acquiesced to “Al's demand
and returned to Al-Madeenah,."!

Since the apostates were not concentrated tn one area but were
instead scattered throughout the Arabian Peninsula, Abu Bakr &
needed to engage the enemy on many fronts at approximately the
same time; therefore, he needed to divide his overall army into
groups, and that is exactly what he # did. He organized the men
of his army under eleven banners, and over each of those groups
he appointed a leader.”! And he # ordered each leader to head
out towards a specific enemy tribe and to mobilize as many
fighters as possible from the tribes they passed by on the way to
their destination. The eleven leaders were as follows:

1) Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏ره‎ who led his men to Banu Asad,

_ and then to Tameem, and then to Al-Yamaamah.

2) ‘Ikrimah ibn Abee Jahl ‏رق‎ who led his men straight to
Musailamah and his followers from the Banu Haneefah tribe.

289 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (2/ 319).
‏لذأ‎ At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/49).

302 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

4 and his men moved on to “Ammaan, Al-Mahrah,
Hadramoot, and then Yemen.

3) Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah ‏رق‎ who led his army to Al-
Yamaamah in order to provide reinforcements for ‘Ikrimah
a and his men; they then went to Hadramoot.

4( Tareefah ibn Haajiz, who led his men towards the Banu
Saleem clan.

5) ‘Amr ibn Al‘Aas #, who led his men towards Qudaa’ah.

6) Khaalid ibn Sa’eed ibn ‏رك عمط لف‎ who led his men to the
highlands of Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).

7) Al-‘Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee , who led his men to Bahrain.

8) Hudhaifah ibn Maihsin Al-Ghilfaanee, who led his men to
‘Ammaan.

9) ‘Arfajah ibn Harthamah ‏رك‎ who led his men towards
Mahrah.

10) Al-Muhaajir ibn Abee Umayyah ‏رك‎ who led his men towards
Yemen — to San’aa and then to Hadramoot.

11) Suwaid ibn Mugrin, who led his men towards Tihaamah."!

The valley of Dhil-Qissah became a launching point for Abu
Bakr’s armies. The brief information provided above about Abu
Bakr’s eleven armies shows that almost each army fought in more
than one place. This meant that the apostate wars, as far as the
Muslim armies were concerned, was a constant affair of grouping,
regrouping, redeploying, mobilizing, attacking, and moving on to
the next target tribe. It was a colossal undertaking, primarily
because the apostates, as opposed to being concentrated in one
city, were scattered throughout the Arabian Peninsula.

That the Muslim armies succeeded so quickly and in such an
organized manner points to Abu Bakr’s brilliant and immaculate

“) Taareckh At-Tabaree (4/68) and to Diraasaat Fee ‘Asr An-Nubuwwah (pg. 321).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 383

planning. Some people might assume that, because Abu Bakr #s
stayed in Al-Madeenah, he was far removed from the conflict, but
nothing could be further from the truth. He 4 was involved in the
war from its earliest planning stages until its successful
completion. In terms of his strategy and planning — which
mainly involved dividing his army into ten separate contingents
and sending each one of them to a specific target area — Abu Bakr
# displayed a profound knowledge not only of the geography of
the region, but also of the location of each rebel tribe, as well as of
the fastest path one had to take to arrive at any given destination
in the peninsula"! Abu Bakr 2 lived in a completely non-
technological era, but the skill with which he orchestrated the war
gives one the impression that he was sitting in a modern-day
military command center, in which he had digital maps of all of
Arabia, video and audio feeds from the various areas of the
peninsula, and every other modern equipment that today’s
armies use to assess their situation during wartime.

Every hour, Abu Bakr # knew exactly where each army was,
what each army was doing, and what each army was supposed to
do on the following day. He had all of that knowledge because he
had speedy messengers working for him both by day and by
night; they would go back and forth from Al-Madeenah to the
wartront, bringing back news of the war's progress, and taking
away instructions for army commanders. This way, Abu Bakr ‏نك‎
‎was able to keep in constant contact with the leaders of his armies.
Among the messengers who went back and forth with news and
instructions were Abu Khaithamah An-Najjaaree Al-Ansaaree «,
Salamah ibn Salaamah «, Abu Burzah Al-Aslamee 2, and
Salamah ibn Waqsh.!

That Abu Bakr’s armies were well-led and well-organized
should not come as a surprise to the reader; after all, these were

‎Diraasaat Fee ‘Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen (pg. 321).‏ لذأ
‎Fit-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Shaugee Abu Khaleel (pgs. 226, 227).‏ أخا

384 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏نك‎

men who had been training for war under the leadership of the
Prophet #¢ for many years. They were prepared and well-trained
for an emergency such as the one that erupted with the outbreak
of apostasy in the peninsula. The commanders knew exactly what
needed to be done, and how they had to go about doing it; and the
soldiers were seasoned, brave, and skilled fighters. In short, the
Muslim forces as a whole were more powerful than any other
army in the peninsula.!"!

If Abu Bakr 4 was the chief-in-command of the Muslim
military, Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed # was the overall commander
of operations for all of the eleven armies. Khaalid, “Allah's
Unsheathed Sword,” was a brilliant military strategist, having
proved his ability during the battle of Uhud (when he was still
a polytheist), during the battles in which he fought alongside
the Prophet #2, and during the entire course of the apostate
wars.

From a strategic point of view, the Muslims were much more
prepared for war than were the apostates. Because the apostate
outbreak began only a few months earlier, and because the
apostate leaders did not think that the Muslims had it in them to
launch an all-out attack against them, the apostates were
unorganized and scattered all over the place, whereas the
Muslims were organized and marched from tribe to tribe with
large armies. Knowing that the apostates were unprepared and
perceiving that time was of the essence — if he was going to
prevent them from mobilizing their forces — Abu Bakr 4 decided
to surprise them with nothing short of an all-out attack. In his
view, apostasy was like a disease in the peninsula that needed to
be eradicated before it could spread. His plan worked brilliantly,
and it took only a few short months to achieve complete victory
over the .apostates.

Of all of the Prophet’s Companions #, only Abu Bakr a had
the resolve that was needed to take tnmediate and decisive

‘Min Daulah ‘Umar Wa Daulah ‘Abdul-Malik, by Ibraaheern Baidoon (pg. 28).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 385

action. Yes, there were many other eminent Companions ‏رق‎ and
one cannot say enough about their many qualities and virtues.
But it was only Abu Bakr # who, because of his resolve and
ability to evaluate the significance of any given situation, was
born to lead the Muslim armies against the likes of Musailamah
and his followers.

The Muslim armies marched towards their destinations,
carrying with them banners that had the message of Tawheed
(Islamic Monotheism) inscribed on them, and invoking with all of
their hearts for help from Allah 8%. They were not only seasoned
and skilled fighters; they had strong Faith as well, and it was this
latter quality that they needed more than anything else if they
wished to win the war. Allah 38 answered their supplications,
granting them victory, and raising through their efforts His Word.
Also through their efforts, Allah 8 protected His religion, until,
after the passing of but a few short months, every last individual
in the Arabian Peninsula submitted to Islamic rule!

Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ did not waste time by sending individualized
letters to the various leaders of rebel tribes; instead, he 4s wrote
one letter, which he sent to all of the Arabs who inhabited the
Arabian Peninsula. In it, he invited Arabs to return to Islam
and to apply all of its teachings. And he warned the apostates
that, if they continued upon their present course, they would
suffer painful consequences both in this life and in the
Hereafter. In the wording of his letter, Abu Bakr 4 was firm,
unrelenting, and uncompromising. He was not addressing
people who had been non-Muslims their entire lives, but
instead a people who had tasted Faith, but who had then
preferred misguidance to guidance. Harshness was called for in
dealing with such people, and harshness is what Abu Bakr ‏عه‎
‎delivered to them - both in terms of the contents of his letter
and the brute force of his armies.

IN At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/51).

386 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

3) The Text of the Letter that Abu Bakr ‏أ‎ Sent to the Apostates,

and the Instructions He « Sent to the Commanders of His Arn

nies

Abu Bakr ‏هه‎ knew that preparing a strong army for the
upcoming conflict with the apostates was an important step
towards victory; nonetheless, he 4 did not discount the value, if
not of diplomacy, then at least of giving the enemy a chance to
repent and to recant their views. As the leader of the Muslim
nation, and hoping to aver the spilling of blood, Abu Bakr «& felt
that it was his duty to at least give the apostates a chance to return
to Islam. Even if he could not convince all of them to repent,
perhaps he could convince a good number of them. And so Abu
Bakr 2 wrote a letter and ordered for it to be distributed all over
Arabia, both to those who were Muslims, and to those who were
content to remain apostates. He # ordered his messengers to
travel to all of the tribes of the peninsula and to read his letter at
any gathering they could find; furthermore, he 2 ordered those
who heard his letter to convey it to others. In short, the intended
audience of his letter was every single inhabitant of the Arabian
Peninsula. The following is the text of his letter:

“Tn the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
(This is) from Abu Bakr, the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah
‏ريه‎ to all whom this letter may reach. It is a letter that is intended
equally for leaders and for the general population of people, for
those who have remained steadfast upon Islam as well as for
those who have turned back from it (and returned to disbelief).
Peace be upon those who follow true guidance, and who, after
having been guided, have not returned to misguidance and
blindness. For indeed, I say to you that all praise is for Allah and

that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah alone, and He
has no partner; and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave
and Messenger. We believe in that with which he came, and we
consider to be a disbeliever anyone who refuses (to believe in that
which Prophet Muhammad #2 came with), and we (vow to)
struggle against him. To proceed: Verily, Allah #& has sent

An All-Out Assault Agamst the Apostates 387

Muhammad #¢ with the truth that came from Him, and he has
sent him to his created beings as a bearer of glad tidings and as a
warner; as one who imvites unto Allah by His leave, and as one
who is like a lamp that gives off shiming light. His purpose of
being sent was: “That he may give warning to him who is living (a
healthy minded believer), and that the Word (the charge (of guilt))
may be justified against the disbelievers (the dead, for they reject
the warnings with which the Prophet #¢ came).’ (a reference to the
Qur'an — 36: 70) So with the truth, Allah guided those who
answered the Prophet’s warning. And with Allah’s permission,
the Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎ struck (and attacked) those who turned
away from his warning (and message) — which continued until
people came to Islam in obedience and through force. Then Allah
caused His Messenger #% to die. The Prophet #2 had spent his life
obeying the commands of Allah, being sincere to his nation, and
fulfilling all of his duties (as a slave and Messenger of Allah). And
in the Book He revealed, Allah made the fact that His Messenger
# would die clear to both him and the people of Islam. He % said:
ine AG ES ay
“Verily, you (O Muhammad #£) will die and verily, they (too)
will die.” (Qur’an 39: 30)

And He 88 said:
(OAT MGs ath ab 3 Ake ‏َمَا‎

“And We granted not to any human being immortality before you
(O Muhammad #2), then if you die, would they live forever?”
(Qur'an 21: 34)

And He #2 said to the believers:
x A fe ey aire ee 4a on 2 we ove
dis 3 SE Gl GON ‏من مله‎ GE ‏رسول قد‎ Vl al 5%

37 7 ae oe ‏مر‎ Ed 72 “a © he woe a ‏ا د‎

CU

‎a =” o‏ ملي مس

‎{ a ‏ني‎ 3 . “ ve 8 ‏ا 5 من‎ wie
‏عقبية فلن نضس الله شام‎ 4 (he ‏أل ملم ؤفن  شلب‎ ile oaks i

388 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4

“Muhammad (8€) 1s no more than a Messenger, and indeed
(many) Messengers have passed away before him. If he dtes or 5
killed, will you then turn back on your heels (as disbelievers)?
And he who turns back on his heels, not the least harm will he do
to Allah, and Allah will gtve reward to those who are grateful.”
(Qur'an 3: 144)

So whosoever used only to worship Muhammad, Muhammad
has indeed died. And whosoever used to worship Allah alone —
and He has no partner — then Allah is Ever-Watchful over him.
Allah is the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all
that exists. Neither slumber nor sleep overtake Him.... I advise
you to fear Allah, and to work in order to achieve your allotted
share and portion (of rewards) from Allah. Adhere to that which
your Prophet #2 came with, be guided with his guidance, and
hold on tightly to the religion of Allah. For indeed anyone that is
not guided by Allah is misguided. And everyone that Allah
protects and keeps healthy (with faith) is. tested (in this life). If a
person is not helped by Allah, then he is truly forsaken (in this
life). Ifa person is guided by Allah, he is upon true guidance; and
if Allah misguides a person, then that person is truly misguided.

Allah # said:
3 a Pe a7 7 ‏ل‎ eA ae a
ae Oy ‏لم‎ 54 ols JL ‏ومن‎ ol 2508 ak ‏طت‎

“He whom Allah guides, is rightly guided; but he whom He
sends astray, — for him you will find no Wali (guiding friend) to
lead him (to the right Path).”’ (Qur'an 18: 17)

As for this life, Allah will not accept from the latter any good
deed that he may perform.... And as for the Hereafter, Allah will
accept from him neither obligatory nor voluntary acts of worship.
I have indeed been informed about how some of you have turned
back on their religion, after having believed im Islam and applied
its teachings. They have done so because they were deceived in
their idea about Allah (not understanding that He is the All-
Powerful, the Almighty), because they were ignorant about Him

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 389

(about Him being the Lord and Creator of all that exists), and
because they answered the call of the Devil (Shaitaan). Allah 3%

said:

Af ‏.د‎ vod ‏ع2‎

35 كلما ميك أسجذواً لدم سَجَدوأ ِل ‎Sul‏ كان من الجن ‎Gada‏
‏4 من

3

عير

aN we

“
pot % SAS wh An S ae oer “f oe

ACIS ‏رسفو‎ 9 foxrase 3 a ‏عن‎
‎4S ‏للطَدلِمِينَ‎
‎“And (remember) when We said fo the angels: “Prostrate to
Adam.” So they prostrated except Iblis (Satan). He was one of the
jinns ; he disobeyed the Command of his Lord. Will you then take
him (Iblis) and his offspring as protectors and helpers rather than

Me while they are enemies to you? What an evil is the exchange
for the Zalimun (polytheists, and wrong-doers, etc.).” (Qur'an.

“ايوم يريس

18: 50(
And Allah ‏هه‎ said:
“te * “eS a 1G 7 ea S Ba tar be 4,
eel ‏من‎ pS ‏حريه‎ Lek Cy ie web ‏عدو‎ SF Qh Ye
j

Gs

“Surely, Shaitan (Satan) is an enemy to you, so take (treat) him
as an enemy. He only invites his Hizb (followers) that they may
become the dwellers of the blazing Fire.”’ (Qur’an 35: 6)

Verily, [have sent to you so-and-so, who comes to you with an
army of men from the Muhaajtroon, the Ansaar, and those who
follow them in goodness. I have ordered him not to fight any
person or kill any person until he first invites him unto Allah.
Whoever answers his invitation, believes (in Islam), ceases his
rebellious activities, and performs good deeds, then that will be
accepted from (i.e., we will not fight against him), and the one I
sent will help him (practice his religion). As for the one who
refuses to answer his invitation, I have ordered the one I sent to
fight him for that reason, and to leave no such person or such
persons alive if they are captured. Furthermore, ] have ordered

390 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

the one I sent to burn such people with fire, and to kill each and
every one of them; and to take their women and children as
slaves. The only thing that will now be accepted from people is
Islam. If someone follows it, then that is better for him. And if
someone abandons it, then he will not be able to harm Allah in the
least. Verily, I have ordered my messenger to read my letter in all
of your gatherings. And a necessary requirement will be the
Aaddhaan (it seems that he #2 was referring to the call to prayer;
and Allah knows best). So if the Muslims make the call to prayer
and they (i.e., those who returned to Islam) too make the call to
prayer, then let my men refrain from harming them. But if they do
not make the call to prayer, then let my men attack them. And
even if they do make the call to prayer, then ask them what they
must rightfully give )1 ‏رع‎ in terms of Zakaat, obedience to the
Khaleefah, ‏.زع‎ And if they refuse to give (what they must
rightfully give), then attack them. But if they accept their duty to
give what they must rightfully give, then my men should accept
that from them, furthermore, they shall be accorded all of the
rights that they deserve ‏رع.1)‎ that are rightfully accorded to every
Muslim citizen).

Abu Bakr’s letter, though it is replete with information and
profound meanings, focuses on two key issues:

1) The reasons why the apostates were being asked to return to
islam.

2) The punishment that would be meted out to the apostates if
they did not return to Islam.

The more specific, detailed points that Abu Bakr made in his
letter are as follows:
@ The letter was intended for every single inhabitant of the
Arabian Peninsula. It was intended as an invitation to Islam;
theretore, Abu Bakr « wanted everyone to read it.

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/69, 70, 71).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 391

@ Allah 4 sent Muhammad 2 with the truth. Those that believe
in him are believers, and those that don’t are disbelievers.
Furthermore, it is the duty of the former to struggle against
and fight the latter.

@ Muhammad ‏يِل‎ is a human being, and, as with all other
human beings, Allah # decreed for him to die. And unlike
Christians, who worship Jesus 38, a Muslim does not worship
Muhammad #2, but instead worships Allah, the Ever-Living
Who never dies. The point that Abu Bakr « was making here
was that, because the Prophet 2%, like all of his followers,
worshipped Allah alone, the Prophet's death was not in any
way an excuse for people to turn away from Islam and
apostatize.4!

@ To turn away from Islam, especially after first having
embraced it, is pure ignorance and, more than anything
else, an act of obedience to the Devil (Shattaan). Apostates
take their avowed enemy as a friend, and thus harm
themselves beyond anything else imaginable. This is
because, by apostatizing, they are voluntarily leading
themselves towards the Hellfire.

@ It was the best of Muslims — the Muhaajiroon, the Ansaar, and
those who followed them in goodness — who rose to the
occasion and defended Islam against its enemies.

© If a person apostatizes but then returns to Islam,
acknowledges his previous errors, refrains from fighting
Muslims, and performs the obligatory deeds that are
required of him as a Muslim — then he is like any other
member of Muslim society; he enjoys the rights and bears the
duties of every other citizen.

@ lf a person apostatizes and then, after being warned, still
refuses to return to the ranks of Muslims, he is an enemy of the
Muslim state and must be fought against until the death. His

‎Taareekh Ad-Da‘wah Mlal-Islam (pg. 290).‏ لذا

302 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeq 2

Muslim foes may kill him or burn him, and they may take his
women and children as slaves.

@ While hurting himself, an apostate does not harm Allah & in
the least. For wherever the apostate goes, and no matter where
he hides, he still remains under the kingdom and dominion of
Allah #.

© The apostates could have saved themselves from an attack by
allowing the Muslims to make the call for prayer in their midst
and by applying the laws of Islam. Their only alternative was
to fight against the Muslims. Abu Bakr 4 did not want his
commanders to judge the inward sincerity of apostates. If an
apostate openly proclaimed his Islam and agreed to fulfill his
rights as a citizen of the Muslim state, the Muslim army had to
accept his declarations from him, even if he inwardly
remained an apostate.

Here is the text of the letter that Abu Bakr « sent to the
commanders of his armies:

“This is an order from Abu Bakr, the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah, to so-and-so, who was sent among others
to fight against those who have turned away from Islam. Abu
Bakr orders him to fear Allah as much as he is able to, in all of his
affairs, both in private and in public. And he orders him to work
hard to fulfill Allah’s command, and to fight against those who
have turned their backs to Him, abandoning Islarn and opting
instead to follow the false promises of the Devil (Shattaan), even
after a final proof has been established against them. Abu Bakr
furthermore orders him to invite them (the apostates) to Islam. If
they answer his call, he should refrain from fighting against them.
If they do not answer his call, he should fight them until they
agree to acknowledge the truth before him. Then, he should
inform them of their duties and their rights; he should then take
from them what they must rightfully give, and he must give to
them that which is rightfully theirs. He should not grant them a
respite or delay, and he should not prevent Muslims from fighting

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 393

against their enemies. If anyone (ie., if any of the apostates)
answers Allah’s command and openly proclaims his belief in
Islam, then that should be accepted from him, and he should be
helped and supported in all matters that are good and noble. The
only thing that will be accepted from someone who disbelieves in
Allah is for him to openly proclaim his belief in what has come
from Allah. If he answers the call to embrace Islam, no one may
harm him, and Allah will be the One Who will hold him
accountable.... If one does not answer the call to Allah, he must be
fought against and killed, wherever he is.... If Allah grants victory
to him (.e., to the Muslim commander whom I have sent), then he
should kill them all with weapons and fire. Then he should
distribute the booty that Allah 3% blessed him and his men with,
with the exception of one-fifth (of the total amount of booty), for
he should sent that amount back to us. He (as the commander of
the Muslim army) should prevent his men from being hasty and
from being the cause of corruption. And he should not admit into
the company of his men strangers until he finds out who they
truly are, for they might be spies. ‘This is a measure he must take
in order to protect his men from being harmed by enemy spies.
And let him be just and gentle with the Muslims who are under
his command, both during the course of their travels and when
they stop somewhere to make camp. Furthermore, he should, ina
concerned manner, ask about the health and welfare of his men....
And finally, let him be a good companion to his Muslim brothers,
and gentle in his speech when he addresses them.”

In his letter to his commanders, Abu Bakr 2» sent clear
instructions on how they were to wage war against the apostates;
he & left no room for interpretation, thus imparting to his
commanders a clear and simple blueprint. First, they were to
invite each apostate army to Islam, and they were not to attack
until that first initial step was taken. If a group of apostates
decided not to fight, but instead to embrace Islam once again, Abu
Bakr’s commanders were to refrain from fighting against them;

(‘I Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/71, 72).

304 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

furthermore, they were to do whatever they could to help re-
assimilate them into the Muslim nation.

If the apostates were to embrace Islam after the beginning of
fighting, Muslim commanders were to go from fighting to making
peace and teaching the members of the opposing army about the
fundamentals of Islam and about their duties and rights as
Muslim citizens who lived under the jurisdiction of the Islamic
state.

Abu Bakr # stressed something that was equally important in
his letter: If the apostates refused to return to Islam even after
continual warnings and the beginning of an armed conflict, the
Muslim army was to continue fighting until the death. This differs
completely from a war that Muslims wage against polytheists, for
polytheists, even if they are losing a battle, may be granted a truce
if doing so is in the best interests of the Muslims. But no truce was
to be made with the apostates, who had only two choices: return
to Islam, or die in battle. That being the case, Abu Bakr # warned
his commanders not to call back their armies once victory was
achieved, for ‘victory’ against the apostates meant either one of
two things: convincing them to return to Islam, which would lead
to peace and to a complete cessation of war; or killing all male,
adult apostates and enslaving their women and children.

Every Muslim commander followed Abu Bakr’s instructions to
the letter; that is to say that none of them hastened to do battle
before inviting their enemies to the truth; after all, the overall goal
of the Muslim armies was to bring apostate and rebel forces back
to Islam.

Abu Bakr 2 proved to be a tremendously effective leader, a
skill he had gradually learned over a span of a number of years
under the tutelage of the Prophet #§. The success of a commander
corresponds to how successful he was when he was merely a
soldier and a follower. As for Abu Bakr #, he was, for many
years, the ideal Muslim soldier. Sincere to his leader, the
Messenger of Allah #8; obedient to his leader’s commands;
skilled in the art of fighting; and brave beyond the call of duty (for

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 395

he had never once fled from battle) — Abu Bakr 2 was the
quintessential Muslim soldier. What is more, he 2s was a brilliant
military strategist.

The following is a summary of the main points of Abu Bakr’s
letter to his commanders:

@ The commander should fear Allah # and act based on the
knowledge that Allah & is always watching him. Abu Bakr #&
knew that At-Taqwa )1 ‏رع‎ fearing Allah 8) is always the key to
success in any endeavor, a military battle being no exception.

Allah #8 said:

© إن ‎ail‏ مَعْ | ‎Spall‏ 2( 05 وَأَلْذ ‎oy‏ هم هم مسو 4

“Truly, Allah is with those who fear Him (keep their duty unto
Him) and those who are Muhsinun (good-doers).” (Qur'an 16:

128)

@ Sincerity, hard work, and determination — these are the
qualities of people who receive help and aid from Allah 86
Allah # said:

‎ides call‏ لتيب ‎bee‏ 5 أله ل الحيني»
‎“As for those who strive hard in Us (Our Cause), We will surely‏
‎guide them to Our Paths (1.e., Allah’s religion — Islamic‏
‎Monotheism). And verily, Allah is with the Muhsinun (good‏
‎doers).”” (Qur'an 29: 69)‏

‎@ Each commander may accept only one of two things from
opposing apostate forces: Islam or war.

‎@ Once victory is achieved, the commanders may distribute the
spoils of war among those who have a rightful share;
however, one-fifth of the spoils must be returned to the
Muslim treasury.

‎@ Each commander should not be hasty or rash, for battles are
lost when armies attack without due planning and
deliberation.

396 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeq ‏واد‎

©» Acommander should not allow strangers to intermingle with
his soldiers, for those strangers might be spies that are
working for the enemy.

@ Each commander should be gentle and caring with his men,
making sure that their morale is strong and that they are all
physically healthy. In general, he should be a good and pleasant
companion to the soldiers who are under his command.

Having organized his overall group of armed forces into
eleven smaller armies, Abu Bakr’s general plan in waging war
against the apostates can be summarized in the following three
points:

1) In his planning, Abu Bakr # made sure that his eleven armies
worked in cooperation with one another. No individual army
worked autonomously, but instead was in harmony with the
other armies under the overall control of the Muslim
leadership im Al-Madeenah. At times, even, two of the
Muslim armies joined forces, only to separate again once
their joint mission was accomplished. The number of armies
that attacked a given city depended on the strength of the
enemy and their fortifications; it was Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ in Al-
Madeenah, who assessed the situation in any given battle front
and decided how many of his eleven armies were needed in
order to achieve victory. In short, through a process of constant
communication with his commanders, Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ the
Khaleefah of the Muslim nation, knew exactly where each
army was, what its duties were, and what it would be required
to do on the following day.

2) Because of the presence of certain apostate tribes not too far
away from Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr # did not send away
every able adult male to fight, but instead kept some fighters
with him, so as to protect and defend the Prophet's city in the
event of an enemy attack. Furthermore, Abu Bakr # kept a
number of eminent Companions # by his side, so that he could
benefit from their wise counsel — counsel that was urgently

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 397

needed considering the tough decisions he 4 had to make ona
daily basis. It must be remembered, after all, that a single
mistake could have potentially changed the tide of the war and
caused considerable Muslim casualties and fatalities. That is
why Abu Bakr # placed so much importance not just on
planning, but on consulting those who were well-Versed in the
art of war.

3) Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ understood all too well that, while
straightforwardness and truthfulness are laudable qualities
in times of peace, deception and stratagem are necessary when
dealing with the enemy during wartime. 5o, for instance, often
during the course of the war against the apostates, Abu Bakr &
outwardly gave the enemy the impression that he wanted to
attack one city, when he really intended to attack another.
Therefore, each decision he made was geared towards
achieving victory and minimizing the number of losses
among his soldiers.

Second: Eradicating the Threats that were

Posed by? Al-As

1) Eradicating the Threat of Al-Aswad Al-‘Ansee, and the

Emergence of Apostasy in Yemen for a Second Time

Al-Aswad’s actual name was ‘Abhalah ibn Ka’ab, and he was
given the nickname, “The Possessor of the Veil,” a name that he
was aptly given because he would always have his head and face
covered in a veil.”! He became better-known, however, by the
title, ALAswad Al’Ansee. The word “Al-Aswad”’ means “The
Black One,” and he was given that name because his skin-color
was dark.

‎AlL-Kaamil Fit-Taareekh (2/17).‏ لذأ

398 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4

Al-Aswad had certain qualities that helped him gain popular-
ity and a strong following; for one thing, his physique was huge,
and, in spite of his overall wickedness, he was genuinely strong
and brave. He used sorcery and magic to seduce his people, for,
through his magic, his followers saw amazing things that they
perceived as being miracles. But perhaps Al-Aswad’s most
valuable asset — as is the case with most charlatans of his kind
— was the eloquence of his speech; his words, it has been
reported, would captivate the hearts of his audience. Being
financially prosperous, Al-Aswad also wielded money as means
of influencing people to become his followers.'!

No sooner did the Messenger of Allah 2 fall ill upon his return
from his “Farewell Pilorimage,” than Al-Aswad Al-‘Ansee
claimed to be a Prophet. He even gave himself the title “The
Merciful One of Yemen,” just as Musailamah “The Liar’ called
himself, “The Merciful One of Al-Yamaamah.”"! While he
claimed to be a Prophet himself, Al-“Ansee did not deny or reject
the Prophethood of Muhammad 2.

Al-Aswad claimed that two angels came to him with
revelation, and that their names were Saheeq and Shageeq (or
Shareeq).") Prior to openly claiming to be a Prophet, he adhered
to secrecy, speaking about his claimed prophethood to only those
who would likely follow him. So much did he adhere to secrecy
that, when he did announce his claimed prophethood, it came as a
surprise to most people, even to the members of his tribe.

The first people to follow him were the members of his clan,
the children of ‘Ans (or the Banu ‘Ans clan).! He then wrote a
letter to the leaders of the Madhhij tribe, asking them to join forces
with him. Most of the common masses of the Madhhij tribe

iN ‘Asr Al-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Al-Umaree (pg. 364).
‏ذأ‎ Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam, by Ash-Shujaa’ (pe. 256).

Dl Al-Bad Wat-Taareekh (5/154).

I! AL-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 257).

‎Futooh ALBuldaan, by Al-Balaadhiree (1/125).‏ أكا

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 399

agreed to follow him, as did some of Madhhiy’s leaders,
particularly those who were ambitious and greedy for power.
In his letter, Al-Aswad was smart enough to play on the strong
pre-Islamic tribal loyalties that were still strongly felt among the
people of tribes that had only recently embraced Islam; that is
why he first approached the people of Madhhy, for his clan, the
Banu “Ans clan, was a subdivision of the overall Madhhij tribe.

The Banu Haarith ibn Ka’ab tribe from Najraan wrote a
message to Al-Aswad, expressing their desire for him to pay a
visit to them, so that they could learn more about his plans and
ambitions. At the time, the people of Banu Haarith were officially
Muslims, but they had not entered into the fold of Islam out of a
desire to embrace the truth, but instead because of political and
military concerns. And so when Al-Aswad went to them, they
followed him, seeing in him an opportunity to achieve victory
against the Muslims. Their enthusiasm to join forces with Al-
Aswad was not the last of his victories, for the people of Zubaid,
Awad, and Masliyah also agreed to follow him.

Al-Aswad decided to reside in Najraan for a while, choosing it
as a place of residence because it served as a good temporary safe
haven for him. In his estimation, he became truly powerful when
he gained the allegiance of “Amr ibn Ma’dee-Karib Az-Zubaidee
and Qais ibn Makshooh Al-Muraadee. And powerful he did
become, for he was able, through the help of his followers, to
expel Farwah ibn Misseek from Muraad, and “Amr ibn Hazm
from Najraan. Convinced that he had the ability to conquer
Sanaa, he set out towards that city with either six or seven-
hundred horsemen, most of whom were from the Banu Haarith
and the ‘Ans clans.

San’aa, at the time, was governed by Shahr ibn Baadhaan Al-
Faarisee, who, along with his father, embraced Islam after having
been loyal his entire life to the Emperor of the Persian Empire.
Both Shahr and his father were genuinely attracted to Islam, and

"l Taareekh Ar-Riddah, by Al-Kilaa’ee (pgs. 151, 152).

400 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

they both became good, practicing Muslims. When Al-Aswad
and his followers attacked San’aa, Shahr gathered as many
fighters as he could; and noble as their efforts were, they could not
withstand the force of Al-Aswad’s army. So, only twenty-five
days after he first openly claimed to be a Prophet, Al-Aswad
managed to conquer a well-fortified city, which certainly sent a
signal to neighboring Muslims that he was a problem that needed
to be dealt with sooner rather than later.

When Al-Aswad won control over a city or village, he wanted
each of its inhabitants to renounce his Islam. Those that didn’t,
suffered mockery, persecution, torture, and even death at the
hands of Al-Aswad and his men. In fact, he was completely
merciless in his treatment of Muslims; for instance, he took a
Muslim named An-No’maan (may Allah be pleased with him),
grabbed a saw (or sword, or some other sharp object), and
proceeded to cut off his limbs, one at a time, until he died 4
Because of this and other similar incidents, the Muslims who lived
in the lands that were under his control kept their Islam a secret
from him.!!

As for the Muslims who lived nearby but outside of the areas
Al-Aswad controlled, they worked hard to mobilize their forces in
preparation for an all-out war against Al-Aswad. Firwah ibn
Misseek Al-Muraadee, who had been forced to leave Muraad
because of Al-Aswad, sought refuge in a place called Al-
Ahsiyyah, which was situated somewhere in Yemen. A number
of Muslims joined him there, as they prepared to attack Al-
Aswad’s forces. And Firwah wrote a letter to the Prophet #&,
informing him about Al-Aswad and the danger he posed to the
region; thus Firwah became the first person to inform the Prophet
#@ about Al-Aswad’s activities.

Elsewhere in the region, Muslims were either fleeing from Al-
Aswad’s tyranny or gathering men in order to prepare for war.

(Ton ‏ع همود‎ At-Tabagaat (5/535).
‏لا‎ Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam, by Ash-Shujaa’ (pg. 258).

402 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

The Prophet 8¢ also asked certain Muslims to move closer to
the conflict, so that they could lend support to their Muslims
brothers. So, for instance, he #€ sent Wabr ibn Yahknas to Fairooz
Ad-Dailamee, Khushaimas Ad-Dailamee, and Daadhiwai AI-
Asthakhree; he #2 sent Jareer Al-Bajalee to Dhil-Kilaa’ and Dhee
Dhaleem of the Hamdaan tribe; he #% wrote important
instructions to the inhabitants of Najraan;!"! and he ‏يه‎ sent ‏علخ‎
‎Haarith ibn “Abdullah Al-Juhanee to Yemen. It was shortly after
Al-Haarith 4 arrived in Yemen that he learned about the death of
the Messenger of Allah #¢.4! Historical sources do not specify
exactly to whom Al-Haarith ‏ذه‎ was sent; however, it seerns likely
that he was sent to Mu’aadh ibn Jabal ‏ره‎ for the Prophet #¢ had
sent a letter to Mu’aadh ‏ره‎ ordering him to send a group of men
to fight against Al-Aswad. The Messenger of Allah #2 also wrote a
letter to Abu Moosa Al-Ash’aree 4s and At-Taahir ibn Abu
Haalah -; in it, he @ ordered them to deal with Al-Aswad either
by fighting against him or assassinating him.!*!

The Prophet's letters to the people who lived in or near to Yemen
bore blessed fruits, for each of the recipients of those letters remained
steadfast upon Islam both during and after the Prophet's death; none
of them wavered in his faith, and, it goes without saying, none of
them apostatized. In response to the Prophet's instructions, the
leaders of Humair and Hamdaan wrote to the inhabitants of Yemen,
promising to lend them as much support and help as they needed;
and, around the same time, the people of Najraan gathered in one
place, in order to prepare for any aggression on the part of Al-Aswad
AlAnsee and his followers. Whereas the situation looked so
promising at first for Al-Aswad — after all, he had conquered As-
San’aa — he now watched as every Muslim in the region was
preparing to go to war with him; and it was a war that he, in spite of
his many followers, could certainly not win.”!

‎Tuareek At-Tabaree (4/52).‏ لذأ

‎el Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 271).
) Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/51).

‎AL-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 272).‏ أخا

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 403

Muslim military strength in Yemen was not focused in one
city, but was instead dispersed over the span of a number of
locales. Nonetheless, in each locale, Muslims had organized
themselves into fighting battalions; moreover, the leaders of each
locale — the likes of Mu’aadh ibn Jabal ‏رق‎ the leaders of
Hamdaan, and the leaders of Humair — communicated with one
another frequently.

The Muslims were, in short, poised to achieve all-out victory
against Al-Aswad Al-Ansee and his followers. And yet they did
not launch an attack against them; instead, they decided to first
make an assassination attempt on Al-Aswad. The Prophet #8 had
given them a choice between fighting a war against Al-Aswad
and assassinating him. They chose the latter option because they
knew that it was a charismatic leader, and not a shared set of
beliefs, that held together the men of Al-Aswad’s army. With Al-
Aswad out of the picture, his followers would become confused,
divided, and terrified ~ terrified because Al-Aswad’s false dream
of victory would vanish, only to be replaced by the harsh reality
of defeat, and perhaps even death, at the hands of Muslim
soldiers.

Thus all of the Muslim leaders in the region agreed not to
attack until they first tried to assassinate Al-Aswad Al-‘Ansee.
They were encouraged in this regard by an offer of help from two
people who had access to Al-Aswad: The first was Qais ibn
Makshooh Al-Muraadee, who was the commander of Al
Aswad’s army. Qais, who initially was on very good terms with
Al-Aswad, got into a disagreement with him and thus feared for
his life. Therefore, fearing for his own life, he had every reason to
want Al-Aswad to die." The second source of inside help came
from a sincere and helpless woman named Aazaad Al|-Faar-
isiyyah ®. Aazaad was Al-Aswad’s wife, not by choice, but as a
result of Al-Aswad’s crude actions. Aazaad was the wife of Shahr
ibn Baadhaan, and the cousin of Fairooz Al-Faarisee. Al-Aswad,

١ AL-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pes. 272, 273).

404 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

otherwise known as “The Liar of Yemen,” killed Aazaad’s
husband, took her captive, and forced her to marry him. In order
to safeguard her religion, she decided to do whatever was
necessary to bring about the demise of Al-Aswad. And thus she
came up with a brilliant plan, one that enabled a group of Muslim
men. to gain direct access to Al-Aswad’s bedroom, where they
ended up killing him, while he was on his bed.

After the Muslim attackers killed Al-Aswad, they cut off his
head and threw it outside, where it landed amidst a gathered
group of Al-Aswad’s followers. Upon seeing their leader’s head,
they became shocked and terrified — just as the Muslim planners
suspected would happen — and they dispersed from Al-Aswad’s
stronghold, fleeing for their lives.4

The Prophet #& was still alive, and on the very same night, he #¢
received news from the heavens, informing him about Al-Aswad’s
demise. The next morning he #& said to his Companions ‏نه‎

a & 5 ‏ليم‎ Boy oA Ze “ 3 oe - 4
‏مُبَارَكُ مِنْ أَهْل بَيْتِ مَبَارَكِينَ)‎ Jeg IB ‏الْعَتّسِحٌ البارحةء.‎ ss
“Al-’Ansee was killed last night. The one who killed him was a
blessed man from a blessed household.”

Someone asked, “And who is he?” The Prophet ‏عل‎ said,
. . ny
“Rairooz. Fairooz has achieved success.”

For more details, the reader would do well to refer to Suwar
Min Jihaad As-Sahaabah. Its author, Dr. Salaah Al-Khaalidee,
wrote extensively on both the planning and execution that was
involved in the assassination of Al-Aswad Al’ Ansee.”!

For a short while that followed Al-Aswad’s death, San’aa was
governed, not by a single man, but by three men who shared the
duties of leadership: Faitrooz, Daadhiway, and Qais ibn Mak-
shooh. Then, when Mu’aadh ibn Jabal ‏ذه‎ arrived in San‘aa, they

11 Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 273).
21 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/55).
8! Suwar Min Jihaad As-Sahaabah, by Al-Khaalidee (pegs. 211-228).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 405

agreed to appoint him as the sole governor of the city. Mu’aadh’s
governorship, and his stay in As-San’aa for that matter, lasted for
a very brief amount of time. For having led the people of As-
San‘aa in prayer for only three days, Mu’aadh 4 received news
that shocked him, saddened him, and frightened him all at once:
The Messenger of Allah 2% had just died.) It was for Mu’aadh ‏كد‎
‎— as it was and always will remain for all Muslims — a calamity
above ail other calamities.

_ News of the detailed account of Al-Aswad’s assassination
reached Al-Madeenah not only after the Prophet's death, but also
after Usaamah’s army departed from Al-Madeenah for its
important mission. Therefore, Al-Aswad’s death was the first
news of victory — and there were many to follow — that Abu
Bakr # received during his caliphate.”

One of the first official duties of Abu Bakr 4 was writing a
letter to As-San’aa, informing its people that he was appointing
Fatrooz Ad-Dailamee as their new governor. Abu Bakr 4 did not
choose Qais because he had been one of the closest followers of
Al-Aswad, having decided to join his cause either because he
sincerely believed in him, because he wanted to show loyalty to
the Madhy tribe, or because he was hungry for power ~ or a
strange combination of the three. Qais changed sides only after he
became afraid that, because of a disagreement, Al-Aswad was
going to have him killed. Abu Bakr’s rule was not to appoint
governors who had apostatized,'"! a decision he probably based
on the principle, a Muslim does not fall into the same hole twice (Or
the more modern-day expression, ‘Fool me once...’). None-
theless , not wanting to alienate Qais, Abu Bakr 4 appointed him,
Daadhiway, and Jashees as Fairooz’s helpers and ministers.

Qais, not being appointed governor, felt slighted. His resent-
ment was at once bitter and extreme, and, adding madness into
the mix, he vowed to destroy Fairooz and the other Abnaa

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/56).‏ لنا
‎Lytooh Al-Buldaan, by Al-Balaadhiree (1/127).‏ 1
‎GI ALYemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 275).‏

406 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

leaders. The term ‘Abnaa’ referred to a group of Persians who
moved to Arabia and married Arab women. Fatrooz was from the
“Abnaa,’ for his father was a governor of Yemen when it was a
part of the Persian Empire. Perhaps most of Qais’s anger was
directed at Fairooz, and he probably brought up the question of
the ‘Abnaa’ because he wanted to reignite ancient loyalties among
the Arabs of the region. The question Qais wanted the Arabs of
the region to ask was, “Why is it that a foreigner of Persian
descent rules over us?” Well, the answer to that question was
clear, although it made no difference to Qais’s mental state of
being. Fairooz 4 was a sincere Muslim, and the Prophet #% bore
witness to his faith when he said that Fairooz had achieved
success and that both he and his family were blessed.
Furthermore, he ruled over San‘aa not because he wrested control
over the city from its people, but because the Khaleefah of the
Muslim nation, Abu Bakr #, appointed him to the post.

But Qais wanted to paint a completely different picture: That
of Fairooz 4 and the other Abnaa ruling over Arabs by force. Qais
made his first move when he either killed Daadhiway himself or
had him killed by one of his henchmen. Perceiving that he was
next on Qais’s list, Fairooz fled San’aa and sought refuge with his
uncles in Khaulaan.!!!

Qais, meanwhile, appealed to nearby tribal leaders, asking
them to help him expel the “Abnaa’ from the region. The leaders
he appealed to decided to take a neutral stance and to allow Qais
and the ‘Abnaa’ to fight it out themselves. Although this was a
serious blow to his ambitions for power, Qais did not give up so
easily, but instead sought the help of the former followers of Al-
Aswad Al-‘Ansee. Having been their former commander, he
knew thern well.

Indeed there were a great many of them, not located in the
same place, but scattered throughout the cities of San’aa and
Najraan, while some of them sought refuge in Lahj. He asked

Ol Teareekh At-Tabaree (4/140).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 407

them to gather around him, so that, together, they could expel the
‘Abnaa’ from Yemen. Al-Aswad’s former followers answered
Qais’s call to arms, and they came out from their hiding places; so
many were they — or so many they appeared to be — that the
inhabitants of As-San’aa thought that they were surrounded by
them. From that moment onwards, Qais tried to gather all of the
“Abnaa’ in one place, so that he could rid himself of them once and
for all.

Meanwhile, safe and sound in Khaulaan, Fairooz # wrote a
letter to Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ informing him about what Qais had done.
Abu Bakr 4 wrote to the same leaders that the Messenger of Allah
#@ wrote to when he needed help to defeat Al-Aswad Al-Ansee.
Abu Bakr’s message to them was simple and clear: he ‏ف‎
‎commanded them to help the ‘Abnaa’ against those who opposed
them, and he ordered them to obey Fairooz ‏رن‎ saying, “And
strive alongside him, for I have appointed him as your leader.”"!

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ had no choice but to seek out the help of local
leaders in Yemen, for, as serious as the situation was there, it paled
in comparison to the strong outbreak of apostasy in Yamaamah,
Bahrain, ‘Ammaan, and Tameem. Furthermore, Abu Bakr’s army
was undermanned, since a large contingent of his overall armed
forces was fighting a war in Ash-Sham under the leadership of
Usaamah ibn Zaid 2s. And he needed to wait until they returned
before he launched a serious major offensive against apostate
forces throughout the peninsula. Therefore, he 2s had to hope that
the leaders to whom he wrote letters would answer his call, just as
they had done when the Prophet #@ requested their help in the
Muslims’ war against Al-Aswad Al-’Ansee.

Among the people Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ wrote to were At-Taahir ibn
Abu Haalah @ and Masrooq Al-’Akkee #, both of whom lived
somewhere between ‘Ak and the Al-‘Asha’riyyoon. Fairooz 2
made some direct pleas for help, seeking out the help of, among
others, the Banu “Ageel ibn Rabee’ah ibn “Aamir ibn Sa’sa‘ah tribe.

"! Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/141).

408 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

Pleas for help were answered, and various Muslim groups
began immediately the difficult task of protecting the “Abnaa.’
Groups of Muslim fighters came from various directions, and
they gathered together and headed as a single army towards
San’aa. They clashed with Qais’s army, and Qais, realizing the
imminence of defeat, was forced to flee from San’aa. Al-Aswad’s
former followers fled in various directions and went into hiding
once again; some of them tried to keep a low profile in Najraan
and San’aa, while others among them fled to Lahj. As for Qais, he
sought refuge with “Amr ibn Ma’dee-Karib. And thus, for a
second occasion in a short span of time, San’aa returned to a state
of peace, safety, and order.

One key strategy that Abu Bakr 2; employed in his war against
the apostates was attacking the enemy not from without but from
within. So, instead of sending armies from Al-Madeenah to attack
apostate strongholds, he ordered local Muslims to form militias
and to wage war against neighboring apostates. We have thus far
seen how Abu Bakr employed this strategy in his efforts to
eradicate the threat that was posed by Al-Aswad Al-Ansee.

Similarly, the apostate uprising that took place in Tihaamah
was quelled not by an invading Muslim army from Al-Madeenah,
but by a local militia that was made up of the Muslim inhabitants
of Tihaamah. Two of the main leaders of that militia were
Masroog Al-‘Akkee a, who led a group of fighters from the ‘Akk
tribe, and At-Taahir ion Abee Haalah 2, whom the Prophet 2
had been appointed as governor of a district of Tihaamah — the
district of ‘Akk and Al-‘Ash’ariyyeen.") When peace was
restored in Tihaamah, Abu Bakr # ordered “Ukkaashah ibn
Thaur to go there and oVersee the process of completely restoring
peace and order and Islamic law.

As for the apostates of the Bajeelah tribe, Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ ordered
Jareer ibn “Abdullah ‏كك‎ — a member of the Bajeelah tribe who had
embraced Islam in the year 10 H — to gather those members of his

( AL-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 277).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 409

tribe who remained steadfast upon Islam, and to fight against the
ones who had apostatized. Once Jareer ‏ف‎ successfully completed
his mission, he was, as per Abu Bakr’s instructions, to take his
men to Khus’um territory and to fight the apostates of the
Khus’um tribe. Jareer 4 carried out all of Abu Bakr’s orders; few
people resisted Jareer’s militia, and those that did were either
killed or given chase."

Some of the members of the Banu Al-Haarith ibn Ka’ab tribe in
Najraan were followers of Al-Aswad AlAnsee; and upon the
death of the Prophet #¢, they continued to waver in their Faith. As
a result, Masroog Al-’Akkee went to them, intending to do battle
with them; but first, he # invited them to Islam. A battle was
averted when they decided to fully embrace Islam; nonetheless,
Masroog 4, not wanting to take any chances, decided to reside
among them until peace and order became fully restored.

Abu Bakr’s strategy of using local militias worked very well,
and it gave him the time he needed until Usaamah’s army
returned from Ash-Sham, for it was only then that he sent out his
armies for an all-out war against the apostates of the penmsula.

The Army of ‘Ikrimah 4

Having helped bring about an end to apostasy in “Ammaan,
‘Ikrimah 2, as per Abu Bakr’s instructions, headed towards
Mahrah. He had under his command 700 horsemen, not to
merition those members of “Ammaan’s tribes that volunteered to
join his army. Upon entering Mahrah, ‘Ikrimah ‏كه‎ found that it
was inhabited by two opposing groups of apostates. The two
groups were against each other because each of its leaders wanted
complete supremacy over the region. One of the two groups was
headed by a man named Shikhreet, and his group was smaller
than the other in terms of the number of its members and its
military capabilities. The other group, which was the more
powerful of the two, was headed by a man named Al-Musbih.

‎Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam Fee Ayyaam Fitnatur-Riddah (pe. 42).‏ ذا

410 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s

‘Ikrimah 2 invited both groups to embrace Islam, but it was
only the followers of Shikreet that answered his call. Al-Musbih
and his followers refused, believing that they could not be
defeated because of their size, numbers, and military capabilities.
They were, of course, deluded in their assessment of the situation.
‘Ikrimah ‏رق‎ his men, and the members of the Shikreet group
attacked Al-Musbih and his followers. The Muslim forces
achieved a quick and decisive victory, and Al-Musbih, as well
as a number of his followers, was killed. ‘Tkrimah ‏كه‎ then stayed in
the area for a while, organizing their political affairs and
oVerseeing the restoration of civil order. All of the people of the
area embraced Islam, after which peace and safety were
completely restored.

‘Ikrimah’s stay in Mahra, although fruitful, was short-lived.
For he soon received a letter from Abu Bakr 2s, who ordered him
to join forces with Al-Muhaajir ion Abee Umayyah # and his
men, who were coming towards him from San‘aa. Along with Al-
Muhaajir’s army, ‘Tkrimah « and his men were to head towards
Kindah in Hadramoot.

‘Ikrimah left Mahrah and made camp in Abeen, where he
awaited the arrival of Muhaajir. From the time he arrived in Abeen
until the time of Muhaajir’s arrival, ‘Ikrimah # made wonderful
use of his time. He 2 united the people of An-Nakha’ and Hameer
and made sure they remained steadfast upon Islam.""! He also
strove to seek out and eradicate the remnants of Al-Aswad ‏علخ‎
‎‘Ansee’s followers. Two primary targets of ‘Ikrimah were ‘Amr ibn
Ma’ dee Karib and Qais ibn Makshoch; the latter, having fled from
As-San’aa following his failed attempt to kill Fairooz 2, was
constantly moving from place to place, looking for a base of
operations. As for “Amr ibn Ma’dee-Karib, he had joined other
former followers of Al-Aswad at or nearby a place called Lahj.

When ‘Ikrimah 4 arrived in the region, Oais and ‘Amr united
their forces and prepared to launch a joint attack against ‘Ikrimah

UT Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 281).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 411

and his men, But before they could do that, they got into a bitter
argument with one another, and they parted company on bad
terms. Then, when Muhaajir 2s arrived with his men, “Amr, being
in awe of the combined strength of ‘Ikrimah and Muhaajir’s army,
went quickly towards them and surrendered himself; shortly
thereafter, Qais did the same. Muhaajir had the two men tied up
and then sent them to Abu Bakr «. Abu Bakr 4 censured them,
after which both men apologized for their mistakes, repented,
openly declared their re-entry into the fold of Islam, and vowed to
remain loyal and obedient to Abu Bakr’s Muslim government.
Having witnessed a change in the two men, Abu Bakr # set them
free.

Based on what we have hitherto discussed, it is clear that
‘Tkrimah # and his men played an important role in defeating the
apostates of Lahj. Many of the apostates did not even fight, but
instead, fearing the approach of ‘Ikrimah’s army, laid down their
arms and surrendered.

Al-Muhaajir ibn Abee Umayyah’s Army Moves in on the
Apostates of Hadramoot and Kindah

Of the eleven armies that Abu Bakr # sent out to fight against
the apostates, the last of them to leave Al-Madeenah was the army
of Al-Muhaajir ibn Abu Umayyah, which was accompanied by a
special unit of men from the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar. As Al-
Muhaajir marched towards enemy territory, various people he
passed by joined his army. 50, for instance, when he passed
through Makkah, Khaalid ibn Asad, brother of Makkah’s
governor “Attaab ibn Asad, joined his army. And when he passed
through At-Taaif, “Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Abul-‘Aas 4 and a
number of other men volunteered to join his army. Others who
joined him along the way were Jareer ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Bajalee,
“Ukkaashah ibn Thaur, Firwah ibn Misseek Al-Muraadee, and
Masroog Al’ Akkee.!™!

‎Taareekh Ar-Riddah, by Al-Kilaa’ee (pgs. 154-158).‏ لذأ

412 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4%

Upon his arrival in Najraan, Muhaajir broke his army up into
two units: The first was to search out and destroy the former
followers of Al-Aswad AlL’Ansee, who, in order to avoid death,
did not stay in groups but instead dispersed throughout the
region that separated Najraan from San’aa. Muhaajir himself was
in charge of this unit. The mission of the second unit, which was
headed by Al-Muhaajir’s brother, ‘Abdullah, was to rid the area
of Tihaamah of any remaining apostate fighters.'!

After having spent some time in San’aa, Muhaajir wrote a
letter to Abu Bakr ‏رذ‎ informing him about his activities and about
the present situation in the region; he also indicated in the letter
that he was awaiting further instructions from Abu Bakr ‏كف‎
‎Around the same time, Mu’aadh ibn Jabal #4 and — with the
exception of Ziyaad ibn Lubaid 4 — the rest of the governors of
Yemen that had been appointed to their posts by the Messenger of
Allah #8, wrote to Abu Bakr 4s, asking permission to return to Al-
Madeenah. Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ replied to their letters, tellmg them that
he was leaving the choice of returning to them; furthermore, he
instructed them that, if they did decide to return, it was their duty
to appoint appropriate persons to govern their districts during
their absence. Every single one of those governors opted to return
to Al-Madeenah.'#!

As for Muhaajir, he received orders to head towards ‘Tkrimah
#, to form a single army that consisted of both his men and
“Tkrimah’s men, and to travel towards Kindah in Hadramoot, in
order to provide reinforcements for Ziyaad ibn Lubaid, who
desperately needed help.

Ziyaad ibn Lubaid was, to be sure, in very serious trouble. It
was the Messenger of Allah # who first appointed Ziyaad 2 to be
his govemor of Kindah in Hadramoot; and when the Messenger
of Allah #¢ died, Abu Bakr # reappointed Ziyaad to his post.
Ziyaad # was at once a resolute and stern leader. His sternness

( Tabagaat Fugahaa Al-Yemen (pg. 36).
P] Tabugaat Fugahaa Al-Yemen (pg. 36)

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 413

was a major reason why Haarithah ibn Suraaqah rebelled agamst
him — which is not to say that Haarithah was in any way justified
in his actions.

The conflict began — as conflicts usually do — with a simple
matter. As he was distributing charity among his people, Ziyaad
# mistakenly gave the wrong camel to a young resident of
Kindah. When the young man demanded that Ziyaad + replace
the camel with another, Ziyaad # outright refused his request.
The young man went to one of the local leaders, a man named
Haarithah ibn Suraaqah, and asked for his help. Haarithah went

the camel, but Ziyaad remained unwavering in his refusal to
comply with that request.

Haarithah became furious, and a tense stand-off took place
between the followers of Ziyaad and the followers of Haarithah.
A battle ensued, and Haarithah and his men were defeated; and
all four of the former kings of Kindah were killed during the
conflict. ‏ظ‎

Ziyaad ‏ذه‎ imprisoned a number of Haarithah’s followers and
personally took part in the process of transporting them to Al-
Madeenah. On the way, however, the prisoners came across Al-
Ash’ ath ibn Qais, to whom they pleaded for help. Mainly out of a
sense of tribal loyalty, Al-Ash’ath responded to their pleas for
help, mobilizing the support of as many followers as possible, and
then laying siege to Ziyaad ‏ذه‎ and his fellow Muslims."!

Ziyaad # managed to send news of his predicament to
Muhaajir and ‘Tkrimah. The two of them, based on Abu Bakr’s
orders, were already on their way, but now, given Ziyaad’s
predicament, their mission took on an air of great urgency.
Muhaajir 2 realized that, if they continued to march at their
present pace, they would probably not be able to arrive on time in
order to save Ziyaad 2 and his men. And so, leaving ‘Ikrimah #
in charge of the infantry, Muhaajir # set out quickly with a

Ul Al-Kaamil Fit-Taareekh (2/49), and Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam (pg. 66).

414 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~-Siddeeq ‏طه‎

contingent that was made up primarily of many horsemen. Since
time was of the essence, Muhaajir 4 acted wisely in his decision to
leave behind part of his army. He # reached the area of the
conflict just in time, and was able to break through the siege and
save Ziyaad # and his men. As for Al-Ash’ath and his followers
from the Kindah tribe, they fled the scene and sought sanctuary in
one of their fortresses; it was called the An-Nujair fortress. Now,
with the Muslims pursuing them, the besiegers became the
besieged. There were only four roads that led out of the An-Nujair
fortress; Ziyaad and his men guarded one of them; Muhaajir and
his men watched over the second road; and the third remained
unguarded until ‘Txrimah ‏ذه‎ and his men arrived at the scene and
took the responsibility of guarding it. Thus Al-Ash’ath and his
followers were surrounded from all directions.

One of the first things Muhaajir did was to invite the people
of Kindah to Islam. Various sub-tribes of the Kindah tribe were
scattered all over the plains and mountains of the region. And
Muhaajir 2 ordered his men to fight against these of them that
refused to embrace Islam. Once that mission was completed, the
only remaining members of the Kindah tribe that had not been
dealt with were those that were besieged in the An-Nujair
fortress. They had no hope of escape, for the combined forces of
Ziyaad and Muhaajir’s armies consisted of more than five-
thousand fighters, many among whom were men from the Ansaar
and the Muhaajiroon. The siege was calculated to slowly force the
besieged members of the Kindah tribe to come out of their own
volition. That is what happened, for, cut off from all help from the
outside world, people inside of the fortress began to complain to
their leaders of hunger. Rather than starve, they would rather go
out and die by the sword.

The leaders inside of the fortress agreed that Al-Ash’ath
should go out and negotiate terms of surrender on behalf of the
besieged. Little did they know, however, that they picked the
wrong man for the job, for he went out ~ as has been established
in many narrations — asking for a guarantee of safety not for

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 415

everyone in the fortress, but only for a small group of men.
Perhaps he did not insist that everybody’s lives be spared, or
perhaps he didn’t ask that their lives be spared in the first place.
Whatever the case, the Muslims stipulated that, in order for the
seven-to-ten men Al-Ash’ath mentioned to be saved, the gates of
the An-Nujair fortress had to be opened. As a result of the deal,
seven-hindred people inside of the fortress, because of their
apostasy and their actions against Ziyaad # and his men, were
killed.) Their treachery and the price they paid for their
treachery has been likened by historians to what happened years
earlier to the members of the Jewish Banu Quraidhah tribe.

As a result of the aforementioned events, apostasy was
completely eradicated from Kindah territory. ‘Ikrimah ibn Abu
Jahl & headed back towards Al-Madeenah, taking with him the
prisoners of the conflict and one-fifth of the spoils. One of the
prisoners was Al-Ash’ath ibn Qais, who became detested by his
people, especially by their women. They were especially angry
because, when he was negotiating terms with the Muslims, the
first person whose security he guaranteed was himself. So much
did the women of his tribe despise him that they gave him the
name, “The Traitor.”

When. Al-Ash’ath was brought before Abu Bakr 4s, the latter
asked, “What do you suppose I will do with you, given your
knowledge of the things you have done?” Al-Ash’ath replied,
“You will show me mercy; you will break off my shackles; and
you will marry me to your sister, for indeed, I have returned (.e.,
repented) and embraced Islam.” The reason he asked for Abu
Bakr’s sister’s hand in marriage is that, months or years earlier, he
proposed to her — and her name was Umm Farwah bint Abu
Quhaafah — during his visit to the Messenger of Allah #2. The
Messenger of Allah #% married her off to him, but stipulated that
he could take her with him only after he would return to AJ-

‎Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 286) and Taareekh Ar-Riddah (168).‏ لذأ
‎Cl Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-Uttoom (pg. 107).‏

416 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 4

Madeenah for a second time. Soon thereafter, the Messenger of
Allah ‏كله‎ died, and Al-Ash’ath committed the crimes that are
discussed above.

After Al-Ash’ath made his plea, Abu Bakr # said, “I do as you
say ‏,.ع.1)‎ lwill show mercy to you, etc.),” after which he # married
him off to Umm Farwah ‏رك‎ perhaps being motivated primarily by
the Prophet’s promise to conclude the marriage agreement upon
Al-Ash’ath’s return to Al-Madeenah. And in spite of the crimes he
came with, he did return, and, after all, he did repent and return
to Islam. Afterwards, Al-Ash’ath remained in Al-Madeenah until
the Muslim conquest of Iraq.

According to one account, when Al-Ash’ath feared that he
would not be pardoned, he said to Abu Bakr #, “Think well of
me, free me, pardon me, accept my Islam, and do with me as you
have done to others who are like me (Le., pardon me because [
have returned to Islam). And return to me my wife. You will find
that [1 arn the best among my people in terms of my support for
Allah’s religion.” And it is reported that Abu Bakr #& replied, “Go
forth (in safety), and let me hear good things about you from now
onwards.” Abu Bakr & spared the lives of the rest of the prisoners
as well (because they repented and returned to Islam), and he
distributed among the people the one-fifth of the spoils that
‘Ikrimah ‏كه‎ had brought back with him."!

Morals and Lessons

The Women of Yemen

In the apostate wars that took place in Yemen, one can see two
contrasting examples of women. The first is that of the pure and
chaste woman, who fought against the evil forces of apostasy, and
who helped Muslims defeat a grave threat to the security of the
region. I am referring here to none other than Aazaad Al-

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/155).‏ لا
‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/155).‏ 01

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 417

Faarisiyyah ‏رك‎ wife of Shahr ibn Baadhaan #, and cousin of
Fairooz Al-Faarisee 4. She took a difficult sttuation, and turned it
into an opportunity to serve Islam. A prisoner who was forced
into marrying Al-Aswad Al-Ansee, Aazaad ‏ذا‎ led a group of elite
Muslim fighters directly into Al-Aswad’s bedroom, so that they
could kill him and thus bring an end to his evil apostate
movement.

Aazaad % was motivated by one overriding desire — the desire
to serve her religion. Sadly, however, some historians have, either
out of ignorance or evil intentions, ascribed nationalistic motives to
Aazaad ‏.وك‎ Consider what Dr. Muhammad Husain Haikal wrote
about her: “The Persian wife of Al-Aswad knew that he believed
that Persians were plotting against him. The native blood of her
people flowed with anger through her veins, and she began to
despise the vile soothsayer (Le., Al-Aswad), the murderer of the
young Persian man whom she loved from the bottom of her heart.
With her feminine talents, she was able to at once hide her feelings
from Al-Aswad and show generosity to the degree that he began to
trust her implicitly.”"!

These sound more like the words of a steamy novel than they
do of an unbiased historian. Dr. Haikal made it sound as if
Aazaad ‏ذا‎ was struggling for the honor of her Persian ancestry
against the corrupt Arab who kidnapped her and forced her to
marry him. In reality, however, Aazaad’s hatred for Al-Aswad
had nothing to do with a conflict between Persians and Arabs;
instead, she was a part of a conflict that was taking place between
Muslims and apostates. And, had Dr. Haikal taken the trouble to
study authentic historical accounts, he would have read about
how Aazaad %& in her own words described her hatred of Al-
Aswad: “ Allah has not created a person who is more despised by
me than Al-Aswad. In his life, he fulfills none of Allah's rights,

while he lets no evil deed pass by without perpetrating it”)

IN As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr (pg. 79).
‏لما‎ Al-Kaamil Fit-Taareekh (2/310).

2416 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

Thus it is clear that she was motivated purely by her strong love
for her religion and her beliefs. And she hated Al-Aswad because
he was a liar who wanted to destroy Islam, and partly because he
killed her husband, but not because he was an Arab. The likes of
Dr. Haikal would do well to laud her for her love of Islam, and not
besmirch her character without having the least bit of proof. May
Allah # be pleased with her and with the other women of her era
who sacrificed all that they had for the cause of Islam.

The second example, which is completely opposite to that of
Aazaad %, is not of a single woman, but of a group of women. [
am referring to a group of young, evil women in Yemen, some of
whom were Jewish and others who were simply apostates. They,
upon learning of the death of the Messenger of Allah #2, spent a
number of nights celebrating his death by singing songs and
committing lewd acts with any and all willing partners. Like the
women who showed up for the Battle of Uhud, singing songs to
encourage their fighters, these women sang lewd songs,
encouraging the apostates of the region to wage war against
Islam. These were women who loved to perform evil and lewd
acts during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance, but who then, with
the advent of Islam, were forced to live purer lives. Throughout
that period, they felt as if they were in prison. So no sooner did
they hear about the death of the Prophet 2g than they openly
displayed their hatred of both him and Islam. Rubbing henna
onto their hands, playing musical instruments, singing songs,
engaging in lewd acts — these were the ways in which celebrated
the Prophet's death.

There were somewhere between 23 and 29 such women, and
they began an apostate movement that appealed to the decadent
upper classes of Arab society and to local Jews ~ both of which
groups stood to gain if Islam was eradicated from the region. The
most famous of those women was Hurr bint Yaamin, who was
renowned for her lewd acts, to the degree that an Arabic
expression was coined because of her: “More of a whore than
Hurr.”’

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 479

News of the said women reached Abu Bakr ‏ها‎ who wrote to
his governor, Muhaajir ion Abu Umayyah 4, instructing him to
take a stern approach to dealing with them. The text of the letter
was as follows: “When this letter of mine reaches you, go to those
women...and cut off their hands. If someone tries to defend them
against you, explain the situation to him, so as to establish your
proof against him, and let him know how severe of a sin he is
perpetrating (by preventing you from punishing those women). If
he moves out of your way, then accept that from him (Le., do not
harm him); but if he refuses, then fight him...” The punishment
that Abu Bakr 2 described is one that, in Islam, is usually meted
out to highway robbers and others of their ik who threaten the
safety and security of Muslim citizens. The said women also
threatened the safety and security of Muslim society, albeit ina
different, but nonetheless more dangerous manner.

Having read Abu Bakr’s letter, Muhaajir gathered all
available horsemen and foot soldiers and traveled towards the
evil women. A group of men from the Kindah and Hadramoot
tribes stood between Muhaajir’s men and the guilty women.
Muhaajir ‏كه‎ obeying Abu Bakr’s instructions, explained the
matter to them as plainly as he could. Most of them moved out of
Muhaajir’s way, but some insisted on fighting. These men were
quickly defeated, and the guilty women’s hands were cut off; as a
result, some of them died, while the rest went to Kufa. They
received a just reward for their evil crimes, and a good example
was made of them.

Abu Bakr # learned of one particular woman who, upon
learning of the Prophet's death, sang songs in which she satirized
and insulted the Prophet #¢. Abu Bakr 4 was informed that his
governor of Hadramoot, Muhaajir ibn Abu Umayyah, had
already punished the woman by cutting off her hands and
pulling out her front teeth. Abu Bakr 4 wrote back, saying that,
even though it was too late, he though that Muhaajir & was too
lenient in his punishment. Abu Bakr 4 told Muhaajir # that, if she
had been a Muslim, she was guilty of apostasy and was deserving

420 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

of a more severe punishment; and if she had been a non-Muslim
who lived under Muslim rule based on the rules of an agreement,
she was guilty not just of the crime of Al-Hiraabah (threatening the
security of Muslim citizens), but of treason as well (since she had
agreed to be loyal to the Muslim nation). So based on both
scenarios, she deserved not the punishment that Muhaajir - had
meted out to her, but death by execution.!!

Moving Speeches

Swords, spears, arrows — these were not the only weapons
Muslims had at their disposal in their war against the apostates.
Some Muslims, risking their lives in the process, used their
tongues, delivering moving speeches in the hope that at least
some apostates would come back to their senses, repent, and
reenter the fold of Islam. Speaking out as a Muslim, especially in
areas wherein apostasy was rampant, was an act that carried with
it a great degree of danger. Nonetheless, the Muslims who spoke
out realized that apostasy itself was more dangerous than death,
for apostatizing without repenting came with the price of eternity
in the Hellfire. And the Muslims who spoke out did not want for
their neighbors, their fellow citizens, or their relatives to enter the
Hellfire.

One prominent example in this regard was Miraan ibn Dhee
‘Umair Al-Hamdaanee, who was one of the kings of Yemen.
When the people of his region apostatized, and the foolish ones
among them openly made blasphemous statements, Miraan ‏مك‎
‎stood up before them and delivered this speech: “O people of
Hamdaan, verily, you never fought the Messenger of Allah #¢
and he never fought against you; and yet, through him, you
gained prosperity and safety. And you were saved from being
cursed (Le., had you disobeyed him).... Some people embraced
Islam before you did, while you embraced Islam before a group of
others did. If you adhere to your religion, you will catch up to
those who preceded you (in terms of rewards from Allah 8). But

"'l Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/157).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 421

if you lose your Islam, those that embraced it after you will catch
up to you (with their weapons, and they will defeat you in
battle).” The audience appreciated Miraan’s truthful words and
answered his call, returning to the fold of Islam.

‘Abdullah ibn Maalik Al-Arhabee 4 also spoke out against his
people. ‘Abdullah ‏كا‎ was a Companion of the Messenger of Allah
#@; he had made Hijrah (performed migration), and he was known
for his many noble qualities. When the people of Hamdaan
gathered around him, he 4 said, “O people of Hamdaan, verily
you did not worship Muhammad; instead, you worshipped the
Lord of Muhammad, Who is Ever-Living, and Who never dies.
And even though you obeyed the Messenger of Allah #8, you
ultimately did so out of obedience to Allah 88. Know that he has
saved you from the Hellfire...” And he 4 went on to deliver a long
and moving speech.

Also, Shurahbeel ibn As-Simt and his son stood up before the
Banu Mu’aawiyah clan of the Kindah tribe; this took place after
the Prophet's death, when every member of the clan refused to
continue to pay Zakaat. Shurahbeel and his son said, “It is an
impropriety for a noble and free people to change their views; in
fact, noble people stick to an unclear point of view, and refuse to
change to a view that is clearer, fearing that, in doing so, shame
will descend upon them. Then what about a people who change
from something that is good, noble, beautiful, and true (Le,
Islam), and opt to replace it with something that is false and vile
(.e., disbelief).”

The Miracles of Righteous Men

In English, there is an all-purpose word for a marvelous event
that is not ascribable to human agency, and therefore is attributed
to the intervention of the One True God, Allah 4#: and that word is
“miracle.” In Arabic, however, the word ‘miracle’ does not
suffice, for it does not distinguish between two distinct kinds of
‘miraculous events.’ The two main words to describe miraculous
events in Arabic are “Mo’jizah,” and “Karaamah.” The former

422 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

refers to miraculous events that occurred at the hands of Prophets
xs If a miracle occurred at the hand of a Prophet ‏ركه‎ and by the
permission of Allah #&, it was a sign that attested to the
truthfulness of that Prophet . But if a miraculous event
occurs for the benefit of a righteous person who is not a Prophet
x, no sign of Prophethood is intended; rather, the ‘miraculous’
event is simply something with which Allah # blesses that
righteous servant — in order to strengthen his Faith, reward him
for his righteousness, etc. This kind of miraculous event is called a
“Karaamah,” so as to distinguish it from a ““Mo’jizah,” which
differs from a “ Karaamah’’ in that it is specific to Prophets #& and
serves a sign that points to the truthfulness of their Prophethood.

Definitions aside, a Karaamah occurred during the time of Al-
Aswad Al-“Ansee. When Al-Aswad gained a considerable
following in Yemen, he sent for Abu Muslim Al-Khaulaanee 4s.
When Abu Muslim came before him, Al-Aswad haughtily asked,
“Do you bear witness that I am indeed the Messenger of Allah?”
Abu Muslim said, “I do not hear.” Al-Aswad said, “Do you bear
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah?” Abu
Muslim said, “Yes.” Al-Aswad repeatedly asked the two
questions, and Abu Muslim repeatedly gave the same answers
for both. So furious did Al-Aswad become that he ordered for
Abu Muslim to be thrown into a large fire. |

Some people gathered to witness the event, but to everyone's
utmost shock, the fire did not harm or burn Abu Muslim AlI-
Khaulaanee in the least. Someone, trying to save Al-Aswad from
embarrassment, said to him, “Send this man away from here, for
if he stays, he will cause your followers to turn against you.” Al-
Aswad, fearing Abu Muslim and being certain, based on his prior
experience, that he would not be able to kill him, ordered him to
leave Yemen.

Abu Muslim # headed towards Al-Madeenah, and by the time
he arrived there, the Messenger of Allah #% had already died, and
Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎ had been appointed as his Khaleefah. Having tied his
riding animal to the door of the Masjid, Abu Muslim went inside

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 423

and began to pray. ‘Umar # noticed the stranger, went to him,
and said, “Where are you from?” Abu Muslim 2 humbly replied,
“Tam. from the inhabitants of Yemen.” “Umar 2, who had heard
about Abu Muslim’s story but had never met Abu Muslim before,
asked, “What happened to the man that “The Liar’ tried to burn
with fire?” Abu Muslim replied, “That was “Abdullah ibn
Thaub,” using a Kunyah so as to avoid ‘Umar's praise. But “Umar
‏رك‎ always perceptive and a good judge of men, said, “ask you by
Allah, are you him?” Abu Muslim ‏أ‎ could not lie, so he simply
answered in the affirmative. ‘Umar # hugged him and cried, and
he then seated Abu Muslim # between himself and Abu Bakr ‏.نك‎
‎And then “Umar & said, “ All praise is for Allah, Who has delayed
my death enough for Him to allow me to see arnong the nation of
Muhammad a person for whom Allah # caused the same thing to
occur as He 4 caused to occur for Ibraaheem, the Khaleel of Allah
4s: (for Ibraaheem 3% too was thrown into a large fire, and Allah
# protected him as well from being harmed or burned by it; and
instead, the fire was coolness for him).”"

Abu Muslim followed Allah’s divinely revealed laws; he loved
for the sake of Allah; he hated for the sake of Allah; and he placed
his complete trust in Allah %& regarding all of the affairs of his life
— as a reward for these qualities, Allah & caused a wonderful
muracle to occur to him, the very same miracle He # caused to
occur to Ibraaheem #8. Allah 8 said:

Ysa a Cal yal ‏فى‎ Bal 2 @ ps ley Tur

# ‏العطيم‎ Sal ‏ذللك هو‎ al ‏لكاي‎ ul
“No doubt! Verily, the Auliya of Allah (i.e., those who believe in
the Oneness of Allah and fear Allah much (abstain from all kinds
of sins and evil deeds which He has forbidden), and love Allah
much (perform all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained)),

3 ‏مم ضير‎ od ‏ل دب‎ fe hor Se west “4
os GY) Os ‏ولا هم‎ tg ae ‏لَه لا‎ thd 3 | Yie

LN Asadul-Ghaabah (6/304) (6247), and AL-stee‘aab (4/1758).

424 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مد‎

no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve, - Those who
believed (in the Oneness of Allah — Islamic Monotheism), and
used to fear Allah much (by abstaining from evil deeds and sins
and by doing righteous deeds). For them are glad tidings, in the
life of the present world (1.e., righteous dream seen by the person
himself or shown to others), and in the Hereafter. No change can
there be in the Words of Allah, this is indeed the supreme
success .”” (Qur’an 10: 62-64)

Abu Bakr’s Mercy and Leniency

One might get the impression that the main theme of the
Apostate Wars was bloody warfare in which many people lost
their lives. The real story of the war, however, was one of peace
and reconciliation — one that involved winning over the minds
and hearts of the enemy once the war ended. Yes, apostasy had
broken out in the Arabian Peninsula — given the calamity of the
Prophet's death, some jolt, after all, was to be expected in the
region — but once it was eradicated, Abu Bakr # needed to make
sure that it never reared its ugly head again.

Abu Bakr # was truly wise and farsighted in all of his policies.
So when brute strength was called for, brute strength is what he
brought to the table — hence the quickness and decisiveness with
which he took on the apostate outbreak. At the same time,
however, if kindness, mercy, and leniency were called for, he ‏نك‎
‎was not slow in displaying those qualities, qualities he needed to
rely on in order to unite the various tribes of the Arabian
Peninsula under the banner of Islam. This was a monumental task
in that, in as much as the Arabs were one people in terms of their
shared language and culture, they were a divided people as a
result of being broken up into many different tribes and sub-
tribes, and of being, for many generations, inculcated with the
idea that tribal loyalties mattered more than anything else.

In order to soften the hearts of the various tribal leaders of the
region, Abu Bakr #& forgave them once they returned to Islam.
Yes, he 4 had used force with them, for domg so was a necessary

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 425

part of achieving two main goals: Showing the apostates the
strength, power, and determination of the Muslim nation, and
sending a clear message to the apostates that they were in the
wrong, that they should not have rebelled against the Muslim
government, and that it was in their best interests to return to the
fold of Islam. Nonetheless, once various tribal leaders returned to
Islam, Abu Bakr «# replaced force with forgiveness,
ageressiveness with leniency, and sternness with mercy.

With a desire to placate tribal leaders, Abu Bakr # allowed
them to wield an influence over the members of their tribes; after
all, using them and their ability to influence others benefited both
Islam and Muslims."! Many of the tribal leaders who had
apostatized possessed important qualities that, if used in the
proper direction, had the potential of greatly benefiting the
Muslim nation. Consider, for instance, the examples of “Amr ibn
Ma’dee-Karib and Qais ibn Yaghooth Al-Muraadee. These two
men were not only influential and popular among the people of
their tribes; but also, they were very brave and steadfast during
battle. Not wanting to lose them, Abu Bakr .& tried to convince
them that it was not in their best interests to waver between Islam
and disbelief, and that the only way in which they could achieve
success in this life and the Hereafter was to be sincere to their
religion. When ‘Amr was brought as a prisoner to Al-Madeenah,
Abu Bakr a said to him, “Does it not make you miserable to think
how, every day, you (if you oppose us) will suffer either defeat or
imprisonment? But were you to support and help this religion,
Allah would raise you (to a level of honor and high-ranking).”
‘Amr replied, “Yes, that is certainly true. I will indeed do as you
say, and I will never again return to apostasy.” Abu Bakr then
freed “Amr, which was a wise decision and one that benefited
Islam. greatly. ‘Amr (may Allah have mercy on him), true to his
word, never again apostatized; what is more, he became a good
and practicing Muslim, a Muslim who helped promote the cause
of his religion and who showed great bravery in the battles that

‎Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Mlal-Islam (pg. 256).‏ أذا

426 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

Muslims fought in during the conquests that took place in
ensuing years.

Qais ibn Yaghooth also greatly regretted the role he played
during the apostate wars, and so Abu Bakr « both forgave and
freed him. Both in the case of ‘Amr and Qais, the lenience that was
shown to them impacted not only them, but also, because of the
influence they wielded, the members of their tribes, who saw in
Abu Bakr’s merciful and forgiving attitude a good reason to be
sincere to their religion. And so Abu Bakr 4, having conquered
the apostates on the battlefield, managed to conquer their hearts
and minds and to show them the greatness of Islam. They, mn turn,
were at the forefront of wars in which they conquered new lands
and, through the lessons they learned from Abu Bakr #, were
able to win over the hearts of the inhabitants of those lands and
bring them into the fold of Islam.

Abu Bakr’s Sends Importan

Abu Bakr # sent ‘Ikrimah ibn Abu Jahl 4 towards Banu
Haneefah territory in order to fight Musalimah and his followers.
Sensing that Musailamah was a force to be contended with, Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ thought it prudent to send reinforcements, and so he ‏ذه‎
‎ordered Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah # to catch up to and join
‘Ikrimah’s army. Having arrived early in Banu Haneefah
territory, ‘Tkrimah # did not wait for Shurahbeel #, but instead
initiated a battle against Musailamah’s army. Abu Bakt’s
assessment of Musailamah’s military capabilities was right on
target, for his army dealt a severe blow to ‘Ikrimah # and his
men, causing many casualties and fatalities.

‘Ikimah ‏من‎ then wrote a letter to Abu Bakr ‏ركف‎ detailing the
events of the battle and the losses he suffered; the tone of his letter
indicated that he # wanted to retreat and wait until
reinforcements arrived before engaging the enemy once more.
But Abu Bakr 2 wrote back to him, ordering him not to retreat:

t Instructions to ‘[krimah 2s

11 Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Ilal-Islam (pe. 256).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 427

“Do not return, for if you do so, the people (of the Muslim army)
wil become weak (in their morale).”” Abu Bakr # also provided
him with the details of ensuing missions, telling him that he was
to join forces with Hudhaitah and ‘Ayafah, and, alongside them,
was to fight against the people of ‘Ummaan and Mahrah. And
then, finally, he was to meet up with Muhaajir ibn Abu Umayyah
in Yernen and Hadramoot.'! That, in short, was the gist of Abu
Bakr’s letter.

lt is mmportant to note here that, in sending out armies to
renegade tribes, Abu Bakr 4 deemed it necessary to send two
armies to fight against Musailamah and his followers. This again
points to Abu Bakr’s military prowess, for it indicates that he ‏وف‎
‎was very well aware of the military capabilities of each renegade
tribe. Furthermore, when ‘Tkrimah ‏ذه‎ indicated that he wanted to
retreat until reinforcements arrived, Abu Bakr 4 warned him not
to retreat. And this too points to the military genius of Abu Bakr
#, for he understood that the morale of his soldiers, whether good
or bad, would greatly impact the outcome of the war. For had
‘Tkrimah 2 and his men went back in a dejected mood and met up
with the army that was headed out to meet the very same enemy,
the members of that army would certainly become filled with
feelings of weakness, despair, and fear — especially after hearing
from ‘Ikrimah’s men about the huge size and tremendous
strength of Musailamah’s army.

Holding His Governors Accountable for Their Actions

When Abu Bakr # appointed a person to govern a region, he
was not sending him off to lead a comfortable and easy life;
instead, he was giving him a very difficult job that entailed a great
deal of responsibility. To be a leader in today’s modern-day world
— as has been the case throughout most of history — means that
one is privileged with a better and more comfortable life than is
enjoyed by any other member of society. Leadership, as under-

‎Al-Kaamil Fit-Taareekh (2/34), and Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/334).‏ لذأ
‎At-Taareckh Al-Islaamee, by Al-Humaidee (9/83).‏ ذا

428 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏وك‎

stood by Abu Bakr #, meant responsibility, hard work, and
sacrifice — qualities he expected from all of his governors, and
more so even from his own self. Thus Abu Bakr .& stayed up most
of the night, so that his people could sleep; worked, so that they
could rest; and sacrificed his own freedom and time, so that they
could enjoy a peaceful and stable existence. That Abu Bakr &
expected the sarne from his governors is clear from various
historical accounts. For instance, when Mu’aadh ibn Jabal
returned from Yemen, and when Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg =
welcomed him home, Abu Bakr 4 said to him, “Now you must
give an account of everything you did (while you served as
governor).”” This was not an unusual welcome, for it was
customary for Abu Bakr # to hold his governors to account as
soon as they returned from their posts in foreign lands. Mu’aadh
& replied, “Will I be held accountable twice: Once by Allah, and
once by you. By Allah, I will never again take on a post for
you!

The State of Yemen after the Apostate Wars

After the conclusion of the Apostate Wars, the people of
Yemen united under the banner of Islam. Furthermore, religion
replaced tribalism as the foundation upon which people felt a
kinship towards one another. The Muslim government encour-
aged this new reality, organizing Yemen into districts based on
geographical borders, and not on tribal-territory borders. Thus
Yemen was divided into three districts: San’aa, Al-Jund, and
Hadramoot.

The role that tribes played in the governance of people was
greatly reduced, if not completely done away with. Leaders were
no longer chosen based on tribal allegiances, but instead upon the
competency and righteousness of proposed candidates. A tribe as
an entity no longer had any role in politics or governance, but it
could still serve as a distinct military unit under the overall
leadership of the Muslim government in Al-Madeenah, One's

[1 “Utyoon Al-Akhbaar (1/125).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 429

status among one’s tribe, tribal loyalties, and wealth — none of
these things mattered any more. Piety, sincerity, and good deeds
— these were the only things that now counted!

All forms of polytheism were eradicated from Yemen, and
everyone in the region realized that Prophethood was a serious
matter and that Muhammad #8 was the seal of all Prophets 83;
therefore, arryone who now claimed to be a prophet was
indubitably a charlatan who should be rejected and scorned. This
was not the only lesson the people of Yemen learned. Through
blood, pain, and many hardships, they came out of the apostate
wars with the understanding that certain things do not mix — that
Faith and greed do not mix, and that Islam and ignorance do not
mix. Beyond what they learned, the people of Yemen wanted to
make up for their past mistakes, and they were givena chance to do
so when ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab #, during his caliphate, gave them
permission to go out and fight in the way of Allah %.

They set out towards foreign lands, taking with them their
sincerity, determination, and desire to please Allah %. And if
former apostates fought bravely to conquer new lands for Islam;
equal or more valiant were those who, from the very beginning,
had never apostatized, but had always remained steadfast upon
Islam. Such men — the likes of Jareer ibn “Abdullah Al-Bajalee 4,
Dhul-Kilaa’ Al-Humairee ‏رون‎ Mas’ood Al--Akkee ‏رن‎ and Jareer
ibn “Abdullah Al-Humairee # — became the leaders of
conquering Muslim armies. And others among them — such as
Hashk “Abdul-Hameed 4s, Sa’eed ibn “Abdullah Al-"Araj 2s, and
Shurahbeel ibn As-Simt Al-Kindee .& — were appointed as judges
both inside and outside of Yemen.

The Muslim armies of Yemen went out, conquering new lands
and, through hard work and determination, building the
foundations of new cities in Iraq and Egypt. As for the inhabitants
of Yemen itself, they trusted greatly in their government — both
the overall government of the Muslim nation in Al-Madeenah,

‎ALYemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 290).‏ لذأ

430 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 4

and the local government that oversaw their day-to-day affairs.
As a result of that trust, peace and stability reigned supreme in
Yemen; and the inhabitants of Yemen became at once productive
and prosperous members of the overall Muslim nation.

Tulathah Al-Asdee

Tulaihah Al-Asdee was the third man who, during the final
stages of the Prophet's lifetime, claimed to be a prophet. His full
name was Tulaihah ibn Khuwailad ibn Naufal ibn Nadlah Al
Asdee. During the “Year of the Delegations” — the year 9 H,
which was the year during which delegations from all over the
peninsula visited the Prophet #& in order to either negotiate terms
of peace or declare their entry into the fold of Islam on behalf of
their peoples — Tulaihah visited the Messenger of Allah in the
company of other members of the Asad tribe. The delegates of his
tribe extended greetings of peace to the Prophet #£ and said to
him, “We have come in order to bear witness that none has the
right to be worshipped but Allah and that you are His slave and
Messenger, though you were not sent to us...” They said these
words not with complete sincerity, but to give the impression that
they were doing the Prophet # a big favor. As a result of their bad
manners, Allah # revealed the Verse:

u
‏و‎ 0 AR

يمون ‎ake‏ له 3 أن ف ل ‎Sly & ES‏ بل لد ‎Se Hs‏

“They regard as favour upon you (O Muhammad 8) th that they
have embraced Islam. Say: “Count not your Islam as a favor
upon me. Nay, but Allah has conferred a favor upon you, that
He has guided you to the Faith, if you indeed are true.”
(Qur'an 49; 17)

It was when he returned to his homeland that Tulaihah not
only apostatized, but also claimed to be a prophet. By claiming to

11 AL-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 291).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 43]

be a Prophet, Tulaihah understood that he would soon be
entering into a military conflict with Muslims, and so he set up a
military command post in Sumairah, which was an area of land
that was a part of Banu Asad territory.

Allah & tested the Faith of the people of Banu Asad through
Tulaihah. One day, they completely ran out of water; the situation
soon became dire, for most of them were overcome by an
unbearable feeling of thirst. Tulaihah spoke a riddle to them, the
answer of which, he claimed, would lead them to water. They
played along, but were shocked and pleasantly surprised to find
that, by following the instructions of his riddle, they came across a
source of water. It was then that the common masses of the Asad
tribe, as well as many Bedouins who lived in the region, fell under
the spell of Tulaihah and willingly became his followers.

Deeming himself to be a legislator of Religious law, Tulaihah
told his people that it was no longer compulsory upon them to
perform prostration during prayer. He claimed that revelation
came down to him from the heavens, and in order to prove that
claim, he composed a number of Verses. Even though the Verses
he recited were trite and nonsensical, people still followed him
out of a sense of tribal loyalty.

Tulaihah became delusional, thinking that he became so
powerful that no one could defeat him. It was perhaps his
arrogance, more than anything else, which led to his quick
demise. Upon hearing of Tulaihah’s claims, the Messenger of
Allah #% sent Diraar ibn Al-Azwar 4 to fight him. Diraar ‏ف‎ and
his men, however, were no match for Tulaihah’s army — for, even
though he had become delusional, Tulaihah did manage to gain a
rather large following, especially after the members of both the
Asad and Ghatfaan tribes joined the ranks of his followers."

The famous encyclopedia Daairatul-Ma’aarif Al-Islaamiyyah
contains this article about Tulaihah: “It is related that he
composed Verses of poetry and that he delivered (moving)

‎Asadul-Ghaabah (3/95).‏ للا

432 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

sermons...on the occasions of battle. And he seems to have been
an example of a truly quintessential tribal, pre-Islamic leader. He
possessed all of the following qualities: He was a soothsayer, a
poet, an eloquent speaker, and a (brave) warrior.”'"! This
excerpt gives one the impression that the author of the article
failed in an attempt to hide his admiration of Tulaihah Al-Asdee.
This is not strange, considering the fact that the authors of the
said encyclopedia have often taken advantage of opportunities to
slander or misrepresent Islam.

When. the Messenger of Allah ‏عله‎ died, Tulaihah was still
commanding a large army, and was still spreading his lies.
Shortly after he became Khaleefah of the Muslim nation, Abu Bakr
# sent out armies to deal with various apostate strongholds -
throughout the Arabian Peninsula; one of the armies he ‏ف‎ sent
was commissioned with the task of dealing with Tulathah and his
followers. That army was headed by Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏ره‎
‎about whom Abu Bakr 4 said, “T heard the Messenger of Allah 2%
say, ‘Khaalid ibn Ai-Waleed is a blessed slave of Allah, and a
blessed brother to his kinsfolk. He is a sword from the swords of
Allah. Allah unsheathed him (and set him loose to fight) against
disbelievers and hypocrites.”7!

When Khaalid « was about to set out with his army from Dhil-
Qissah, Abu Bakr # announced that he would meet him, along
with other army leaders, on one of the borders of Khaibar; Abu
Bakr # made this announcement, hoping that it would reach the
Bedouins of the region and instill fear into their hearts.

Abu Bakr ordered Khaalid to go first to Tulaihah ‏لذ‎
‎Asdee, and then to Banu Tameem. Meanwhile, Tulaihah was
building a formidable army, already having gained the support of
the Banu Asad and Ghatfaan tribes. Shortly thereafter, the Banu
‘Abs and Dhibyaan tribes joined the ranks of his followers. But

4 Daatratul-Ma’aarif Al-Islaamiyyah (pg. 78).

‎Musnad Ahmad (1/173). Commending on the authenticity of this Hadeeth,‏ لما
‎Shaikh Ahmad Shaakir said, “Its chain is authentic.”‏

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 433

still, Tulaihah was not one to rest on his laurels; instead, he sought
out new followers. For instance, he sent a message to the Banu
Jadeelah and Ghauth clans of the Taiy tribe, asking them to join

his cause.

Thus the Taiy tribe — which was the tribe of the famous
Companion “Adee ibn Haatim 2 — was in danger of falling
under the spell of Tulaihah’s false promises; in fact, they
responded positively to his message, with a number of them
leaving Taiy territory in order to join Tulaihah’s army. Things did
not bode well for the people of Taiy, but they were not altogether
beyond hope, for Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎ had, by that time — and even prior
to sending out Khaalid 4 — sent “Adee ibn Haatim # to his
people, hoping that he could convince them not to apostatize.

When “Adee reached his destination, he pleaded with the
people of Taiy to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg as"!
and to retum to the fold of Islam. At first, they were cold and rigid
in. their response to “Adee’s pleas, but slowly they warmed up to
his arguments and softened their stance. It was around then that
Khaalid 4 arrived with his army; one of the Ansaaree men that
were serving under his command was Thaabit ibn Qais ibn
Shammaas «&.

Khaalid # sent out an advance party of two men, Thaabit ibn
Aqram # and ‘Ukkaashah ibn Maihsan ‏.كك‎ They were met on the
way by a man named Hibaal, who was the nephew of Tulaihah.
The two of them killed Hibaal, and news of his death soon
reached Tulathah.

Whatever else he was, Tulaihah was not a coward. He quickly
set out with his brother Salamah in order to exact revenge for his
nephew’s death. And when they came across Thaabit # and
“Ukkaashah 4, they challenged them to a duel. Tulaihah faced
off against “‘Ukkaashah # and managed to kill him. And
Salamah fought against and killed his opponent, Thaabit ibn

'" Tarteeb Wa-Tahdheeb Kitaab Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah, Khilaafah Abu Bakr, by
Dr. Muhammad ibn Saamil As-Salmee (pg. 101).

434 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏فد‎

Agram ‏.نف‎ After a short while, by which time Tulaihah and his
brother were far away from the scene of the duels, Khaalid
and his men came across the corpses of their fallen brethren. It
was truly painful for them to witness the loss of two such noble
Muslims — and may Allah 4 reward them with the highest
stations of Paradise.

Khaalid « continued his march, intending first to attack the
people of Taiy. Either Khaalid 2 knew that many members of the
Taty tribe had apostatized or he suspected it; what is for sure,
however, is that he had to assess the situation of each tribe in the
area, in order to find out who had apostatized and who had
remained steadfast upon Islam; furthermore, Abu Bakr # gave
clear instructions to the effect that he was to go first to the people
of Taiy. Before Khaalid ‏كه‎ reached Taiy, ‘Adee 4 went out to meet
with him. Of the two.men, Khaalid # was in charge, since he was
sent to fight the apostates, while “Adee ‏ده‎ was sent simply to
convince his tribe to remain steadfast upon Islam. And so, while
“Adee ‏ند‎ wanted to save his people from destruction, he had to
speak carefully and wisely with Khaalid a. “Adee 2 said, “Give
me three days. They have asked me to wait. They want to call
back those of their fellow tribesmen that have already gone to
Tulaihah. They say that, once those fellow tribesmen return, they
will openly follow you. This is because they fear that, if they were
to openly follow you now, Tulaihah would kill those among them
that had already reached him. So is not this solution more beloved
to you than for you to (fight them and) hasten them towards the
Hellfire.” “Adee # made a very good point, for if Khaalid &
fought them then and there, they would still be considered
apostates and would therefore be headed towards eternity in the
Hellfire. But if he were to wait a few days, they would openly
return to the fold of Islam, and he would be able to enlist them in
his army.

True to his word, ‘Adee « returned to Khaalid # after three
days, coming not alone, but in the company of five-hundred
fighters, who all joined the ranks of Khaalid’s army. With five-

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 437

Siddeeq ‏وك‎ wrote a congratulatory letter to Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed
‏.نه‎ The text of that letter ran as follows: “May Allah increase you
in the goodness that He has blessed you with. And fear Allah
regarding all of your affairs; for indeed, Allah is with those who
fear Him and those who do good deeds. Be stern now, and do not
become soft: So if you come across any polytheist (from the
apostates) who had killed even a single Muslim, exact revenge
upon. him.”

And so, in keeping with Abu Bakr’s instructions, Khaalid ‏كك‎
‎stayed in the area of Buzaakhah for an entire month. He 4 and his
men pursued enemy fighters, seeking revenge not only on behalf
of those Muslims who had died in the recent battle, but also on
behalf of those Muslims who had lived among the apostates and
had been persecuted, tortured, or killed for their beliefs. In short,
Khaalid 4 was to make an example of the apostates, so that no
one in the region would ever again think of apostatizing, of -
persecuting Muslims who lived in their midst, or, for that matter,
of waging war against Muslim armies. Sufficient warning had
been given to the apostates, but because they had refused to
return to Islam, because they were adamant in their desire to fight
against and kill Muslims, and because they were guilty of heinous
war crimes, those of thern that Khaalid « captured were either
burned to death, crushed with huge stones, or thrown off of the
cliffs of tall mountains. News of their demise spread throughout
the region, and thus terror was instilled into the hearts of other
apostate and renegade tribes.

A Delegation of Men from the Asad and Ghatfaan Tribes Visit
Abu Bakr «

The main followers of Tulaihah were members of the Asad and
Ghatfaan tribes. A group of them visited Abu Bakr « in order to
ask him for a truce. Abu Bakr «& responded by giving them one of
two bitter choices: Either they could continue the conflict with an
all-out war against the Muslims, or they could surrender and
agree to humiliating terms. They responded, “As for an open war

438 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq as

(against you), we know what it means (for we have already tasted
the consequences of doing battle against you), so what are the
humiliating terms you speak of?”

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ said, “All weapons (and horses) will be taken
from you. And you will become a people who follow the tails of
camels (perhaps this means: you will become nomads in the
desert), until Allah makes the Khaleefah of His Prophet and the
believers see some positive change in you, a change that will
result in your being pardoned. Furthermore, you will return all of
the booty you took from us, while we will not give back to you
anything we won from you. You will bear witness that our fallen
fighters are in Paradise, and that your fallen fighters are in the
Hellfire. And you will pay blood money for our fallen fighters,
while we will not pay blood money for your fallen fighters.”
‘Umar # then said to Abu Bakr &, “As for your saying, “You will
pay blood money for our fallen fighters,’ no blood money should
be paid for them since they died fighting for the sake of Allah.”
But shortly thereafter ‘Umar 2 changed his mind and said to Abu
Bakr &, “Blessed and good was your opinion (regarding the issue
of receiving blood money).””"!

Many of the former followers of Tulaihah, either looking for a
new cause or a new leader, rallied around a woman named Umm
Ziml, whose actual full name was Salmaa bint Maalik ibn
Hudhaifah. Umm Ziml lived in a place called Dhafar, which was
situated near Al-Hauab, alongside the road that led from Basrah
to Al-Madeenah. Salmaa was a prominent and well-known
female chieftain. She had initially gained respect because of her
mother, Umm Firqah, who, because of her many children, her
high standing among her tribe, and her noble lmeage, was
considered by Arabs a paragon of nobleness.

Salmaa encouraged her newfound followers to wage war
against Khaalid #. They enthusiastically obeyed her, and they

11 AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (2/323).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 439

were joined by a number of individuals from the Sulaim, Taiy,
Hawaazin, and Asad tribes. Thus the army became quite large
and formidable, and Salmaa was now deemed a powerful leader
in the region. But her fame and power were short-lived, for no
sooner did Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏ذه‎ hear about the formation of
her army, than he set out with his army to engage them in battle.
When the battle later began in earnest, the fighting was fierce. In
the end, however, the Muslims came out victorious and Khaalid .
# killed both Salmaa # and the riding camel upon which she was
mounted. Once the battle was concluded, Khaalid # sent news of
the victory to Abu Bakr 2.1

Lessons and Morals

Abu Bakr’s Trust in Allah 4, and His Brilliant Military Strategy

Abu Bakr # said to “Adee ibn Haatim #, “Go to your people
and prevent them from joining up with Tulaihah, for if they do
join the ranks of his followers, it will be the cause of their
destruction.” That Abu Bakr as said, “It will be the cause of their
destruction,” points to his strong Faith, in that, even before any
battle took place, he knew what the results would be: Allah 8
would help his obedient slaves, and the Muslim army would
easily defeat Tulaihah and his followers from the Taiy tribe.

Also, by ordering Khaalid 2 to begin his expedition by going
to the Taiy tribe, Abu Bakr «& showed just how brilliant a military
strategist he was. Taiy, it should be remembered, was further
away from Al-Madeenah than was the place wherein Tulaihah
and his followers were gathered. On the surface, therefore, it
would have been better to attack Tulaihah and his followers first,
but in reality, Abu Bakr 2 made a wise decision, taking a step that
would prevent the people of Taiy from joining up with Tulaihah,
or, at the very least, would force those of Taiy’s members who had
already joined up with Tulaithah to abandon Tulaihah, to return to

“I Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayaht (2/323).

440 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏هه‎

their native land, and to defend their fellow tribesmen against
Khaalid’s army. Regardless of how the people of Taty would
respond to “Adee’s invitation to return to Islam, Khaalid # and
his men, by going to Taiy first, would be able to at once decrease
the size of and weaken Twaihah’s army.

Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ even though he was in Al-Madeenah, far
removed from Tulaihah’s army, was able to influence the
outcome of the war in other ways as well. For instance, he
announced that he # was heading out with an army in the
direction of Khaibar, with the goal of meeting up with Khaalid’s
army in Taiy territory. Of course, Abu Bakr -& knew that news of
his announcement would quickly reach the enemy, and that is
exactly what he desired, for he wanted to instill fear into the
hearts of both enemy soldiers and all people who remained
undecided as to whether they would side with Tulaihah or the
Muslims. |

But perhaps the greatest impact that Abu Bakr # had on the
conflict was choosing the right leader for his army — Khaalid ibn
Al-Waleed 4. Khaalid 4 was known as a man of war, both as a
soldier, a commander, and a military strategist. If the Muslims
hoped to achieve a quick and decisive victory, they needed the
leadership skills and military genius of Khaalid 2. This proved to
be true, for Khaalid « led his army to a surprisingly easy victory
against the formidable and sizeable army of Tulaihah.™

When the Battle of Buzaakhah was over, Abu Bakr a sent a
very meaningful letter to Khaalid #, one in which he
congratulated Khaalid « and provided him with important
advice. Abu Bakr # wrote: “May Allah increase you in the
goodness that He has blessed you with. And fear Allah regarding
all of your affairs; for indeed, Allah is with those who fear Him,
and those who do good deeds. Be stern now, and do not become
soft: So if you come across any polytheist (from the apostates)
who had killed even a single Muslim, exact revenge upon him.”

1 Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Al-Humaidee (9/ 60-63).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 44]

Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ showing concern for the welfare of one of his
Muslim brothers, began his beautiful letter by supplicating for
Khaalid ‏.كه‎ He 2 reminded Khaalid # about the importance of
fearing Allah ‏رق‎ an issue that is especially important for military
commanders, since a mistake or an act of tyranny on their part
results usually not in hurt feelings, but in deaths and injuries. In
short, Abu Bakr # was saying to Khaalid 4 that he should
continue to wage war according to the Islamic rules of war: This
meant that he had to take good care of his soldiers, that he was not
to kill women and children, that he was not to wrongly mutilate
the bodies of fallen enemy soldiers, and so on. |

The apostates differed from other enemies of Islam in that they
did not deserve the least bit of mercy. They were a people who had
tasted the sweetness of Faith but then, because of worldly
concerns, opted to replace guidance with misguidance; what is
more, they treacherously sought to take advantage of the
vulnerable state of the Muslims — vulnerable because of the
death of the Prophet #2 - by preparing to wage war against them.
They were not enemies in the sense that the Romans were enemies;
they were, more accurately put, traitors who had betrayed their
oaths to defend and be loyal to Allah %, His Messenger ##, and the
believers. For these reasons, Abu Bakr ‏رض‎ in his letter to Khaalid ‏رف‎
‎ordered him to be unrelenting in his pursuit of apostate soldiers.
By being stern with the apostates, Abu Bakr 2 hoped to achieve
two goals: First, to punish the apostates for their treachery; and
second, to make an example of them, for there were still many
tribes throughout the region that were wavering in their Faith, not
having as of then decided whether they preferred the truth or
falsehood, guidance or misguidance, good or evil, Faith or
disbelief. So we see from his letter that Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ though he
is predominately remembered for being soft and easy-going, was
stern when sternness was called for, and merciful when mercy was
the appropriate course of action.

When delegates from the Asad and Ghatfaan tribes visited Al-
Madeenah, Abu Bakr « again was able to directly steer the course

442 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

of the war through his policy decisions. He ‏هه‎ set a clear tone for
the war, informing the delegates that, since they had not repented
when the opportunity to do so was presented to them, he was not
prepared to make any concessions to them. They could either
accept his terms of their surrender, or they could go back and
prepare for an open, all-out war against the Muslims. To be sure,
this firm stance of Abu Bakr 2 sent a clear message to all of the
apostates of the region: The Muslims would not waver or hesitate
or waste time with peace treaties; instead, they would unrelent-
ingly continue to fight the war until they succeeded in completely
eradicating apostasy from the peninsula.

Thus, knowing that they were no challenge for their Muslim
counterparts, the leaders of Ghatfaan and Asad accepted defeat as
well as Abu Bakr’s terms of their surrender. They gave up their
weapons and their horses, and they were not allowed to take up
weapons again until they repented and proved their sincerity to
the Muslim nation. Preventing them from bearing arms acted as a
guarantee that they would never again return to apostasy."

‘Adee ibn Haatim «&

“Adee # was truly a blessing for his people. He # had to walk
a tightrope when he had to deal with both his people and Khaalid
#, having to convince the former to return to Islam, and having to
prevent the latter from attacking them. ‘Adee # was himself a
sincere Muslim, but, in order to achieve his aims, he had to come
down to the level of his people and convince them that, from a
worldly point of view, it was in their best interests to return to
Islam. He ‏ف‎ told them that the Muslim army was definitely going
to defeat them, kill their men, and take their women as prisoners.
He #s said this because he sensed that his people were
underestimating the strength of the Muslim army. He won over
his people with his arguments, but they did make one stipulation:
They would openly announce their reentry into the fold of Islam

“ At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/66).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 44.3

only after they sent word to those of their fellow tribesmen who
had already joined the ranks of Tulaihah’s followers. They feared
that, ‏كا‎ Tulaihah were to learn of their return to Islam, he would
either kill their fellow tribesmen or use them as hostages.

Now all ‘Adee 2 had to do was to convince Khaalid ‏وق‎ not to
attack his fellow tribesmen. This was a tall order, since Khaalid ‏كك‎
‎was known to be a stern and unrelenting military commander.
When it came to war, he was known to show more of an iron fist
than a soft heart. So ‘Adee # addressed Khaalid 4s at his level,
arguing that, from a military standpoimt, tt was in his best
interests to wait three days, for, according to at least one account,
“Adee ‏مف‎ promised that, after the passing of three days, he would
bring Khaalid # five-hundred fighters from his tribe. Given the
strength of “Adee’s arguments, Khaalid 4 agreed to fulfill his
request. And true to his word, “Adee 4, after the passing of three
days, returned with five-hundred fighters from the Banu ‏لذ‎
‎Ghauth clan — for “Adee’s tribe was made of two clans, the Banu
Al-Ghauth clan and the Banu Jadeelah clan. A short while later,
‘Adee & convinced Khaalid # to allow him to speak with the
members of the Banu Jadeelah clan; they too were convinced by
“Adee’s arguments, and one-thousand of their fighters joined the
ranks of Khaalid’s army. And so, through diplomacy and a
sincere desire to save his people, “Adee # not only brought his
fellow tribesmen back to Islam; but also, his efforts resulted in
1500 soldiers being added to the ranks of Khaalid’s army. “Adee’s
people acted nobly as well, for they could have sat out the war
and waited to see which side came out victorious; but instead they
decided to risk their lives and to contribute a contingent of 1500
fighters to the Muslim army.

Nonetheless, ‘Adee’s people were careful and did not want to
pay the consequences of fighting against their allies from the Banu
Asad tribe. Rather than fight against their allies, they asked
Khaalid 2 for permission to instead fight against the people of
Qais, for they too had apostatized. Khaalid # acquiesced to their
request, saying to them, “By Allah, the people of Qais are not the

444 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

weaker of the two opposing enemies. Stand up firmly and fight
against whichever of the two tribes you want.” “Adee 4s, on the
other hand, was furious with his people, and he expressed his
outrage when he said, “Were the closest members of my family
and of my tribe to abandon this religion, | would have fought
against them. So why then should I refuse to fight Banu Asad,
even if they have been our allies! No, by Allah, I will not do that.”

Khaalid # took a more moderate approach, for he was
interested more in achieving results than in anything else;
moreover, he felt, what the people of Taiy said actually made
sense: Since both the Qais and Banu Asad tribes were enemues of
the Muslims, since the people of Taiy had been allied to the Banu
Asad tribe, and since the people of Taiy were weak in their Faith,
only recently having returned to Islam, it was likely that they
would fight with more enthusiasm and with less chances of being
tempted to betray Khaalid 4: if they were sent to fight against the
people of Qais. Thus Khaalid said to “Adee #, “Verily, waging
war against both groups -- against the people of Qais and the
people of Banu Asad — is Jihaad, so do not show opposition to the
opinion and viewpoint of your companions. Go and fight one of
the two groups; lead your companions towards the people
against whom they will fight with greater enthusiasm and
energy.”

Ina way, both ‘Adee 2 and Khaalid 2 were in the right. ‘Adee
# proved the strength of his Faith, showing that he was willing to
fight against anyone who turned away from Islam, even if that
meant fighting against his closest relatives. But Khaalid 2 was
right also, for the people of Taiy were not anywhere close to
‘Adee’s level of Faith. And so it was wise not to put them in a
situation wherein they would be tempted to side with their
former allies, especially considering the fact that there was an
alternative solution: Sending them to fight against the people of
Qais.

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/75).‏ [ذا

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 445

It must be remembered that ‘Adee ibn Haatim’s efforts to bring
his tribe back to Islam benefited not only the people of Taty, but
the general population of Muslims as well. Taty, after all, was one
of the strongest and most powerful tribes in the entire Arabian
Peninsula. The army of Taiy was feared, and the people of
neighboring tribes had always tried their best to remain on the
good side of Taiy’s leaders by forming alliances with them.
Therefore, by winning over the people of Taiy, Khaalid’s army
dealt a severe blow to the enemy — the impact of which resulted
in a sharp decrease in morale among the ranks of Tulathah’s
followers and, for that matter, of all of the apostates in the
peninsula.

The tide of the war shifted, and momentum was clearly in the
favor of the Muslim armed forces. The Muslims knew that it was
only a matter of time before they defeated all of the apostates in
the Arabian Peninsula, and for their part, the apostates lost all of
the confidence and enthusiasm that they had possessed just a few
weeks or months earlier. The immediate result of the increase in
momentum for the Muslim armed forces was the quick and
decisive defeat of Tulaihah’s army. Muslim soldiers chased down
the enemy, killing some and capturing others. As for Tulaihah, it
appears as if he knew that defeat was imminent, for he had made
preparations for a quick escape from the scene of the battle. Once
it was clear that his army would be defeated, Tulaihah mounted
his horse and fled towards Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding
regions). His followers, however, were not so fortunate, for many
among them were killed. This victory for the Muslims, although
the only direct losers were Tulaihah and his followers, dealt a
severe psychological blow to all of the apostates that were
scattered throughout the Arabian Peninsula. Their days were
numbered, and they were probably aware at some level that the
end of their rebellion was near."!

‎Al-Harb An-Nafsiyyah Min-Mandhoor Islaamee, by Dr. Ahmad Naufal (2/143,‏ لذا
.)144

446 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏لد‎
‎The Causes of the Downfall of Tulaihah’s Army

There are a number of factors that coalesced to bring about the
downfall of Tulathah’s army; the most prominent of them are as
follows:

@ The Muslims under Khaalid’s command were fighting in
order to uphold beliefs that they valued more than their very
own lives; meanwhile, most of Tulaihah's followers fought for
worldly reasons, such as greed and a desire to maintain tribal
loyalties and alliances. While Muslims were certain of
achieving victory through Allah's help, they nonetheless
longed to achieve martyrdom. By wanting to die i the path of
Allah, they became fearless — and men who have nothing to
fear are very dangerous in battle. The enemy understood this,
for when they began to flee from the scene of the battle,
Tulaihah called out, asking his men why they were fleeing.
One of them responded, “Each one of us hopes for his
opponent to die before he does; meanwhile, we are facing a
group of people who all want to die (and become martyred)
before anyone else does.”!! And even before the battle
commenced, Khaalid # made the enemy understand the state
of mind of his fighters, for he sent this simple, short message
to them: “Verily, I have come to you with a group of people
who love death just as much as you love life.”

@ Taiy’s reentry into the fold of Islam shifted the power balance
in the battle that was to take place between Khaalid’s army
and Tulaihah’s army. And even though the people of Taty
opted not to fight against the people of Banu Asad, the simple
fact that they returned to Islam had a demoralizing effect on
Tulaihah’s soldiers.

@ The deaths of “‘Ukkaashah ibn Maihsin # and Thaabit ibn
Agram. # enraged the Muslims, and gave them all the more
reason to want to teach Tulaihah’s followers a stern lesson.

11 Taareekh Al-Khamseen, by Ad-Dayyaar Bakree (2/207); also refer to Harakatur-
Riddah, by Al-"Uttoom (pe. 289).

2) Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 289).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 447

© By allowing the people of Taiy to fight against the Qais instead
of the children of Asad, Khaalid 2 maximized the potential of
his army and increased the chances of achieving a quick and
decisive victory.

Some of the Consequences of the Battle of Buzaakhah

The main consequence of the Battle of Buzaakhah was that a
large number of Arabs, from various tribes, returned to the fold of
Islam. After their defeat at Buzaakhah, for instance, the children of
‘Aamir said, “We enter into the same religion from which we had
recently exited.”” And so the Banu ‘Aaamir tribe, as well as the tribes
of Asad, Ghatfaan, Hawaazin, Sulaim, and Taty, pledged allegiance
to Abu Bakr # through his representative Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed
‏.ذه‎ Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏رف‎ however, did not immediately accept
pledges of allegiance from them; no, if they wanted to return to
Islam, they had to first surrender to the Muslim army their war
criminals — those who not only apostatized but also tortured,
killed, and mutilated Muslims who lived in their midst. When such
war criminals were captured, or when they were handed over to
Khaalid ‏ردهي‎ he 4 punished them in the same manner that they killed
Muslims: He 2 burned them with fires, crushed them with large
stones, threw them into wells, stabbed them with arrows, and
pushed them off of the cliffs of tall mountains.

Along with Bagarah ibn Hubairah and other prisoners,
Khaalid # sent the following message back to Abu Bakr 4s:
“Verily, after having first turned away (from Islam), the Banu
‘Aamir (tribe) has come back; and they have entered into the fold
of Islam, after having plotted (to destroy us). Verily, I do not
accept anything (in terms of an agreement) from anyone who
either fought against me or tried to make peace with me, until
they bring me those who attacked and viciously killed Muslims
(who lived in fear in their midst). And I have sent to you Bagarah
and his companions.”""!

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/82).‏ اذا

448 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

One of the said prisoners was ‘Uyainah ibn Hisn of the Banu
Fuzaarah tribe. To punish him and teach a lesson to others,
Khaalid ‏كه‎ tightened ‘Uyainah’s shackles, having first tied his
hands behind his neck — an especially humiliating and painful
punishment, considering he would have to remain that way for
the entire journey to Al-Madeenah. That was not the end of
‘Uyainah’s humiliating treatment, for when he entered Al-
Madeenah, he was greeted by a crowd of jeering children, who
poked at him with their little hands, all the while saying, “O
enemy of Allah! You have abandoned Islam.” To this “Uyainah
responded, “By Allah, I never believed in the first place.” Then
‘Uyainah was brought before the Khaleefuh of the Messenger of
Allah #8, and much to “‘Uyainah’s surprise and disbelief, Abu
Bakr # was kind and forgiving to him. First, Abu Bakr 4 ordered
for his shackles to be undone, and then he, with kind words,
convinced “Uyainah to repent. “‘Uyainah, moved by Abu Bakr’s
treatment, made a sincere repentance and apologized for all of his
previous misdeeds. This time around, “‘Uyainah was sincere, for
he never turned away from Islam again, but instead became an
upstanding citizen and a good, practicing Muslim.|!

As for Tulaihah, even after he had been the cause of so much
grief for Muslims, Allah % blessed him by guiding him to Islam.
He sought refuge with and lived among the people of the Kalb
tribe, and he continued to reside in their midst until Abu Bakr #
died. It was when he heard -about the return of the Asad,
Ghatfaan, and ‘Aamir tribes to Islam that he too embraced Islam.
Shortly thereafter, he set out on a journey towards Makkah, with
the intention of performing “Umrah (the lesser pilgrimage to
Makkah); and this took place during the caliphate of Abu Bakr 4s.
On his way, he passed by the outskirts of Al-Madeenah, where he
was recognized and reported to Abu Bakr «. Abu Bakr # said,
“What should I do to him! Leave him alone, for Allah has guided
him to Islam.’”*! |

I As-Siddeeq Awwalul-Khulafaa (pg. 87).
‏لها‎ Trareekh AlIslaamee (9/59).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 449

Tulaihah’s situation resembled that of Al-Wahshee, the
Abyssinian man who killed Hamzah ‏رف‎ the uncle of the
Prophet 2, but then repented and embraced Islam. For the rest
of the Prophet's life, however, Al-Wahshee 4s, feeling the gravity
of his past errors, shied away from coming face to face with the
Prophet #¢. For the same reason, Tulaihah # — and all signs
indicate that he was sincere in his repentance — avoided coming
face to face with Abu Bakr 4s.

Tulaihah, having become a good Muslim, went to “Umar 4s
when, following Abu Bakr’s death, people were pledging
allegiance to him. “Umar #, recognizing him, said, “You are the
murderer of ‘Ukkaashah # and Thaabit ‏.ف‎ By Allah, I will never
love you.” Tulaihah replied, “O Leader of the Believers, why do
you bother about two men whom Allah honored (with martyr-
dom) through my hands, especially considering the fact that He
did not humiliate me through their hands (.e., they died as
martyrs because of my actions, and I, not having been killed by
them, was saved from dying as a disbeliever; therefore, every-
thing worked out for the best)” Tulaihah returned to his
homeland, and after some time, he moved to Iraq.) It is not
related that anyone thereafter accused him of any wrongdoing; all
signs indicate that his repentance was sincere, and he even wrote
a poem in which he expressed his regret for his past misdeeds.

Abu Bakr’s Treatment of Former Apostates

Abu Bakr # was at once forgiving and guarded in his
treatment of former apostates. On the one hand, he forgave them
and encouraged them to lead noble lives; and on the other hand,
he did not appoint them to positions of leadership and forbade
them from participating in the conquests of Iraq and Ash-Sham
(Syria and surrounding regions). Abu Bakr 4 had two choices: He
could trust former apostates and put the general population of
Muslims at risk, since those who had formerly betrayed Muslims

1! At-Taareckh Al-Islaamee (9/59) and At-Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/81).

450 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

might do so once again. Or, he could protect the general
population of Muslims and prevent former apostates from taking
leadership positions, which would result in hurt feelings on their
part. Abu Bakr # chose the latter option, opting to place the
interests of all Muslims before those of a small group of Muslims.
This did not mean that Abu Bakr # accused their sincerity, or
lacked trust in them altogether; rather, he 4 was simply taking a
precautionary step that affected only those who had already once
been guilty of betrayal and treason. This provides an important
lesson for Muslims of all generations: Important positions of
leadership should be entrusted only to those who, having once
embraced Islam, have always remained upright Muslims and
have never been found guilty of betraying Muslims or acting
treacherously towards them.

The Story of Al-Fujaa’ah

Fujaa‘ah’s actual name was [yaas ibn ‘Abdullah ibn “Abd Ya-
Lail ibn “Umair ibn Khufaaf; and he was, according to the eminent
historian ibn Ishaag, a member of the Banu Sulaim tribe. Fujaa’ah
died in a humiliating and painful manner, for he was burned to
death in Al-Bagee’, the graveyard of Al-Madeenah.

His death, as well as the manner in which he died, was a direct
result of his evil actions. He came into prominence when, during
the apostate wars, he visited Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ in Al-Madeenah and
declared that he had embraced Islam — when, in reality, he was
only trying to decetve Abu Bakr 2. Pujaa’ah asked Abu Bakr 2 to
provide him with an army, so that he could attack people who
had apostatized.

Abu Bakr # took him at his word, and cooperated with him by
helping him form a small battalion of fighters. But instead of
waging war against apostates, Fujaa’ah robbed and killed every
group of people he came across — regardless of whether they
were apostates or Muslims. His sole concern was to kill and rob as
many people as possible. Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ having quickly learned
about Pujaa‘ah’s actions, sent a contingent of fighters to pursue

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 451

him, and it was not long before he was captured and sent back as
a prisoner to Al-Madeenah. The person who captured him was a
member of his tribe; his name was Turaifah ibn Haajiz.

Abu Bakr « ordered for the prisoner to be taken to Al-Baqee’,
which was — and stillis — the graveyard of Al-Madeenah. With
his hands tied behind his head, Fujaa’ah was thrown into a
blazing fire that was set for him. The probable reason why
Fuyaa’ah was burned to death is that, during the period in which
he wreaked havoc on the people he came across, he killed one or
more of his victims by burning them to death.!!

Sujaah, Banu Tameem, and the Death of Maalik ibn Nuwairah

Al-Yarboo’ee

During the outbreak of apostasy, the people of Banu Tameem
were divided into three main groups. The first apostatized and
refused to pay Zakaat; the second sent Zakaat wealth to Abu Bakr
‏ذأ‎ in Al-Madeenah; and the third took a neutral stance, deciding
to wait out the conflict and to later side with the victors. At some
point while they were thus divided, a woman named Sujaah bint
Al-Haarith ibn Suwaid ibn “‘Ugfaan At-Taghlabiyyah (Le., from
the Banu Taghlib tribe), passed by; she had been a Christian Arab,
but then she claimed to be a prophetess.

Her followers consisted mainly of, but were not limited to, the
members of her tribe. Marching through Arabia with an army of
followers, Sujaah was bent on the idea of attacking Abu Bakr 2 in
Al-Madeenah. When she passed by Banu Tameem territory, she
invited people to join in her cause. The common masses of people
from the Banu Tameem tribe agreed to follow her. Among her
newfound followers from the Banu Tameem tribe were Maalik
ibn Nuwairah At-Tameemee, ‘Ataarid ibn Haajib, and a number
of prominent chieftains.

Still, some people from Banu Tameem refused to follow her.
The tribe, now divided, was on the verge of an internal war; a

‎Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-‘Uttoom (pg. 185).‏ اذا

452 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قد‎

peace agreement, however, was arrived at and temporarily
averted internecine warfare. | say temporarily because Maalik
ibn Nuwairah soon convinced Sujaah not to attack the people of
Al-Madeenah, but to instead attack Banu Yarboo’, a subtribe of
the overall Banu Tameem tribe that had refused to join Sujaah’s
army.

Sujaah, who was a bloodthirsty leader, did not need much
convincing at all. And after her soldiers failed in their attempt to
defeat the Banu Yarboo’ clan, her followers from Banu Tameem
convinced her to go to Al-Yamaamah and to wrest control of it
from the hands of Musailamah ibn Habeeb. Having just faced
defeat, Sujaah was discouraged about her idea to attack the
inhabitants of Al-Madeenah, so, agreeing with her counselors
from the Banu Tameem tribe, she decided to go after easier prey.

Musailamah too was a false prophet, and he had many
followers, most of whom were from the Banu Haneefah tribe.
Thus Sujaah was being advised to fight not against the Muslims of
Al-Madeenah, but agaimst another false prophet and his
followers; the goal, it seems, was to defeat Musailamah and gain
the support of his followers, which, if achieved, would lead to her
having a very large and formidable army.

Musailamah could not have heard worse news than he did
when he was informed about the unpending arrival of Sujaah and
her army. He and his soldiers were already preoccupied with war,
for they were defending their stronghold against the armies of
Thumaamah ibn Uthaal and ‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl ‏.كه‎ These two
leaders were encamped in the region and were awaiting the
arrival of Khaalid & and his army. The last thing Musailamah
needed, therefore, was another army that wanted to destroy him
and his followers.

Since he was a false prophet who was bent on gaining power
and wealth, and since he represented the antithesis of Islamic
teachings and values, there was no point in negotiating terms
with his Muslim counterparts. Sujaah, however, was someone
who took after his own heart — someone with whom he could

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 453

arrive at a mutual agreement. He sent word to her, seeking an
alliance with her and promising her one-half of Quraish’s land.
He then rode out towards her in the company of forty of his fellow
tribesmen; the two of them then conducted a meeting alone ma
tent. Upon being alone with Sujaah, Musailamah offered her one-
third of his land, which she readily accepted. He then said, “Will
you allow me to marry you, so that with my people and your
people under my command, I can eat up (ie., destroy and
subjugate) all Arabs?”” She said, “Yes.” The two of them spent
three days together, after which she returned to her people, and
he, to his.

Sujaah’s followers asked her, “Did Musailamah give you any
dowry?” She said, “He did not give me anything.” They said, “It is
indeed vile for someone of your standing not to receive any
dowry.” She, seeing the logic of their words, sent a message to
Musailamah, asking him to pay her some dowry. In his reply,
Musailamah asked her to send a representative, and she responded
by sending him a man named Shabth ibn Rib’ee Ar-Riyaahee.

Musailamah said to Shabth, “Call out to your people with this
message: Verily, Musailamah ibn Habeeb, messenger of Allah,
has removed from you the obligation of performing two of the
prayers that Muhammad came to you with — the Fajr and ‘Eesha
prayers.” This legislation was Musailamah’s dowry payment to
Sujaah. Sujaah was not so foolish as to take only that from
Musailamah; instead, upon learning about Khaalid’s impending
arrival in the vicinity, she headed back towards her people,
having taken from Musailamah half of his land’s produce.
Knowing that Khaalid 2 and his men would destroy
Musailamah and that she would probably face a similar end,
she gave up her pursuit of power and returned to Banu Taghlib _
territory, where she continued to reside for a mumber of years.
Then, years later, Mu’aawiyah 2 confronted her and her people
and banished her from her land.!4

]11 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/326).

454 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

After Sujaah fled from Yamaamah and returned to her people,
Maalik tbn Nuwairah regretted the role he played in following
her; at the time, he and his fellow tribesmen were staying at a
place called Al-Butaah, which was situated in Banu Asad
territory, in the land of Najd. Khaalid 2 and his men, having
found out about their whereabouts, headed their way. ‘The people
of the Ansaar refused to join Khaalid 4, arguing that “We have
fulfilled Abu Bakr’s orders (so let us not attack Banu Tameem, but
instead let us wait for new orders from Abu Bakr 4).”’ Khaalid 4
said, “This is something that we must do, and It is an opportunity
that we must take advantage of.” The opportunity he was
speaking about was the vulnerable situation of Banu Tameem.
Khaalid # told his Ansaaree brothers that he would not force
them to accompany him, but it was a mission he felt he needed to
accomplish.

Two days after Khaalid 4 and his men began their pursuit of
the Banu Tameem, a messenger from the Ansaar caught up to
them and asked them to wait; Khaalid 4 did so, and a short while
later, his brothers from the Ansaar joined him.

The leader of the people who had gathered at Al-Butaah was
Maalik ibn Nuwairah. The first thing Khaalid « did upon
arriving at Al-Butaah was to send out units throughout the area,
inviting people to embrace Islam. The leaders of Banu Tameem
welcomed Khaalid ‏رك‎ vowed that they would follow him, and
handed over Zakaat wealth to him.

The only leader of Banu Tameem that did not come forth
repentantly was Maalik ibn Nuwairah, who seemed to have been
depressed and confused about his situation. He had secluded
himself, and was seated all alone when a unit of Khaalid’s army
found him and imprisoned both him and his followers. The
members of that unit disagreed about what happened next. Abu
QOataadah (Al-Haarith ibn Rib’ee Al-Ansaaree) bore witness that
they prayed (therefore, their lives should have been spared).
Other members of the unit said that they neither made a call to
prayer nor performed prayer.

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 455

Accounts vary regarding what happened next. According to
one account, Maalik and his fellow prisoners spent the night tied
up in their shackles; and that, since it was a very cold night,
Khaalid’s messenger announced that heat should be provided for
the prisoners. The guards thought that, by heat, Khaalid ‏كك‎ meant
that they should be killed (perhaps burned), and so they killed
each and every one of them. According to that account, it was
Diraar ibn Al-Azwar who killed Maalik ibn Nuwairah.

Upon hearing of the killings and the miscommunication that
took place between his messenger and some of his soldiers,
Khaalid # took a resigned attitude and said, “If Allah wills for
something to happen, it occurs.” According to some people,
Khaalid « had overstepped his bounds and seemed to justify the
killings,

Based on another account, Khaalid 4 met with Maalik ibn
Nuwairah and castigated him for following Sujaah and for having
refused to pay Zakaat. Khaalid « said to him, “Did you not know
that Zakaat is the companion of prayer (ie, both of them are
pillars of Islam that must be applied)?”’ Maalik, referring to the
Prophet #€, replied, “That is what your companion claimed.”
Khaalid 2 said, “Is he our companion, and is he not your
companion?” Furious at Maalik’s impudence, Khaalid 4 called
out, “O Diraar, strike his neck (Le., kill him).” And that, according
to this account, is when Diraar killed Maalik.

Whatever the case, Abu Qataadah spoke to Khaalid 4 about
what had just happened, and the two men got into an argument.
So dissatisfied was Abu Qataadah with the situation that he went
back to Abu Bakr & and complained that Khaalid # had gone too
far and had wrongfully killed a group of men. “Umar & sided
with Abu Qataadah, saying to Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ “Remove him from
his post.” Maalik’s brother, Mutammim ibn Nuwairah, also went
to complain about Khaalid ‏.كك‎ But im spite of the arguments he
heard, Abu Bakr # remained adamant in his support for Khaalid
a, convinced that Khaalid 2 was in the right, and justifying his
support for Khaalid 4 with the words: “T will not sheathe a sword

456 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-~Siddeeg #

that Allah has unsheathed and let loose against the disbelievers.”’
Nonetheless, in order to appease Mutammim, Abu Bakr # paid
him blood money from his own wealth.

Lessons and Morals

1) Not Everyone from the Banu Tameem Tribe Apostatized

Certain contemporary historians have attempted to give the
impression that practically everyone from the Banu Tameem tribe
apostatized. That, however, is patently false. Banu Tameem was a
huge tribe that consisted of various subdivisions, or subtribes.
And suffice it to say not every individual, and not every subtribe,
and not every chieftain, for that matter, apostatized. In fact, even
after some members of the overall Banu Tameem tribe aposta-
tized, Islam was still a strong and vibrant force among the people
of Banu Tameem. Maalik ibn Nuwairah, after he became a
follower of Sujaah, considered the Muslims of his tribe to be
enough of a threat to wage war against them. And after he
convinced Sujaah to attack the clans of Banu Tameem that had
remained steadfast upon Islam, Sujaah and her soldiers, even
with the aid of Maalik and his men, suffered a humiliating defeat
‏سه‎ one that discouraged them from going on towards AI-
Madeenah, and made them look for a weaker enemy to fight
against, which is why they headed towards Al-Yamaamah. That
Sujaah lost so decisively to the Muslims of Banu Tameem, even
though she had help from Maalik and his followers, indicates
that, from the overall Banu Tameem tribe, there were more people
who remained Muslims than there were that apostatized.

Certain narrations point to the important role that the Ar-
Rubaab subtribe, or clan, played in standing up to Sujaah, Maalik,
and their followers. In the end, after having failed to defeat the
Muslims of Banu Tameem, Sujaah was forced to agree to a truce
with the leaders of the Ar-Rubaab clan. The same narrations also

‎ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/327).‏ ذا

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 457

give an account of how Qais ibn “Aasim, one of the leaders of the
Banu Tameem tribe, transported Zakaat wealth from Banu
Tameem territory to Al-Madeenah. All of this proves that only
certain factions of the Banu Tameem tribe apostatized and that
many, or in fact the majority, of the tribe's members remained
steadfast upon Islam.

2) Khaalid & and the Killing of Maalik ibn Nuwairah

There has been much discussion and disagreement among
historians regarding the death of Maalik ibn Nuwairah. The
disagreement stems from the questions, was he wrongfully killed,
or was he justly killed? Did he die a disbeliever, or did he die a
Muslim? Much of the disagreement over this matter came as a
result of conflicting accounts and narrations.

In his invaluable work Harakatur-Riddah, Dr. ‘Ali Al-“Uttoom
discussed in detail the events surrounding Maalik’s execution.
And in Nagd ‘Ilmee Li-Kitaab Al-Islam Wa-Usool Al-Hukm, Shaikh
Muhammad At-Taahir ibn “Aashoor similarly provides a detailed
analysis of Maalik’s death. Also, Shaikh Muhammad Zaahir Al-
Kautharee, in his book Maganalaat Al-Kautharee, wrote a great deal
in defense of Khaalid 2 and his decision to execute Maalik ibn
Nuwairah.

Various other books have also treated the same subject matter,
but of all that I have read, | am most convinced by the arguments
and opinions of Dr. ‘Ali Al-Uttoom, who I feel dealt with the
subject matter in an unbiased and highly scholarly manner; he
relied on authentic proofs, and, more importantly, he focused not
just on the day of Maalik’s death, but on Maalik’s history, his past
actions, and the overall context and events of the apostate wars.

Dr. Al-"Uttoom rightly concluded that what led Maalik to his
ultimate demise was his arrogance. Why else did he delay
repenting and returning to Islam, when all others had already
surrendered and pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr 43? And why
else did he strive continually to prevent his people from paying
Zakaat? All authentic historical accounts show Maalik to be a man

458 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

who was greedy for power, and who was scornful of those of his
relatives that remained loyal and obedient to the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah #8.

Maalik’s sayings and actions are enough of an indictment
against the man. He stood side by side with Sujaah, a false and
evil prophetess. And when his people gathered camels that were
meant for Zakaat, Maalik, instead of sending them to Abu Bakr «,
redistributed them among his people; in fact, he outright forbade
his people from paying Zakaat wealth to Abu Bakr &.
Furthermore, Maalik remained deaf to the counsels of his Muslim
relatives, who sought to bring him back to the fold of Islam. All of
the above indicates that Maalik was a man who was closer to
disbelief than he was to Islam.

One might argue that final actions are what count, but even
until the end, he did not change his ways. In his discussion with
Khaalid 4, which I have hitherto mentioned, Maalik referred to
the Prophet #8 as “your companion’ and not as ‘our companion,’
which clearly proved that he wanted nothing to do with Islam or
with the Prophet ‏عل‎

Even supposing that there were mitigating circumstances and
that Maalik, during his last days, performed prayer, the
fundamental and key issue at stake was not his performance of
prayer, but his refusal to pay Zakaat. One must remember, after
all, that many of the apostates throughout the peninsula
performed prayer, but they were nonetheless disbelievers because
they refused to pay Zakaat (to reject one pillar of Islam is to reject
all of the pillars of Islam).

In Tabagaat Fuhool Ash-Shu’araa, lbn Salaam wrote, ‘What is
agreed upon is the fact that Khaalid debated and argued (issues of
Islam) with Maalik and that, while Maalik accepted prayer, he
spoke in a roundabout and twisted manner regarding Zakaat.”"
And in Sharh Saheeh Muslim, Imam An-Nawawee wrote, “Among

"l Tabagaat Fuhool Ash-Shu’araa, with notes and commentary by Mahmood
Shaakir (pg. 172).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 459

groups of apostates were individual who were willing to pay
Zakaat, but who were prevented from doing so by their leaders.
Such was the case regarding the Banu Yarboo’ clan: its members
gathered their Zakaat wealth and intended to send it all to Abu
Bakr ‏رق‎ but Maalik ibn Nuwairah forbade them from doing so
and instead redistributed the wealth among them.”!!

aaalid’s Marriage to Umm Tameem

Umm Tameemy’s full name was Lailah bint Sinaan Al-Minhaal,
and she was the wife of Maalik ibn Nuwairah. After Maalik was
killed, Khaalid married her.

Khaalid’s marriage to Umm Tameem was not a controversial
issue during the era of Abu Bakr’s caliphate; nor was it so during
the centuries that followed. Only recently have doubts been raised
regarding their marriage, and the people who have raised. those
doubts have ulterior motives and lack proofs to back up their
arguments. They claim that Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed # married her
as soon as she was captured, since Khaalid 4 had always been
enamored with her; based on their claim, his union with her was
closer to an act of fornication than it was to marriage. Their claim
is not backed by any proof, and it is clear that their sole intention
is to tarnish the reputation of a noble Companion of the
Messenger of Allah #&. The fact is that, based on sound
scholarly research, Khaalid # was legally married to Umm
Tameem, which is why no one at the time even raised any doubts
about the validity of their marriage.

There are a number of factors that both contradict and
disprove the above-mentioned claim. First, Khaalid # ordered
for Maalik ibn Nuwairah to be killed not because he desired Umm
Tameem, but because Maalik refused to pay Zakaat; second, since
Maalik was an apostate, his marriage to Ummm Tameem became
null and void; they became, for all intensive purposes, strangers
unto one another. Third, when the wives and female relatives of

Ul Sharh An-Nawawee ‘Ala Saheeh Muslim (1/208).

460 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeg ‏د‎

apostates are captured in enemy territory, they are not killed, but
are instead taken as slaves, as has been pointed out by Imam As-
Sarakhsaree. So when Umm Tameem was captured, she became a
slave, after which Khaalid ‏ذف‎ chose her for himself. And when her
first period of menstruation came to an end, he consummated his
matriage to her, all of which occurred in harmony with the
teachings of Islam and the principles of Islamic warfare.

Shaikh Ahmad Shaakir (may Allah have mercy on him)
pointed out that, when a female is taken as a slave, her owner
does not have to let her go through a long waiting period before
he engages in sexual relations with her; he simply has to wait until
she becomes purified from her next period of menstruation. A
female slave is deemed unlawful for her owner only if she is
pregnant, in which case he must wait until she delivers her baby.
Otherwise, upon the conclusion of a female slave’s menstrual
period, she is deemed Islamically lawful for her owner.

Therefore, there is no basis for the criticism that has been
leveled against Khaalid #. Only those who harbor ill feelings —
towards Khaalid 2 have criticized him for his marriage to Umm
Tameem, and they took advantage of the circumstances
surrounding his marriage by claiming that Maalik was a Muslim
and that Khaalid killed him so that he could marry his wife.

Critics of Khaalid # further have argued that his marriage to
Umm Tameem, in that it was done so hastily after her capture,
was contrary to Arab customs. Al-“Aqqaad, for instance, wrote,
“Khaalid killed Maalik ibn Nuwairah and consummated his
marriage with Maalik’s wife at the scene of the battle — a show of
hastiness that was contrary to Arab customs both prior to and
after the advent of Islam; what is more, the hasty manner of his
marriage was contrary not only to Muslim customs, but also to
what Muslims are commanded to do by the Shariah (Islamic
] ‏لقا ربوج‎

11 Yarakatur-Riddah (pg. 230).
i") “A bgariyyatus-Siddeeg (pg. 70).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 461

‘Aqqaad certainly did not do his homework, for his statement
is far from the truth and from what is authentically related
regarding wars that took place both prior to and after the advent
of Islam. For it was a very frequent occurrence, during pre-Islamic
times, for Arabs to marry captured women immediately after
having vanquished the army of an enemy tribe; in fact, they took
pride in doing that, which is why pre-Islamic Arabs had a great
many children by way of their female slaves.

As for the issue of Islamic Law, “Aqqaad could not have been
more wrong. What Khaalid # did was not only lawful and
permissible in Islam, it was also done by someone who was much
better than him - the Messenger of Allah #%. Before criticizing
Khaalid 2 for marrying so soon after a battle, ‘Aqqaad should
have first brushed up a little on the events of the Prophet's
biography. For the Messenger of Allah #@ married Juwairiyyah
bint Al-Haarith Al-Mustalagqiyyah mmmediately after the Battle of
Al-Muraisee’. Juawairiyyah % was one of the members of the Banu
Al-Mustalig tribe that were taken captive. The Prophet #@ paid off
a lump sum of money in order to free her, and then he #@ married
her. Because of that marriage — which the critics of Khaalid
would have called hasty — the Prophet's Companions ‏رك‎ not
wanting to keep captive the in-laws of the Prophet's wife, set free
one-hundred prisoners from the Banu Al-Mustaligq tribe. And asa
further result of the Prophet's blessed marriage to Juwairiyyah %&,
her father, Al-Haarith tbn Diraar ‏لاير‎ , embraced Islam, as did the
rest of her fellow tribesmen.

And on yet another occasion, the Prophet ‏يل‎ married Safiyyah
bint Huyai ibn Akhtab — who was of Jewish descent —
immediately after the Battle of Khaibar; and he x
consummated his marriage to her either in Khaibar itself or on
his way back to Al-Madeenah.”! Since the Prophet #% is the best

example and the model we must follow in all of our affairs, it is

‎Seerah ibn Hishaam (2/290, 295).‏ أذ
‎Seerah ibn Hishaam (2/339).‏ !4

462 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg a

clear that Khaalid « was blameless in his marriage to Umm
Tameem.!)

There is one point, however, that we must remember when we
defend Khaalid # or anyone else for that matter. If Khaalid « or
any one else makes a mistake, we must point it out without
making unacceptable excuses. | am referring here to what Dr.
Muhammad Husain Haikal wrote about Khaalid 2. Perhaps Dr.
Haikal had the best of intentions when he attempted to defend
Khaalid #, but he nonetheless presented arguments that are at
once unacceptable and dangerous in their implications. Dr.
Haikal wrote, “What does it matter if a man marries a woman
in a manner that is contrary to the customs of Arabs? And what
does it matter if he enters upon her before she becomes purified
(from her period of menstruation)? What do these things matter if
they were perpetrated by a conqueror, a man who deserves to
take ownership of female captives? If we speak about applying
Islamic Law, what we say should not apply to great men such as
Khaalid, especially when holding such great men to account hurts
the interests of the Muslim nation or endangers the lives of
Muslims. It appears, as Shaikh Ahmad Shaakir pointed out,
that Dr. Haikal was influenced by what has been written about
Napoleon and other European leaders and kings. Such men,
according to certain Western writings, are, because of their
greatness, above the law. This certainly is not an Islamic principle,
and so what Dr. Haikal wrote is both misleading and unacceptable.
The Muslims of the early generations of Islam were nothing like
western kings and rulers; if anything, they were more accountable
to the laws of Islam than were the common masses of Muslims. So,
in short, if one endeavors to defend Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2s, one
is doing something honorable; nonetheless, his arguments and the
methodology of his defense count of a lot, for he must adhere to
clear proofs and sound principles. As for what Dr. Haikal said, the

‎Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 237).‏ لذأ
‎As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr 2, pg. 140.‏ أذا

Arn All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 463

implications of his arguments run contrary to some of the most
cherished and important of Islamic principles."

a Supports His Military Commanders

Some of the members of Khaalid’s army bore witness that,
when the Muslims made the call to prayer, the prisoners —
among whom was Maalik ibn Nuwairah — also made the call to
prayer; therefore, some of Khaalid’s soldiers felt that it was
forbidden to kill the prisoners. One such soldier was the noble
Companion Abu Qataadah ‏نك‎

Abu Qataadah 4 was genuinely, if not correctly, outraged; he
felt that Khaalid # had gone too far when he killed Maalik ibn
Nuwairah. Abu Qataadah ‏نه‎ then left Khaalid es and went to Al-
Madeenah, in order to register an official complaint with the
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah 8.

When Abu Qataadah 2s went to Al-Madeenah and complained
about Khaalid’s actions, Abu Bakr 2 became upset and took a
strong position, being upset more with Abu Oataadah # than with
Khaalid ‏.ذه‎ Khaalid ‏,رق‎ after all, was the appointed leader of the
Muslim army; he and his men were in enemy territory; and it was
clearly a time of war. Therefore, Abu Bakr 2 felt, it was highly
inappropriate for Abu Qataadah # to abandon his leader during a
time of grave danger. And so, wanting to teach a lesson to Abu
Qataadah # and other members of the Muslim army, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎ordered Abu Qataadah # to leave Al-Madeenah immediately and
to return from whence he came in order to rejoin his fellow soldiers
under the command of Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏كاي‎ During a time
of war, it was important for soldiers to remain united among
themselves and loyal to their commanders.

Abu Bakr 2 did not ignore Abu Qataadah’s complaints, for he
did look into the matter, and he did listen to Abu Oataadah # and
to other accounts as well. It was simply a matter of Abu Bakr ‏ره‎

Ul Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 232).
Pl Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 231).

464 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذف‎

having studied the matter mn depth, conchiding that Khaalid &
was innocent of the accusations that were leveled against him. It is
not unlikely that Abu Bakr 4 approved of Khaalid’s actions since
Maalik ibn Nuwairah continued to refuse to pay Zakaat until the
end of his life.

Everyone had their own opinion about what had happened.
Abu Bakr 4s was able to listen to their opinions, weigh the various
proofs that were presented to him regarding the matter, and
arrive at a correct conclusion — hence his belief in the innocence
of Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 4».

In keeping Khaalid 2 on as the commander of his army, Abu
Bakr ‏ذاه‎ was following the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎
‎For at times, Khaalid & did things — at times out of zealousness
or at times out of a lack of knowledge — that the Messenger of
Allah #@ was not completely comfortable with; nonetheless, ‏عط‎
‎Messenger of Allah #¢ kept him on and did not fire him from his
post. And he #@ would accept Khaalid’s apologies when he might
have gone too far. Overall, Khaalid 2 might not have been 5
knowledgeable as other Companions ‏كأ‎ were, but he was a
supremely brilliant military commander who, in the end, was a
great asset to the Muslim nation. The Prophet # said:

د ‎cared fF‏ 587 لكين ه بيرع . 2 - 38 ا 7( 2“
‎manele 9d 4 Sy‏ فإنه سَيْف مِنْ سيوفي الله ‎Awe‏ الله الكفار)

“Do not harm Khaalid, for indeed, he is a sword from the swords
of Allah, which Allah has set loose against the disbeltevers JAY

There is, as Imam ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on
him) pointed out, a deeper meaning to Abu Bakr's unwavering
attitude towards Khaalid ‏ذه‎ A leader must be balanced; he
should not be exclusively soft and lenient, nor should he be
exclusively harsh and stern; instead, he should have a mix of both
qualities. The problem was that Abu Bakr 2, by his very nature,
was soft and lenient; yet when he became Khaleefah, he added a

LD Fathy}-Baaree (7 / 101).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 465

degree of appropriate sternness to his character — hence the firm
stand he took against the apostates. Understanding that a leader
must be balanced in his level of sternness and leniency, Abu Bakr
# sought the help of men who could help make him complete. Ifa
leader is lenient, and if he employs the help of men that are stern
and harsh, a proper balance will be arrived at, which is why Abu
Bakr 2 used “Umar a as a minister and counselor, and Khaalid
ibn Al-Waleed 4 as a military commander.

The opposite is true as well: If a leader is harsh and stern, he, in
order to arrive at a proper balance, should employ the services of
men who are lenient and easy-going. That is why ‘Umar 4, who
was known for his stermness and harshness, relied, upon being
nominated to the post of Khaleefah, on the likes of Abu “‘Ubaidah
ibn Al-Jarraah ‏رذ‎ Sa’ad ibn Abee Waqqaas ‏رك‎ Abu “Ubaidah Ath-
Thagafee ‏رف‎ An-No’maan ibn Muarin 4, Sa’eed ibn “Aamir ‏رق‎
‎and others of their kind, who were known more for their worship
and abstemious lifestyles than was, for instance, someone like
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2. To achieve a complete balance, ‘Umar
# strove, after he became Khaleefah, to become more gentle and
lenient that he had ever been before. Thus arriving at a proper
balance — between the states of harshness and leniency — he
truly became deserving of the title, “The Leader of the Believers.”

In the case of Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ he continued to employ the services
of Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2 throughout not only the apostate
wars, but the conquests of Iraq and Ash-Sham (Syria and
surrounding regions) as well. Abu Bakr # needed Khaalid ‏رض‎
‎and even when Khaalid 4 would make the odd mistake, Abu
Bakr 4 would think the best of him if an excuse could be found
for him; otherwise, he 4 would admonish him and censure him
with words; what he was not willing to do, however, was fire him
from his post. The benefit of keeping him on as commander of his
armies was greater than the benefit of removing him from his
post; after all, no one else could truly replace him.

In. short, if a leader’s personality leans towards leniency, his
ministers and helpers should be stern; and if a leader's personality

466 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏لد‎

leans towards harshness, his ministers and helpers should be
lenient — all in the name of arriving at a proper balance. So for the
above-mentioned reason Abu Bakr # kept on Khaalid ‏كل‎ as the
commander of his armies; and for the very same reason “Umar &,
upon becoming Khaleefah, decided to remove Khaalid # from his
post and to replace him with a more lenient man, Abu “Ubaidah
ibn Al-Jarraah #. For both the sternness of “Umar ‏هه‎ and the
sternness of Khaalid 4 would not make for a good mix. Both Abu
Bakr 4 and ‘Umar # strove in the same fashion to become,
through the men they appointed to important posts, balanced
leaders. As for the Messenger of Allah ‏وي‎ he was, in and of
himself, balanced and complete, stern when necessary, and
lenient when leniency was called for. And that is why he #€ said
about himself:

م ‎rere‏ 4 م ‎vete‏
‎GY‏ نبي الرحمة» آنأ نبي الملحمة»)

“T am the Prophet of mercy; I am the Prophet of slaughter (in
war)’

5) The Apostasy of the Peoples of ‘Ummaan and Bahrain

The people of ‘Ummaan had in fact embraced Islam during the
lifetime of the Prophet #¢. In order to educate the people of
‘Ummaan about the teachings of Islam, the Prophet 2 sent ‘Amr
ibn Al-’Aas -& to live among them for a while. But as with other
parts of Arabia, ‘Ummaan went through turbulent times after the
death of the Prophet #&. For shortly after the Prophet #& died, a
man named Dhut-Taaj Lageet ibn Maalik Al-Azdee rose to
prominence among his people and claimed to be a Prophet. The
ignorant masses among the people of ‘Ummaan followed him,
and with so many followers under his command, he was able to
defeat the forces of ‘Abbaad and Jaifar, who were the two
recogmed leaders of ‘Ummaan.

11 Musnad Ahmad (4/395, 404, 407).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 467

Jaifar, ‘Abbaad, and their followers were forced to retreat to
nearby mountainsides and seashores. And Jaifar immediately
sent word to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s, informing him about the
dire situation of his people, and imploring him to send armies to
‘Ummaan in order to restore peace to the region.

In response to Jaifar’s letter, Abu Bakr ‏د‎ mobilized and
dispatched two armies, one of which was headed by Hudaifah
ibn Maihsin Al-Ghilfaanee ‏رف‎ and the other by ‘Inifah ‏.كك‎ Abu
Bakr ‏يه‎ ordered the two leaders to cooperate with one another
and to head towards ‘Ummaan. He told them that Hudhaifah ‏دك‎
‎was to be the overall leader of the two armies, but that, once they
reached Mahrah, ‘Irjiafah was to take over that role. Furthermore,
Abu Bakr 4 sent ‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl « to provide them with
reinforcements. After he sent ‘Ikrimah ‏ف‎ Abu Bakr # sent word
to ‘Injifah ‏ذه‎ and Hudhaifah ‏ره‎ ordering them to follow ‘Tkrimah’s
decisions once they reached “Ummaan.

Upon nearing the region of “Ummaan, Hudhaifah # and
‘Irjitah ‏ذه‎ contacted Jatfar, informing him of their impending
arrival. Although their message reached Jaifar, Laqeet too was
informed about their approaching army. And so in order to
prepare for an impending battle, Lageet set out with his followers
and made camp in a place called Dabaa, which was the largest
city of the region; also, it was the most visited city of the region,
since it contained in it a large marketplace.

As was sometimes practiced during wars that took place prior
to the advent of Islam, Lageet brought with him not just his
soldiers, but their wives, their children, and their wealth as well.
These three were placed at the rear of the army in order to
motivate soldiers and remind them about what they were fighting
for, a strategy that was at once effective and dangerous, in that it
put the lives of women and children directly at risk. But no
matter, for Laqeet knew that this was going to be a decisive battle:
Either he would win and gain power, or he would lose, never to
get back up on his feet again. It was, in short, an all-or-nothing
battle for him.

468 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قد‎

Meanwhile, Jaifar, “Abbaad, and their followers made camp
nearby at a place called Suhaar, and they were soon met by
Hudhaifah, ‘Inifah, and their soldiers.

Shortly thereafter, the Muslim forces met head on with
Lageet’s army. The fighting was intense, and the Muslims had
their backs up against the wall, and were on the verge of fleeing
from the scene of the battle. But at the most crucial moment of the
battle — when the Muslims were about to flee and lose all hope of
victory — Allah 8, by His Grace and Mercy, helped his obedient
slaves in the form of reinforcements from the Banu Naajiyah and
‘Abdul-Qais tribes. No sooner did the reinforcements arrive than
the tide of the battle shifted completely: imminent defeat for the
Muslims turned into certain victory as the polytheists went from
attacking to running away from the battlefield. Muslim soldiers
mounted horses that were left behind by the enemy and gave
chase to enemy fighters, managing, in the end, to kill approxi-
mately ten-thousand of them. Also, the women and children of
enemy soldiers were taken captive, and their wealth was seized;
and what is more, all of the wealth that was in the marketplace of
Dabaa was taken as booty. After all of the war booty was collected
and gathered in one place, one-fifth of it was put to one side and
was then sent, in the hands of ‘Irjifah ‏رك‎ ta Abu Bakr # in ‏لذ‎
‎Madeenah."!

A number of factors contributed to the victory of the Muslim
army. First, a large percentage of the inhabitants of “Ummaan,
instead of following Lageet, remained steadfast upon Islam and
fought under the leadership of ‘Abbaad and Jaifar. Second,
‘Abbaad, Jaifar, and their followers managed to stay safe in
fortified areas for long enough to allow the Muslim army to arrive
on the scene. Third, the Banu Judhaidh, Banu Naajiyah, and Banu
‘Abdul-Oais tribes arrived just in the nick of time, thus greatly
influencing the outcome of the battle and helping turn defeat for
the Muslims into a clear and decisive victory.!”

11 Ath-Thabitoona ‘Alal-Islam (pgs. 58-60}.
I Thid..

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 469
Apostasy in Bahrain

The Messenger of Allah ‏وَل‎ sent out messengers to distant
lands, charging them with the duty of inviting foreign kings,
leaders, and emperors to Islam. One of the messengers he sent
was Al-’Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee 2, and his mission was to go to
Bahrain and invite its king, Al-Mundhir ibn Saawaa ‏علط‎ Abdee, to
Islam. Whereas most foreign leaders rejected the message of
Islam, Al-Mundhir enthusiastically embraced it, as did his people
shortly thereafter. Al-Mundhir stayed on as leader of his people,
and he quickly succeeded in establishing justice and the laws of
Islam throughout Bahrain. Al-Mundhir’s initial response to Al-
“Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee was at once moving and very logical in
its tone: “T have given thought to my kingdom, and I have come to
the conclusion that being king will benefit me only in this world,
and not at all in the Hereafter. And I have also given thought to
your religion; [ have come to the conclusion that it will benefit me
both in this life and the Hereafter. So what should prevent me
from embracing a religion that will provide me with safety in this
life and peace once | am dead? Yesterday (ie., years earlier, when
I first heard about Islam), | wondered at those who embraced
Islam; as for today, I wonder at those who reject it”!

But the situation in Bahrain changed when, within a short span
of time, both the Messenger of Allah #@ and Al-Mundhir 4s died.
The tnhabitants of Bahrain apostatized, and they crowned as their
new king a man named Al-Mundhir ibn An-No’maan Al-
Gharoor.'*!

Not everyone in Bahrain apostatized; in fact, those of them that
remained steadfast upon Islam played an important role in
bringing back Islam, safety, and justice to the region. Noteworthy
in this regard was a man named Jaarood ibn Al-Ma’‘laa ‏ركه‎ who
was a Companion of the Messenger of Allah #2, and who was
knowledgeable about the teachings of Islam.

‎At-Taraateeb Al-Idaariyyah (1/19).‏ ذا
‎Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Ahmad Sa’eed (pg. 146).‏ لكا

40 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

Having gained knowledge directly from the Messenger of
Allah #&, Jaarood # returned to his people and invited them to
Islam. They all answered his call, but shortly thereafter the
Messenger of Allah #@ died, and they began to harbor doubts
about their religion. They, the members of the ‘Abdul-Qais tribe,
said to one another, “Had Muhammad been a Prophet, he would
not have died.”” And so they apostatized. Upon learning of their
condition, Jaarood # asked them to gather together for a meeting.
Once they were all assembled before him, he 4 said, “O people of
“Abdul-Oais, I will ask you about something, and tf you know the
answer, tell it to me; but if you don’t know the answer, don’t
answer me.” They replied, “Ask whatever you want.” He said,
“You know that in bygone times Allah had (sent) Prophets.” They
said, “Yes.” He asked, “You know that to be true, or you think
that to be true?” They said, “We know that to be true.” He asked,
“And what happened to them in the end?” They said, “They
died.” He & said, “And so Muhammad has died just as they have
died. And I bear witness that none has the right to be worshipped
but Allah, and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger.”
They said, “And we too bear witness that none has the right to be
worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and
Messenger; we further bear witness that you are our chief and the
best among us.” Thus did they change their minds and choose
Islam over apostasy. Truly, this was a memorable moment for
Jaarood ‏رك‎ who showed that, with knowledge and logical
arguments, one can have a profound effect on the hearts and
minds of one’s people. Knowledge, to be sure, is as indispensable
to Da’wah (Le., to propagating Islam) as water is to life.

In Bahrain, the inhabitants of the town of Juwaathah remained
steadfast upon Islam. Consequently, the apostates of Bahrain laid
siege to their town and made matters very difficult for them,
having prevented all food from entering their fortified areas. As a
result of the siege, the people of Juwaathah were made to suffer
severe hunger; Allah's help soon came, but not before they were
put to trial in their Faith and came out of that test trimmphant,
even though many of them were on the verge of death by

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 471

starvation. Throughout the ordeal, they remained strong because
of their Faith and because of their complete and unyielding trust
in Allah a.

Their ordeal came to an end when the army that Abu Bakr «&
sent to the region finally arrived. That army was headed by Al-
“Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee #, who, upon nearing Bahrain, was
joined by Humaamah ibn Uthaal #& and a large contingent of
people from the Banu Suhaim tribe. Also, Jaarood ibn Al-Ma’laa
# soon arrived on the scene along with a number of fighters from
the Banu ‘Abdul-Qais tribe. With so many soldiers now under his
overall leadership, Al-‘Alaa ‏ذه‎ led an attack against the apostates.
And it was not long before Allah # granted victory to His
believing slaves. As for ‏ره مهلف “لذ‎ he, in his effort to eradicate
apostasy in Bahrain, was greatly helped by Qais ibn ‘Aaasim An-
Nagree, ‘Afeef ibn Al-Mundhir, and Al-Muthannah ibn Haar-
ithah Ash-Shaibaanee.”!

A Miracle Occurs for the Benefit of Al-‘Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee 4

In our times, Al-’Alaa 4 might not be widely known among
the common masses of Muslims; nonetheless, he was among the
best of the Prophet's Companions &. Even among the many
highly knowledgeable Companions & of the Messenger of Allah
#@, Al-’ Alaa ‏نا‎ was deemed a scholar; and what is more, he 4 was
a prolific worshipper. But perhaps it was something else for
which Al-‘Alaa 4 was most respected: he was that rare kind of
person who was so close to Allah 8 that he simply had to pray for
something tn order for his prayer to be answered.

One of the clearest examples of the power of his prayer relates
to the above-mentioned expedition to Bahrain. On their way to
enemy territory, Al-’Alaa ‏هك‎ and his men suffered a great loss that
almost resulted in their deaths. For, while they were in the middle
of the desert, ready to make camp, their camels inexplicably went
wild and raced off with all of their belongings — their food, drink,

Ul AtTaareekh Al-Islaamee, by Al-Humaidee (9/98).
Pl Ath-Thaabitoona ‘Alal-Islam (pg. 63).

472 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ف‎

tents, supplies, weapons, etc. And so ‏مهلخ “لم‎ # and his men
were stranded in the middle of the desert with nothing more than
the clothing on their backs.

The camels were nowhere to be found; in fact, the soldiers
were not able to retrieve even a single one of them. The situation
seemed hopeless. Far away from any town or city, the soldiers
new that, without water, it was only a matter of days before the
desert heat and a complete lack of water would result in their
deaths. Sadness and misery overcame the soldiers, as they, feeling
the certainty of death, began to verbally dictate their final wills
and testaments to one another.

Al’Alaa ‏رك‎ not being able to countenance so much
hopelessness in his men, ordered them to gather around him.
He # then said to them, “O people, are you not Muslims? Are you
not out here striving in the way of Allah? Are you not Allah’s
helpers?’ They said, “Yes.” He ‏ذه‎ said, “So rejoice, for, by Allah,
Allah does not abandon those who are in a situation that
resembles the one you find yourselves to be in now.” The call to
Fajr prayer was then made.

After he led his men in prayer, Ai-‘Alaa 4 fell down on his
knees and raised his hands in order to supplicate. And his men
then did the same. They remained tpon that state until the rising
of the sun, at which time Al’ Alaa 4 was still, with all of his heart,
invoking Allah # for help. Then, suddenly, Allah 388 created a
large stream of pure water right beside where ‏مهلم “لذ‎ # and his
men were making supplication. ‏أ مهلك “لم‎ and his men walked
towards the stream, drank from it, and even bathed with its
water. Later on that morning, their camels, coming from all
directions, returned to them. It was not a matter of some camels
returning; rather, every single one of them came back, carrying
upon their humps all of the soldiers’ supplies. Then the camels
were taken to the miraculous stream and were made to drink to
their full not once, but twice, so blessed and plentiful was the
stream’s water. The soldiers rejoiced, were thankful to Allah %,
and continued onwards in order to complete their mission.

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 473
The Defeat of the Apostates

When Al-’Alaa # and his men reached enemy territory, they
made camp at a close distance from the opposing army’s
encampment. That night, as the Muslims were resting in
preparation for the upcoming battle, Al-“Alaa # heard loud
voices emanating from the enemy encampment. Al-’ Alaa 4 then
said, “Who is the man that will go and find out what they (Le., the
enemy) are doing?” ‘Abdullah ibn Hadhf volunteered for the job,
after which he stealthily made his way to the enemy encampment.
Upon entering he found that many, if not most, of the enemy
fighters were drunk.

When ‘Abdullah ibn Hadhf returned and informed the
Muslims about the unbridled revelry that was taking place in
the enemy encampment, ‏مهلخ “لمر‎ 4s ordered his men to launch an
immediate attack against the enemy. Given their drunken states,
the apostates were in no way ready to fight, and so many of them
were killed that night, with only some of them being able to
escape death. For the Muslims, the battle was a resounding
success; they not only defeated the enemy, but they also gained a
great deal in terms of war booty.

Around the time the Muslims launched their attack, one of the
leaders of the opposing army, a man named Al-Hutam ibn
Dubai’ah, was deep in sleep. He woke up with a start when
Muslims began their attack. Al-Hutam was terrified, but he
nonetheless, being determined to survive the attack, made his
way towards his riding horse and mounted it. Realizimg that the
stirrups were broken, he called out, asking for one of his men to
come and fix them. But instead of one of his men, it was a Muslim
soldier who responded to his call. “J will fix your stirrups for
you,” the Muslim soldier said, “so raise your leg.” Al-Hutam, not
realizing that the man who came to help him was a Muslim,
complied, at which point the Muslim soldier took a heavy swing
with his sword, the result of which was the complete severing of
Al-Hutam’s leg. Having fallen down onto the ground, Al-Hutam,
not wanting to live the rest of his life with a single leg only,

474 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

pleaded with the Muslim soldier, saying, “Please, finish me off.”
The Muslim soldier replied, “T will not do so,” after which he left.
Then, each time another Muslim soldier passed by, Al-Hutam
implored him to finish him off, but each one of them refused.
Finally, when Qais ibn ‘Aasirn (may Allah have mercy on him)
passed by, Al-Hutam said, “lam Al-Hutam, so kill me.” Qais, not
seeing the state of Al-Hutam’s lower body, did as Al-Hutam
asked, killing him with a lethal blow. But when he then saw the
state of Al-Hutam’s missing leg, he regretting what he had done,
saying, “O what a mistake 1 have made! Had I known about his
situation, I would not have even touched him.”

The Muslims pursued the fleeing enemy fighters, killing all
those they came across. Most enemy soldiers that did manage to
escape with their lives went to Daarain, which was a famous
seaport in Bahrain. From there they boarded ships and prepared
to leave the region. Meanwhile, back at the scene of the battle, Al-
‘Alaa Al-Hadramee + was busy distributing the spoils of war.
. And once that task was completed, he said to his men, “Come and
let us attack the enemy in Daarain.”

By the time Al-’Alaa # and his men reached the seaport of
Daarain, the apostates had already cast off and were sailing
towards safety. Al-’ Alaa knew that even if, right then and there,
he and his men boarded ships and set sail in pursuit of the enemy,
they would not be able to catch up to them on time. And so he
rode into the sea on horseback, all the while saying, “O Most
Merciful of the merciful ones, O All-Wise, O Most Generous One;
O the One; O As-Samad (The Self-Sufficient Master, Whom all
creatures need, He neither eats nor drinks); O Ever Living One, O
the One Who sustains and protects all that exists; O Possessor of
Might and Majesty — None has the right to be worshipped but
You. © our Lord.”"! He ‏ع‎ then ordered his soldiers to do the
same; they obeyed, and they too entered the sea on their nding
animals.

01 Al Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/121).

An All-Out Assault Against the Apostates 475

By the permission of Allah #, the Almighty, they crossed the
bay as if they were riding on sand; miraculously, none of their
riding camels’ hooves became immersed in water; also, water did
not reach the knees of their riding horses. In the span of a day,
they caught up to the enemy, killed every enemy soldier, and
returned with captives and a great deal of war booty. Throughout
their sea expedition, they did not lose a single thing. When they
returned safely to shore, Al-’Alaa # distributed the war booty,
giving six-thousand (Deenars or Dirhams) to each rider, and two-
thousand to each infantryman. He 4 then wrote to Abu Bakr &,
informing him about their victory; and Abu Bakr then wrote
back, commending him for his efforts.

In this section, I have given an account of two miracles with
which Allah 8 blessed ‏مهلف “لذ‎ Al-Hadramee ‏.ذه‎ One of the
witnesses of both miracles was a Christian monk from Hajr who
had decided to accompany the Muslim army. When the Muslims
achieved victory, the monk embraced Islam. Upon being asked,
“What made you accept Islam?” he replied, “I feared that Allah
would transform me (into a pig or some other animal) if I didn’t
embrace Islam. I had that fear because I witnessed so many clear
miracles.” He became a good, practicing Muslim, and the
Companions 4 would listen to his narrations (this probably
refers to Israelite narrations).

After the defeat of the apostates, Islamic law, justice, and peace
were restored in Bahrain. It should be noted, however, that the
uprising of the apostates in the region was not attributed only to
Arabs who turned away from Islam; rather, the Persians too
played a role in the conflict, providing fighters and other forms of
material support to their apostate allies. In fact, the apostates
would not have been able to fight against the Muslims for so long
had it not been for their Persian allies. The total number of foes
that the Muslims had to face in the region was twelve-thousand,;
nine-thousand of them were foreign Persian fighters, and three-

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/334).‏ لذ

476 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2

thousand were Arab apostates."! Meanwhile, the Muslim army
consisted of four-thousand soldiers.

Muthannah ibn Haarithah 2 played an important role in
helping to defeat the apostates in Bahrain. Along with the soldiers
who were under his command, Muthannah - was a great help to
Al-’Alaa #. He led his contingent of fighters northwards from
Bahrain to Qateef, Hajr, and then finally to the Dijlah River. Along
the way, he came across and defeated battalions of Persian
soldiers who were stationed in the region in order to provide
support to their apostate allies in Bahrain.

Upon hearing of the brave feats of Muthannah ‏رض‎ and after the
conflict in Bahrain was over with, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ ordered
Muthannah to continue his Da’wah (propagation of Islam)
efforts among the Arabs of Iraq. Abu Bakr # was pleased with
Muthannah’s achievements, but he considered them to be only
the first steps to freeing Iraq from the shackles of disbelief. The
final and decisive step would involve sending an army headed by
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed & to the region.*!

‘4 Futooh ibn ‘Atham (pg. 47) and to Ath-Thaabitoona ‘Alal-Islam (pg. 64).

"1 Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq (pg. 44), by Khaalid Al-Jinaabee and Nazzaar ‏للق‎
‎Hadeethee.

Chapter 4

the

Hlaneefah Tribe

First: Some Backer

Musailamah posed perhaps the greatest threat to the Muslims
during the apostate wars, for he had many well-armed followers.
And though his evil became a cause for concern during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr 4, Musailamah had been a charlatan and
an evil-doer even as far back as during the Makkan period of the
Prophet's biography. And after Musailamah died he continued to
be remembered through an Arab expression that was coined
because of him: “More of a liar than Musailamah.”

His full name was Musailamah ibn Thumaamah ibn Kabeer
ibn Habeeb Al-Hanafee Abu Shaamah, and he was a member of
the Banu Haneetah tribe. Born and raised in Yamaamah, ina town
that is today called Al-Jubailah, and that is situated near Al-
‘Uyainah, Musailamah was given the nickname “ Ar-Rahmaan’”
during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance; and later on, he became

478 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2

known as the Rahmaan (merciful one) of Yamaamah.!"!

In his younger days, he traveled far and wide throughout both
Arab and foreign lands. His goal was to learn ways of influencing
people; of particular interest to him were magic, soothsaying,
sorcery, fortunetelling, and other sumilar evil arts. He was known
to have practiced a magic trick m which he would reattach a
bird’s wing that seemed to be, but was not really, broken.

When Musailamah first claimed to be a prophet, the
Messenger of Allah # was still in Makkah. Most probably
Musailamah did not make his claim to many people, but instead
maintained a low profile. Nonetheless, having heard about the
Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ he sent men to Makkah in order to hear the
Qur’an for him. When they returned and conveyed to him the
Verses they heard, he would recite them to people, claumimg them
as his own sayings.!”

In the ninth year of the Islamic calendar, a year during which
Islam spread throughout the entire Arabian Peninsula, a
delegation of Banu Haneefah tribesmen visited the Messenger
of Allah #¢ in Al-Madeenah in order to declare their entry into the
fold of Islam. Accompanying the delegates was Musailamah.
According to an account that is related by ibn Ishaag, Musailamah
met with and spoke to the Messenger of Allah #¢. Although ibn
Ishaaq did not relate their entire conversation, he did mention
that the Messenger of Allah #8, referring to a piece of palm branch
that was beside him, said:

“Were you to ask me for this palm branch, I would not give it to
{3}
you.

11 Huroob Ar-Riddah Wa Binaa Ad-Daulah, by Ahmad Sa’eed (pg. 133); also refer
to Az-Zarkalee (2/125).

1 Al-Bad’ Wat-Taareckh, by Al-Maqdasee (5/160); also, refer to Harakatur-Riddah

(pe. 71).
‏1ذا‎ As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah (2/576, 577), by bn Hishaam.

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 479

This wording suggests that Musailamah had first asked the
Messenger of Allah #2 to make him a partner in prophethood or to
appoint him as his successor.

According to another account, however, Musailamah did not
meet with the Messenger of Allah #% but instead stayed behind,
looking after and guarding the riding animals and supplies of
the Banu Haneefah delegates. When the Messenger of Allah #8
gave out gifts to the delegates, he #€ allotted a share to
Musailamah that was equal in quantity to what was received by
the rest of the delegates. Having allotted a share for Musavamah,
the Prophet #@ said, “He is not the most evil one among you.”
The Prophet 2% said this because Musailamah was looking after
their things for them.!!

The Banu Haneefah Delegates Return to Yamaamah

Shortly after the delegates returned to Yamaamah, Musaila-
mah openly declared that he was a prophet; he said that he was a
partner of the Messenger of Allah #¢, basing his claim on the
Prophet's saying:

o tu 9 3
5 rid
0 ‏ل بسر‎ aa) ‏(إنه‎
‎“He is not the most evil one among you.”

In reality, this saying of the Prophet #2 in no way meant that
Musailamah was the best person among his people. Rather,
what is more likely, the Prophet's statement was based on the
fact that all of the delegates were evil; and so what the Prophet
# meant was simply that Musailamah was no more evil than
they were, but was instead as evil as them. This, as later events
showed, proved to be true, for the vast majority of people from
the Banu Haneefah tribe were evil. And even though
Musailamah was their leader, they were willing participants
in his evil activities.

‎As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah (2/577).‏ 1لا

480 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ويد‎

After he claimed to be a prophet, Musailamah began to predict
future events for his people, compose Verses of poetry, and decree
laws based on his whims and desires. One claim he made was that
the Qur'an was being revealed to him; in order to prove his claim,
he would compose and recite Verses that he described as being a
part of the Qur'an. Some of those Verses are mentioned im history
books, and they range from the ridiculous to the absurd to
outright nonsense. One such Verse described, in a banal and trite
manner, the life of a frog. The more Musailamah tried to imitate
the lofty and eloquent wording of the Qur'an, the more he
exposed himself as a composer of third-rate poetry; but no matter,
for many of his people followed him not because they believed in
him, but out of a sense of tribal loyalty.

ibn Katheer related an account of how, prior to becoming a
Muslim, ‘Amr ibn Al-‘Aaas met Musailamah. Knowing that ‘Amr
was a member of the Quraish, Musatlamah asked him about what
had recently been revealed to Prophet Muhammad #8. “Amr said,
“Allah has revealed to him Chapter “Al-“Asr’” Musailamah said,
“A similar chapter has been revealed to me,” after which he
proceeded to recite trite Verses of poetry which he claimed was
revealed to him by Allah #. When Musailamah finished reciting
his poetry, “Amr, who was still a polytheist, said, “By Allah,
indeed you know that I know that you area liar!”"! Referring to
this incident, ibn Katheer aptly pointed out that Musailamah’s
poetry was so terrible that he was not even able to. gain the
support of a polytheist who was, like him, a staunch enemy of the
Prophet #6.) And as Abu Bakr Al-Baagillaanee pointed out,
even though history books record some of Musailamah’s foolish
sayings, they are not worth any sane person’s time; they are
mentioned only to be laughed at and to be wondered at —
wondered at because, even though they are trite and ridiculous
sayings, Musailamah still managed to lead a great many people

' Tafseer ibn Katheer (4/547).
‏أثا‎ thid.

Musailamah, “The Liar’, and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 481

astray, which goes to show just how gullible and ignorant many
people are in this world!

Musailamah’s Letter to the Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎

In the year 10 H, when the Messenger of Allah #¢ became sick
with the illness that led to his death, Musailamah became at once
more confident and bold in his actions. He wrote a letter to the
Messenger of Allah #8, claiming in it that he was a partner to the
Messenger of Allah #¢ in his prophethood. “Amr ibn Al-Jaarood
Al-Hanafee wrote the letter for Musailamah, and ‘Ubaadah ibn
Al-Haarith Al-Hanafee was the messenger who delivered it to the
Prophet #@ in Al-Madeenah. Here is the actual text of that letter:
“This is from Musailamah, the messenger of Allah, to Muham-
mad, the Messenger of Allah. To proceed: We should have one-
half of the earth, and the Quraish should have the other halt, but
the Quraish are not just (with us).

The Messenger of Allah #2 wrote back a beautiful reply, which
Ubai ibn Ka’ab # transcribed for him:

يسم الله ‎gers‏ 1 ني الرَحِيِمٍ» من محمد ‎reo‏ ل ِ ‎et‏ إلى مُسَيُلْمَةٌ ‎HS‏

af
oe

ما تعد فَإِنَ الأرْضّ يله ‎ats, 7 as‏ من عادو » ‎acl‏

ral

للْمتَّقِينَ» وَالسَّلَامُ عَلَى مَنِ ‎BSI‏ الهُدَى)

“In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
This is from Muhammad, the Prophet, to Musailamah, the Liar.
To proceed : Verily, the earth belongs to Allah, and He gives it to
whomsoever He pleases from armong his slaves. And the good
ending (in life) is for those who fear Allah. And so peace be upon
those who follow true guidance.”

‎‘Aijaaz Al-Qur‘an, with scholarly commentary by Sayyid Sagr (pg. 156).‏ لذ
‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (3/386).‏ 1
‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (3/ 387).‏ اذا

482 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

Musailamah sent his letter with two men; one of them, as I
have hitherto mentioned, was ‘Ubaadah ibn Al-Haarith Al-
Hanafee, who was known by the nickname, ibn An-Nuwaahah.
When the Prophet ‏وله‎ was finished reading the letter, he #@ asked
the two messengers:

as ee
‏أنتمًا؟)‎ ON gai 13105)
“And what do the two of you say?”

They said: “Whatever Musailamah says, we say,” to which the
Prophet 2 replied,

(SCE) ‏ربت‎ a) Ase y ‏لا أن الرسُلَ‎ J ‏وَاللَه‎ Lain
“Lo! By Allah, had it not been for the fact that messengers are not

killed, I would have struck your necks (with the lethal blows of a
sword) “14

The Dangerous Mission of Habeeb ibn Zaid Al-Ansaaree ‏ويك‎

The Messenger of Allah # respected and honored not only the
treaties he signed, but also international norms; for since it was
customary among the nations of the world not to harm
messengers and emissaries from foreign lands, the Messenger of
Allah # did not kill Musailamah’s messengers, even though they
were both despicable apostates who deserved to be executed right
then and there. Musailamah, on the other hand, had no respect for
treaties, agreements, and international norms. For this reason, the
person who was delivering the Prophet's reply was embarking
upon a dangerous mission that would very likely end in his death.

Dangerous as the job was, Habeeb ibn Zaid Al-Ansaar ‏ره‎ son
of Umm “Ammaarah bitn Ka’ab Al-Maaziniyyah #, willingly
agreed to deliver the Prophet's letter to Musailamah. Upon
receiving and reading the Prophet's letter, Musailamah asked

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (3/386).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 483

Habeeb &, “Do you bear witness that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah?” Habeeb said, “Yes.” Musailamah then
asked, “And do you bear witness that I am the messenger of
Allah?” Habeeb ‏هه‎ replied, “I am deaf and cannot hear (what you
have to say).”” Musailamah repeated his question many times, but
Habeeb 2 continued to refuse to answer him. With each refusal
on Habeeb’s part, Musailamah became more furious and
frustrated; more importantly, each time Habeeb & refused to
answer Musailamah’s question, a limb from his body was
chopped off. Throughout the entire horrific ordeal, however,
Habeeb ‏كه‎ remained unbelievably calm and patient — until
finally, he achieved martyrdom at the hands of the tyrannical
charlatan."! May Allah be pleased with Habeeb « and with all of
the Prophet's Companions &.

Ar-Rajjaal ibn “Unfuwah Al-Hanafee

Musaitlamah gained almost universal and instant support from
his fellow tribesmen. This indicates that most people from the
Banu Haneefah tribe were naturally inclined towards evil, and
were just waiting for someone to lead them. The most rotten apple
among them all was perhaps not even Musailamah, but a man
named Ar-Rajjaal ibn “Unfuwah.

Arx-Rajjaal’s story began on a positive note, for he migrated to
Al-Madeenah, embraced Islam, recited the Qur'an, and even
memorized certain Chapters of the Qur'an. But he changed when
the Messenger of Allah #¢ ordered him to go back to Al-
Yamaamah in order to convince people not to follow Musaila-
mah. Dpon arriving in Yamaarah, Ar-Rajaal did the opposite of
what the Messenger of Allah #¢ asked him to do, for not only did
he abstain from inviting people to Islam, he told people that he
was coming back from Al-Madeenah with important news: That
the Messenger of Allah #¢ had made Musailamah his partner in
prophethood. As a result of this most heinous lie, Ar-Rajaal

11 Asadul-Ghaabah (biography number: 1049).

484 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq «

convinced more people to follow falsehood than did his leader,
Musailamah.!4!

During his lifetime, the Messenger of Allah #8 alluded to the
evil change that was to occur in Ar-Rajjaal. Abu Hurairah ‏كك‎ said,
”1 and a group of others sat down with the Prophet #¢, and
present among us was Ar-Rajjaal ibn “Unfuwah. During that
gathering, the Messenger of Allah #8 said:

‎stof i, 2 A550. fe -Tek. %‏ وه
(إن ‎Weg) KS‏ ضِرّسّه فِي الثار أغظم مِنْ أحد)
‎among this gathered group today) is a‏ ر . ع. 1) ‎Verily, among you‏

‎man whose molar tooth in the Hellfire will be larger than (Mount)
Uhud .””"

‎fat

‎Abu Hurairah 4 then said, “The members of that gathering
had died, and the only two that remained were myself and Ar-
Rajjaal. I continued to be afraid for myself (i.e., that the Prophet #
was referring to me) until Ar-Rajjaal came out with Musailamah,
(supporting him and) bearing witness to his prophethood. The
turmoil that was caused by Ar-Rajjaal was greater than the
turmoil that was caused by Musailamah.”'*! |

‎Second: The M

‎luslims of B

‎Anyone who studies the Apostate Wars is likely to come out
with the impression that every member of the Banu Haneefah
tribe apostatized. This is because history books abound with
narrations that describe the apostate movement in Yamaamah,
while very few accounts discuss those of Yamaamah’s inhabitants
that remained steadfast upon Islam.

‎And while it is true that the majority of Banu Haneefah’s
tribesmen apostatized, some of them did not; though hard to find
among the many narrations that describe the widespread

‎11 Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-“Uttoom (pg. 75).
"1 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/106).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 485

apostasy that took place in Yamaamah, some trustworthy
accounts do shed light on the reality that, not only did some
members of the Banu Haneefah tribe remain steadfast upon
Islam, they played an important role in defeating Musailamah
and his followers."

If not anything else, the reader should take away from the
following paragraphs a sense of appreciation and admiration for
those of Banu Haneefah’s tribesmen who, in spite of the dangers
they faced, refused to succumb to Musailamah’s false promises.
One such man — who should be remembered as a hero to all
Muslims — was Thumaamah ibn Aathaal ‏.ذه‎ He was one of ‏عط‎
‎chieftains of the Banu Haneefah tribe, and his opposition to
Musailamah was known to many. Because of his high ranking
among his tribe, and because he openly opposed Musailamah,
other Muslim members of his tribe went to him for guidance when
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed # approached with the Muslim army.

Thumaamah # was at once wise and brave. He openly scorned
the followers of Musailamah, saying to them, “Woe upon you, O
children of Haneefah. Listen to what I say, so that perhaps you
might become guided. And obey me, so that perhaps you might
become upright in your affairs. Know for certainty that
Muhammad #@ was a Prophet who was sent (by Allah) and
that there is no doubt whatsoever regarding the truthfulness of
his prophethood. And know that Musailamah is a liar. Do not be
deceived by his speech and his lies. Verily, you have heard the
Quran that Muhammad #¢ came with from his Lord, and you
have heard Allah’s Saying:

-

PA Bs AAT BED lll gyal all ‏الكتب. يت‎ LO Gh
rid x, i Ge me Je . a fa “

nail of BY SV SH ‏ذى‎ CG wt

“Ha Mim (These letters are one of the miracles of the Qur’an, and

none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings). The revelation of

(4 4th-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam (ps. 51).

156 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كد‎

the Book (this Qur’an) is from Allah the All-Mighty, the All-
Knower. The Forgtver of sin, the Acceptor of repentance, the
Severe in punishment, the Bestower (of favors), La ilaha illa
Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), to Him ts the
final return.” (Qur'an 40: 1-3)"

Thumaamah (may Allah have mercy on him) went on to say,
“Now compare that to the (nonsensical) speech of Musailamah,
the Liar. Consider and contemplate these matters, and do not let
them escape your attention. Lo! Verily, lam going out to Khaalid
ibn Al-Waleed tonight, and I am going to ask him to grant me
safety — safety for myself, my wealth, my wife, and my
children.” Al-Kilaa’ee related that Thumaamah also said to them,
“In these times, the only Prophet is Muhammad, and there will be
no Prophet after him.” According to Al-Kilaa’ee, Thumaamah
also recited some of the Verses that Musailamah claimed were
revealed to him, in order to expose Musailamah for the charlatan
and third-rate poet that he really was."

Those that agreed with him responded, “We are with you, O
Abu ‘Aamir. We want you to know that.” True to his word,
Thumaamah ibn Aathaal 2, along with a number of his fellow
tribesmen, went out in the middle of the night in order to meet
with Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 4. Thumaamah asked for a promise
of safety, and Khaalid # of course granted it to both him and his
companions.*!

There is another account that describes Thumaamah’s role in
the battle that took place against Musailamah and his followers.
Thumaamah’s contributions did not end there, for he and other
Muslims from the Banu Haneefah tribe fought alongside Al-‘Alaa
ibn Al-Hadramee & against the apostates of Bahrain. In regard to
the battles that took place in Bahrain, many brave feats have been
ascribed to Thumaamah (may Allah have mercy on him).!?

‎Huroob Ay-Riddah, by AL-Kilaa’ee (pg. 117).‏ ذا
‎Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alaltslam (pg. 52).‏ لما
‎Ath-Thanbitoon ‘Alal-Islam (pg. 54).‏ اذا

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 487

Another Banu Haneefah tribesman who remained steadfast
upon Islam was a man named Ma’mar ibn Kilaab Ar-
Rummaanee (may Allah have mercy on him). Ma’mar, who
was Thumaamah’s neighbor in Yamaamah, openly dissented by
delivering a speech in which he exhorted Musailamah and his
followers to come back to Islam. Ma’mar also made his way to
the Muslim army, and he too fought alongside Khaalid ‏يه‎
‎against the apostates of Banu Haneefah.

A man named ibn ‘Amr Al-Yashkaree also decided not to
follow Musailamah, but he, fearing for his life, kept his Islam a
secret. Me was probably most afraid of being ratted out by his
former friend, the infamous Ar-Rajjaal ibn ‘Unfuwah. ibn “Amr
composed a poem in which he discussed his beliefs and his refusal
to turn away from Islam. Somehow, Musailamah learned about
both the poem and its author, and he then ordered his men to
arrest, or perhaps even kill, the dissenter. But it was too late: By
the time they reached his house, he was already gone; and shortly
thereafter, he safely reached the place where the Muslim army
had made camp. He then met up with Khaalid # and discussed
strategy with him, pomting out to him the most weak and
vulnerable parts of Yamaamah.!! Other examples of Banu
Haneefah tribesmen who remained steadfast upon Islam were
‘Aaamir ibn Maslamah and the members of his clan.

Abu Bakr & honored and rewarded the Muslims of Banu
Haneefah, for once Muslims defeated Musailamah and his
followers, Abu Bakr 4 appointed Mutraf ibn An-No’maan as
governor of Yamaamah. Mutraf was a nephew of both
Thumaamah ibn Uthaal and ‘Aamir ibn Maslamah, both of
whom remained firm upon their Islam throughout the ordeal of
the Apostate War in Yamaamah.©!

iN Eturoob Ar-Riddah, by Al-Kilaa’ee (pgs. 104-106).
4) Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam (pg. 57).
‏أذا‎ Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam (pg. 58).

488 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذف‎

lid ‏نك‎ Leads H

Third: Khaa 3 ‏وكببر‎ Towards Yamaamah

Abu Bakr « sent orders to Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏أ‎ telling
him that, as soon as he finished dealing with Asad, Ghatfaan, and
Maalik ibn Nuwairah, he was to lead his army towards
Yamaamah. Shareek Al-Fizaaree ‏رط‎ whose job it was to carry
messages between Abu Bakr & and Khaalid +, said, “I witnessed
the Battle of Buzaakhah, and when it was over with, [1 went to Abu
Bakr. He ordered me to go to Khaalid, and he sent with me this
written message: ‘To proceed: Your messenger has arrived with
your letter, in which you described how Allah granted you
victory over the people of Buzaakhah and how you acted in
regard to the Asad and Ghatfaan (tribes); furthermore, you
mentioned that you were heading towards Yamaamah. That you
should go to Yamaamah is what I command you to do. Fear Allah
alone, for He has no partner; and be gentle with the Muslims that
are with you; be as a father to them....Study the state of the Banu
Haneefah tribe when you meet them, In Sha Allah (Allah Willing),
for you have never before come across a people that are like the
people of Banu Haneefah: They are all against you, and their
territory is vast. So when you arrive at your destination, oVersee
the proceedings of the conflict yourself. Put a man on your right
(i.e., in charge of the right wing of your army; or perhaps, in order
to guard over and protect you)), and a man on your left."! And
put a man in charge of your horse. Seek the counsel of the most
eminent of the Messenger of Allah's Companions from the Ansaar
and the Muhaajiroon. And give them the respect that is due to
them. When you meet the enemy, and you see that they are lined
up in their rows, then meet them (in battle), making sure that you
have prepared for them like weapons (.e., weapons that are at
least similar to theirs): an arrow for an arrow, a spear for a spear,
and a sword for a sword. Use a sword to kill their prisoners. And

UW Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Shaugee Abu Khaleel (pg. 78).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 489

terrify them by killing (those of them that you come across), and
burn them with fire @.e., as a payback for how they burned to
death the Muslims that lived among them). Beware of disobeying
my command. And peace be upon you”!!! After he read this
letter, Khaalid ‏ذه‎ said, “I have heard, and I will obey.”

Khaalid ¢ headed towards Yamaamah, fighting against and
killing all of the apostates he came across on the way. Meanwhile,
back in Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr « didn’t want to take any
chances, and so he sent out another large army, whose job it
would be to protect the rear of Khaalid’s army.

There were a number of apostate tribes that Khaalid 2 passed
by on his way to Yamaamah. He fought against them, and some
of them he killed, while others returned to Islam. Khaalid 4 even
came across the rear of Sujaah’s army (Sujaah, whom we have
hitherto discussed, was the woman who married Musailamah
and claimed to be a prophetess). Khaalid ‏ا‎ afflicted Sujaah’s
soldiers with a great deal of punishment, but he couldn’t pursue
them, since doing so would require a great deal of time, would
take him far away from Yamaamah, and would divert him from
his primary mission of attacking Musailamah. Therefore, he
swerved away from the direction of Sujaah’s army and continued
on his way towards Yamaamah."!

Upon learning about Khaalid’s imminent arrival, Musailamah
made camp at a place called “Aqribaa, which was situated on the
outskirts of Yamaamah. He then concentrated his efforts on
motivating his soldiers to fight bravely against Khaalid #& and his
men. He appointed Al-Mahkam ibn At-Tufail and Ar-Rajjaal ibn
‘Untuwah as the leaders of the right and left wings of his army.

As for the Muslims, Khaalid ‏ل‎ met up with ‘Ikrimah + and
Shurahbeel 2. As he prepared for the upcoming battle, Khaalid ‏ذه‎

‎Majmoo’ah Al-Wathanig As-Siyaasiyyah (pg. 348, 349) and Huroob Ar-Riddah, by‏ لذأ
‎Abu Khaleel (pg. 79).‏

‎1 Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Shaugee Abu Khaleel (pg. 79}.
‏اذا‎ As-Siddeeg Awwalul-Khulafaa (pg. 105).

490 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2%

appointed Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah 4s to lead the front of his
army, and over the army’s two wings he ‏ذا‎ appointed Zaid ibn
Al-Khattaab ‏كأ‎ and Abu Hudhaifah ibn ‘Utbah ibn Rabee’ah.”!

Mujaa’ah ibn Miraarah Al-Hanafee is Captured by the Muslim

The men in the front part of Khaalid’s army came across forty
(and it has been said, sixty) horsemen, who were under the
leadership of Mujaa’ah ibn Miraarah Al-Hanafee. These were
members of the Banu Haneefah tribe who had no idea about the
arrival of Khaalid’s army. This is because they had been absent
from Yamaarmah for a while, being preoccupied with getting
revenge on their enemies from the Banu Tameem and Banu
‘Aamir tribes. On their way back to Yamaamah, they were
surprised to see Khaalid’s army, and since there was no way to
escape for them, they were forced to surrender and were taken as
prisoners by Khaalid’s soldiers.

When Mujaa’ah and his men were brought to Khaalid #, he
asked them, “O children of Haneefah, what have you to say?”
They, at the cost of their lives, said, “We say that one of us is a
prophet and that one of you is a Prophet.” Based on their aposta Sy,
Khaalid 2 killed them.! According to one account, Khaalid ‏كه‎
‎asked them, “When did you first feel our presence (in the region)?”
They said, “We never felt your presence (until you came upon us
and captured us}. We went out to exact revenge against the people
of Banu ‘Aamir and Tameem.” But Khaalid # did not believe
them; he thought that they were spies that Musailamah had sent
out for the purpose of gathering information.

When Khaalid 2 made it clear that each and every one of them
was to be killed, they pleaded only for the life of their leader,
saying to Khaalid ‏رام‎ “Whether you want to help or hurt the
people of Yamaamah tomorrow, keep this one alive,” and as they

‎Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Shaugee Abu Khaleel (pg. 80).‏ لذأ
‎ll ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/338).‏

Musatlamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 497

said this, they pointed to Mujaa’ah. Khaalid # then spared
Mujaa’ah’s life and killed the rest of the prisoners. Mujaa’ah, a
man of good lineage, was a well-respected chieftain of the Banu
Haneefah tribe.

Each time Khaalid & stopped to make camp, he invited
Mujaa’ah to sit down beside him; then the two of them would eat
together and engage in conversation. On one of those occasions,
Khaalid asked him, “Tell me about your companion (ie.,
Musailamah). What is it that he recites to you? And have you
memorized any of his sayings (which he claims to be revelation)?”
Mujaa’ah replied, “Yes,” after which he proceeded to recite some
of Musailamah’s poetry. Khaalid ‏ره‎ shocked at the silliness of
what he was hearing, stood up, struck one of his hands against the
other, and said, “O Muslims, come and listen to the enemy of
Allah and to how he opposes the Qur'an.” Khaalid then said,
“Woe upon you, O Muyaa’ah. I consider you to be a chieftain who
is wise and intelligent (and yet how can you buy into his
nonsense). O enemy of Allah, listen to the Book of Allah (The
Possessor of Might and Majesty) and then reflect on how what the
enemy of Allah (Musailamah) says pales in comparison to it.”
Khaalid « then recited to him the Chapter:

“Glortfy the Name of your Lord, the Most High.” (Qur'an 87: 1)

After Khaalid finished his recitation, Mujaa’ah softened his
stance and decided to open up a little to Khaalid, telling him this
story: “There was a man from Bahrain who knew how to read and
write. Musailamah gave him preferential treatment, making him
his closest companion. In spite of the status he enjoyed with
Musailamah, the man would come out to us and say, “Woe upon
you, O people of Yamaamah: Your companion, by Allah, is a liar.
I do not think that you would accuse me of being biased against
him, for you see how he favors me (over everyone else). By Allah,
he lies to you, and he has taken pledges of allegiance from you
based upon pure falsehood.” Khaalid # asked, “What happened

492 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏م‎

to that Bahraini man?” Mujaa’ah said, “He ran away. He would
continue to speak in that manner until finally Musailamah found
out what he was saying about him. Fearing for his life, the man
ran away and went back to Bahrain.” Khaalid # said, “Tell us
more about the lies of this vile creature.” Mujaa’ah then related
more of Musailamah’s poetry, after which Khaalid # said, “And
you people considered this to be the truth? You actually believed
him?” Mujaa’ah said, “Had my people not considered what he
said to be true, we would not have prepared to meet you
tomorrow with more than ten-thousand swords...” Khaalid &
said, “Then Allah is sufficient for us against you, and He will
honor His religion (by granting us victory). Indeed, it is against
Him that you are fighting, even though it is His religion that you
are seeking out.”

Some people might have the impression that Khaalid # was
purely a military man who had very little knowledge about Islam,
but that is simply not true. He # was a man of profound Faith,
and the powers he had on the battlefield were derived from that
Faith. Consider the above-mentioned conversation and the strong
Faith and trust in Allah 46 Khaalid # evinced when he said, “Then
Allah is sufficient for us against you, and He will honor His
religion (by granting us victory). Indeed, it is against Him that
you are fighting, even though it is His religion that you are
seeking out.” Yes, Khaalid # was a military man by nature; but he
was more than that: He 4 was a true believer who fought to raise
the Word of Allah 8 above all else. May Allah be pleased with
him and with all of the Prophet's Companions &.

The Actual Battle is Preceded by Psychological Warfare
If the pressure was on anyone regarding the upcoming battle,
it was on the followers of Musailamah. They had their backs up

against the walls, with no hope of reinforcements from foreign
allies; yes, they had numbers and weapons, but they were all

LN Erooh Ar-Riddah (pe. 82).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah 1716 495

alone, with most of the Peninsula under the banner of Islam. The
Muslims, on the other hand, had plenty of reinforcements they
could rely upon if needed; what is more, Khaalid’s soldiers were
fighting for the sake of Allah 8, and so they had nothing to lose:
For even if they died, they would achieve martyrdom.

Another advantage that Khaalid # had over the enemy was
that his soldiers were confident of victory; they were certain that
Allah % would help them. As for Musailamah’s soldiers, they
were, at best, doubtful about the outcome of the upcoming battle.
Some of them weren't fighting to uphold their beliefs, but instead
to show loyalty to their fellow tribesmen. Khaalid # wisely
decided to take advantage of the situation by waging psycholo-
gical warfare against the enemy. For one thing, he sent Zaid ibn
Lubaid to meet wp with his friend Mahkam ibn Tufail, who was
one of the most respected chieftains of Yamaamah. Zaid’s goal
was to convince Mahkam to change sides in the conflict.

Also, Khaalid # sought the help of “Umair ibn Saaleh AI-
Yashkaree, who was a Muslim, but who kept his Islam a secret
from his fellow tribesmen. ‘Umair’s faith was strong, and he was
inspired to convey a clear warning to his people: “You are
surrounded by Khaalid and men from the Muhaayiroon and the
Ansaar....1f you think that you can beat them by your numbers,
they will defeat you with the help of reinforcements. You and
they are not equal: Islam is growing strong, and polytheism is
becoming a thing of the past. Their companion (i.e., the
Messenger of Allah #8) is a Prophet, and your companion (e.,
Musailamah) is a liar. They have happiness with them, and all
you have is deception (.e., you are all being deceived by
Musailamah’s lies).

The purpose of this speech was of course to lower the morale of
Musailamah’s soldiers. Khaalid # charged Thumaamah ibn
Uthaal Al-Hanafee # with a similar mission. He was to go to
his fellow clansmen from the Banu Haneefah tribe and instill fear

() Al-Harb An-Nafsiyyah, by Dr. Ahmad Naufal (pg. 144, 145).

494 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

into their hearts. When he went to them, he said, “Verily, two
Prophets do not come together at the same time for the same
purpose. Indeed, there will be no Prophet after Muhammad, and
there is no Prophet that was sent along with him. Abu Bakr has
sent to you a man who goes neither by his own name nor by the
name of his father; rather, he is simply called, ‘The Sword of
Allah.” He has many swords with him, so think hard and long
about what you want to do.”

As should be clear to the reader by now, Khaalid
meticulously took every possible step to achieve victory against
his enemy. The key to his attitude was that he never under-
estimated his enemy; as such, he was always prepared and one
step ahead of his opponents. He was a brilliant military man for
his entire life; even back when he was a polytheist, he, through his
carefully planned strategy, was one of the main reasons why the
polytheists of Makkah fared so well during the Battle of Uhud.
Khaalid # was described by his soldiers as a man who would be
vigilant even during his sleep; every night, he was fully prepared
for the events of the following day, and he always tried to learn as
much as possible about the enemy.!

Prior to the commencement of the battle, Khaalid 4s made his
final preparations. He sent two scouts — Mukannaf ibn Zaid Al-
Khail and his brother, Huraithah — to gather information about
the enemy. He gave the banner of his army to “Abdullah ibn Hafs
ion Ghaanim, and later on to Saalim, the freed slave of Abu
Hudhaifah. Khaalid « then divided his army into five divisions,
appointing Khaalid Al-Makhzoomee to lead the division that was
at the front of the army; Abu Hudhaifah to lead the right-wing
division of the army; Shujaa’ to lead the left-wing division; Zaid
ibn Al-Khattaab to lead the division that was at the heart of the
army; and Usaamah ibn Zaid + to lead the cavalry. And he

("Fann Idaarah Al-Ma‘rakah, by Muharamad Farj (pg. 138); and Al-Harb ‏سم‎
‎Nafsiyyah, by Dr. Ahmad Naufal (2/145).

"l Harakatur-Riddah, by Al’Uttoom (pg. 199).

Musailamah, 1116 Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 495

ordered Adh-Dha’an to remain in the rear of the army, which is
where the women and tents were situated.!") These were Khaalid’s
final preparations prior to the commencement of the battle.

Fourth: The Fighting B

ERIN

As the two armies marched towards one another, Musailamah
delivered a quick speech, reminding his soldiers about what
would happen if they lost the battle: “Today is a the day you show
your sense of honor. Verily, if you are defeated, your women will
be married off as slaves...so fight to preserve your lineages and to
protect your women.”

Khaalid stopped on the way and built a makeshift military
command post on a hill that overlooked Yamaamah. Shortly
thereafter, the two armies clashed. Musailamah’s soldiers gained
an. early advantage, to the degree that they were able to enter
Khaalid’s command post. Finding Umm Tameem there, they
intended to kill her, but Mujaa’ah, who was there as a prisoner,
forbade them from doing so. He said to them, “She is a noble and
good free woman (so leave her alone).” While Musailamah’s
soldiers were able to initially penetrate the ranks of Muslim
fighters, they did suffer an important loss, for Zaid ibn ‏لذ‎
‎Khattaab 4 was able to kill one of their leaders, the infamous
scoundrel Ar-Rajjaal ibn “Unfuwah.

The advantage that was enjoyed by Musailamah’s army was
short-lived, for Muslim fighters were quickly able to repel them
and force them to retreat. The Muslims fought in an organized
manner; Khaalid « had placed a banner over each battalion, so as
to distinguish between Muhaajiroon soldiers, Ansaaree soldiers,
and Bedouin soldiers. As long as each respective group remained
close to their respective banner, chaos would be averted, and they
would be able to distinguish between friend and foe.

‎Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-"Uttoom (pg. 200).‏ ذا
‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/328).‏ 2

498 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq as

Muslim to see him was Wahshee ibn Harb as, the freed slave of
Jubair ibn Mut’am. 1) was the same Wahshee 2 who killed Hamzah
# during the Battle of Uhud. This was the opportunity for
redemption that Wahshee had wanted for a long time. He killed
one of the best people on earth, and now, as an act of redemption,
he, now a good, practicing Muslim, wanted to kill one of the most
evil people on earth. A skilled spear thrower, Wahshee # took aim
and threw his spear; it pierced right through Musailamah’s body,
exiting from the other side. Musailamah was as good as dead, but
he was still standing up; Abu Dujaanah Simaak ibn Kharishah then
raced towards him and struck him with his sword, causing him to
fall down onto the ground. A woman who was inside of a nearby
building saw what happened and screamed out, “O the loss of a
pure leader! He has been killed by a black slave.”

Approximately ten-thousand apostate fighters were killed in
the garden, although some historians have said that the number of
their fallen soldiers was closer to twenty-one thousand — hence
the new name of the garden: “The Garden of Death.” The number
of Muslim fatalities (in the garden) ranged between five and six
hundred — and Allah % knows best. Among the Muslim dead
were some of the most eminent of the Prophet's Companions &.

Once the garden was secured, Khaalid # walked through it,
and he was followed by Mujaa’ah ibn Muraarah, who, being a
prisoner, was tied up in chains. Khaalid 4 took Muyjaa’ah with
him because he wanted him to identity for him the dead corpse of
Musailamah. When they passed by the dead body of Ar-Rajjaal
ibn ‘Unfuwah, Khaalid # asked, “Is this him?’’ Muyaa‘ah said,
“No, by Allah, this man is better than Musailamah. This is Ar-
Rajaal ibn “Unfuwah.” Finally, when they passed by a snub-
nosed, yellow-skinned man, Mujaa’ah said, “This is the one you
are looking for.” Khaalid # said, “May Allah disfigure all of you
for following him.” Khaalid # then sent out horsemen, ordering
them to ride throughout Yamaamah and gather all of the wealth
and female prisoners of the city.

RD] ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (2/330).

Musailamah, “The ‏مهتا‎ and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 499

3) Abu ‘Aqgeel: ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Balwee Al-

Ansaaree Al-Ausee

Abu “Aqeel 2, a man from the Ansaar, was one of the first
people to be injured on the Day of Yamaamah. He became hurt as
a result of an arrow that struck him somewhere between his
shoulder and his heart; it was a serious but non-lethal blow, and
he was able to pull out the arrow. Nonetheless, his entire left side
became weak, and so he returned to the Muslim encampment in
order to seek medical attention. When the fighting became intense
and the Muslims were forced to head back towards their
encampment, Ma’an ibn “Adee called out, “O people of the
Ansaar. (Remember) Allah, Allah, and turn around and _ bear
down upon your enemies.” So as to set an example for others,
Ma’an & then raced ahead of everyone else, plunging directly into
the ranks of the opposing army. And the people of the Ansaar, in
response to Ma’an’s plea, were right behind him.

At that point, Abu “Aqeel 2 got up, intending to catch up to his
Ansaaree brothers. Some Muslims tried to convince him to stay where
he was, saying to him, “O Abu‘ Ageel, you arenotfit for fighting.” Abu
‘Aqgeel 4s, referring to Ma‘an’s plea for help, said, “The caller
mentioned me by name.” Someone responded, “The caller merely
said, ‘O people of the Ansaar.’ He was not referring to injured fighters.”
Abu’ Aqeel 4 replied,” And lam from the Ansaar, and [will answer his
call to arms, even if [ have to crawl (towards the enemy).

Because his entire left side was weak and numb, Abu “Aqeel ‏نك‎
‎was able to hold his sword with his right hand only; nonetheless,
with pure grit and determination, he marched onwards toward
the enemy, all the while calling out, “O people of the Ansaar, let us
launch a renewed attack like we did on the Day of Hunain.”
Every member of that elite Ansaaree group then fought with high
spirits, seeking out one of two things: martyrdom or victory. With
their renewed attack, they forced their enemies to retreat and seek
refuge in the “Garden of Death.” During the course of this assault,
Abu ‘Aqeel’s arm was cut off; in fact, he was inflicted with a total
of fourteen wounds, each of which was lethal in and of itself.

500 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

Later on, when ibn ‘Umar # walked by him, Abu “Aqeel &
was taking in his last few breaths. tbn “Umar # said, “O Abu
‘Ageel,” to which Abu ‘Aqeel # responded with a heavy voice,
“Here I am, answering your call. Who has won (today)?” ibn
‘Umar # replied, “Rejoice, for the enemy of Allah (e.,
Musailamah) has been killed.” Abu “Aqeel 2s then raised his
finger towards the sky, a gesture by which he meant to praise and
thank Allah.

‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab « later said about Abu ‘Aqeel 2, “May
Allah have mercy on him. He has sought out martyrdom for a
long time, and he has now achieved it. Verily, he is among the
best of our Prophet's Companions 4.71"!

4) Naseebah bint Ka’ab Al-Maaziniyyah Al-Ansaariyyah

Naseebah % not only accompanied Khaalid’s army towards
Yamaamah, but she also took part in the fighting. Despising the
evil “Liar” of Yamaamah, she took an oath not to lay down her
weapons until he died. She ‏كا‎ lived up to her promise, for after
Musailamah died, she returned to Al-Madeenah with twelve
wounds, which were inflicted upon her with arrows, spears, and
swords. The extent of her wounds goes to show just how much
she participated in the fighting. She took upon herself a
responsibility that most other women wouldn’t be able to handle.
And because of her efforts and sacrifices for the cause of Islam,
Khaalid continued to honor her for the rest of her life. Khaalid
# visited her and even brought to her a doctor to look after her
wounds. She ‏طب‎ later said, “Khaalid took care of me a great deal,
and he was a good companion to us (.e., to the people of the
Ansaar). He fulfilled our rights and obeyed the command that the
Prophet #2 gave regarding us (i.e., the command to be good to the
Ansaar).”7

BT Furoob Ar-Riddah (pg. 93, 94), by Shaugee Abu Khaleel; refer also to Al-Iktifaa
(2/13).

‎AL-Ansaar Fil-‘Asr, by At-Raashidee (pg. 190).‏ أما

Musailamah, 16 Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 501

Sixth: Some of the Ma riyrs of the Battle of Yamaamah

1) Thaabit ibn Qais ibn Shimaas ‏نك‎

Thaabit’s Kunyah was Abu Muhammad, and he was the orator
of the Ansaar. And it is authentically related that the Messenger of
Allah #2 gave him glad tidings that he would die as a martyr. That
prophecy came true on the Day of Yamaamah, when Thaabit ‏و‎
‎was killed while he was fulfilling his duty as the flag-bearer of the
Ansaar.

After Thaabit « died, a man saw him in a dream; in it,
Thaabit # addressed the man directly, saying to him, “When I
was killed yesterday, a Muslim man passed by me and pulled
away from my body an expensive piece of armor. He is staying
in the furthermost part of the encampment.” In the man’s dream,
Thaabit « went on to describe the exact location of the armor.
Thaabit ‏قف‎ then said, “So go to Khaalid and order him to seize
my armor (from the man, since it is mine). Then when you return
to Al-Madeenah and meet the Khaleefah of the Messenger of
Allah #2 (.e., Abu Bakr ‏رز‎ tell him that I have such and such
debts to pay, and tell him that such and such slave of mine is
now a free man. And beware of saying (to yourself) that this is
only a dream and thus allow these matters to be forgotten.”
When the man woke up, he didn’t take his dream lightly;
instead, he did as Thaabit & asked, by going to Khaalid # and
telling him about Thaabit’s armor. When they went to look for it,
they found it exactly where Thaabit 2 said it would be. When
the man later told Abu Bakr # about his dream, Abu Bakr 4
executed Thaabit’s final will and testament. This is the only
known case of someone mentioning his final will and testament
not while being alive, but after having died. May Allah % be —
pleased with Thaabit « and with all of the Prophet's
Companions @.

202 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎
‎2) Zaid ibn ALK

Zaid & was “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab’s brother by way of their
father. Eldest among the two brothers, Zaid 23 was one of the
early converts to Islam, and he had the distinction of having
participated in the Battle of Badr, not to mention the battles that
took place later on.

When the Messenger of Allah #2 arrived in Al-Madeenah, he
established bonds of brotherhood between members of the
Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar. As for Zaid ibn Al-Khattaab 4s, his
appointed Ansaaree brother was Ma’an ibn ‘Adee Al-Ansaaree ‏ضفه‎
‎— the very same Ma’an # who was martyred on the Day of
Yarmaamah.

During the Battle of Yamaamah, Zaid ‏ذه‎ was the flag-bearer of
the Muhaajiroon. He continued to advance with his flag until he
became martyred, after which Saalim, the freed slave of Abu
Hudhaifah, took hold of the Muhaayiroon’s flag.

Before being killed, Zaid # delivered a costly blow to
Musailamah by killing his number one commander, the infamous
Ar-Rajjaal ibn ‘Unfuwah, whose evil was described as being
ereater than that of Musailamah himself. The man who killed
Zaid ‏كله‎ was Abu Maryam Al-Hanafee, who later embraced Islam
and said, upon encountering Zaid’s brother ‘Umar 4, “O Leader
of the Believers, Allah has indeed honored Zaid by my hand, and
He has not humiliated me at the hands of Zaid.” Or in other
words: It was because of me that Zaid ‏كه‎ achieved martyrdom,
and, all praise is to Allah #, Zaid ‏ده‎ did not kill me, for had he
done so, | would have died as a disbeliever and suffered eternal
humiliation.

Upon learning about Zaid’s death, ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏ذه‎
‎said, “He beat me to goodness twice: He embraced Islam before |
did, and he was the first of us to be martyred.” And when “Umar
& consoled Mutammim ibn Nuwairah after his brother died,
Mutammim replied, “Had my brother died as your brother (Zaid)
died, [ would not have felt sad on account of his death.” “Umar ‏كه‎

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Triber 503

then said, “No one has consoled me as well as you have just
done.” “Umar ‏رك‎ who loved Zaid 4% a great deal, later said that he
would often think of and remember Zaid ‏كارع‎

3) Ma’an ibn ‘Adee Al-Balwee

Ma’an &, a member of the Ansaar, attended the Pledge of
‘Aqabah and took part in the Battles of Badr, Unud, Khandaq, and
all of the other battles in which the Prophet 2 took part. Both
Ma’an # and his brother from the Muhaajiroon, Zaid ibn Al-
Khattaab 2, died during the Battle of Yamaamah.

Among other things, Ma’an # is remembered for his unique
yet commendable attitude when the Messenger of Allah #& died.
Everyone was crying, and many people were saying, “By Allah,
we wish we had died before him, and we fear that, now that he
has died, we will succumb to temptation.” As for Ma’an 4, he
said, “By Allah, 1 do not wish to have died before him, because |
want to be able to believe in him when he is dead just as I believed
in him when he was ‏لكا وتاج‎

4) ‘Abdullah ibn Suhail ibn ‘Amr 4

An early convert to Islam, ‘Abdullah 4 migrated (probably to
Abyssinia), but then, after the Prophet #£ migrated to Al-
Madeenah, was forced to stay back in Makkah against his will.
On the Day of Badr, he went out with the army of the Quraish,
and when the two armies faced each other, he raced to the other
side and then fought alongside his Muslim brothers. “Abdullah &
was yet another eminent Companion who died during the Battle

of Yamaamah.

Later on, when Abu Bakr ¢ performed Hay (the greater
pilgrimage to Makkah), he consoled “Abdullah's father, Suhail.
Suhail # then said, “It has been conveyed to me that the
Messenger of Allah #8 said, “A martyr will intercede on behalf of

‎ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/240).‏ لذا
‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/240).‏ 21

504 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq as

seventy members of his family.’"! And I hope that he will begin
with me (i.e., that he will begin by interceding on my behalf).’”*!

Suhail 2 took a brave and noble stance when the Messenger of
Allah #@ died. Most of the inhabitants of Makkah were thinking
seriously about turning away from Islam; the situation became so
tense that the governor of Makkah, ‘Uttaab ibn Aseed 2s, went
into hiding. But Suhail .& did not hide; instead, he stood up before
the people, praised Allah, glorified Him, mentioned the death of
the Messenger of Allah #% and then stated that Islam was as
strong as ever, and that anyone who turned away from it would
be killed. After Suhail & delivered his speech, the people of
Makkah changed their minds, deciding not to apostatize.
Tensions were immediately eased m the city, and “Uttaab ibn
Aseed ‏د‎ came out of hiding.

It has been said that the Prophet #¢ established bonds of
brotherhood between Abu Dujaanah # and ‘“Utbah ibn
Ghazwaan #. And it is related that, on the Day of Badr, Abu
Dujaanah # wore a red head-cloth. Then, on the Day of Uhud, he
stood firmly alongside the Prophet #2, and he was one of the
Companions 4 who made the pledge of death to the Prophet #2.
As for the Battle of Yamaamah, Abu Dujaanah # was martyred
during it, but not before he helped kill Musailamah “The Liar.”

Zaid ibn Aslam # said, “When Abu Dujaanah was once sick,
people visited him, and upon seeing the gleam in his face, someone
asked, “Why is your face shining so?” Zaid # said, “Of the deeds I
have performed, the two that 1 am the most confident about are the
following: I would not speak about matters that did not concern
me. And as for the other, I was at peace in my heart regarding all

Muslims (ie., [ did not hold a grudge against any Muslim).’”!

1١ Sunan Abu Daawood, The Book of Jitaad, chapter, “The Martyr Will Intercede.”
(2522).

‎Teareekh Adh-Dhahabee, Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon (pg. 61).‏ خا

‎‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Adh-Dhahabee (pg. 70).‏ أذا

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe | 505

6) ‘Abbaad ibn Bishr &

Also one of the more eminent of the Prophet’s Companions &,
‘Abbaad # was martyred on the Day of Yamaamah, having died
at the age of forty-five.

A member of the Ansaar, ‘Abbaad # embraced Islam — like
many other members of the Ansaar — at the hands of Mus’ab ibn
“Umair ‏.حل‎ In Saheeh Bukhaaree, a miracle involving ‘Abbaad 4s is
described: “Abbaad 4 had spent much of the night in the
company of the Prophet #¢, and when it was time to go home, it
was pitch dark outside, thus making it very difficult for him to
know for certain what road he was upon and in which direction
he was heading. By the grace, mercy, and permission of Allah 4,
“Abbaad’s stick lit up for him, after which it became easy for him
to find his home. This incident alone attests to ‘Abbaad’s piety
and closeness to Allah 4.

The Prophet #% trusted “Abbaad # a great deal. Based on his
confidence in “Abbaad’s integrity, the Prophet #8 charged him
with the duty of collecting Zakaat wealth from the Muzainah and
Banu Saleem tribes; and during the Tabook expedition, he made
him a personal guard. Also during the Prophet's lifetime,
‘Abbaad # had the honor of taking part in the killing of Ka’ab
ibn Al-Ashraf.!

In short, ‘Abbaad # was recognized among the Prophet's
Companions ‏كأ‎ as a noble and pious believer. Attesting to his
superior character, ‘Aaishah said, “Three members of the
Ansaar stand out as being superior to others, and each one of them
is from the Banu ‘Abdul-Ashhal clan: 5220 ibn Mu‘aadh ‏رذ‎ Usaid
ibn Hudair es, and ‘Abbaad ibn Bishr as.” ‘Aaishah & also said,
“(One night,) as the Messenger of Allah #¢ was performing the
late-night voluntary (Tahajjud) prayer in my house, he heard the
voice of ‘Abbaad ibn Bishr. He #& then said to me, ‘O “Aaishah, is

‎Bukhaaree (3805).‏ ذا
‎Bukhaaree (4037).‏ )2

506 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ل‎

that the voice of “Abbaad?’ I said, “Yes.” He #€ said, “O Allah,
forgive him.”

As for the Battle of Yamaamah, “Abbaad # achieved what he
had always wanted: martyrdom. He #& had an idea beforehand
that he would die a martyr, as is indicated by the following
narration. Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudree » said, “When we had
finished fighting the Battle of Buzaakhah, I heard “Abbaad 2
say, ‘O Abu Sa’eed, last night, in a dream, I saw the sky opening
up for me. Then it closed upon me. In Sha Allah (Allah Willing),
that means martyrdom (for me).’ 1 replied, “By Allah, you have
seen a good dream.’”*!

On the Day of Yamaamah, ‘Abbaad # showed exceptional
bravery and skill on the battlefield, to the degree that he left an
indelible mark on the people of Banu Haneefah. Thereafter, if any
man among them got injured, they would utter the expression, “Tt
is as if he has been struck by...’ Abbaad ibn Bishr.”’*!

They had every reason to coin that expression, stnce “Abbaad
# inflicted their army with many losses on the Day of Yamaamiah.
During the earlier stages of the battle, ’Abbaad # stood up ona
small mound and called out as loudly as he could, “Iam “Abbaad
fbn Bishr. Come, O people of the Ansaar. Come, O people of the
Ansaar. Lo! Rally around me. Lo! Rally around me.” Responding
with the words, “Here we are, answering your call,” the people of
the Ansaar gathered around him. He then broke his sheathe, thus
indicating that his sword would remain unsheathed until he
achieved either victory or martyrdom; the people of the Ansaar
then did the same. Next, he 2 said to them, “Let us attack with
sincerity and determination. Now follow me.” Having said this,
he led his brothers from the Ansaar straight towards the heart of
the opposing army. It was an attack that changed the momentum
of the battle. Having been the aggressors early on, the people of

Ul Bukhaaree (2655).
® AtTubagaat, by Ton Sa’ad (2/234).
‏اذا‎ Al-Iktifaa (3/53).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 507

Banu Haneefah were now forced to retreat. And even when the
people of Banu Haneefah retreated, “‘Abbaad # and his fellow
Muslims did not let up, but instead continued to attack, thus
forcing enemy soldiers to continually retreat, until they were
forced to seek refuge in a large, enclosed garden.

When the gates of the garden were forcefully opened, ‘Abbaad
@ raced inside and continued to engage enemy fighters until he
could fight no longer. He was inflicted with so many wounds
that, when he was later found, his body was practically
unrecognizable. It was only because of a distinguishing mark
on his body that he was able to be identified."! May Allah # be
pleased with ‘Abbaad ‏رق‎ and may Allah & reward him with the
highest stations of Paradise.

All of the Ansaaree soldiers that took part in the Battle of
Yamaamah fought with an exceptional degree of bravery, and
many of them were martyred. Later on, when Mujaa’ah ibn
Muraarah Al-Hanafee was describing the events of the battle to
Abu Bakr, he said, “O Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, I have
never seen any people who more patiently endure the blows of
swords and who attack with a greater degree of sincerity and
determination than the people of the Ansaar.” Then, when
Mujaa’ah went on to describe how, in the company of Khaalid
‏,نف‎ he surveyed the scene of the battle and came across many
fallen Ansaaree soldiers, Abu Bakr 4 cried so much that his beard
became soaked in tears.”

7) At-Tufail ibn ‘Amr Ad-Dausee Al-Azdee 4

A man who was both noble in lineage and in character, At-Tufail
# was a skilled and wise poet. Prior to the Battle of Yamaamah,
Tufail 2 saw a very telling dream. He # described it himself when
he said, “I went out (to fight), and with me was my son, “Amr. Ina
dream I had, I saw that it was as if my head was being shaved, thata

‎AL-Iktifaa, by Al-Kilaa’ee (3/53).‏ لذأ
.)3/65( ملم ‎Ol‏

508 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

bird came out of my mouth, and that it was as if a woman inserted
me into her private part. | interpreted my dream as follows: The
shaving of my head signified it being chopped off; the bird
represented my soul (coming out of my body); and the woman
represented the earth, in which [ would (soon) be buried.” At-Tufail
was then martyred on the Day of Yamaamah.

The outcome of the Battle of Yamaamah resulted in mixed
feelings for Muslims. They felt joy for having defeated Musaila-
mah, and sadness for the losses they incurred. It was not so much
a matter of how many Muslims died — during the course of the
entire conflict in Yamaamah, 1200 Muslims lost their lives;
instead, it was more of a matter of which Muslims died, for many
eminent members of the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar were
martyred in Yamaamah. Many of them were among the most
eminent of the Prophet's Companions ‏رذ‎ and approximately
forty of them had memorized the Qur’an in its entirety. Therefore,
back in Al-Madeenah, Muslims at once rejoiced and wept —
rejoiced in the knowledge that Musailamah and his followers had
been defeated, and wept because of the many eminent Muslims
who had been killed during the conflict.

th: The Deception of Mujaa’ah; Khaalid ‏وك‎ Marries
Mujaa’ah’s Daughter; and Letters of Correspondence

Between Abu Bak

The Deception of Mujaa’ah

After Muslim soldiers managed to completely secure the inside
of the “Garden of Death,” Khaalid 4 sent horsemen throughout
Yamaamah. His orders were simple: They were to go from
fortress to fortress, and gather whatever they could outside of the
fortresses, in terms of wealth and prisoners. Shortly thereafter,
however, Khaalid # decided to attack Yamaamah’s fortresses, not
knowing that the only people left inside of them were women,
children, and old men.

Musailamah, ‘The Liar”; and the Banu Haneefah Triber 509

When Khaalid assumed that there were soldiers stationed
inside of each fortress, Mujaa’ah, still Khaalid’s prisoner, saw an
opportunity to save the lives of many of his people. He said to
Khaalid, “These fortresses are filled with soldiers, so come and
allow me to broker a truce between you and them.” Under normal
circumstances, Khaalid 2 would not have accepted Mujaa’ah’s
proposition; but the Battle of Yamaamah was long and hard for
his soldiers, and they were all extremely tired. Not wanting to
place upon his soldiers a burden greater than they could bear,
Khaalid # accepted Mujaa’ah’s offer. Mujaa’ah then said to him,
“Now let me go to them, so that can see whether they will accept
a truce.”

Upon entering one of the fortresses, Mujaa’ah put the next
stage of his plan into action. He ordered the women inside to wear
armor and to gather in a conspicuous manner on the roofs of their
fortress. When Khaalid « looked at them from a distance, all he
saw was a group of armed soldiers; they were so far up that he
could not see that they were all women.

Before a truce was agreed upon, Khaalid # thought it best to at
least try to invite the people inside of the fortresses to Islam. Every
single person in those fortresses repented and returned to Islam;
then, to further show encouragement to the people of Banu
Haneefah, Khaalid 2 returned to them some female captives.

Many historians believe that the Battle of Yamaamah took
place in the year 11 H; Al-Waagidee and others, however, are of
the view that it took place in the year 12 H. Perhaps - and Allah
knows best — both opinions are correct, in that the conflict began
in the year 11 H, and then ended in the year 12 H.

After a truce was ratified by both sides, Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed
a asked Mujaa’ah for his daughter’s hand in marriage. Mujaa’ah
at first protested, saying that, in marrying his daughter, Khaalid
# would be bringing down upon all of them the wrath of Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏.ذه‎ Khaalid # did not believe he was doing

ries Mujaa’ah’s Daughter

510 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ف‎

anything wrong, and so he repeated his request, saying, “Marry
your daughter to me.” Mujaa’ah acquiesced and married his
daughter off to Khaalid ‏لكاي‎

Meanwhile, back in Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr ‏نل‎ had not yet
received news about the outcome of the Battle of Yamaamah. And
so he sent Salamah ibn Waqsh to Khaalid, ordering him to tell
Khaalid # that he was to kill every adult male from the Banu
Haneefah tribe. But by the time Salamah arrived in Yamaamah, it
was too late: Khaalid # had already agreed to a peace treaty with
the people of Yamaamah, which meant that the lives male Banu
Haneefah tribesmen would be spared.

Abu Bakr 2 waited eagerly for news about the progress of the
war in Yamaamah. One evening, he went out in the company of
men from the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar to Al-Hurrah; there he
was met by Khaalid’s messenger, Abu Khatthamah An-Najjaaree.
Upon seeing Abu Khaithamah, Abu Bakr & asked, “What news
do you bring with you, O Abu Khaithamah?” Abu Khaithamah
replied, “I bring with me good news, O Khaleefah of the Messenger
of Allah. Allah has indeed granted us victory in Yamaamah, and
here is Khaalid’s letter (to you).”” Without wasting a second, Abu
Bakr ‏يه‎ fell to the ground and performed prostration, after which
he as said, “Tell me about the battle — what happened during it?’
Abu Khaithamah # then proceeded to tell Abu Bakr 4 about
Khaalid’s strategy, about the manner in which victory was
achieved, and about those of the Prophet's Companions ‏أ‎ who
became martyred during the course of the battle.

The loss of so many eminent Companions # saddened Abu
Bakr ‏رك‎ but there was something else that elicited a different
emotion from him: Anger overcame him when he found out
about Khaalid’s marriage to Mujaa’ah’s daughter, and about how
he allowed himself to be deceived by Mujaa’ah into agreeing to a
truce. As a result of that anger, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ wrote the following
letter to Khaalid #: “Are you so free to go about marrying women

(1) As-Siddeeg Awwalul-Khulafaa (pg. 110).

Musailamah, “The ‏تنهال‎ and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 511

when, in the courtyard of your house, the blood of 1200 Muslims
has not yet dried. And then Mujaa’ah deceived you, causing you
to change your decided course of action; as a result of his
deception, you made peace with his people just when Allah gave
you the ability to finish them ‏ليون‎

Whether or not Khaalid 2 had been expecting such a harsh
reprimand from the Khaalefah of the Messenger of Allah #, he
was not fazed by the angry remarks he read in Abu Bakr’s letter.
Instead, he remained confident that he had done nothing wrong.
So in order to clear the air with Abu Bakr 4, Khaalid 2 sent a
reply letter in which he defended his actions. In that letter,
Khaalid 4 made the following pomts:

1) Only after he was certain that complete victory had been
achieved against the enemy, did he begin the process of
securing Mujaa’ah’s daughter’s hand in matriage.

2) Through that marriage, Khaalid « became an in-law of one of
the chieftains of the Banu Haneefah tribe. That act would, if
anything, have a positive impact on the members of the Banu
Haneefah tribe.

3) He did not go to great lengths to get married to Mujaa’ah’s
daughter. It was simply a matter of him proposing and
Mujaa’ah accepting his proposal. Or, in other words, in order
to get married to the girl, he did not have to humiliate himself
or any other Muslim.

4) His marriage to Mujaa’ah’s daughter did not violate either the
laws of Islam or the norms and conventions of Arab customs.

5) To have avoided marriage on account of being sad because of
the death of many Muslims would not have made much sense,
since sadness is an emotion that has no practical application in

(I Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Shaugqee Abu Khaleel (pg. 97).

512 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضك‎

the everyday goings on of life: It can neither keep the living
alive nor bring the dead back to life.

6) He did not consider any endeavor to be more important than
Jihaad. He fought with every ounce of energy he had inside of
him, doing everything he could — im terms of placing himself
in harm’s way — to achieve martyrdom. Now, if he did all that
he could to achieve martyrdom, and if Allah # decreed for him
to survive the battle, then what should prevent him from
getting married.

7) By agreeing to a peace treaty with Mujaa’ah, he & was doing
everything in his power to do what was best, not for Mujaa’ah
and his people, but for Muslims. Furthermore, Mujaa’ah was
the one who was guilty of deception; Khaalid #, being a mere
mortal, had no way of knowing about what the real situation
was inside of the Yamaamiah’s fortresses. After all, he did not
rely merely on Mujaa’ah’s word; he also based his assessment
of the situation on the many soldiers that appeared to be
gathered on the roof of one of the fortresses. In short, he was
deceived, but that was, more than anything else, caused by the
cunning of Mujaa’ah; therefore, Khaalid felt that he should
be excused in the matter. But even if he was deceived, what
happened in the end was in the best interests of the Muslims:
Muslims gained control of Banu Haneefah’s land, and many
Banu Haneefah tribesmen returned to Islam.

When Abu Bakr # read Khaalid’s letter, he softened his stance
somewhat, and was further encouraged to excuse Khaalid &
when a group of men from the Quraish stood up to defend
Khaalid 4. One of them, Abu Burzah Al-Aslamee 4, said, “O
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, Khaalid 4 is not a man who
can be described with either of the qualities of cowardice or
treachery. He did his utmost to achieve martyrdom....He was
patient until he achieved victory. And agreemg to a truce with
them is something he wanted, and in this regard, he was not

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 513

wrong. Also, you should remember that, when he saw a group
of women in the fortress, he though that they were men.” Abu
Bakr ‏دف‎ replied, “You have spoken the truth. What you have said
better excuses Khaalid than do the contents of the letter that he
sent to me.”

Abu Bakr’s reaction to both Khaalid’s letter and Abu Burzah’s
comments certainly put the matter to rest. Khaalid ‏قك‎ was
innocent of any wrongdoing in Yamaamah. He remained true to
his cause, and at the same time he had every right to marry
Mujaa’ah’s daughter.

Certain recent historians have revived the issue in an under-
handed manner. Whether they did that on purpose or without
malicious intent is not the point; the point is that they distorted
facts and portrayed a false image of Khaalid 2. For instance, there
is no excuse for what Dr. Muhammad Husain Haikal said, even
though his ostensible aim was to defend Khaalid. In As-Siddeeq
Abu Bakr, Dr. Haikal wrote, ““And what did the daughter of
Mujaa’ah matter in relation to the yearly celebrations that should
be enacted in memory of Khaalid and his many victories on the
battlefield . She was nothing more than a sacrifice that was tossed
towards the feet of a man who can be described as both a military
genius and a great conqueror ; after all, he is the one who caused
blood to flow throughout Yamaamah, so that, perhaps, it might
become purified of its filth.”

What kind of nonsense is this? What was Dr. Haikal thinking
when he wrote these words, words which insinuate that Khaalid
was like an ancient Greek warrior who fought for glory, fame,
riches, or power; or that he was like the god of the Nile River,
whom the Egyptians believed was willing to give them of his
bounties only if they cast into his river the most beautiful woman
among them.

11 Huroob Ay-Riddah (pg. 98).
‏ذا‎ As-Siddeeg Abu Bakr (pg. 157).

514 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

In reality, Khaalid 2 did not have any delusions of grandeur.
He did not feel that he was entitled to any special privileges,
rather, he 25 was a warrior-worshipper, a true believer who had
Faith in the Oneness of Allah 8%. He # fought not for glory or
power, but in order to raise the Word of Allah 3% above all else.
For his efforts, he desired no worldly reward, and he expected
neither gratitude nor recognition from any human being.

General Akram also erred im his explanation of Khaalid’s
matriage. He attributed the marriage to Khaalid’s physical
strength and excellent physique, qualities that made him a source
of temptation to many beautiful women throughout the Arabian
Peninsula. General Akram thus portrayed Khaalid as being an
ancient Don Juan, a man whose main occupation in life was the
pursuit of romantic encounters with women. General Akram’s
insinuation is of course false; Khaalid # was a warrior whose
main occupation in life was fighting for the cause of Islam."! One
thing we do learn from Dr. Haikal and General Akram is how
easy it is to distort the reality of a situation with false and baseless
insinuations. | |

Khaalid 2 fought for the cause of Islam, and he desired
rewards from no one save Allah #. During battles, he did
everything he could to achieve martyrdom, fighting not just
alongside his Muslim brothers, but all by himself in front of the
Muslim army’s front row. For example, when he advanced ahead
of every other Muslim soldier on the Day of Buzaakhah, his
soldiers exclaimed, “Allah! Allah! Verily, you are our leader, and
you should not advance (ahead of all of us).” He replied, “By
Allah, 1 do not know what you are saying. I advanced (ahead of
you all) only because I did not think that I could patiently wait (in
order to engage the enemy), and because | feared that the
Muslims would be defeated.””?! And when Khaalid # advanced
ahead of the Muslim army on the Day of Yamaamah, he fought

') Harakatur-Riddah, by AlUttoom (pg. 236).

1 Khaalid Ibn Al-Waleed, by Saadiq ‘Urjoon (pg. 744).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 515

with a great deal of skill and bavery, killing all those who came
across his path.

Victory and martyrdom were the two main things for which
Khaalid # worked and struggled throughout his life. A leader of
an army usually oVersees the proceedings of a battle from a
nearby hill or command center; as for Khaalid 2, even though he
was the overall commander of the Muslim army, he fought with
the enemy in the most dangerous of situations. Khaalid 2 himself
described a painful encounter he had with one of the soldiers of
Musailamah: “I was in the garden ‏رع‎ The Garden of Death)
when one of their men grabbed onto me. Asa result, both of us fell
off of our horses. Then we fell onto one another on the ground. [
stabbed him with a dagger that was attached to my sword, and he
stabbed me with a pick that was attached to his sword; in fact, he
repeatedly stabbed me, all-in-all inflicting me seven wounds. (In -
spite of the pain I felt) I continued to push down with my dagger
until finally his body, still in the grip of my hands, relaxed (thus
signaling his death). I could not move because of my wounds, and
blood poured freely from my body. Nonetheless, he died and I

remained alive, and I praise and thank Allah for that.”

There is one more thing that made Khaalid # an effective
military man: He never underestimated his enemy, and he always
gave them credit for their good qualities. For instance, he
acknowledged the bravery of his opponents from the Banu
Haneefah tribe when he said, “I witnessed the enemy (ie., the
people of Banu Haneefah) advancing twenty times. I never saw a
people that more patiently endured the blows of swords; nor did I
ever encounter a people who knew how to use swords better than
they did. And I never witnessed a people who were more
steadfast on the battlefield than were the children of Haneefah on
the Day of Yamaamah....That day, because of the many wounds
with which I was afflicted, 1 was not able to move. I reached a
point that I lost hope of living and became certain of death.”

‎Khaalid Ibn Al-Waleed, by Saadiq ‘Urjoon (pg. 180).‏ !ذا
‎I Vid.‏

516 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏لد‎

alid 2, and The
-Niddeeq &

Seventh: An Assasination Attempt on Kha
Haneefah Delegation Visits Abu Bakr As

Banu |

No matter how many clear proofs are shown to them, some
people simply will not change: Falsehood is a way of life for them.
Such people will continue to fight against Islam until they are
defeated, at which time they turn from open displays of hostility
to secret plots and deception. This was the case regarding a man
named Salamah ibn “Umair Al-Hanafee. His people were
defeated during the Battle of Yamaamah, his leader was killed,
and all of his remaining fellow tribesmen repented and returned
to Islam; and yet he remained the same, fierce in his determina-
tion to fight against Islam and Muslims.

After Khaalid ‏كه‎ agreed to a truce with the people of Banu
Haneefah, Salamah, wanting to show his opposition to the peace
agreement, decided to make an attempt on Khaalid’s life. Before
he could do anything, however, his plans became known to
others and he was promptly arrested. He then made a vow to his
fellow tribesmen that he would never again think about carrying
out such an evil plan. But he soon escaped and broke his vow,
having decided that he was going to try once more to kill Khaalid
‏.ف‎ He probably did not have much of a plan, for he was quickly
spotted by Khaalid’s guards, who called out for help. Then, the
people of Banu Haneefah, not wanting to be held accountable for
Salamah’s actions, responded quickly to the guards’ cry for help.
They pursued Salamah and showed no mercy to him, since he
had already once been warned about his evil plans. As they were
attacking him, he fell into a well and died.'" Salamah’s story is a
good example of how some people defend falsehood no matter
how many clear proofs are presented to them, and no matter how
many chances they are given to repent.

") Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/117, 118).

Musatlamah, ‏ع1‎ Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 517

The Banu Haneefah Delegation

When a delegation from the Banu Haneefah tribe visited ‏لذ‎
‎Madeenah, Abu Bakr 4 said to them, “Let us hear some of
Musatlamah’s Qur'an.” The conflict was over; Musailamah had died;
and the people of Banu Haneefah had repented for having followed
Musailamah, and so, feeling somewhat ashamed, the delegates said,
“Will you not excuse us from having to do that, O Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah?” Abu Bakr 4 replied, “It is something you must
do.” They said, “He used to say, ‘O frog, daughter of two
frogs...Neither water do you spoil, nor a drinker do you prevent from
drinking. Your head is in water, and your tail is in mud.” Musailamah
claimed that these words were a part of the Qur’an that was revealed
to him. It is related that, after hearing a number of other similarly
ridiculous sayings, Abu Bakr said to the delegates, “Woe upon you!

To what (low) places did he manage to take your minds!”

Various historical accounts point to how Musailamah tried to
imitate the Prophet #¢ as much as possible. For instance, upon
hearing about how the Messenger of Allah #¢ spit in a well, after
which its water became abundant, Musailamah decided to
conduct an experiment. He too spit into a well, but the results
of his spitting were different: Rather than become filled with
water, the well went dry. When he spit into another well, its water
became bitter and salty.

Musailamah “The Liar’ was the opposite of blessed; once,
when he performed ablution, he took the water he used to wash
himself and poured it onto the roots of a date-palm tree; shortly
thereafter, the tree became dry and then died. On another
occasion, he took a group of children and tried to bless them by
passing his hands over their heads. Some of them developed a lisp
in their speech, and others among them became bald. And on yet
another occasion, Musailamah supplicated for a man whose eyes
became irritated; Musailamah then passed his hands over the
man’s eyes. By now, the reader can probably guess what
happened next: The man, instead of being cured, became blind.”!

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/118).‏ ذا
‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/331).‏ اما

518 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

When the Prophet ## died, the Qur'an was not gathered ina single
Book; instead, parts of it were with different people — on leather
parchments, on bones, and in the hearts of men. And so when many
Companions @ who had the Qur’an memorized died on the Day of
Yamaamah, their loss signified much more than the departure of
noble and pious Muslims. It signified a possible tragedy that would,
if it occurred, outweigh all other tragedies: the loss of the Qur’an, or
at least the loss of some of its Verses and Chapters. This is because the
Prophet's Companions # were likely to fight in many more battles
against apostates and disbelievers. And if they too were going to die
on the battlefield — particularly those among them that had the
Qur'an memorized in its entirety — then the greatest tragedy of all,
the one I just referred to, was likely to occur.

The first person to perceive not only the danger of the situation
but also the necessity of taking immediate and decisive action was
‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏.نك‎ Shortly after the Battle of Yamaamah
took place, Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq # summoned for Zaid ibn
Thaabit Al-Ansaaree 4 to come to him. When Zaid 4 went to Abu
Bakr 2, he saw ‘Umar & sitting down beside him. Abu Bakr ‏كك‎
‎then said to Zaid a, “Verily, “Umar # came to me and said,
‘Many of the Qurr’aa (those that had the Qur’an memorized in its
entirety) have died on the Day of Yamaamah, and I fear that many
other Qurr’aa will die in future battles and conflicts, and the
dangerous result of that will be the loss of much of the Qur’an.
Therefore, I think that you should order someone (or some
committee of people) to gather the Qur’an (from what is written
of it on leather parchments and bones, and from what is
preserved in the hearts of men).’ I said to ‘Umar ‏رك‎ “How can I
do something that the Messenger of Allah 2% didn’t do himself?!

11 Ttis possible that the Messenger of Allah ‏وه‎ didn’t gather the entire Qur'an into
one book during his lifetime because he expected some Verses to be abrogated,
and so he didn’t want to risk having them included in the Qur’an. Then, by the
time the last part of the Qur’an was revealed to him, he #¢ had very little time

Musailamah, ‘The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 519

‘Umar # said, ‘By Allah, this is something good (that you must
do).’ ‘Umar ‏ذه‎ continued to come back to me with the same advice
until Allah opened my heart to the same idea to which Allah had
opened ‘Umar’s heart. And, regarding the gathering of the Qur’an,
I came to hold the same opinion that “Umar holds.”

Up until this point, Zaid 4 probably had no idea of what was
coming next: he 4 was about to be assigned the greatest and most
important mission of his entire life. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ went on to say,
“Verily, you are a young man who is wise and intelligent, and we
have nothing to accuse you of. And you used to write down
revelation for the Messenger of Allah ‏.وله‎ Therefore, search out for
the various parts of the Qur’an and gather them all (nto one
Book).” Zaid 4 replied, “By Allah, had you charged me with the
task of moving a mountain from one place to another, you would
not have placed a greater burden than you place upon me now by
ordering me to gather the Qur'an.”

Zaid ‏ذه‎ later said, “1 then searched out for the various parts of
the Qur’an, finding them preserved on palm branches, on the
surfaces of flat stones, in the hearts of men, on pieces of leather,
and on (the) shoulder bones (of camels and/or sheep). I continued
to search out for the Qur’an until I found the last part of (Chapter)
‘Al-Taubah’ with Abu Khuzaimah Al-Ansaaree — a part of the
Qur’an which I did not find with anyone else.”

Cate be atl & ‏رشك‎ ead ale
panes 5565 Scat oie ‏حر‎

“Verily, there has come unto you a Messenger (Muhammad #8)
from amongst yourselves (1.e., whom you know well). It grieves
him that you should receive any injury or difficulty. He
(Muhammad #8) is anxious over you (to be rightly guided, to

ue

سر 5

0

left to live. ‏هد صخ‎ Allah inspired the rightly-guided Khaleefahs to do what the
Prophet #6 — given the short amount of time that separated the revelation of
the last Verse of the Qur’an and his death - was not able to do during his
lifetime. (Refer to Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeq (pg. 120).

520 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

repent to Allah, and beg Him to pardon and forgive your sins, in
order that you may enter Paradise and be saved from the
punishment of the Hell-fire), for the believers (he #% is) full of
pity, kind, and merciful.” (Qur’an 9: 128)

The gathered scrolls of the Qur'an stayed with Abu Bakr
until he died, and then with “Umar # until he died, after which
they were passed on to Hafsah bint ‘Umar &."!

Commenting on the above-mentioned account, Al-Baghawee
(may Allah have mercy on him) wrote, “This (narration) clearly
establishes the fact that the Companions ‏ذه‎ gathered all of the
parts of the Qur’an that Allah 36 revealed to His Messenger,
without adding anything to them or removing anything from
them. They gathered the Qur’an because they feared that part of it
would be lost or that all of the people who memorized it would
die. This is because the different parts of the Qur'an were not
gathered in one place; instead, they were preserved in different
places — on date-palm branches, on the surfaces of flat stones,
and in the hearts of men. When the Companions # feared that the
Qur'an would become lost, at least In part, they went to the
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #8, asking him to gather it in
one place. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ then ordered for the Qur'an to be gathered,
an endeavor that was backed by the unanimous support of the
Prophet's Companions ‏.م‎ They then wrote it down exactly as
they heard it from the Messenger of Allah #2, without adding
anything to it or removing anything from it, and without
advancing or moving back any part of it from its rightful place.
And they did not order any of its parts in a manner that was
contrary to how they learned it from the Messenger of Allah #8.
The Messenger of Allah #@ would meet with them and feach them
what was revealed to him from the Qur'an in an order (e., in
terms of how the Verses and Chapters of the Qur'an are ordered)
that exists until this very day in the copies of the Qur'an we have
with us. That ordering (of Verses and Chapters) is based on what

11 Bukhaaree (4986).

Musailamah, “The Liar’; and the Banu Haneefah Tribe 527

Jibreel % taught the Messenger of Allah ‏.كله‎ Jibreel 8 would
inform the Messenger of Allah 2 about each Verse and its place
relative to the Verse that preceded it (and the Verse that came
after it); and the same goes for Chapters of the Qur’an.”""!

“Ali ibn Abee Taalib ‏ذه‎ said, “May Allah have mercy on Abu
Bakr; he was the first to gather what is between the two tablets
(Le., covers) of the Qur’an.’”?!

To be sure, Abu Bakr 2 gave a lot of thought to the matter
before he put Zaid ibn Thaabit ‏كأ‎ in charge of gathering the
Qur'an. Although the decision to appoint Zaid 4 was hard, it was
also obvious and inevitable, for Zaid # possessed the very
qualities that were needed for the grand undertaking of gathering
the Qur'an:

1) He was young - only 21 years old. His young age was a plus
in that he had the energy that was required for the job; after all,
in order to gather the entire Qur’an, Zaid 4 would have to play
the role of an energetic and meticulous investigator who would
have to constantly be on the move, visiting different people,
cross-examining witnesses, gathering witness statements,
searching out for missing Verses (not lost Verses, but Verses
that he did not find with previous witnesses), and so on.

2) Zaid 4 was blessed with intelligence, wisdom, and a powerful
memory.

3) He was trustworthy, never having been known to lie. Because
of his good track-record as an honest and sincere Muslim, no
one had any reason to distrust him or to be suspicious of him.
The qualities of sincerity, honesty, and trustworthiness served
him well since the person that the Muslims were going to
entrust with the task of gathering the Qur’an had to be
someone of an impeccable character.

‎Sharhus-Sunnah, by Al-Baghawee (4/522).‏ ذا
‎The chain of this narration is authentic, and it is related by Ibn Abu Shaibah‏ !“
. .)7/197(

522 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeg ‏نك‎

4) He ‏ف‎ had experience and expertise in the field, for he was one
of the people who wrote down revelation for the Messenger of
Allah ‏.كه‎ Incidentally, if the Messenger of Allah ## trusted him
to write down revelation, it behooved Abu Bakr # and other
Muslims to trust him as well.

5) He # was one of four people to have gathered the Qur’an
during the lifetime of the Prophet 2#%."! Qataadah reported
that he once asked Anas ibn Maalik ‏رف‎ “Who gathered the
Qur’an during the lifetime of the Prophet #2?” Anas 2s replied,
“Four people did so, and each of them was from the Ansaar:
Ubai ibn Ka’ab es, Mu’aadh ibn Jabal 4, Zaid ibn Thaabit ‏ركه‎
‎and Abu Zaid ‏لكا‎

Zaid # was very strict and careful in his methodology of
gathering the Ouran. It was not sufficient for a Companion 4 to
assert that he had memorized a Verse of the Qur’an. That Verse, in
order for Zaid ‏حل‎ to accept it, also had to have been written down
in the presence of the Messenger of Allah #8. Zaid & stipulated
this condition, fearing that a Companion # might not have
memorized a Verse precisely. Also, if someone came to him witha
Verse, Zaid 2 stipulated that he produce two witnesses who
could testify that that Verse had in fact been written down in the
presence of the Messenger of Allah ®. In short, Zaid 2 did
everything that was necessary in order to ensure the correct and
precise gathering of the Qur'an.

‎What is meant by gathering the Qur'an in this context is unclear; perhaps it‏ أذ
‎means that Zaid had already went around, asking people about the various‏
‎parts of the Qur’an. Therefore, he knew where the various parts of the Qur’an‏
‎were gathered, although he did not physically gather them all in one place —‏
‎the latter task he completed only after the Prophet #& died, at the behest of‏
‎Abu Bakr 2. Then again, perhaps another meaning is intended by the phrase,‏
‎“Zaid 2 was one of four people to have gathered the Qur'an during the‏
‎lifetime of the Prophet #¢). And Allah % knows best.‏

‎Siyyar ‘Alaam An-Nubalaa (2/431).‏ ذا

Chapter 5

First: The Prerequisites of Establishing

a Stable and Strong Country

Every sincere Muslim wants all Muslims to be united, to be
successful as a nation, and to play a dominant role on the world
stage. But what every Muslim does not realize is that these things
are not the birthright of Muslims, but instead they have to be
earned.

In the Noble Qur‘an, Allah % promised to grant certain
Muslims succession to the present rulers of the earth; furthermore,
he promised to grant them the authority to practice their religion;
and finally, He # promised to give them in exchange a safe
security after their fear. All of these promises are mentioned in the
Saying of Allah 3%:

524 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏دف‎

‎EET esa Les SG IEC Gall ait %;‏ فى ‎WAT‏ حكما
‎if‏

‎AS i Mo BEG ale ‏رك‎
‎oe fF “ Be od 01 3 > #220. re OA we iw
‏ويد‎ Che SEY Site Ch ies se ls ASS
at (35 alate © ‏الي‎ Sh ‏ند لك‎
259 1 a ao if
“Allah has promised those among you who believe, and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the earth, as He granted its
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority to
practice their religion, that which He has chosen for them )) .©
Islam). And He will surely give them in exchange a safe security
after their fear (provided) they (believers) worship Me and do not
associate anything (in worship) with Me. But whoever
disbelieved after this, they are the Fasiqun (rebellious,
disobedient to Allah). And perform As-Salat (qamat-as-Salat),
and give Zakaat and obey the Messenger (Muhammad 8§) that
you may receive mercy (from Allah) .” (Qur'an 24: 55, 56)

‎One who reads these Verses should focus not just on the
promises Allah # makes in them, but also on the conditions he
stipulates. Therefore, in order for Muslims to achieve safety,
authority, prosperity, and the freedom to practice their religion
on earth, they must possess certain qualities, and they must do
certain things. They must believe in Allah % and perform good
deeds; they must struggle against disbelief, in all of its forms.
And they must establish prayer, pay Zakaat, and obey the
Messenger of Allah #¢.") All of these conditions were fulfilled
during the caliphate of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg +, as well as
during the rule of the other rightly-guided Khaleefahs; therefore,
Allah ® granted the Muslims of that century success and
prosperity as a nation.

‎11 Pighut-Tamkeen Fil-Qur’an Al-Kareem, by As-Sallaabee (pg. 157).

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 525

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ was, of course, completely aware of the above-
mentioned conditions, which is why he both resolved to send out
Usaamah’s army and came to the correct conclusion that
negotiating terms with apostates and with those who refused to
pay Zakaat was not an option. “Abdullah ibn Mas’ood # said,
“After the Messenger of Allah #@ died, we all took a stance that,
had it not been for the fact that Allah blessed us with the help of
Abu Bakr #, would have led to our ultimate demise. We agreed
among ourselves that we should not fight over an Ibn Makhaad or
an Ibnatu Laboon (two kinds of camels that are paid as a form of
Zakaat ‏,.ع.1)‎ that we should not fight against people who refuse to
pay Zakaat))...but Abu Bakr # was determined to fight for those
things (he gave people who refused to pay Zakaat one of two
choices: either repent and pay Zakaat, or prepare for war).

1) Taking Practical Steps to Achieve Victory

Whatever project one embarks upon in life, one must always
do two things in order to ensure success: First, one must place
one’s complete trust in Allah 8, relying on His help and guidance,
and supplicating to Him for all of one’s needs; and second, one
must, based on the universal laws of cause-and-effect by which
Allah & governs this world, take all of the worldly, practical steps
that lead to success. In the case of the Apostate Wars, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎was certain that Allah # would help him defeat the enemy,
primarily because he was fighting for Allah’s cause, whereas the
enemy was fighting for the cause of disbelief. Furthermore,
understanding the power of prayer, Abu Bakr 4 constantly
supplicated to Allah 8 for help. And yet Abu Bakr ‏ذف‎ did not only
pray to Allah and rely on Him for help; he went beyond those
things, taking every possible step to ensure victory in his war
against the apostates. That he didn’t depend on his Faith alone
was a sign, not of weak Eemaan (Faith and belief m Allah}, but of
exceptionally strong Eemaan, for he ‏ذف‎ understood that Allah %&
commanded people to both depend on His help and take worldly,

‎Al-Kaamil Fit-Taareekh (2/21).‏ لذأ

526 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

practical steps that ensured success in life’s endeavors. Regarding
warfare specifically, Allah 3 made this point very clear in the
following Verse of the Noble Qur'an:

‎ad ae ta 2 7 7 A 8 Ae 34 ot ae © he <4‏
#وَأعِدوا لهم ‎|i‏ أستطعتم ‎oF‏ 3 ومن ‎oe py dol bly‏
مكري ‎oh, thee Se‏ معاي ص شال ل و ‎ater‏ ب كوو ‎Eater‏ لل م اله
عدو ‎ais}‏ وعدوصكم وء أحرين من دو دهم إي* تعلمونهوالله ‎weal‏ وما تنفهوا
‎SF 7 9‏ رمه مسقي ‎a Re‏ إل ‎SURE‏
‏من ‎oh‏ ف سَبيلٍ الله ‎Gp‏ إلتكم وَأنمْرُ لا ظلموت»

‎“And make ready against them all you can of power, including
steeds of war (tanks, planes, missiles, artillery, etc.) to threaten
the enemy of Allah and your enemy, and others besides whom,
you may not know but whom Allah does know. And whatever
you shall spend in the Cause of Allah shall be repaid unto you,
and you shall not be treated unjustly.” (Qur'an 8: 60)

‎In regard to taking practical steps to achieve victory in war,
Abu Bakr # prepared a number of armies to fight against the
apostates; he thought out and then implemented a brilliant plan
of action; he armed his soldiers with all of the supplies and
weapons they needed in order to be prepared for battle; he
appointed experienced and capable men — such as Khaalid ibn
Al-Waleed # ~— to lead his armies; and, from the stages of
planning until execution, he personally oversaw all of the detailed
aspects of the war. One of the practical steps that Abu Bakr .& took
was to appoint the right people for each job. Unlike most leaders,
Abu Bakr & was not, in his appointments of governors and
commanders, motivated by such matters as familial relationships
or past favors from friends; instead, he appointed the most pious
and most capable person for each given job. In accordance with
this principle, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ appointed Khaalid as the leader of
his armies, Zaid ibn Thaabit ‏ذا‎ as the man in charge of gathering
the Qur'an, and Abu Burzah Al-Aslamee # as a messenger
between himself and his army commanders. If one were to study
the characteristics of these three men, one would find that each
one of them, based on prior experience and skills, was exactly
best-suited to the job that was assigned to him.

the Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 327
2) The Effects of Applying Islamic Law

Today, people from various backgrounds speculate about
what will happen if all Muslim countries begin to implement
Islamic Law. True believers argue that Muslims will prosper and
that Allah 864 will bless them with strength, success, and
widespread prosperity. The enemies of Islam claim that, if [Islamic
Law were to be applied in Muslim countries, Muslims would
suffer dire consequences as a result. In reality, however, one does
not need to speculate; instead, one needs to refer back to history
and ask the questions: Was there ever a time when Muslims
applied Islamic Law, and how did applying Islamic Law affect
their lives? The answer to the first question is, yes, Islamic Law
was applied at least during the eras of the Prophet #2 and of the
rightly-guided Khaleefahs. During the first century of Islam,
Muslims applied the teachings of Islam on an individual, a
familial, and a societal level; consequently, they lived during a
period that has come to be known as “The Golden Years of
Islam,” a period of unprecedented and unmatched prosperity,
both of the spiritual and material kind. Muslims established a
strong presence on the world stage, and were feared by even the
major Empires of the time. And Allah 4 bestowed victory-upon-
victory to the Muslims, first during the Apostate Wars, and then
during the conquests of foreign lands and empires. Within
Muslim societies, Allah #8 blessed His believing slaves with peace,
safety, and security. Allah 8 said:

ores ‏ل الوم‎ SSH Ah, ‏إيستهم‎ GA ap ‏ءامنا‎ Galt

“Tt is those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah and worship none

but Him Alone) and confuse not their belief with Zulm (wrong,

i.e., by worshipping others besides Allah), for them (only) there

is security and they are the guided.” (Qur'an 6: 82)

In another Verse, Allah 3 said:

{365 ras oD

‎gy ll ©‏ أ ‎Ieee‏ من ديدرهم بِعَيْرٍ ‎iN Ge‏ أت ‎Gh‏ رسا ‎Vg) a‏ دقع

528 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

“a ‏ار عمل عسل ع‎ aa a: ‏ع‎ a ad ‏مل عه‎ fee “ny? as
eee; Je ats isles ‏وب‎ Ee Eh ‏ينين‎ pp tN ‏َه‎
‎& + & a“ 700 gr pe zy 5 oe aw
ye Esl Ss ‏أ‎ Dl ‏من ينضرة:‎ iil ‏من‎ 2 ee ne
(24 “oo 0 ae 3 5
yal ‏الرمكرة‎ isle, ‏لصَلَرة‎ ipl ry ‏فى أ‎ He)

‎Ayo vy Se Be oe ed‏ وو
‎aah‏ و ل ‎g‏ را الأمور #

‎“Those who have been expelled from their homes unjustly only
because they said : “Our Lordis Allah.” ~ For had it not been that
Allah checks one set of people by means of another, monasteries,
churches ‏ر‎ synagogues, and mosques, wherein the Name of Allah is
mentioned much would surely have been pulled down. Verily,
Allah will help those who help His (Cause). Truly, Allah is All-
Strong, All-Mighty . Those (Muslim rulers) who, if We give them
power in the land , (they) order for Igamat-as-Salat (1.e., to perform
the five compulsory congregational Salat (prayers) (the males in
mosques})), to pay the Zakaat and then enjoin Al-Ma’ruf (.e.,
Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam orders one to do), and forbid
Al-Munkar (1.e., disbelief, polytheism and all that Islam has
forbidden) (i.e., they make the Qur’an as the law of their country
in all the spheres of life). And with Allah rests the end of (all)
matters (of creatures) .”” (Qur’an 22: 40, 41)

‎Beyond the “Golden Years of Islam,” whenever Muslims have,
as a group, applied the teachings of Islam, Allah & has bestowed
upon them strength, protection, and authority on earth — be it
right away, or in the end, after a period of tests, trials, and
tribulations.

‎3) The Characteristics of Muslims from the First Generation of
Islam

‎Allah 3% said:

‎AS on aoe aa we Se wy, 2 ‏حامر‎ if Ser
me fyi ai Ct AB gal ‏من عن دسف‎ Gy cy pale “yl! (las

‎Ul Fee Dhilaal Al-Qur’an (4/270).

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 529

we ‏ان مرا سحل‎ et Bee

a “i wb 4 a
‏ول‎ ail ‏فى جيل‎ Sg ool & fA
Ci i hi aS ‏لآير‎ CS oak

‎ae’ 2G KS of‏ عَليم
‎“O you who believe! Whoever from among you turns back from‏
‎his religion (Islam), Allah will bring a people whom He will love‏
‎and they will love Him; humble towards the believers, stern‏
‎towards the disbelievers , fighting in the Way of Allah, and never‏
‎afraid of the blame of the blamers . That 15 the Grace of Allah which‏
‎He besiows on whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for‏
‎His creatures’ needs, All-Knower .” (Qur’an 5: 54)‏

‎When this Verse was revealed, it referred, among other things,
to events that were to take place in the future — or more
particularly, to what was to take place in the wake of the
Prophet's death. For even if Allah’s Saying “Whoever from
among you turns back from his religion (slam) refers to more
than one group of people, it certainly applies to those who
apostatized after the Prophet #@ died. And, without a doubt,
Allah’s Saying “Allah will bring a people whom He will love and
they will love Him” most certainly refers to Abu Bakr ‏هف‎ and his
companions who fought against the apostates. The Verse then
goes on to enumerate a number of qualities that Abu Bakr « and
his companions possessed — qualities they needed in order to
fight against those who turned back from Islam. The following
are, as stated in the above-mentioned Verse, those qualities:

‎a) “Whom He Will Love, and They Will Love Him”

‎Allah 4% loved the first generation of Muslims because of the
many sacrifices they made for the cause of Islam. Going beyond
the call of duty, they were so enthusiastic in their application of
Islam that they performed voluntary acts of worship consistently
and without fail, treating them as if they were the most important
of obligatory duties in Islam. The first generation of Islam
consisted of Muslims who were pious, righteous, and fearful of
Allah % — all qualities that make a person deserving of Allah’s
love. In Chapter “Aal-‘Imraan,” Allah 38 said:

530 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

ve Gall Era ‏وَالحطِين‎ 620 Jel ‏فى‎ ofa ‏بن‎

“Those who spend (in Allah’s Cause ~ deeds of charity, alms,
etc.) in prosperity and adversity, who repress anger, and who
pardon men; verily, Allah loves Al-Muhsinun (the good-
doers)” (Qur'an 3: 134)

Also in Chapter “Aal-‘Imraan,” Allah & said:

“Yes, whoever fulfils his sage. and fears Allah much ; verily,
then Allah loves those who are Al-Muttaqun (the pious).”

(Qur'an 3: 76)

Muslims from the first generation of Islam loved Allah % a great
deal. Human beings are predisposed to liking someone who does a
favor to them. Consider, then, the case of Allah &, Who created
man, provided for him, legislated laws for his welfare, made
matters easy for him, promised him Paradise if he follows true
guidance, not to mention the countless other blessings that Allah %&
has showered wpon his slaves. Therefore, it is clear why the first
generation of Muslims loved Allah &% as for the extent of their love,
it far exceeds any other love known to mankind. If they knew that
Allah # hated something, they too hated it; and if they knew that
Allah # loved something, they too loved it. They even placed
Allah’s commands above their personal desires. Then they further
manifested their love of Allah 4 by following His Messenger #8.
And to prove the sincerity of their love for Allah 38, they were
willing to sacrifice everything they had for the cause of Islam. In an
instant, and without the least bit of hesitation, one of them was
willing to give up his life for the sake of Allah 3%, and instead of
thinking that they were doing a favor to Allah %, they would
believe with certainty that it was Allah % Who — by honoring them
and granting them Paradise — was doing them a great Favor.

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 533

1) It was an Islamic society in the fullest meaning of the word
“Islamic.” The laws of Islam were manifested not only inwardly,
but outwardly as well, with most members of society making a
concerted effort to apply the teachings of Islam in every aspect of
their lives. Sinning is common to any society, but it was, to be sure,
perpetrated to a lesser degree during the rule of Abu Bakr 4 then
it has been in any other society since.

Religion was not pushed to one side; instead it was a central
part of life, playing a dominant role on an individual, a
farnilial, and a societal level. People’s outlook on life, manners,
values, customs, practices, laws, and relationships with one
another ‏ل‎ these were all governed by the laws of Islam.

None of what I said means that every single member of society
was an exemplary Muslim, for in this world no society can
reach such a level of purity. Even during the era of the Prophet
#¢, the Muslim society of Al-Madeenah consisted not just of
upright and upstanding citizens; to the contrary, some
members of society were hypocrites; others were slow to
apply Allah’s laws; and yet others were weak in their Faith.
That being said, none of these groups had any real impact on
the goings on of society. Bereft of any real influence or power,
they were relatively harmless. True power, on the other hand,
was in the hands of sincere believers; it was they who dictated
the rules and norms of society.

2) The true meaning of the word “nation” was realized during the
era of Abu Bakr’s caliphate. A community of people does not
become a nation ~ at least not in the true Islamic sense of the
word — based merely on a shared land, language, or culture. In
Islam, a nation unites people not on the basis of color, race, or
language; but instead on the basis of a common set of beliefs and
values. Throughout history, no group of people has succeeded
in forming a nation based on the aforesaid understanding to the
degree that the Muslims has succeeded in doing so.

532 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏طك‎

But Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ knew that the only wise choice before him was to
wage an all-out war against the apostates. As a result of his
decision, Muslims were able to raise the Word of Allah above all
else, to establish Allah's divinely revealed laws throughout the
peninsula, to put an end to the oppressive and unjust ways of the
apostates, and to bring back many wayward people to the fold of
Islam. The Peninsula, having become united under the banner of
Islam, turned into a launching point for conquests of foreign
lands. Abu Bakr # and his Companions ‏رك‎ fearing the blame of
no human being, did what was necessary to make truth prevail
over falsehood. As a result, Allah 88 blessed them with safety,
security, and strength under one leader, and under the banner of
the one True religion.”

d) “That is the Grace of Allah which He Bestows on Whom He
Wills”

The end of the Verse refers to everything that preceded it; or in
other words, that Allah # loves them, that they love Allah, that
they are humble towards believers, that they are stern towards
disbelievers, that they fight in the way of Allah, and that, in doing
so, they fear the blame of no human being — all of these are from
the Grace of Allah, which He bestows on whomsoever He
wills.

Second: M

the Caliphate of Abu Bak

luslim Society D

When one studies the years of Abu Bakr’'s rule, one cannot help
but notice a number of features that distinguish the Muslim
society of that era from the societies of almost all other eras. The
following are some of those features:

Ol Refer to Taareekh Ad-Da’walt Al-Islaamee, by Dr. Jameel Al-Misree (pg. 256);
and to Tafseer Al-Muneer (2/233).

2 Tafseer Al-Muneer (6/233).

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 535

family relations, helping the needy, enjoining good,
forbidding evil, volunteering to join Muslim armies,
spending time in the Masjid, and so on from the myriad of
good deeds that one can perform. What is important is that
they did not loiter the streets, looking for a hobby or some
kind of diversion to pass away their hours. They were too
busy for that, too preoccupied with the affairs of their nation
and with the welfare of their fellow citizens.!"!

5) If one had to describe society during Abu Bakr’s caliphate
with a single word, “action’” would be a good choice. Almost
every member of society worked hard to improve as a
Muslim and to contribute towards the betterment of the
Muslim nation, not just with words, but with actions as well.
Keep in mind that Muslims lived during a period of intense
war, first against apostates and then against foreign empires.
And yet Abu Bakr 4 never had to force citizens to join
Muslim armies; instead, they volunteered themselves; they
actually wanted to take part in battles, knowing that, if they
were sincere to Allah 8, He % would grant them either
victory or martyrdom.

6) The spirit of worship permeated throughout the ranks of
society. All around one could see people performing both
obligatory and voluntary acts of worship. And yet the spirit of
worship went beyond ostensible acts of worship, such as
prayer; in fact, it encompassed all aspects of people's lives.
Individual Muslims appreciated the fact that they could
transform every part of their lives, from the more important
to the mundane, into an act of worship. 50, for instance, the
ruler governed the affairs of his people with the intention of
pleasing Allah 8% in all of his actions and policies. A scholar
taught his students the Qur’an or Islamic Jurisprudence in the
spirit of worship, i.e., he taught his students with the intention

‎Kaifa Naktub At-Taareekh (pg. 102).‏ أذا

536 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

of pleasing Allah 3%. Even businessmen in the marketplace
transformed their transactions into actions of worship. They
achieved that end by being fair in their dealings, by striving to
be generous towards customers, and by adhering to the
Islamic laws of buying and selling (such as the law which
states that it is forbidden to deal in usury). Similarly, on a
family level, the man of the house would take care of his
dependants with a spirit of worship; and the same goes for his
wife. In short, each person applied the saying of the Messenger
of Allah #:

nae ere ‏ل‎ 5 BES
“Each one of you is a shepherd, and each one of you is responsible
for his flock.“

These were the main features that made the society over which
Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ ruled an Islamic society in the truest meaning of
the word “Islamic.” That Islam was practiced so openly and
sincerely by Muslims helped pave the way for many of earth’s
inhabitants to embrace Islam. Ina period of just 50 years, Islam
spread with lightning-like speed westwards from the ocean
and eastwards towards India. From a military perspective, that
was an amazing achievement; nonetheless, arms and force
alone could not have won over the hearts and minds of people.

In conquered lands, people willingly, and without the least bit
of coercion, entered into the fold of Islam. They did so because
they saw Muslims practicing it properly, and they were
impressed by what they saw — to the degree that they too
wasted to become adherents of the religion they witnessed
being so beautifully applied.”!

11 Kaifa Naktubut-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (pg. 102).
‏خا‎ Khaifa Naktubut-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (pg. 103).

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 537

Third:

Negative External

How Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ Combated
Influences

As Islam continued to spread throughout the Arabian
Peninsula, many Arab tribes, which in the past had been loyal
to their Roman and Persian neighbors, were forced to form
alliances with the Muslim nation. Here I am referring to Arabs
that lived along the border regions that separated Muslim lands
from Roman and Persian territory. Those Arabs were not a
trustworthy lot, for no sooner did they hear about the death of the
Messenger of Allah # than they tried to mend relations with their
Roman and Persian neighbors. Their friendly overtures were met
with welcoming arms, for the Romans and Persians had used
them to act as a buffer between them and the Muslims. Pursuant
to their mutual understanding, Romans and Persians sent
weapons and soldiers into the region, as well as anything else
that was needed in order to wage war against what they deemed
to be an upstart nation.”

Abu Bakr understood that that kind of foreign interference
had to be met with an iron fist, and so he sent a number of armies
to border regions in order to put up a show of strength; after all, if
the Romans and Persians sent military support one day, what was
to stop them from carrying out an all-out invasion the next. It was
therefore necessary to dispel any notions the Romans and
Persians had about the weaknesses of Muslims; hence the
importance of sending out, for instance, Usaarah ibn Zaid’s
army to Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).

Abu Bakr 2s sent Khaalid ibn Sa’eed ibn Al’Aas & to ‏لذ‎
‎Hamagtain along the highlands of Ash-Sham; “Amr ibn Al’ Aas a
to Tabook and Daumatul-Jandal; ‏مهلف “لذ‎ ibn Al-Hadramee 4 to
Bahrain (in fact, he traveled along the entire coastline of Arabian
Peninsula); and then Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah Ash-Shaibaa-
nee # to southern Iraq. Witnessing the strength of Al-

Ul Dirgasaat Fee ‘Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah (pg. 311).

538 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Stddeeq ‏ضف‎

Muthannah’s army, Sujaah At-Tameemiyyah — the woman who
had falsely claimed to be a prophetess, and who had married
Musailamah “The Liar’-was forced to return to her homeland in
Iraq. Prior to the advent of Islam, she belonged to a tamily of
Christians that lived in Iraq under the rule of the Persian Empire.

Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ was far-sighted in his approach to dealing with
problems both domestic and foreign. On the surface, it seemed
obvious to most that Abu Bakr’s sole priority should have been to
deal with the apostates. But to Abu Bakr 4 it was clear that,
although dealing with the apostates should be his primary
objective, he would be remiss if he were to ignore the Romans and
Persians that lived along the borders of the Arabian Peninsula.
Thus he 4 sent armies to protect the entire length of the border
that separated Muslims from Persians and Romans. He ‏مه‎ sent Al-
‘Alaa Al-Hadramee # and Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed # to the
northern part of Najd; “Amr ibn Al-‘Aas # to Daumatul-Jandal;
and Khaalid ibn 5a’eed 2 to the highlands of Ash-Sham (Syria
and surrounding regions), never mind the formidable army of
Usaamah 4 that he 2 also sent to the region."

The Persians attempted to take advantage of any and every
opportunity to hurt, if not destroy, their Muslim neighbors. After
the Prophet # died, various tribes that lived along the Muslim-
Persian border sought to form alliances with Kisra, the king of the
Persian Empire. For instance, the Bakr ibn Waail tribe offered
Kisra control of Bahrain. He accepted their offer, and he sent Al-
Mundhir ibn An-No’maan to accompany them on their return
journey. Along with Mundhir, Kisra sent an army that consisted
of seven-thousand fighters, some of them horsemen, and the rest
infantrymen. And yet, as impressive as that army might have
seemed, it was relatively harmless and posed little if no threat to
the more powerful Muslim armies they faced./*!

11 Huroob Ar-Riddah (pgs. 174, 175).

Pl AL-Iktifua Fee Taareekh Al-Mustafaa Wath-Thalaathatul-Khulafaa (3/318,
319).

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 539

The Persians were constantly making efforts to destabilize the
Arabian Peninsula. It was their support and encouragement that
prompted Sujaah - a woman who falsely claimed to be a
prophetess — to leave Iraq and to travel into the Arabian
Peninsula with an army of followers.

If the Persians were eager to destabilize the Arabian Peninsula
and to weaken the Muslim nation, the Romans were doubly so,
and they were more dangerous to boot. They took a harsher
stance vis-a-vis the Muslim nation; they had a complicated belief
system and a detailed set of laws that they had developed over
the centuries; they had a huge population that they could draw
upon for soldiers, and many nations, peoples, and tribes were
allied to them — and were indebted to them in one way or
another,#!

From the very moment that the Messenger of Allah #8 invited
Romans to embrace Islam, they made open and repeated attempts
to increase hostilities with Muslims. Their aggressive attitude led
to two early battles: Mo’tah and Tabook, both of which
established two important lessons: First, Mo’tah and Tabook
taught the Romans that it would not be easy to defeat their
Muslim foes; second, the two battles taught Muslims that the
Christian Arabs of Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions), in
spite of the treaties they signed with the Messenger of Allah 2s,
were loyal to their fellow Christians in Rome.

Abu Bakr & was very well aware of the fact that the Romans
were plotting on a daily basis to destroy the Muslim nation, and
that is one of the main reasons why he ‏أ‎ was so adamant in his
decision to send Usaamah’s army to Ash-Sham (Syria and
surrounding regions). Arab tribes that lived along the northern
part of the peninsula — such as the Lakhm, Ghassaan, Jidhaam,
Balee, Qudaa’ah, ‘Udhrah, and Kalb tribes — went back on the
treaties they signed with the Messenger of Allah #8. And who was
it, if not the Romans, that provided them with the weapons,

‎Harakatur-Riddah, by Al Uttoom (pg. 146).‏ لذأ

540 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2

soldiers, wealth, and strategy they needed in order to make a
stand against the Muslims? When Abu Bakr # sent out
Usaamah’s army, it was as if he was saying to the Romans,
“Even if Arabs have created a climate of chaos within my
territory, we are not weaker as a result; in fact, we are able to
withstand any large-scale attack that you might dare to launch
against us./""!

Romans and Persians were aVerse to the idea of getting their
own hands dirty; they hoped that Arab apostates would do an
adequate job for them, by destroying Islam and bringing back
idolatry to the region. For this reason, the Romans and Persians
provided as much support as possible to their apostate allies; they
even gave refuge to apostates that were forced to flee the Arabian
Peninsula. By the time Muslims were able to restore Islam and
safety to the region, it became clear to them that it was high time
to march northwards and face the two huge enemies that were
just waiting for the right time to destroy both Islam and
Muslims.

But before taking the major step of attempting to conquer the
lands of Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions) and Iraq, Abu
Bakr ‏ذف‎ had to make sure of three things:

1) That he ¢ was determined not only to attack the Romans and
Persians, but to continue fighting them until the very end.

2) That his society remained pure, and by ‘his society,’ I mean the
society of the city of Al-Madeenah, which consisted of
members of the Muhaapiroon and the Ansaar.

3) That the overall society of the Muslim nation — which
consisted of.all of the inhabitants of the Arabian Peninsula —
remained pure from the diseases of polytheism and disbelief.

I! Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-"Uttoom (pg. 150).

‎Mausoo’atut-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Dr. Ahmad Shalbee (1/388).‏ اذا

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 541

Once security and safety were achieved at home, Abu Bakr #
launched a series of attacks in Iraq and Ash-Sham, attacks that
shook the very foundations of the Roman and Persian Empires.
Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was successful in his military campaigns because the
soldiers he sent out were fighting for a common cause and were
united under one flag; they were protected from behind, and they
were well-supplied with all of the weapons and materials they
needed."! And, more so than anything else, rather than fear
death, they yearned for it, desiring it more than life itself — for
death on the battlefield mieant eternity in Paradise.

Fourth: Some of the Results of the Apostasy Wars
The Apostate Wars led to results that had repercussions on
generations to come; the following are the more important of

those results:

1) Islam Became Distinguished from All Other Religions and
Sets of Beliefs

Almost immediately after the Messenger of Allah #¢ died, the
situation in Arabia turned from peaceful and safe to violent and
chaotic. Many Arabs turned their backs on Islam and returned to
disbelief. Some of those Arabs had only accepted Islam after
having received large shares of the spoils of war; others had been
hypocrites all along; others had embraced Islam not based on
Faith, but on political and economic factors; and yet others
embraced Islam at a very late point in time. One example from the
first two categories was “Uyainah ibn Hisn Al-Fizaaree, whose
acceptance of Islam was doubtful at the very least. As soon as a
group of people turned away from Islam, “‘Uyainah joined their
ranks, selling his religion for the material things that were offered
to him by Tulaihah Al-Asdee. Later on, when “Uyainah was
captured and taken to Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ in chains, the children of Al-

‎Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 323).‏ ذا

54? The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏له‎

Madeenah would pass by him, poke him with date-palm
branches, and say, “O enemy of Allah! Have you disbelieved
after having had Faith?” And he would say, “By Allah, I never
believed in the first place.”"!

And it is said about the ’Ans tribe from Yemen that they never
embraced Islam; the ‘Ans tribe, it should be remembered, was the
tribe of Al-Aswad, the evil tyrant who claimed to be a prophet.

A lack of understanding led some people away from Islam; for
example, many among those who apostatized — particularly
those who refused to pay Zakaat —cited the following Verse as
proof of their being upon the truth:

Bon, K 4 = ‏ولد‎ ls BAS ‏م‎ % >
‏سكن‎ &b ‏صا‎ i age 13 & ‏تطهر: هم وتركهم ب‎ Adve Ay ‏نا‎

“Take Sadagah (alms) from their wealth in order to 7 them
and sanctify them with it, and invoke Allah for them. Verily,
Your tnvocations are source of security for them, and Aliah is All-
Hearer, All-Knower .”” (Qur'an 9: 103)

They argued that the command “Take Sadagah (alms)” was
addressed to the Messenger of Allah #¢ only; therefore, once he ##
died, once he #@ was no longer able to collect Sadaqah (alms, or
Zakaat), Sadagah (alms, or Zakaat) was no longer obligatory. In his
Tafseer of the above-mentioned Verse, ibn Katheer (may Allah
have mercy on him) said, “Some Arabs who refused to pay Zakaat
believed that it was not their duty to pay Zakaat to the Imam (the
Khaleefah, the overall ruler of the Muslim nation); they believed
that collecting Zakaat was specific to the Messenger of Allah #,
and the basis of that belief is the Saying of Allah 3%:

رمت 2 6 5 مم
سهد من ‎ris‏ $2312

‘Take Sadagah (alms) from their wealth.’

‎Taaveekh At-Tabaree (3/260) and Harakatur-Riddah (pg. 114).‏ للا

The Lessons and Morais of the Apostate Wars 543

This false interpretation, this corrupted understanding was
then refuted by Abu Bakr # and the rest of the Prophet's
Companions #4, who fought against the apostates until they
finally agreed to pay Zakaat to the Khaleefah just as they used to
pay it to the Messenger of Allah #¢/")

With the advent of widespread apostasy came a resurgence of
a kind of tribalism — the belief that tribal supremacy meant
everything and that one had to defend one’s fellow tribesmen
regardless of whether they were wrongdoers or victims. It was a
blind form of zealotry that, during the pre-Islamic days of
ignorance, was the cause of many senseless wars. When people
apostatized, they yearned for the past, a past that included idol
worship, lewd acts, and a zealous kind of loyalty towards one’s
tribe.

Musailamah “The Liar,” for instance, tried to revive feelings of
tribal honor among his people when he said to them, “I want you
to tell me why the Quraish is more worthy of Prophethood and of
leadership (i.e., the right to lead all Arabs) than you are? By Allah,
they do not outnumber you, and they are not blessed with more
allies than you have. And indeed, your land is more vast than is
their land, and you have more wealth than they have.””?!

Then there is the example of Ar-Rajjaal ibn ‘Unfuwah, a fellow
tribesman of Musailamah, and a man whom Allah 3 had blessed
with knowledge. Ar-Rajjaal was a man who both recited the
Qur'an and learned the teachings of Islam, but the disease of tribal
xenophobia overcame him and clouded his judgment. Referring
to the Messenger of Allah #2 and Musailamah, and to the issue of
Prophethood, Ar-Rajjaal said, “They are two rams that have
struck one another with their horns, and of them the one we love
most is our ram ‏رع.1)‎ the one who is from our tribe,
Musailamah).”°

11 Tofseer ibn Katheer (2/ 386) - The Al-Halabee Edition.
Vl Harakatur-Riddah, by Al-Uttoom (pg. 124).
Pl Al-Tsaabah, by Yon Hajar (2761).

544 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

Talhah An-Namree was another follower of Musailmah, and
yet he said to him one day, “I bear witness that you are a liar and
that Muhammad is truthful; nonetheless, a liar from the
descendants of Rabee’ah is more beloved to us than is a truthful
person from the descendants of Mudar.”"!

If it was not enough for the people of Banu Haneefah to
acknowledge that their leader was a liar and a charlatan,
Musailamah also admitted the truth abut himself. When the tide
began to shift in the favor of the Muslims during the Battle of
Yamaamah, apostate soldiers turned towards Musailamah and
angrily asked him the question, “Where is the victory and where
are the miracles that you have promised us?” Musailamah
replied, “Fight in order to defend and honor your noble lineages.
As for religion, there is no religion.”! |

The apostates tried their utmost to destroy Islam and Muslims;
and at the very least, they wanted to corrupt the pure teachings of
Islam — by questioning the fact that the Prophet #2 was the seal of
all Prophets, by making prayer a non-obligatory act of worship,
and by, among other things, rejecting Zakaat as an essential pillar
of Islam. In each of their goals the apostates failed miserably. They
did not destroy Muslims, and they did not even manage to
corrupt, even to the slightest degree, the teachings of Islam.

Abu Bakr’s uncompromising attitude vis-a-vis the apostates,
teaches us that we must never be willing to accept changes in our
religion. Years earlier, the Quraish tried to convince the Prophet # to
worship their gods for a while, in return for which they would be
willing to worship Allah % for a while. The Prophet #€ flat-out
refused to accept their offer, and years later, Abu Bakr 4 did the same
when the apostates wanted to change the religion by accepting
certain teachings of Islam and rejecting others - such as Zakaat. Abu
Bakr’s determination further teaches us that the strength of Muslims
lies not in numbers or weapons, but in the power of Faith.

‘| Vaareekh At-Tabaree (4/104).
‏لها‎ Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/104).

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 545

2) The Importance of Both a Strong Core Group of Muslims and
a Well-Protected Homeland

When the outbreak of apostasy threatened to destabilize the
Arabian Peninsula, a core group of Muslims were ready, willing,
and able to stand up to the challenge of fighting against and
defeating the apostates. That core group did not consist of
Muslims who acted as individuals, with each one of them
following his own plan of action; to the contrary, they worked asa
group, united under a single leader. That might seem tunim-
portant to some, but it was an important, if not the key, reason
that led to many victories against the apostates.

Whenever Muslims act as individuals or in small groups with
seemingly disparate goals, it is unlikely that they will succeed in
achieving those goals. It is when they act on a united front, with
common goals, mutual cooperation, and a true sense of
brotherhood that they will be likely to succeed in their endeavors.
After the initial outbreak of apostasy, Muslims acted as a group,
united under a single leader: They knew their own strengths; they
knew the strengths of their enemy; and they made plans for all
possible contingencies. And then they executed their plans in an
organized manner. It was because of their efforts — after the
Grace and Mercy of Allah & — that the Muslim nation remained
united and protected against its enemies.

Just as having a strong core group of Muslims is important, so
too is having a well-protected and stable homeland. If the
homeland — or in other words, the Arabian Peninsula — was
infected with disbelief among its various tribes, it made no sense
to launch an all-out offensive against foreign enemies. Under-
standing this reality, Abu Bakr # made very few offensive
maneuvers against foreign enemies until he first remedied
problems at home. He 4 made an elaborate and ambitious plan
to fight against and defeat all of the apostates in the Arabian
Peninsula, and to bring back all of the Peninsula’s inhabitants to
Islam. He # succeeded in achieving his goals, and the Arabian
Peninsula became a stable land, a land that was well-protected

546 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏وك‎

against its enemies. It was then, and only then, that Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎was able to turn the Peninsula into a launching pad from which he
sent out armies to attack and conquer foreign lands."

3) Preparing a New Cadre of Fighters

Throughout the Madanee period of the Prophet's lifetime,
Muslims were constantly being trained in the art of warfare. The
people who graduated from that school of training were the likes
of Abu Bakr 4, Khaalid fbn Al-Waleed ‏رف‎ ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab
‏,ذه‎ Usaamah ibn Zaid ‏,ا‎ and the list can go on and on. It was
mainly because of their extensive traming under the direct
supervision of the Prophet #% that they were able to defeat thei
apostate enemies with relative ease and quickness.

Whereas the Prophet’s Companions 4 received guidance and
training from the Messenger of Allah #¢, a new group of Muslims,
those who had never met the Messenger of Allah ‏ول‎ drew their
euidance directly from the Book of Allah #. They were recently-
converted Muslims who were suddenly thrust into a dangerous
regional conflict, one that pitted their Muslim brothers against well-
organized groups of apostates. Those new Muslims remained
steadfast upon Islam, and the Apostate Wars became for them what
Uhud, Badr, and Khandaq were for the Prophet’s Companions #:
Essential training for future battles and wars. This new cadre of
fighters produced some leaders who, though they were neither
Muhaafiroon nor Ansaar nor Companions & for that matter, were
undeniably sincere and strong in their Faith. They, having acquired
an adequate degree of training during the Apostate Wars, were key
leaders in the conquests that took place months and years later.

4) The Islamic Laws that Pertaim to Apostasy are Put into Practice

There are Verses of the Qur'an and sayings of the Prophet #%
that discuss the phenomenon of apostasy — referring to it as a
disease that can overcome some people. For the most part, those

‎Divgasaat Fee ‘Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafatul-Raashidah (pe. 325).‏ [ذا

The Lessons and Morals of the Apostate Wars 547

revealed texts remained a matter of theory until the Prophet #¢
died, since it was after he #¢ died that apostasy occurred on a
widespread level for the first time. When Muslims had to face the
outbreak of apostasy, they were armed with a number of revealed
texts that told them what they had to do in order to remedy the
problem. And from some revealed texts they learned about what
they had to do not directly, but through a process of using their
powers of reasoning and their knowledge of revealed texts to |
derive rulings.

The important thing to remember here is that, when apostasy
occurred on a widespread level, and when the Companions &
discussed the problem, they relied not on their own opinions, but
on divinely revealed texts — from the Qur'an and Sunnah. Even if
they initially disagreed, they shared the same methodology of
going back to revealed texts, and so, in the end, they arrived at the
same, correct legal ruling, one that propelled them into an all-out
war against the apostates. |

5) “But the Evil Plot Encompasses only Him Who Makes It.”
(Qur’an 35: 43)

The Apostate Wars confirm an important reality for us: That
whenever an individual, a group, or even a nation of Muslims
rebel against Islarn in order to destroy it, their efforts will end in
complete and utter failure. This is because they rebel against
Allah's commands, which are manifested in His Book -- the very
Book that He #% guaranteed to preserve and safeguard. So let
those who plot against Islam take heed: Their end in this world is
destruction; and in the Hereafter, the Hellfire.

6) The Peninsula is Divided inte Provinces

One of the main results of the Apostate Wars is that stability
was returned to the region, a turn of events that alowed Abu Bakr
@ to concentrate much of his efforts on governing his people. In
that spirit, he # divided the region into provinces, much in the
same fashion as had been done during the lifetime of the Prophet

548 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg

‎The following consists of the name of each province and the‏ .عله
‎governor that Abu Bakr 4 appointed to rule over it:‏

‎Name of Province : Governor of Province
1) Makkah : ‘Attaab ibn Usaid «s

‎2) At-Taaif : “Uthman ibn Abul-‘Aas ‏ذه‎

‎3) San’aa : Al-Muhaajir ibn Abu Umayyah 4
4) Hadramoot : Ziyaad ibn Lubaid 2

‎5) Khaulaan : Ya’la ibn Umayyah &

‎6) Zubaid and Raf’: Abu Moosa Al-Ash’aree # (he was governor
of both provinces)

‎7) Janadul-Yemen : Mu’aadh ibn Jabal «

‎8) Najraan : Jareer ibn “Abdullah ‏ف‎

‎9) Jursh : ‘Abdullah ibn Noor &

‎10) Bahrain : Al-‘Alaa ibn Al-Hadramee ‏له‎
‎11) ‘Ummaan : Hodhaitah Al-Ghilfaanee ‏نف‎

‎12) Yamaamah : Sulait ibn Qais el

‎1١ Ad-Daulah Al-Avabiyyah Al-Islaamiyyah, by Mansoor Ahmad Al-Hiraabee (pg.

Introduction

Muslims have a clear purpose for their existence, as do all
humans for that matter; and that is to apply Islamic Monotheism
and to worship Allah # in all aspects of their lives. Allah % said:

hoki Vy ‏والاضن‎ EA Cale 5}

“And I (Allah) created not the jinns and humans except that they
should worship Me (Alone).” (Qur’an 51: 56)

If the sole purpose of creating jinns and humans is for them to
worship Allah #8 alone, Muslims must not only worship Allah #
themselves, but also call upon others to do the same; after all,
Allah # said ‘humans’ and not ‘Muslims’ in the above-mentioned
Verse. It is every human being’s duty to worship Allah % alone,
and itis every Muslim’s duty to inform other human beings about
that reality.

Muslims must not take that duty lightly. As the torchbearers of
the truth, they must inform all people about the message of Islam.
Abu Bakr 4 understood the importance of that duty, but there
was only one problem: foreign rulers, emperors, and kings stood
552 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏مد‎

in the way of Muslims who wanted to present the message of
Islam to non-Muslims who lived outside of the realm of Muslim
territory. As such, it further became the duty of Muslims to put
aside any obstacles that stood in the way of all people hearing
about the message of Islam. The overall goal of Abu Bakr 2 was
to apply the teachings of Isiam throughout earth and to raise the
Word of Allah # above all else. Therefore, he had to send out
armies to remove all of the obstacles that prevented Islam from
spreading to foreign lands. The noble scholar ibn Taymiyyah
wrote, “If legal warfare in Islam means fighting Jihaad so that all
religion will be for Allah and so that Allah’s Word will be the
highest, then, based on the consensus of Muslims, those who
prevent (others from hearing the message of Islam) must be
fought against.”

The Messenger of Allah #2 began, but was not able to complete,
the mission of spreading Islam to all corners of the globe. He ## sent
letters to the rulers, kings, and emperors of foreign lands, inviting
them to enter into the fold of Islam. And he #@ sent out armies as far
as possible based on the then strength and power of the Muslim
nation. The last of those armies was sent out on the famous Tabook
expedition in the year 9 H. The peoples to whom the Prophet ‏كه‎
‎sent out armies were given three choices: Either they could
embrace Islam and become brothers unto all other Muslims; or
they could remain upon their disbelief but pay a small Jizyah tax to
Muslims; or they could refuse the first two options, at which point
they would be left with one final choice: to use swords to resolve
matters between them and Muslims.”

Abu Bakr # applied the same methodology when he sent out
armies to conquer foreign lands. He 2 hoped to realize during his
lifetime the prophecies of victory that the Prophet #@ had
discussed with his Companions ‏ره‎ such as the one the Prophet
#@ mentioned to “Adee ibn Haatim a:

i As-Siyaasah Ash-Shar’iyyah, by ibn Taymiyyah (pg. 18}.
"1 Safahaat Min Taareekh Libya ALIslaamee, by As-Sallaabee (pg. 168).

Introduction 553

o
‏اعم‎

se ‏الظَعِيئَةٌ‎ Calta >in ‏يده لَيتِمَّنّ الله لله هكد‎ 5 ged Gilg
‏كُنُورَ‎ (245 wl le ‏فِي غَيْر‎ ote 3 bi 2S ‏الجيّرة‎

CAS ‏بْن‎ SHS
“By the One Who has my soul in His Hand, Allah will complete
this affair, until a women will travel from Heerah until she
(reaches Makkah and) performs Tawaaf around the House (1.e.,
the Ka’bah), having undergone that journey without being under
any person’s protection. And you will indeed gain through war
the treasures of Kisra ibn Hurmuz (the Emperor of the Persian
Empire).

Orientalist scholars have attempted to divest the early Muslim
Conquests of their lofty goal — that of spreading Islam to other
peoples — and have leveled base and false accusations against
Muslim conquerors. The fact remains, however, that the chief aim
of Muslim conquerors was to spread the message of Islam to the
rest of mankind; and their secondary goal was to save people
from the tyrants that ruled over them.

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ believed with certamty that Allah # would
bestow upon the Muslim nation strength, power, and victory.
Both Abu Bakr 4s and Muslims soldiers believed wholeheartedly
in Allah’s promises of victory, promises that are, for instance,
mentioned in the followimg two Verses of the Noble Qur'an:

SH A oft ‏عل‎ Feb) Bl ‏وين‎ ccthh Wey So) Gal jay

oe

“He 11 15 Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad ££) with guidance
and the religion of truth (Islamic Monothetsm) to make it victorious
over all (other) religions even though the Mushrikun (polytheists,
pagans, idolaters, and disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah and in His
Messenger Muhammad 8% hate (it).” (Qur'an 61: 9)

Ul Saheeh As-Seerah An-Nabawtyyah (pe. 580).

554 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

io GM at ‏فى‎ in oth Oy AS Gp

6 AGNI
“Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and
those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah — Islamic
Monotheism) in this world’s life and on the Day when the

witnesses will stand forth, (i.e., Day of Resurrection) .” (Qur'an
40: 51)

The major conquests of Islam began during the era of the
Prophet #£; some important conquests were realized during the
era of Abu Bakr’s caliphate; and the rest took place during the eras
of the other rightly-guided Khaleefahs. In the following sections,
we will cover those conquests and battles that took place during
the caliphate of Abu Bakr As-Sidddeeq 4.

Chapter I

uest of Iraq

Way For Conquering Iraq

r 4; Paves the

No sooner did peace return to Arabian Peninsula with the end
of the Apostate Wars, than Abu Bakr # put into effect plans of
foreign conquest — plans that were originally put together by the
Messenger of Allah 8. In order to conquer Iraq, Abu Bakr 4 sent
out two armies:

1) The first army was headed by Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 4; at the
time, Khaalid 2 was in Al-Yamaamah, having just managed to
rout Musailamah’s army. Abu Bakr # sent a message to
Khaalid #, ordering him to attack Iraq from its south-western
front. Abu Bakr 2 said in his message, “Travel towards [rag
until you enter it. Begin with its coastal city, Al-Ublah.” Abu
Bakr 4s further ordered Khaalid 2 to try to win over the hearts
of Iraq’s people, and to invite them to Islam. If they were to
answer his invitation, then all would be well; otherwise, he

556 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg as

was to take the Jizyah tax from them, a tax that is paid by non-
Muslims living in Muslim lands. It is a tax that enables non-
Muslims to continue practicing their religion, and it further
guarantees their safety and protection. But if they were to
refuse to pay the Jizyah tax, Khaalid ‏هه‎ was to then attack them.

In his message, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ made it clear that Khaalid & was
to force no one to take part in the expedition, and he explicitly
forbade Khaalid ‏ذه‎ from enlisting people who had apostatized,
even if they had now returned to Islam. Finally, Abu Bakr # told
Khaalid ‏نك‎ that, whenever he would pass by a group of Muslims,
he should ask them to join him in his expedition to Iraq.

Once Abu Bakr # sent out his instructions to Khaalid ‏بنك‎ he
began setting up special units of soldiers, whose job it would be to
provide reinforcements for Khaalid ‏كف‎

2) The second army was headed by ‘Tyaadh ibn Ghanam 4. At
the time, ‘lyaadh was stationed somewhere between Hyaaz
and An-Nabaaj ~ An-Nabaaj being a small town that was
situated halfway along the road from Makkah to Basrah. Abu
Bakr # sent a message to ‘Iyaadh ‏رذ‎ ordering him to attack
Iraq from its north-eastern front, beginning at a place called Al-
Maseekh, which was situated along the border between Ash-
Sham and Iraq. In his message to ‘lyaadh #, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎wrote, “Travel until Al-Maseekh and begin with that location.
Then enter Iraq from its highest point and continue (to
penetrate its territory) until you meet Khaalid.” Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎then followed with another command, “If anyone wants to
return (to Arabia and to abstain from taking part in the
expedition), give them permission to return. Do not force
anyone to take part in this expedition. If someone wants to take
part, then by all means, let them proceed. And if someone
wants to abstain, then. by all means, let them stay back.’

(Refer to Al-Fann Al-‘Askaree Al-Islaamee, by Dr. Yaaseen Suwaid (pg. 83); and
to Taareekh Ai-Tabaree (4/162).

The Conquest of 8 557

Abu Bakr 2s also wrote a message that he sent to both Khaalid
#5 and ‘Iyaadh ‏زه‎ in it, he +s said, “Then compete with one
another to reach Al-Heerah first.” Abu Bakr « then said,
“Whichever of you reaches Al-Heerah first is the leader (Ameer)
of his companion (Le., is the overall leader of the two armies).”
The next part of Abu Bakr’s message read: “When you will be
gathered together at Al-Heerah, after having penetrated the
fortified areas of Persia, and after having made sure that Muslims
will not be attacked from the rear of their army, then let one of you
act as a guard for Muslims and for his companion (Le., the other of
the two leaders) at Al-Heerah; and let the other (of you two
leaders) attack the enemy of Allah and your enemy from the
people of Persia; attack their central and honored place: AI-
Madaain.”4

There was a third army that had been sent earlier, and it was
headed by Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah 2, who himself was a
native of Iraq. Near the conclusion of the Apostate Wars, Al-
Muthannah ibn Haarithah # visited Abu Bakr ‏صانق‎ Al-Madeenah
and exhorted him to wage war against the Persians. AI-
Muthannah . said to the Khaleefah ‏رك‎ “Send me to fight against
my people,” and that is what Abu Bakr & then did.

Al-Muthannah # went to Iraq and began fighting battles there
against the Persians. Soon realizing that he lacked the numbers to
defeat the Persians, he sent his brother, Mas’ ood ibn Haarithah ‏رلك‎
‎back to Abu Bakr #s in order to ask the Khaleefah to provide them
with reinforcements. As a result of what he heard from Mas’ood,
Abu Bakr #& sent the following message to Muthannah, “To
proceed: Verily, I have sent to you, to the land of lraq, Khaalid ibn
Al-Waleed ‏.هه‎ In the company of your people who are with you,
welcome Khaalid, and then help him, aid him, support him, and
cooperate fully with him. Do not disobey any of his commands,
and do not oppose any of his opinions, for indeed, he is among
those that Allah 88 has described in His Book (in this Verse):

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/163).

558 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏نف‎

vA 1 ae 4 { howe Fue &

Pb ppc Baer per ge oF ‏ور‎
‎WS ne pee ‏رماء‎ SUNT de ‏معدد أَسِذَاءُ‎ oul ‏رَسول الله‎

4 weedy

سهد ©

“Muhammad #8 ts the Messenger of Allah, and those who are
with him are severe against disbelievers, and merciful among
themselves. You see them bowing and falling down prostrate (in
prayer). (Qur'an 48: 29)

In his message to Al-Muthannah ‏رق‎ Abu Bakr 4 went on to
say, “As long as he stays with you, he is the Ameer (the leader of
both his army and yours); but if he departs from you, then you

will return to your previous position (Le., to your position of
ed]

leader of your army).

One of Al-Muthannah’s soldiers was a man named Madh’oor
ibn “Adee. Madh’oor departed from the ranks of Al-Muthannah’s
army, apparently without the permission of his leader, and sent a
letter to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s. In his letter to the Khaleefah,
Madh’oor wrote, “To proceed: Verily, lam a man from the Banu
‘Tj tribe, a people who are known for remaining steadfast upon
their mounts {.e., we are a fighting people). And we are known to
attack our enemies in the morning. With me are men from my
clan; each one of them is more valuable (on the battlefield) than
one-hundred other men. I know the land (which you are
attacking); I am experienced in the art of war; and I am well-
acquainted with the landscape of the region. So appoimt me over
the masses (of your soildiers).”

Once Madh’oor left the ranks of his army, Al-Muthannah ‏ف‎
‎felt that it was his duty to notify the Khaleefah about what had
happened. Al-Muthannah 2 wrote a letter to the Khaleefah, in
which he said, “Verily, | am informing the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah #2 about a man from my tribe; he is called
Madh’ oor ibn ‘Adee, and he is from the children of ‘jl. Very few
of his people are with him. He has openly disputed with me and

11 Al-Wathaaiq As-Siyaasiyyah, by Humaidullah (pg. 371).

The Conquest of [8 559

opposed me, and [ wanted to inform you about his situation, so
that you can arrive at a fair judgment regarding his matter.”!"!

Abu Bakr ‏هك‎ now had two letters to respond to: one from
Madh’oor and the other from Al-Muhthannah +. And he # had
to handle the matter carefully, in such a way that he would benefit
from the services of both Madh’oor and Al-Muthannah — since
both seemed to be able military men — without hurting the
feelings of either, and without jeopardizing the overall mission of
conquering ‏.نوما‎ In his response to Madh’oor’s letter, Abu Bakr ‏مك‎
‎wrote, “Io proceed: I have received your letter, and I have
understood very clearly the matters you mentioned. You are
indeed as you have described yourself to be. And your clan is a
blessed and good clan. I have arrived at the conclusion that you
should join Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed’s army. Stay with Khaalid as
long as he stays in Iraq, and when he departs, depart with
him.”! And Abu Bakr 2 wrote the following to Al-Muthannah
ibn Haarithah 2, “Verily, your companion from the ‘Tilee clan
wrote to me, asking me about a number of matters. | wrote back to
him, ordering him to adhere to the company of Khaalid (Le., to
fight under his command) until I decide what to do about the
situation. In this letter of mine to you, Lorder you to remain in Irag
until Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed departs from it. And when Khaalid
ibn: Al-Waleed leaves (Iraq), continue to stay in the place you were
stationed. Indeed, you are deserving of an increase (in blessings),
and you are worthy of all virtues.””!

Important Lessons, Facts, and Morals Regarding the
Previous Section

1) Khaalid 4 went to Iraq in the month of Rajab; based on one
account, however, he went not in Rajab, but m Muharram.
Although the month of his departure is a matter of

Ul Majmoo’atul-Wathaaig As-Siyaasiyyah (pg. 372).
[I Thid.
Cl Thid. (pg. 373)

560 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

disagreement, the year of his departure is not — for all
accounts confirm that it took place in the year 12 HA!

2) To be sure, Abu Bakr 4 was a brilliant military strategist, a fact
that is underscored by his quick and decisive victories during
the Apostate Wars. No less brillant, however, were his plans
to invade Iraq. Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ lived in a relatively primitive
world — a world that was not yet introduced to running
water, electricity, gun powder, computers, and the myriad of
other things that have been discovered over the period of the
last few hundred years. And yet it was as if Abu Bakr # was
seated in a modern-day command center, one that was
equipped with the latest digital maps. From Al-Madeenah,
he sent word to Khaalid « and ‘Iyaadh ‏رق‎ telling them what
roads they should take to enter Iraq. He & ordered one of them
to enter from the south-western part of Iraq, and the other,
from. the north-eastern part of Trag. It was an ideal mode of
entry, one that kept the enemy engaged from two fronts;
furthermore, it allowed both Muslim armies to gather together
in central Iraq — and to thus consolidate their forces and work
as a team to completely bring down the enemy.

Also, in choosing Al-Heerah as a meeting place between his
two armies, Abu Bakr 4 showed a profound understanding of
Iraq’s geography. From a military perspective, Al-Heerah was
strategically perhaps the most important city in Iraq; to take
control of it was deemed a great victory. Al-Heerah was
important for a number of reasons. First, it was located near
some of the major cities of Iraq. It was situated three miles outside
of Kufah, and it would take a rider only a single day to travel from
Al-Heerah to An-Najf. Second, if one looked at a seventh-century
map of [raq, one would find that Al-Heerah connected all of the
roads and traveling routes from all directions of Iraq. To the east,
it was connected to Al-Madaain by way of the Euphrates Kiver; to

١1 AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/347).

The Conquest of Irag 56]

the north, it was connected by way of a road to Heet; by way of
the Anbaar Bridge, it was connected to Anbaar; to the west, it was
connected by way of a road to Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding
regions); similarly, it was connected to Al-Ablah in the region of
Basrah, to Kaskar, to As-Sawaad, and to An-No’maaniyyah.
Third, because of the topography of the region, whoever gained
control of Al-Heerah automatically gained control of all of the
land that was situated west of the Euphrates. Fourth, and perhaps
most important of all, Al-Heerah was the nearest major city to Al-
Madaain, which was the capital of the Persian Empire. The
Persians were all too aware of the strategic importance of Al-
Heerah, as was made clear by their many attempts to regain
control of it. For Muslims, besides being strategically important in
Iraq, Al-Heerah acted as a launching point from which Muslim
armies attacked the Romans in the lands of Ash-Sham.!

3) Abu Bakr as felt that participation in Iraq’s invasion should be
a voluntary matter, and so he ordered his two commanders to
refrain from forcing anyone to join their armies; furthermore, if
any person under their command wanted to return to Arabia,
they were to give him full permission to return.!!

4) Not only in his enthusiasm to fight, but also in his humility, Al-
Muthannah ibn Haarithah # was one of the key Muslim
heroes of the conquest of Iraq. With the help of his people, Al-
Muthannah « fought battles in [rag even before Abu Bakr &
decided to launch an all-out invasion of the Persian Empire.
When Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ found out about Al-Muthannah’s activities
in the region, he became at once pleased with and impressed
by Al-Mutharmah +; consequently, he appointed Al-
Muthannah ‏كك‎ as the overall leader of the Muslim armed
forces in Iraq. But when Abu Bakr 43 made his decision to
invade the Persian Empire, he # decided that the overall

‎Ma'aarik Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed Dhidd Al-Furs, by ‘Abdul-Jabbaar As-‏ اذا
‎Saamiuraaee (pg. 35).‏

‎Al-Fann Al-’Askaree Al-Islaamee (pgs. 83, 84).‏ ذا

562 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

leader of the Muslim armed forces in Iraq should be Khaalid ‏رف‎
‎and not Al-Muthannah. And so he # wrote a letter to Al-
Muthannah 4, ordering him to join ranks with the
approaching Muslim army and to obey Khaalid ‏ذه‎

Al-Muthannah ‏ضف‎ had he been proud or boastful in the least,
would have had reason to be upset; after all, through is own
efforts he had managed to mobilize a formidable army of
fighters; and he had been fighting for the cause of conquering
lraq longer than anyone else. And yet, because of his humble-
ness, he 4, was not hurt; moreover, he did not delay, but instead
hastened to obey Abu Bakr’s command by joining the ranks of
Khaalid’s army.!"!

5) In gathering soldiers for war, Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ was interested not
so much in forming a large army as he was in forming an
army that consisted purely of sincere Muslims. Therefore, he
# ordered his generals to enlist two kinds of Muslims: First,
those who had fought against the apostates, and second,
those who, even if they had not fought against the apostates,
had at least remained steadfast upon Islam. This implied the
exclusion of a third category: people who had apostatized,
even if they later returned to the fold of Islam. Abu Bakr ‏قه‎
‎then made this implication explicit with his words, “And do
not take along for this invasion any person who had
apostatized, at least not until I arrive at a final decision
regarding the matter.” Based on these instructions, former
apostates did not take part in the early stages of Abu Bakr’s
foreign wars. Later on, however, when it became clear that
they were sincere and dedicated to their Faith, they were
given permission to take part in foreign conquests (and this is
a topic we will discuss later on, In Sha Allah).

Abu Bakr ‏نم‎ was faced with a difficult choice: Either to hurt the
feelings of the few, of those who had apostatized, by forbidding

‎AtTaareekh Al-Islaamee (9/130).‏ الأ

the Conquest of Iraq | 563

them from taking part in foreign conquests; or, to jeopardize the
overall mission of the conquests, by sending soldiers whose
sincerity was in question — after all, it was, depending on
individual cases, only months, weeks, or days earlier that
apostates had repented and returned to Islam. Abu Bakr #
chose the former option, knowing that, if Muslims were going
topple the governments of foreign empires, they needed strong
Faith, sincerity, and determination more than they needed
numbers. Apostates had shown in the past that their goals were
worldly in nature: some of them wanted power; others, wealth;
and yet others, fame. The true Muslim soldier, the type that was
needed in frag, was one who fought for none of those things, but
instead to raise the Word of Allah 8 above all else.!"!

6) In his message to Khaalid 4, Abu Bakr 2 wrote, “And win
over the hearts of the people of Persia, and of the people who
live within their realm.’”"! This statement, as corroborated by
the actions of Abu Bakr’s armies, proves that the primary goal
of fighting foreign empires was not to subjugate people, but to
free them from the shackles of disbelief and tyranny. As long
as tyrannical governments remained in power, Muslims
would not be able to preach the message of Islam to the
average Persian or Roman citizen. Wherefore, those
governments had to be removed by force. Muslims had no
qualms with the citizens of foreign lands; in fact, once a group
of people entered into the fold of Islam, they automatically
became equals with their Muslim brothers in Yemen, Makkah,
and even Al-Madeenah. They then had the same rights and
duties that their Muslim brothers had all over the Muslim
world.

If some individuals refused to embrace Islam, they were not
coerced into embracing Islam; rather, they were allowed to
remain upon their religion, as long as they paid the Jizyah tax, a

Ul ‏قر‎ Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/131).
‏اا‎ Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/159).

564 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏د‎

tax that worked to their favor. The tax consisted of a small amount
of money, and in return for it, non-Muslims could retain their
religion, live in Muslim lands, and enjoy a guarantee of safety and
protection from the Muslim government. It was when non-
Muslims refused the first two options — accept Islam. or pay the
fizyah tax — that Muslims fought against them, for the purpose of
raising the Word of Allah above all else."

In his letters to commanders, Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ continually
reiterated the importance of being gentle with and winning over
the hearts of the masses of foreign citizens in general, and of
farmers in particular. Muslims sought to strengthen foreign lands,
and not to destroy them or their infrastructure. And the people
who had the most valuable wealth of foreign nations m. their
hands - food — were farmers; as such, it was important to win
over their hearts, so that, once Islamic rule was put in place ina
piven country, that country’s economy would not suffer as a
result of no one working in farms, fields, and gardens.)

7) Abu Bakr # had a great deal of prescience when it came to
evaluating the makeup and value of individuals. Perhaps there
is no better example of that than when Khaalid ‏رك‎ while on his
way to lrag, asked Abu Bakr # to send reinforcements. Rather
than send a battalion of fighters, Abu Bakr 4 sent a single man:
Al-Qa'qaa’ ibn ‘Amr At-Tameemee 4. Someone asked Abu
Baky ‏ا‎ about the point of sending, not a battalion of fighters,
but a single soldier. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ replied, “An army does not
lose when it contains the likes of this man.””! The events that
later took place in rag, and the feats of Al-Qa’qaa’ 2 on the
battlefield, confirmed the fact that Abu Bakr # was a good
judge of people's characters, qualities, talents, and skills."!

Ul AtTaareekh Al-Islaamee (9/130).

1 Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Ilal-Islam (pe. 342).
‏أذ‎ Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/164).

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/129).‏ لكا

The Conquest of 8 565

Second: Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed’s

When Khaalid ‏كه‎ traveled towards Iraq, he took with him two-
thousand fighters, all of whom had fought in battles against the
apostates; he # further mobilized eight-thousand fighters from
the tribes of Rabee’ah. Along the way he # wrote to three Muslim
leaders, each of whom was already stationed im Iraq. Those three
leaders were Madh’ oor ibn ‘Adee Al-‘Tjlee 4, Sulmah ibn Al-Qeen
At-Tameemee ‏رجاه‎ and Harmalah ibn Murbatah At-Tameemee 4s.
They wrote back, informing him that they were awaiting his
arrival; also, they merged into a single army — one that, along
with Al-Muthannah’s army, consisted of eight-thousand soldiers.
Therefore, the overall army of Khaalid consisted of eighteen-
thousand soldiers.) It was agreed that all of the above-
mentioned soldiers would meet at a place called Al-Ublah."!

Prior to arriving in Iraq, Khaalid 4 wrote a letter to Hurmuz,
the leader of the Persian battalion that was stationed at Al-Ublah.
It was a warning letter that contained the following message: “To
proceed: Embrace Islam and thereby achieve safety, or take
protection for yourself and your people and agree to pay the
Jizyah tax; otherwise, blame no one save yourself. For indeed, |
have come to you with a people who love death just as you love
life.”"! To be sure, this letter was a form of psychological warfare
through which Khaalid # hoped to instill fear into Hurmuz’s
heart; after all, throughout history, it has not been often that an
army met a foe that loved death more than life itself.

As Khaalid # drew nearer towards the enemy, he divided his
army into three battalions, ordering each one to travel by a
different road. The first was headed by Al-Muthannah 4; the

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/163).

[Abu Bale As-Siddeeq, by Khaalid Al-Jinaanee and Nizaar Al-Hadeethee (p¢.
46).

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/164).‏ أذا

566 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏دف‎

Khaalid ‏م‎ himself. The three battalions were to meet up at a place
called Al-Hudair, which was situated approximately four miles
outside of Makkah.

1) The Battle of Dhaat As-Salaasil

Hurmuz somehow learned about his enemy’s plans. He knew
both that Khaalid’s army was drawing nearer and that the
Muslims had agreed to meet at Al-Hudair. Reacting immediately
to this information, he set out with his two commanders,
Qubbaaz and Abu Shujaan, and arrived at Al-Hudair before the
enemy did. It was a battle of wits between Khaalid ‏ذه‎ and
- Hurmuz 2s, for as soon as Khaalid # heard about Hurmuz’s
arrival at Al-Hudair, he changed his course and led his army
towards a place called Kaadhimah. But again Hurmuz was one
step ahead of him and was able to arrive there first.

Hurmuz made camp beside the only water source of
Kaadhimah. When Khaalid # arrived on the scene, he made
camp at the best spot possible, but without a water source, he was
clearly at a disadvantage. He # was left with one choice, and that
was to try to win over the water source. And so he 4 said to his
soldiers, “Put down your heavy supplies and then fight them for
the water source...for indeed, the most patient and most noble of
the two armies will gain control of it”!

The Muslims unloaded their heavy supplies; their horsemen
stood their ground, and their infantrymen marched forward
towards the enemy. By His Grace and Mercy, Allah # blessed
Muslims with a single cloud that poured rain upon their rows of
soldiers. They all drank from that rainwater and thus gained the
strength they needed to face the enemy. This occurrence — the
appearance of a single cloud that poured rain down upon the
Muslim army — is just one of many examples that illustrate the
meaning of Allah & “being with His believing slaves.”

iN Al-Kaamil, by Ton Al-Atheer (2/51), and Tareekh At-Tabaree (4/165).

The Conquest of 8 567

Before any fighting commenced, Hurmuz, an evil man who
was known for his complete lack of scruples, challenged Khaalid
& to a duel. On the inside, however, Hurmuz had no intention of
actually fighting against Khaalid. He simply wanted to set a trap
for him, to have him killed through treacherous means, and to
thus demoralize the enemy.

As the soldiers of both armies stood in rows, facing the enemy,
Khaalid # and Hurmuz both came forward. When the two of
them met, they exchanged blows, after which Khaalid &
managed to lock Hurmuz in an embrace; meanwhile, according
to their plan, Hurmuz’s guards surrounded Khaalid 4. And yet
their presence did not divert Khaalid 4 from the task at hand —
that of killing Hurmuz.

All the while, Al-Oa‘qaa’ ibn ‘Amr -& was watching every
move of the enemy; being thus prepared, he #&, along with a
group of Muslim horsemen, sprang into action once Hurmurz’s
guards interrupted the duel. That is when the fighting began in
earnest. Al-Qa’qaa’ # and his men handled Hurmuz’s guards;
Khaalid ‏ذه‎ killed Hurmuz; and Muslim soldiers entered into
attack mode, neither holding their ground nor retreating, but
instead piercing straight through the ranks of the opposing army.
The momentum gained by the Muslim army was too powerful to
overturn, and it was a matter of only a short amount of time
before the battle ended in their favor.

The victory that day began with the brave work of Al-Qa’gaa’
‏,كف‎ about whom Abu Bakr a correctly said, “An army does not
lose when it contains the likes of this man.” Khaalid 2 too was a
notable member of the Muslim army that day, for he 4 killed not
only the enemy’s leader, Hurmuz, but also, with the help of Al-
‘Oa'qaa ‏,ذه‎ Hurmuz’s guards. At the beginning of the battle,
Persian. fighters, as they stood in rows, tied one another with
chains, so as to prevent themselves from fleeing from the scene of
the battle. But, faced with the reality of having to fight against
brave and fierce fighters, their strategy availed them not in the
least. The word for “chains” in Arabic is “Salaasil,” and so

568 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

because of the said strategy employed by the Persians, the battle
became known as “The Battle of Dhaat As-Salaasil 7”)

The quantity of war booty the Muslims gained that day was so
large that it had to be loaded onto one-hundred camels. Once
Muslims had secured the scene of the battle, Khaalid 4 sent small
units of soldiers to conquer enemy fighters who had holed
themselves up in the fortresses that surrounded Al-Heerah. Once
Muslim soldiers wrested control of those fortresses, they gained
even more war booty.

War booty, as much as was won by the Muslims that day, was
not an unlimited quantity of wealth; after all, Abu Bakr’s
instructions had been clear: Khaalid & was to be gentle with the
people of Persia, particularly with farmers. Khaalid 4 obeyed Abu
Bakr’s instructions to the letter, particularly regarding farmers who
had not taken part in the battle. Khaalid ‏ذه‎ allowed them to keep
their land and their crops. He # then mentioned the amount of
Zakaat that was to be paid by those among them that embraced
Islam. As for those that remained upon their religion, Khaalid ‏نك‎
‎informed them about the fizyah tax they had to pay, a tax, it should
be noted, that was far less than the amount that farmers had to pay
in the past to their Persian overlords. Most importantly, Khaalid 4s
did not dispossess amy Persian citizen of his land, his crops, or his
belongings — thus making them all feel like they were valued,
albeit new, mernbers of the Muslim nation.

One-fifth of the spoils Khaalid # sent to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg
‏هن‎ in. Al-Madeenah; the rest he 4s distributed among his soldiers.
Among the things Khaalid «s sent to Abu Bakr & was a hood that
belonged to Hurmuz; upon receiving it, however, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎sent it back to Khaalid ‏رك‎ informing him that it was a reward for
his brave feats on the battlefield. Perhaps unknown to both Abu
Bakr # and Khaalid ‏رق‎ the hood turned out to be worth-one-
hundred thousand (Deenaars or Dirhams; at any rate, a huge sum
of money). It was embroidered with valuable jewels, but that

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee 9/133) and Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/165).‏ لنا

The Conquest of Iraq 569

alone did not make the hood so valuable. Hoods in Persia were
individualized, and the value of each hood varied depending
upon the nobility and honor of its owner. Hoods that belonged to
the highest class of people in Persia were valued at one-hundred
thousand; and since Hurmuz was deemed a man of the most
superior lineage, his hood was worth that amount.”!

2) The Battle of Al-Madhaar (or Ath-Thanyee)

Hurmuz had made a foolish mistake prior to the battle of
“Dhaat As-Salaasil,” a mistake that cost his army a victory, and
himself his life. It was one of the worst mistakes that an army
commander can every make — that of underestimating the
enemy.

A short while before the battle commenced, Hurmuz wrote a
letter to Kisrah, the King of Persia, asking him to send
reinforcements. In response to NHurmuz’s request, Kisrah sent an
army that was headed by a man named Qaaran. But thinking that
he could easily defeat the Muslim army, Hurmuz did not wait for
Qaaran to arrive, but instead initiated fighting with Khaalid’s
army. As a result, his army suffered a humiliating defeat, he lost
his life, and those of his soldiers that survived were forced to flee
from the scene of the battle.

The surviving soldiers of Hurmuz’s army met up with Qaaran
and his army and informed them about what had happened.
Strong feelings of anger, of patriotic duty, and of a desire to exact
revenge flowed through the veins of Qaaran’s soldiers. They
rallied one another's spirits and decided to head straight towards
the enemy and engage them in another battle. They then made
camp at a place called Al-Madhaar (hence the name of the
subsequent battle).

Earlier on, Khaalid ‏ذه‎ had ordered Al-Muthannah tbn
Haarithah ‏ذه‎ and his brother, Al-Mu’annah 4, to chase fleeing
enemy soldiers. The two brothers succeeded in wresting contro]

Ul Taareekh Ai-Tabaree (4/166).

570 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

of some of the fortresses they came across, but shortly thereafter,
they learned about the impending arrival of Qaaran’s army. They
sent word to Khaalid 4, who in turn sent a message to Abu Bakr
#, informing him about his intention to march towards the
opposing army.

As they marched onwards towards the enemy, Khaalid #& and
his soldiers were on a constant state of alert, with each one of
them completely prepared in the case of an ambush. The two
opposing armies finally met at Al-Madhaar. When the soldiers of
both armies were lined up in rows, facing one another, Qaaran
came forward and announced that he wanted to engage in a duel.
Khaalid # stepped forward, but Mai’gal ibn Al-’Amash ibn An-
Nabbaash # volunteered first and was thus the declared
opponent of Qaaran.

Qaaran placed Qubbaaz in charge of the right-flank of his
army, and Abu Shujaan in charge of the left-flank; these were the
same two commanders who had fought under the command of
Hurmuz during the Battle of Dhaat As-Salaasil; and they both
managed to survive the battle by fleeing before Muslim soldiers
were able to capture them.

In the early stages of the battle, Qubbaaz and Abu Shujaan
faced stiff opposition from brave Muslim fighters. Qubbaaz had
the worst of it, for he fought against and was quickly killed by
‘Aasim ibn “Amr At-Tameemee 4s.

The fighting between the two armies quickly intensified. But
the Persians could not match the energy and bravery of their
opponents. They lost hope of victory when their general was
killed, and they soon suffered another humiliating defeat. Thirty-
thousand of their soldiers were killed, and the rest sought
sanctuary in nearby ships; once they were safely aboard those
ships, they set sail and thus managed to escape before their
Muslim foes could catch up to them.

Khaalid # made camp at Al-Madhaar. He # gave each
Muslim the belongings of each enemy soldier that he killed, no
matter how valuable those belongings might have been. Next, he

The Conquest of Iraq 57]

# distributed the spoils of war, giving one-fifth to the brave
fighting men of his army, and sending the rest back to Al-
Madeenah."!

3) The Battle of Al-Waljah

At first, the Persian response to the Muslim invasion seemed
limited, almost as if the Persians considered Khaalid’s army to be
no more than a nuisance, a small band of fighters having come
from an upstart nation. In fact, it is quite probable that most
Persian soldiers did not feel the least bit threatened by Khaalid’s
army; after all, it was a war between a dominant Empire and a
small, seemingly inferior army. But, as coming events proved, the
Persians’ disparagement of Khaalid’s army was, to say the least,
misplaced. In fact, it was the overconfidence of the Persians that
hurt them the most. It was their overconfidence that led to the
demise of Hurmuz, who didn’t even bother to wait for
reinforcements, but instead thought that he could easily defeat
Khaalid’s army with the men he had with him.

By being overconfident, and by underestimating the enemy,
the Persians suffered two humiliating defeats, first in the Battle of
Dhaat As-Salaasil, and then in the Battle of Al-Madhaar. When
Kisra learned about his army's defeat at Al-Madhaar, he realized
that he had a major crisis on his hands, one that could potentially
lead to the destruction of his Empire. In view of that, he sent outa
huge army under the command of Al-Andarzhaghar, and so as

not to take chances, he dispatched a second army as well, one that
was headed by Bahman Jaadhiwaiy.

As for Al-Andarzhaghar, he marched from the capital city of
the Persian Empire, Al-Madaain, to Kaskar, and then from Kaskar
to Al-Waljah. Meanwhile, Bahman took another route, hoping
that, when the Muslims arrived at the battlefield, they would be
sandwiched between Al-Andarzhaghar’s army and his own
army. Bahman, a capable leader, managed to enlist many civilian
volunteers on his way to Al-Waljah.

‎Taareekh Ai-Tabaree (4/168) and At-Taareekh AL-Islaamee 9/134).‏ لذأ

572 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg a

When Al-Andarzhaghar felt certain that his army was so
large that it could not be defeated, he decided to begin marching
towards Khaalid 4; at the time, Khaalid was at Ath-Thanee, a
place that was situated near Al-Basrah. And when Khaalid ‏ف‎
‎was informed about Al-Andarzhaghar’s arrival at Al-Waljah,
and when he learned abut the size of the Al-Andarzhaghar’s
army, he decided that it would be best to attack the enemy from
three directions, hoping that that might help break up the
enemy's huge army.

Khaalid’s plan was brilliant, incorporating the element of
surprise, and giving the Muslims at least a fighting chance
provided they could succeed in breaking up Al-Andarzhaghar’s
huge army. In order to protect the rear of his army, Khaalid ‏نه‎
‎ordered Suwaid ibn Mugrin 2 to stay behind at Al-Hudair. Then
he # led the rest of his army towards Al-Waljah.

Having sent out advance scouts, Khaalid # found out that the
battleground at Al-Waljah consisted of a large area of land; and
that that land was even, flat, and therefore ideal for the plans that
he had in mind. In executing his plan, Khaalid # broke up his army
into three groups. One of them, which was the main division of his
army, he would lead; and the other two would surprise the enemy
by attacking them from the rear and two sides of their army.

When the fighting began in earnest, Khaalid # and the men of
his division met the enemy head on; meanwhile, the two other
divisions of the Muslim army were hiding at a short distance from
_ the battlefield. When the time was right, those divisions attacked
enemy fighters, taking them by surprise. Khaalid’s plan worked
brilliantly: The enemy was genuinely taken by surprise, the
momentum turned in the favor of the Muslims, and Al-
Andarzhaghar and his soldiers were soon forced to concede
defeat. Andarzhagar’s soldiers fled from the scene of the battle,
and those among them that did manage to escape ended up dying
of thirst in the desert.!7J

(0 Al-Kaamil, by Ibn Al-Atheer (2/52); and Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Khaalid Al-
Jinaanee (pg. 48).

The Conquest of Iraq 573

In his victory speech, Khaalid 4 exhorted Muslims to spend
little time in Arab lands, and to stay as much as possible in foreign
lands. He ‏كل‎ said to his soldiers, “Do you not see the great variety
of foods over here? By Allah, had fighting in the way of Allah and
inviting others to Islam not been obligatory upon us, and had we
been here only for worldly gain, it would still be wise for us to
stay here and take control of this countryside...” These words of
Khaalid 4 carried a profound meaning. For one thing, he 2 was
hinting at the fact that, during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance,
when Arabs stayed in Arabia, they would not seek out the
Hereafter, nor were they successful in a worldly sense; stead,
they were a misguided and divided people who were constantly
at war among themselves. Also, it was as if Khaalid ‏هذه‎ said, “We
are the seekers of the Hereafter; our goal is the loftiest of goals. In
order to attain that goal, we invite others to Islam and we fight in
the way of Allah. But suppose we did not have that goal — the
goal of raising the Word of Allah above all else — and suppose we
had no religious reason to fight; logic would still dictate that we
fight here in order to improve our standard of living.” It is
important to understand that, when Khaalid # said this, he was
not likening the goal of gaining worldly things to the goal of
raising the Word of Allah & above all else; rather, he was simply
presenting to his soldiers a hypothetical situation so as to
encourage them to stay and to continue fighting. So it was as if
he # said, “If we would have fought them for worldly reasons
under other circumstances, why then should we not fight them
for a religious reason — for the aim of gaining the Good Pleasure
of Allah a?” |

According to one narration, Khaalid # entered into a duel with
a famous Persian soldier, one who, because of his skill, reputation
on the battlefield, and past acts of bravery, was said to be equal in
worth to one-thousand men; be that as it may, Khaalid ‏ذه‎ quickly
defeated and killed him. When the battle was over with, Khaalid
‏رذق‎ as per his usual practice, divided the spoils into five parts; four
of those parts he distributed among his soldiers, and the last he
sent back to Abu Bakr 2. Some children and female family

574 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏كف‎

members of fighters were taken captive, and the farmers of the
region were allowed to keep their land and adhere to their
religion, in return for which the fizyah tax was levied upon
them."

4) The Battle of Ilyas

A group of renegade Christian Arabs traveled to ‏مدعا‎ and
formed an alliance with the Persians, promising to help them in
their fight against Muslims. The leader of that Arab group was
‘Abdul-Aswad Al-‘Tlee, and his counterpart from the Persian
army was a man named Jaabaan. Bahman Jaadhiwaiy, who had
had experience fighting against Muslims, wisely warned Jaabaan
not to initiate hostilities with Muslims, but to fight only if
Muslims were the first to attack.

When Khaalid # learned about the gathering of a Christian
Arab army in the region, he headed towards them with the
intention of engaging them in battle. He didn’t know, however,
that the Persians had joined forces with the Christian Arab army.
So when the Muslims arrived on the scene, Jaabaan, thinking that
he had the advantage, ordered his soldiers to attack the enemy.
His soldiers disobeyed him, arrogantly thinking that Khaalid ‏ذل‎
‎and his soldiers were a mere nuisance, and not an actual threat.
They decided that, instead of obeying Jaabaan, they would gather
together in their encampment and partake of a huge feast
together.

Khaalid 2, on the other hand, was in no mood to wait; nor was
he in the mood to allow the enemy to engage in eating and
merrymaking as a way of showing just how little they feared their
Muslim opponents. And so he # attacked them during their feast.
The fighting was intense, and the soldiers of the Persian-Arab
alliance quickly learned that they were facing a formidable foe; it
got so bad that Persian commanders were desperately hoping
that Bahman Jaadhiwaity would send them reinforcements.

 AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/350).

The Conquest of Iraq 5/2

Even though the odds were against them, Muslim soldiers
fought bravely and patiently. Khaalid 4, who was as much an
avid worshipper as he was a brave soldier, mvoked Allah # for
help, saying, “O Allah, if you grant us victory over them, then for
You I will not leave a single one of them alive, at least not those
among them we are able to capture; and I will make their river
flow with their blood.” Khaalid’s prayer was answered: The
Muslims defeated the enemy and captured a great many Persian
١ and Christian Arab soldiers. With a great many enemy fighters
killed, the only question that remained was this: how was Khaalid
@ going to fulfill his oath. Al-Oa’qaa’ # was the one who
answered that question. He # told Khaalid 2 that the blood of
enemy soldiers had not yet dried, and that there was a dam in the
area, one that they should let loose, so that his cath could be
fulfilled. Khaalid « then ordered for the dam to be opened, after
which water ran its natural course on the ground of the
battlefield. The blood of fallen soldiers flowed with the water,
which is why the newly-formed river took on the name, “The
River of Blood.”

Once the battleground in particular, as well as the area in
general, was secured, the Muslims entered the abandoned
encampment of Jaabaan’s army. What they saw upon entering
was a huge feast, but no people, no merrymakers enjoying it.
Khaalid # declared that the food was a part of the spoils and
instructed his soldiers to share it among themselves; that night, it
served as their dinner.

The battle took place m an area called Ilyas; hence the naming
of the battle. When there was nothing left to do in Ilyas, Khaalid 2
led his army towards Amgheeshiyah. The people of Amghee-
shiyah, upon seeing Khaalid’s army, evacuated their city, leaving
behind all of their wealth. So much wealth did they leave behind
that when it was all gathered and divided among Khaalid’s
soldiers, the share of each horseman was 1500 Dirhams.

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/173).‏ لأا

576 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

Later on, when one-fifth of the spoils reached Al-Madeenah, as
did the news of Khaalid’s many victories, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ exclaimed,
“© group of Muslims, your lion (.e., Khaalid 4) has attacked
another lion and has taken away from it its piece of meat. Indeed,
women are now failing to give birth to the likes of Khaalid.”"! This
saying, Which was addressed to the inhabitants of Al-Madeenah,
spoke volumes about the level of respect Abu Bakr # had for the
overall general of his armies. May Allah # be pleased with Abu
Bakr #, Khaalid ‏رق‎ and all of the Prophet's Companions &.

The naan who brought back the news to Abu Bakr & was
fundul. Jundul, who was a member of the Banu ‘Tl tribe, was a
skilled guide, having been very knowledgeable regarding the
roads and pathways of Arabia and beyond. Upon arriving in Al-
Madeenah, Jundul informed Abu Bakr 4 about the conquest of
Ilyas and about a number of other matters as well — such as the
amount of spoils, the number of captives, and the men who,
because of their bravery, were most responsible for victory. Abu
Bakr , being impressed by Jundul’s demeanor, asked him his
name. After Jundul told him his name, Abu Bakr # gave him a
young woman from the female captives — a young woman who
soon gave birth to Jundul’s child.!*!

5) The Conquest of Al-Heerah

The Satrap of Al-Heerah - the word “Satrap’’ refers to a
provincial governor in ancient Persia — heard about what
happened at Amghishiyyah. Consequently, he feared — and he
had every reason to do so - that Khaalid 4 would soon head in his
direction. Therefore, in order to protect Al-Heerah, he dispatched
an army under the leadership of his son; shortly thereafter, he too
left Al-Heerah with a group of soldiers. His son's mission was not
to engage the enemy directly, but to deliver an indirect blow to
them. He was to block the flow of the Euphrates River in order to
run aground ships that were carrying Muslim soldiers.

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/175).‏ لأا
‎I Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/174).‏

The Conquest of [rag 577

News of the Satrap’s plans shocked Muslims soldiers, for if the
Satrap’s son was to succeed in his mission, Muslim sea vessels
would be run aground, thus rendering the Muslim army
ineffective and deprived of its supply lines.

As for Khaalid ‏رطف‎ he knew that sadness, anger, and fear do not
help improve a situation; and that only action helps. And so
without panicking, he 4 got up and left the encampment with a
group of soldiers; his intention was to overtake the Satrap’s son
and to thus prevent him from carrying out his mission. On the
way, Khaalid # came across a group of horsemen that belonged
to the army of the Satrap’s son. Khaalid ‏كه‎ and his men took the
horsemen by surprise and slaughtered them. Without wasting
even a moment — so as to act before news of his ambush could
reach the Satrap — Khaalid # continued his pursuit of the
soldiers who were under the command of Satrap’s son. He #
finally overtook them at the mouth of the Euphrates River, just
before they were able to accomplish their mission. Khaalid 4s and
his men killed the Satrap’s son and all of his soldiers; afterwards,
he 2 made sure that the Euphrates had not been tampered with
and that it was running its proper course.

Next, Khaalid 2 headed towards Al-Heerah. As for the Satrap
of Al-Heerah, he was given bad news not once but twice: the first
was concerning the death of his son at the hands of Khaalid, and
the second had to do with the death of Azdasheer, the Emperor of
Persia. The Satrap was, in short, terrified — too feeble and
overcome with fear to even contemplate seeking revenge for the
death of his son. So rather than confront Khaalid’s army, and
rather than defend his province of Al-Heerah, the Satrap crossed
the Euphrates River in order to escape, if not with his dignity,
then at least with his life.

With the Satrap of Al-Heerah and his army out of the picture,
the people of Al-Heerah were left to fend for themselves. They
shut themselves up in fortresses, thus setting the stage for an all-
out siege. And a full-scale siege is what in fact occurred next, with
Khaalid 2 besieging not the entire city with his army, but

578 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ذف‎
‎individual fortresses with small groups of soldiers. ‘Thus:

1) Diraar ibn Al-Azwar # was in charge of laying siege to what
was known as the “White Castle.”

2) Duraar ibn Al-Khattaab 2 was responsible for laying siege to
the “Al-Adasiyyeen Castle.”

3) Diraar ibn Migran # was in charge of laying siege to the
“Castle of Banu Maazin.”

4) Al-Muthaanah ibn Haarithah ‏ذه‎ was in charge of laying siege
to the “ibn Bageelah Castle.”

Khaalid 4 instructed each of his commanders to invite the
enemy to Islam. Of the choices that were given to them, the
besieged Persians decided to fight against the Muslims. They
began by launching clusters of tiny stones in the direction of
Muslim soldiers; for their part, Muslim soldiers responded by
firing arrows back at them. It became quickly apparent to the
Persians that resisting was futile, and so they called out from
inside of their fortresses, “O group of Arabs, we accept one of the
three choices you gave us (Le., that of paying the fizyah tax), so
hold your fire.”

The leader of each fortress then came out for a one-on-one
meeting with Khaalid 2. Each meeting began with Khaalid ‏ف‎
‎scolding his counterpart for having first chosen to fight. Then he
2 struck a deal with all of the leaders of the besieged fortresses:
Based on that agreement, they would not embrace Islam, but
would instead pay the Jizyah tax, at a rate of 190 000 Dirhams
each year. Khalid # then sent back a share of the war booty to
Al-Madeenah, and along with that wealth, the people of Al-
Heerah sent expensive gifts for the Khaleefah, Abu Bakr #. Upon
receiving the gifts, Abu Bakr + felt that it was highly
inappropriate for him to accept them. It was the way of foreign
leaders to lay clam to expensive gifts from the people they
conquered, and Abu Bakr 2 did not want to establish the same

The Conguest of 8 579

precedent in Islam; instead, he # wanted to be just, fair, and
kind with the people he conquered. So instead of accepting the
expensive gifts, he added them to the pile of war booty that had
arrived from Al-Heerah.

Back in Al-Heerah, Khaalid #4 wrote a comprehensive
agreement with Al-Heerah’s inhabitants. In it, he « stated that
the people of Al-Heerah would pay a tax of 190 000 Dirhams ona
yearly basis. In return for that, they could remain upon their
religion. Furthermore, by agreeing to pay the fizyah tax, the
people of Al-Heerah were to receive a guarantee of safety and
protection from the Muslim government — protection even from
third parties, such as foreign invaders. Khaalid 4 went on to say
that, if the Muslim government failed to protect them, they would
no longer have to pay the fizyah tax — at least not until the
Muslims again fulfilled their part of the agreement by protecting
them. Finally, Khaalid # pointed out that, if the people of Al-
Heerah would act treacherously towards Muslims or breach their
agreement with them, the entire agreement would be considered
null and void. This agreement was written in the month of
Rabee’ul Awwal, in the year 12 HY!

According to one account, when the people of Al-Heerah were
still in their fortresses, Khaalid 2 presented them with three
choices: “Either you enter into the fold of our religion, im which
case you will have the exact same rights and duties that we have,
regardless of whether you stay here in your land or migrate to
another land; or you pay the fizyah tax; or you fight against us. But
remember this: By Allah, [have come to you with a people who
are more desirous of death than you are of life.” In response, the
leaders of the besieged fortresses said, “Okay, then, we will pay
you the Jizyah tax.” Khaalid ‏ذه‎ said, “May you be destroyed! Woe
upon you! Verily, disbelief is a desert pathway that leads one
astray, and it is only the most foolish of Arabs that travel by it.”7!

‎Tgareekh At-Tabaree (4/181).‏ لذأ
‎Tuareekh At-Tabaree (4/ 178).‏ )4

580 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏هف‎

Based on this account, it is clear that Khaalid’s primary goal
was to invite people to Islam — to guide people to the truth.
Glory, the gaining of more property, becoming rich, enjoyime life
— none of these things mattered to Khaalid 4. In war, he ‏يه‎
‎sought martyrdom; and in peace, he ‏عه‎ desired nothing more than
to guide others to the truth. Why else did he # become angry
when the people of Al-Heerah agreed to pay the Jizyah tax? After
all, that they agreed to pay the Jizyah tax benefited Muslims by
adding riches to the Muslim treasury — and that ona yearly basis.
Worldly prosperity meant nothing to Khaalid ‏رذ‎ a man who
wanted more than anything else to gain what Allah 88 had in store
for his obedient slaves — Paradise and an eternal life of bliss,
comfort, and happiness. It is very likely that, when Khaalid &
gave the people of Al-Heerah a choice between embracing Islam
and paying the fizyah tax, he remembered the saying of the
Prophet #2:

‎oe ©‏ سم ‎pi Be 7, BY‏ 7 # 7 00م م ‎SB‏ @ ~
‎yy)‏ | الله بك رحلا واحذاء ‎ie‏ لك ‎il a‏
ل يهذدي الله يك رجلا ‎Kher g‏ حير من ‎pom‏ النعم

‎“For Allah to guide a single man through you is better for you
than for you to own red camels (a person who owned red camels in
those times was like a millionaire in our times).

‎The Strategic Importance of Conquering Al-Heerah

‎Because of its location, Al-Heerah was, without a doubt, a city
of great strategic importance in Iraq. Khaalid 2, recognizing that
fact, decided to make it a central command post for all military
activities in Iraq. Thereafter, it was from Al-Heerah that all of the
Muslim armies in the region were deployed; and it was from Al-
Meerah that all orders were sent. Furthermore, while in his
command post in Al-Heerah, Khaalid would send out men to
collect the Jizyah tax as well as to patrol and protect the front lines
of the war,

‎fy Bukhaaree, the Book of Al-Maghaazee (4210).

The Conquest of Iraq ١: 581

In short, until all of Iraq could be conquered, Al-Heerah acted
as a temporary capital city of the Muslim-controlled part of Iraq.
Khaalid ‏دنه‎ was successful] not only on a military level, but also in
restoring law and order in areas he recently conquered. His
situation resembled that of the Prophet #8 in the ninth year of the
Muslim calendar, when Muslims controlled much of the Arabian
Peninsula, and when delegates from various tribes went to Al-
Madeenah in order to announce their entry into the fold of Islam
or to sign a peace treaty with the Prophet #¢. With much of Iraq
under the control of Muslims, the leaders of various cities in [raq
went to Khaalid 2 in order to make peace with him. After only a
short while passed, the vast majority of people in the region had
either embraced Islam or agreed to Khaalid’s terms for peace (Le.,
terms involving the payment of the Jizyah tax).

For administrative purposes, Khaalid # divided the areas that
Muslims conquered into provinces, and over each province he 3s
appointed a governor. Thus he # appointed:

1) ‘Abdullah ibn Watheemah An-Nasree 4 as the governor of Al-
Kalaaleej,

2) Jareer ibn ‘Abdullah # as the governor of Baangiyaa,
3) Basheer ibn Al-Khasaasiyyah & as the governor of An-Nahrain,
4) Suwaid ibn Muqran Al-Muzanee # as the governor of Tastar,

5) Att ibn Abee Att as the governor of Raudhastaan.

And the following were the Muslim commanders of the front
lines of the war in lrag:

1) Diraar ibn Al-Azwar &
2) Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah Ash-Shaibaanee ‏نك‎

3) Diraar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏فك‎

582 22 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎
‎4) Diraar ibn Muqrin ‏كه‎

5) Al-Qa’qaa ibn ‘Amr 4

6) Yusr ibn Abee Ruhm ‏كك‎

7) Qateebah ibn An-Nuhaas ‏لايق‎

The Letters that Khaalid « Sent to the Persian Leaders of brag

After centuries of relative stability, the Persian Empire was
thrown into a state of chaos. Muslim forces had mvaded their
territory and succeeded in taking control of much of their lands.
Battle after battle was lost to Muslim armies, and there was no
sign of a shift in momentum, no indication that the Empire could
be saved. What made matters worse was the recent death of the
Emperor of Persia, Azdasheer. At the highest levels of govern-
ment, officials and members of the royal family were fighting for
the throne. If princes, noblemen, and politicians were fighting
among themselves, how could they expect to defeat a foreign
enemy ?

Khaalid ‏كه‎ realized the implications of Azdasheer’s death and
was aware of the infighting that was taking place among Persia's
most powerful class of people. Wanting to take advantage of the
situation, Khaalid # wrote the following letter to the noblemen
and leaders of Persia: “From Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed to the
kings of Persia, to proceed: All praise is for Allah, Who has
undone your government, weakened your ability to plot, divided
you, weakened you, taken away your wealth, and stripped from
you your honor. When this letter of mine reaches you, embrace
Islam, and you will have achieved safety; otherwise, take (a
covenant of) protection from us and pay the Jizyah tax. If you say
no to that, then, by Allah, I will come to you with a people who
love death just as you love life, and who are desirous of the

i‘ Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Khaalid Al-Jinaanee and Nizaar Al-Hadeethee (pgs.
51, 52).

The Conquest of 8 583

Hereafter just as you are desirous of this world.”") Khaalid
also wrote a letter to the general masses of Persia’s citizens, a letter
that was worded slightly differently, but that contained the same
basic message: Embrace Islam, or pay the Jizyah tax, or get ready
for war, keeping in mind that “I will come to you with a people
who love death just as you love life, and who are desirous of the
Hereafter just as you are desirous of this world.”

With the conquest of Al-Heerah, Abu Bakr - realized one-half
of his goals for fraq, for the stage was now set for attacking the
Persians in the heart of their Empire. What was astonishing about
the war in Iraq was not so much the victories the Muslims
achieved, but the speed with which they achieved them. Khaalid
‏ذه‎ began his military campaign in [rag in the month of Muharram,
in the year 12 ‏بط‎ and he conquered Al-Heerah in Rabee’ul Awwal
of the same year,!

Allah 8 Blesses Khaalid ‏هن‎ with a Miracle

Regardless of whether Khaalid ‏نك‎ was a worshipper-warrior or
a warrior-worshipper, or in other words, regardless of whether he
was more a watrior or more a worshipper, the fact remains that he
was both. History books abound with details of Khaalid’s feats on
the battlefield, but few of them discuss his beliefs, his piety, and
his prolific acts of worship. This should come as no surprise
because, while his acts of worship were personal in nature, his
feats on the battlefield were public in nature, having an effect on
all people of his era, and on the people of generations that came
after him. Nonetheless, the fact remains that it was because
Khaalid 4 was a prolific worshipper that he achieved great feats
on the battlefield. True, becoming a skillful soldier comes through
training and practice; but bravery, the key ingredient of an
effective military man, is a result of deep Faith and a complete
trust in Allah’s promises of rewards. —

Q) Paareekh At-Tabaree (4/116).
2] At-Taureekh ‏للم‎ (9/150).

584 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg

Allah % rewarded Khaalid 4 for his strong Faith by granting
him a miracle. During his stay in Iraq, Khaalid ‏كه‎ spent some time
with a man named ‘Amr ibn ‘Abdul-Maseeh, who was the leader
of his people. One day, Khaalid # was with ‘Amr, and
accompanying them was one of “Arnr’s slaves. Noticing a bag
around the slave’s neck, Khaalid # took hold of it and emptied its
contents, finding, among other things, a vial of sorts. Khaalid
then said, “O ‘Amr, what is this?” ‘Amr replied, “This...is poison
that can kill its victim within the period of an hour.” When
Khaalid # then asked him why he was carrying poison, “Amr
explained that he was afraid that Khaalid ‏كه‎ and his men would
turn out to be contrary to the positive image he had of them; and
that he preferred dying — by taking the poison — to seeing evil
befall his people. He further said that his time to die had come.
Explaining to ‘Amr that it was not up to him to decide when his
time to die had come, Khaalid # said, “Verily, no person dies
until his divinely decreed time arrives,” or in other words, Allah
ag has decreed a specific time for each person to die, and no one
dies until his ‘specific (decreed) time’ arrives.” Next, Khaalid 4s
did something that took everyone around him by surprise. He
held the vial of poison in his hand and said, “In the name of Allah
- and Allah is the best of names — the Lord of the earth and the
Lord of the heavens; Lo! With the mention of His name no disease
can cause harm. He # is the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.”
Having said these words, Khaalid 4 raised the vial to his mouth
with the intention of swallowing its contents. Those that were
with him tried to stop him, but they were too late: he had already
swallowed the poison. Based on the potency of the poison,
Khaalid # should have died within a period of one hour; but
because of Allah’s blessings and then Khaalid’s Faith, the poison
had no harmful effect on Khaalid # whatsoever.

Having been a first-hand witness to this miracle, ‘Amr said,
“By Allah, O group of Arabs, you will rule over whatever lands
you wish as long as you continue to have among you someone
from this generation (ie., from the generation of the Prophet's
Companions #.”

The Conquest of 82 585

At first blush, the above-mentioned account might seem
strange or even made-up, which is why some recent scholars
have stated that certain narrators fabricated it in order to boost
Khaalid’s reputation as a brave and fearless man. Upon further
scrutiny, however, one finds that the story is not fabricated, but
is actually true and, if not authentic, then at least acceptable,
based on the science of Hadeeth criticism. The renowned historian
Ibn Katheer (may Allah have mercy on him) related it without
even suggesting that it is weak, never mind fabricated") And
when Al-Haafidh Ibn Hajar (may Allah have mercy on him)
mentioned it in Al-Isaabah, he wrote, “Abu Ya‘laa related it. And
Abu Ya‘laa, who related it by way of two other chains, did not
consider it to be weak.””! And while discussing miracles that
Allah # caused to occur at the hands of righteous people, ibn
Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him) mentioned this story
as an example. Therefore, since the chain of the above-mentioned
narration is acceptable — as has been clearly asserted by giants
in the field of Hadeeth criticism, the likes of At-Tabaree, ibn
sa’ad, Ibn Katheer, Ibn Hajar, and Ibn Taymiyyah — and since
the scholars that ruled it to be acceptable are more knowledge-
able than present-day writers, we must conclude that the story is
true.

Once we arrive at the conclusion that the story is true, a
mumiber of important questions arise, such as: Why did Khaalid
knowingly drink poison? Wasn't it wrong for him to have done
so? And if he did it, should people of strong Faith do the same
today? First, we must understand that Khaalid 2 was ina state of
Faith that has rarely been paralleled in the annals of history. Since
he was in that state, or zone, if you will, it is not right for us to
question. his actions. He #& was from a generation of men who
witnessed many miracles, some of which occurred during the
lifetime of the Prophet #¢, and others of which occurred later on.

(N ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/251).
‏خا‎ Al-Isaabah, by Yon Hajar (2/218) - Hadeeth number: 2206.

586 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

At the moment that Khaalid # held the vial in his hand, he
believed with certainty that Allah # is the Creator of all things
and that He 4 is the One Who causes each food, herb, medicine,
or poison to have the effect for which it is known. Khaalid #
further was certain that Allah 4, the All-Powerful, is able to
negate a thing’s known effect, if He wills. And so, for instance,
when [braaheem 3&8 was cast into a pit of fire, fire did not have its
known effect — that of burning. Rather than having a burning
effect on Ibraaheem 38, the fire he was cast into had a cooling
effect on him. The same miracle occurred fora man who was nota
Prophet, Abu Muslim Al-Khaulaanee 2; it occurred when he
refused to say that Al-Aswad Al-“Ansee was a prophet, and
when, consequently, he was thrown into a pit of fire. The people
who were present when this miracle occurred witnessed Abu
Muslim performing prayer in the pit, and all the while the fire had
no harmful effect on him whatsoever." In the same way, Allah %
caused the poison to have no harmful effect on Khaalid 4s.

We must also understand that, when Khaalid ‏هه‎ took the
dangerous step of consuming the poison, he did not even for a
second think about the fame and honor he would gain if he were
to survive. Had he had any thoughts of showing-off or of gaining
fame, Allah 3 would have forsaken him by allowing the poison to
have its normal effect. Then, having been forsaken by Allah &,
Khaalid « would not have had any power or ability to negate the
harmful effects of the poison. And so what happened was this:
Khaalid took offense to “‘Amr’s words — regarding his
statement that his time to die had come — believing instead that
a person dies only when his divinely decreed time comes to pass,
not a minute before, and not a minute after. Khaalid « believed so
deeply in that reality, as well as in the fact that Allah & can
neutralize the harmful effects of something such as poison, that he
@ consumed the poison, believing with all of his heart that the
poison had no power in and of itself, that there is neither might
nor power in this uniVerse except with Allah %, and that he

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/153).‏ [ذا

The Conquest of frag 587

would die only if Allah # willed him to die. As a result of, or
rather as a reward for, Khaalid’s deep Faith, Allah # caused a
miracle to occur: Khaalid # remained in perfectly good health
despite the fact that he had just consumed lethal poison.

Regarding the above-mentioned story, Muslims should keep
the following in mind: Do not try this at home. If this warning
sounds trite, it is nonetheless important. A Muslim, if he is
motivated by Khaalid’s story, might think that, if his Faith is
strong, he could also drink poison without being harmed as a
result. He would be foolish in thinking so, not because Allah 8
does not bestow miracles upon some of his believing slaves ~ for
He 88 does do that — but because he thinks that his level of Faith is
comparable to that of Khaalid 2. ‘The level of Faith of Khaalid ‏كه‎
‎and the rest of the Companions ‏رك‎ their commitment to following
the teachings of Islam, the pureness of their sincerity , the deepness
of their conviction, the hardships they were willing to undergo for
the sake of their Faith, and the degree to which they placed their
trust in Allah 88 — these things we can neither fathom nor hope to
parallel. So, even if one is sincere, and even if one believes that
Allah 4 can neutralize the harmful effects of poison, one should
not embark upon the experiment of drinking poison in the hope of
being blessed with the same miracle with which Khaalid ‏م‎ was
blessed. Khaalid 2 attamed a very high level of Faith, a level that
most, if not all, of us, carmot hope to reach ourselves.

Incidentally, it is related that, when the Muslims achieved victory
in Al-Heerah, Khaalid & performed eight units of prayer, which he
performed not in units of two or four, but ina row, making Tasleem
(i.e., saying, “Assalaamu ‘Alaikum Wa-Rahmatullah,” thus signaling
the end of prayer) only after the very last unit.!"!

6) The Conquest of Al-Anbaar

The first part of Khaalid’s mission in lraq was now
accomplished: Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ had ordered Khaalid 4 and “lyaadh

 ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (4/352).
y aay ‏ظ‎

588 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

to compete with one another to see who could first reach Al-
Heerah. Khaalid ‏هه‎ was to enter from the southern part of Iraq,
and ‘Iyaadh, from the north. In the end, it was Khaalid 2 who
_ reached Al-Heerah first, after having conquered all of the
opposition that stood in his way. ‘Tyaadh ‏را‎ on the other hand,
was not as successful: He was having a hard time with the enemy
at Daumatul-Jandal. For this reason, Khaalid 2s decided to leave
Al-Heerah and to try his best to help ‘Iyaadh # and the members
of his army. Having placed Al-Qa’qaa ibn “Amr At-Tameemee ‏تك‎
‎in charge of Al-Heerah, Khaalid « headed northwards. But along
the way, his mission was interrupted by enemy fighters in a city
called Al-Anbaar. Rather than continue northwards, Khaalid #
decided to gain control of Al-Anbaar, and to thus protect the rear
of his army from an ambush.

The city’s inhabitants had no intention to surrender. They shut
themselves up in their fortresses, and even prior to that, they dug
trenches, thus preventing Khaalid # from gaining easy access to
their city. What followed, then, was a siege, one that did not last
for long though, since Khaalid # was determined to defeat the
people inside of the fortresses as quickly as possible. Thus he ‏فك‎
‎was willing to do whatever was necessary in order to achieve his
goal. First, he # slaughtered the weakest camels that his soldiers
had with them; and then he used the carcasses of those camels to
fill up the narrowest part of the trenches. Finally, he used those
carcasses as a bridge to cross over to the other side, into the city of
Al-Anbaar.

His plan took the enemy by surprise, for they felt certain that
Khaalid # and his men would not be able to cross their well-dug
trenches. As Muslim soldiers crossed over the carcasses of the
dead camels, the people of Al-Anbaar sought refuge in their
fortresses, and their leader, Shairaaz, was forced to surrender.
Before surrendering, however, he stipulated that he be allowed to
leave Al-Anbaar in the company of a number of horsemen who
would act as his guards. Khaalid « accepted his condition, but
only if Shairaaz would leave without taking with him any

The Conquest of Iraq 589

belongings or money. Shairaaz, who was desperate to escape with
his life, accepted those terms and shortly thereafter departed from
Al-Anbaar."!

Not all of the people inside of the fortresses were Persians;
some were Arabs who had previously had close ties to the Banu
Iyaad tribe — a tribe that had entered Iraq during the reign of
Bakhtansar. With the siege over with, Muslim soldiers, many of
whom had been Companions ‏كأ‎ of the Messenger of Allah 2g,
learned how to read and write Arabic from the people of Al-
Anbaar.

7) ‘Ain At-Tamr

Khaalid ‏رذ‎ having left Al-Barzaqaan ibn Badr in charge of Al-
Anbaar, resumed his journey northwards. On the way, at a place
called ‘Ain At-Tamr, he # was confronted by “Uqqah ibn Abee
“Uqqah. ‘Uqqah was waiting for Khaalid # with a large army that
consisted of soldiers from the Tamr, Taghlab, and lyaad tribes.
These were all Arab tribes, and they weren’t the only ones that
wanted to fight against Khaalid ‏رك‎ for with them was an army of
Persian soldiers, soldiers that were under the command of a man
named Maihraan. The Arab and Persian armies were allies, and
yet they remained two distinct forces, as opposed to a single,
merged, larger army.

Yet again enemy forces in Iraq made the deadly mistake of
underestimating the strength of Khaalid’s army. ‘Ugqqaah did not
even think that he needed Maihraan’s help to defeat Khaalid ‏ره‎
‎and so, with an air of pride and arrogance, he asked Maihraan to
stay out of the conflict, saying to him, “Verily, Arabs are best
suited to fight against Arabs, so let us take care of Khaalid.”
Maihraan replied, “Then he is all yours. Nonetheless, if you need
us, we will help you (against them).” When Persian soldiers
complained about Maihraan’s decision to not participate in the
coming battle, Mathraan, also with an unwarranted sense of

[| Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/191).

590 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

pride, said to them, “Let them (Le., “Uggaah and his soldiers)
fight. If they defeat Khaalid, then he is yours (yours to punish and
kill). And if they are defeated, we will fight against Khaalid, for in
that case, they (Khaalid # and his men) will have become weak
(from fighting against “‘Uqqah’s army) while we will be strong
(and fresh).” After Maihraan said these words, the sentiments of
his soldiers towards him changed from blame to praise and
adulation.

Shortly thereafter, Khaalid’s army and “Uqqah’s army faced
one another; it was a tense moment during which final
preparations were being made. Khaalid 2 decided to take a big
risk, employing a strategy that seemed, at first glance, to be
nothing short of suicidal. It was a strategy that in the world of
modern-day sports is akin to what is known as the “suicide steal.”
For those who are familiar with the sport of baseball, the
connection between the “suicide steal” and what Khaalid « did
will be clear, for both depend completely on the element of
surprise. If there is a runner on third-base, a pitcher does not
always have to look at him in the same way that he looks at
runners that are on first or second base. A runner on first base, for
instance, can steal a base, a process that involves running towards
second-base while a pitcher throws the ball to his catcher. The
runner has to touch second-base before the catcher can throw the
ball to the second-baseman and before the second-baseman can
tag, him out. When a runner is on third-base, a pitcher does not
have to worry about him stealing a base. If the runner does try to
steal a base by going to home plate, he will be met by the catcher
who, with the ball in his glove, will be waiting to tag him out.
Nonetheless, in the history of baseball, some runners have stolen
home-plate (by going from third-base to home plate while the
pitcher throws the ball to the catcher). They managed to do so by
relying on the element of surprise. True, in order to steal home-
plate, a runner has to be fast; but more importantly, he has to be
smart. He has to catch both the pitcher and the catcher unawares,
at a time when the pitcher would least expect the runner to steal
home plate. In such an instance, a runner can try to steal home

The 06011011651 of Iraq 591

plate while the pitcher throws the ball to his catcher, but uf the
runner mistimes his attempt by even a fraction of a second, he will
be out and his team will have lost the opportunity to gain a run —
which is why the attempt is known as a “suicide steal.”

Now, coming back to the battle in question, Khaalid ‏ذه‎ did
something similar — albeit not in the world of modern-day
sports, but in the realm of something more important, the pursuit
of winning a battle for the sake of Allah #. With the two armies
lined up and facing one another, Khaalid saw that he had a tiny
window of opportunity to end the battle right then and there.
“Uqgah was facing his soldiers, busy in the task of lining them
up in rows. So, in short, the opposing army was momentarily
preoccupied, focused not so much on the enemy as on preparing
to fight the enemy. Khaalid # ordered his soldiers to stay where
they were, and then he, followed by a number of horsemen, raced
across the short distance that separated his army from that of the
enemy. When he reached the other side, he reached down for
“‘Uqqah, picked him up, locked him m an embrace — thus
preventing him from moving — and raced back to the other side.
The entire operation took just a few seconds, so that, by the time
enemy soldiers noticed the arrival of Khaalid ‏رك‎ they could do
nothing to stop him from taking their leader. Had Khaalid #
mistimed his attempt ever so slightly, he, and not "Uqqah, would
have been the one who was taken captive the enemy; and that
would have had catastrophic consequences for the Muslims. In
the end, with “‘Uqgah as a prisoner of the Muslims, “Uqqah’'s
soldiers lost hope of winning and were forced to surrender.

Meanwhile, “Uggah’s Persian allies weren't even present at the
battlefield; instead, they were at a safe distance in the fortress of
“Ain At-Tamr. And yet no sooner did their leader, Maihraan, hear
about the defeat of “Uqgah’s army, and about the many prisoners
that were taken by Khaalid ‏ره‎ than he decided to abandon the
fortress and flee towards safety; his soldiers followed close
behind. Once the fortress was left empty, a group of Christians
that lived in the area sought refuge im it.

592 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏هك‎

By the time Khaalid # arrived at the fortress, Maihraan and his
soldiers were long gone, and the only people that remained were
the Christians who were native to the land. A brief siege followed,
and seeing that there was no escape, the Christians inside of the
fortress soon surrendered.

Khaalid ‏ف‎ then ordered for “Uggah and other prisoners to be
killed. When all was said and done, the Muslims gained a great
amount of war booty that day, much of which was found in ‘Ain
At-Tamr’s fortress.

In a nearby church forty children were studying the bible.
Khaalid # placed those children under the custody of wealthy
men who could take care of them. Among those children — and
they were all considered slaves — was Humraan, who later
became the freed slave of ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan 2s. And one of them
was Seereen, who was given to Maalik ibn Anas 4s. Interestingly,
Seereen was the father of Muhammad ibn Seereen (may Allah
have mercy on him), who would later become one of the most
eminent scholars of the Muslim nation.

Khaalid # sent one-fifth of the spoils to Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq
‏رك‎ who upon receiving the spoils as well as news of Khaalid’s
victory, sent Al-Waleed ibn “Ugbah 4 to the northem part of Iraq,
where he was to search out for and help ‘Iyaadh ‏.ف‎ At the time,
‘Tyaadh # was in somewhat of a predicament, for even though he
was laying siege to Daumatul-Jandal, he too was besieged, for
enemy fighters blocked all of the routes that led away from the
city. Al-Waleed managed to reach ‘Tyaadh ‏رق‎ who said to him,
“Some forms of advice are better than a huge army, so tell me
what we should do, considering our present predicament.” Al-
Waleed ‏د‎ replied, “Write to Khaalid ‏رذن‎ and he will come to you
with his army.” ‘ITyaadh # wrote to Khaalid ‏رق‎ asking for his
help; and his letter reached Khaalid ‏ذه‎ just after the Muslims
gained control of ‘Ain At-Tamr. In response to ‘Iyaadh’s plea for
help, Khaalid 2 wrote back the following letter: “From Khaalid to
‘lyaadh: I am now coming to you.”"!

iN” AlL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/354).

The Conquest of Irag 593

8) Daumatul-—Jandal

After he left ‘Uwaim ibn Kaahil Al-Aslamee « in charge of
‘Ain At-Tamr, Khaalid # headed towards Daumatul-Jandal.
News of his departure reached Daumatul Jandal’s leaders, who
then, out of a sense of fear and desperation, pleaded for military
help from their allies from the Bahraa, Kalb, Ghassaan, and
Tanookh tribes.

The people of Daumatul-Jandal had two leaders: Ukaidir ibn
‘Abdul-Malik and Al-Jaudee ibn Rabee’ah, and the two of them
disagreed about how they should deal with Khaalid #. Dkaidir
was the more frightened of the two, and he had every reason to be
frightened, considering his past experience with Khaalid ‏.دن‎ The
two of them met during the Tabook expedition. Khaalid 4, based
on the instructions of the Messenger of Allah 22, captured Ukaidir
and took him back to the Muslim encampment. Rather than kill or
punish Ukaidir, the Messenger of Allah #£ freed him, but not
before taking a covenant from him. Ukaidir later broke the terms
of that covenant, and from that day onwards, because of how he
had betrayed the Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ he lived ina state of fear,
knowing that his betrayal would, sooner or later, be the cause of
his demise.

Now that Khaalid 2 was coming with a formidable army,
Ukaidir became afraid that the time to pay for his wicked and
treacherous ways had come. So, out of desperation, he said to Al-
Jaudee, “Of all people, 1 know Khaalid the best.... No one is better
than he is in the art of war. And whenever a group of people see
the face of Khaalid, regardless of whether they are few or many,
they run away from him (because they fear him). So make peace
with him (since that is the only way you can save yourselves).””
Al-Jaudee and everyone else rejected his suggestion, after which
he said, “Then I will not help you in your war with Khaalid; your
war with him, then, is your business.”!“! When praise is given by

11 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/354).
Pl Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nikaayah (6/355) and At-Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/195).

594 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

one’s enemy, we can be sure that that praise is truthful; it is
certain, therefore, that what Ukaidir said about Khaalid # ~—
about the fear he inspired into the hearts of his enemy, and about
his superior skill as a military fighter and commander — was
pertectly true.

What happened next illustrates the fact that, regardless of the
precautions one takes, one carmot avert one’s divinely pre-
ordained time of death. Although Ukaidir left Daumatul-Jandal,
bent on getting as far away from Khaalid # as possible, news of
his flight quickly spread throughout the region. Khaalid #, wpon
learning of Ukaidir’s nearby presence, ordered “Aasim ibn “Amr
a to search out for and capture him.

It did not take long for “Aasim to locate and capture Ukaidir,
and when they returned to the Muslim army, Khaalid & gave the
order for Ukaidir to be executed. It was a just punishment,
considering Ukaidir’s history of betrayal and treachery. Despite
the fact that the Prophet #¢ had treated him kindly, setting him
free when he was deserving of a severe punishment, Ukaidir

acted treacherously towards the Prophet #¢, breaking all of the
promises he made to him by continuing to fight in battles against
Muslims."

Upon arriving at Daumatul-Jandal, Khaalid 42 made camp. As
for the people of Datumatul-Jandal and their allies from the
Bahraa, Kalb, and Tanookh tribes, they divided their overall
forces into two groups: the first faced Khaalid’s encampment, and
the second faced ‘Iyaadh’s encampment. Therefore, two separate
battles were about to take place at the same time. And that is
exactly what happened: Al-Jaudee ibn Rabee’ah and his soldiers
marched towards Khaalid 4; and at the same time, ibn Al-
Hadrajaan, ibn Al-Abham, and their forces marched towards
‘Tyaadh ‏.نك‎

Fierce fighting ensued. Khaalid ‏له‎ was able to achieve a
decisive and relatively quick victory over Al-Jaudee’s army.

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/136).‏ ذا

The Conquest of 9 595

‘Tyaadh ‏كه‎ too was able to defeat his foes, but with a great deal of
difficulty. The enemy troops that survived the battle and that
avoided capture made their way to Daumatul-Jandal’s fortress,
intending to seek safety inside. The fortress, however, was
already filled to capacity, and the people inside, in order to save
themselves, shut the gates on fleeing soldiers, thus leaving them
as easy prey for pursuing Muslim fighters.

Upon arriving at the scene, Khaalid 2 and his men broke
through the gate of the fortress, attacked those that were inside,
and ended up killing a great many of them.

By conquering Daumatul-Jandal, Muslims gained control of a
city whose strategic importance was immeasurable. Three
important places had roads that intersected at Daumatul-Jandal:
The Arabian Peninsula towards the south, [rag towards north-
east, and Ash-Sham (Gyria and surrounding regions) towards
north-west. Given that reality, Abu Bakr certainly had his
sights on gaining control of Daumatui-Jandal as soon as possible.
And that is why ‘Tyaadh # didn’t simply go around Daumatul-
Jandal on his way to Al-Heerah; instead, he # stayed there and
patiently endured many hardships, willing to wait as long as it
would take to wrest control of the city. For ‘Tyaadh « knew that,
as long as Dawmatul-Jandal remained in the hands of the enemy,
Muslims would remain in grave danger throughout Iraq.7)

Khaalid 2 not only conquered most of the southern part of
frag, he helped ‘Iyaadh «& conquer a strategically important part
of northern [raq. But while we give credit to Khaalid # for his
military prowess, his brilliant strategy, and his ability to instill
fear into the hearts of the enemy, we must not forget the
contributions ‘Iyaadh ¢ made in the war effort m Iraq — his
steadfastness, his patience, his willingness to endure many
hardships, his trust in Allah #&, and his determination to

( Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/ 196), and Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Khaalid Al-
Jinaanee (pg. 54).

“I Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Nizaar Al-Hadeethee and Khaalid Al-Jinaanee (pg.
5A).

506 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

continue fighting in spite of the tact that he was surrounding by
enemy units.

That ‘Iyaadh 2 fought with so much bravery and integrity
should not come as a surprise, for he was among the most
eminent members of the Muhaaproon. A chieftain among the
Quraish, he was known off the battlefield for his generosity and
easy-going character. On the battlefield, and in all important
matters, ‘Iyaadh # had earned the trust of all of the rightly-
guided Khaleefahs, as well as of their governors. ‘Tyaadh « was
one of the generals of the Muslim army at Al-Yarmook, and he
was at the forefront of Abu ‘Ubaidah’s army. Also, ‘lyaadh
helped conquer the northern border areas of the peninsula, the
areas that were situated between Ash-Sham and frag. And when
Abu ‘Ubaidah « was about to die, he appointed ‘Iyaadh 4s to the
post of governor of Ash-Sham. Afterwards, ‘Umar ‏وف‎ reappointed
‘Iyaadh #, later removing him from his post only because he
needed his help elsewhere, for the purpose of leading armies in
order to conquer even more foreign lands.!!

9) The Battle of Al-Haseed

The Battle of Al-Haseed was prompted by a number of events,
the most important one being Khaalid’s decision to send Al-Aqra’
ibn Haabis # back to Al-Anbaar. That Khaalid 2 did not go back
with Al-Aqra’ # gave the disbelieving Arabs of the region the
impression that Al-Anbaar was now vulnerable and that they
should take advantage of the situation by invading it. After all,
they thought, Khaalid #, their most feared enemy, was at a safe
distance — at arm’s length in Daumatul-Jandal.

A number of events followed, and they all culminated in the
Battle of Al-Haseed. First, non-Muslim Arabs in the region made
contact with local Persians, asking for their help, so that, together,
they could exact revenge for “Uqqah’s death. In response to their
allies’ call to arms, Razmahar and Rauzabah left Baghdad and

‎AtTaareekh AL-lslaaamee (9/164).‏ ذا

The Conquest of [9 597

began marching towards Al-Anbaar. But along the way, their forces
planned to meet up with their Arab allies at Al-Haseed and Al-
Khanaatis. News of their departure reached Az-~Zabargqaan ibn
Badr, the recently appointed leader of Al-Anbaar. Az-Zabarqaan 4s
proceeded to seek the help of Al-Qa’qaa ibn “Amr ‏رك‎ who was, by
the order of Khaalid, in charge of Al-Heerah. Al-Oa’gaa #
responded by sending ‘Abud ibn Fadakee As-Sa’dee (Abu Laila)
to Al-Haseed, and ‘Uwah ibn Al-Ja‘ad Al-Baarigee to Al-Khanaafis.

When Khaalid 2 found out that a number of tribes intended to
join up with Rauzabah’s forces at Al-Haseed, he realized that it was
important to break up the opposing army before it becarne too
strong. Therefore, rather than wait for the next move of the enemy,
Khaalid ¢ wanted to attack them, and thereby break up their forces,
at Al-Haseed. In order to accomplish that task, he 4 appointed his
most able military commander, Al-Qa’qaa #, to be in charge of
Muslims in Al-Haseed; furthermore, Khaalid # appointed ‘Tyaadh
ibn Ghanam 4 to take Qa’qaa’s place as leader of Al-Heerah.

Just as Muslims tried to gain as much information as possible
about the enemy’s movements and plans, so did the enemy keep a
close watch on their Muslim foes. Thus Rauzabah was able to find
out that Al-QOa’qaa # was heading towards him; consequently, he
sought the help of Razmahar, who quickly responded by merging
his army with that of Rauzabah. Both the Muslims and the
disbelievers had now made their final moves. Their armies met at
Al-Haseed, and even though the Muslims faced a formidable and
large army, they came out victorious, managing to kill in the
process a great number of enemy fighters — not to mention the
two leaders of the opposing army, Razmahar and Rauzabah.
Also, the Muslims gained a great deal of war booty.)

10) The Battle of Al-Maseekh

When Khaalid ‏يه‎ learned about the Muslims’ victory in Al-
Haseed, He 4s ordered the various commanders of his army to
meet at a place called Al-Musayyakh, which was situated near

‎Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/355).‏ لذا

598 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏حل‎

Hauraat. When various battalions met at the appointed time, they
proceeded to attack a number of local tribes from three directions,
inflicting upon them a great many losses.)

Shortly thereafter, Khaalid ‏ا‎ found out that various enemy
tribes were joming forces in two places: in Al-Muthannah, which
was near Ar-Ruqqah, and Az-Zumayyal. Rather than allow the
enemy to gain strength, Khaalid « took the fight to them,
attacking them at both Al-Muthannah and Az-Zumayyal, and, in
the end, inflicting them with huge losses.)

‘Adee ibn Haatim ‏وض‎ who was one of the Muslim soldiers
during the said raids, later recalled, “We reached a man whose
name was I larqoos ibn An-No’maan An-Namree, and at the time
he was surrounded by his sons, daughters, and wife. He placed
before therm a bow] of alcohol, upon which they said, ‘Will anyone
drink this hour, at a tome when Khaalid’s armies have arrived?’
He replied, ‘Drink a farewell drink, for I do not think that you will
ever have another drink after it.”

‘Adee # then went on to say, “As Harqoos was saying that
(and as he was about to drink some of the alcohol), a group of
horsemen rode by, striking his head at the moment his head was
inside of the bowl. We then took his daughters and killed his
children.”

During one of the said raids, two Muslims, who were staying
among the natives of Iraq, were killed. The two men had
embraced Islam and had with them a letter that guaranteed their
safety, and that letter was from none other than Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeq #. Muslim soldiers didn’t know about the letter, and so
they killed the two men, not knowing that they were Muslims.
When Abu Bakr # found out about what had happened to the
two men, he paid blood money to their relatives, but he also sent a

‎Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Khaalid Al-Jinaabee and Nizaar Al-Hadeethee (pg.‏ لذأ
.)30

‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/199, 200).‏ خا

‎31 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/199).

The Conquest of 98 599

clear message to Muslims who lived among non-Muslims,
particularly non-Muslims that were at war with Muslims. He
said, “And that is what people who live with the enemy in their
lands get.” Or in other words, it was not the Muslim army that
sinned by killing the two men — since they didn't know that they
were Muslims — but instead it was the two men who were
sinning by living in enemy territory.!

11) The Battle of Al-Furaad

With all Arab tribes in [rag conquered, Khaalid ‏كه‎ set his sights
on Furaad, a city of exceptional strategic importance, due to the
fact that it straddled the borders of Ash-Sham (Syria and
surrounding regions}, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula. Conquer-
ing Furaad was also important because Khaalid 2» wanted to
make sure the rear of his army would not be vulnerable to an
attack when he crossed into Persia.

By gathering in Puraad, the Muslims inspired the ire of the
Romans. Furious that the Muslims threatened them from so close
a distance, the Romans were determined to defeat the Muslims by
any means necessary. As such, they, for the very first time, sought
the help of Persians against their common foes, the Muslims. The
Persians did not hesitate to joi ranks with the Romans, since they
wanted desperately to exact revenge upon Muslims for crushing
the foundations of their Empire. To make matters worse for
Muslims, their Roman and Persian foes sought the help of various
Arab tribes, such as the Taghlab, Iyaad, and An-Namr tribes.
Arab tribes were just as enthusiastic to fight as were the Persians,
for they had not yet forgotten the deaths of their leaders at the
hands of Muslim soldiers. With so many enemies working
together, the ensuing battle marked the first time that Muslims
faced an army that was comprised of Persians, a people who were
members of the predominant Eastern Empire; of Romans, a .
people who were members of the predominant Western Empire;

‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (6/356).‏ لاا

600 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

and of Arabs, people who were loyal to one of the two said
Empires.

And yet Muslim soldiers were not perturbed by the size of the
opposing army. When the Persian-Roman-Arab army reached the
banks of the Euphrates River, they said to the Muslims on the
other side, “Either you cross over to us, or we will cross over to
you.” Khaalid & said, “Then you cross over.” They said, “Then
move to one side, and allow us to cross.” Khaalid # replied, “We
wil not do that, so instead cross over from below where we are
positioned.”

Before crossing over, the leaders of the opposing army
questioned whether it was wise to fight Khaalid ‏.ذاه‎ They said to
one another, “He is a man who is fighting for His religion;
furthermore, he is both intelligent and knowledgeable. It seems
certain, therefore, that he will come out victorious and that we
will suffer defeat.’ In the end, however, these words fell upon
deaf ears; too many people were bent upon seeking revenge, and
so, alter receiving encouragement from their leaders, Roman,
Persian, and Arab soldiers crossed the Euphrates and fought ina
battle that was both long and fiercely contested. In spite of the
enthusiasm shown by Persian, Roman, and Arab fighters, they
were no match for Khaalid’s army. During the battle, a single
Muslim would gather a number of enemy soldiers with his spear
and kill them all; such was the bravery of Muslim soldiers and the
terror they inspired in the hearts of their enemy. Tens of
thousands of enemy soldiers died that day. After the conclusion
of the battle, Khaalid # stayed in Furaad for ten days, after which
he returned to Al-Heerah.”!

The events of this battle took place in the middle of Dhil-
Qai’dah, of the year 12 H.

Maslims had fared very well in a great number of previous
battles, but this was different: The victory at Furaad was extra
special because victory was achieved in spite of the fact that

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/201).

The Conquest of Iraq 601

Khaalid’s army was facing three foes: Romans, Persians, and
Arabs. To be sure, the Battle of Furaad is considered a decisive
battle in the history of Islam, even though it is not as well known
as the major battles that took place during the same period. The
Battle of Furaad was decisive because its events completely
crushed the morale of each of the three opposing forces that were
defeated. Also, The Battle of Furaad is considered the last battle in
Iraq that Khaalid ‏كه‎ took part in”! More than any of the other two
opposing forces, it was the Persians who suffered the worst
psychological blow — a blow from which they never recovered.
After the conclusion of the Battle of Furaad, the Persians were
never again able to put together an army that posed a serious
threat to Muslims. So for all of the above-mentioned reasons, the
Battle of Furaad should be remembered as one of the key battles
that took place during the conquest of Iraq.

Third: Khaalid ‏كك‎ Perform Tay >Abu!
Him to Go to Ash-Sham (Syria and Surrounding
2s is Made the Overall
ed Forces in [rag

Regions); and Al-M

luslim Arm

1) Khaalid 4 Performs Hajj in the Year 12 H, and Abu Bakr &
Orders Him to go to Ash-Sham (Syria and Surrounding Regions)

With only five days to go until the end of the month of Dhil-
Qai’ dah, and after having spent ten days at Al-Furaad, Khaalid
instructed his army to prepare for the return journey to ‏لط‎
‎Heerah. Khaalid # placed “Aasim ibn ‘Amr 4 in charge of the
front of his army, and Shajarah ibn Al-A‘az in charge of the rear.
Khaalid 4 gave everyone the impression that he would be
traveling among the soldiers who were in the front of his army,
but then, with a number of companions, he secretly parted
company from his army and headed towards Makkah. It is

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/173).‏ أذا

602 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏مف‎

interesting to note that, in heading towards Makkah, Khaalid #
took a road that had never before been used. In not telling his
soldiers that he was leaving them for a short while, and in taking a
never-before used path to go to Makkah, Khaalid 4 probably was
trying to avoid letting the enemy know that he was leaving Iraq.

By the time Khaalid 4 reached Makkah, the Hajj season for the
year 12 H was about to begin. Khaalid # then performed Hajj
along with the other pilgrims, and then he raced back to his army,
managing to catch up to them before they reached Al-Heerah.
Abu Bakr 23 found out that Khaalid « performed Hajj only after
the Hajj season was over — when pilgrims returned to Al-
Madeenah and told Abu Bakr « that they saw Khaalid «& in
Makkah. Even though Khaalid « had done a noble thing by
performing Hajj, Abu Bakr 2 was upset at him because he didn’t
ask permission to leave his army. Nonetheless, Abu Bakr # was
generally pleased not only with Khaalid « but with the victories
that Khaalid ‏ذه‎ achieved in Iraq. Therefore, a few words of gentle
censure was all that was necessary to remind Khaalid - that it
was his duty to seek Abu Bakr’s permission before he did
something that jeopardized his mission abroad. Otherwise, it was
time to move on ~ to send Khaalid 2 to fight in a place where he
was more needed: Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).
And so Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ sent a letter to Khaalid 4s, a letter whose main
points can be summarized as follows:

@ Abu Bakr 4 ordered Khaalid # to leave Iraq and to head
towards Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions), in the
hope that Allah would grant Muslims victory at Khaalid’s
hand and through Khaalid’s leadership.

©» Abu Bakr # reproached Khaalid # for leaving his army
without his permission, and warned him never to repeat the
sare mistake.

@ Abu Bakr 4 encouraged Khaalid # to work hard and to do his
utmost not for worldly gain, but purely for the sake of Allah #.

@ Abu Bakr # warned Khaalid & not to become proud or
boastful as result of his achievements; similarly, Abu Bakr 2

The Conquest of Iraq 603

warned him against thinking that, by fighting disbelievers, he
was doing Allah % a favor; rather, all favors are from Allah 8
and it is He # alone Who guides people to become obedient to

Him

The following accolades all apply to the Muslim military
efforts in Iraq: Few, if any, tactical errors; brave fighting; skilled
military maneuvers; brilliant strategy; the ability to intercept key
information from the enemy; and the ability to execute every plan
with great precision and expertise. In short, the performance of
Khaalid ‏ذه‎ and his men can be described as being almost flawless.
With victory achieved, it was time for Khaalid # to move on toa
new mission — that of fighting the Romans in Ash-Sham.

And if Khaalid was a superior military man before the
Muslim invasion of Iraq, he — through the experience and
knowledge he gained during the many battles he fought in
against the natives of Iraq ~ afterwards became known as the
most feared and most brilliant military commander on earth, not
just to the people of his generation, but, by virtue of his
reputation, to the people of ensuing generations as well.

Now that Khaalid « was leaving the region, the Muslim
armed forces in Iraq needed a new overall leader. The man that
was nominated for the job was Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah Ash-
Shaibaanee 2, an obvious choice considering his knowledge of
Iraq and his many years of experience in fighting against the
Persians of the region. Even while Khaalid ‏كأ‎ was leader of the
Muslim military in Iraq, Al-Muthannah # was an indispensable
soldier who proved himself to be not only a brave warrior and
military strategist, but also a wise and competent leader. Much of
Khaalid’s military activities in Iraq depended on the element of
surprise; as such, he needed a skilled group of spies who could, on
a continual basis, acquire as much information about the enemy
as possible. The person he relied on to gather intelligence about the

‎Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Mal-Islam (pg. 295).‏ 1ن

enemy was none other than Al-Muthannah ‏رك‎ not only because of
Al-Muthannah’s ability to organize detailed missions, but also
because of his knowledge of the land and of the people of Iraq. Al-
Muthannah # was a member of the Banu Shaibaan tribe, a tribe
whose territory was situated on the border regions of Iraq, not too
far from the Euphrates River. Therefore, based on his native land
and his knowledge of Iraqi people, Al-Muthannah ‏ف‎ was best
suited to put together a group of Banu Shaibaan tribesmen and
charge them with the duty of gathering intelligence in the region.
After Al-Muthannah # put his team of spies together, Khaalid
constantly received reports about what was happening in the
region, who was coming and who was leaving, and, most
importantly, what plans the enemy were making. It was because
of the efforts of Al-Muthannah 4 and his team of spies that Khaalid
# often learned about - and was consequently able to foil — the
enemy’s plans to attack Muslim strongholds. It often occurred that,
while enemy soldiers flocked towards a city in order to form an
army and prepare for an attack on Muslims, Khaalid # attacked
that city, thus thwarting the enemy’s ability to assemble a sizeable
enough of an army to pose a threat to the Muslims in the region."

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ wrote the following letter to Khaalid ‏:نل‎ “Leave
Iraq, and leave behind the natives of Iraq that you traveled to
(when you first began your mission there (.e., the likes of ‏للخ‎
‎Muthannah ibn Haarithah # and his soldiers)). Travel lightly and
take with you the people of strength from our companions, those
that went to Iraq with you from Al-Yamaamah, those that
accompanied you on the way, and those that came to you from
Hijaaz. Then go to Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions),
where you should meet up with Abu “‘Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah 2
and the Muslims that are with him. When you meet up with them,
you will be their overall leader. And may peace and the mercy of
Allah be upon you.”!

Ul Ma'aarik Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed Did-Al-Furs (pg. 143).
I Thid.

The Conquest of Iraq 605

Khaalid « immediately made preparations to leave Iraq. He
divided his army into two groups: the first was to travel with him
to Ash-Sham, and the second was to stay behind with AI-
Muthannah ‏.ف‎ When Al-Muthannah « found out that Khaalid 4s
was taking all of the Prophet’s Companions # with him, he said,
“By Allah, I will only accept all of Abu Bakr’s commands, for he
clearly stated that you are to take one-half of the Companions ‏حك‎
‎with you and that you are to leave one-half of them behind (with
me). By Allah, it is only through them that lam hoping to achieve
victory, and yet you are divesting me of their services.” Here, Al-
Muthannah # was referring to a letter that reached Khaalid # just
before he was about to depart from Iraq; in that letter, Abu Bakr ‏و‎
‎wrote, “O Khaalid, for every strong fighter you take with you,
leave one strong fighter behind. Then, when Allah grants you
victory, send the rest back to Iraq...”

Having read this latest letter, Khaalid 4, proceeded to appease
Al-Muthannah # by assigning to his army brave and skilled
soldiers. When enough of those soldiers were given over to him,
Al-Muthannah +s was satisfied, and thus the matter of who was
going with Khaalid # and who was staying behind became
settled.)

The task that lay ahead for Khaalid ‏ذه‎ was, to say the least,
daunting. Somehow, he was supposed to enter Ash-Sham and help
the Muslim army that was stationed there without being
intercepted and attacked by Koman armies that guarded the
borderlands between Iraq and Ash-Sham. Perhaps it would have
been easier for him to have been assigned the task of putting a camel
through a needle. Nonetheless, Khaalid 2, as is the case with all
great military leaders, was not discouraged in the least; and rather
than complain about a difficult situation, he 4 looked for a solution.

To make matters even more difficult, before Khaalid 2s and his
men lay a vast desert, one that was almost bereft of life. Khaalid
gathered his guides — men who knew the pathways of the entire

My As-Siddeeq Awwalul-Khulafaa (pg. 170).
7) Tid.

606 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ف‎

region, and others who knew the stars well and so were expert
night-travelers — and said to them, “What path can I take so that,
when 1 get to the other side (of the desert), | will have gone by the
Roman armies (that guard the borders between Ash-Sham and
Iraq)? For if Iam forced to face them, they will hold me back and
prevent me from helping the Muslims (that are fighting in the
region).” All of the guides agreed that there was only one road
that met Khaalid’s criteria, and it was a road that was rarely used;
moreover, it was a road that was meant for a hardy traveler or
two, and not for an entire army that was accompanied by horses
and camels. The guides said to Khaalid 4, “We know of only one
such road, and it cannot be crossed by armies. By Allah, even a
lone rider would fear traversing it by himself! Therefore, you,
given the fact that you have horses and supplies (horses that need
nourishment, and supplies that will slow you down), will not be
able to traVerse it, for one is required to travel along it for five full
nights without coming across any source of water whatsoever.”

And yet Khaalid 24s remained resolute: If he was going to succeed
in his mission, and if he was going to avoid the Roman armies that
guarded the border between Iraq and Ash-Sham, he would have to
travel by this strange and dangerous road that was being described
to him. Seeing that Khaalid 4 was thus determined, Raafai’ ibn
‘Umair 4 suggested that they carry as much water as possible.
Given the desperate circumstances, Khaalid 4 resorted to desperate
means, ordering his men to fill the stomachs of thirsty camels with
water, and further ordering them to tie up the insides of those
camels, thus preventing the water from escaping. And in order to
raise the spirits of his soldiers, Khaalid # said to them, “Verily, as
long as Allah’s help is with him, a Muslim should not be bothered
by any predicament he finds himself to be in.” ‏لكا‎

The journey was difficult for one main reason: Khaalid 4 was
traveling with an army that consisted not just of men, but of
horses and camels as well. Therefore, he had to get to the other

( AL-Harb An-Nafsiyyah, by Dr. Anmad Naufal (2/155).

The Conquest of 4 607

side of the desert, with all of his men and riding animals not just
alive, but in good health and ready for battle. A single rider might
hope to traVerse the dangerous road — a road that for five days of
travel was bereft of all sources of water ~ since he only had to
worry about providing drink for himself and his horse. Khaalid
2s, on the other had, had to worry about providing water for all of
his soldiers, and all of the horses and camels that were
accompanying his army.

Raafai’ ‏ذه‎ prepared twenty camels by depriving them of water
for a number of days and then making them drink until their
stomachs were full. Next, he surgically cut off a part of their insides,
thus preventing the water from leaking out. He ‏كه‎ then said to
Khaalid 4, “Now you can travel with the horses and supplies.”

Once all preparations for departure had been made, Khaalid’s
guide, Raafai’ ibn ‘Umair 4s, led the army along a path that was at
once rugged and barren. There were no distinctive marks along
the way: Everything was desert wasteland, and everything
looked the same, especially the part of the desert that extended
from Qawaadir to Siwaa. Khaalid told his soldiers that, despite
the many disadvantages of the path, taking it was necessary in
that it would enable them to travel unnoticed and to take their
enemy by surprise.

Every time the Muslims stopped to make camp, a few of the
water-filled camels would be slaughtered and every member of
the army would take something to drink. In this manner, they
were able to travel from Qaraaqir until Saul, which was situated
near a number of villages inside of Ash-Sham. Muslims would
rest by day and travel by night, and Khaalid relied on Raafai’ ‏ا‎ ~
as his guide once he came to trust his judgment. And Khaalid 2s
was right in trusting Raafai’ ‏رف‎ for Raafai’ 4 provided expert
advice, making sure they stayed on course, so that they could
arrive at their destination as quickly as possible. Khaalid 4 also
employed the services of another guide, Maihriz Al-Maihraabee.
Because he was knowledgeable about the names, positions, and
formations of stars, Maihraaz was an expert guide for night-

608 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

travel. So with the help of both Raafai’ and Maihraaz, the Muslim
army was able to travel both by night and in the morning, and
they would stop to rest just before noon-time.

Khaalid 2 forbade all of his soldiers from walking; he ordered
them to ride because he warted to keep them as strong as possible
for the unknown dangers that awaited them once they entered
Ash-Sham. On the fifth day of travel, the army completely ran out
of water, and Khaalid « feared that some of his soldiers might die
of thirst. And so he consulted Raafai’ ‏ف‎ Fortunately for the
soldiers, Raafai’ # was familiar with the area. He knew that there
were small trees nearby and that a small spring flowed under-
neath them. He ordered Muslim soldiers to search the area for an
‘Ausaj tree. When a group of soldiers found, not the tree, but some
stalks that were probably connected to its roots, Raafai’ ordered
them to dig in the vicinity of the stalks. They did so, and after a
short period of digging, a small source of water appeared.
Whatever the size of the source, it was enough to quench the thirst
of everyone in the army. Prior to the journey, Khaalid ‏يله‎ was
informed about the said tree. Some Arabs had said to him, “If you
reach such and such tree, then you and those that are with you
will have been saved. If you don’t reach it, you will all be
destroyed (i.e., you will all die of thirst).”

This story illustrates Khaalid’s genius, and his willingness to
face dangers and take risks, as long as doing so meant achieving
key military goals. On the fifth day of their journey, Khaalid ‏ذه‎
‎and his men reached Siwaa, which was situated inside of the Ash-
Sham border. More important than reaching Siwaa, the army
went around and thus left behind a number of Roman army units
that were guarding the main roads that led trom Iraq to Ash-
Sham. Thus Khaalid ‏ذه‎ and his men managed to slip into Roman
territory unnoticed, all because of the brilliant strategy of taking a
dangerous yet unguarded path."!

‎Ma’rakah Al-Yarmook, by Al-Liwaa Khaleel Sa’eed — a research report that‏ 1ذا
‎was submitted to the Arab Academy of Military Studies; refer also to Abu‏
‎Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Khaalid Al-Jinaanee (pg. 68).‏

The Conquest of lrag 609

Having entered Ash-Sham, Khaalid # began his mission
without delay. He # attacked the village of Adak, besieging its
inhabitants. The conflict ended peacefully when Adak’s inhabi-
tants surrendered. Next, Khaalid # attacked Tadmar. its people
refused to surrender, choosing instead to lock themselves up in
their fortresses. Soon realizing that resistance was futile, they
asked for a guarantee of safety. And when it was granted to them,
they surrendered. Khaalid 2 traveled onwards until he reached
Al-Oaryatain. His army then fought against and defeated Al-
Qaryatain’s inhabitants. Next, Khaalid # headed towards
Hiwarain. When he # reached a spot that was known as Ath-
Thaniyyah, Khaalid 4 spread and waved his flag; previously, the
flag had belonged to the Messenger of Allah #2, and it was called
AlTqaab; consequently, the said spot. was given the name,
Thaniyyat Al-Tqaab.4!

Khaalid # and his army marched onwards, attacking ‘Adhraa
along the way, and gaining a great deal of war booty from the
Ghassaan tribe. Then, upon arriving at Qanaat Busraa, Khaalid #
found a number of the Prophet’s Companions & attacking the
city; those Companions @ acknowledged Khaalid ‏ها‎ as their
leader, and together they conquered the city, making it the first
city that the Muslims conquered in Ash-Sham. Khaalid 4 put to
one side one-fifth of the spoils that were won from the people of
Ghassaan, and he # entrusted that wealth to Bilaal ibn Al-Harth
Al-Muzanee, ordering him to take it to Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎

Along with Abu ‘Ubaidah #, Marthad #, and Shurahbeel #,
Khaalid ‏كذ‎ headed towards ‘Amr ibn Al-‘Aas a, who, at the time,
was in the land of Al-’Arbaa. Khaalid was not the only one that
was headed towards “Amr 4; the Romans were doing the same,
and the conflict that followed became known as the Battle of
Ajnaadain.4

Ol Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Dr. Nizaar Al-Hadeethee and Khaalid Al-Jinaanee
(pg. 68).
Ul ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/6, 7).

610 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg #
In the armals of warfare, Khaalid’s decision to travel to Ash-
Sham by way of a dangerous and unused road was a unique and
brilliant maneuver, a maneuver that reaped many positive
rewards. Taking the Romans by surprise, Khaalid # entered
into Ash-Sham virtually unnoticed. For a single man to enter into
a country unnoticed is one thing, but for an entire army to do the
same is a truly amazing feat. On the one hand, the Romans were
taken by complete surprise; and on the other, Khaalid 4 achieved
his goal of providing direly needed reinforcements to the
embattled Muslim armies that were already in the region.

Commenting on Khaalid’s early success in Ash-Sham, Mah-
mood Shait Khattaab wrote, “Khaalid’s crossing of the desert by
way of a dangerous road constitutes a truly unique prelude to a
surprise attack; | know of no similar achievernent. Hannibal's
crossing of the Alps, Napoleon’s crossing of the Alps, Napoleon’s
crossing of the Sinai desert, and Britain’s crossing of the same
desert in World War I ~— none of these feats equal the gamble
Khaalid # took (when he crossed into Ash-Sham). Crossing
mountains is much easier than crossing a desert, since water is
easily found in mountain areas, whereas it is not in desert lands.
Also, the Sinai Desert contains many wells, and various parts of it
are populated; as for the desert that Khaalid « traveled through,
it was barren, with no water source of any kind along a stretch of
the desert that took five days to traVerse. Given the nature of the
barren stretch of desert that Khaalid # traVersed, and given the
near impossibility of crossing it with an army, Khaalid # took the
Romans completely by surprise. As advanced as the Roman army
was, no Roman commander had ever thought that an opposing
army would try to cross over into Ash-Sham by way of the road
that Khaalid ‏ينه‎ used to cross over! Because the Romans were
taken completely by surprise, every village or army that Khaalid
#, passed by surrendered after little or no fighting. Roman
soldiers stationed in the region never imagined that a huge

“! Qaadah Fathul-lrag Wal-Jazeerah (pg. 193); refer also to Al-Harb An-Nafsiyyah
(2/163).

The Conquest of Iraq 611

Muslim army would take them by surprise; furthermore, they
had no time to call for reinforcements.”

In the centuries that followed, military men all over the world
both read about and admired stories of Khaalid’s military genius.
In fact, Faun Dargoitz, a German general during World War I,
and the author of the book The Armed Naton, wrote about
Khaalid ‏ركه‎ “In the art of war, he is my teacher ei

Iraq

aalid 2 gone, Al-Muthannah Leads the War Effort in

Muslim soldiers had every reason to be proud of and pleased
with their new leader, Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah ‏.ذه‎ In fact, he
was a soldier’s dream leader, an unselfish man who shared not
just in his subordinates’ joys, but in their hardships as well.

Al-Muthannah was brave and fearless. His Faith was strong,
and he had his priorities set straight: He was concerned with long-
term success more so than short-term comfort and prosperity, and
when he had to choose between an individual’s welfare and the
greater good, he would choose the greater good - a principle that
he applied to himself before anyone else. One thing that made
him a superior leader was his ability not only to make correct
decisions, but also to make them quickly, without the least bit of
wavering or hesitation. He gained the respect and loyalty of his
soldiers because, in the most dangerous of circumstances, he was
willing to sacrifice his own life before anyone else’s. And because
of his selfless attitude, a strong bond of mutual love and trust was
established between him and his soldiers. Always the first to
attack and the last to retreat, Al-Muthannah truly deserved the
love he received from his soldiers.

Being a native of rag, and very knowledgeable about its
natives and their customs, Al-Muthannah # was the preeminent
expert, not as much on the art of war in general, as on the art of

‎Al-Harb An-Nafsiyyah, by Dr. Ahmad Naufal (2/162).‏ 1لا
‎Ma’aarik Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed Did-Al-Furs (pe. 167).‏ 71

612 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

waging war against the Persians of Iraq. Before Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ even
announced his plans to invade Irag, Al-Muthannah ‏ا‎ led his own
army in some early attacks on Persian strongholds. Realizing that
he could not defeat the Persians on his own, he 4 encouraged
Abu Bakr 4 to launch a large-scale military campaign in ‏.مدعا‎ Al-
Muthannah # continued to fight on his own until the end of the
Apostate Wars, which is when Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ sent two large armies
to invade Iraq, one from its northern front, and the other from its
southern front.

Then, even though he had personally paved the way to
conquering lraq, even though, through his own effort and time,
he mobilized a fair-sized army of fighters, and even though he
knew the Persians better than anyone else, Al-Muthannah 4s was
humble enough to hand over the reins of leadership to Khaaalid
# and to become a common soldier in his army.

Because he was an Arab who lived along the borderlands of
both the Arabian Peninsula and Iraq, Al-Muthannah 4 was well-
acquainted with both Arabs and Persians. In a fair and
penetrating assessment of Arab and Persian armies, both prior
to and after the advent of Islam, Al-Muthannah « said, “T have
fought against Arabs and foreigners both prior to and after the
advent of Islam. By Allah, prior to Islam, one-hundred foreign
fighters were stronger in my view than one-thousand Arab
fighters. But today (Le., with the advent of Islam), one-hundred
Arab fighters are stronger in my view than one-thousand foreign
fighters. Allah 4% has taken away from the latter group their
strength, their might, and their ability to intimidate (their foes). So
do not become frightened by their splendor, their mumbers, their
dangerous-looking bows, or their long arrows. If these things are
taken away from them, or if they lose them, they will become like
domesticated livestock: They will go in any direction you nudge
them towards.”"! By choosing Al-Muthannah # to replace

(Min Dhee Qaar Hal-Quadisiyyah, by Saaleh ‘Ammaash (pg. 124); refer also to Al-
Harb An-Nafsiyyah (2/168).

The Conquest of 9 613

Khaalid # as the new leader of Muslims in Iraq, Abu Bakr 4 once
again showed that he was a good judge of people’s talents and
abilities.

When it was time for Khaalid to leave Iraq with one-half of
his army, Al-Muthannah 2 walked with him for a part of the way
in order to bid him farewell. Upon sensing that it was the right
moment for the two of them to part ways, Khaalid 4 said,
“Return — may Allah have mercy on you — to your
dominion.”"!

With Khaalid 4 going away from the region, Kisra, the new
emperor of Persia, was infused with a new breath of hope. He
mobilized an army that consisted of thousands of soldiers, and he
sent a warning letter to Al-Muthannah 4; in it, he wrote, “Verily, I
have sent to you an army that consists of the roughest and most
uncouth inhabitants of Persia. Verily, they are the shepherds of
chickens and pigs, and it is only with them that I will fight
you.”! With this letter, Kisra was attempting to deride and
mock Muslims, not realizing that he was deriding and mocking
only himself. In a letter that humiliated Kisra in the presence of his
people and advisors, Al-Muthannah # wrote the following reply:
“Verily, you are one of two men, Either you are a tyrant, and you
being a tyrant bodes il for you and well for us; or you are a liar,
and the liars that will be most punished and most humiliatingly
exposed in front of Allah and in front of the people, will be kings.
Now, this is what we think: you were forced to hire such people to
fight us. And so all praise is for Allah, Who has reduced your
power to the point that you have to depend on the shepherds of
chickens and pigs (to defend your kingdom).’”’*!

The inhabitants of Persia lost all hope when they learned about
the contents of Al-Muthannah’s letter, and they blamed their king
— who by now had lost all of the respect of his people — for
writing such a foolish letter to Al-Muthannah 4s.

‎‘Asrus-Sahaabah, by ‘Abdul-Mun’im Al-Haashimee (pg. 189).‏ لذا
‎Al-Kaamil, by Ibn AL-Atheer (2/ 73).‏ ]2{
‎AL-Kaamil, by Ibn ALAtheer (2/73).‏ اتا

614 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

Al-Muthannah 4s traveled from Al-Heerah to Baabil, and then
it was at a place called “‘Udwatus-Suraat Al-Oolah — which was
situated beside a stream that led to the Euphrates — that he was
confronted by Kisra’s army. The Persians, probably out of a sense
of desperation, fought with a fierce determination, they even
released an elephant between the rows of Muslim horsemen, in
the hopes of causing the horses to go wild. But before the elephant
caused any serious damage or chaos, Al-Muthannah ibn
Haartthah « killed it. After that, it was all downhill for the
Persians. Muslim soldiers killed a great many of them, gaining in
the process a huge amount of war booty. The Persian soldiers that
did survive fled back to the capital of the Persian Empire, Al-
Madaain. Once there, they were not only the bearers of bad
tidings, but the recipients of bad tidings as well, for, during their
absence, Kisra had died and the lands of Persia were consequently
thrown into a state of chaos.!"!

As for Al-Muthannah 4, he pursued fleeing soldiers until he
made it all the way to the gates of Al-Madaain. He # then wrote a
letter to Abu Bakr ‏را‎ informing him about his victory over the
Persians, and asking his permission to employ the services of
former apostates — by former, ] mean those that repented and
returned to the fold of Islam ~ in the next, and probably final,
stages of the war in Iraq. But a long time passed by without Al-
Muthannah # receiving a reply. Abu Bakr 4 delayed sending a
reply because he was preoccupied with the battles that were
taking place in Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).

Al-Muthannah decided to go back himself and speak
personally with Abu Bakr # about the situation of the war in Iraq.
Before he departed for the long journey, he placed Basheer ibn Al-
Khusaasiyyah 4 in charge of Iraq, and Sa’eed ibn Murrah Al-‘Tjlee
# tn charge of Al-Masaalaih.

Al-Muthannah’s arrival in Al-Madeenah coincided with Abu
Bakr’s final illness. In fact, by the time Al-Muthannah. # reached

[1 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/18).

The Conguest of Iraq 615

Abu Bakr’s home, Abu Bakr « was on his deathbed — and was
on the verge of dying that very night. In spite of Abu Bakr’s poor
condition, he welcomed Al-Muthannah ‏ره‎ listened to what he
had to say, and became satisfied with his suggestion. Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎then summoned for “Umar 4: and said to him, “O “Umar, listen to
what 1 have to say to you, and then put what I say into action.
Verily, 1 hope that I die this very day. So when | die, make sure
that, before nightfall, you encourage people to jom Al-Muthannah
{i.e., his army). And let no calamity, no matter how great it is,
distract you from your religious duties and from the commands
of your Lord.... And if Allah grants victory to the leaders of Ash-
Sham (.e., to the leaders of the Muslim army in Ash-Sham), then
send back Khaalid’s companions to Iraq...”

‎Al-Kaamil, by Ibn Atheer (2/74).‏ لذا

Chapter 2

Certain areas of Ash-Sham were a part of the Roman Empire,
and other parts of it were inhabited by Arabs who were, if not a
part of the Empire, then at least loyal and answerable to it and its
Emperor.

During the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah #2, even though
the primary goal of the Messenger of Allah #& was to win over to
Islam the Arabs that inhabited the Arabian Peninsula, he # gave
some serious attention to the land of Ash-Sham. For one thing, he
#€ sent a letter to Haragl, the Emperor of the Roman Empire,
inviting him to embrace Islam. Also, he # wrote a similar letter to
Alj-Haarith ibn Abu Shammar Al-Ghassaanee, the king of the
Ghassaan people in Balqaa, which was situated in the land of
Ash-Sham. Al-Haarith, who was the Caesar's viceroy over Arabs,
was overcome with pride and arrogance when he read the
Prophet's letter. He even wanted to attack the Messenger of Allah
‏عله‎ in Al-Madeenah, but he received a command from Caesar,
forbidding him from taking that step.

618 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

The Prophet 2 sent an army to Ash-Sham, appointing not one
but three leaders: Zaid ibn Haarithah ‏رذ‎ and if he died, Ja’far ibn
Abu Taalib #, and if he died, ‘Abdullah ibn Rawaahah es. As
matters turned out, all three of these leaders died. The man who
next took charge of the Muslim army was none other than
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏رك‎ who, through sheer genius, led the
Muslim army away from the scene of the battle without losing
any soldiers in the process. Given the fact that the Muslims were
greatly outnumbered, the successful retreat operation left a strong
impression on the enemy.

And even though the Muslims did not win the battle, it was the
first step towards destroying, if not the entire Roman Empire,
then at least the part of it that ruled over Ash-Sham. Also, the
Messenger of Allah #% sent a clear message to both the Arabs in
the peninsula and the Arabs in Ash-Sham: The Roman Empire, if
powerful, was not indestructible.

Later on, to further pave the way towards conquering Ash-
Sham, the Prophet #¢ himself accompanied an expedition that
became known as the “Invasion of Tabook.” During the various
skirmishes and battles that took place between Muslims and
Romans, Muslims learned a great deal ~ about the strength of the
Roman Empire and about their war tactics. ConVersely, the same
battles allowed the people of Ash-Sham to become acquainted
with the religion of Islam and its teachings. As a result, many of
them embraced Islam.

During his caliphate, Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ continued where the Prophet
# had left off, first by sending Usaamah’'s army to Ash-Sham, and
then by sending other armies as well. He 4 appointed Khaalid ibn
Sa’eed ibn Al-‘Aas as the leader of one of those armies and
ordered him to go to the highlands in Ash-Sham. Then he ordered
Khaalid # to provide military support to the Muslims of Teemaa,
to stay there until he received further orders, and to fight only
against those that initiated fighting with him.

Haragql, having learned about Khaalid’s presence in the region,
mobilized an army that consisted purely of Arabs that were loyal

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 619

to the Roman Empire. Those Arabs were from the Bahraa, Saleeh,
Kalb, Lakhm, Judhaam, and Ghassaan tribes. Rather than turn
back, Khaalid ibn Sa’eed # marched towards the said Arab tribes
and, upon reaching them, forced them to disperse, with each tribe
caring only about its own safety. When Abu Bakr 4 was informed
about Khaalid’s early success, he wrote him a letter, ordering him
to march onwards and to reach nearby Roman strongholds before
the enemy could have the chance to get organized.

Abu Bakr 2 gave the following advice to Khaalid ‏نك‎ he was to
secure the road he was traveling upon (in case he needed to retreat),
and he was not to enter too deep into enemy territory. Given the size
of the Roman Empire, Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ wisely preferred a slow push
into enemy territory rather than an all-out effort to get as deep into
enemy territory as possible. Conquering Rome would require the
sending of one army after another; furthermore, it would require
patience and the understanding that, just as Rome was not built in a
day, the Roman Empire was not going to be conquered in a day, or
even in a few weeks. It was going to take time, patience,
determination, and brilliant planning. Even though Abu Bakr ‏كه‎
‎advised Khaalid 4 not to enter too deep into enemy territory, he +s
also said, “Do not hold back, and seek victory through Alah.”

Khaalid 4s continued marching onwards until he reached ‏على‎
‎Qastal, which was situated along the seashore of the Dead Sea.
His army defeated a Roman battalion in a battle that took place
along the Eastern shore of the sea. Then he continued on his way
until the Romans in the region sprang into action, They mobilized
an army that was larger than the one that fought m Teemaa.

Seeing how the Roman army kept on growing in size, Khaalid
‏دن‎ wrote a letter to Abu Bakr ‏يق‎ asking him to send
reinforcements. It was only with more men that he could risk
penetrating deeper into Roman territory. Abu Bakr ‏هه‎ responded
to Khaalid’s plea for help by sending two armies to Ash-Sham:
The first was headed by ‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl 4, and the other by
Al-Waleed ibn “‘Ugbah ‏.نل‎ When these two armies arrived in Ash-
Sham, Khaalid « ordered an attack on the Romans.

620 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فد‎

Things didn’t go so well for the Muslim army. The leader of the
Roman army, Maahaan, was a capable military strategist. Rather
than make an immediate stand, Maahaan allowed the Muslims to
gain ground, so as to give them the impression that they would
win the battle easily; meanwhile, he was waiting for the right
moment to launch a counterattack, and to thus trap the Muslims,
giving them little room to escape. When that moment came, he
gave the order to his men, and they succeeded in achieving
victory against the Muslim army. A Roman unit that was headed
by Baahaan had an entire Muslim battalion trapped. They then
killed every member of the battalion, including Khaalid ibn
Sa’eed’s son, Sa’eed ibn Khaalid ibn Sa’eed ‏ف‎ Shortly thereafter,
Khaalid 2 learned about his son’s death, but he could do nothing
since he was with another unit, and he too was surrounded by the
enemy. He # and his men managed to escape on their horses, and
‘Tkrimah - was able to retreat with the rest of the army all the
way back to the border of Ash-Sham.|#

First: Abu Bakr
and Signs of E

Abu Bakr 2 was constantly thinking about attacking Ash-
Sham. He 4 had every reason to want to attack Ash-Sham, an
area that represented the Eastern wing of the Roman Empire.
After all, the Arabian Peninsula became stable, with its people all
united under the banner of Islam. Yemen, to the south, also
became stable. Now it was time to spread Islam to foreign lands,
and that meant attacking the Persian Empire in Iraq, and the
Romans — along with their Arab minions — in Ash-Sham. But as
important as was his desire to conquer Ash-Sham, it was an
endeavor of monumental proportions, an endeavor that would
require a great deal of planning, a great many resources, strong
determination, and, above all, a patient resolve to endure a long,

“Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Nizaar Al-Hadeethee and Dr. Khaalid Al-Jinaanee
(pg. 58).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 627

drawn-out war. He was not planning to attack a small tribe, but
instead one of the two major superpowers of the world, the
Roman Empire.

One day, while Abu Bakr # was contemplating a military
campaign in Ash-Sham, Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah ‏رف‎ one of the
Mushm military commanders during the Apostate Wars, came to
him and said, “O Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, are you
debating within yourself whether or not you should send an army
to Ash-Sham?” Abu Bakr « said, “Yes...but I have told no one
about my thoughts regarding the matter. To be sure, you are
asking me about this for a reason.”” Shurahbeel # replied, “Yes. 0
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, lindeed saw something, and
by ‘saw,’ I mean what a person sees when one is sleeping: It was
as if you were walking among the people above a rough and
uneven mountain-pass, and you continued to do so until you
ascended to a very high peak. You overlooked the people, and
you had with you your companions. Then you descended from
those peaks and Janded on a flat, soft part of the earth — one that
had in it fields, villages, and fortresses. And you said to the
Muslims, “Attack the enemy of Allah, and I will guarantee for you
both victory and spoils.’ | am among them, and I have with me a
flag. I take the flag and head towards the people of a village, and
they ask me for a guarantee of safety, and I grant it to them. Then |
return and find that you have reached a huge fortress. Allah &
then grants you victory, and the people (inside of the fortress)
surrender to you. Allah then provides you with a kind of chair,
and you sit on it. Then someone says to you, “Allah bestows upon
you victory, and help has come to you, so thank your Lord and be
obedient to Him.’ The same person then recites:

fF RAL “ 1 ae

3 اسار 7 ‎a we On ghee a at‏ 0 م
إذا ‎Ae‏ نصر الله ‎KEN 53 )0( ‘jams ashe‏ سوك فى دمن |
‎a‏ ع

١ ONE”

»

ير ”

CEG See ‏إِتَمُ‎ ALG SO he GUO UE
“When comes the Help of Allah (to you, O Muhammad #%)
against your enemies) and the conquest (of Makkah), And you see
that the people enter Allah's Religion (Islam) in crowds, So

glorify the Praises of your Lord, and ask for His Forgiveness.

cert

622 : The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏تك‎

Verily, He is the One Who accepts the repentance and forgives.”
(Ouran 110: 1-3)

Shurahbeel said, “Then I woke up.” Abu Bakr 4 said, “Tt is
something good that you have seen (in your dream). And
something good will happen (regarding what you have seen), In
Sha Allah (Allah Willing).” Abu Bakr 4 then said, “(In your
dream) you have been given glad tidings of victory, and at the
same time, you have given me news about my death.” Tears then
fell from Abu Bakr’s eyes, and then he said, “As for the rough
mountain-pass that you saw us in, and from which I ascended to
the high peak, from where I overlooked the people - it means
that we will face many hardships and difficulties, and that the
enemy will face many hardships and difficulties as well. Our
being raised (to the peak of the mountain) signifies that we will be
raised above our enemy and that our cause will prevail. In terms
of us descending from the high mountain-pass and landing on
earth that is flat and soft and that contains in it fields, springs,
villages, and castles — all of that signifies that, with regard to
agriculture and our standard of living, our situation will become
easier than it was before. And as for me saying to Muslims,
‘Attack the enemy of Allah, for [ will guarantee for you both
victory and spoils,’ that refers to when Muslims will be near the
territory of the polytheists. 1 will encourage them to perform
Jthaad, and 1 will remind them about the rewards and spoils that
will be distributed among them. They will then follow what I say.
As for the flag you had with you, and with which you headed
towards one of their villages and entered it, after which they
asked for a guarantee of safety, and you granted it to them — all
of that signifies that you will be one of the Muslim commanders
(during the conquest of Ash-Sham) and that Allah will grant
(Muslims) victory at your hands. The fortress that Allah enabled
me to conquer refers to those lands over which Allah # will grant
me victory. As for the throne upon which you saw me seated, it
signifies that Allah # will at once raise me and lower the
polytheists. Allah 3% said:

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 623

*» ‏الْعَرّشٍ‎ Je 5) Gain
“And he raised his parents to the throne.”’ (Qur'an 12: 100)

Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ went on to say, “The person who was ordering me
to obey Allah and was reciting to me the said Chapter of the
Qur'an, was in fact announcing to me my imminent death. When
the same Chapter was revealed (to the Prophet #¢), Allah 8
announced to the Prophet # his imminent death, and the Prophet
#% understood (from Chapter “An-Nas?’’) that he was being told
about his imminent death.”

With tears flowing from his eyes, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ said, “Verily, I
will indeed enjoin good, and I will indeed forbid evil. I will be stern
with those who abandon Allah’s command(s), and I will send out
armies to those who associate partners with Allah 3&, be they in the
East or inthe West, until they say, “Allah, He is One, He is One, and
He has no partner,’ or until they pay the jizyah tax... This is the
command of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger #8. (I will do
the said things) so that, when Allah causes me to die, He will not
see me ina state of weakness or lassitude (i.e., in terms of how I deal
with polytheists), and He will not see me desiring only a little from
the reward of the Mujaahidoon.”"4

This story describes a good dream that Shurahbeel « saw, a
kind of dream that was seen by Prophets ‏.نه‎ The Messenger of
Allah #8 said:

لم ‎Sa‏ من الو ‎abd yy‏ قَالُوا: وَمَا المُبَشَّرَاتُ؟ ‎SB‏
‏«الْروْيًا الْصَالْحَة

2

“Nothing remains from prophethood except for the glad tidings.’
His Companions a asked, “And what are the glad tidings?” He
#8 said, “The good (i.e., the good and true) dream ‏لكا"‎

("I Taaeekh Damashg, by ibn ‘Asaakir (2/61, 62), Futooh Ash-Shaam, by Al-Azdee
(pg. 14), and At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Al-Humaidee (9/179).

‎Al-Bukhaaree, the Book of Dream Interpretations (6990).‏ خا

624 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4%

With Prophethood came different forms of revelation, one of
which was the good, true dream. The Prophet #2 at least once
described how things would occur in real life exactly in the same
manner as he saw them occur in his dreams. In the above-
mentioned Hadeeth, the Prophet #€ informed us that, with his
death, all forms of revelation ceased to occur — except for the true
dream. So, although a righteous person cannot receive revelation
from Allah # by way of the angel Jibreel ‏نك‎ he can, if Allah %&
wills, see a true dream, such as the one that Shurahbeel «
described to Abu Bakr #.

The dream came at an opportune time, at just the moment that
Abu Bakr # needed an extra nudge to transform his idea of
invading Ash-Sham from a dream into a reality. His mind now
made up, and certain that Shurahbeel’s dream was going to come
true, Abu Bakr 4, rather than make a rash decision, followed the
Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ‏فول‎ He + consulted his
companions, seeking their thoughts about his idea to invade Ash-
Sham.

Second: Abu Bakr « Consults H
Orders the People of Yemen to Join in the W

War Effort

Abu Bakr ‏م‎ summoned his top advisors, the likes of “Umar es,
“Uthman as, ‘Ali ‏ركف‎ Talhah ‏ركف‎ Az-Zubair 2, ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn
“Auf te, Sa’ad ibn Abee Waqqaas ‏رف‎ Abu “‘Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah
4, in addition to other leaders from the Muhaajiroon, the Ansaar,
and the participants of the Battle of Badr. When they all were
gathered together, Abu Bakr # began their meeting by saying,
“Verily, Allah is the Most Blessed, the Most High, and His favors
and blessings cannot be enumerated, so many are they. No deed
can match the reward one receives for performing it. All praise is
for Allah many times over for uniting you, for making peace
among you, and for guiding you to Islam. Allah % has banished
from among your midst the Shaitaan (the Devil); so now, the
Shattaan has lost all hope of making you associate partners with

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 625

Allah, or of making you take a god besides Him. Arabs are one
nation, the children of the same father and mother. I wanted to
call upon you to wage war against the Romans in Ash-Sham.
Whosoever (among you) dies, dies a martyr, and that which is
with Allah 3 is better for the righteous ones. And whoever lives
(after the upcoming war is over with), will have lived defending
his religion. And Allah (the Possessor of Might and Majesty) has
made it binding upon Himself to reward those who struggle for
His Cause (the Mujaahidoon). This is what I have come to see as
being our correct course of action, so let each person counsel me
based on his opinion.”

‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 4: stood up, praised Allah %, sent
Prayers and salutations upon the Prophet #8, and then said, “All
praise is for Allah, Who gives goodness to whomsoever He wills
among His created beings. (Here, ‘Umar # begins addressing
Abu Bakr ‏سدق‎ particular.) By Allah, whenever we have raced to
something that is good, you (i.e., Abu Bakr 2) have always beaten
me to it. And that is the Favor of Allah, which He gives to
whomsoever He wishes. By Allah, lintended to meet you in order
to express the same opinion that you just finished expressing.
Allah 88 then decreed for me not to express it until you first
expressed it now. And indeed you are correct. May Allah guide
(people) to the paths of righteousness through you. Send to them
units of horsemen upon units of horsemen; send battalions of men
followed by battalions of men; send army upon army, for indeed,
Allah will grant victory to His religion. He will honor Islam and
its people, and He will put into effect that which He promised His
Messenger 38.”

Next, ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn ‘Auf # stood up and said, “O
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, they are the Romans, the
children of the yellow ones, the people of both many weapons
and a powerful military. By Allah, 1 do not think that you should
send them many horsemen all at once. Instead, send (smaller)
units of horsemen. Have them enter mto the nearest part of their
territory, invade them, and then return. And when your units of

626 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مك‎

horsemen will have carried out such raids many times over, they
will have hurt the enemy and gained spoils from their land. As a
result, our horsemen will have increased in strength, thus making
them better able to fight the enemy. Then you should send word
to the inhabitants of the furthest parts of Yemen, and to the people
of Rabee’ah and Mudar. Bring them all to you (and employ their
services in the war you will be waging in Ash-Sham). At that
point, you can, if you want, lead the attack against the enemy
yourself. Or, if you want, you can send someone else to lead the
attack against them.” ‘Abdur-Rahmaan 4s then sat down, and the
people remained silent. After a brief period of silence during
which no one volunteered their opinion, Abu Bakr # said, “What
do you all think, may Allah have mercy upon you?”

‘Uthman ibn “Affan # stood up, pratsed Allah, sent prayers
and salutations upon the Prophet #2, and then said, “It is my
opinion that you (.e., Abu Bakr 4) are sincere to the people of this
religion, and towards them merciful and compassionate. If you
arrive at an opinion which you know to be correct, good, and
beneficial, then be determined to apply it. And know that, if you
do that, we will accuse you neither of bemg insincere nor derelict
in your duties.” Talhah ‏رك‎ Az-Zubair ‏رك‎ Sa’ad 4, Abu ‘Ubaidah
ibn Al-Jarraah 4, Sa’eed ibn Zaid #, and everyone else who
attended the gathering said, “Uthmdan has spoken the truth. Do
whatever you feel needs to be done, and we, in turn, will listen
and obey. Neither will we disobey you nor will we accuse you of
misleading us.” They then continued to say similarly encouraging
words.

“Ali ibn Abee Taalib + was present as well, but throughout the
meeting he rematned silent. So when everyone else finished
expressing their views, Abu Bakr 2 turned to “Ali # and said,
“What do you think, O Abul-Hasan?’

” 1 think you are blessed in your opinions and views,” ‘Ali 2
said. “Verily, regardless of whether you lead an army against
them, or you send someone else to iead your army, you will be
granted victory, In Sha Allah (Allah Willing).” Abu Bakr 4 said,

Abu Bakr’ 8 Conquests in Ash-Sham 627

“May Allah 88 give you glad tidings of goodness. | How do you
know this?” ‘Ali 4s said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah 8 say:

جع رس # ‎a eae S 2 Tw‏ 4
دلا يَرَال هذا الدينٌُ ظاهِرًا عَلَى ‎WS‏ مَنْ نَاوَأَة» ‎a=‏ حَتَّى ‎ig || byt‏
‎(yale alas‏

“This religion will continue to prevail over those who oppose tt
until Islam and its people rise up in victory.”

Abu Bakr # said, “How perfect Allah # is indeed! And how
wonderful is this speech that you are relating to me! You have
indeed made me happy; may Allah # make you happy both in
this world and in the Hereafter.” Standing up before the people,
Abu Bakr # then praised and extolled Allah #%, mentioned
qualities that are befitting of His Majesty, sent prayers and
salutations upon the Prophet #8, and then said, “O people, Allah
%¢ has blessed you with Islam, has honored you with Jilaad, and
has preferred you with this religion over the people of all other
religions. So prepare, O slaves of Allah — prepare to attack the
Romans in Ash-Sham. Verily | am appointing over you a number
of commanders, and I am handing each one of them his war
banner. Obey your Lord, and do not disobey your leaders. Make
well your intentions and your actions, and eat of that which is
lawful, for indeed Allah & is with those who fear Him, and those
who are good-doers.”"! Abu Bakr # then gave the order to Bilal
‏ره‎ who then called out to the people, saying, “Prepare to fight
your enemies: The Romans, in Ash-Sham.””!

This meeting illustrated Abu Bakr’s methodology in dealing
with matters of great importance, in that he would not, in a
dictatorial manner, express a view and then expect his sub-
ordinates to execute it. Instead, he would gather his most trusted

‎Al-Bukhaaree, Kitaab Al-‘Aitisaam (7311); and Muslim, Kitaab Al-Imaarah (1533).‏ ذا
‎Ahmad (5/87)‏

‎ Taareekh Damashg, by Ibn ‘Asaakir (2/ 63-65).
‏اذا‎ Taareekh Damash, by ‏عط[‎ ’Asaakir (2/ 64-65).

628 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

ministers, seek their good counsel, and then, after studying all
angles of a problem, arrive at a final decision. This methodology is
based on the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah #2, as we have
amply seen in our study of the Prophet’s Seerah."! When we
contemplate the details of the aforementioned meeting, we find
that the Companions & were actually in agreement: they all
agreed that Abu Bakr 4 should attack the Romans. Their views
differed not regarding whether they should attack the Romans,
but regarding how they should attack the Romans. ‘Umar ‏كل‎ was
of the view that Abu Bakr « should send horsemen after horsemen,
soldiers followed by soldiers, army wpon army, until a huge force
would be gathered in Ash-Sham; thus the Muslims would have a
huge army that could stand up to and defeat the enemy. ‘Abdur-
Rahmaan ibn “Auf as, on the other hand, felt that it was wiser to
begin the invasion of Ash-Sham with small units, units that would
raid the nearest parts of Ash-Sham and then return to Al-Madeenah.
With many raids, he felt, a number of positive things would occur:
fear would be instilled into the hearts of the enemy, the Roman
Empire would be weakened, and Muslim forces would gain not
only spoils but also the experience needed to wage further war
against the Romans. In the end, Abu Bakr 4s followed “Umar’s
opinion, yet at the same time he did follow one of ‘Abdur-
Rahmaan’s suggestions, in that he sent word to the Muslims of
Yemen, asking them to volunteer for the war effort in Ash-Sham.

1) Calling upon the People of Yemen to Volunteer for War

Based on what was discussed in the above-mentioned war
council, Abu Bakr wrote a letter to the people of Yemen,
inviting them to perform Jihaad in the way of Allah &; or in other
words, inviting them to take part in his planned invasion of Ash-
Sham. It is unportant to note that Abu Bakr was not instituting
a draft, whereby every able-bodied man was required to take part

1 Mere, the atithor is referring to his famous Seerah work, The Noble Life of the
Prophet #@ (also published by Darussalam).

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/188).‏ ذا

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 629

in the war; instead, he was simply asking for volunteers, so that
anyone that did come from Yemen ended up coming of his own
volition. The following is the text of Abu Bakr’s 4 letter, which
was to be read out in the major centers, markets, and places of
gathering in Yemen: “ In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent,
the Most Merciful. From the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah
#6 to whomsoever this letter is read to from the believers and
Muslims who inhabit Yemen: Peace be upon you. Verily, I say to
you that all praise is for Allah 4; none deserves to be worshipped
save Him. To proceed: Verily, Allah % has made Jtfaad obligatory
upon believers, and has ordered them to go out for war, whether
they be light or heavy. And He has commanded them to struggle
with their wealth and their lives in the way of Allah %. Jihaad is
indeed an obligatory deed, and the reward Allah % gives (for
performing it) is indeed great. I have called upon the Muslims
(over here) to volunteer in our Jihaad against the Romans in Ash-
Sham. They have raced with one another to answer that call; as
such, they have made well their intentions, and they have made
themselves deserving of a great reward. O slaves of Allah, so you
too race with one another (to volunteer for the war effort in Ash-
Sham), just as they have raced to join the same cause. And make
well your intentions, for indeed you will then achieve one of two
good things: Either martyrdom or victory with spoils. Verily,
Allah ~ the Most Blessed, the Most High — is not happy with His
slaves if they talk without action. We must continue to wage war
against His enemies until they submit to the truth and to the laws
of the Book (ie., the Qur’an). May Allah preserve your religion,
‏ع تناع‎ your hearts, purify your deeds, and grant you the reward
that is given out to those who both struggle for His Cause and are
patient.” Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ sent this letter with Anas ibn Maalik «.
In it, one sees Abu Bakr’s 2 direct role in encouraging Muslims to
volunteer for major military campaigns that took place durtng the
period of his caliphate.

1 Taareekh Futooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pg. 80), and Tahdheeb Taareekh
Damashg (1/129.

630 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

In addressing the people of Yemen, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ made it clear
that fihaad must be performed in order to realize two goals: the
first is to substantiate, or legitimize, Muslims’ claim to the religion
of Islam, in that Allah 3g is not pleased with His slaves when they
limit themselves to speech to the exclusion of action. The second
goal he stated was to wage war against non-Muslims until they
submitted to Islam and to the laws of the Book of Allah. It was the
desire to realize these goals that prompted the people of Yemen to
answer Abu Bakr’'s call to arms, not just in groups of tens or
hundreds, but in many groups of thousands. What is truly
amazing about the vast number of Yemeni volunteers is that it has
not been reported in any book that we know of that even a single
one of them was coerced into joming in the war effort; rather, all
reports indicate that they all came out enthusiastically and of their
own volition; in fact, many of them traveled northwards towards
Ash-Sham, bringing along with them their women and children.
In short, the people of Yemen were as quick as anyone else to
answer Abu Bakr’s call to arms, and they did so out of love for
Islam and a desire to wage war in order to raise the Word of Allah
% above all else.

Anas ibn Maalik 4, the bearer of Abu Bakr’s letter to the
people of Yemen, expressed the enthusiasm shown by the people
of Yemen in various accounts that are related from him. He
described how he would travel from tribe to tribe, group to
group, reciting Abu Bakr’s letter to the natives of Yemen, and
encouraging them to volunteer to join the Muslim army. It is
related that Anas 4 later said, “Every person to whom I read the
letter and who heard what I had to say responded in a positive
manner, saying (for instance), “We will come...’ This continued
until we reached a man named Dhil-Kilaa’. When I read the letter
to him and said what I had to say, he summoned for his horse and
weapons, and he forthwith stood up among his people (and made
preparations for going out to war). He did not delay in the least:
he immediately ordered for a camp to be made, and we did not
leave him until he and a great many of the natives of the people of
Yemen made camp (ready to march towards Ash-Sham). And he

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 631

stood up among his people, and one of the things he said was,
‘Verily, your righteous brothers have invited you to wage war
against the polytheists and, in the process, to gain great rewards
(from Allah 8). So whoever wants to go out to fight, let him go
out with me this very ‏“روط‎

Anas ibn Maalik 4 returned to Al-Madeenah approximately
the 11™ of Rajab, the year 12 H. Upon his arrival, he gave Abu
Bakr ‏ذا‎ the good news about the response he received from the
people of Yemen, and about their imminent arrival in AI-
Madeenah. It is related that he said to Abu Bakr #, “A group of
people whose appearances are disheveled and whose bodies are
dust-covered are coming to you; they are the heroes and brave
men of Yemen. They are racing towards you with their children,
their wives, and their wealth.”! Only a few days passed before
Dhil-Kilaa” and his people from the Humair tribe arrived in Al-
Madeenah — let us say approximately the 16 of Rajab, of the
year 12 H.! An enthusiastic response to Abu Bakr’s call to arms
was not limited to the people of Humair; rather, people who came
from all parts of Yemen were similarly enthusiastic and eager to
join the war effort in Ash-Sham. More than two thousand men
came from Hamdaan, and they came under the leadership of a
man named Hamzah ibn Maalik Al-Hamdaanee ‏أكأؤ‎ When the
people of Yemen arrived in Al-Madeenah, they entered the Masjid
of the Messenger of Allah #¢. And upon hearing the Our’an being
recited, their skins shivered from the Fear of Allah 8%, and they
began to cry while in a deep state of spiritual bliss. Abu Bakr &
cried as well, and said, “This is how we used to be, and then our
hearts ‏اتا ووو عوط‎

١1 AL-Kaamil, by ibn Al-Atheer (2/64), and Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pgs. 301,

302).
4) AL-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam (pg. 302).
Bl Thid.
IT Tid.

‎At-Tantaawee (pg.‏ وار ‎As-Siddeeg Aunvalul-Khulafaa (pe. 114), and Abu Bakr‏ اذا
.)218

632 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddecg #

Upon arriving in Al-Madeenah, Dhil-Kilaa’ saw that Abu Bakr
# was an old, skinny man, with eyes that were deeply set in their
sockets; and upon him was a simple garment made of rough
material. There were no precious metals, gems, or jewels
embroidered onto his garments; everything he wore was plain.
The only thing that shined on him was his radiant face that
exuded a sense of piety and righteousness. Dhil-Kilaa’, on the
other hand, was anything but simple: he was surrounded by a
thousand slaves, and upon his head he wore a crown. His
garment was embroidered with gold and all kinds of precious
jewels. He was taken aback when he saw the clothes, the
simplicity, and the humbleness of Abu Bakr 4, who was not only
his leader, but the leader of an entire nation. What was truly
amazing to Dhil-Kilaa’ was that Abu Bakr’s simplicity and
tattered clothes did not inspire one with a sense of revulsion or
disgust but rather instilled one with a great degree of awe and
veneration. Or in other words, Dhil-Kilaa’ saw not a poor man,
but a man who was great in his humbleness. So impressed was
Dhil-Kilaa” with Abu Bakr # that he removed all of the fancy
ornaments that he had upon him and wore in their place the
simple attire that he saw upon Abu Bakr 4, and his people did the
same. One day, shortly thereafter, Dhil-Kilaa’ was seen in the
marketplace of Al-Madeenah, and upon his shoulders was a robe
made of sheepskin — or in other words, a robe made of low-grade
material. His fellow clansmen, who were shocked upon seeing
him, said, “You have exposed and humiliated us in front of the
people of the Muhaajtroon and the Ansaar!’’ In his defence, Dhil-
Kilaa’ said, “So do you want me to bea tyrant in Islam just as Iwas
a tyrant during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance? No, by Allah ‏رق‎
‎obedience to the Lord is not achieved except through humbleness
and a concerted effort to take very little from this world.”

The kings of Yemen followed Dhil-Kilaa’s example: all of them
removed their heavy crowns and their embroidered jewels,
buying in their place garments made of rough and coarse

]1[ Al-Murooj Adh-Dhahab, by Al-Mas’oodee (2/305).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 633

material. Whatever they removed from their precious attire they
gave to Abu Bakr #, who put it all in the Muslim Treasury.!"!

After the Messenger of Allah #2, Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ was the one man
who epitomized Islam the best. Almost his every movement, his
every action, and his every saying were an invitation to come
closer to Allah 8. The advice he gave was not conveyed as much
through hearing as it was through sight; or in other words, people
simply had to look at him in order to see what was wrong in
themselves. The best of those who advise are those who advise
not with their sayings, but with their deeds, and Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ was
among the best of those who advised with their deeds. When the
kings of Yemen saw Abu Bakr 4s, the Khaleefah of the Messenger
of Allah 38%, and the ruler of the entire Arabian Peninsula, walking
in the marketplace, attired in a coarse and rough garment, they
knew that there was something more important in lite than
wearing ornamented clothes and carrying expensive gold and
precious metals. What was more important than those things,
they realized, was to have a beautiful soul, one that radiated with
strong Faith and piety. Consequently, they strove to imitate Abu
Bakr #, and they felt embarrassed for having appeared before the
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #8 with so many expensive
ornaments and jewels. They were overcome with a feeling of
humbleness, and whatever arrogance they felt earlier vanished
just as a small star’s light vanishes in the presence of the sun. May
Allah # have Mercy on Abu Bakr ‏ركه‎ for indeed, he was great in
his humbleness, and humble in his ereatness.!4)

When all preparations had been made for the upcoming
expedition to Ash-Sham, Abu Bakr # harided out banners to the
commanders of the four armies he was sending to conquer Ash-
Sham. Those armies were as follows:

Ul As-Siddeeq Awwalul-Khulafaa (pgs. 137, 138).
4] Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by ‘Alee Tantaawee (pg. 219).

634 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏نك‎
‎1) The Army of Yazeed ibn Abee Sufyaan &

This was the first of the four armies to travel to the lands of
Ash-Sham, and its mission was to both reach and conquer
Damascus. Its secondary mission was to provide military and
logistical support to the other three armies, whenever necessary.
At first, Yazeed’s army consisted of three thousand soldiers, but
then Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ continued to send him more and more recruits
until his army had in it seven thousand men. Before the army left,
Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ gave Yazeed # advice that pertained both to war and
peace. Walking alongside Yazeed # in order to bid him farewell,
Abu Bakr 4 said to him, “Verily, I have appointed you in order to
test both you and your mettle. If you do well, I will return you to
your post and give you even more duties. But if you perform
poorly, I will remove you from your post. Fear Allah &, for
indeed He sees what is inside of you just as He sees your outward
deeds and actions. Verily, the person who is closest to Allah 8 is
the one who is most obedient to Him, and the one who performs
more deeds for His sake. Verily, I have given you Khaalid’s job
(this refers to Khaalid ibn Sa’eed ibn Al-’Aas 2, who had asked
permission to resign from his post, and who was then granted it
by Abu Bakr #). Beware of returning to the pre-Islamic ways of
ignorance, for indeed, Allah hates those ways and hates the
people who follow them. When you reach your army, be a good
companion to your soldiers. Start your relationship with them ina
good manner and promise them good things to come. When you
advise them, be brief in your speech, for indeed, the nature of
speech is that part of it makes one forget other parts of it. Improve
yourself, and as result people will be made to improve for you.
Perform prayers on their times and complete their bowing and
prostrating positions, and be fearful and heedful during prayer.
When messengers from the enemy come to you, honor them, and
let only a short while pass by before you make them leave your
encampment, so as to keep them ignorant about it (i.e. about the
number of soldiers in your encampment, the quality of weapons
they have with them, etc.}. And whatever you do, do not let them

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 635

see where you are vulnerable; otherwise, they will act against you
based on the same knowledge that you have about your own
army. When they come to you, have them sit with you in the most
impressive part of your encampment (so as to show them the
streneth and capabilities of your army). And forbid your soldiers
from speaking to those messengers; instead, you alone should talk
to them. Do not reveal to those messengers your secrets;
otherwise, you will hurt yourself and your cause. When you
seek the advice of others, be truthful in speech; and as a result,
you will be given truthful counsel. And do not hide from your
advisors key information that you have with you; otherwise, you
will only expose yourself (and show yourself to be an incapable
leader). And stay up late at night with your companions, so that
they can provide you with important information, and so as to
break any barriers that might exist between you and them. Keep
many guards, and spread them throughout your encampment.
And very frequently come upon your guards by surprise.
Whosoever you find among them to be negligent regarding his
guarding duties, discipline him, and punish him without going
too far in your punishment. And rotate your guards throughout
the night, and make the first shift longer than the last shift, since
it (.e., the first shift) is easier, given that it is closer to the
previous day (.e., the further the night goes, the more tired one
gets). And do not be afraid of punishing a person who is
deserving of punishment...and do not spy on your soldiers; nor
should you expose them or reveal to the people their secrets. Be
content with what your soldiers show you outwardly. Do not sit
in the company of foolish people who waste their time; instead,
sit with the people of truthfulness and faithfulness. Be sincere
and true when you meet the enemy. Do not be cowardly;
otherwise, your men will become cowardly as well. Avoid
wrongfully taking from the spoils of war, for doing so brings one
closer to poverty and wards off victory. And you will find a
group of people who have confined themselves to monasteries.
Leave them alone, and leave them to the purpose for which they
have confined themselves.”

636 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

ibn Al-Atheer said, “This is among the best and most beneficial
advice that has ever been given to rulers (i.e, governors or
commanders of armies).’”"""!

lhe Lessons and Morals of Abu Bakr’s Advice to Yazeed ss,

@ Government posts are not supposed to be handed out based
on one’s status in society, one’s lineage — and certainly not on
one’s connections to important people. To the contrary,
government posts should be assigned based purely and
solely on merit. Even then, even if one, based on one’s own
merit, deserves to be governor or leader of an army, one
should not treat his job as a sinecure, a job requiring little work
and involving no accountability. In order to keep one’s job,
one must prove one’s worth, not just on a single day, but ona
continual basis — a principle that, though it is hardly applied
today, was certainly applied during the era of the rightly
guided Khaleefahs. Every overall leader must keep a close eye
on his appointees, showing very clearly that he is willing to
fire anyone that does not perform his job properly. Such an
attitude from the overall leader will not only keep government
officials in check, but also will encourage them to improve the
quality of their work performance. Whenever one is
guaranteed to keep his job, one is likely to turn into a lazy,
inefficient worker who benefits no one around him.

@ Nothing increases the likelihood of achieving success in one’s
endeavors as much as having the quality of At-Taqgwa — or in
other words, being someone who fears Allah 3. If one fears
Allah % in secret, one will likely do the same out in the open.

@ One of the worse things one can do is to return to pre-Islamic
ignorant teachings that were followed by one’s parents and
grandparents. Blind loyalty to one’s tribe or the ways of one’s
forebears leads to misguidance and its natural concomitant,
musery.

‎Al-Kaamil, by Ibn Al-Atheer (2/64, 65).‏ لذ

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 637

@ When advising others, one should deliver a speech that is brief
and succinct. When a person delivers too long of a sermon, his
audience will remember nothing of what he says. By trying to
remember his preamble, they forget his long closing remarks;
and by trying to remember the interminable heart of his
speech, they will forget the preamble; and so on and so forth.
After hearing a long, drawn-out speech, one more likely than
not leaves the lecture without having remembered anything.
If the person who delivered the long speech is eloquent, his
audience will remember him for his eloquence — for the
aesthetic value he places on words — more so than for the
substance of his speech. And if he is long-winded and
completely lacking in the quality of eloquent speech, his
audience will become bored by him, not paying attention to a
word he has to say.

@ By holding himself accountable for his deeds, by searching out
for and correcting his own mistakes, and by being an example
for others, a leader is better able to improve the behavior and
characteristics of his subordinates.

@ One should not only perform prayer on time, but also with a
fearful and trembling heart. By performing prayer as it should
be performed, one develops enough strength to face and
overcome all hardships. And in times of need and difficulty,
Prayer is the safe refuge of all true Muslims.

¢ Abu Bakr # advised Yazeed & to honor foreign messengers,
for doing so is a means of inviting them to Islam. At the same
time, however, Abu Bakr # warned Yazeed # not to allow
those messengers to learn sensitive secrets, particularly of the
military kind. Rather than allow them to see weaknesses that
they could take advantage of, Yazeed 4 was instructed to
show them that part of his encampment that would impress
upon them the strength and power of the Muslim army.

@ Especially when it comes to the affairs of Muslim society in
general, it is important to avoid divulging secrets to the

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4s

enemy, or, for that matter, to anyone who has no business
knowing those secrets.

To achieve optimal results, it is important to know how to
consult others. If one consults a wise person, one will not
benefit from his advice if one does not clearly explain all
aspects of the problem he is facing; neither will one benefit if
one neglects — whether it be out of embarrassment or for any
other reason — to mention key points that are related to his
problem.

Every leader should intermingle not just with his immediate
subordinates, but with everyone that is under his command.
A leader who isolates himself risks alienating himself from the
people under his command. Or, if he socializes only with his
immediate subordinates, they might distort the reality of or
hide from him their subordinates’ problems. Therefore, those
at the lowest level of command might come to see him as a
tyrant who uses others to make life difficult for them.

Abu Bakr 2 made it clear to Yazeed 2 that, in times of danger,
it is important not only to keep many guards, but also to test
them, in order to ascertain who among them does his job
properly. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ made a very important point:
Unsupervised, a guard might become lazy, fall asleep, and
thus be the reason why the enemy becomes able to infiltrate
the Muslim encampment.

As a leader, one must take the middle path in dealing with
subordinates who break rules. One must not avoid punishing
offenders; otherwise, they will become emboldened to commit
further, and perhaps more serious, offences. Nor should a
leader go too far when punishing an offender. By going too
far, he risks alienating himself from his subordinates, or being
seen as a heartless and brutal tyrant. In punishing offenders,
as in all of his affairs, a leader should be balanced. He should
be quick to resolve problems, but slow to judge the mistakes of
others. So as to not allow anger to cloud his judgment, he

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 639

should think about the offender’s mistake and about his
appropriate punishment for a reasonable amount of time
before taking any decisive action.

@ A leader should make it known to his subordinates that he is
aware of everything that occurs under his command. This will
motivate subordinates to be careful and to avoid perpetrating
serious offences. At the same time, however, a leader must not
spy on his subordinates, especially when they are not on duty,
when they expect and deserve privacy in the safety of their
home, apartment, or any other place of residence, such as a
tent during a journey. Asa leader, one does not want to make
it a point to expose the private faults of his subordinates. If
people think their leader spies on them, they will no longer be
loyal to him, and they will find innovative ways to perpetrate
offences behind his back. By that stage, people's level of Taqwa
(fear of Allah) will have weakened, and they will begin to
chase after their desires without any sense of restraint or
decency. Therefore, it is very important for a leader to
maintain a relationship of mutual trust and love with his
subordinates, for when that trust and love are lost, all else will
be lost as well.

@ A leader must strive to sit in the company of wise, intelligent,
and sincere people. Even if he has to hear what he dislikes
from them, their criticism can serve as an impetus to help him
improve as an individual and as a leader. Conversely, he
should avoid sitting in the company of people who have either
no aim in life or purely worldly aims. Even if such people are
known to be pleasant company, and even if they praise their
leader, their poisonous company — poisonous im that it,
perhaps like television today, numbs the mind — will prevent
that leader from thinking about important and serious
matters. In their mirthful company, he will be like a
drunken person who risks sobering up only when it is too
late 35 when he becomes surrounded by difficulties that can
no longer be remedied.

640 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

@ Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ informed Yazeed #& about one of the most
important aspects of leadership during war, and that is that,
above all else, a leader must be brave and steadfast. This is
because cowardice is contagious, transferring most easily from
commanders to lower-ranking soldiers. When lower-ranking
soldiers see their leader trembling in fear on the battlefield, they
will think, and rightly so, that thetr chances of victory are slim,
and then they too will feel overcome with fear and cowardice.

Abu Bakr’s advice, though brief, was filled with meaning. His
words showed that he cared deeply about the welfare of his
fellow Muslims and about promoting the Cause of Islam. Having
previously participated in many military campaigns, he 4 knew
the problems his commanders could potentially face, and he
knew that, in avoiding or overcoming those problems, his
commanders had to be disciplined in their time and skilled in
their leadership techniques.

To be sure, Abu Bakr’s advice indicated his profound knowl-
edge of warfare, and not just about what takes place on the
battlefield, but also about the minor details that a leader must be
involved in — such as his soldiers’ morale, negotiating terms with
the enemy, disciplining soldiers who commit offences, dealing
with enemy messengers, and so on. And it wasn’t just in military
matters that he was an expert; he # excelled in everything he did.
As a leader, he 2 knew how to govern his people; he was an
excellent judge of people, so he knew who to appoint for every
given job; he was a great humanitarian and philanthropist in
terms of the many hours of his life he dedicated to helping the
poor and downtrodden; he was the preeminent scholar of the
Muslim nation; he was a prolific and sincere worshipper; in short,
everything he did, he did well. May Allah & be pleased with him
and with all of the Prophet’s Companions &. |

2) Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah’s Army
Abu Bakr 4 scheduled to send Shurahbeel’s army three days

after the departure of Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan’s army. When it
was time to leave, Abu Bakr # bid farewell to Shurahbee! ‏به‎

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 641

saying to him, “O Shurahbeel, did you hear the advice that I gave
to Yazeed ibn Abee Sufyaan?” He 4 said, “Yes.” Abu Bakr 2
said, “Verily, that same advice I give to you now, but im addition
to that, | will advise you about qualities which I neglected to
mention to Yazeed. I advise you to perform Prayer on time; to be
patient on the day of Battle, until you either achieve victory or are
killed; to visit the sick and to attend funerals; and to remember
Allah 8 frequently, and in every possible situation.” Shurahbeel
# said,” Allah is the One Who helps (one achieve success as well
as one’s goals), and whatever Allah wills to happen, happens.”

Shurahbeel’s army consisted of somewhere between 3000 and
4000 soldiers. When Shurahbeel 4 was about to leave for his
mission, Abu Bakr ‏كن‎ ordered him to travel to Tabook and ‏علخ‎
‎Balqaa, and then to Busrah, which was to.be his final destination.

Shurahbeel 2 headed towards Al-Balqaa and arrived there
sooner than he probably had expected, given that he faced very
little resistance along the way. Entering deep into Al-Balgaa
territory, he continued onwards until he reached Busrah, the
inhabitants of which heard about his arrival and locked
themselves up in their lofty and impregnable fortresses. Shur-
ahbeel 4 and his men besieged Busrah, but, because it was a city
that was well fortified, they managed to neither break through its
gates nor force its people to surrender,”

3) Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah’s Army

As with the other leaders of his armies, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ met with
and bid farewell to Abu ‘Ubaidah 4 when his army was ready to
depart from Al-Madeenah. During the short time they had left
together before Abu ‘Ubaidah’s departure, Abu Bakr # said to
him, “Listen like someone who wants to understand what is being
said to him, intending thereby to execute the commands that are
imparted to him. Verily, you are leaving in the company of noble
people from Arab households, people who are the most righteous

‎Futooh As-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pg. 15).‏ لذأ
‎Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Nizaar Al-Hadeethee (pg. 62).‏ 1

642 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg a

of Muslims today, and who were the most gallant of people
during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance. In those days, they
fought out of a sense of (tribal) loyalty; today, they fight with a
good intention, seeking nothing save rewards from Allah 88. Be a
good companion to those that are accompanying you. And when
it comes to the truth, treat everyone equally. Seek help from Allah,
and know that He is sufficient for you as a Helper. And place your
trust in Allah, for He is sufficient (for you) as a Guardian. Leave
tomorrow, In Sha Allah (Allah Willing). a

Abu ‘Ubaidah’s army consisted of somewhere between 3000
and 4000 fighters, and their target city was Hims. Abu “Ubaidah
as, departed from Al-Madeenah, passed by Waadee Al-Qura,
passed above Al-Hajr (the past cities of Saaleh), passed through
Dhaat Manaar and Zeezaa, until he finally reached Maamoaab. It
was there that he faced the enemy, fought against them, and then
agreed to a truce with them. It was the first truce that was agreed
upon between the Muslims and the people of Ash-Sham.

Abu ‘Ubaidah 4 then resumed his forward progress, this time
heading towards Al-Jaabiyah.”! Thus his army was situated
١ between the two Muslim armies that had departed before him.
Among Abu “Ubaidah’s soldiers was a man who was renowned
for his gallantry and his past feats as a horsemen; his name was
Qais ibn Hubairah ibn Mas’ood Al-Muraadee. #. Before the army
departed from Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr # had advised Abu
‘Ubaidah « to honor the venerable warrior, saying to him,
“Verily, accompanying you is a man of great honor, a famous and
brave Arab warrior. The Muslims (i your army) cannot do
without his advice and his strength in war. 50 make him your
close companion, be kind and gentle to him, and show him that
you cannot do without him. Also, prove to him that you do not
disrespect him in the least. If you do as | have just instructed you
to do, you will gain his trust and loyalty; consequently, he will
fight hard for you against your enemy.”

‎Eutooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pe. 17).‏ لذأ
‎I Al-Kaamil, by Ibn Al-Atheer (2/66).‏

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 643

After his meeting with Abu “Ubaidah ‏رف‎ Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎summoned for and met with Qais ibn Haibarah ‏.كك‎ And he ‏ل‎
‎said to him, “Verily, | am sending you with Abu “Ubaidah, the
‘Trustworthy One,’ the one who, when he is transgressed against,
does not transgress. When he is wronged (on a personal level), he
forgives; if someone cuts off ties from him, he joins ties (thus
becoming responsible for reestablishing a good relationship). He
is merciful towards believers, harsh against disbelievers. Do not
disobey his commands, and do not oppose his views; indeed, he
will command you to only that which is good. I have indeed
ordered him to listen to you, so command him only to fear Allah.
Verily, we used to hear about your gallantry and your strength,
about how you were an experienced chieftain and leader during
the pre-Islamic days of ignorance. And I say ‘ignorance’ because
people in those times would do nothing but sin. So use your
strength and power and ability to help others for Islam and
against the polytheists, the people who disbelieve in Allah, and
the people who worship others besides Him. For those who do
the things I have just described — those who use their strength
and ability to promote the cause of Islam and to struggle against
polytheists — Allah has decreed a great and tremendous reward.
Remember that all Honor belongs to Muslims.” Qais ibn
Haibarah # said, “If you remain alive (when news of our
battles reaches Al-Madeenah) ~ and may Allah preserve you —
you will hear about me, in terms of the care I take to protect
Muslims and the efforts I make to inflict harm on disbelievers,
that which will please you and make you happy.” Abu Bakr
said, “Do that, and may Allah have mercy on you.”

Later on, when Abu Bakr 2 heard about Oais ibn Haibarah’s
duel with two famous warriors in Al-Jaabiyah, and about how he
killed them, he # said, “Qais spoke the truth, and he has fulfilled
and honored his promise.”

Abu Bakr 2 might not have taken direct part in the war-zone
of Ash-Sham, but he 4 was there in the way he inspired his

‎Putooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 26, 27).‏ لذأ

644 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

soldiers to fight sincerely and bravely for the cause of Islam. To be
sure, his words of encouragement stayed with Qais ibn Haibarah
# throughout the expedition and brought out talents that had
remained dormant for some time. Qais « thus gave it his all,
taking all of the skills he acquired as a warrior during the pre-
Islamic days of ignorance, and using them to promote the cause of
Islam. The key thing to note here is that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ knew how to
influence people and to bring out the best in them. Given Qais’s
background, Abu Bakr -& knew that the best way to get the best
out of him was to praise him, honor him, and make him feel like
his services were greatly needed. Great people, when thus treated,
become motivated to make any sacrifice that is necessary for the
greater good of mankind."

4) ‘Amr ibn Al-‘Aas

At the time of the invasion of Ash-Sham, or at least during the
invasion’s planning stages, ‘Amr 4 wasn’t available to serve as a
member of any Muslim army. He 4 was too busy governing one
of the Muslim provinces in the region. So, as governor, his
number one duty was to take care of his constituents, a job that
required all of his time and energies. And yet ‘Amr # was a man
suited more to war than to peacetime administrative duties. This
is not to say that he was an inadequate governor; far from it, he as
was well-respected and carried out his duties in an honorable and
honest manner. But given the fact that a war was going on, his
services on the battlefield were greatly needed, more so than were
his services as governor.

Therefore, Abu Bakr # gave him a choice: Either he could
remain governor (after all, he had been appointed to the post by
none other than the Messenger of Allah #); or he could do what
would, in the end, be better for him in this world and the
Hereafter — lead an army in an epic war against the Romans in
Ash-Sham. Despite the importance of the war, Abu Bakr &
informed him that, if he preferred staying on as governor, then he

(At Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/206).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 645

had every right to do so. In response to Abu Bakr’s choices, “Amr
‏مه‎ wrote a letter back to the Khaleefah ‏د‎ that, with the use of
metaphors, expressed “Amr’s deep respect for Abu Bakr # and
his feeling that the decision was not his to make, but instead was
totally up to Abu Bakr ‏.ذه‎ He # wrote, “Verily, [1 am an arrow
from the arrows of Islam. After Allah, you are the archer who fires
the arrows (of Islam) and gathers them together. Therefore, look
for the strongest, the best, and the most fearful (of Allah) of
arrows, and then fire it (towards the enemy) (or in other words,
look for the most qualified and best suited man and send him to
lead your army against the Romans in Ash-Sham).”U!

Shortly thereafter, ‘Amr arrived in Al-Madeenah. Wasting
no time, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ ordered ‘Amr # to go outside of Al-
Madeenah, to make camp, and to wait until a group of soldiers
could be mobilized in order to join him in his expedition. A
number of noble Makkan chieftains volunteered to join “Amr’s
army; among them were Al-Haarith ibn Hishaam 4, Suhail ibn
‘Amr 4, and ‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl 2.

When his army was ready, and when he was about to depart
from Al-Madeenah, ‘Amr # was in the company of Abu Bakr ‏رك‎
‎who decided to accompany him for a brief while in order to
impart important advice to him and to bid him farewell. In those
final moments together, Abu Bakr 4 said to “Amr a, “O “Amz, in
the art of war you have foresight, experience, and sound opinions.
You are leaving with the most noble members of your people and
with men who are among the most righteous of Muslims. When it
comes to war, many of your opinions are praiseworthy and are
blessed in the results they reap.” “Amr 4 replied, “Then I should
certainly strive to avoid disappointing you and to make myself
worthy of the good opinion you hold of me.”!*!

“Amr # went out with an army that consisted of somewhere
between six and seven thousand soldiers, and their goal was to

[5 Ttnaam Al-Wafaa, Bi-Seeratil-Khulafua (pg. 55).
°l Futooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 48-51).

646 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

invade Palestine. Initially, they traveled along the coast of the Red
Sea, until they reached the “Arbah Valley, which is situated near
the Dead Sea. Then ‘Amr # put together an advance battalion
that consisted of 1000 soldiers and ordered them to head towards
the focal-point of Roman power in the region. The leader of the
advance battalion was the noble Companion ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar
Al-Khattaab ‏عله‎

‘Abdullah ‏نه‎ and his men clashed with the enemy’s army. The
Muslims won the battle, managed to scatter the surviving soldiers
from the opposing army, and brought back with them a number
of prisoners. ‘Amr & forced those prisoners to speak, and thus
learned from them that the enemy’s army, which was headed by
Rouis, was planning to launch a surprise attack against ‘Amr’s
army. Based on the information he received from the prisoners,
‘Amr # developed an appropriate strategy, one that involved
attacking the enemy before they could attack first. In the fighting
that ensued, ‘Amr’s army succeeded in pushing back enemy
soldiers. So successful were the Muslims in their surprise attack
that many enemy soldiers were forced to flee; furthermore,
thousands of them died at the hands of Muslim soldiers."

Based on the information hitherto mentioned, tt should be
clear to the reader that Abu Bakr. 4s ordered each of his four army
commanders to travel along different roads, though their end
destination was, in general, the same: the lands of Ash-Sham.
Here, Abu Bakr 4 implemented the same strategy that Ya’goob
s employed with his sons, a strategy that is made clear in the
saying of Allah 8:

“And he said: “O my sons! Do not enter by one gate, but enter
by different gates, and I cannot avail you against Allah at all.

11 AL‘Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Ad-Difaa'iyyah ‘Tndal-Muslimoon (pg. 143).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 647

Verily! The decision rests only with Allah. In Him, I put my
trust and let all those that trust, put their trust in Him.”
(Qur'an 12: 67)

Fourth: A Crisis D

To put it mildly, the armies that were sent to conquer Ash-
Sham had a difficult time completing their mission. They faced,
after all, the army, not of a city or province or even country, but of
an Empire; an army that was renowned for its superior strength
and large size; an army that was always ready for war.
Furthermore, the very fact that the Romans formed an Empire
suggests that they were a warring people; how else did they gain
control of so much land.

The Romans were well-prepared for an invasion, for they had
spent a great deal of money building fortresses and towers in
order to fortify their most populated cities. In Ash-Sham, the
eastern wing of the Empire, the Romans had at their disposal two
large armies, one that was stationed in Palestine, and the other in
Antaakiyyah. The divisions of these armies were garrisoned in six
primary locations:

1) Antaakiyyah, which, during the Roman rule of the region, was
the capital of Ash-Sham.

2) Qansareen, which was situated between Humaat and Haleb —
or, more precisely, approximately 25 kilometers south-west of
Haleb. Omsareen was situated along the Ash-Sham border, the
other side of which was the north-western part of Persia.

3) Hims: The army that was stationed in Hims had enough
military capabilities to control the entire area, all the way until
Tadmar and the deserts of Ash-Sham. Hims was located along
the Ash-Sham border, the other side of which was the north-
eastern part of Persia.

048 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ضف‎

4) ‘Ammaan, which contained the military command post for the
region of Al-Balqaa, and inside of “Ammaan the Romans had
built an impenetrable fortress.

5) Ajnaadain, which contained the military command post for the
entire region of southern Palestine. Afnaadain was bordered
by Arab lands both to the east and to the west, and it was also
bordered by Egypt.

6) Qaisaariyyah, which was situated in northern Palestine,
approximately 13 kilometers away from Haifa.

The central command post for the entire Roman army was
situated either in Antaakiyyah or Rome. When the Roman leader,
Haraql — who acted as both king and military commander-in-
chief — witnessed Muslims armies penetrating deep into Roman
territory, he ordered his generals to attack and defeat those
armies, and here are the main points of the strategy he employed
in order to accomplish his goals:

@ He first ordered his generals to give way to the Muslim armies
along the Ash-Sham border, to allow those armies to enter
deep into Ash-Sham territory, and to thus set a trap for them
— or at least give them a false sense of security.

@ He ordered the divisions of his first army to gather in
. Palestine, under the leadership of Sirjoon.

@ He ordered the divisions of his second army to gather in
Antaakiyyah, under the leadership of Tidor.

@ He ordered his generals to attack the four Muslim armies, one
after the other; or in other words, one at a time. This was the
key part of his strategy: He felt that it would be easier to defeat
them one at a time, instead of all together at the same time. In
implementing this strategy, Haraq] deployed his armies in the
following manner:

a) He sent his brother, Tadhaariq, with an army that consisted of
ninety-thousand fighters, in order to attack “Amr ibn ‏لظ‎ Aas’s
army.

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 649

b) He sent ibn Taudhar to lead a contingent of soldiers against
Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan’s army.

c) He sent Al-Oabgaar ibn Nantoos, with an army of sixty-
thousand soldiers, to attack Abu ‘Ubaidah’s army.

d) And finally, he sent Ad-Daargas with a contingent of soldiers
to attack Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah’s army.!"!

If the Romans formed an Empire that was defended by large,
formidable, and literally awe-inspiring armies, the Muslims were
no amateurs when it came to the art of war. In fact, they thrived
not as much in situations wherein they possessed the more
powerful army as in situations wherein they were both out-
numbered and outgunned. Therefore, in spite of the fact that the
Muslims were greatly outnumbered by their Roman enemies, the
result of the war was anything but a foregone conclusion.

One advantage that the Muslims had was their superior ability
to gather and analyze information about the enemy. The war in
Ash-Sham was no exception: Muslim leaders quickly learned
about the detailed plans of Haraql; they knew where each army
division was situation and where, as well as whom, each division
planned to attack. Muslim commanders even found out about
Haraql's strategy to take on the four Muslim armies, one at a time,
instead of all at once.

The leaders of the Muslim armies wrote back to Al-Madeenah,
informing Abu Bakr # about their predicament. In their letters
they suggested, not directly but through a description of their
dangerous situation, that they needed reinforcements. Abu
‘Ubaidah 2, one of the leaders of the four armies, wrote this
letter to Abu Bakr &: “In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent,
the Most Merciful. To “Abdullah, Abu Bakr, the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah; from Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah: peace be
upon you. Verily, I say to you that all praise is for Allah; none has

‎AL‘Amaliyyaat Ai-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah ‘Indal-Muslimoon (pg. 147).‏ لأا

650 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

the right to be worshipped but Him. To proceed: Verily, I ask
Allah to honor Islam and its people with a mighty honoring, and
to grant them an easy victory. Indeed, it has been conveyed to me
that Haragl, the king of Rome, has made camp in Antaakiyyah,
one of the cities of Ash-Sham,; that he has sent word to the people
of his kingdom, calling them to arms; and that they are coming to
him (in great numbers), upon both easy and hard to ride animals
(i.e, they are coming on any riding animals they can find, so
enthusiastically have they answered his cali to arms). I felt that I
should tell about these developments, so that you can decide on
our best course of action. May peace and the mercy and blessings
of Allah be upon you.”

Abu Bakr # sent back to Abu “CUbaidah ‏فق‎ the following
reply: “In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most
Merciful. To proceed, your letter has reached me, and I have
understood what you said about Haraql, the king of Rome. As
for his making camp in Antaakiyyah, rest assured that it signifies
defeat for him and his companions, and victory, from Allah, for
you and the Muslims. You meritioned that he is gathering the
people of his kingdom and that he has already gathered throngs
upon throngs of fighters to attack you. Well, that is what both
we and you knew was going to happen; we expected that of
them. After all, no people leave their realm and give up their
kingdom without fighting. And indeed, you know — and all
praise is for Allah 28 — that many Muslim men are attacking
them, men that love death just as their enemies loves life, and
that, through their fighting, are hoping for a great reward from
Allah. They are men who love to fight in the way of Allah, more
so even than their love for their young women and their most
valuable wealth. At the time of fighting, a single man among
them is equal to one-thousand men from the polytheists. So meet
the enemy with your soldiers, and do not feel sad or disconsolate
on account of the Muslims that are not with you — for indeed,
Allah is with you. And in spite of all that I have said, I will still
send you more men, so many men that you will satisfied with
the number of men you have with you and that you will not

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 651

want any more, In Sha Allah (Allah Willing). And may peace and
the mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you.”

Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan 2, another one of Abu Bakr’s
commanders in Ash-Sham, also wrote a letter to Abu Bakr +,
and its contents were very similar to those of Abu “Ubaidah’s letter.
The following was Abu Bakr’s reply: “In the Name of Allah, the
Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. To proceed: Your letter has
reached me. In it, you mention how the king of Rome has moved to
Antaakiyyah and that Allah has cast terror into his heart because of
the large number of Muslim soldiers (that have penetrated deep
into his land). Verily, when we were with the Messenger of Allah
‏روه‎ Allah — and all praise is for Him — granted us victory through
(the) fear (He cast into the heart of the enemy), and He provided us
with the help of noble Angels. Verily, the religion we followed, the
Religion for which Allah granted us victory through (the) fear (He
cast into the heart of the enemy), is the very same Keligion we are
inviting people to follow today. And by your Lord, may Allah not
treat Muslims as wrongdoers, nor those who testify that none has
the right to be worshipped but Allah as people who worship
alongside Him all kinds of false deities. So when you meet the
enemy, attack them with those that are with you, and fight against
them. Verily, if you do that, Allah will not forsake you. And indeed,
Allah — the Most Blessed, the Most High — informed us that a
small group can overcome a large group by His permission. And in
spite of all that I have said, I will send reinforcements: men
followed by even more men, until you will feel that you have
enough soldiers, and until you will no longer need even a single
additional man (Le., soldier), In Sha Allah (Allah Willing). And may
peace and the mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you.” Abu
Bakr # sent this letter in the hands of “Abdullah ibn Ourt Ath-
Thumaalee ‏.يه‎ When ‘Abdullah # arrived with the letter, Yazeed
‏د‎ read it out loud to the Muslims (who were under his command),
and as a result they became joyful and happy.'*

‎At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee (9/213); refer also to Fuftooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee‏ أذا
‎(pes. 30, 31}.‏
‎Eutooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 30-33).‏ خا

652 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

“Amr ibn AlL’Aas #& also wrote a letter to Abu Bakr ‏ركه‎
‎describing the increasingly dangerous situation in Ash-Sham.
Abu Bakr 2 sent back the following reply: “Peace be upon you.
To proceed: Your letter, in which you describe the gathering of
Roman forces, has reached me. Verily, when we were with the
Prophet #%, Allah 88 granted us victory, but not by providing us
with a great many soldiers. We used to fight alongside the
Messenger of Allah #¢ when we had with us only two horses; and
we would have to take turns riding on camels. On the Day of
Uhud, we were with the Messenger of Allah #¢, and we had with
us only a single horse, which the Messenger of Allah #¢ would
ride. And yet, Allah 8 would grant us victory and help us against
those who opposed us. O ‘Amr, know that the most obedient of
people to Allah # is the one that despises sins the most. So obey
Allah, and order your companions to obey Him.’”"!

In his letters, Abu Bakr # reminded his commanders that, it
was strong Faith, and not large numbers, that they needed in
order to achieve victory. Abu Bakr truly believed in everything
he mentioned in his letters. In fact, for many years he was living
proof that Faith counted more than numbers; he had taken part in
various battles in which Muslims were outnumbered, and still
they came out victorious. He himself witnessed how, with the
help of Allah 4, Muslims defeated their more numerous foes at
Badr; and he saw how the Confederate armies — armies that
greatly outnumbered the Prophet’s army — were forced to
acknowledge defeat and leave Al-Madeenah in a state of shame
and humiliation. Therefore, Abu Bakr « was confident that, in
spite of the bad news he was receiving from Ash-Sham, Muslims
would defeat the Romans.

And yet, along with his Faith, Abu Bakr s realized that he had
to do more in order to ensure victory for Muslims. In that spirit,
and based on the promises he made to his commanders, he set in
motion the process of enlisting as many soldiers as possible, so

0 Khutab Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Muhammad Ahmad ‘Aashoor ((pg. 92).

Abu Bakr’s Congquests in Ash-Sham 653

that he could send his four armies the reimforcements they
desperately needed. And it was not just men he planned to send,
but weapons and horses as well, in addition to any other supplies
that his armies might need.

He summoned for Haashim ibn “‘Utbah ibn Abee Waqqaas 2;
and when the latter came, Abu Bakr #s said to him, “O Haashim, it
pleases your grandfather...that you have become among those
that Muslims seek help from in their fight against their
polytheistic enemies. Furthermore, you are blessed in that the
ruler has faith m your advice, sincerity, loyalty, chastity, and
strength. The Muslims Gin Ash-Sham) have sent word to me,

taking along with you those who will follow you. Verily, 1 will call
upon people to join you (Le., your army). Then (when your army
will have been assembled) go to either Abu “‘Ubaidah # or Yazeed
‏“.نه‎ Haashim # said, “No, it is to Abu “Ubaidah (that I wish to
go).” Abu Bakr & said, “Then go to Abu “Ubaidah.”

Abu Bakr « then stood up before the people, praised Allah #,
and said, “To proceed: Verily, your Muslim brothers (abroad) are
doing well, and are protected (by Allah).... Verily, Allah has cast
terror into the hearts of their enemies, so that they have sought
safety in their fortresses, closing their gates in order to prevent
(our Muslim brothers) from getting inside. Messengers from your
Muslim brothers have come to me, informing me about how
Haraql, the king of Rome, has taken to flight in order to escape
(the wrath of Muslim soldiers), and has made camp in a city that
is situated in the most distant part of Ash-Sham. The Muslims im
Ash-Sham have sent word to me about how Haragl, from the
safety of his (hiding) place, has sent an army against them. And so
1 have thought it best to send our Muslim brothers reinforcements
— an army that consists of soldiers from among you. That, with
the help of Allah, will strengthen our Muslim brothers and will
keep in check their enemies. Also, through our strengthened army
of soldiers, Allah will cast terror into the hearts of the enemy. So
come forth and volunteer yourselves - may Allah have mercy on

654 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏تك‎

you — and join Haashim ibn “Utbah ibn Abu Waqgaas. And if
you do volunteer, do so expecting to receive rewards (from
Allah). Verily, if you are helped (by Allah against your enemies),
then that means victory and war booty. And if you are killed, then
that means martyrdom and honor.”

Although Abu Bakr # returned to his house, his words were
still present in the hearts of his audience. People were so moved
by his speech that they wasted no time in enlisting in Haashim’s
army. After only a short while passed, one-thousand men were
with Haashim 4s. Satisfied with the number of volunteers, Abu
Bakr ‏ذه‎ then ordered Haashim # to depart for Ash-Sham. Then
Abu Bakr # went himself to Haashim # tm order to extend
greetings of peace to him and to bid farewell to him. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎said to him, “O Haashim, in the past, we would benefit trom an
old man’s advice, good counsel, and sound planning; and we
would benefit from a young man’s patience, strength, and ability
to help when called upon to do so. And verily, Allah — the
Possessor of Might and Majesty — has combined in you all of
those qualities. You are young, and a bright future awaits you. So
when you meet the enemy, be patient and enjoin patience (among
your soldiers). And know that for every step you take, for every
amount of wealth you spend (for good causes), for each time you
become afflicted with thirst, fatigue, or hunger for the cause of
Allah — Allah records to your credit a deed of righteousness.
Verily, Allah does not waste the rewards of good-doers.”
Haashim said, “Verily, if Allah wants good for me, he will
make me do the things you have mentioned. And I will (try to) do
them, and there is no power except with Allah. And if I do not die
(in the early stages of fighting), 1 hope for two things: That I kill
(enemy soldiers), and that 1 am then killed myself, In Sha Allah
(Allah Willing).”

Before Haashim # departed, his uncle, Sa’ad ibn Abee
Waqqaas +, gave him the following advice, “O son of my
brother, do not perform the action of stabbing or striking without
seeking thereby the Countenance of Allah (ie., whatever good

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 655

you do, do it for Allah & and not to show off).... And know that
you are soon returning to your Lord. The only things you can take
with you from this world to the Hereafter is a truthful step you
have taken or a good deed that you have performed.” Haashim 2s
replied, “O my uncle, do not be afraid on my account except
regarding the matter you have mentioned. Verily, I will be among
the losers if I dedicate my staying at home and traveling abroad,
my coming and going, my stabbing with my spear, or my striking
with my sword for the purpose of showing off to people.”

Haashim # then parted company with Abu Bakr 4 and
followed the same road that Abu ‘Ubaidah 4 took to reach Ash-
Sham. When Haashim #s arrived at his destination, the soldiers in
Abu “Ubaidah’s army were suddenly infused with hope,
confident now that they had the numbers they needed to
overcome the enemy.!!

Some time after Haashim ibn “Utbah # departed from Al-
Madceenah, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ felt that the time was right to start a new
enlistment campaign, so that he could send another contingent of
fighters to Ash-Sham — this time, one that would be sent to
strengthen Yazeed’s army. The leader of the new contingent was
to be Sa’eed ibn ‘Aaamir ibn Hudhaim 2.

Abu Bakr # ordered Bilaal & to call out to the people,
announcing to them that they should volunteer to go with Sa’eed
ibn ‘Aamir & to Ash-Sham. When Sa’eed ‏ف‎ intended to depart for
his mission, Bilaal 4 went to Abu Bakr « and said to him, “O
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, if (years ago) you freed me so
that I could stay with you, and so that you could (by dint of my
obligation towards you) prevent me from doing the good things I
want to do, then 1 will stay with you. But if you freed me so that I
can truly be in charge of myself, free to do the things that will
ultimately benefit me, then let me go, so that I can fight in the way
of my Lord. Indeed, Jihad is more beloved to me than staying
here.” Abu Bakr # said, “Lo! If it is Jitaad you desire, then I

11 Fytooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 33-35).

656 the Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

cannot and will not order you to stay. | wanted you for the
Aadhaan (Call to Prayer; perhaps announcements are intended
here as well). O Bilaal, when I think about parting from you, I feel
a sense of loneliness. Nonetheless, I do know that, sooner or later,
we must part company, never to meet again until the Day of
Resurrection. So perform good deeds, O Bilaal: They will be your
sustenance in this world. And because of your good deeds, Allah
will mention you (in the highest of company) as long as you live,
and He will give you a good reward when you die.”’ Bilaal ‏ف‎
‎thanked Abu Bakr ‏ره‎ supplicated for him, and praised him for
always ordering Muslims to be patient, to obey Allah, to perform
good deeds, and to remain steadfast upon the truth. Then he 2
said, “ And [ do not want to perform Aadhaan for anyone after the
Messenger of Allah 26.“ Bilaal ‏كه‎ then left and joined up with
Saeed ibn “Aamir ibn Hudhaim ‏ا‎ and his men.

Abu Bakr ordered Sa’eed & to continue onwards until he
reached Yazeed ibn Abee Sufyaan #. Sa’eed # followed Abu
Bakr’s instructions, and reached Ash-Sham on time to participate
alongside Yazeed # in the Battles of Al’Arabah and Ad-
Daashinah.!

Thereafter, groups of people, from various places, continued to
pour into Al-Madeenah with the goal of volunteering for jihaad in
Ash-Sham, Whenever someone arrived with a group of soldiers,
wanting to help out in the war effort, Abu Bakr # instructed him
where to go and who to report to once he arrived in Ash-Sham.

Some groups of volunteers consisted of men who came from
villages, men who, because of their inconrplete training in Islamic
values and manners, were rough around the edges, ignorant, and
sometimes even impolite to the point of rudeness. The people of
Al-Madeenah from the Companions # and Taabi’oon (may Allah
have mercy on them) had to put up with the improprieties of such
men, and so they complained about the situation to Abu Bakr ‏نك‎
‎Abu Bakr 4 then gathered the people of Al-Madeenah and

‎Eutook Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 33-35).‏ ذا

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 657

pleaded with them to be patient and to put up with the
improptieties of the said ignorant villagers — unless, of course,
when someone from the latter group went too far. During his
speech to the people of Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ said,
“Whoever among you feels that 1 have a right over him, then
let him put up with the sharpness and harshness of their tongues,
and with their hastiness (in being rude, etc.)...as long as their
improprieties do not reach the point of deeds that are punishable
by law. Verily, it is through those people (villagers who are rough
around the edges) that Allah will destroy our enemies, the
gathered armies of Haraq] and Rome. Verily, they ‏رع‎ the very
same Villagers) are your brothers. If one of them is hasty (Le,
rude) with one of you, then put up with that. Is not that better in
the long-run than for you to seek victory without them?” Abu
Bakr’s audience replied in unison, “Yes.” He # then said, “Then
they are your brothers in religion, your helpers against your
enemies. And they have a right over you, so, for their sake, put up
with their improprieties.” His point being made, Abu Bakr # then

descended from his pulpit.U! 1

The leaders of the four Muslim armies were constantly
monitoring the movements of Roman forces, and what they
saw and learned astonished them. Never before had Muslims
faced such a grave danger. True, during the days of the Prophet
sg they were frequently outnumbered; true, the apostate uprising
posed a serious threat to the stability of the Muslim nation; and
true, conquering Iraq was not an easy task. But none of that
compared to the danger faced by Abu Bakr’s four armies in Ash-
Sham. Their Roman foes greatly outnumbered them; furthermore,
each of the four Muslim armies was left isolated, so that if it was

Ul At-Taareekh ALIslaamee, by Al-Humaidee (9/223).

658 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

attacked and surrounded by Roman forces, none of the other
three armies could be of any help.

The four Muslim generals convened an emergency meeting in
Jaulaan. And while Abu ‘Ubaidah 4 sent a letter to Abu Bakr &,
explaining the situation of Muslims in Ash-Sham, he didn’t wait
for a reply, but instead, along with the other three leaders,
decided that their only choice was to retreat as quickly as possible.
And here I am not referring to a minor retreat, but one that
involved withdrawing the four armies all the way back to the
borders of Ash-Sham and giving up control of the cities and
villages they had conquered when they first entered the region.

On the surface, Muslims seemed to be conceding defeat, but
that was far from the case. Their withdrawal from conquered
lands was in their best interests, bringing them one step closer to
victory, and not defeat. By withdrawing and uniting in a single
location, Muslims avoided being attacked one army at a time;
instead, they chose to fight together in a single decisive battle
against the enemy. This was contrary to Haraql’s plans; for all
along, Haraql had hoped to isolate and destroy each of the four
armies.

If the Muslims were going to withdraw and meet at a single
location, they had to choose that location carefully. “Amr ibn Al-
‘Aas ‏هله‎ suggested to the other three leaders that they gather in
Yarmook. Shortly thereafter, a letter from Abu Bakr # arrived,
and he ‏كه‎ — having approved of the planned withdrawal - too
suggested that his four armies meet in Yarmook. That “Amr ‏ون‎
‎and Abu Bakr # agreed on Yarmook was, based on Yarmook’s
strategic importance, less a coincidence than an instance of great
minds thinking alike.”

Having agreed upon the place they would meet, the four
leaders agreed that, during the process of withdrawing their
forces, it was in their best interest to avoid clashing with the
enemy as much as possible. Putting their plan into action, Abu

‎Al-‘Amaliyyaat At-Ta‘arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah ‘Indal-Muslimeen (pg. 147).‏ لذأ

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 659

“‘Ubaidah « withdrew from Hims, Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah ‏كه‎
‎withdrew from Jordon, and Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan 4 withdrew
from Damascus. Whereas these three leaders successfully
retreated to Yarmook, ‘Amr ibn Al-’Aas ‏ذه‎ did not fare so well.
He attempted to withdraw from Palestine in stages,"! but only
succeeded in executing a full withdrawal when Khaalid « came
to help him. In the meanwhile, ‘Amr ‏ذه‎ continued to clash with
the enemy, until, after a series of attacks and counterattacks, the
Battle of Ajnaadain took place (a battle that we will discuss
shortly, In Sha Allah).

According to one account, when Abu “Ubaidah -& initially sent
word to Abu Bakr 4 about the dangers he and his men faced in
Ash-Sham, Abu Bakr 4 sent the following reply: “Verily, people
such as yourselves do not lose because they are too few in
numbers. When tens of thousands of soldiers are united together
(such as you are), they are defeated only because of their sins. So
protect yourselves from sins, and gather together in Yarmook, so
that you can support one another. And let each man (.e., leader)
among you lead his companions (i.e., the members of his army) in
prayer.” Abu Bakr 4, as was the thinking of his commanders,
felt that his four armies should unite together in a single
encampment, and that they should face their enemies together,
and not in separate places. Abu Bakr # wrote this message to his
soldiers: “You are the helpers of Allah. And Allah helps those
who help Him, and abandons those who leave (or betray)
Him.”

As the Commander-in-Chief of the overall Muslim armed
forces, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ made his presence felt on the battlefield, even
if he was back in Al-Madeenah. He # made his presence felt
through his orders, his quick responses to major crises, his
decisions that affected the course of the war, his wise choice of

01 Al-Amaliyyaat ‏طمراب ميس نه انلشف‎ Wad-Difaa'iyyah ‘Indal-Muslimeen (pg. 147).
‏ا‎ Huroob Al-Islaant Fish-Sham, by Anmad Muhammad, pg. 45.

°l Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/211).

4) At-Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/211).

660 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #s

commanders, and his overall strategy. Whenever time and
circumstances allowed, Abu Bakr 2, from his command post in
Al-Madeenah, would coordinate the detailed aspects of the wars
that were being waged by his armies. Messages came from him so
fast and with such great frequency that it was almost as if he was
personally present at each battle. And even when time didn’t allow
for him to make specific decisions, when his commanders were
forced to make decisions on the spot, they, based on common
thinking and a muttual sense of trust, made the very same decisions
he ‏كه‎ would have made had he been there with them.

Other than specific strategy, Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ was present on the
battlefield with his advice. For instance, in the above-mentioned
letter which he wrote to Abu “Ubaidah ‏رن‎ Abu Bakr ‏أ‎ reminded
Muslim soldiers that victory comes through the obedience of
Allah 8 and that sins and disobedience to Allah % lead to defeat
— to being forsaken by Allah 4%.

Having ordered his four commanders to gather in one place,
Abu Bakr 2s had to appoint a single leader to lead the overall
Muslim armed forces in Ash-Sham. Initially, he 2s chose Abu
‘Ubaidah ‏رك‎ but then he decided to give the job to Khaalid ibn Al-
Waleed ‏رف‎ who, at the time, was leading the war effort in Iraq.
Given the epic nature of the upcoming conflict with the Romans,
choosing a leader was no small matter. Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ wanted a
leader who had the ability of Abu “‘Ubaidah 4, the cunning of
‘Amr #, the worldly wisdom of ‘Igrimah ‏رذ‎ and the courage of
Yazeed 2. The one person who had all of these qualities, in
addition to many years of battle-experience and the ability to
make correct decisions under stress, not to mention various other
important qualities, was Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 4s.

When Khaalid & received Abu Bakr's orders to depart for Ash-
Sham, he # embarked upon a long and dangerous journey, the
details of which we have hitherto discussed.

Thereafter, Abu Bakr @ continued ona consistent basis to send

reinforcements to Ash-Sham. The Romans developed a strategy
whereby they hoped to preoccupy Abu Bakr #, so that he ‏وك‎

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 661

would not have time to send many reinforcements. In fact, their
leaders said among themselves, “By Allah, we will keep Abu Bakr
= 50 busy (on the warfront) that he will have no time to send
more horses (and horsemen) to our land.” Upon learning about
what they said, Abu Bakr # retorted, “By Allah, through Khaalid
ibn Al-Waleed ‏رف‎ I will preoccupy the Christians (in Ash-Sham),
so that they will have little time left to heed the whispers of the
Shaitaan (the Devil).”"7!

In a short amount of time, Abu Bakr ‏يه‎ succeeded in achieving
many goals. He ‏كه‎ brought together his various armies in a single
location, thus making them unified in place and in purpose; he
appointed over his army a single leader, the very brave and very
capable Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏رق‎ and he # chose the location at
which his armies would make their stand against their Roman
counterparts. Thus one can conclude that Abu Bakr # had a very
clear vision about how the invasion of Ash-Sham was going to
take place, and he took all of the necessary steps to ensure that the
decisive battle there was going to take place on his terms, and not
on the terms of Haraq] and his commanders.

Prior to Khaalid’s arrival in Ash-Sham, it was understood that
Abu ‘Ubaidah & deserved to be the overall leader of the Muslim
armed forces in the region. And so not only did Abu Bakr 2 have
to send word to Khaalid about his decision to appoint him as
the new leader in Ash-Sham, he # also had to write to Abu
‘Ubaidah « and inform him that the job was no longer his — and,
of course, he 2 had to do that in a very tactful manner. It wasn’t
that Abu ‘Ubaidah was going to get upset, for he was
superlatively humble; it was more a matter of taking his feelings
into consideration. Here is what Abu Bakr # wrote to Abu
“Ubaidah #: “To proceed: Verily, [ have charged Khaalid # with
the duty of fighting the Romans in Ash-Sham, so do not disobey
him; instead, listen to him and obey his commands. I have
appointed him over you even though I know that you are better

[1 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/5).
‏ا‎ ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/5).

662 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2s

than him; I have done so because I feel that he has a degree of
insight in matters of war that you do not possess. May Allah will
(and decree) for both us and you the path of guidance. And may
peace and the mercy and blessings of Allah % be upon you.”")

Abu Bakr & wasn’t the only one who was sensitive to Abu
‘Ubaidah’s feelings; Khaalid 4 too wrote a letter to Abu ‘Ubaidah
‏,نف‎ and it ran as follows: “To Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah, from
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed. Peace be upon you. I say to you that all
praise is for Allah; none has the right to be worshipped but Him.
To proceed, verily, Iask Allah to grant both us and you safety on
the Day of Fear, and protection in the abode of this world. Verily, I

“have received a letter from the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah
‏ركه‎ in it, he ordered me to travel to Ash-Sham, to oVersee its
armies, and to be in charge of matters there. By Allah, I did not
request that appointment, nor did 1 desire it. And 1 did not write
to Abu Bakr # about it. And as for you ~ may Allah have mercy
on you — your status has not changed in the least: Your
command should not be disobeyed, your opinion should not be
opposed, and no decision should be made without your prior
input. After all, you are a chief from the chiefs of Muslims, and no
one can deny your superior qualities; and none of us can do
without your opinion. May Allah complete the favors and
goodness He has bestowed upon us and you; may He have
mercy on us and protect us from the punishment of the Hellfire.
And may peace and the mercy of Allah be upon you.”

The messenger who carried this letter, ‘Amr ibn At-Tufail ibn
‘Amr Al-Azdee 4s, was carrying another letter as well, one that
was addressed to the general population of Muslim soldiers in
Ash-Sham. That letter ran as follows: “To proceed: Verily, I ask
Allah ~ Who has honored us with Islam; dignified us with His
religion; honored us with His Prophet, Muhammad #8; and
favored us with Faith, which signifies much mercy upon us from
our Lord and a great many blessings from Him — to complete for

‎Majmoo’atul-Wathaaig As-Siyaasiyyah (pgs. 392, 393).‏ أذا
‎VI Tid.‏

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 663

both us and you the Favors He bestowed upon us. O slaves of
Allah, praise and thank Allah, and as a result, He will give you
more. And hope for complete safety and health for you, and He
will make those things lasting for you. And be, in regard to His
Favors, among the thankful ones. Verily, I have received a letter
from the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #¢, and in it, he
orders me to come to you.... Rejoice, knowing that Allah will
fulfill the promises He has made to you, and will give you a good
reward. May Allah protect both us and you through Faith, and
may He make all of us firm upon Islam. And may He grant us the
good reward that is given to those who fight for His Cause (ie.
the Cause of Islam). And peace be upon you”!

The two letters reached Abu ‘Ubaidah # and his men while
they were in Al-Jaabiyah. After Abu “Ubaidah 2 read the letter
that was specifically addressed to him, he ‏ها‎ said, “May Allah
bless the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #8 in the decisions he
makes; and welcome to Khaalid ‏رف‎ and may Allah bestow upon.
him peace.)

From Khaalid’s letter and Abu “Ubaidah’s response to it, one
discerns an elevated level of communication between the two
great men — a level of communication that exposes to us the true
meaning of Islamic brotherhood. The Companions & were linked
to one another by their common Faith in Islamic Monotheism, and
in their dealings with one another, they were governed by a lofty
code of manners. In spite of his many victories in Iraq and
elsewhere, and in spite of the fact that he was being earmarked to
lead Muslims in their war against Rome, Khaalid ‏ذه‎ did not
change, thinking himself to be better than his Muslim brothers; to
the contrary, he was humble, giving credit to those who deserved
it, affirming his belief that Abu ‘Dbaidah ‏كه‎ was a man of great
worth, and vowing to obey him, even though he himself had been
appointed by Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ to lead. The feeling of respect was
mutual, for Abu ‘Ubaidah ‏نه‎ invoked Allah % to bless Abu Bakr’s

11 Futooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdeee (pgs. 68-72).
‏لما‎ Thid,

664 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2%

decision and welcomed Khaalid # in a humble and respectful
manner. Both Khaalid « and Abu “‘Ubaidah # were free from
feelings pride and selfishness; through their deeds, they desired
only to please Allah; and they both placed the needs of the nation
ahead of their personal whims and desires.

The Story of Abu Bakr’s appointment of Khaalid ‏كذ‎ and of the
reaction of all parties concerned contains a very important lesson
that should be understood and heeded by government officials,
scholars, students of knowledge, preachers, leaders, and anyone
else who works in public service. It is a lesson that is, considering
man’s greedy desire to advance his own goals, very difficult to
apply. And that lesson is this: When it comes to appomting,
hiring, or firing public officials, all parties concerned should act
based, not on the motive of personal gain, but on trying to achieve
what is good for everyone, for all Muslims, for the Muslim nation.
Applying this lesson might involve refusing to accept a post
because one knows that someone else is better qualified for the
job, but as painful as doing that might seem, it leads to great
rewards and blessings from Allah 38.

1} The Battle of Aaadain

After he entered Ash-Sham, and while he was on his way to
join the Muslim armies that were stationed there, Khaalid «
stopped to conquer the city of Busrah. Then he # headed straight
for Yarmook, and upon arriving there, he met up with three of the
four military commanders that were stationed in Ash-Sham: Abu
‘Ubaidah «s, Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah ‏رن‎ and Yazeed ibn Abu
Mu’aawiyah #. The fourth military commander, “Amr ibn Al-
‘Aas #, was still trying to retreat. While “Amr 2 was desperately
trying to get back to Yarmook, the opposing army pursued him,
slowing down his movement and constantly trying to force him
into an all-out battle. The last thing “Amr # wanted was to fight
the enemy, since they greatly outnumbered his army, and since
Abu Bakr’s strategy was to face the enemy with one large army at
Yarmook rather than with. four small armies in various parts of
Ash-Sham.

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 665

While “Amr ‏ذه‎ was thus bogged down in one part of Ash-
Sham, Khaalid 4. was busy in another part, drawing up military
plans and analyzing the strengths and weaknesses of both his and
his enemy’s armies. And yet Khaalid « did not forget ‘Amr 4s,
who at the time was slowly retreating along the banks of the
Jordon River, and who was being coaxed into fighting by a much
larger and more powerful army. In regard to ‘Amr ‏رف‎ Khaalid ‏نك‎
‎knew that he was faced with two choices: Either he could hurry
towards ‘Amr ‏ف‎ and together, alongside him, fight the army that
was pursuing him. Or he 4 he could send word to ‘Amr 4 and
order him to retreat on his own. Khaalid 4 chose the former
option, and for more than one reason. First, ‘Amr # needed the
help; if “Amr 4 were to be left on his own, retreating to Yarmook
would be a long and hard process. Second, if, along with “Amr -&,
Khaalid # managed to defeat the opposing army, he 4 would
have succeeded in weakening the enemy, scattering their forces,
and giving the Muslims both the advantage and momentum in
the decisive battle that was soon to take place. And third, if he ‏ذه‎
‎and “Amr # defeated the enemy, Roman forces would become
depleted to the point that it would be possible for Muslims to
attack them from more than one front. Therefore, Roman
commanders would be forced to alter their strategy in order to
protect themselves from all fronts. So m effect, after a long period
of having followed an offensive strategy, Romans would now be
forced to be on the defensive, and that would represent an
important shift in the overall war.

Khaalid # sent word to “Amr ‏را‎ ordering him to continue to
retreat in slow, measured stages, until he ‏أ‎ arrived with his army,
at which time they would face the enemy together. By the time
Khaalid 2 arrived with a large contingent of soldiers, fighting
between ‘Amr’s army and the enemy had just begun. In total, the
Muslim army — which was made up of both ‘Amr and Khaalid’s
men — consisted of thirty-thousand soldiers. The fighting was
intense, but in the end, it was mainly the superior leadership skills
of Khaalid # and “Amr # that made the difference. Their army
achieved a resounding victory against the enemy; in fact, one unit

666 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

of soldiers pierced through the ranks of the Roman army, all the
way until their reached and then killed the opposing army’s
leader. With the death of their leader, Roman soldiers lost hope
and began to flee in different directions.""!

Ajnaadain was the first major battle between Muslims and
Romans in Ash-Sham. Haraql, who was at a safe distance from
the battle, soon learned about its results. Not just an emperor, but
a man of war as well, Haraql understood the calamitous
implications of the defeat: The tide was shifting, and just one
more major defeat could mean the end of his Empire.!#!

Haraq!’s counterpart in Al-Madeenah also found out about the
results of the battle, learning about it through a letter he received
from Khaalid ‏رك‎ a letter that ran as follows: “To ‘Abdullah, Abu
Bakr, the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #2, from Khaalid ibn
Al-Waleed, the “Sword of Allah’ that is being used against the
polytheists. To proceed: Peace be upon you. Verily, I say to you
that all praise is for Allah; none has the right to be worshipped but
Him.... O As-Siddeeq (Truthful One), [am writing to inform you
that we have met with the polytheists; they had gathered a huge
force for us at Ajnaadain. They raised their crosses, spread their
book, and swore by Allah 3% that they would not flee (or leave)
until they (destroyed us or) forced us to leave their lands. 50 we
went out to them, placing our trust in and depending upon Allah.
We attacked them with spears, and then we resorted to (our)
swords. And we fought them in every mountain pass and valley. I
praise Allah for honoring His religion, for humiliating His
enemies, and for doing well by His obedient slaves. And may
peace and the mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you.”” When
this letter reached him, Abu Bakr # was overcome with joy, and
he said, “All praise is for Allah, Who has helped Muslims, and
who has made that (victory and the news I received of it) the
delight of my eye.”!!

-€) Abu Bakr s&s, by Nizaar Al-Hadeethee (pg. 70).
‏أذا‎ Abu Bakr ‏رك‎ by Nizaar Al-Hadeethee (pg. 71).
Cl Putooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 84-93).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 667

Having achieved a resounding victory at Amaadain, Khaalid
#, “Amr a, and their men returned to Yarrmook, where they
joined up with the rest of the Muslim army. The mood was bright
in the Muslim encampment. And though joy was in order, the
war was far from over. Under the leadership of Tidor, a huge
Roman army arrived at Al-Waagisah — which was situated near
Yarmook — made camp there, and prepared for their upcoming
battle with the Muslims. The Muslim army, whose leader was
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed. ‏ركه‎ consisted of somewhere between forty
and forty-five thousand soldiers; the Roman army, which was led
by Tidor, consisted of two-hundred and forty thousand soldiers.
Therefore, the Romans outnumbered the Muslims approximately
by a margin of 6 to 1. |

With the Muslim army encamped in Yarmook, Roman forces
gathered along the southern bank of the nearby river. “Amr ‏اد‎
‎took the fact that the enemy was blocked by the river as a good
sign. He 4 said, “O people, rejoice. For indeed, Allah has blocked
the Romans (from crossing easily, placing in their way a river);
rarely does a blocked (army) achieve anything good.”

As for Khaalid ‏ره‎ he employed a strategy that was never
before used by Arabs.'*! His strategy involved the forming of
divisions and subdivisions; in that spirit, he organized his army as
follows:

@ He formed divisions, with each one having over it a leader,
and with each one consisting of somewhere between ten and
twenty subdivisions.

@ He formed forty subdivisions; each one was a part of an
overall division; each one had its own leader; and each one
consisted of one-thousand soldiers.

Or more precisely, he organized his army into these groups:

 AL‘Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difna’iyyah (pg. 163).
‏لها‎ Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/8).

668 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeqg ‏زه‎

1) The central division of his army, which consisted of eighteen
subdivisions (or in other words, eighteen thousand soldiers).
This division was headed by Abu ‘Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah ‏رق‎
‎who had with him ‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl ‏ذه‎ and Al-Oa’gaa ibn
‘Amr 2s.

2) The right wing of the army consisted of ten subdivisions (or in
other words, 10 000 soldiers), and it was headed by “Amr ibn ‏علخ‎
‎‘Aas 4, who was accompanied by Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah -s.

3) The left wing also consisted of 10 subdivisions, and it was
headed by Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan 2.

4) The front division: Because of the nature its mission — which
primarily involved guarding against the enemy in the case of a
surprise attack — the front division did not require a large force,
and instead made do with a relatively small cadre of fighters.

5) The rear division, which consisted of five subdivisions (or in
other words, 5000 soldiers), was headed by Sa’eed ibn Zaid 4s.
Sa’eed # was in charge of certain administrative aspects of
running the army. “Abdullah ibm Mas’ood # also had
administrative duties, in addition to bemg in charge of
handing out food rations to the soldiers and gathering the
spoils of war from the battlefield.

Another notable Companion present at Yarmook was Abu Ad-
Dardaa #. Al-Miqdaad ibn Al-Aswad ‏رك‎ who was known as a
skilled reciter of the Our’an, would walk between the ranks of
Muslim soldiers, all the while reciting Chapter “Al-Anfaal” as well
as other Verses that discussed the topic of Jihaad; he # did this to
raise the level of morale among Muslim soldiers. The orator or
speech-maker of the Muslim army was Sufyaan ibn Harb 4; he
would go from row to row of the army and encourage soldiers to
fight bravely and sincerely for the sake of Allah %. The overall

B] AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/8).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Shanr 669

leader of the army was, of course, Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏.كه‎ He 4
was stationed in the middle of his army, and he was surrounded
by the most eminent of the Prophet’s Companions &.

Realizing that the upcoming battle was near at hand, the leader
of each subdivision walked up and down the rows of his men,
encouraging them to fight bravely and reminding them to be
steadfast and patient on the battlefield.

The leaders of the Muslim army perceived the significance of
the upcoming battle. It was, they knew, a battle of epic
proportions, one that would decide the fate not just of Yarmook
or nearby cities, and not just of the region, but of Ash-Sham in its
entirety. Khaalid 4 in particular knew that, whichever way the
battle went, it was going to be decisive in terms of its long-term
consequences. If the Muslims were to succeed in defeating the
Romans in the upcoming battle, the door to conquering the rest of
Ash-Sham would be swung wide upon: After that, Muslims
would perhaps face resistance, but not of the kind that could stop
them from achieving all-out victory and expelling the Romans
from Ash-Sham. Victory, also, would lead directly to further
conquests in Asia and Europe.!"! ConVersely, Khaalid # knew
that, if the Muslims were to lose the upcoming battle, the door to
Ash-Sham would be closed, if not forever, then at least for a very
long time to come.

Last Words of Encouragement Before the Commencement

of the Battle

There were a great many eminent Companions ‏و‎ present at
Yarmook, and each one of them was called upon to provide
words of encouragement to lesser experienced soldiers in the
army. In that spirit, Abu “Ubaidah # delivered this speech: “O
slaves of Allah, help Allah (ie, help his Cause, the Cause of
Islam), and He will both help you and make your feet firm. Verily,
the promise of Allah is true. O Muslims, be patient, for patience

" AL‘Amaliyyaat At-Ta‘arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah ‘Indal-Muslimeen (pg. 164).

670 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ضك‎

saves one from disbelief, leads to the Good Pleasure of Allah, and
protects one from shame. Do not leave your rows, do not take one
step towards them (Le., the enemy), and do not initiate fighting
with them until [ order you to do so, In Sha Allah (Allah Willing).
Begin fighting with spears and protect yourselves with shields.
And adhere to silence, the only exception being the remembering
of Allah you do within yourselves.”

Another eminent Companion, Mu’aadh ibn Jabal ‏ره‎ also
delivered a speech to his soldiers. He 4 said: “O people of the
Qur'an, and O people who are called upon to guard the Book! 0
helpers of guidance and supporters of the truth, Allah’s Mercy
and His Paradise are not achieved through wishful thinking. And
Allah bestows forgiveness and His vast Mercy only upon those
who are truthful and who confirm their truthtulness through
actions. Have you not heard the Saying of Allah 8#

57 يود جمس لود مره ‎ob‏

a 8 oer A wo te Od we
a § athe ve Hod w ay »
‏لحنت أستخلفنهمر 3 ا صرة كم‎ yall | phase - §

“Allah has promised those among you who believe, and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the earth, as He granted its
to those before them...” (Qur'an 24: 55).

Mu’aadh # continued to say, “Be shy of your Lord by not
having Him see you flee from your Enemy, when all the while
you are in His grasp, when you have no one to seek refuge in
except in Him, and when you have no honor without Him.”

Yo his soldiers, “Amr ibn AL’Aas 4 said, “O Muslims, lower
your gazes, sit on your knees, and begin (the fighting) with your
spears. Then, when they come to attack you, give them a respite
(from your blows) until reach the edges of your spears’ blades. At
that moment, pounce on them the way a lion pounces on its prey.
By the One Who is pleased with truthfulness, gives rewards for it,
despises lying, metes out punishment for it, and rewards
goodness with goodness — I indeed heard that the Muslims will

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 671

conquer it (ie., Ash-Sham) village after village, and castle after
castle. So do not allow their size and their numbers to terrify you,
for if you are true and sincere in the severity you show them (in
fighting), they will fly away like the children of a partridge bird.”

Abu Sufyaan « gave this speech: “O group of Muslims, you
are now in a foreign land, cut off from your family, and far away
from the Leader of the Believers and from other Muslim soldiers
who could help you. By Allah, you now face an enemy that is here
with large numbers; and they are furious with you, for you have
caused them much tension and stress regarding the safety of their
lives, of their children’s lives, of their wives’ lives, of their wealth,
and of their homes. By Allah, you will not be saved from these
people, and you will not achieve Allah’s Good Pleasure
tomorrow, unless you are true when you meet the enemy, and
patient when the going gets tough. So defend yourselves with
your swords and work together.” Abu Sufyaan ‏ذه‎ then went to
the women and advised them, after which he 2s returned and
said, “O people of Islam, what you see ‏رع‎ in terms of the
formidable foe in front of you) is our present reality (and so we
must face it with sincerity and strong Faith). So remember: Here is
the Messenger of Allah #@ and Paradise in front of you, and here is
the Shaitaan (The Devil) and the Hellfire behind you.” Having
said this, Abu Sufyaan ‏كه‎ — may Allah have mercy on him —
returned to his position among the rows of the Muslim army.

Abu Hurairah ‏كه‎ said to his soldiers, “Hurry towards the fair
maidens of Paradise, and towards being near your Lord — the
Possessor of Might and Majesty — in gardens of bliss. Of all
places, this right now is the place that your Lord most loves you to
be. Lo! The patient ones are indeed blessed and good.” Abu
Sufyaan « went to each subdivision and said, “Allah! Allah!
Verily, you people are the defenders of Arabs, the helpers of
Islam. And they (Le., the enemy) are the defenders of Romans,
and the supporters of polytheism. O Allah, this ts a day among
Your days; O Allah, send down victory upon your slaves,”

11 Tarteeb Wa-Tahdheeb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (pg. 163).
‏ا‎ Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/10).

672 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq as

As the two armies faced one another, a Christian Arab,
perhaps not with the best of intentions, said to Khaalid ibn Al-
Waleed 2, “How numerous are the Romans today, and how few
the Muslims!” True as his remark might have been, numbers, as
Khaalid 4 reminded him, do not mean everything in war: “Woe
upon you! Are you trying to frighten me by mentioning the
Romans (ie., by mentioning the size of their army)? In reality, the
true measure of an army’s size is not the number of its men, but
rather the help it receives (from Allah). If it is helped (by Allah),
then it is large; and if it is forsaken (by Allah), then it is small.’

And when Mu’aadh ibn Jabal 4 heard the voices of priests and
monks emanating from the enemy encampment, he ‏ف‎ said, “O
Allah, shake their feet, instill terror into their hearts, send peace
down upon us, make us adhere to the word of piety, make us love
to meet our enemy on the battlefield, and make us pleased with
your Divine Decrees (i.e., make us pleased with everything that
You decree for us).”""!

3) The Romans

The Romans came with ornaments and displays of elegance
which they felt were befitting of their power. And they were
accompanied by priests and monks who would recite the Injeel to
them and encourage them to fight bravely in the upcoming battle.
Their arrogance and pride notwithstanding, the Komans did
come with numbers. From the vantage point of Muslims, the
Romans looked like a huge black cloud in the horizon; and, by
chanting in loud voices, they seemed all the more numerous.

The Roman army made camp in Al-Waagisah, which was
situated near Yarmook. They were separated from the Muslims
by a large valley, a valley that, considering the strategic
positioning of both armies, acted as a huge ditch or wide trenches
that the Romans would have a hard time traveling across.

11 AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/10).
“I Abu Bakr, Rajalud-Daulah (pg. 88).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 673

The Romans also organized their army into many divisions.
They formed two lines of divisions. In the first line, divisions were
formed into a number of circles. Each circle was formed by five
divisions, and one circle was separated from the next by a sizeable
gap. Then, in the second line, the same circles of divisions were
formed, except that they were stationed behind the gaps that were
left between the circles of the first line.

The Roman army was further organized in the following three
groups:

1) Archers: They were in the front of the army, and it was their job
to initiate fighting by launching into the air a foray of arrows;
then, once they had completed their task, they were to retreat
to the rear of the two wings of the army.

2) Horsemen: They were stationed along the two wings of the
army, and it was their job to protect the archers until they
safely returned to the rear of the army.

3) Divisions of infantrymen: Their task was simple; it was to
march forward, attack the enemy, and attempt to break
through the enemy’s rows of soldiers.

The front of the Roman army was led by Jarjah, and the two
wings were led by Maahaan and Ad-Daraagas."!

Last Minute Negotiations

As the two armies slowly approached one another, a team of
Muslim delegates marched ahead of their army. That team
consisted of Abu “Ubaidah a, Yazeed ibn Abu Sutyaan 4, Diraar
ibn Al-Azwar #, and Al-Haarith tbn Hishaam 2. They
approached in a manner indicating that they had not come to
fight, and they called out to the throngs of Romans that faced
them, saying, “We want fo meet with your leader.” Permission
was granted to them, and they were escorted to the inside of the

11 ALAmaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa iyyah ‘Indal-Muslimeen (pg. 167).

674 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2

Roman encampment. They were then taken to a commander
named Tadhaarik, who was waiting for them inside of a tent that
was made of silk. The Muslim delegates objected to entering the
tent, saying, “We do not think it permissible for us to enter it.” A
carpet made of silk was then spread for them, but again, because
of the material of the carpet, they objected, saying, “We will not sit
on this.” Other arrangements were made, and then the Muslim
delegates and Tadhaarik sat down to discuss terms of a truce.
Since Tadhaarik refused both to enter into the fold of Islam and to
pay the Jizyah tax, the negotiations ended quickly and the Muslim
delegates returned to their encampment.

According to an account that is related by Al-Waleed ibn
Muslim, the Romans also made an attempt to negotiate terms of a
truce. Baahaan asked Khaalid 2 to come and meet him in the
middle of the space that separated the two armies. Baahaan began
their meeting by saying, “Verily, we have long known that
hunger and hardships have forced your people to leave your
lands. So allow me to give each man among you ten Deenaars,
clothing, and food. 1 will give you these things if you then return
to your lands. Then, next year, we will send you a similar amount
of supplies.” That Baahaan meant to humiliate Khaalid ‏كك‎ is an
understatement, but Khaalid 2 was not to be outdone. He # said
to Baahaan, “We have not left our lands because of the things you
have mentioned. No, instead, we are a people who drink blood,
and it has reached us that no blood is tastier than the blood of
Romans. And so that is why we have come!”

After the negotiations failed to produce a peace agreement,
Khaalid ‏ذه‎ went to ‘Ikrimah ibn Abu Jahl & and Al-Qa’qaa ibn “Amr
&, the leaders of the two wings of the Muslim army, and ordered
them to start the fighting. They both called upon their counterparts to
engage in duels, and then the fighting began in earnest.

11 AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/10).
‏لما‎ Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/10).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 675
A Roman Commander Embraces Islam on the Battlefield

One of the top leaders of the Roman army, a man named
Jarjah, walked ahead of the front row of his army, towards the
middle of the space that separated his army from that of the
enemy. He then requested Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed & to meet with
him. To all observers, both from the Muslim and Roman armies, it
appeared as if Jarjah was making a final attempt at negotiating a
peace agreement. But the two armies and the battle seemed less
on Jarjah’s mind than some questions regarding which he yearned
for answers.

When the two men met, they came so close to one another that
the neck of each of their horses was touching the head of the other.
Jarjah began their meeting by saying, “O Khaalid, I want
information from you, but be truthful and do not lie to me.
Remember that a free man does not he. And do not deceive me,
for an honorable man does not deceive someone who is asking
questions about Allah. Did Allah send down to your Prophet #8 a
sword from the heavens? And did your Prophet 2% then give that
sword to you, informing you that you will not unsheathe it upon
any people without defeating them?” Khaalid « replied, “No
(that is not true).” Jarjah asked, “Then why have you been named,
‘The Sword of Allah’?” Khaalid replied, “Verily, Allah sent
among us His Prophet #2, who invited us (to embrace the Truth).
We turned away from him; in fact, all of us distanced ourselves
from him. Then a change occurred: Some of us began to believe m
and follow him, while others among us disbelieved m and
distanced themselves from him. I was among those who
disbelieved in and distanced themselves from him. Then Allah
took us by our hearts and forelocks and guided us through His
Prophet #2. And we pledged allegiance to him. He {.e., the
Prophet #%) then said to me, “You are a sword from the swords of
Allah, a sword that Allah has unsheathed so that it can be used
against the polytheists.’"! The Prophet 2 then invoked Allah #%

IN AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/13).

676 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

to bless me with victory. That is the reason why I have been
named “The Sword of Allah.’ [am the harshest of Muslims against
polytheists.”

Jarjah then asked, ‘O Khaalid, what is it that you are inviting
(people) to (follow)?” Khaalid # said, “(We are inviting people) to
bear witness that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah
and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger. And we further
invite people to accept and follow what the Prophet #¢ has come
with from Allah ~ the Possessor of Might and Majesty.” Jarjah
said, “What about those who do not answer your invitation?”
Khaalid 2 said, “Then we ask them to pay the Jizyah tax, m return
for which we protect and defend them (against all foreign
enemies, as long as they remain loyal and follow the laws of the
land).” Jarjah asked, “And what if someone refuses to pay the
Jizyah tax?’ Khaalid # said, “We declare war upon him, and then
we fight him.” Jayah then asked, “And what is the status of
someone who, today, answers your invitation and enters into this
affair (that you mention (i.e., into the fold of Islam)).” Khaalid ‏ف‎
‎said, “Our status will be the same regarding all that Allah has
legislated for us. We are all equal, the noble among us and the
poor or low-born ones among us, the first among us and the last
among us.” Jayjah said, “Does one who joins you today receive
the same reward that you all receive?” Khaalid ‏ذه‎ said, “Yes, and
more.” Jarjah asked, “How can a person who joins you today be
your equal when you have embraced Islam (long) before he did?”’
Khaalid ‏كه‎ said, “Verily, we are a people who have accepted this
Religion by force; furthermore, we pledged to follow our Prophet
at a time when he was alive, living in our midst. During that time,
news from the heavens came down to him, and he would inform
us about the Book. And he would show us signs and miracles.
And it is only befitting for people such as us, people who have
seen what we have seen and heard what we have heard (in terms
of signs and miracles), to embrace Islam and pledge allegiance (to
the Prophet #2). As for you, you have not seen what we have seen,
and you have not heard what we have heard, in terms of signs,
miracles, and irrefutable proofs. So if someone among you truly

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 677

embraces Islam with a good intention, then he is better than us.”
Jarjah then made a statement which he meant as a question: “By
Allah, you are telling me the truth, and you are not lying to me.”
Khaalid 2 said, “By Allah, J have told you the truth, and Allah is a
Guarantor over what you have asked me (and over the answers I
have given you).” At that very moment, Jarjah turned over his
shield and went with Khaalid # to the Muslim encampment. As
they were riding together, Jarjah said, “Teach me about Islam.”
Khaalid ‏كه‎ took him back to his tent, where a bucket of water was
prepared for Jarjah, who then used it to wash himself. And then
Jarjah performed two units of prayer, doing what every other
Roman should have also been doing: Embracing the truth and
saving himself from the Hellfire. But the other Romans were of a
different mind. When they saw Khaalid « going back with Jarjah,
they thought that Khaalid # was taking one of their men by force,
and so they began to attack the Muslim army, forcing Muslim
soldiers to leave their positions. Only one unit of Muslims soldiers
held its ground, and it was headed by ‘Ikrimah ibn Abu Jahl
and Al-Haarith ibn Hishaam.™

The Left-Wing of the Roman Arn
the Muslim Army

1y Attacks the Right-Wing of

The entire Roman army began an all-out assault against their
Muslim foes. The left-wing of their army attacked the right-wing
of the Muslim army, and soona gap opened up in the center of the
right wing. That gap both widened and deepened, resulting not
just in serious losses, but also in a dangerous situation wherein
Roman soldiers were able to reach the last rows of the Muslim
army. At this dangerous juncture, Mu’aadh ibn Jabal # called out
to his fellow Muslims. “O Muslim slaves of Allah, these people
have been fierce in their onslaught against you; and by Allah, they
will not be repelled or pushed back unless you are true when you
meet them and patient when you trade blows with them.” ‘Then,
descending from his horse, he 2s said, “Whoever wants to take my

‎Al-Bidgayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/13).‏ لأا

678 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

horse, then let him take 1t and fight wpon it.” He # preferred to
fight the harder fight, the fight that was fought on foot in the
infantry division of the army."!

The Azd, the Madhhaj, the Hadramoot, and the Khaulaan —
each of these tribes stood their ground, not allowing the enemy to
get through their ranks. But soon the Romans were too much for
them, and the entire right-wing of the Muslim army was pushed
towards the heart of the army. As a result, a number of people in
the Muslim encampment — which was situated in the rear of the
army — became vulnerable and easy targets to the enemy. But the
situation improved whena long wall of Muslim fighters stood their
ground and, by engaging the enemy, kept enemy soldiers at bay,
preventing them from attacking Muslims at the rear of the army.
Some Muslim fighters did flee to the rear of the army, but they were
met by Muslim women who began striking them with stones and
pieces of wood; those soldiers then returned to their positions,
knowing that it was better to stand firm and be killed by the enemy
than to run away and be treated as a coward by fellow Muslims./)

One man who certainly did not flee was ‘Ikrimah ibn Abu Jahl
‏.م‎ At the very suggestion of fleeing, he ‏و‎ said, “T (stood firm and)
fought against the Messenger of Allah #6 on many occasions, so
shall 1 now (now that I am following the truth) flee from you (Le.,
from the enemy)!” He # then called out, “Who will make a
pledge to die?” His uncle Al-Haarith ibn Hishaam ‏رق‎ Diraar ibn
Al-Azwar #, and four-hundred of the bravest and noblest
Muslims made a pledge of death with him. They then fought in
front of Khaalid’s tent until they all became afflicted with serious
wounds; a great many of them died, including Diraar ibn Al-

Azwar & PL

Al-Waaqidee related a beautiful story about ‘Tkrimah ‏ذاه‎ and

those who pledged along with him to die on the battlefield at
Yarmook. They continued to fight in spite of their wounds, but

‎AL’Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah (pg. 169).‏ ألا
‎Eutooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pg. 222).‏ 41
‎Tartees Wa-Tahdheeb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (pg. 170).‏ أذا

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 679

when more and more wounds were inflicted upon them, resulting
in them all falling to the ground, they asked for water. When a
drink of water was procured, it was offered to one of them. He
looked to the person beside him and said, “Give it (Le., this drink
of water) to him.” When it was given to that man, he looked to the
person, beside him and said, “Give it to him.” They continued in
this fashion until all of them died, without a single one of them
having drunk even a sip of the water. May Allah 3 be pleased
with them all.

It is said that the first martyr on the Day of Yarmook was a
man who went to Abu ‘Ubaidah ‏ف‎ and said, “Verily, | am ready
now (ie., ready to fight and die a martyr). Is there anything you
want from the Messenger-of Allah #8? Abu ‘Ubaidah ‏كف‎ said,
“Yes, extend greetings of peace to him from me, and say, 0
Messenger of Allah, we have indeed found that what our Lord
promised us is true!’ Having heard Abu “Ubaidah’s request, the
man 4 proceeded to fight until he was killed — may Allah have
mercy on him. Every tribe remained steadfast, and the Romans
kept circling Muslim units in the hope of crushing their enemy.
All in all, Yarmook was one of the bloodiest battles that the
Prophet's Companions 4 had ever taken part in. Yarmook has
been described as being a battle during which one saw nothing
save decapitated heads falling to the ground and severed hands
flying in the air."

The Right-Wing of the Roman Army Attacks the Left-Wing of

Qanaatir, the leader of the right-wing of the Roman army, led
his troops in an all-out assault on the left-wing of the Muslim
army, a wing that was made up of the following tribes: Kinaanah,
Qais, Khutham, Judhaam, Qudaa’ah, “‘Aamilah, and Ghassaan.
Given the severity of the attack, these tribes were forced to leave
their positions, and as a result, the central part of the left-wing of
the Muslim army was left exposed. Roman soldiers chased fleeing

Ul AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/12).

680 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

Muslim soldiers, continuing their pursuit until they entered the
Muslim encampment at the rear of the Muslim army. Fleeing
Muslim soldiers were met by Muslim women who struck them on
their faces with stones and the poles of tents. And all the while the
women were saying, “Where is the honor of Islam? What about
your mothers and wives? Are you fleeing and leaving us as easy
prey for these disbelievers?” Musiim soldiers, having been thus
chastised, felt ashamed for having fled from their positions. They
then resumed fighting the enemy, but this time with more energy,
more enthusiasm, and less fear. During this stage of the fighting,
Sa’eed ibn Zaid & was martyred.

Then the left-wing of the Roman army tried once more to break
down. the right-wing of the Muslim army; they focused their
attack on “Amr ibn Al’ Aas # and his division of soldiers. Despite
the fact that ‘Amr ‏كه‎ and his soldiers tried their best to stave off
the enemy attack, Roman soldiers still managed to enter the
Muslim encampment. Muslim soldiers, who were pushed back
into their own encampment, were met by women who struck the
face of any man who attempted to flee. The daughter of ‘Amr ‏وك‎
‎called out, “May Allah make ugly the man who flees from his
wife. May Allah make ugly the man who flees from his honor, his
dear one (i.e., his wife).” Other women yelled out, “You are not
our husbands if you do not defend ‏“عن‎ With such reminders
being yelled out to them, Muslim soldiers regained their resolve
to fight until the very end. They resumed their battle duties, this
time fighting with a stronger resolve than before. With a fresh
burst of energy and determination, Muslim soldiers not only
staved off the enemy’s attack, but succeeded in regaining control
of the areas that had been won over by the Romans.!

A Shift in Momentum That Led to the End of the Battle

Khaalid 2 and a number of horsemen who were under his
command attacked the left-wing of the Roman army — which
was busy attacking the right-wing of the Muslim army. In this

U1 AL‘Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah (pg. 174).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 681

foray, a foray that forced Roman soldiers to move towards the
heart of the Muslim army, six-thousand Roman soldiers were
killed.

At first, the Romans had the upper hand in the battle, but then
they were repelled by Muslim soldiers and, consequently, lost all
of the ground they had gained. Then, try as they might, they were
not able to inflict any serious harm upon the Muslim army — and
this in spite of the fact that they outnumbered the Muslim by a
ratio of about six to one. By that point, the morale of the Romans
was at an all-time low; that it sunk even lower when Khaalid ‏ف‎
‎and his men killed six thousand of their fellow soldiers was, to say
the least, inevitable. How, they asked themselves, could an army
so small be so resilient? Khaalid 4, like any good general,
understood the mindset of the enemy. With his successful foray,
he knew that he had broken their wills, and he could literally feel,
see, and smell the fear in their hearts. The main part of the war,
the part that had more to do with psychology than with weapons,
was over with. With Allah’s help, Roman soldiers were overcome
by two feelings (which was worse than the other, 1 do not know):
Fear and a sense of hopelessness. Confident now that, with the
help of Allah ‏رأ‎ victory was within his grasp, Khaalid 4 called
out to his soldiers, “By the One Who has my soul in His Hand,
their supply of patience and hardiness has been depleted....And I
indeed hope that Allah will grant you power over them (so that
you can kill them).”

Khaalid 2 then did something that signified his disdain for his
own life, his desire for martyrdom, and his wonderful ability to
seize opportunities. With a hundred horsemen by his side, he
raced towards the heart of the opposing army, where one-
hundred thousand Roman soldiers were positioned. Whether it
was terror that seized their hearts or the inevitability of defeat or
the false impression — because of dust that was being kicked up
into the air and because of the tenseness of the moment — that
many more than one-hundred horsemen were coming towards
them, Roman soldiers began to scatter in various directions. And

682 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كك‎

this was before Khaalid 4 and his men even reached them.
Encouraged by what they saw, the rest of the Muslim army raced
behind Khaalid 2. Then Muslim soldiers began to slaughter
confused and feartul Roman soldiers; meanwhile, the right-wing
of the Muslim army blocked every path from which the Romans
could escape. And so the Romans were trapped between the
valley of Yarmook and the Az-Zarqaa River.

Next, the Muslims succeeded in separating Roman horsemen
from Roman infantrymen. As a result, Roman horsemen: tried to
find a point of exit from which they could flee from the scene of
the battle. Khaalid ‏كه‎ ordered ‘Amr ibn Al-‘Aas to open up an
escape route for Roman horsemen. After “Amr # executed
Khaalid’s order, every Roman horseman (or almost every Roman
horseman) rode away from the scene of the battle, thus leaving
the infantrymen to fend for themselves. No thanks to therr fellow
soldiers who had just fled from the battle, Roman infantrymen
were left exposed, and they had no way to escape. What made
matters worse was that they were linked to one another im chains,
a strategy they had employed in order to prevent soldiers from
running away from battle.

Trapped and with no protection from horsemen, Roman
infantrymen were trapped along the edges of cliffs, for below
them was the valley of Yarmook. Then, in the darkness of the
night, the Muslim army attacked them. Cornered against the
edges of cliffs, many Roman fighters fell down into the valley of
Yarmook — a fall so dangerous that it meant almost certain death.
And because Roman soldiers were linked together with chains,
when one of them fell, a whole group of them fell along with him.
It was in this stage of the battle that the Muslims killed the most
Roman soldiers. With tens of thousands of their fellow soldiers
dead, the Roman soldiers that did manage to escape sought safety
deep inside of Ash-Sham, with some of them seeking refuge in
Fahl, and the rest in Damascus."

11 AL‘Amaliyyaat At-Ta‘arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa iyyah (pg. 175).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in Ash-Sham 683

Among those who performed exceptionally well during the
battle were Abu Sufyaan 2 and his son, Yazeed ibn abu Sufyaan
#. The latter fought with grit and determination, perhaps
motivated in part by the advice of his father, who, upon passing
by him, said, “O son, cling to two qualities: the fear of Allah and
patience. Every Muslim man in this valley is worthy of fighting
well. Then imagine how much more worthy of fighting. well are
the likes of you, men who have been made leaders over other
Muslims. Of all people, it is they (.e., leaders, commanders,
generals) who are most worthy of fighting patiently and sincerely.
So fear Allah, my son, and let no one from your companions be
more desirous than you of being patient and achieving rewards in
this war; furthermore, let no one among them be more intrepid
than you against the enemy.” Yazeed ‏ذه‎ said, “I will do so, In Sha
Allah (Allah Willing).”” Fighting with an intensity that was hard to
match, Yazeed 2: then fulfilled his promise to his father. As for
Abu Sufyaan ‏ره‎ he motivated not just his son, but many others as
well; for as I have hitherto mentioned, he 4. would go from one
Muslim division to another and impart to soldiers words of
encouragement and advice. Sa’eed ibn Al-Musayyib # reported
that his father # said, “At a moment when all voices were
silenced on the Day of Yarmook, we heard a voice that seemed to
reverberate through all parts of the encampment. “O, now the
victory of Allah is near! So remain steadfast, remain steadfast, O
eroup of Muslims!’ We looked to see whose voice it was, and we
saw that it was the voice of Abu Sufyaan a, who was calling out
from underneath the war banner of his son, Yazeed.”""!

Muslim soldiers delayed performing the ‘Eesha prayer until
victory was secured.') Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed # spent that night
in the tent of Tadhaarig, who was the brother of Haraql and the
overall leader of the Roman army that day. Until the morning,
horsemen patrolled the area near Khaalid’s tent, killing all Roman
soldiers they came across. And among the dead was Tadhaariq,

(") Tarteeb Wa-Tahdheeb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (pg. 173).
‏ذا‎ Tarteeb Wa-Tahdheeb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (pg. 173).

684. The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏د‎

who left behind as spoils for the victors many valuable
possessions. In the morning, Muslims continued the process of
collecting the spoils of war.!!

The number of deaths at Yarmook points to just how decisive
of a victory the Muslims achieved that day. Three-thousand
Muslims were martyred at Yarmook, and among them were some
of the most eminent of the Prophet’s Companions ‏كك‎ — such as
‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl 2%; his son, ‘Amr ‏ركه‎ Salamah tbn Hishaam
as, ‘Amr ibn Sa’eed ‏رذ‎ and Abbaan ibn Sa’eed #.! Quite
astoundingly, even though the Romans outnumbered the
Muslims by a ratio of six to one, the number of fatalities on their
side was far greater than the amount of Muslim deaths — in fact,
about forty times greater. More precisely, 120 000 Roman soldiers
died at Yarmook, a statistic that put the Roman Emperor, Haraql,
into a virtual state of shock.

And yet, as happy as were the Muslims that day, and as
thankful were they of Allah’s help and blessings, their joy was
drowned in a sea of sadness upon finding out, immediately after
the battle, that the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, Abu Bakr
As-Siddeeq #, had just died. All Muslim soldiers were overcome
by great sadness. News of Abu Bakt’s death had in fact reached
Yarmook just prior to the beginning of the battle, but Khaalid 2,
not wanting to lower the morale of his soldiers on such an
important occasion, decided to wait until the end of the battle
before he informed his soldiers about the sad news.

Even though no one could truly take the place of Abu Bakr ‏رك‎
‎Allah & blessed the nation with a successor who was almost as good
as Abu Bakr 2, ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 2. One of the first things
“Umar -& did upon being appoimted Khaleefah was to replace Khaalid
ibn Al-Waleed + with Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah ‏.نا‎ To be sure,
“Umar’s decision was not personal, nor was it taken in that light by
Khaalid ‏ركه‎ who magnanimously and humbly stepped down from
his post as overall leader of the Muslim armed forces in Ash-Sham.

11 Tarteeb Wa-Tahdheb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (pe. 173).
‏لكا‎ Al-’Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah (pg. 179).

Abu Bakr’s Conquests in. Ash-Sham 685

Khaalid had done his job with the utmost integrity, sincerity, and
bravery; and he achieved nothing but success on the battlefield;
nonetheless, “Umar # felt, it was time to appoint a new leader.
Perhaps ‘Umar # was motivated in his decision by more than one
factor: It was possible that he did not want success to get to Khaalid’s
head, but instead wanted him to stay as humble as he was; perhaps
he # disagreed with Abu Bakr ‏,ا‎ thinking that the better man and
not the better military leader and strategist should lead the Muslim
army; or it may be, as I have mentioned earlier on im this work, he
wanted his harshness and sternness to be offset by Abu “‘Ubaidah’s
softness and leniency, just as Abu Bakr & had wanted his softness
and leniency to be offset by Khaalid’s harshness and sternness. At
any rate, Khaalid # accepted “Umar’s decision with an air of
humility and contentment."

When Khaalid # was consoling Muslims over the death of
Abu Bakr ‏رذ‎ he ‏كف‎ said to them, “All praise is for Allah, Who has
decreed for Abu Bakr as to die. Indeed, Abu Bakr 4 was more
beloved to me than ‘Umar #. And all praise is for Allah, Who has
granted authority to ‘Umar ‏رق‎ who (during the pre-Islamic days
of ignorance) I despised more than I did Abu Bakr #, but who
(with the advent of Islam) I was then made to love.” Shortly
thereafter, Abu ‘Ubaidah « assumed his duties as the new leader
of the Muslim armed forces in Ash-Sham.

The news of the defeat at Yarmook was too much to bear for
Haraq!l. When he was informed about the humiliating loss and the
tens of thousands of Roman soldiers that had died, Haraql first
was put into a state of shock, and then was overcome by extreme
grief and sadness. A short while later, bands of Roman soldiers
made their way back to Antaakiyyah. Wanting a first-hand
account of what had gone wrong, Haraql said to them, “Woe
upon you! Inform me about the people who fought against you:
are they not human beings like you?” They said, “Yes.” Haraql
asked, “And did you not outnumber them?” They said, “Yes, in

‎ALBidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/14).‏ لذأ
‎AL-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/14).‏ ذا

686 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

every battle we were many times more than them.” Haraq] asked,
“Then what was your problem? Why did you suffer defeat at their
hands?” An old and wise leader among them was the only one
who ventured a reply: “We were defeated because they stand up
at night (to pray), they fast during the day, they fulfill their
covenants, they enjoin good, they forbid evil, and they are just
and fair among themselves; and because we drink alcohol, we
fornicate, we perpetrate unlawful acts, we violate the terms of our
covenants, we become angry and oppress others, we enjoin angry
(and senseless acts of violence), we forbid the things that please
Allah, and we spread corruption throughout the earth.” “You
have answered me truthfully,” Haragl then said to him. Haraql
appreciated the fact that, while no one else had the courage to
speak their minds, the old, wise man answered him in a
forthright, sincere, and judicious manmer.

— Chapter 3

bn Outline of Abu bak ,

In terms of foreign policy, Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ sought to achieve a
number of goals during the period of his caliphate; the most
important of those goals are as follows:

1) Instilling a Sense of Awe and Fear in the Hearts
Leaders and Peoples

of Foreign

A country that is not feared by other countries can never
achieve stability or security; rather, it will constantly be eyed by
other countries as an easy target — a country that is ripe for an
invasion. Abu Bakr 4 understood this reality all too well, which is
why one of his main foreign policy goals was to instill fear into the
hearts of the enemy. During the early days of his caliphate, he
achieved that goal in two ways.

First, he fought against and defeated apostate rebels. To be
sure, Abu Bakr’s primary goal was to bring stability to the region;

688 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فد‎

nonetheless, a secondary goal was to show the powers of foreign
nations that Muslims were capable of overcoming all threats and
challenges,

The leaders of foreign nations were observing the goings-on of
Arabia very closely. And by foreign nations, | mean, first and
foremost, the leaders of both the Roman and Persian Empires.
Prior to the advent of Islam, the only two major superpowers
were Rome and Persia; Arabs, if they had any importance at all on
the world stage, were alternately used by their Roman and
Persian overlords to fight wars on their behalf. Also, certain Arab
lands acted as a buffer zone between Roman and Persian
territory. But now Muslims were rising up; even during his
own lifetime, the Prophet #¢ had sent armies to clash with and test
the strength of Roman armies. Therefore, the Romans, as well as
the Persians, had a vested interest in what was happening in
Arabia. And much to their chagrin, they watched as Muslim
armies destroyed one apostate army after another. Consequently,
Roman and Persian leaders came to realize that the Muslim nation
was becoming stronger and was increasingly posing a more
serious threat with the passing of every day. That the Muslims
quickly and decisively overcame internal threats that were not
minor in nature certainly made Romans and Persians think many
times over before planning an attack on Arabia. Their hesitation,
which was a result of fear and a desire not to suffer great losses,
came back to haunt them when, rather than attack their Arab
neighbors, it was their Arab neighbors who attacked them and
invaded their lands.

And second, Abu Bakr 2 sent out Usaamah’s army. Instilling
fear into the hearts of the enemy was one of the main goals Abu
Bakr ‏كه‎ had in mind when he decided to send out Usaamah’s
army. The Romans in particular had every reason to be afraid.
They knew that, with the uprising of apostates, the entire Arabian
Peninsula had been thrown into a state of chaos; and yet they
were seeing with their very own eyes that the so-called
beleaguered Muslim state had just sent a large army to invade

Important Lessons and Morals 689

Roman-controlled lands. The sheer audacity of the invasion at
once baffled and terrified the Romans. What made matters worse
was the fact that Usaamah’s army succeeded in its mission,
defeating enemies that were loyal to the Romans, and taking back
with them spoils of war. Consequently, the Roman Emperor,
Haraql, sent tens of thousands of Roman soldiers to guard the
border between Ash-Sham and Arabia.

The Persians had every reason to be afraid as well, for no doubt
news of Usaamah’s army reached Persian leaders, who began to
fear for the safety and security of Persian lands — particularly Iraq.
Persian leaders, fearing the growing strength of Muslims, allied
themselves to apostate rebels, providing them with both moral and
material support in their war against Muslims. So, with the use of
minimal force, Abu Bakr 2 succeeded in sending a clear message to
the leaders of foreign empires, and that message was this: It would
not be long before the Muslims carried out an all-out invasion of
foreign lands, and they were coming with soldiers who yearned for
death just as much as enemy soldiers yearned for life.

2) Continuing the Expansion that had been Initiated by the
Prophet #

Ever since the early years of the Prophet's mission, Islam has
always been an expansionary force. Islam, after all, is not meant
for a single tribe, group, or nation, but for all of mankind.
Therefore, Muslims, those whose duty it is to convey Islam to
others, must constantly strive to break down the barriers that
prevent the message of Islam from being heard by foreign
peoples; hence the spreading of Islam from Makkah, to Al-
Madeenah, and to the rest of Arabia, and then the spreading of
Islam to [rag and Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions).

No one was closer to the Prophet 2 than was Abu Bakr 4; in
fact, after ‘Eesha prayer, they would sit together and discuss the
affairs of the Muslim nation. And so Abu Bakr ‏را‎ having spent so
much time with the Prophet #, understood not just the
importance of the aim of spreading Islam, but also the means

690 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كام‎

and the strategy that needed to be employed in order to achieve
that aim. Or in other words, Abu Bakr ‏ذأ‎ understood that military
operations were the chief means of breaking down barriers that
prevented Islam from being conveyed to other peoples. Therefore,
if Persian leaders refused to embrace Islam and if Persian peoples
remained polytheists, it was Abu Bakr’s duty to send armies to
conquer the Persian Empire.

In sending out armies to foreign lands, Abu Bakr 4 had a keen
understanding of the maxim which states that he who hesitates is
lost. If Abu Bakr # were to delay, the enemy would be
emboldened, and it would be the Romans who invaded Muslim
lands instead of Muslims invading Roman lands. And so, no
sooner did the Apostate Wars come to an end than Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎sent out armies to Iraq, and then later to Ash-Sham.

Abu Bakr’s commanders went to foreign lands with the
intention of spreading the message of Islam and of removing
tyrants and despots from their thrones. Brave men — the likes of
Khaalid #&, Abu “Ubaidah 4s, ‘Amr ‏رف‎ Shurahbeel 2, and Yazeed
‏وق‎ ~— were carefully chosen and earmarked for the task of
invading foreign lands. Abu Bakr ‏رق‎ a man of great military
experience himself, chose his leaders based on their specific
abilities, talents, and, importantly, level of piety. They then
succeeded in conquering both iraq and Ash-Sham in a very short
period of time.

3) Establishing Justice in Foreign Lands, and Treating
Conquered Peoples Mercifully

It is easy to pay lip-service to conquered peoples by saying to
them that they are being conquered for their own benefit: To
make them civilized, to bring democracy to them, to empower
them, to free them from the shackles of tyranny, and so on. Most
conquerors have said such things to the people they conquered,
when, in reality, their motives were always purely selfish and self-
serving, with no regard for the dignity and welfare of the people
they conquered.

Important Lessons and Morals 691

But Islam has always been different. Yes, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ did want
to win over the minds and hearts of conquered peoples, but he, as
opposed to almost all other non-Muslim conquerors, truly meant
what he said. Abu Bakr 4 knew that he could not win over
foreign peoples with the sword. Simply defeating an enemy
militarily neither solves nor achieves anything. Or in other words,
Abu Bakr 2 appreciated the fact that post-war planning was just
as essential as pre-war planning; the latter involves defeating the
enemy on the battlefield, and the former involves providing for
the basic needs of conquered peoples, providing them with
security, and spreading justice among them. The people had to be
reassured, so that they would not think that one tyrant was being
replaced by another, one who was more severe, harsh, and evil
than the first.

As such, Abu Bakr # ordered his commanders to be gentle and
merciful with foreign peoples. A man whose land has been
conquered needs to be reassured on many levels — that his land
will not be taken away, that he will not be prevented from his
means of livelihood, that his family will remain safe from
criminals, and so on. Muslim commanders, as per Abu Bakr’s
instructions, preserved the infrastructure of foreign lands and
honored the sanctity of life among foreign peoples. As a result,
people in Persia and Ash-Sham came to love Muslims for their
lofty morals, their generosity, their kindness, and their sincerity.
Through the lofty manners of Muslim conquerors, the light of
Islam penetrated the hearts of foreign peoples, and once again —
as during and after the conquest of Makkah — people entered
into the fold of Islam in throngs. What they gained as a result was
security, safety, stability, and prosperity, not to mention equality
with their Muslim brothers in Arabia.

For people in Persia and Ash-Sham, the difference between the
life they knew and Islam was like the difference between night
and day. When Persian or Roman armies invaded a land, they
destroyed everything that came in their path. Like barbarians,
they mutilated enemy soldiers, destroyed innocent lite, wreaked

692 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg 2s

havoc in every way possible, and earned the hate and curses of
the people they invaded for all of eternity. The horrors of war and
the liberties taken by barbarian-like victors was known all too
well by the people of that century. Therefore, people had every
reason to be pleasantly surprised when Muslim conquerors
brought, not misery and destruction, but justice, peace, honor,
and prosperity; and all the while they removed from the lives of
conquered peoples all forms of tyranny and oppression.

Abu Bakr demanded no less than perfection from his
commanders. He kept a close watch over them, and forbade them
from all acts of tyranny. And he # was quick to correct the
smallest of mistakes that were committed by them. Al-Baihagee,
the farmous compiler of Hadeeth narrations, related that, when
foreign peoples achieved victory in war, they deemed it lawful to
perpetrate barbaric acts against their enemy. For instance, it was
customary for them to carry the decapitated heads of enemy
commanders back to their kings, as a way of announcing victory.
During the war in Ash-Sham, two Muslim commanders, “Amr ibn
Al-‘ Aas #& and Shurahbeel ibn Hasanah 2, sent the severed head
of Banaan, one of the high priests of Ash-Sham, to Abu Bakr 4.
When “Amr and Shurahbeel’s messenger, ‘Ugbah ibn ‘Aamir 4,
returned with Banaan’s severed him, Abu Bakr 4 became angry.
“Uqbah ‏ذه‎ then said, “O Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah, this is
what they do with us,” to which Abu Bakr #& retorted, “And
should we follow the ways of Persia and Rome! Carry no more
heads to me; instead, it is enough for you to send me a letter or to
inform me directly (about a victory or about the death of an
enemy leader).”"

4) Granting Conquered Peoples Freedom of Religion

Although Abu Bakr’s primary goal was to spread the message
of Islam to foreign peoples, it was neither his aim nor purpose to
force people to embrace Islam, In fact, Abu Bakr 2 never forced

‎Taareekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 123).‏ [ذا

111117011711 Lessons and Morals 693

any nation or group of people to become Muslims, a policy that
was derived from the Saying of Allah ‏نظ‎

dd USS E AB LS SD
“So, will you (0 Muhammad #2) then compel mankind until
they become believers.” (Qur'an 10: 99)

Without a doubt, Muslims wanted to remove tyrants, thus
giving people the opportunity to see, appreciate, and embrace the
light of Islam. And yet when a nation was conquered and its
people were informed about the teachings of Islam, they were
allowed to choose for themselves whether they wanted to
embrace Islam or remain upon their religion. They were allowed
to choose the latter option as long as they remained true to their
covenant with Muslims, the terms of which were as follows:

1) They were to pay the Jizyah tax to Muslims. This tax was paid
by non-Muslims who lived in Muslim lands. It afforded non-
Muslims the right to follow their own religion, and it also
guaranteed them that, as long as they remained loyal to the
Muslim government, Muslims would be just towards them
and would protect them from all foreign enemies. So, like all
other Muslim citizens, they would enjoy security and safety,
and no one had the right to steal from them or wrongfully take
from their wealth.

2) There were certain jobs to which they could not aspire; for
instance, given that their loyalty to the cause of Islam was suspect
at best, they were not allowed to fight in the Muslim military.

3) They were not to pose a threat to Muslims or their religion, and
they were not to form any movement that sought to ruin,
destroy, or distort any aspect of Islam.

4) They were allowed to maintain their religion only, but if they
wanted to switch from their religion to another one, only Islam
would be accepted from them.

694 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏وف‎

Islam recognizes that beliefs are in the heart, the only part of
one’s body that is impervious to coercion. Therefore, Muslims did
not force others to embrace Islam; rather, through deeds and
sayings, through theoretical teaching and practical application,
they sought to influence non-Muslims in the hope that they
would, of their own will, accept and embrace Islam.!!

Second: An Outline of Abu Bakr’s Military Strategies

By studying the military conquests that took place during Abu
Bakr’s caliphate, one is able to discern a pattern of key strategies
he employed to achieve victory against the enemy. Some of the
more important of those strategies were as follows:

1) Conquering Enemy Territory One City at a Time

It was clear that, among Muslims, the overall strategist and
decision-maker of foreign wars was Abu Bakr «, and not his
commanders. Abu Bakr # employed the services of trustworthy
and speedy messengers, and was thus able to remain in almost
constant communication with his commanders. By studying both
the invasions of Iraq and Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding
regions), one is able to see that there were two kinds of decisions
that needed to be made: The first had to do with the overall
strategy of the war, which involved issues such as, who to attack,
when to attack, when to retreat, when to join up with other
armies, when to suffice with the number of soldiers in one’s own
army, and so on. Such decisions were, for the most part, made by
Abu Bakr ‏.ف‎ A Muslim commander made a decision on the spot
only when action had to be taken immediately — when there was
no time to wait for Abu Bakr’s command. And even then, a
commander would make his decision and then inform Abu Bakr
a, about it. And then there were battle decisions, decisions that
had to do with the strategies of fighting a specific battle — where
to position each battalion, where to position horsernen, what

11 Taareekh Ad-Da'wah Mlal-Islam (pg. 263).

Important Lessons and Morals 695

formation was best suited to defeat the enemy, and so on. Such
decisions were almost always left to the commander.

Among the former category of decisions was the question of
how fast the Muslim army should penetrate into enemy territory.
One theory suggested that Muslims should penetrate enemy
territory as deeply as possible and with the greatest speed
possible. Abu Bakr 2, however, rejected this theory, strictly
ordering his commanders to secure the nearest part of enemy
lands before they ventured to penetrate any more deeply into
enemy territory. When Abu Bakr ‏وف‎ ordered both Khaalid # and
‘Tyaadh # to attack Iraq from both its northern and southern
fronts, he ‏نف‎ sent the same message to both of them: “Whichever
of you reaches Al-Heerah first is the leader of Al-Heerah. And
when you gather there, having broken up enemy units that are
situated between Persian and Arab lands, and when you have
secured the land behind you, such that no one can attack you from
the rear, then let one of you stay in Al-Heerah, while the other
attacks the enemy, fighting with them over the things (property
and wealth) they have in their hands. Seek help from Allah and
fear Him. Choose the Hereafter over this world, and you will be
given both. Do not choose this world (over the Hereafter);
otherwise, you will be divested of both. Be careful regarding the
matters Allah warns you about by abstaining from sins and
hurrying to repent. Beware of persisting (in sinful ways) and of
delaying repentance.”

This letter shows that Abu Bakr « was no neophyte when it
came to the art of war; to the contrary, a veteran of many wars,
Abu Bakr ‏كن‎ knew exactly how to defeat enemies, and how to
break their wills. Abu Bakr’s superior knowledge of warfare was
acknowledged by the greatest expert of warfare at the time —
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2. Khaalid & not only executed Abu
Bakr’s commands, but knew that doing so was the best thing he
could do to achieve victory.

(') Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/188, 189).

696 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

When Khaalid 2 traveled north of Al-Heerah to help ‘Iyaadh
# accomplish his mission, he stopped at Karbala. Muslims
complained to him about the many fltes that were bothering
them. Khaalid ‏ذه‎ then said to ‘Abdullah ibn Watheemah ‏رف‎ “Be
patient, for [1 want to tear apart enemy strongholds that ‘Iyaadh
was ordered to take care of, so that we can inhabit those areas
with Arabs and thus protect Muslim armies from being attacked
from their rear. Then more Arabs can come to us without having
to be afraid (of an enemy ambush). This is what the Khaleefah has
ordered us to do, and following his opinion is tantamount to
achieving help for this nation.”

In Iraq, Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah # followed the same
strategy. A respected and brilliant leader in his own right, Al-
Muthannah # said to his soldiers, “Fight the Persians along the
borders of their lands, or in other words, in the area that is closes
to Arab lands. And do not fight them deep in their country. If (by
fighting along the border of enemy territory,) Allah grants victory
to Muslims, they will have secured the area that is behind them.
And if they are made to suffer defeat, they can retreat and join up
with another division (of soldiers); then the next time around,
they will be bolder and more knowledgeable regarding how to
defeat the enemy, and they will continue to be so until Allah
blesses them with victory.’”"!

In the conquests of Ash-Sham, Muslims were protected from
the rear by vast and empty desert lands, and yet they still took
precautionary steps to make sure that the enemy would not be
able to attack them from behind; furthermore, they would secure
the lands that were situated both to the right and to the left of their
positions.”

11 Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/189).
“I Al-Isaabah (8/568), and Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Nal-Islam (pg. 331).
3] Teareekh Ad-Da’wah Ual-Islam (pe. 331).

important Lessons and Morals 697

TS

Interestingly, Abu Bakr # did not institute a draft during his
caliphate; or in other words, he #& forced no one to fight in his wars.
And yet victory would not come without sufficient numbers; after
all, Abu Bakr # was not leading minor raids against small tribes; he
a was invading the only two superpowers of the world — the
Roman and Persian Empires. The question was, then, how was he
‏كه‎ going to procure enough men to achieve his goals of conquering
Ash-Sham and Iraq. This was a question that Abu Bakr e# did not
take lightly, especially considering the fact that, in enlisting
soldiers, he set restrictions, not allowing a large segment of the
population in Arabia to take part in his wars. For when Khaalid ‏ذه‎
‎and Al-Muthannah « hinted at the fact that they needed more
men, Abu Bakr # replied, “Call to arms those who fought against
the apostates and those who (at the very least) remained steadfast
upon Islam following the death of the Messenger of Allah #2. And
let no one who had apostatized participate in the invasion (of Iraq),
at least not until | arrive at a final decision regarding the matter.”"'
Nonetheless, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ took key steps to convince people to
volunteer: He 2 delivered moving speeches in which he 4
reminded people about the rewards of fighting in the way of Allah
4%, and he ‏ذه‎ sought the help of Muslims in Yemen. Consequently,
many people volunteered to fight in both Iraq and Ash-Sham. So,
in short, the instituting of a draft was not required because a
sufficient number of people volunteered to fight, wanting to be
recipients of Allah’s Promise of one of two things: victory or
martyrdom; in fact, many people, given the high level of their
Faith, preferred the latter over the former.

Abu Bakr 4 focused his energies on convincing people to join
his armies not just before the invasions of Iraq and Ash-Sham, but
during the invasions as well. Thus he 4 continued to send his
commanders reinforcements — battalions that consisted of a few
hundred or more men — until the very end of his life.

698 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ذف‎
‎3) Specifying the Goal of His Wars

Abu Bakr # of course knew what his primary goal was in
invading Iraq and Ash-Sham, but that was not enough: He *
further made sure that every soldier had the same knowledge as
well. In his speeches, and in the advice he imparted to
commanders and soldiers alike, Abu Bakr « made it clear that
they were fighting in order to spread the message of Islam, to
convey it to all peoples throughout the earth, and to remove the
tyrants that were preventing their people from learning about the
one true religion. Commanders were fully aware of their goals, as
is proven by the uniform set of choices they gave to enemies:
Embrace Islam, pay the Jizyah tax, or prepare for war.

4) Sending Soldiers to the Places They were Most Needed

Abu Bakr had a clear policy when it came to sending
soldiers to war zones: If he @ was fighting battles on many fronts,
he would concentrate the bulk of his forces where they were most
needed. That being said, he 4 would never neglect sending forces
to places where they were less urgently required. Therefore, he ‏وك‎
‎established a balance, concentrating the bulk of his forces where
they were most needed, and sending other units and armies of
soldiers to other, if not less important, then at least less urgent,
war zones. So, for instance, Abu Bakr # used the majority of his
forces to fight against the apostates, since the apostates posed an
immediate and a dangerous threat to Muslims; nonetheless, he 2s
did not ignore other war fronts, as is proven by the fact that he 2
sent Usaarmah to fight along the borders of Roman territory.

In other wars, Abu Bakr 2 similarly showed a brilliant ability
to spread out his armies in such as way as to achieve optimal
results, In the middle and latter stages of his caliphate, he « had
to spread out his armed forces between Iraq and Ash-Sham (Syria
and surrounding regions). Then, when it became clear to him that
the war in Ash-Sham was not going as well as it was in Iraq, he &

١1 Taareekh Ad-Da’wah al-Islam (pg. 332).

Important Lessons and Morals 699

ordered Khaalid to take half of his army and-to travel
immediately from Iraq to Ash-Sham. With the majority of his
overall armed forces now in Ash-Sham, Abu Bakr 4s did not
neglect the war front in Iraq; he # left a sizeable army there, and
he .& appointed over them a capable and wise leader, Al-
Muthannah ibn Haarithah 2.

What I mentioned above are just a few examples. Throughout
his caliphate, Abu Bakr « continued to deploy, redeploy, reassign,
and transfer units of soldiers based on what was needed in each
particular war zone; and by doing those things in a strategically
brillant manner, he & imstilled confidence in his soldiers, who
came to know that if they were ever greatly outnumbered by the
enemy, they could count on their leader to send them enough
soldiers to give them at least a fighting chance to win.

5) Replacing Army Commanders

No governor, commander, or leader of an army was
euaranteed that he had a job for life; to the contrary, every
government employee was constantly being judged and evalu-
ated based on his job performance. If someone was neglectful in
his duties, he would be fired on the spot. And even if someone
was honest and did his best, but ultimately failed to accomplish
his mission, Abu Bakr 4 would consider firing him if someone
else would be able to do a better job. This was just and correct, for,
according to Abu Bakyr’s policy, the feelings of the individual were
less important than the greater good for the masses. Such. was the
reality of public service during Abu Bakr’'s caliphate, and such
should be the reality in any government. Consider, for instance,
when Khaalid ibn Sa’eed # failed to complete his mission in
Tabook. Khaalid was honest and upright; he did his best to
complete his mission, but ultimately he failed. That did not make
him any less of a person as a Muslim, but it did raise the question
whether someone else would be able to succeed where Khaalid 2,
had failed. Abu Bakr # thought this question over and decided to
replace Khaalid ‏كه‎ with ‘Tkrimah 2; in the end, ‘Ikrimah #&
successfully completed his mission.

700 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏يك‎

Also, even when a man was qualified for a job, and even if he
was performing it well, Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ would not hesitate to appoint
someone who was better qualitied. Al-Muthannah & was doing a
wonderful job in Iraq, but still, Khaalid 4 was more qualified and
would be better able to win future battles. And in Ash-Sham, Abu
“Ubaidah .& was very well-suited to lead the Muslim armies in the
region, but again, Abu Bakr « thought it better to replace Abu
‘Ubaidah # with someone who was, if not a better Muslim, then
at least a better military commander — Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed as.
Therefore, when it came to appointing and replacing leaders, Abu
Bakr & was concerned not as much with the feelings of
individuals as with the greater good for the masses of Muslims.
As the leader of an entire nation, Abu Bakr « understood that, in
war, and in life in general, the needs of the few do not outweigh
the needs of the many.

6) Communicating Constantly with Army Commanders

During the period of Abu Bakz’s caliphate, there were no
cameras, satellite photos, spy planes, telephones, or any other
form of technology that enabled a leader to communicate with his
army real time. There was always a delay: the time it took for a
rider to travel from the war front back to Al-Madeenah. And yet,
based on all of the events that took place during the apostate wars
as well as the invasions of Iraq and Ash-Sham, it was as if Abu
Bakr was, not back in Al-Madeenah, but present in each war
zone. He 4s gave commands and planned out travel routes to his
armies as if he was seeing everything that was happening in every
war zone, and as if he had access to modern-day maps that show
the terrain and topography of every region.

How did Abu Bakr manage to leave the impression that he
was present at every war front? It was not through magic, but
instead through an intricate message-sending system that he had
established with his commanders. For just as important as the
soldiers on the front lines were the messengers who traveled back
and forth between the front lines and Al-Madeenah, with

Important Lessons and Morals ‏01م‎

messages going back and forth between Abu Bakr and his
commanders. Abu Bakr’s messengers were trustworthy; they
rested little along the way so as to carry out their mission as
quickly as possible; and they were cautious and secretive, so as to
avoid letting the enemy know about Abu Bakr’s plans. Therefore,
Abu Bakr # had detailed knowledge about what was going on in
the front lines because of the organized manner in which he kept
in constant communication with his army commanders.

In the end, much of the success in Iraq and Ash-Sham can be
attributed to Abu Bakr’s sound military planning. Yes, Abu Bakr
# is primarily remembered by Muslims for his piety, his closeness
to the Prophet #8, his softness, his fear of Allah 8, and his
knowledge. But he was also a brilliant military planner — in fact,
one of the best in the entire history of mankind. I don’t think that
Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ was a born military commander; rather, I feel that it
was more a matter of him going through many years of training
under the tutelage of the Prophet #¢. Abu Bakr ‏كك‎ did not go out
looking for war; rather, war came to him, in the form of Quraish’s
armies at Badr and Uhud, the confederate armies at the borders of
Al-Madeenah, and the many other armies that the Muslims faced
during the lifetime of the Prophet #é.

Abu Bakr # himself fought alongside the Prophet # in every
single battle, becoming in the process, not just a skilled warrior,
but also an intelligent military planner. He # spent a great deal of
time with the Prophet #@ in fact, when other people would go to
sleep after the ‘Eesha prayer, he would stay up with the Prophet #
and discuss matters that pertained to the well-being of the
Muslim nation; and no doubt, among the things they discussed
during such meetings were issues that related to war. So based on
his military experience and all that he # learned from the Prophet
#¢, Abu Bakr 4 was able to put together a series of brilliant plans,
plans that involved the defeat of the apostates and then the
invasions of Iraq and Ash-Sham.!#!

Ul Tyareekh Ad-Da’wah Tal-Islam (pg. 326).

702 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ققد‎

Third: The R

of Common Soldiers, as Explained by Abu Bakr <1
the Advice He 2 Gave in Speeches and |

In everything a Muslim does, there are etiquettes he must
follow, and there are rights that he must fulfill. So, yes, war is a
bloody affair, which mainly involves each man trying to kill men
from the opposing army. And yet even im war, there are rights
that must be fulfilled. First, there are certain rights that pertain to
Allah & — such as being patient when facing the enemy; fighting
purely for the sake of Allah; acting in a trustworthy manner,
especially when it comes to the collection and distribution of war

booty; and not allowing any personal motives — such as
friendship, family relations, etc. — to turn one away from one’s
duties.

Then there are rights that pertain to the leader of the Muslims
army. For instance, it is his right to be obeyed by his soldiers;
furthermore, itis his right not to be questioned or criticized for the
manner in which he distributes the spoils of war. Finally, there are
rights that soldiers have over their leader. For example, a leader
should inquire about the health and well-being of his soldiers; he
should be gentle with them; he should provide them with
adequate nourishment; he should, in order to ensure the safety of
his soldiers, send out spies to find out if the enemy is nearby or is
planning an ambush; he should encourage them to fight for the
sake of Allah; he should remind them about Allah’s rewards and
about the honor of dying a martyr; he should consult those among
them who are known for their intelligence and good character;
and, among them, he should enjoin good and forbid evil. The
following is a more detailed discussion of the rights of Allah, of
leaders, and of soldiers during times of war.

‎Ai-fdaarah Al-‘Askariyyah Fid-Daulatul-Islaamiyyah (1/120).‏ لذأ

Important Lessons and Morals 703

1) The Rights of Allah #

a) Being Patient When Facing the Enemy

Upon sending ‘Tkrimah ibn Abu Jahl & to ’Ammaan, Abu Bakr
# imparted to him these farewell words of advice: “And when
you meet the enemy, be patient.” Similarly, when he - sent
Haashim ibn ‘Utbah ibn Abu Waqqaas « to Ash-Sham, he ‏مف‎ said,
“When you meet your enemy, be patient and encourage others to
be patient. And know that, for every step you take; for every bit of
money you spend (for good causes); for every time you become
afflicted with thirst or fatigue while you are in the way of Allah,
Allah will record for you a good deed. Verily, Allah does not
waste the rewards of good-doers.’”!

b) Making One’s Intention Sincere for the Sake of Allah &

In the speeches he made to departing soldiers, and in the letters
he sent to commanders, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ always made one point clear:
Their fighting was for naught if their intention was to achieve
some worldly aim; or m other words, it was incumbent upon
them to make their intention sincere and pure for the sake of Allah
alone. When Abu Bakr 4 sent a letter to Khaalid ‏رف‎ ordering him
to go to Ash-Sham, he # stressed the importance of being sincere
and of doing deeds for Allah % alone. After he told Khaalid # that
he should perform deeds only for the sake of Allah #, he warned
him not to be proud or arrogant, and not to think that, by fighting
in the way of Allah, he was doing a favor to Allah &. Instead, it
was Allah 4 Who was doing him 2 tavor — and all favors, for that
matter, are from Allah #.

‎Being Trustworthy‏ ل

‎Both to his commanders and his soldiers Abu Bakr 2 made it
clear that they must be trustworthy m handling war booty; he

‎“Uyoon AL-Akhbaar (1/188).‏ أذ
‎I Eytooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pg. 34).‏

704. The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذف‎

would issue this warning because stealing from war booty is a
serious sin. He a further ordered every person to take any wealth
he found on the battlefield and to give it to the person who was in
charge of the spoils of war, so that it could then be distributed
fairly among the army’s soldiers. While bidding farewell to
Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan #, Abu Bakr # imparted to him advice
about a number of topics, one of them being the harmful
consequences of wrongfully taking from the spoils of war.

2) The Rights of a Leader

a) Being Obedient to Him

Also in his speeches and letters, Abu Bakr 2 made it clear that,
when it comes to their leader, soldiers have many rights that they
must fulfill. One of those rights is that they must be obedient to him.

When Abu Bakr # decided to replace Al-Muthannah & with
Khaalid as the leader of the Muslim army in Irag, he 4 wrote
this letter to Al-Muthannah 4s: “Verily, I have sent Khaalid ibn Al-
Waleed 2 to you in the land of Iraq. So welcome him, and order
those that are with you to do the same. Then help and support
him, and neither disobey any of his commands nor oppose any of
his opinions. For indeed, he is among those that Allah 88 has
described in His Book when He said:

‎sgt‏ و وما 007 1 ل 27 ; ا
‎hae‏ تحمل ‎Maat al oll a Sgt,‏ عَلَ ]أ

‏سَجِّدا#
‎“Muhammad (#2) is the Messenger of Allah, and those who are‏
‎with him are severe against disbelievers, and merciful among‏

‎themselves. You see them bowing and falling down prostrate (in
prayer). (Qur'an 48: 29)

‏7 مم مع عط ‎a Rote‏ %

‎whiz pepe ‏نر رحماء‎

‎Also, when he 4 sent a number of armies to Ash-Sham, he ‏كك‎
‎stressed the importance of obeying leaders to departing soldiers:

‎''l Taareekh Al-Khulafaa, by As-Suyootee (pg. 121).

Important Lessons and Morals 705

“O people, Allah has indeed blessed you with Isiam, has honored
you with Jiheaad, and has preferred you (over the people of other
nations) with this religion. So prepare, O slaves of Allah, to attack the
Romans in Ash-Sham. Verily, lam appointing over you leaders, and
1 am handing to them banners. So obey your Lord, and do not
oppose your Leaders. Make well your intentions, your drinks, and
your food (ie., make sure that what you eat and drink is lawful and
is procured through lawful means). V ‏القت‎ Allah is with those who
fear Him and those who are good-doers.”") His soldiers answered
him in unison, saying, “You are our leader, and we are your
followers. It is for you to command, and for us to obey. We will obey
your command, and we will go wherever you tell us to go.”"")

Obeying the army's leader was an oft-repeated theme in Abu
Bakr’s advice to soldiers. Yet another example is how he # ordered
Abu ‘Ubaidah 4s to obey Khaalid ‏كن‎ when he appointed the latter as
the new leader of the Muslim army in Ash-Sham. Abu Bakr’s order
had a trickling-down effect on his army, for Abu “Ubaidah # not
only obeyed Khaalid 2, but he also — based both on Abu Bakyr’s
command and on his own initiative — ordered his subordinates to
obey him. For instance, Abu ‘Ubaidah ‏ف‎ ordered Ad-Dahhaak ibn
Oais ‏ذه‎ to go fromone group ofsoldiers to another, ordering themall
to obey Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed ‏رك‎ the new leader of the Muslim
armed forces in Ash-Sham (Syria and surrounding regions). All of
the soldiers responded to Dahhaak ‏كه‎ by vowing to both listen to
and obey all of Khaalid’s commands.™!

b) Uniting Around Him
Allah $% said:

o
ae 1

ae ‏إل‎ se 12S) ‏الأ الكو‎ a "A a 55)
‏م 7 3 & و‎ 7 XK Se “* ry

‎Evtooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 60, 61).‏ أذ
‎PI Al-Futooh, by Ibn ‘Atam (1/82).‏
‎Vl Putooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pg. 189).‏

706 The Biography of Abu Bakr As~Siddeeg 4

$58 ‏الا‎ ci 2A ‏تي‎ Ac
‏صر ليه‎ 2 " wr 3 6 45 ‏م‎

“When there comes to them some matter touching (public) safety
or fear, they make it known (among the people), if only they had
referred it to the Messenger or to those charged with authority
among them, the proper investigators would have understood it
from them (directly). Had it not been for the Grace and Mercy of
Allah upon you, you would have followed Shaitan (the Devil),
save a few of you.” (Qur'an 4: 83)

Regarding a matter of public concern, it is not up to followers
to conduct an investigation and to arrive at their own conclusions;
rather, it is their duty to unite around their leader and to allow
him to be completely and solely in charge of all of their affairs. If,
regarding a specific matter, he is in the wrong, then it is the duty
of his followers to point out the truth to him; they should do this
as part of the Islamic process of mutual consultation.|!

Therefore, people must first know who their leader is, and then
they must trust in and follow his authority. At times, a number of
people have authority of a group, and so it must be made known
who among them is the overall leader of that group. When Abu
Bakr ‏كف‎ invaded Ash-Sham, he ‏ذا‎ sent four armies under the
leadership of four commanders. Each commander was individu-
ally in charge of his army, but when two armies came together, it
became important to know who of the two leaders was in charge
of the other. When Abu Bakr «& advised his four commanders, he
first said, “O Abu “Ubaidah, 0 Mu’aadh, O Shurahbeel, O Yazeed,
you are the defenders of this Religion, and I have entrusted you
with the affairs of these armies. So work hard (at excelling im your
duties), and be as one hand in facing your enemy.”"! Then Abu
Bakr 4 clarified who would be in charge when the four armies
would gather in one place and merge into a single larger army:
“When you arrive in that land, when you meet the enemy, and

11 Al-Ahkaam As-Sultaaniyyah, by Al-Mawardee (pg. 48).
PT AL-Eutooh, by Ibn ‘Atam (1/84).

Important Lessons and Morals 707

when you fight together in a single place, then your leader is Abu
‘Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah «. And if Abu “Ubaidah does not meet
up with you when the rest of you are together and ready for war,
then your leader is Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan.”"! Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎went into detail about what would happen when his four armies
came together in order to avoid confusion and disagreement
among his four commanders. In a similar vein, Abu Bakr # said
to ‘Amr ibn AL’ Aas 4, “You are one of our commanders there.
But if you come together to fight as one army, then your leader is
Abu ‘Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah ‏شايع‎

[t was always possible for circumstances to arise that would
make it difficult to know who the leader of the Muslim army was;
if that would have happened, confusion and disagreement would
have resulted, and it would have been possible for two or more
people to vie for leadership. If that were to happen, then Muslims
would be busy fighting among thernselves instead of against the
enemy. Therefore, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ always made it clear not just who
the leader was of the Muslim army, but also who would replace
that leader in the case of his absence or death. The above-
mentioned narrations about the four armies that invaded Ash-
Sham refer to one example; another example is the letter Abu Bakr
wrote to Al-Muthannah ibn Haarithah ‏:دف‎ “Verily, I have sent
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2 to you in the land of Iraq.... As long as
he stays with you, he is the Ameer (the overall leader), but if he
leaves you (i.e, if he leaves Iraq to go elsewhere), then your
previous job (.e., that of leader) will be yours again. And peace be
upon you.”

lands

c) Hastening to Execute His Comn

Followers must not only obey their leader's commands, but
they must do so ina speedy manner — especially when time is of
the essence. In regard to Abu Bakr’s caliphate, there are many

‎Futooh Ash-Sham (pg. 7).‏ ذا
‎Futooh Ash-Sham (pg. 48).‏ 1
‎“I Al-Wathasig As-Siyaasiyyah, by Humaidullah (pg. 371).‏

708 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

examples of how his commanders and soldiers responded quickly
to his commands, wasting no time in the process; the same goes
for those who applied the orders of Abu Bakr’s commanders. For
example, when Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2 informed his soldiers
that he had been ordered to lead his army towards the stronghold
of Musailamah “The Liar,” they responded by saying, “It is your
opinion that matters. There is not a single person among us who
will disobey your orders.’”""!

When Khaalid ‏أ‎ was in frag, and when Abu Bakr 4 wrote to
him, ordering him to take half of his army to Ash-Sham, Khaalid
@ executed Abu Bakr’s commands very quickly, which was
important since ‘Amr’s army in Ash-Sham was desperately in
need of reinforcements. Khaalid 2 then took a little-used route,
traveled both by morning and by night, and reached his
destination in about just five days.""!

When Abu Bakr 2 wrote to “‘Amribn Al-Aas 2, ordering him to
travel from the lands of OQudaa’ah until Yarmook, the latter neither
questioned the former’s decision nor wasted time in executing his
orders. Also, when Abu Bakr « sent Abu ‘Ubaidah # and Yazeed 4s
to the lands of Ash-Sham, ordering them to fight along the borders of
enemy territory but not too deep inside of Ash-Sham, they too were
quick to execute his commands. This was a consistent pattern during
the caliphate of Abu Bakr 4: subordinates of all levels followed the
orders of their leaders, doing so with the utmost expediency. That, to
be sure, is one of the key reasons why Muslim armies were blessed

with many important victories.””!

d) Not Complaining about His Distribution of War Booty

It happened on a few occasions that Bedouins complained to
the Prophet #2 about his distribution of the war booty; they felt

11 AL-Futooh, by Ibn ‘Atam (1/29).

PY Al-ldaarah Al-‘Askariyyah Fid-Daulatul-Islaamiyyah, by Sulaimaan Aal Kamaal
(1/112).

©) ALldaarah Al-'Askariyyah Fid-Daulatul-tIslaamiyyah, by Sulaimaan Aal-Kamaal
(1/112).

Important Lessons and Morals 709

that they were entitled to a greater share, but the Prophet 2%
censured them, telling them, in so many words, that if he wasn’t
fair, then who was? Of course, the Prophet #£ was completely fair,
and their complaints were unwarranted; furthermore, other
Muslims learned not to make the same mistake. In fact, it was a
lesson well learned, for during Abu Bakr’s caliphate it is not
related that any soldier complained about receiving too small a
share of the spoils; instead, they, as was required of them,
submitted to their commander's method of distributing war
booty. And why shouldn't they have, for their commander
followed the orders of Abu Bakr ‏روف‎ who in turn was following the
commands and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ‏كل‎

After the conclusion of the Battle of Yamaamah, Khaalid ibn Al-
Waleed ‏وك‎ wrote to Abu Bakr 4, informing him about the war booty
he gained. Abu Bakr # then wrote the following response: “Gather
the spoils, the women and children prisoners, and all of the wealth
that Allah has given you from the Banu Haneefah tribe. Then take
one-fifth of all that you have gathered and send it to us, so that itcan
be distributed among those Muslims that are here with us; and give
each person that which he rightfully deserves. And peace be upon
you.” All of Abu Bakr’s commanders distributed war booty in the
exact same mammer, and no soldier questioned them or complained
about receiving too small of a share.”

3) The Rights of Soldiers

a) Watching them While They are Lined Up, and Making Sure
that They are Doing Well

When a group of apostates planned to attack Al-Madeenah,
Abu Bakr # lined up available soldiers and then, in order to
ensure the safety of everyone in Al-Madeenah, chose from rows of
soldiers men whose job it would be to guard the main entry points
of Al-Madeenah.*!

‎Al-Idaarah Al-Askariyyah Fid-Daulatul-Islaamiyyah (1/120).‏ لذأ
‎Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/64).‏ 1

710 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq &

Also, when an army was prepared for the invasion of Ash-
Sham, Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ while riding on his mount, positioned himself
so that he could have a clear vision of his entire army. He looked
upon his soldiers, who filled the land before him, and his face lit
up with joy. Then, before they departed, he imparted words of
advice to them; supplicated for them; handed out war banners;
and, as they departed, walked alongside them for approximately
two miles." To be sure, the concern Abu Bakr 2s showed and the
time he gave instilled soldiers with a sense of love and respect for
their leader.

b) Being Easy on Soldiers

Yes, war is tough and painful; nonetheless, a leader does not
have to make matters more difficult than necessary for his
soldiers. In fact, he can take a number of steps to make a journey
more bearable for them. For instance, he can hire a road guide to
take his army along the easiest and fastest path that leads towards
their destination. Without a guide, a leader might take a
circuitous path that results in unnecessary fatigue and hardship
for his soldiers.

During the Apostate Wars, Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ ordered Khaalid ibn
Al-Waleed 4 to be easy on his soldiers and to take along with him
euides.! Throughout the same wars, Abu Bakr gave similar
commands to the rest of his commanders as well.”! During the
invasion of lrag, before Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2 agreed to a
truce with the people of Alyas (and others as well), he stipulated
that they accompany the Muslim army, walk ahead of them,
guard them, and guide Muslim commanders along the best roads
to travel upon. He # made this stipulation because the people of
Alyas had detailed knowledge of the terrain in Iraq, and because
he wanted to make matters as easy and comfortable as possible
for his soldiers.

‎Al-Idaarah Al-'Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/136).‏ لذأ
‎Al-Idaarah Al-'Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/136).‏ 1
‎Pl Ma‘aathir Al-Anaafah, by Al-Qalqashandee (3/140).‏

Important Lessons and Morals 711

Similarly, when Khaalid # was ordered to leave lraq and
travel immediately towards Ash-Sham, he # again employed the
services of guides. And upon sending Yazeed inb Abu Sufyaan ‏فك‎
‎to Ash-Sham, Abu Bakr 4 said, “While you are traveling, do not
make matters difficult for yourself or for your companions.”"!
Then when Yazeed # forced his soldiers to pick up their pace, one
of them reminded him that he should adhere to what Abu Bakr ‏نك‎
‎commanded, in terms of being gentle and easy with his
soldiers.”

Upon sending ‘Amr ibn Al-’Aas 4 to Palestine, Abu Bakr &
said, “Be as a father to those that are with you, and, as you travel
with them, be gentle with them, for among them are weak (and
perhaps even sick) people.’ Given the frequency with which Abu
Bakr ‏ف‎ spoke about being gentle and easy-going with
subordinates, his message got through to his commanders,
who, whenever they would travel with their soldiers, would take
guides who could point out to them the easiest roads to travel
upon, the roads upon which water and grass could easily be
procured. The overall goal, after all, was to reach the enemy
without weakening the physical stamina of soldiers, and without
destroying their morale.'*!

‎Giving Each Battalion a Slogan‏ ع

‎Slogans serve two main purposes: They keep battalions
organized into groups, and in times of hardship, they have a
morale-boosting effect on soldiers ~ especially when the words
of the slogan convey an important meaning. Wheh Usaamah ‏ف‎
‎went to fight the Romans in Ash-Sham, the slogan of his army
was, “Yaa Mansoor Ummat.”!4) During the Apostate Wars, when
Khaalid # traveled towards Yamaamah, the slogan of his army

‎'] Eutooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Waaqidee (1/23).

‎Vl Eutooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Waaqidee (1/23).

‎Al-Idaarah Al-‘Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/149).‏ ذا
‎At-Tabagaat ibn Sa’ad (2/191).‏ ]4[

712 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏وك‎

was, “O Muhammad, © Muhammad.”""! The slogan of Tanookh
during the invasion of Iraq was, “O family of the slaves of
Allah”) And in Yarmook during the invasion of Ash-Sham, the
people of each battalion and tribe had their own specific slogan,
one that helped the members of battalions to remain together.
When the fighting would commence, the members of each
battalion would call out their slogan. The slogan of Abu
‘Ubaidah’s battalion was, “O Ummat, 0 Ummat’’; the slogan of
Khaalid’s battalion was, “O party of Allah’; the slogan for the
tribesmen of ‘Abs was, fittingly, “O people of ” Abs’; the slogan of
the people of Yemen and of other groups with them was, “O
helpers of Allah”; the slogan of Humair Al-Fath as well as of
Daaram As-Sakaasik was, “Patience, patience.” And the slogan of
the Banu Muraad tribe was, “O help of Allah: descend upon us.”
These were some of the more prominent slogans during the Battle
of Yarmook.!!

d) Protecting Soldiers From Enemy Spies and Surprise
Ambushes

When Abu Bakr # sent commanders on military missions, he
« warned them not to allow strangers to enter their encampment
and mingle freely among Muslim soldiers — at least not until they
ascertained their identities and became certain that they were not
spies.|4! On a similar note, he + forbade commanders from
enlisting the help of former apostates. When fighting against the
enemy, Muslim soldiers needed to trust in one another, and they
could not trust apostates since their loyalty to Islam. was in
question; or in other words, if they had apostatized once before
for worldly reasons, they might do the same again and turn
against their Muslim brothers — especially if they began to feel
that the enemy was gaining the upper hand against the Muslims.

"I Toareekh At-Tabaree (4/111).

‎Al-Idaarah Al-‘Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/174).‏ لها
‎AL-Idaarah Al-Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/174).‏ أذا
‎Tyareekh At-Tabaree (4/71, 72).‏ ذا

111180118111 Lessons and Morals 713

During the invasion of Ash-Sham (yria and surrounding
regions), Abu Bakr 2 advised his commanders to be very careful
in dealing with foreign messengers. He 4 advised them not to allow
foreign messengers to see the weak points of their armies or to
mingle freely among Muslim soldiers, so as to prevent them from
learning about any sensitive information that they could use against
the Muslims. When Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan # was departing from
Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr said to him, “When messengers from
your enemy come to you, be generous towards them, so as to leavea
good first impression upon them. And keep them with you (in your
encampment) only for a short while, so that when they leave, they
will remain ignorant about what you have with you (in terms of the
weaknesses of your army); also, forbid your soldiers from talking to
them. You alone should speak to them.”

In order to protect the lives of common soldiers, Abu Bakr ‏نه‎
‎stressed the importance of appointing guards who could sound
the alarm in the case of a surprise attack or ambush. Abu Bakr ‏ف‎
‎followed his own advice when, during the Apostate Wars, he <
appointed guards to watch over the entry points of Al-Madeenah,
fearing that neighboring apostate tribes might attempt to Invade
Muslims in their capital city. When Abu Bakr ‏كذ‎ sent Khaalid -& to
fight in the Apostate Wars, he 2 advised him to always guard
against a surprise attack. And he # gave similar advice to his
commanders during the invasions of frag and Ash-Sham. In fact,
so important was the job of guards — for if one guard was
negligent in his duties, by falling asleep, for instance, he might be
the reason why enemy attackers became able to infiltrate and
attack a Muslim encampment unnoticed — that Abu Bakr 4: told
his commanders to conduct surprise inspections of them in order
to weed out those guards that weren't taking their duties
seriously. When Yazeed # was leaving for Ash-Sham, Abu
Bakr & said to him, “Keep many guards, and come upon them by
surprise frequently (in order to see whether they are doing their
jobs), both by day and by night’?!

[I Murooj Adh-Dhahab (2/309).

/14 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

And to ‘Amr ibn Al-’Aas #, who was also heading towards
Ash-Sham, Abu Bakr - said, “Order your companions to stand
guard (over the entrances of the Muslim encampment), and then
personally supervise their duties.” Commanders of Muslim
armies obeyed Abu Bakr’s orders, appoimting men to stand
guard both when the army was traveling and when it had
stopped to make camp."

e) Providing Soldiers with an Adequate Supply of Food and
Provisions

True, some of the food and supplies that Muslims acquired
came from the spoils of war that they gained from their enemy;
nonetheless, from the very outset of military expeditions Abu
Bakr 4 would make sure that his soldiers had everything they
needed to complete their missions. In fact, Abu Bakr 2 would, on
a consistent basis, purchase camels, horses, and weapons as a way
of financing military expeditions.”! And when Abu Bakr ‏قد‎
‎ordered Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 4 to go out and fight against the
apostates, he « told Khaalid # not to enter enemy lands unless he

had with him an adequate amount of supplies.©!

Abu Bakr’s army commanders also did everything they could
to ensure that Muslim soldiers were well supplied with both food
and provisions. For instance, when they would sign peace treaties
with the enemy, they would stipulate all people in the area always
provide Islamically lawful food and drink to Muslim soldiers that
passed through their lands. And so important was the well-being
and proper nourishment of Muslim soldiers that, even though
Abu Bakr 2 strictly forbade Muslim soldiers from slaughtering
sheep or camels that belonged to the enemy, he # made an
exception for when they slaughtered an animal in order to eat
from its meat."

11 Al-Idaarah Al-Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/196).
2) Al-Kharraaj, by Abu Yusuf (pgs. 286, 287).
‏ذا‎ Nihaayatul-Arib, by An-Nuwairee (6/168).
(1 Nihaayatul-Arib, by An-Nuwairee (6/168).

1711170114111 Lessons and Morals 715
f) Lining up Muslim Soldiers in Rows

Throughout the many wars they fought in, Abu Bakr’s army
commanders would line up soldiers in rows; and the sizes of rows
would increase or decrease depending on what was appropriate
for each given situation.)

The most prominent exception to, the row-system of fighting
was the Battle of Yarmook, during which Khaalid # did not
organize his army into a series of unbroken rows. Instead, he 2
lined them up in clusters of small rows, leaving a large gap
between one cluster of soldiers and the next. That gap enabled
Muslim soldiers to spread out, thus giving them the ability to
move more freely on the battlefield. This imovative method of
army formation was employed because it was effective against a
huge enemy army, such as the one that the Romans came with to
Yarmook. After Yarmook, however, Muslim soldiers returned to
the system of fighting in rows.”

‎Motivating Soldiers to Fight Bravely‏ زع

‎Common soldiers count on their leaders to provide them with
words of encouragement. This fact was not lost on Abu Bakr ‏ركه‎
‎who would frequently motivate his soldiers to fight bravely,
remind them of the rewards for fighting in the way of Allah ‏رك‎
‎and point out to them the things they needed to do in order to
have a chance at achieving victory. Very often, Abu Bakr 2 chose
a few words that conveyed a profoundly deep meaning, such as
the words of encouragement he ‏كه‎ once gave to Khaalid ibn Al-
Waleed ‏:كه‎ “Seek out death, and you will be granted life.”*! And
when Abu Bakr # handed out war banners to his commanders
prior to the invasion of Ash-Sham (yria and surrounding
regions), he # delivered moving speeches to Muslim soldiers,

‎Ul Al-Idaarah Al-'Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/231).
‏أثا‎ Al-Idaarah Al-’Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/232).
Db) AL-Idaarah Al-’Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/238).

716 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏ف‎

advising them, invoking Allah ® to grant them victory, and
ordering them to fight bravely for the sake of Allah &. (1

h) Consulting Senior, Trustworthy, and Wise Members of His
Army

Like the Prophet #@ before him, Abu Bakr ‏نك‎ would consult his
most trusted advisors regarding all matters of public concern. He
‏ذه‎ would seek their counsel particularly when difficult Islamic
legal issues arose and when he would send armies to wage wars
on behalf of the Muslim nation. During the Apostate Wars, for
instance, he 4 said to “Amr ibn Al-’Aas a, “O ‘Amr, verily,
among the people of the Quraish, you are a man of sound
judgment. Tulaihah openly claims to be a Prophet, so what do
you think we should 007“ Then Abu Bakr 4 asked him about
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed. When “Amr 4 then informed him about
Khaalid’s superior military prowess, Abu Bakr 4 appointed
Khaalid ‏ف‎ to be the leader of his army.

Not only did Abu Bakr # consult his most trusted advisors, he
4 requested his military commanders to the ‏خا فصوو‎ Khaalid 2
obeyed Abu Bakr’s orders, consulting his soldiers about how he
should go about fighting battles against the apostates; and then he
# would inform the higher authority in Al-Madeenah about the
battle plans that had been agreed upon among his soldiers.!*!

When Abu Bakr # intended to invade the Romans in Ash-
Sham, he ‏ذاه‎ first gathered and consulted his advisors — a group
that consisted of the most eminent of the Prophet's Companions
#. Having practically applied the principle of mutual
consultation, Abu Bakr # advised his military commanders to
do the same; for instance, he ‏كه‎ said to Yazeed ibn Abu Sutyaan,
“Here is Rabee’ah ibn “Aamir.... You know about his bravery, so

"I Putooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Azdee (pgs. 11-15).
2) AL’ Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah ‘Indal-Muslimeen (pg. 142).
‏أذا‎ Al-Futooh, by Ibn ‘Atham (1/29).

Important Lessons and Morals 717

know this as well: I have ordered him to accompany you, and
have made you his leader. So put him forward (i.e., honor him),
consult him regarding your affairs, and do not oppose him.”
Yazeed # responded, “1 will do so out of a sense of both love and
of honoring him.” Abu Bakr # further said, “When you embark
upon your journey, and while you are traveling, do not make
matters difficult for either yourself or your companions. And do
not become angry at your people or at your companions. Seek
their good counsel (i.e., the good counsel of your subordinates)
and be just among them.”

Positive, good habits are contagious. 50 when Abu Bakr’s
commanders witnessed Abu Bakr # consulting them and others,
they did the same among themselves. For instance, Abu “‘Ubaidah
ibn Al-Jarraah # said to ‘Amr ibn Al-Aas ‏رك‎ “O “Amr, on many
days have Muslims been blessed by your presence and good
opinions. Remember that lam merely a man among you (and not
a Prophet), and so, even though I am your leader, I will not make
a final decision without your input. So every day give me your
good counsel, for | cannot do without you (.e., without your help
and guidance).”

i) Ordering Soidiers to Fulfill Allah’s Rights Over Them

A leader must look after the material welfare of his soldiers by
providing them with adequate food, rest, and drink; he must, to
the best of his ability, safeguard their lives by providing them
with weapons and protecting them from surprise attacks;
furthermore, he must make sure that they fulfill Allah’s rights
over them. After all, an army that is disobedient to Allah ® is
unlikely to receive Allah’s help on the battlefield. Abu Bakr «
understood this reality, as is exemplified by the following advice
he gave to ‘Amr ibn Al-’Aas # when he sent him to Palestine:
“Pear Allah both secretly and outwardly; be shy of Him when you
are alone, for He sees what you are doing. As you surely have
noticed, | have put you ahead of people who preceded you to the

(0 Futooh Ash-Sham, by Al-Waaqidee (1/22).

715 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏وك‎

Faith and who have therefore been respected and honored
(among Muslims) for a longer period of time. So be of those who
perform deeds for the Hereafter, and desire from your deeds the
Countenance of Allah. Be as a father to those who are with you.
Adhere to prayer, and again I say to you, adhere to prayer. Make
the call to prayer whenever the time for a prayer enters, and
perform prayer only with a call to prayer that can be heard by
every member of your encampment. Fear Allah when you meet
the enemy, and make it obligatory for your companions to recite
the Qur’an. And forbid them from discussing the days of pre-
Islamic ignorance, for talk about such times can cause discord and
disagreement among them (things that are extremely dangerous
during times of war). Turn away from the sweet temptations of
this world, and continue to do so until you meet those who have
passed away before you. And be of those leaders that are praised
in the Qur’an, for Allah 8 says:

Kid CON, 6 ie 9 2

3 0
ي
صميو عير

“And We made them leaders, guiding (mankind) by Our
Command, and We inspired in them the doing of good deeds,
performing Salat Iqgamat-as-Salat), and the giving of Zakaat and
of Us (Alone) they were worshipper.” (Qur'an 21: 73)

Romans and Persians i in Just a Short Amount of Time

Throughout history, the expansion of the Muslim nation, in
terms of the speed with which it occurred, remains virtually
unparalleled. In a span of a few years, the Muslim nation, which

( Alidaarah Al-‘Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah (1/251); it is from this
book that I have summarized the rights of Allah &, of military leaders, and of
common soldiers.

Important Lessons and Morals 719

was considered an upstart group by their enemies, defeated the
only two superpowers of the world. To many people today, the
degree of success that was achieved by Muslim armies is
unexplainable, one of those epoch-making occurrences in human
history that are accepted as fact, but that are not analyzed or
properly understood. A keen student of history, however, should
be able to discern a number of reasons that explain why Muslims
were so successful in their wars against Persians and Romans.
Virst and foremost, Muslim armies were receiving help from Allah
‏:ذا‎ it seems that every movement they made was blessed by His
guidance and help. Then of course there was the sound leadership
that was shown by all of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs — Abu
Bakr ‏,ا‎ ‘Umar a, ‘Uthmdan ‏,ركف‎ and ‘Ali a.

And then there were reasons that had to do with Muslims, as
well as other reasons that had to do with the Romans and
Persians. As for the reasons that had to do with Muslims, some of
the more important of them are as follows:

1} Muslims had strong faith m the Truth.

2) Muslims believed with certainty that every part of their lives
was under the control of Allah #: They believed in His Divine
Preordainment, and in the fact that He had already written for
them the amount of sustenance they would receive in their
lives as well as the appointed timings of their deaths. And so
they fought bravely, secure in the knowledge that death would
come upon them only when Allah # willed it to occur.

3) The qualities that are common among brave and _ strong
warriors were deeply ingrained im their characters.

4) Muslims were lenient, just, fair, and merciful towards the
people they conquered; hence they were able to win over the
hearts and minds of people. Having gained the loyalty of
conquered peoples, Muslims were secure in the knowledge
that the control they gained over cities was not temporary —
ending in a coup or rebellion — but permanent.

720 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 2

5) Muslims were merciful and easy-going when it came to
estimating the amount of Jizyah tax that was owed to them by
conquered peoples. This prevented feelings of bitterness and
hostility from growing in the hearts of non-Muslim residents in
Muslim lands - or in other words, of conquered people who
chose to remain upon their religion.

6) Muslims had a seemingly endless supply of skilled manpower,
men who were experienced in war, who had fought alongside
the Prophet #2, and who preferred martyrdom to life. To be
sure, when an army consists of a few thousand such brave
men, it can defeat an army of many thousands. And that is
exactly what happened in both Iraq and Ash-Sham (Syria and
surrounding regions).

7) Muslims followed plans that were so flawless that they seemed
to be divinely inspired. In almost every battle — against the
apostates, against the Persians, and against the Romans —
Muslims seemed to employ the exact strategy that was going
to produce for them optimal results."

In regard to the speed with which Muslims defeated their
Persian and Roman foes, a mumber of reasons can be ascribed to
the latter two groups. The two Empires, both in their final throes,
were ripe for the taking. Decadence, widespread injustice, and
corruption on the grandest of scales — these dominated life in the
two Empires. And, as is well-established throughout history, a
nation that is plagued by widespread decadence and corruption is
a nation that is on the decline — and, depending on the degree of
injustice, perhaps even on the verge of collapsing. The clearest
symptom of the end of the two Empires was the degree to which
their people had turned away from the divinely revealed laws of
Allah 38. Muslims, on the other hand, were following Allah’s
divinely revealed laws in all aspects of their lives; so they were, in
other words, deserving of victory.

١1١ Taareekh Ad-Da'wah Nal-Islam (pgs. 222-27).

Important Lessons and Morals 721

In spite of what I have just mentioned, the reader should not
conclude that the weakness of the Roman and Persian Empires
meant that the path to victory for Muslims was paved with
comfort and ease, On the contrary, the decay of both Empires did
not prevent their leaders from mobilizing armies that consisted of
many thousand soldiers — many times more than were found in
the ranks of invading Muslim armies. Not only did the Romans
and Persians outnumber their Muslim foes, they also had better
equipment, more supplies, and a wider arsenal of weapons, some
of which Muslims had never seen before ~— such as elephants and
heated hooks that they used to ensnare attacking Muslims who
tried to break into their fortresses. Also, no one should be under
the impression that the Romans in particular took their Muslim
enemues lightly, or that they underestimated them in any way.
Haraql, the leader of the Romans, for many years had been afraid
that Muslims would grow in strength and would conquer his
lands. Therefore, rather than underestimate Muslim invaders,
Haraql feared them and held them in awe. He even rebuked his
priests who, years earlier, had refused to listen to him when he
suggested making peace with Muslims. He said to them, “This
(the coming of Muslim armies to our lands) 15 what I had warned

you about. And, in response, you all refused to listen to mefT4

01 Taareekh Ad-Da’wah lal-Islam (pg. 338).

Chapter 4

Appoints ‘Umar ‏قف‎ As His Successor

It was in the month of Jumaadah Al-Aakhirah of the year 13 H
that the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah became sick with the
ilness that led to his death. His condition quickly worsened,
and when it became clear that the end was near for him, he
ordered for the people to gather around him. When they were all
gathered before him, he said, “Verily, as you can clearly see I have
been afflicted with a severe illness, and | feel certain that, because
of the severity of my condition, I will soon die. Therefore, Allah
has released you from the pledge that you have made to me, and
my covenant with you (ie., my covenant as your Khaleefah) has

١1 Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (7/18) and Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/238).

724 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏له‎

also come to an end. Allah has returned your affair to you (i.e,
your ability to choose a leader among yourselves), so appoint
over yourselves whomsoever you wish. Indeed, if you choose
your new leader while I am still alive, you will be less likely to
differ among yourselves after I am gone.)

In order to complete the process of appointing his successor,
Abu Bakr ‏قل‎ took the following steps:

1) Abu Bakr # Consulted the Most Eminent of the Prophet's
Companions « from the Muhaajiroon and the Ansaar:

The Prophet's Companions 4 consulted one another regarding
the matter of choosing the next Khaleefah of the Muslim nation.
Whenever a given Companion was nominated for the job, he
would refuse and suggest someone else in his place. Such was the
way of the Prophet’s Companions ‏:مف‎ each one of them thought
that his Muslim brother was better and more worthy than he was.
For this reason, the Prophet’s Companions ‏رك‎ unable to arrive ata
decision among themselves, returned to Abu Bakr 4 and said to
him, “O Khaleefah of the Messenger Allah, your opinion is our
opinion (i.e., appoint your successor for us)."” He said, “Then give
me some time, so that I can see what is best in the view of Allah
and what is best for His religion and His slaves.”

Abu Bakr ‏رذ‎ as did the Prophet #¢ before him, always
consulted his companions before making an important decision.
In keeping with that policy, he discussed the matter with a few
eminent Companions. First, he summoned for ‘Abdur-Rahmaan
ibn ‘Auf as, to whom he said, “Tell me about “Umar ibn AI-
Khattaab.” Abdur-Rahmaan 4 responded, “In regard to what
you are asking me about, you have more knowledge than I do.”
Abu Bakr 2 said, “Even ‏“.مه‎ Abdur-Rahmaan 4 said, “He is, by
Allah, better than what you think of him.”’ Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ then
summoned for ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affaan , and when he came, Abu
Bakr « said to him, “Tell me about “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab.”

1) At-Taareekh ALIslaame (9/258).

Abu Bakr Appoints ‘Umar as His Successor 725

‘Uthmdn said, “You know more about him than any of us do.”
Abu Bakr ‏نه‎ said, “Evenso, O Abu ‘Abdullah.” ‘Uthman said, “O
Allah, what I know about him is that his secret, private life is
better than his open, public life; and that there is no one among us
that is equal to him.” Abu Bakr # then summoned for Usaid ibn
Hudair ‏ره‎ and when Usaid came, Abu Bakr 2 asked him the
same question that he asked ‘Abdur-Rahmaan 4 and “Uthman as.
Usaid ‏ذه‎ said, “Next to you, he is the best among us. He is happy
when. happiness is called for, and he becomes angry when anger
is called for. And that which he keeps secret is better than that
which he displays openly. And there is no one that is stronger and
better able to take on this responsibility than he is.” Similarly,
Abu Bakr & consulted Sa’eed ibn Zaid #, and a number of other
Companions # from the Ansaar and the Muhaajiroon. The vast
majority of them were of the same opinion: That “Umar ‏ضف‎ was the
most worthy of the Prophet's Companions to succeed Abu Bakr ‏وف‎
‎as the Khaleefah of the Muslim nation. The sole dissenter in this
regard was Talhah ibn ‘Ubaidullah ‏رذ‎ who was afraid of “Umar’s
harshness. Talhah ‏كك‎ said to Abu Bakr ‏رح‎ “What will you say to
your Lord when He asks you about why you appointed “Umar
over us even though you knew all along about his harsh
demeanor?” Abu Bakr # said, “Help me sit down,” after which
he said, “Is it by Allah that you are trying to frighten me? Verily,
one is truly a loser if one acts regarding your affairs (.e., the
affairs of the Muslim nation) in a wrongful and oppressive
manner. (In answer to your question) I will say, ‘O Allah, I have
appointed over them the best of your people.”""! It is related that
Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ further justified his decision to appoint “Umar 4 in
spite of his harshness by saying, “That is because “Umar sees me
as being soft, but then when the responsibilities of leadership fall
upon him, he will abandon much that he is upon now (i.e., he will
act less harshly than he does now).”!

IN AL-Kaamil, by Ton Al-Atheer (2/79); At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Mahmood
ohaakir (pg. 101); and Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon .

I Al-Kaamil, by Ibn Al-Atheer (2/79).

726 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

2) Next, Abu Bakr ‏ا‎ Wrote a Decree Which Was To Be Read Both
to The Muslims of Al-Madeenah And to Muslims Who Lived
Abroad:

The following is the text of that decree:

“In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
This is the (final) command of Abu Bakr ibn Abu Quhaafah,
which he writes as he is exiting this world, and entering the world
of the Hereafter...a time during which a disbeliever comes to
believe, a wicked-doer comes to have faith, and a liar tells the
truth: Verily, 1 appoint over you “Umar ibn Al-Khattaab as my
successor, so listen to him and obey him... If he acts justly, then
that is what I think of him and that is what I know about him. But
if he changes for the worse (i.e., he begins to act unjustly), then for
each person is that which he has earned. Goodness is what I
wanted, and I do not know anything of the Unseen world.

Opes ‏منقاب‎ GI Ab call cn}
“And those who do wrong will come to know by what
overturning they will be overturned.”’ (Quran 26:227)"!

“Umar # was Abu Bakt’s solution for this nation. Abu Bakr #&
saw that the world was coming to the Muslims with its riches and
temptations, and he feared that if they embraced those tempta-
tions with open arms, then they would be heading down the path
of destruction.! Tt is not unlikely that Abu Bakr # remembered
the saying of Messenger of Allah 28:

” ” 7 عل الل 215 ‎B‏ “

‎dis 153)‏ لا ‎Gaal‏ أَخشَى ‎ace aT ists Xe‏ 0 تَنْسَط
عَلَيكُمُ ‎Ch us CA‏ عَلَى مَنْ ‎ASUS OW‏ كَتَنَامَسُوهَا ‎US‏
‎CASEI Ls ° 55 Ls 205‏

‎‘

‎Taareekh Al-Islaam, by Adh-Dhahabee, ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa (pgs. 116, 117).‏ !ا
‎Abu Bakr: Rajalud-Daulah (pg. 99).‏ ما

Abu Bakr Appoints “Umar as His Successor 727

“Verily, by Allah, it is not poverty that I fear for you; rather, I
fear that the world will be given to you in abundance, just as it
was given to those who came before you ; that you will compete
over it just as those before you competed over it; and that it will
destroy you just as it destroyed them,”"!

Fearing this eventuality, Abu Bakr « prescribed a potent cure
— acure that was embodied, both literally and symbolically, in
the leadership of ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab a; after all, “Umar 4 was
the man to whom the Prophet #8 said:

Com

lo oth

a

SEU tas ot ‏الذي‎ en oh ‏يا‎

“O Ibn Al-Khattaab, by the One Who has my soul in His Hand,
the Shattaan (the Devil) has never come across you in a mountain
pass except that he then passes through a mountain pass other
than the one through which you are passing ‏لغاا,‎

In this regard, as was the case regarding almost all of his
decisions, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was right on the mark, for the great trials
and tribulations that afflicted the Muslim nation began tmmedi-
ately after the death of ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab ‏.ا‎ That those trials
and tribulations began only after ‘Umar # died in itself proves
that Abu Bakr # was correct regarding his decision to appoint
‘Umar « as his successor. “Abdullah ibn Mas’ood 4 said, “The
three most penetrating and judicious of people are the following:
Moosa’s female companion, who said:

aed 0

455M Gal GAN ys ‏إدك حَرْرٌ‎ ell eile}

“O my father! Hire him! Vertly, the best of men for you to hire is
the strong, the trustworthy.” (Quran 28: 26)

01 Bukhaaree, Kitaab Al-Jizyah Wal-Muwaada’ah (3158).
) Bukhaaree, Kitaab Fadaail Ashaab An-Nabee (3683).

728 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

Yousuf’s companion, who said:

fey Bo Bh ZF mye KH & ve & vey 7 &

eis Boheme 1 acs ‏أن‎ CF gpa A gat ‏أصسكرى‎ #
“Make his stay comfortable, for it may be that he will profit us or
we shall adopt him as a son.” (Qur’an 12: 21)

and Abu Bakr 2, when he appointed ‘Umar # as his
successor.”"!41 ‘Umar # was like an impenetrable dam that
protected the Muslim nation from the violent waters of
misguidance and the roaring waves of trials and tribulations.”!

3) The next step Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ took was to inform “Umar ibn Al-
Khattaab « about his decision. When ‘Umar 2 then flat out
refused to accept his appointment, Abu Bakr # threatened him
not just with words, but with his sword as well. “Umar 4,
seeing no escape, acquiesced, accepting the post, even. though
it was the last thing he wanted."!

4) Wanting to make sure there would be no confusion regarding
his decision, Abu Bakr # stood up before the people and said
to them, “Are you pleased with the person that I have
appointed over you? Verily, I have thought long and hard
before making this decision, and 1 did not appoint a relative (to
the post); instead, | appointed over you ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattab,
so listen to him and obey him.” They said, “We hear and we
obey.”

5) Even though Abu Bakr 4 took all the worldly steps that were
necessary to carry out his decision, he did not forget to invoke

‎Majma’ Az-Zawaaid (10/268). Al-Haithamee said that At-Tabaraanee related it‏ اذا
‎with two chains and that the narrators of one of them are all narrators of As-‏
‎Saheeh (Saheeh Muslim or Bukhaaree). Al-Haakim related this narration and‏
‎declared its authenticity (3/90), and Adh-Dhahabee concurred.‏

‎PF] Abu Bakr Rajulad-Daulah (pg. 100).
‏أذا‎ Ma‘athir Al-Inaafah (1/49).
4) Taareekh At-Tabaree (4/248).

Abu Bakr Appoints “Umar as His Successor 729

Allah #8 for guidance and help. It is related that, during the
final days of his illness, he said, “O Allah, | have appointed
him without having been commanded to do so by Your
Prophet; even still, all I desired through his appointment was
to improve the situation of the people. I feared that trials and
tribulations would descend upon them, and so 1 exhausted all
of my efforts to do what is in their best mterests. That is why I
have appointed the best among therm to rule over them — the
one among them who most desires to make their affairs
upright and correct. You indeed know what has befallen me
from. Your decree (Le., this illness and my imminent death), so
replace me (with a good successor), for they are Your
slaves.” :

6) Abu Bakr already took every step that was necessary to
make sure that there would be no confusion among the people
regarding his decision to appoint “Umar ‏ذه‎ as his successor.
Nonetheless, he took further steps as well, just to make sure
that the transition would go smoothly. For instance, he
charged “Uthman ibn ‘Affaan 4 with the duty of reading out
his decree to the people, as well as the duty of taking pledges of
allegiance from them on behalf of “Umar 4s. This all occurred
before Abu Bakr # died. “‘Uthmdan ‏رق‎ holding up the decree
which Abu Bakr # had sealed with his stamp, said to the
people, “Will you pledge allegiance to the one that is
mentioned in this letter?” They said, “Yes.” And they
unanimously agreed to, and were pleased with, ‘Umar’s
appointment.”

7) The people pledged allegiance to ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab
while Abu Bakr # was still alive; consequently, no sooner did
Abu Bakr ‏4ك‎ die than ‘Umar # assumed all of the

‎Tabagaat ibn Sa’ad (3/199); and Taareekh Al-Madeenah, by Ibn Shubbah (2/665-‏ لذأ
.)669

‎2] Tabagaat ibn Sa’ad (3/200).

730 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏لد‎

responsibilities of the caliphate.!"! The reader should note that
“Umar 2 became the Khaleefah not just by Abu Bakr’s decree,
but also by the unanimous agreement of the people of “ Al-Hill
WalIqd.” The people of “ Al-Hill Wal-‘Iqd” in any generation
are the scholars and wise people of society; in ‘Umiar’s case, the
most eminent and knowledgeable of the Prophet's
Companions ‏رق‎ or the people of “Al-Hill Wal-‘Iqd,” were
unanimous in their decision to appoint him as the successor of
Abu Bakr ig ‏لما‎

Even though ‘Umar 2 was not appointed in the exact same
manner that Abu Bakr 2 became Khaleefah, “Umar’s appointment
did, to be sure, take place according to the Islamic principle of
Ash-Shoorah (Mutual Consultation). After all, as we have hitherto
seen, Abu Bakr ‏كا‎ did consult many of the Prophet's Companions
“>. It is certain, therefore, that ‘Umar's appointment to the
caliphate took place based on mutual consultation and the
universal consensus of the Muslim nation. It is not related
anywhere that, once ‘Umar « was appointed to the caliphate, any
person dissented or objected to his appointment. Nor is it related
anywhere that any person, throughout the period of “‘Umar’s
caliphate, wanted to see him ousted from his post. The entire
Muslim nation was united behind “Umar a. They continued to
obey him and they remained united behind him up until the very
end of his caliphate.©!

8) Abu Bakr’s Farewell Advice to ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 2

Throughout the Prophet's life, Abu Bakr # remained a Joyal
and obedient follower. Thereafter he spent the next two years or
so not as a follower but as a leader — and not just a leader of a few
people, but the leader of the entire Muslim nation. He worked

‎Diraasaat Fee ‘Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah (pg. 272).‏ 1لا
‎Diraasaat Fee ‘Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah (pg. 273).‏ أذا
‎An-Nadhariyyah As-Siyaasiyyah Al-Islaamiyyah, by Diyaa Ar-Rees (pg. 181).‏ اذا

Abu Bakr Appoints “Umar as His Successor 731

both by day and by night, expending all of his energy in order to
make sure that the affairs of the Muslim nation ran smoothly.
Finally, after a long period of toil and service, Abu Bakr 2 was
returning to his Lord, but before he departed from this world,
there was one more thing he had to do: he had to meet in private
with ‘Umar # in order to impart to him important advice !! ;

The following is what Abu Bakr ‏فأ‎ said to “Umar # when the
two of them met in private:

“O ‘Umar, fear Allah, and know that Allah has deeds (which He
commands His slaves to do) by day, deeds which He does not
accept if they are performed at night. And He has deeds (which He
commands His slaves to do) by night, and he does not accept them
if they are performed by day. And He does not accept voluntary
deeds until obligatory deeds are first performed. If a person's scale
is heavy on the Day of Resurrection, then that is because he
followed the truth in the abode of this world even though doing so
was heavy upon him. As for tomorrow, it is only right that a scale ~
should be heavy if the truth is placed init. And if a person's scale is
light on the Day of Resurrection, then that is because he followed
falsehood (in the abode of this world). And, also in regard to
tomorrow, it is only right for a scale to be light if falsehood is placed
in it. Verily, Allah & has mentioned the inhabitants of Paradise,
and He mentioned them by the best of their deeds, and He
overlooked the worst of their deeds. So if you remember them {i.e.,
the inhabitants of Paradise), then say, “Verily 1 fear that | will not
catch up with them.’ Indeed, Allah # mentioned the people of the
Hellfire, and He mentioned them by the worst of their deeds, and
He rejected the best of their deeds. So if you remember them (ie.,
the inhabitants of the Hellfire), then say, “Verily, 1 hope that I will
not be one of them.” You should do that (Le., the abovementioned
things) in order to remain both hopeful and fearful, upon a state in
which you do not place false hopes on Allah, and in which you do
not lose hope of Allah’s Mercy...”!

(I Diraasaat Fee “Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah (pg. 273).
1 Sifatus-Safwah (1/264, 265).

732 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq a

Second: The Time to D

“Aaishah & said, “Abu Bakr’s illness began when he took a
bath on a cold day. He then had a fever for fifteen days, and on
each of those days he did not come out for prayer; instead, he
would order ‘Umar to lead the people in prayer. People would
visit him, but the person who adhered closest to his company
throughout his illness was ‘Uthman «s."! When his condition
worsened, someone said to him, ‘Will you not call for a doctor to
come and check on you?’ He said, “Verily, He has already seen
me, and He has said: Verily, | always do (and succeed in doing)
whatever I will to occur’!

“Aaishah & reported that, during the final stages of his illness,
Abu Bakr 4 said, “Go and see how much extra wealth I have
acquired ever since [| have been appointed as leader (of the
Muslim nation), and send that extra amount to the Khaleefah who
will succeed me.” ‘Aaishah & said, “We did an inventory of his
wealth, and we found that the only extra wealth he had was a
Nubian slave who would carry his children for him, and a camel
that was used to water one of his gardens. And we sent those
two to ‘Umar, who, upon receiving them, cried and then said,
“May Allah have mercy on Abu Bakr; verily, he has been toiling
and has become fatigued a great deal ever since the death of the
Prophet ‏ا يي‎

While Abu Bakr & was on his deathbed, ‘Aaishah ‏كذ‎ read some
Verses of poetry to him. When she was finished, Abu Bakr
looked upon her with an angry expression on his face, and he then
said to her: It is not as you say (in your poem), O Mother of the
Believers, but rather the saying of Allah is more truthful:

‎Ashaab Ar-Rasool, by Muhammad Al-Misree (1/104).‏ أذ
‎Tarteeb Wa-Tahdheeb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (pe. 33).‏ |“
‎Sifatus-Safwah (1/265).‏ اذا

Abu Bakr Appoints ‘Umar as His Successor 733

de
‏ا عر‎ Be od 44 ‏ال‎ ante bed ‏ريع م‎
‏باحق ذلك مَا كت منه ع‎ gall 5 eS

“And the stupor of death will come in truth: “This is what you
have been avoiding!” (Quran 50:19).

Abu Bakr « then said, “O ‘Aaishah, there is no one in my
family who is more beloved to me than you; nonetheless, you
took some fruits from the garden (i.e., one of my gardens), and I
do not feel comfortable about that, so return it to the contents of
my estate (so that it can be distributed properly to my inheritors
along with the rest of my estate).”” She said, “Yes,” after which she
complied with his request.

Abu Bakr # then said, “Lo! From the day I have been put in
charge of the affairs of the Muslims until this very day, I have not
taken a single (extra) Deenar or Dirham from them. Throughout
that period, I have put in my stomach the lowest quality and least
desirable of their foods, and I have put on my back the coarsest of
their garments. As for war booty, all that [ have is an Abyssinian
slave, this camel which is used to water the fields, and this piece of
palm branch. When I die, send these things to “Umar, so that I can
wash my hands of them (.e., so that I will no longer be heid
responsible for them). When Abu Bakr’s messenger took the said
items to ‘Umar, “Umar cried — so much so, in fact, that his tears
literally made a small stream on the ground. And all the while he
was saying, “May Allah have Mercy on Abu Bakr. Ever since the
Prophet #8 died, he has worked himself to the point of exhaustion.
May Allah have Mercy on Abu Bakr. Ever since the Prophet 2
died, he has worked himself to the point of exhaustion. May Allah
have Mercy on Abu Bakr. Ever since the Prophet ¢ died, he has
worked himself to the point of exhaustion.’”"!

According to one account, as Abu Bakr 4 was on the verge of
dying, he said, “Verily, ‘Umar forced me to take 6000 Dirhams
from the Muslim treasury (in order to cover my day-to-day

UT At-Tabagaat, by Ibn Sa’ad (3/146, 147), and all of the narrators of this account
are trustworthy.

734 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏كه‎

expenses). In return for that amount, take my garden, which is
situated (in such-and-such place).”” After Abu Bakr # died, his
last request — that his garden should be donated to the Muslim
treasury — was mentioned to ‘Umar, who then said, “May Allah
have Mercy on Abu Bakr. Verily, he did not want to give people
any opportunity to say anything about him (i.e., he did not want
to give people the opportunity to make any accusation against
him).

Based on the abovementioned accounts, the reader can see just
how careful Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ was with the wealth of the Muslim
nation. For more than two years, he abandoned not only his
business, but all forms of paid work, just so that he could dedicate
himself wholly for the service of the Muslim nation. Since he had
no means of earning an income — because he was so busy taking
care of his responsibilities as the Khaleefah of the Muslim nation —
he was forced to take a stipend from the Muslim treasury, a
stipend that in no way exceeded his basic needs. And by basic
needs, | mean enough money to satisfy his hunger and to cover
his private areas with clothing. He took so little, even though,
considering the services he rendered, he deserved so much. Then,
when he died, all that he had left over from what he took from the
overall wealth of the Muslim nation amounted to an Abyssinian
slave and a camel, and even those things he returned to the
Muslims, so that he could meet his Lord secure in the knowledge
that he had nothing to be held accountable for in regard to the
wealth of Muslims. While others take into the Hereafter a heavy
load in terms of wealth for which they will be held accountable,
the load that Abu Bakr «4 took with him consisted only of his
piety, his righteousness, and his faith. Truly, his story imparts a
profound lesson for the people of understanding”! Not only did
Abu Bakr « return the extra wealth that he had left over from
what he took from the Muslim nation, he also wanted to return all

‎Al-Muntadhim, by Ibn Al-Jawzee (4/127), and Ashaab Ar-Rasool (1/105).‏ اذا

‎Ashhar Mashaaheer Al-Islam (1/94).‏ أخا

Abu Bakr Appoints “Umar as His Successor 735

of the salary he took during the period of his caliphate. Not
having money to return that full amount, he donated one of his
gardens, which was equivalent in value to all of the salary he ever
took from the Muslim Treasury. Abu Bakr # did this not because
he had to, but because he wanted to make the work he did for the
cause of Islam a completely voluntary affair, one that was done
purely for the sake of Allah #, and one for which he received no
material gain whatsoever. |

Abu Bakr’s illness continued for fifteen days. The last day of
his illness was Monday, the 294 of Jumaadah Al-Aakhirah, the
year 13 H. ‘Aaishah & related that Abu Bakr # asked her that
day, “On which day did the Messenger of Allah # die?’’ She said,
“On Monday.” It was evening time, and the day of Tuesday was
about to begin. Therefore, desiring to die on the same day on
which the Messenger of Allah #¢ had died, Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ said,
“Verily, I hope that my time will come sometime between now
and the end of this night.” He then asked ‘Aaishah ‏رذ‎ “In what
did you enshroud the Prophet #7" She said, “In three white
Suhoolee garments from Yemen, and neither a shirt nor a turban
was added to them.” Abu Bakr # said, “Look at this garment that
Iam wearing now, and you will find upon it a saffron stain... So
wash it and use it (to enshroud me) along with two other
garments.”'"! The people that were gathered around him were
surprised that he was using an old garment, and so one of them
said, “Allah has provided us with a great 25w>wealth), so why
should. .we not enshroud you in new garments?” Abu Bakr 4
replied, “ Verily, the living are in more need of covering themselves
with something new than are the dead. Verily, the dead are headed
towards decay and the filth matter [that is underneath the ground
(Le., insects that eat up their bodies)!

Two of Abu Bakr’s last commands were that his wife, Asmaa
bint ‘Umais ‏رك‎ should wash his body, and that he should be

US Ashaab Ar-Rasool (1/106).
I At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Mahmood Shaakir; and Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon
(pg. 104).

736 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏قد‎

buried alongside the Prophet #¢. And Abu Bakr’s last words on
earth were:

‎he ey oe Soe‏ 2 ا ما ا اس
وف ‎fireball galls UL‏

‎“(My Lord!) Cause me to die as a Muslim (the one submitting to
Your Will), and join me with the righteous.” (Qur’ an 12:101))

‎The city of Al-Madeenah literally trembled on the day that Abu
Bakr ¢ died; in fact, other than the day of the Prophet's death the
people of Madeenah had never witnessed a sadder day, nor a day
upon which they had shed more tears. Upon hearing the sad
news, ‘Ali ibn Abee-Taalib # hurried towards Abu Bakr’s house,
all the while saying, “Verily, we belong to Allah, and to Him is
our return.”

‎‘Ah 4 then stood outside the house in which Abu Bakr #s had
died, and made the following long speech, which he addressed to
Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ himself:

‎“© Abu Bakr, may Allah have Mercy upon you. You were the
closest companion and friend of the Messenger of Allah 38; you
were a comfort to him; you were the one he trusted most. [f he had
a secret, he would tell it to you; and if he needed to consult
someone regarding a matter, he would consult you. You were the
first of your people to embrace Islam, and you were the most
sincere of them in your faith. Your faith was stronger than any
other person's, as was the degree to which you feared Allah. And
you were wealthier than anyone else in terms of what you
acquired from the religion of Allah ‘Azza Wa-Jail (the Possessor of
Might and Majesty). You cared most for both the Messenger of
Allah #¢ and Islam. Of all people, you were the best Companion
to the Messenger of Allah #2; you possessed the best qualities; you
had the best past; you ranked highest; and you were closest to
him. And of all people you resembled the Messenger of Allah ‏كه‎

‎Ash-Shaikhaan Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq Wa ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab, by way of‏ لذأ
‎Al-Balaadhiree’s narration in Ansaab Al-Ashraaf (pg 69) ~ with the criticism‏
‎and commentary of Ihsaan Sidgee Al-‘Amad.‏

Abu Bakr Appoints ‘Urar as His Successor 437

the most in terms of his guidance and demeanor. Your ranking
was higher than anyone else’s, and the Prophet #2 honored you
and held you in higher esteem than anyone else. On behalf of the
Messenger of Allah and Islam, may Allah reward you with the
best of rewards. When the people disbelieved in the Messenger of
Allah #2, you believed in him. Throughout his life, you were both
his eyes with which he saw, and his ears with which he heard.
Allah has named you truthful in his book when He said:

ST are “ wt Aber we oth ee Be
‏هم المتقويت»‎ ASS ‏به‎ Gites GLAL de ‏#وألذى‎
‎“And he (Muhammad ‏وَل‎ who has brought the truth (this Qur’an
and Islamic Monotheism) and (those who) believed therein (1.e.,
the true believers of Islamic Monothetsm), those are Al-Muttagun
(the pious and righteous persons)” (Qur'an 39:33)

When people were stingy in their support for the Messenger of
Allah #2, you comforted him. And when people sat still, you
stood side by side with the Messenger of Allah #8, facing the same
hardships that he faced. In times of hardship, you were truly a
good and noble Companion of his. You were the “second of two,’
his Companion in the Cave; and the one upon whom As-Sakeenah
(peace, tranquility, calmness) descended. You were his Compa-
nion during the migration (to Al-Madeenah), and you were his
successor regarding the religion of Allah and His nation. And a
truly good successor you proved to be when the people
apostatized. You did what no other Khaleefah of a Prophet did
before you. You stood up firmly and bravely when his other
Companions lost their resolve and became soft. And when they
became weak, you adhered to the methodology of the Messenger
of Allah #@. You truly were as the Messenger of Allah #8 said:
weak in your body, but strong regarding the commands of Allah;
humble in yourself, bat lofty in your ranking with Allah; well-
esteemed in the eyes of people, honored and great in their hearts.
Not a single one of them had any reason to dislike you, to be
suspicious of you, or to hold you in contempt.... The weak and
humble you have always treated as strong and honorable, making

738 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏فد‎

sure you gave them what was rightfully theirs. And in this regard,
you have treated relatives and strangers equally. Of all people,
you respect those who are most obedient to Allah and who fear
Him the most. In your overall character, you embody truth and
compassion. Your speech has always been characterized by the
qualities of wisdom and decisiveness. And you have always
struck a noble balance between gentleness and firmness. You
have always based your decisions on knowledge, and once you
have made your decisions, you have always kept a firm resolve to

return. We are pleased with, and we submit to, Allah’s decree.
And by Allah, other than the death of the Messenger of Allah #¢,
Muslims have never been afflicted with a greater calamity than
the calamity of your death. You have always been a protector, a
sanctuary, and source of honor for this religion. May Allah ‘Azza
Wa-Jail (the Possessor of Might and Majesty) make you join the
company of His Prophet, Muhammad #§, and may he not deprive
us of your reward. And may He not lead us astray after you.”

People had gathered around ‘Ali 4 and listened to his speech
until he was finished. Then they all cried with raised voices, and
they all responded in unison to ‘Ali's speech, saying, “Indeed, you
have spoken the truth’!

Muslim scholars unanimously agree that Abu Bakr died at
the age of 63, which was the exact age at which the Messenger of
Allah #€ died. As per his instructions,!*!_ Abu Bakr & was washed
by Asmaa bint “Umais % and was buried alongside the Messenger
of Allah 8. In his grave, Abu Bakr’s head was placed parallel to
the shoulders of the Messenger of Allah #%,°! and the side
compartment of his grave was placed directly beside the grave of
the Messenger of Allah #¢. During the burial process, each of the

‎At-Tabsirah, by Ton Al-Jawzee (1/477-479); and Ashaab Ar-Rasool (1/108).‏ لذا

‎21 At-Tabagaat, by Ibn Sa‘ad 3/203, 204), and the chain of this narration is
authentic.

‎Taareekh ALIslaam, by Adh-Dhahabee; and ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon‏ اذا

‎(pg. 120).

Abu Bakr Appoints “Umar as His Successor 739

following descended into Abu Bakr’s grave: ‘Umar 4, “Uthmdan #,
Talha ‏رذ‎ and‘ Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Abu Bakr. And his funeral
prayer was led by his successor, ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab 2s.

such was the peaceful death of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ذه‎ after a
lifelong struggle for the cause of Islam. Throughout the early
years of his Islam, Abu Bakr # was a source of comfort and
constant help for the Prophet #2, always willing to sacrifice his
wealth and his very life for the cause of Islam. Then, when the
Prophet #6 died, Abu Bakr # continued where the Prophet # had
left off. He further strengthened the foundations of the Muslim
nation, first by fighting against and defeating the apostates, and
then by spreading Islam in some of the major conquests that took
place during his caliphate. May Allah be pleased with Abu Bakr
‏كه‎ and reward him with the best of rewards.

“ 1
‏كم سير‎ Ww o & we ot +,

nS 25 oy UA SI cases Bl

“And the close of their request will be : Al-Hamdu Lillahi Rabb-il-
‘Alameen (All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of
‘Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that extsts)).”’ (Qur'an 10: 10)

How perfect you are, O Allah! And all praise is for You. O
Allah. Lask for Your forgiveness, and I repent to You.

‎Ashaab Rasoolullah (1/106).‏ لذأ

1) Up until this very day, the biographies of the four nightly
guided Khaleefahs continue to remain among the most
important sources of authentic Islamic knowledge for
Muslims. The foundations of Islamic knowledge are, without
a doubt, the Quran and the Sunnah. Next in importance are the
lives of the rightly guided Khaleefahs — Abu Bakr 2, ‘Umar &,
“Uthman #, and “Ali ‏نه‎ |

2) Especially in the difficult tumes during which we live, Muslims
are in dire need of learning about the virtues and noble
qualities of the Prophet’s Companions ‏ركذأ‎ and the effects that
the Prophet's direct teaching methods had on their lives.

3) The events of Islamic history in general, and the events that
took place during the first century of Islam in particular, have
been distorted and misinterpreted by non-Muslim, and mainly
Western, researchers — those who feel a need to spew venom
against Islam. For this reason, it has become an important
obligation for Muslim scholars and students of knowledge to
present to the general masses of people a clear and accurate
description of the lives of early Muslims and of the events that
shaped their lives.
742 The Biograplry of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏م‎

Without a doubt, the most important figure in Islam is the
Prophet #2, whose every action and saying imparts an
important lesson for Muslims. Next in importance is Abu
Bakr ‏ره‎ who, because of his life-long friendship with the
Prophet #¢, developed noble qualities, qualities that all

Muslims should strive to emulate.

Even as a non-Muslim during the pre-Islamic days of
ignorance, Abu Bakr # was upright in his character. Like his
friend, Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah #¢, Abu Bakr 4 was never
known to have drank alcohol or prostrated before an idol.

As a member of pre-Islamic Makkan society, Abu Bakr 2s was
universally loved for his noble qualities and respected for his
scholarly achievements. He 2s was the pre-eminent genealogist
of his era, having known more about the lineages of Arabs in
general, and of the Quraish in particular, than any other
person. And unlike other genealogists of his time, he would
not, out of a sense of propriety, discuss the shameful aspects of
people's lineages.

The people of the Quraish shared a universal love for Abu Bakr
#. And they had every reason to love him, for he was easy-
going, wonderful company, and exceptionally generous with
his money. As a businessman, he became famous for his fair
and honest dealings; and as a host at home, he was widely
known for the lavish dinners he served to all classes of society
— the rich, the middle-class, and especially the poor.

Immediately upon embracing Islam, Abu Bakr 4 made it his
primary mission in life to spread the message of Islam to
others. As a result of his Da’wah (propagation of Islam) efforts,
he achieved a wonderful degree of success, for many of
Quraish’s most respected members embraced Islam at his
hands. His hard work for the cause of Islam, however, came at
a price: He was mocked, tortured, and even beaten — at least
on one occasion — almost to the point of death.

4)

5)

6)

7)

8)

Sunmmary 743

In spite of hardships and constant persecution, Abu Bakr ‏نك‎
‎did not make any compromises in his religion. This is
because he was brave and resolute, fearing neither blame nor
retribution, but instead focusing with all of his heart on the
tasks at hand: promoting Allah’s religion, applying Allah's

commands, and protecting Allah’s Messenger ##

on a
coer

Abu Bakr 2, based on his own initiative and personal
resources, spearheaded a campaign to protect Muslim slaves
who were being tortured at the hands of their owners. With
his own wealth — for he was one of the wealthiest men in
Makkah ~ Abu Bakr # would go around purchasing
Muslim slaves and then freeing them for the sake of Allah 8g.

With the advent of Islam, Abu Bakr # did not let his
knowledge of Arab lineages go to waste; to the contrary, he
put that knowledge to good use. For when the Messenger of
Allah #¢@ was looking for a tribe that would grant him safety
and protection, Abu Bakr 4s would go out with him, pointing
to the delegates of various tribes, and mentioning both their
good and bad points, and both their strengths and their
weaknesses. His analysis of various tribes helped the Prophet
‏علد‎ choose which delegates he would go to in order to invite
them to Islam and ask for their help and protection.

Whenever a situation arose wherein the Prophet #2 was in
the company of a single companion, more often than not that
companion was Abu Bakr ‏.كه‎ One example of this occurring
was the Prophet's migration to Al-Madeenah, during which
the Prophet's sole companion was Abu Bakr a. During that
trip, as well on other occasions when he was alone with the
Prophet 2g, Abu Bakr 4 was able to benefit a great deal from
the Prophet's company, bemg able to grow — simply by dint
of being in the presence of the Prophet #2 — in Faith, piety,
sincerity, determination, knowledge, and wisdom.
Consequently, he was able to make correct decisions when
others faltered — such as the decision to send out Usaamah’s
army, and the decision to fight against the apostates.

9)

10)

11)

12)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Suldeeq ‏نك‎

Trae, Abu Bakr 2 helped the Prophet #¢ with his time, his
sincerity, his wise counsels, and his wealth, but by no means
was he a liability on the battlefield. To the contrary, Abu Bakr
# was a brave and skilled soldier, having fought in every
single battle in which the Prophet #2 participated. He ‏كه‎ was
especially helpful on the Day of Uhud, for he stood firmly
alongside the Messenger of Allah #& when most others were
fleeing from the scene of the battle. And on the Day of
Tabook, Abu Bakr # was recognized for his bravery when
the Messenger of Allah #2 handed him the overall banner of
his army.

During times of war, Abu Bakr # was the quintessential
Muslim warrior; and during times of peace, when he was at
home in Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr 4% was the ideal Muslim —
in terms of his qualities, his dealings, his noble speech, and
his good deeds. Much has been written about Abu Bakr’s
contributions during the Makkan phase of the Prophet's
biography and during the period of Abu Bakr’s caliphate; no
less amazing were the things he accomplished during the
Madanee phase of the Prophet's biography.

It was not so much his deeds as it was his strong Faith that
distinguished Abu Bakr from the rest of the Prophet's
Companions #. Even so, he was in every aspect of his
character an admirable example for all Muslims to follow. It
is for this reason that, in Hadeeth compilations, one can find
many Ahaadeeth in which the Prophet #¢ extols the
wonderful characteristics and virtues and superiority of
Abu Bakr -s.

If one were to ask a group of Muslims the question, “Who
was the most knowledgeable person among the Prophet's
Companions #?” it is likely that one would hear a variety of
names — such as “Umar 4, Abu Hurairah ‏رذ‎ ‘Aaishah “&,
‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ood 4, “Ali #, “Uthman #, ‘Ubaidullah
‏رن‎ and so on. Truth be told, however, the answer to the

744
13)

14)

15)

16)

Summary S45

aforementioned question, although it might not be known to
the average Muslim, is not a point of debate among Muslims
scholars, for they unanimously agree that the most
knowledgeable of all of the Prophet’s Companions & was
none other than Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏كه‎ He was able to
achieve that status because he would spend more time in the
company of the Prophet #¢ than anyone else, being with him
both by day and by night, both at home and away on
journeys. After “Eesha prayer, it was customary for Abu Bakr
# to sit for a while with the Messenger of Allah 2% during
such meetings, they would discuss the affairs of the Muslims.

And certain events indicate that the Prophet #¢ recognized
Abu Bakr 4 as the most knowledgeable of his Companions
‏.نه‎ For instance, the Prophet #% appointed Abu Bakr & to lead
Muslims during the first Hajj (pilgrimage to Makkah) that
they ever performed. This was no small matter, for the legal
rulings of Hajj are both detailed and complicated. Therefore,
when the Prophet #¢ appointed Abu Bakr ‏رف‎ he #% did so,
being confident of Abu Bakr’s superior level of knowledge.
Also, throughout his life, the Prophet #¢ appointed only one
man. to lead Muslims in prayer in his place, and that man
was, of course, Abu Bakr ‏.كه‎ A lesser known fact about Abu
Bakr 4 has to do with the “Book of Charity,” which outlines
the amount of Zakaat one must pay depending upon the
quantity and type of wealth one owns. The most authentic
account of that book, which was dictated by the Messenger
of Allah #8, is related by Anas #, who narrated it on the
authority of Abu Bakr 4. It is that account that Muslim
jurists depend upon in their legal rulings that pertain to
Zakaat (obligatory charity). And finally, there is no known
saying of Abu Bakr 2: that runs contrary to a revealed text;
this alone attests to Abu Bakr’s wisdom, knowledge, and
profound understanding of Islam’s laws.

When the Messenger of Allah 2% died, people fell into a state
of shock and disbelief. It was Abu Bakr 4 who then brought

17)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏ضف‎

them back to their senses, saying to them his now-famous
words: “Whoever used to worship Muhammad,
Muhammad has indeed died. And whoever used to
worship Allah, Allah is alive and never dies.” Shortly
thereafter, Abu Bakr 4 again steered the Muslim nation in
the right direction at a time when one wrong move could
have resulted in a bitter conflict. The people of the Ansaar
were determined to appoint one of their own as the Khaleefah
of the Messenger of Allah #%. Then, with wisdom and
propitiating words, he was able to convince them that they
were in the wrong — and that the Khaleefah should be a man
from the Quraish.

At first, Sa’ad ibn “Ubaadah 4 nominated himself for the
caliphate, but because of Abu Bakr’s sound logic and clearly
articulated arguments, he immediately took back his
nomination and happily agreed with everyone else in
appointing Abu Bakr # as the first Khaleefah of the Muslim
nation. The decision to appoint Abu Bakr 4 was unanimous.
Every member of the Ansaar was pleased with Abu Bakr’s
appointment; in fact, Sa’ad’s nephew, Basheer ibn Sa’ad 4s
was the first person to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr ‏نك‎
‎Contrary to what some writers have insinuated, there is no
authentic account which indicates that the least bit of
division and disagreement took place on the day during
which the Muslims nominated Abu Bakr 2 as their Khaleefah.
The claims of those writers are baseless and should be
disregarded by every right-thinking Muslim.

There are a number of Verses of the Qur'an and. sayings of
the Prophet # which indicate — some explicitly and some
implicitly ~ that Abu Bakr 4 rightfully deserved to be the
first Khaleefah of the Muslim nation; furthermore, the scholars
of Ahlus-Sunnah, both from the past and the present,
unanimously agree that, of all of the Prophet's
Companions #, Abu Bakr # was most deserving of the
caliphate. This consensus was reached even by the Prophet's

/46

18)

19)

Summary 747

Companions #, who understood that, when the Messenger
of Allah ‏وله‎ appointed Abu Bakr to lead the people in
prayer in his place, he was signaling to them the man who
was to be his Khaleefah.

By way of a consensus among the first generation of
Muslims, we know that the ‘caliphate’ is the correct form
of government in Islam. The ‘caliphate’ system of
government was obvious to all, for immediately following
the Prophet's death, the people of the Ansaar wasted no time
but instead convened an emergency meeting to choose the
Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #8. They understood that
without a Khaleefah, chaos and disunity would result.

Based on what occurred after the Prophet's death, scholars
agree that the two foundations of choosing a Khaleefah are: 1)
Mutual consultation, and 2) pledging allegiance (i.e., pledging
to obey the Khaleefah). Then it is the job of the Khaleefah to
organize and govern the affairs of the Muslim nation.

As I mentioned earlier on in this work, Abul-Hasan An-
Nadwee (may Allah have mercy on him) enumerated the
conditions one would have had to fulfill in order to become
the Khaleefah of the Messenger of Allah #¢. Having listed
those conditions, Abul-Hasan then went on to prove that
Abu Bakr 4 fulfilled each and every one of them.

After the general population of Muslims pledged allegiance
to him, Abu Bakr # delivered a sermon that, in spite of, or
perhaps because of, its succinctness, is remembered today as
one of the most important speeches that has ever been
delivered in the history of Islam. In a few words, Abu Bakr a&
explained the foundations of a just and fair government; he
further pointed out the basis of a healthy relationship
between the ruler and the ruled — that the latter must
obey the former as long as the former does not order the
latter to disobey Allah 38 and His Messenger #8. Finally, in a
few well-chosen words, he established a clear link between

20)

21)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏د‎

fighting just wars and honor and dignity for the Muslim
nation, as well as between the spreading of lewd acts in
society and a rapid fall towards calamities and outright
destruction.

In his acceptance speech, Abu Bakr « outlined the policies by
which he intended to govern the Muslim nation. In order to
implement those policies, he sought out the help of righteous
and able men. As such, he put Abu “Ubaidah ibn Al-Jarraah
# — the “Trustworthy One of This Nation” — in charge of
the Muslim Treasury; he appointed ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab
# as a judge, and he too presided over certain cases; and he
charged Zaid ibn Thaabit 4 with the task of reading and
writing all official letters. And sometimes, if others from the
Prophet’s Companions & were present — such as “Ali ibn
Abee Taalib & and ‘Uthman ibn “Affan 4 — he would ask
them to write his letters for him.

Throughout the duration of Abu Bakr’s caliphate, the
Prophet’s Companions # both respected and honored him.
It was they who gave him the title “The Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah ‏وله‎ And wanting Abu Bakr & to
dedicate all of his time to his duties as their Khaleefah, they
asked him to stop working and imstead allotted him a
humble salary that was enough for his daily needs.

Abu Bakr 2 not only governed the affairs of the Muslim
nation, he # also — as did the Prophet ‏عله‎ before him - took
out time to educate Muslims, to teach them about their
religion, to enjoin good, and to forbid evil.

The period of the rightly-guided Khaleefahs is deemed an
extension of the Prophet's lifetime, in that, throughout that
period, Islam continued to be applied in the exact same
manner as it was applied during the lifetime of the Prophet
‏.يه‎ And that golden period was inaugurated with the
nomination of Abu Bakr # as the Prophet's Khaleefah.

Since it was obviously unfeasible to govern all Muslim lands

748

23)

24)

25)

26)

27)

Summary 749

directly from Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr 4, as did the Prophet

3% before him, appointed a governor over each province or

district. It was the duty of each governor to be
administratively in charge of his province, to lead people
in prayer, to judge between their disputes, to collect Zakaat
wealth, and to implement Islamic Law in its entirety. Given
the importance of these duties, Abu Bakr 4 chose his
governors carefully, making sure that each appointee was
upright, honest, righteous — and competent as a leader.
Because he trusted the Prophet's decisions above his own,
Abu Bakr 4 reappointed every governor that had been
appointed by the Prophet #¢ and that was still actively on
duty when the Prophet #2 died. Abu Bakr # did not fire a
single one of those governors; and if he did remove one of
them from his post, it was only to transfer him to another
district or province, one that was in greater need of a good
and wise leader. This occurred, for instance, when Abu Bakr
& transferred ‘Amr ibn Al-‘Aas 2 from one province to
another.

There are various narrations which mention that “Ali ibn
Abee Taalib # and Az-Zubair ibn Al-Awwaam 4 were late
in pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr 2s. Those narrations have
led to a great deal of speculation and hearsay, with some
ignorant people — and some people with evil motives —
claiming that they were at first aVerse to the idea of Abu Bakr
becoming Khaleefah. Those claims are baseless and
completely false — baseless because most of the said
narrations are not authentic, and false because the one
authentic narration that does refer to their belated pledge of
allegiance provides a perfectly good reason for their delay.
According to that narration, ibn “Abbaas 2 said, “Ali, Az-
Zubair, and others who were with them stayed behind
(during the time when people were pledging allegiance to
Abu Bakr ‏زه‎ in the house of Faatimah bint Rasoolullah. They,
a group of men from the Muhaajiroon, a group that was

28)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

headed by ‘Ali ibn Abee Taalib, were busy preparing for the
burial of the Messenger of Allah #2 — a process that
involved, for instance, washing and enshrouding the body of
the Prophet #&. Then, on the day after the Messenger # died
— which was a Tuesday - Az-Zubair ibn Al’Awwaam ‏نه‎
‎and ‘Ali ibn Abee Taalib 2s pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr
‏.مه‎ Therefore, the delay was only a single day, and it was
justified because they were in charge of preparing for the
Prophet's burial.

When Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ was asked about the estate of the
Messenger of Allah #8, he ‏ف‎ said to Faatimah & and Al-
‘“Abbaas 2, “I heard the Messenger of Allah #8 say, “We (Le.,
Prophets) are not inherited from; instead, what we leave
behind is charity...” According to one account, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎
‎said, “I do and apply {in terms of actions, policies, etc.)
everything that the Messenger of Allah #¢ did and applied,
for I fear that, if [1 abandon any part of his way (or system of
rule), I will go astray.” Throughout the duration of his
caliphate, Abu Bakr # gave the members of the Prophet's
household everything that was due to them — their share of
war booty, the wealth of Fadak, and one-fifth of Khaibar’s
wealth. That being said, because of what he heard from the
Prophet #2, he did not allow them to inherit shares of the
Prophet's estate.

In his acceptance speech, Abu Bakr # defined his role as the
leader of the Muslim nation. He made it clear that he was not
the Khaleefah of Allah, but instead the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah #%. And he highlighted the fact that he
was not a Prophet or Messenger, but instead a mere man;
and that, therefore, he could never replace the Messenger of
Allah #2. In his method of governance, he was a follower,
and not an innovator or a legislator.

The story of how Abu Bakr & sent out Usaamah’s army
contains many important lessons for Muslims, the more
important of which are as follows:

700

29)

30)

31)

Summary /517

In life, there are periods of ease and periods of hardship. The
important thing is to remain steadfast and upright at all
times. Hardships, therefore, should not preoccupy or
frighten or affect Muslims to the degree that they turn
away from their religious duties. The Muslim nation was
facing one of its most difficult problems: many people in
Arabia had apostatized, and they posed a serious threat to
the safety of all Muslims. Yet, in spite of the dangers
involved, Abu Bakr 4: did not waver in his Faith; instead, he,
in accordance with one of the Prophet's last commands, sent
Usaamah’s army abroad at a time when he needed as many
soldiers as possible to fight locally against apostates.

The continual mission of spreading the message of Islam
does not hinge on the presence or participation of any given
individual. No one is so important that, without him,
Muslims should cease in their efforts to spread Islam. to
other peoples. So, yes, the Messenger of Allah #¢ had died;
but his mission lived on, and must continue to live on as long
as Muslims are able to spread the message he came with to
the rest of mankind.

Whenever Muslims disagree among themselves, they should
refer their dispute to the Book of Allah 38 and the Sunnah of
the Prophet #¢. Many Companions ‏كأ‎ disagreed with Abu
Bakr’s decision to send out Usaamah’s army, but no sooner
did they listen to the proofs he presented to them than they
changed their minds and agreed with his decision.

Many people apostatized in Arabia, but not all for the same
reason, and not all to the same degree:

Some people abandoned Islam altogether — in terms of both
their Faith and their actions; such people returned to their
previous religion, which consisted primarily of worshipping
idols.

Some people apostatized because they wanted to claim that
they, like the Messenger of Allah #¢, were Prophets, sent to

a)

b)

32)

b)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مق‎

mankind by Allah %. And it was out of a sense of tribal
loyalty, or the desire to profit from the situation, that many
others followed them; such, for instance, was the situation of
Musailamah and his followers in Yamaamah.

Some apostates abandoned prayer but claimed to still believe
in the rest of Islarn.

Others continued to have Faith in Islam and to pray;
nonetheless, they became apostates when they refused to
pay Zakaat.

Yet others, having harbored hatred for the Prophet 2 for a
number of years, rejoiced upon hearing about the death of
the Prophet #&; such people also returned to the worship of
idols.

And yet another group of people hesitated, deciding that,
from a worldly point of view, it was not wise to take sides;
instead, they reasoned, it would be better to await the
outcome of the war and then side with the victors.

Abu Bakr #& took a brave and unpopular and
uncompromising stance against the apostates, a stance that
changed the course of history. lt was an uncompromising
stance in that Abu Bakr # was not willing to negotiate any
form of truce with the apostates; instead, he # gave them one
of two choices: repent and return to Islam or prepare for war.
On certain other occasions, it is interesting to note, the
Prophet #2 and Abu Bakr & were willing to negotiate treaties
with non-Muslims. And therein lies the difference: In terms
of foreign policy, Islamic Law makes a clear distinction
between disbelievers — those who have never entered into
the fold of Islam — and apostates — those who, having
entered into the fold of Islam, turned back on their heels and
returned to disbelief. Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ perceived that distinction,
knowing fully well that making compromises with apostates
meant corrupting the true teachings of Islam. Disbelievers, in
that they reject Islam altogether, pose no threat to the Islam's

132

33)

Summary 753

teachings and tenets; the people who apostatized after the
death of the Prophet #%, on the other hand, did pose a serious
threat to the pure teachings of Islam. They claimed to be
Muslims, and yet they rejected or distorted some of the most
fundamental teachings of Islam: Muslims believe that
Prophet Muhammad 28 is the Seal of all Prophets #, and
yet some apostates — such as Musailamah and his followers
—- claimed otherwise; Muslims believe not only in the five
pillars of Islam, but in the principle that one disbelieves when
one rejects even a single one of those pillars — hence the
disbelief of those who refused to pay Zakaat.

Therefore, by taking an uncompromising stance vis-a-vis the
apostates, Abu Bakr 4 helped preserve the true and pristine
teachings of Islam, and for that all Muslims should honor
him, praise him, and remember him in their supplications.

The spread of apostasy during the rule of Abu Bakr & is
widely misunderstood as meaning that almost everyone in
the Arabian Peninsula apostatized. This misunderstanding
probably stems from the fact that, from a geographical point
of view, apostasy was in fact a widespread phenomenon, for
it affected all parts of the Arabian Peninsula. And yet froma
population perspective, not all people apostatized, for just as
there were chieftains and tribal members that apostatized
throughout Arabia, so too were there chieftains and tribal
members who, in each part of Arabia, remained steadfast
upon Islam.

The apostate wars in Yemen featured two types of women,
one that stood for truth and justice, and another that could be
described as purely evil. The former type was exemplified by
Aazaad A-Faarisiyyah ‏رك‎ who was the wife of Shahr ibn
Baadhaan # and the niece of Fairooz Al-Faarisee 4. Her
patience, bravery, and loyalty to Islam and Muslims led to
the killing of one of Islam’s worst enemies of that era. The
latter type was epitomized by a group of women in Yemen

34)

35)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

that had never truly believed in Islam. They showed their
true nature when, instead of mourning the death of the
Prophet #€, they openly celebrated, expressed a great deal of
joy, and performed lewd acts in order to tempt others away
from Islam.

While it is true that apostasy was rampant in Yemen, it did
not infect the entire population; in fact, some Yemeni
inhabitants, in spite of the dangers they faced, remained
steadfast upon the truth and, what is more, warned their
people about the dangers of apostatizing ~ the main danger
being eternity in the Hellfire. One such brave man was
Miraan ibn Dhee ‘Umair Al-Himdaanee, who was one of the
kings of Yemen; another was “Abdullah ibn Maalik Al-
Arhabee ‏رك‎ who had been one of the Prophet’s Companions
&; and yet two others were Shurahbeel ibn As-Simt and his
son, both of whom were from the Banu Mu’aawiyah tribe in
Kandah.

At the end of Apostate Wars, the people of Yemen returned
to Islam and became a part of the Muslim nation, under the
overall control of the central Muslim government in Al-
Madeenah. Then Yemen was divided into three districts:
San’aa, Al-Jund, and Hadramoot. The borders of these
districts were not determined by the locations of tribes; in
fact, no longer did tribal loyalties play a role in the
governance of citizens or in the choosing of leaders. The
only functional role that remained for individual tribes was
that the members of each army unit were from the same
tribe, and even that was done primarily for organizational
and motivational purposes (motivational in the sense that a
unit would fight against enemy forces with greater
enthusiasm in order to bring honor to its tribe). In short,
citizens of Yemen no longer identified one another based on
tribal loyalties; instead, new standards were put into place —
standards of Faith, righteousness, sincerity, and good deeds.

/o4

Summary 755

38) The Battle of Buzaakah was a great turning point in the
Apostate Wars. When the battle ended with the defeat of
Tulaihah Al-Asdee, many tribes reconsidered their treachery
and ultimately decided to return to the fold of Islam. So, for
instance, immediately after the conclusion of the Battle of
Buzaakah a delegation of Banu ‘Aamir tribesmen went to
Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed 2 and said, “We enter into what we
had previously exited from (i.e., the fold of Islam).” Khaalid
@ then accepted their apologies and took pledges of
allegiance from them on behalf of Abu Bakr 4s.

39) Contrary to what some writers have insinuated, Maalik ibn
Nuwairah died purely as a result of his arrogance and his
refusal to make a complete return to the fold of Islam. Even if
he did outwardly claim to be a Muslim, he refused to pay
Zakaat, moreover, when his people gathered Zakaat wealth,
he prevented them from sending it to Al-Madeenah.
Therefore, given Abu Bakr’s clear and uncompromising
stance vis-a-vis apostates, Khaalid 2 was completely
justified in ordering for Maalik’s death. Later on, Abu Bakr
# investigated the matter, and based on all of the
information that was presented to him, he # arrived at the
conclusion that Khaalid # was completely innocent
regarding the death of Maalik.

40) Abu Bakr « did his utmost to become a better leader. He
knew that the Prophet #@ was the ideal leader, having
established a perfect balance between mercy and sternness;
after all, the Prophet #2 did say about himself, “I am the
Prophet of mercy, and I am the Prophet of slaughter (Le.,
when violence or a stern punishment is justified, | do not
back down, but instead do what is necessary in order to
implement justice).” Abu Bakr ‏رذ‎ on the other hand, knew
that he was not perfectly balanced, but instead was inclined
more towards lenience than to harshness. As an individual,
that was okay, but as a leader, he would be called upon to be
stern on many occasions. Therefore, in order to complete

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

what he lacked in himself, he # employed the services of
men who were known for their sternness: thus he ‏ننه‎ made
“Umar # his chief counselor, and Khaalid # the overall
leader of his armies.

Al’ Alaa Al-Hadramee 2 deserved much credit for quelling
the apostate uprising in Bahrain. No less important,
however, were the contributions of Al-Muthannah ibn
Haarithah 2&. He ‏رك‎ along with the men under his
command, provided Al-’Alaa 4 and his men with
important strategic support. He traveled from the northern
part of Bahrain all the way until the Dijlah River. On the way,
he managed to defeat apostate strongholds and to cut off the
support line that the apostates were receiving from their
Persian allies. News of Al-Muthannah’s achievements
reached Al-Madeenah, and Qaish ibn ‘Aasim Al-Manqaree
& praised him in the presence of the Khaleefah of the
Messenger of Allah ##, Abu Bakr ‏نك‎

Although it did not signify the complete destruction of the
apostates, the defeat of the Banu Haneefah tribe in
Yamaamah did signal that the end of the Apostate Wars
was imminent — the apostates could continue fighting, but
they no longer could harbor any hope of winning.

As touch as the victory in Yamaamah was a joyous occasion
for Muslims, it was accompanied by a degree of sadness, for
many of the Prophet’s most eminent Companions & were
killed during the course of the battle. In fact, many Huffaadh
(people who have the entire Qur'an committed to memory)
were martyred in Yamaamah, a turn of events that signaled a
frightening possibility: If more Huffaadh were to become
martyred in future battles, much of the Qur'an would
become lost. Therefore, ‘Umar ‏وف‎ first, and then Abu Bakr ‏بعك‎
‎appreciated the need to gather the Qur’an into one Book - to
bring together the various parts of the Qur'an that were
preserved in the hearts of men or written down on bones,

06

41١

42)

43)

Summary 737

pieces of leather, flat date palm branches, and flat, smooth
stones. It would be a grand undertaking, and so, after giving
the matter a great deal of thought, Abu Bakr « appointed the
person who was best suited for the job: Zaid ibn Thaabit Al-
‏رف عع مودق‎ a man who was both trustworthy and
experienced, in that he had previously written down
Verses of the Qur’an for the Prophet #8.

Success and prosperity and stability are not the birthright of
Muslims; they are things that Muslims much achieve by
fulfilling certain conditions — such as obeying Allah %,
applying Allah’s laws on earth, establishing prayer, paying
Zakaat, etc. Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ reminded Muslims of those
conditions, and he made very difficult decisions — such as
waging war against apostates and sending out Usaamah’s
army — in order to make sure that those conditions were
fulfilled. Muslims followed his lead and implemented the
laws of Islam in all aspects of their lives; as a result, Allah 3
granted them safety and security, strengthened them, and
helped them overcome their enemies.

Allah & commands Muslims not only to supplicate to Him
and place their complete trust in Him — although these are
essential components of their Faith; He 4 further commands
them to take all of the material, practical steps that are
necessary in order for them to achieve their goals.
Understanding this principle, Abu Bakr invoked Allah
a for help, relied on His guidance, and depended upon His
help; and yet he did not stop there: He ‏هه‎ took every worldly
step possible to ensure victory against his enemies. He
mobilized an army that consisted of brave and battle-tested
soldiers; he provided them with the best military weaponry
that was available at the time; he appointed competent
generals to lead his armies; and he appointed people to jobs
based on their experience, talents, and expertise; hence he
appointed Khaalid # to be the overall leader of the Muslim

armies, Zaid ibn Thaabit 4 to gather the Qur’an, ‘Umar ‏ذه‎ to

44)

45)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq

serve as a judge in Al-Madeenah, and Abu Burzah ‏لذ‎
‎Aslamee # to act as a messenger between him and his
generals.

The war in which the Muslims fought against the apostates
was important to the stability of the region; but it had further
meaning as well: It provided Muslim soldiers with the
experience and confidence they needed in order to conquer
foreign lands. The victories the Muslims achieved in a short
amount of time taught them that, with Allah’s help, they
could achieve anything; and that the two major Empires of
the time — the Roman and Persian Empires — were not so
powerful that they could not be conquered. As long as they
were willing to sacrifice their lives for the cause of Islam, and
as long as they were fighting to raise the word of Allah &
above all else, Muslims believed that the sky was the limit for
them. And that is why they were able to conquer so many
lands in so few years.

4

By the grace and mercy of Allah &, and then because of the
sacrifices of the Prophet’s Companions @, the Arabian
Peninsula soon fell under the complete control of the
Muslim government. All Arabs in the Peninsula became
united under the banner of Islam, and they were
consequently blessed with peace, safety, and prosperity.
With the borders of the Muslim nation thus secured, it was
time for Abu Bakr ‏ع‎ to look beyond the Peninsula towards
foreign lands — to continue the mission that the Prophet 2
initiated, the mission of spreading Islam to all of the
inhabitants of earth. In order to achieve that end, Abu Bakr
‏مث‎ began by sending armies to [raq and Ash-Sham (Syria and
surrounding regions).

That Abu Bakr # was a brilliant military commander is
attested to by the orders he sent to his generals — Khaalid ‏كك‎

and ‘Iyaadh #. While in Al-Madeenah, Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ sent
them instructions about the routes by which they were to

46)

47

48)

Summary 759

travel and the locations from which they were to enter Iraq.
So precise and brilliant were his instructions that it was as if
Al-Madeenah were a modern-day command center and that
Abu Bakr # had access to maps that explained the
topography, the terrain, and the roads of Iraq.

Khaalid 2 led his army in a number of battles in brag, battles
that led the way to a complete conquest of the region. The
following are the names of some of those battles: Dhaat As-
Salaasil, Al-Madhaar, Al-Waljah, Alyas, Al-Heerah, Al-
Anbaar, “Ain At-Tamr, Daumatul-Jandal, Waq’atul-Haseed,
Wadq/’atul-Maseekh, and Waq’atul-Faraad.

Before making his final decision to attack the lands of Ash-
Sham (Syria and surrounding regions), Abu Bakr ‏كف‎ first
consulted the most eminent of the Prophet’s Companions s.
Then, once his decision was made, he ‏كه‎ enlisted the help of
the inhabitants of Yemen. And then he # divided his overall
army into four battalions, each of which had a specific
mission in Ash-Sham. The battalions were headed by the
folowing men: Yazeed ibn Abu Sufyaan #4, Abu “Ubaidah
ibn Al-Jarraah 2, ‘Amr ibn Al-‘Aas ‏ره‎ and Shurahbeel ibn
Hasanah 4s.

The four battalions were not able to achieve success in their
missions, because they faced not only soldiers from Ash-
Sham, but soldiers that were sent from the Roman Empire.
Because they were vastly outnumbered, Muslim
commanders were forced to send news of their dire
predicament to Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ and to hint at the fact that
they needed reinforcements. Abu Bakr ‏ذأ‎ ordered them to
steer clear from the enemy and to head with the members of
the four battalions to Al-Yarmook. Once there, they were to
wait for reinforcements. Abu Bakr « then sent word to
Khaalid #, ordering him to send half of his army away from
Iraq towards the front lines of Ash-Sham; furthermore, Abu
Bakr 2 ordered Khaalid # to personally leave Iraq with half
of his army and to take care of matters in Ash-Sham.

49)

50)

51)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed # achieved great victories over
opposing armies in Ash-Sham,; the most important of those
victories were the Battles of Amaadeen and Al-Yarmook.

In regard to foreign policy, Abu Bakr # strove to achieve the
following aims:

To make other nations fear the Muslim nation.
To continue to fight just wars.

To establish justice throughout conquered lands, and to be
gentle and generous with conquered peoples.

To give conquered peoples the freedom to choose their
religion.

To make it possible for all people throughout the earth to at
least hear the message of Islam.

Warfare is not an enterprise that is to be taken lightly, nor is it
one that is to be undertaken im an indiscriminate and
haphazard manner, without any regard to proper rules and
principles. There are rules that must be followed during times
of war, and every party that is actively involved in a war has
rights that must be fulfilled. Abu Bakr & pointed out those
rights in the letters that he would write to his commanders
and soldiers. Before anyone else, Allah % has rights over
Muslim soldiers; for instance, as long as they are fighting on
the side of justice, they must remain firm and steadfast on the
battlefield; furthermore, they should be sincere, by placing the
goal of pleasing Allah #@ above all other goais.

Abu Bakr # would remind soldiers about the rights that
their commander had over them. For instance, it was their
duty to obey their commander; in fact, if he gave them a
command, it was their duty to execute it as quickly as
possible. Also, Abu Bakr warned soldiers not to be hasty in
taking their shares of the spoils of war, but instead to wait
until their commander gave the order for the spoils to be
distributed.

760
52)

53)

a)
b)

3
d)
e)

54)

Summary 761

Finally, Abu Bakr 4 would remind commanders about the
rights that their soldiers had over them. The primary duty of
a leader is to protect his soldiers; in order to achieve that aim,
one of the most important duties of commanders was to
search out for enemy spies. Also, it was the duty of
commanders to make sure that soldiers had enough food
and drink for every given expedition. Abu Bakr 4 instructed
commanders to look after their soldiers and to be gentle and
kind with them. As a leader, every commander had the
additional duties of encouraging his soldiers to fight, of
raising their morale, of reminding them about Allah’s
rewards, of the virtues of dying a martyr, and of the
dangers of turning away from Jihaad (fighting for the cause of
Islam).

Any student of history cannot help but be astonished at the
tremendous successes that were achieved by Muslim armies
in so short a span of time. Only twenty years earlier, Arabs
were insignificant players on the world stage, but now they
were not only able to defend their territories, but also they
managed, with the help of Allah #&, to destroy the Persian
Empire and one-half of the Roman Empire. The following are
some of the main reasons why Muslims achieved so much
Success:

Muslims had deep faith in Islam; it was, in fact, the most
precious thing they had. And it was for its cause that they
fought, with each individual soldier knowing that he would
achieve one of two things: victory or martyrdom; and for
many of them, the latter was more desirable than the former.
With such attitudes, they were, to be sure, formidable
opponents to Roman and Persian soldiers, who, more than
anything else, wanted to return to the safety of their homes.

The Muslim army was like a vast and efficient military
machine, a machine that had no shortage of brave fighters
and capable military leaders.

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4

Muslims were fair, just, and even generous towards the
peoples they conquered, and therefore quickly managed to
win over their hearts and minds.

Muslims were merciful in estimating the amount of taxes
that had to be paid by non-Muslims who lived in Muslim
lands; furthermore, they always fulfilled their promises and
treaties. Consequently, there was a spirit of trust and
harmony between conquering Muslim armies and
conquered peoples; in fact, many people enjoyed a higher

‘standard of living than they did prior to being conquered by

Muslim armies.

While on his deathbed, Abu Bakr ‏ذه‎ took a number of steps to
ensure a smooth transition of power. First, he consulted the
most eminent Companions # from the Muhaajiroon and the
Ansaar, asking their opinions about who was most worthy to
succeed him as the Khaleefah of the Muslim nation. Then,
once ‘Umar .«& was nominated, and once his nomination was
agreed upon by the vast majority of the Prophet's
Companions &, Abu Bakr # took a decisive step, writing
an official letter in which he announced “Umar’s
appointment, a letter that was to be read to people both in
Al-Madeenah and abroad. Next, Abu Bakr « informed
‘Umar 2 about his appointment and literally forced him to
accept the job. While he took care of the worldly steps he
needed to take in order to ensure a smooth transition of
power, Abu Bakr # did not forget to seek help from Allah &;
in fact, he # made a sincere and heartfelt supplication to
Allah &. Finally, in order to make sure to leave no room for
confusion, Abu Bakr 4 charged “Uthman ibn ‘Affaan 4 with
the duty of reading out his decree to the people; people then
pledged allegiance to “Umar # while Abu Bakr 4s was still
alive. Then, as a last duty towards the people he was leaving
behind, Abu Bakr 4s sat in private with ‘Umar ‏د‎ and advised
him about how should rule over the Muslim nation.

/62

d)

56)

Summary 763

Although ‘Umar 4 was not chosen m the exact same manner
that Abu Bakr ‏كه‎ was chosen for the caliphate, “‘Umar’s
appointment did, to be sure, take place according to the
Islamic principle of Shoorah (Mutual consultation). The most
wise and pious members of society were consulted, and they
agreed that ‘Umar 4 was the most worthy man for the job.
During the nomination process no one tried to nominate
another Companion # for the caliphate; and throughout
“‘Umar's caliphate, no one tried to have him removed or fired
from his job. In fact, “Umar’s entire caliphate was a period
during which Muslims remained united under one religion
and one leader.

After a lifelong struggle for the cause of Islam, Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeg # died a peaceful death. Throughout the early years
of his Islam, Abu Bakr ‏ذا‎ was a source of comfort and
constant help for the Prophet #8, always willing to sacrifice
his wealth and his very life for the cause of Islam. Then, when
the Prophet #¢ died, Abu Bakr # continued where the
Prophet #¢ had left off. He further strengthened the
foundations of the Muslim nation, first by fighting against
and defeating the apostates, and then by spreading Islam in
some of the major conquests that took place during his
caliphate. May Allah be pleased with Abu Bakr # and
reward him with the best of rewards.

This humble effort that [ have put before you, the reader, is
not above criticism and suggestions; it is nothing more thana
humble effort, the goal of which is to spread authentic
information about the era of the nightly-guided Khaleefahs —
so that, in our times, we can learn from the examples of the
Prophet's Companions &.

1 ask Allah, the Most-High, the Almighty, the Lord of the
Noble Throne, to accept this effort of mine, to bless it, and to
include it among my good deeds. And I ask Allah not to
deprive me and those of my brothers who helped me

57)

58)

59)

764 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

complete this work, of His Rewards and of being in the
company of the Prophets 338, the truthful ones, the martyrs,
and the righteous ones. And I end this book with the Saying
of Allah &:

i ‏في‎ LAG ‏بالإيكن‎ Cac. ot SSEy5 ‏آنا‎ Zab 65>

m7 weg wu

‎EL (eke Gall Se‏ موث تسم
‎“Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in‏
‎Faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who‏

‎have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most
Merciful.” (Quran 59: 10)

‎“And the close of their request will be : Al-Hamdu Lillaht Rabb-il-
‘Alameen (All the praises and thanks be ‏ما‎ Allah, the Lord of
‘Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists)).”’ (Qur'an 10: 10)

‎How perfect you are, O Allah! And all praise is for You. O
Allah. 1 ask for Your forgiveness, and 1 repent to You.

The Letter “4lif’”’

1) Abaateel Rajib An-Tumha Minat-Taareekh, by Dr. Ibraahecem
“Ali Shu’oot, Al-Maktab Al-Islaamee, Sixth Edition, 1409 H
(1988).

2) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq: Awwalul-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen,
Muhammad Rasheed Rida, Daar Al-Kutub Al-Ilmiyyah,
Beirut, 1403 H (1983).

3) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq: Afdalus-Sahaabah Wa-Ahagquhum Bul-
Khilaafah, by Muhammad ibn ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn
Muhammad ibn Qaasim, Daar Al-Qaasim, First Edition,
1417 H (1996).

4) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq, by Dr. Nizaar Al-Hadeethee and Dr.
Khaalid Jaasim Al-Jinaanee, Daar Ash-Shuoon Ath-
Thaqaafiyyah Al-’Aaamah, Iraq, First Edition, 1989.

5) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by ‘Ali Tantaawee, Daar Al-Manaarah,
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, Third Edition, 1406 H (1986).
766 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #

6) Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg , by Muhammad Maalullah, Maktabah ibn
Taymiyyah, First Edition, 1410 H (1989).

7) Abu Bakr Rajulud-Daulah, by Majdee Hamdee, Daar Tayyibah,
Riyadh, First Edition, 1415 H.

8) Al-Ahkaam As-Sultaaniyyah, by Abul-Hasan Al-Maawardee,
Daar-ul-Kutub Al-‘Thmiyyah, Beirut.

9) Akhtaa Yajib An-Tusaahah Fit-Taareekh: Istikhlaat Abu Bakr As-
Siddeeq, by Dr. Jamaal ‘Abdul-Haadee Muhammad Mas’ood
and Dr. Muhammad Rif’at Jumu’ah, Daar Al-Wafaa, Al-
Mansoorah, First Edition, 1406 H (1986).

10) Al-Asaas Fis-Sunnah, by Sa’eed Hawa, Daar-us-Salaam,
Egypt, First Edition, 1409 H, 1989).

11) Asadul-Ghaabah Fee Ma’rifatus-Sahaabah, by Abul-Hasan ‘Ali
ibn Muhammad Al-Juzaree, Daar Ihyaa At-Turaath Al-
‘Arabee, First Edition, 1417 H (1996).

12) Ashhar Mashaaheer Al-Islaam Fil-Harb Was-Siyaasah, by Rafeeq
Al-"Adham, Daar Ar-Raaid Al Arabee, Beirut, Lebanon,
Sixth Edition, 1403 H (1983).

13) Ashaab Ar-Rasool, by Mahmood Al-Misree, Maktabah Abu
Hudhaifah As-Salafee, First Edition, 1420 H, 1999.

14) Adwaa Al-Bayaan Fee Eedaah Al-Qur’an Bil-Qur’an, by
Muhammad Al-Ameen ibn Muhammad Al-Mukhtaar ‏للم‎
‎Jinkee Ash-Shingeetee, Al-Madanee Edition, 1386 H.

15) Adwaa ‘Alal-Hijrah, by Tawfeeq Muhammad Saba’, Al-
Hai’ah Al-‘Aamah Li-Shuoon Al-Mataabai’ Al-Ameeriyyah
Edition, 1393 H (1973).

16) Al-Ansaar Fil-’Asr Ar-Raashidee (Styaastyyan, ‘Askariyyan,
Wa-Fikriyyan), by Dr. Haamid Muhammad Khaleefah ‏ب‎
‎an unpublished PhD. Thesis from the University of
Baghdad.

Bibliography 767

Al-Ibaanah ‘An Usool Ad-Diyaanah, by Abul-Hasan ‏لظ‎
‎Ash’aree, Islamic University, 1975.

Al-Aihsaan Fee Saheeh ibn Wibbaan, by ‘Alaa Ad-Deen “Ali ibn
Balbaan Al-Faarisee, Muassasatur-Risaalah, Beirut, First
Edition, 1412 H (1991).

Al-Idaarah Al-‘Askariyyah Fid-Daulah Al-Islaamiyyah :
Nashatuha Wa-Tatawwaruha, by Dr. Swaimaan ibn Saalaih
ibn Sulaimaan Aal Kamaal, Umm Al-Qura University, First
Edition, 1419 H (1998).

Al-Isaabah Fee Tamyeez As-Sahaabah, by Ahmad ibn ‘Ali ibn
Hajar, Daar Al-Kutub Al-‘Ilmiyyah, Beirut, First Edition,
1415 H (1995).

Al-Imaamah Al-‘Udhmaa ‘Inda Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa‘ah, by
‘Abdullah ibn “Umar ibn Sulatmaan Ad-Dameejee, Daar
Tayyibah As-Sa’oodiyyah, Second Edition, 1409 H.

Al-Eemaan Wa-Atharuhu Fil-Hayaat, by Yousuf Al-
Qardaawee, Muassasatur-Risaalah, Beirut, Tenth Edition,
1405 H (1984).

AL-Ab‘aad As-Styaasiyyah Li-Mafhoom Al-Amn Fil-Islaam, by

Mustafa Mahmood Manjood, Higher Institute of Islamic

Thought, First Edition, 1417 H (1996).

Itmaam Al-Wafaa Fee Seeratul-Khulafaa, by Muhammad ‏علط‎
‎Khudaree, Daar Al-Ma’rifah, Betrut, First Edition, 1417 H
(1996).

Ahkaam Al-Murtad Fish-Sharee’ah Al-Islaamiyyah, by No’maan
‘Abdur-Razzaag As-Saamiraaee, Daar Al-‘Arabiyyah, 1968.

Al-Istee’aab Fee Ma'rifatul-Ashaab, by “Umar ibn ‘Abdul-Barr,
Daar Al-Kitaab Ai-’Arabee, Beirut.

Al-‘Attigaad “Ala Madhhab As-Salaf Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-
Jamaa’ah, by Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Al-Husain Al-Bathaqee,
Faisalabad, Pakistan.

17)

18)

19)

20)

21)

22)

23)

24)

25)

26)

27)

768 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq 4

28) Al-lktifaa Bima Tadammanahu Min Maghaazee Rasoolullah Wah-
Thalaatha Al-Khulafaa, by Abu Ar-Rabee’ Sulaimaan Al-
Kilaa’ee Al-Andaloosee, “Aaalam Al-Kutub, Beirut, First
Edition, 1417 H (1997).

The Letter “Baa”’

29) Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah, by Abul-Pidaa Al-Haafidh ibn
Katheer Ad-Dimashgee, Daar Ar-Rayyaan, Cairo, First
Edition, 1408 H (1988).

The Letter “Taa”

30) Taareekh Al-Umam Wal-Mulook, by Abu Ja’far At-Tabaree,
Daar Al-Fikr, Beirut, First Edition, 1407 H (1987).

31) Taareekh Al-Ansaar As-Siyaasee, by Dr. ‘Abdul-Mun‘im Ad-
Dusoogee, Daar Al-Khulafaa, Egypt.

32) Taareckh Al-Islaam (Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raushidoon), by Adh-
Dhahabee, Daar Al-Kutub Al’ Arabee, First Edition, 1407 H
(1987).

33) At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee: Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by
Mahmood Shaakir, Al-Maktab Al-Islaamee, Fifth Edition,
1411 H (1990).

34) At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee : Mawaagif Wa-‘Ibar, by Dr. ‘Abdul-
‘Azveez “Abdullah Al-Humaidee, Daar Ad-Da’wah,
Alexandria, Daar Al-Andalus Al-Khadraa, Jeddah, First
Edition, 1418 H (1998).

35) Taareekh Al-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Muhammad ibn
Ahmad Kan’aan, Muassisatul-Ma’aarif, Beirut, Lebanon,
First Edition, 1417 H (1997).

36) Taareekh AIl-Khulafaa, by Imam Jalaal Ad-Deen As-Suyootee,
Edited by Ibraaheem Saaleh, Daar Saadir, Beirut, First
Edition, 1417 H (1997).

Bibliography 769

Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Hal-Islam Fee “Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-
Raashideen, by Dr. Yusree Muhammad Haanee, Umm ‏لذ‎
‎Qura University, First Edition, 1417 H.

Taareekh Ad-Da’wah Al-Islaamiyyah Fee Zaman Ar-Rasool #8
Wal-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen, by Dr. Jameel ‘Abdullah Al-
Misree, Maktabah Ad-Daar, Al-Madeenah Al-
Munawwarah, First Edition, 1407 H (1987).

At-Taareekh As-Siyaasee Wal-‘Askariyyeen, by Dr. “Ali
Mo’tee, Muassasatul-Ma’aarif, Beirut, First Edition, 1419
H (1998).

Taareekh Al-Qadaa Fil-Islam, by Dr..Muhammad Az-
Zuhailee, Daar Al-Fikr Al-Mu’aasir, Betrut, Daar Al-Fikr,
Damascus, First Edition, 1415 H (1995).

Taareekh Al-Ya'qgoobee, Daar Beirut for Publishing and
Distribution, 1400 H (1980) Edition.

Taareekh Baghdad Au-Madeenatus-Salaam, by Abu Bakr
Ahmad ibn “Ali Al-Khateeb Al-Baghdaadee, Daar Al-
Kutub Al-Iimiyyah, Beirut, Lebanon.

Taareekh Sadrul-Islaam Wa-Fajrihi, by Dr. Shahaadah ‘Ali An- |
Naatoor, 1995.

Taareekh Futooh Ash-Shaam, by Abu Zakariyyah Yazeed ibn
Muhammad Al-Azdee, edited by “Abdul-Mun’im “Abdullah
‘Aamir, Muassasatul- Qaahirah, 1970.

At-Tabyeen Fee Ansaab Al-Qurashiyyeen, by Abu Muhammad
‘Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Qudaamah Al-

Maqdasee, ‘Aalam Al-Kutub, Beirut.

At-Tahaaluf As-Styaasee Fil-Islam, by Muneer Al-Ghadbaan,
Daar As-Salaam, Second Edition, 1408 H (1988).

Tuhfatul-Ahwadhee Bi-Sharh At-Tirmidhee, by ‘Abdur-
Rahmaan ibn ‘Abdur-Raheem Al-Mubaarakfooree, Daar
Al-Ittihaad Al-‘Arabee for Publishing, Second Edition,
1385 H (1965). |

37)

38)

39)

40)

41)

42)

43)

4A)

45)

46)

47)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq as

Turaath Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen Fil-Figh Al-Islaamee, by Dr.
Subhee Maihmasaanee, Daar Al-‘Ilm Lil-Malaayeen, First
Edition, 1984.

At-Tarbiyyah Al-Qtyaadiyyah, by Al-Ghadbaan, Daar Al-
Wataa, Al-Mansoorah, First Edition, 1418 H (1998).

Tarteeb Wa-Tahdhieeb Al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (Khilaafah Abu
Bakr As-Siddeeg), by Dr. Muhammad ibn Saamuil As-
Sulamee, Daar Al-Watan, Riyadh, First Edition, 1418 H
(1997).

Tafseer ibn Katheer, Daar Al\-Fikr for Publishing, Beirut,
Second Edition, 1389 H (1970).

Tafseer Al-Aaloosee, otherwise known as Rooh Al-Ma’aanee Fee
Tafseer Al-Qur’an Al-‘Adheem Was-Saba’ Al-Mathaanee, by
Mahmood Al-Aaloosee Al-Baghdaadee, Idaarah At-
Tibaa’ah Al-Mustafaaiyyah, India (no publishing date is
mentioned).

Tafseer Ar-Raazee, Daar Inyaa At-Turaath Al-‘Arabee, Beirut,
Third Edition.

Tafseer Al-Qaasimee, otherwise known as Mahaasin At-
Ta’weel, by Muhammad Jamaal Ad-Deen Al-Qaasimee,
Daar Al-Pikr, Beirut, Second Edition, 1398 H (1978).

Tafseer Al-Qurtubee, by Abu “Abdullah Muhammad ibn
Ahmad Al-Ansaaree Al-Qurtubee, Daar Ihyaa At-Turaath
Al Arabee, Beirut, Lebanon, 1965.

At-Tafseer Al-Muneer Fil-‘Aqeedah Wash-Sharee’ah Wal-
Manhaj, by Dr.Wahbah Az-Zuhailee, Daar Al-Fikr ‏لذ‎
‎Mou’aasir, Beirut, Daar Al-Fikr, Damascus, First Edition,
1411 H (1991).

At-Tafawwug Wan-Najaabah ‘Ala Nahyj As-Sahaabah, by Hamad
ibn Baleeh ibn Mirhaan ‏“لخ‎ Ajmee, Maktabah ‏“لخ‎ Abeekaan,
Riyadh, First Edition. | |

At-Tamkeen Lil-Ummah Al-Islaamtyyah Fee Dau Al-Qur’an Al-

7/0
48)

49)

50)

51)

52)

53)

54)

55)

56)

57)

58)

Bibliography ‘71

Kareem, by Muhammad As-Sayyid Muhammad Yousuf,
Daar As-Salaam, Egypt, First Edition, 1418 H (1997).

59) Tahdheeb Taareekh Damashg Al-Kabeer, by Ibn ‘Asaakir, Daar
fhyaa At-Turaath Al-Arabee, Beirut, Third Edition, 1407 H
(1987).

The Letter “Thaa”

60) Ath-Thaabitoon ‘Alal-Islam: Ayyaam Fitnatur-Riddah Fee ‘Ahd
Al-Khaleefah Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Dr. Mahdi
Rizgullah Ahmad, Daar Tayyibah, First Edition, 1417 H
(1996). |

The Letter “Jeem”

61) Jaamai’ Al-Usool Fee Ahaadeeth Ar-Rasool, by Abu As-
Sa’aadaat Al-Mubaarak ibn Muhammad Al-Juzaree, edited
by ‘Abdul-Qaadir Al-Arnaaoot, Maktabah Al-Hilwaanee
Edition, Syria, 1392 H.

62) Al-Jaamai’ Li-Akhlaag Ar-Raawee Wa-Adaab As-Saamati’, by ‏لذ‎
‎_ Khateeb Al-Baghdaadee, Maktabah Al-Ma/aarif, Riyadh,
1403 H (1983).

63) Al-Jihaad Wal-Qitaal Fis-Siyaasah Ash-Shar‘iyyah, by
Muhammad Khair Haikal, Daar Al-Bayaarig, Amman,
1414 H (1993). |

The Letter “Haa”’

64) Al-Hyaaz Wad-Daulah Al-lslaamiyyah, by Dr. Ibraaheem
Baidoon, Daar An-Nahdah Al-Arabiyyah, 1416 H (1995)
Edition.

65) Al-Harb An-Nafsiyyah Min Mandhoor Islaamee, by Dr.
Ahmad Naufal, Daar Al-Furqaan, Amman, 1407 H
(1987) Edition. |

772 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq #
66) Harakatur-Riddah, by Dr. ‘Ali Al-'Utoom, Maktabah Ar-
Risaalah Al-Hadeethah, Amman, Second Edition, 1997.

67) Al-Harakah As-Sanoosiyyah Fee Leebiyyah, by “Ali Muhammad
As-Sallaabee, Daar Al-Bayaariq, Amman, First Edition,
1999.

68) Harakatul-Fath Al-Islaamee, by Shukree Faisal, Daar Al-‘Ilm
Lil-Malaayeen, Sixth Edition, 1982.

69) Huroob Al-Islam Fish-Sham, by Muhammad Ahmad
Baashmeel, Daar Al-Fikr, First Edition, 1400 H (1980).

70) Huroob Ar-Riddah Min Qiyaadatun-Nabee Ia-Imra Abu Bakr , by
Shaugee Abu Khaleel, Daar Al-Fikr, Damascus.

71) Huroob Ar-Riddah Wa-Binaa Ad-Daulah Al-Islaamtyyah, by
Ahmad Sa’eed ibn Saalim, Daar Al-Manaar, 1415 H
(1994).

72) Huroob Ar-Riddah, by Muhammad Ahmad Baashmeel, Daar
Al-Fikr, First Edition, 1399 H (1979),

73) Al-~Hukm Bi-Ghair Maa Anzalallah: Ahwaaluhu Wa-

_ Ahkaamuhu, by Dr. ‘Abdur-Rahmaan ibn Saaleh Al-
Mahmood, Daar Tayyibah, Riyadh, First Edition, 1420 H
(1999).

74) Hilyatul-Auliyaa Wa-Tabagaat Al-Asfiyaa, by Abu Na’eem
Ahmad ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Asfahaanee, Daar Al-Kartub AL
‘Tbmiyyah, Beirut.

75) Hayaat Abu Bakr, by Mahmood Shilbee, Daar Al-Jeel, Beirut,
First Edition, 1979.

The Letter “Khaa”

76) Khaatam An-Nabtyyeen, by Abu Zuhrah, Daar Al-Fikr,
Beirut, First Edition, 1972.

77) Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed Saadiq Ibraaheem ‘Urjoon, Ad-Daar As-

Su’ oodiyyah, Fourth Edition, 1407 H (1987).

Bibliography . 773

Al-Kharraaj, by Abu Yousuf, Manshooraat Maktabah Ar-
Riyadh Al-Hadeethah (no publishing date is mentioned).

Khutab Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg , by Dr. Muhammad Ahmad ‘Aashoor
Jamaal ‘Abdul-Mun’im Al-Koomee, Daar Al Aitisaam.

Al-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah Wad-Daulah Al-Umawiyyah Min
Fathul-Baaree, by Dr. Yahya Ibraaheem Al-Yahya, Daar Al-
Hijrah, Saudi Arabia, First Edition, 1417 H (1996).

Al-Khilaafah Wal-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon Bainash-Shoorah Ad-
Daimagaraatiyyah, by Saalim Bahnasaawee, Maktabah Al-
Manaar Al-Islaamiyyah, Kuwait, Second Edition, 1418 H

(1997).

Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon Batnal-Istikhlaaf Wal-Istishhaad , by
Salaah ’Abdul-Fattaah Al-Khaalidee, Daar Al-Oalam,
Damascus, Ad-Daar Ash-Shaamiyyah, Beirut, First
Edition, 1416 H (1995).

Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by “Abdul-Wahhaab An-Najjaar,
Daar Al-Qalam, Beirut, First Edition, 1406 H (1986).

Khulafaa Ar-Rasool, by Khaalid Muhammad Khaalid, Daar
Thaabit Al-OQaahirah, Daar Al-Fikr, Damascus, First
Edition, 1415 2 (1994).

78)

79)

80)

81)

82)

83)

84)

The Letter “Daal’’

Ad-Durr Al-Manthoor Fit-Tafseer Bil-Ma’thoor, by Imam As-Suyootee,
Distribution by Muhammad Ameen Damj, Beirut, Lebanon.

Diraasaat Fil-Hadaarah Al-Islaamiyyah, by Ahmad Ibraaheem
Ash-Shareef, Daar Al-Fikr Al’ Arabee.

Diraasaat Fis-Seerah An-Nabawtyyah, by “‘Imaad Ad-Deen
Khaleel, Beirut, Eleventh Edition, 1409 H (1989).

Diraasaat Fee “Ahd An-Nubuwwah Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah,
by Dr. “Abdur-Rahmaan Ash-Shujaa’, Daar AJl-Fikr Al-
Mu/’aasir, First Edition, 1419 H (1999).

85)

86)

87)

88)

The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

Dalaail An-Nubuwwah Wa-Ma’rifatu Ahwaal Saalib Ash-
Sharee’ah, by Abu Bakr Ahmad Al-Baihagee, edited by
‘Abdul-Mo’tee Qal-‘ajee, Daar Al-Kutub Al-‘Tlmiyyah,
Betrut, First Edition, 1405 H.

Dawaa'ee Al-Futoohaat Al-Islaamiyyah Wa-Dawaa'ee Al-
Mustashrigeen, by Jameel ‘Abdullah Al-Misree, Daar Al-
QOalam, Damascus, Ad-Daar Ash-Shaamiyyah, Beirut, First
Edition, 1411 H (1991).

Daur Al-Hijaaz Fil-Hayaat As-Styaasiyyah Al-"Aamah Fil-
Qarnain Al-Awwal Wath-Thaanee hi-Hiyrah, by Dr. Ahmad
Ibraaheem Ash-Shareef, Daar Al-Fikr Al-‘Arabee, Second
Edition, 1977.

Ad-Daur As-Siyaasee Lis-Safwah Fee Sadril-Islam, by As-‘Sayyid
‘Umar, World Institute of Islamic Thought, First Edition,
1417 28 (1996).

Ad-Daulatul-‘Arabiyyah Al-Islaamtyyah Al-Oolah, by ‘Isaam
Muhammad Saaboor, Daar An-Nahdah Al-’Arabiyyah,
Beirut, Third Edition, 1995.

Ad-Daulah Al-‘Arabiyyah Al-Islaamiyyah, by Mansoor Al-
Hiraabee, Manshooraat Jam’iyyah Ad-Da’wah Al-
Islaamiyyah Al-Leebiyyah, Second Edition, 1396 H (1987).

Deewaan Ar-Riddah, by Dr. “Ali Al-Utoom, Maktabah Ar-
Risaalah Al-Hadeethah, Amman, First Edition, 1408 H
(1987).

Deewaan Hisaab ibn Thaabit, edited by Waleed ‘Arafaat.

Ar-Riyadh An-Nadhrah Fee Manaagib Al-‘Asharah, by Abu
Ja’far Ahmad Al-Muhib At-Tabaree (who died in the year
694 Hh), Al-Maktabah Al-Oayyimah Al-Qaahirah.

774
89)

90)

91)

92)

93)

94)

95)

96)
97)

The Letter “Seen”

Silsilatul-Ahaadeeth As-Saheehah, by Muhammad Naasir Ad-
Deen Al-Albaanee, Al-Maktab Al-Islaameee Publications.

98)

Bibliography 775

99) Sunan Abu Daawood, by Sulaimaan As-Siistaanee, edited by
‘lzzit Ad-Di‘aas - and with commentary by him — Syria,
1391 H.

100) Sunan At-Tirmidhee, by Abu ‘Eesa Muhammad Ibn “Eesa At-
Tirmidhee, Daar-ul-Fikr, 1398 H.

101) As-Siyaasah Ash-Shar’tyyah Bain Ar-Raa’ee War-Ra’eeah, by
Shaikh Al-Islam ibn Taymiyyah.

102) Siyyar “Alaam An-Nubalaa, by Muhammad Ibn Ahmad ibn
“Uthman Adh-Dhahabee, Muassasatur-Risaalah, Seventh
Edition, 1410 H (1990),

103) As-Seerah Al-Halabiyyah Fee Seeratul-Ameen Al-Ma’moon,
‘Ali ibn Burhaan Ad-Deen Al-Halabee, Daar AI-
Ma’rifah.

104) As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah “Ard Li-Waagi'tha Wa-Tahleel Li-
Ahdaathihah, by Dr. ‘Ali Muhammad As-Salaabee (the
English translation of this work is also published by
Darussalam Riyadh).

105) As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah Fee Dau Al-Masaadir Al-Asliyyah,
by Dr. Mahdee Rizquilah Ahmad, The King Faisal
Institute for Islamic Research, Riyadh, First Edition,
1412 2

106) As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Abu Shohbah, Daar Al-Qalam.
Damascus, Second Edition, 1417 H (1996).

107) As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by Ibn Hishaam, Daar Ihyaa At-
Turaath, Second Edition, 1417 H (1997).

108) As-Seerah An-Nabawtyyah : Duroos Wa-‘Tbar, by Dr. Mustata
As-Sibaa’ee, Al-Maktab Al-Islaamee, Beirut, Lebanon,
Ninth Edition, 1406 H (1986).

109) As-Seerah An-Nabawiyyah, by tbn Katheer, Imam Abul-Fidaa
Ismaa’eel, edited by Mustafah “Abdul-Waahid, Daar Al-Fikr,
Beirut, Second Edition, 1398 H.

776 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏مد‎

110) Seerah Wa-Hayaat As-Siddeeq, by Majdee Fathee As-Sayyid,
Daar As-Sahaabah Lit-Turaath Bi-Tantaa, First Edition, 1417
TH (1996).

The Letter “Sheen”

111) Ash-Shoorah Bainal-Asaalah Wal-Mu'aasirah, by ‘Izz Ad-Deen
At-Tameemee, Daar Al-Basheer, Furst Edition, 1405 H -
(1985).

112) Ash-Shatkhaan Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq Wa ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattaab
Bi-Riwaayatul-Balaadhiree Fee Ansaab Al-Ashraaf, edited by
Dr. Ihsaan Sidgqee Al--Amd, Al-Mo’tamin for Distribution,
Saudi Arabia, Third Edition, 1418 H (1997).

The Letter “Saad”

113) Saheeh Al-Bukhaaree, by Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad ibn
Ismaa’eel Al-Bukhaaree, Daar Al-Fikr, First Edition, 1411 H
(1991).

114) Saheeh Al-Jaamai’ As-Sagheer Wa-Ziyaaditini, by Muhammad
Naasir Ad-Deen Al-Albaanee, Al-Maktab Al-Islaamee,
Beirut, Lebanon, Third Edition, 1408 H (1988).

115) Saheeh As-Seerah An-Nabawtyyah, by Upraaheem Saaleh Al-
‘Ali, Daar An-Nafaais, Third Edition, 1408 H (1998).

116) As-Saheeh Al-Musnad Min Fadaail As-Sahaabah, by Abu
‘Abdullah Mustafah Al’Adwee, Daar ibn ‘Affaan, Saudi
Arabia, First Edition, 1416 H (1995).

117) Saheech Sunan ibn Maajah, by Muhammad Naasir Ad-Deen
Al-Albaanee, Al-Maktab Al-Islaamee for Distribution.

118) Saheeh Sunan Abu Daawood, by Muhammad Naasir Ad-Deen
Al-Albaanee, Al-Maktab Al-Islaamee for Distribution.

119) Saheeh Muslim Bi-Sharh An-Nawawee, Al-Matba’ah Al-
Misriyyah Bil-Azhar, First Edition, 1347 H (1929).

Bibliography 4/7

120) Saheeh Muslim, published under the supervision of
Muhammad Fuaad ‘Abdul-Baagee, Daar Ihyaa At-Turaath
Al Arabee, Beirut; Lebanon, Second Edition, 1972.

121) As-Siddeeq Awwalul-Khulafaa, by ‘Abdur-Rahmaan Ash-
Shirqaawee, Daar Al-Kitaab Al-‘Arabee, First Edition, 1410
H (1990).

122) As-Siddeeq: Abu Bakr, by Muhammad Husain Haikal, Daar
Al-Ma’aarif, Egypt, 1971.

123) Safwatus-Safwah, by Imam Abul-Far ibn Al-Jawzee, Daar ‏لذ‎
‎Ma’rifah, Beirut.

124) Safahaat Min Taareekh Leebiyyah Al-Islaamee, by ‘Ali

Muhammad As-Sallaabee, Daar Al-Bayaariq, Amman,
1418 H (1998).

125) Suwar Min fihaad As-Sahaabah: ‘Amaliyyaat Jihaadiyyah
Khaasah Tunfidhuha Majmoo’aat Khaasah Minas-Sahaabah, by
Dr. Salaah ‘Abdul-Fattaah Al-Khaalidee, Daar Al-Qalam,
Damascus, First Edition, 1421 H (2000).

The Letter “Taa”’

126) At-Tabagaat Al-Kubraa, by Ibn Sa’ad, Daar Saadir,
Beirut.

The Letter “’Ain”’

127) ‘Abgariyyatus-Siddeeq, by “Abbaas Mahmood Al-Aqqaad,
Al-Maktabah Al- Asriyyah, Beirut.

128) “Ateeq Al-’Utagaa Al-Imam, by Mahmood ‘Ali Al-Baghdaadee,
Daar An-Nadwah Al-jJadeedah, Beirut, First Edition, 1414 H
(1994).

129) Al-’Asharah Al-Mubashiroon Bil-Jannah, by Dr. Sayyid Al-
Jameelee, Daar Ar-Rayyaan Lit-Turaath, Beirut, Second
Edition, 1408 H (1988).

778 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg &

130) ‘Asrul-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Dr. Akram Diyaa ‏لط‎
‎‘Umaree, Maktabah Al-“Uloom Wal-Hikam, Al-Madeenah
Al-Munawwarah, First Edition, 1414 H (1994).

131) ‘Asrul-Khulafaa Ar-Raashidoon, by Dr. Fathiyyah ‘Abdul-
Fattaah An-Nabraawee, Ad-Daar As-Sa’oodiyyah, Third
Edition, 1415 H (1994).

132) “Asrus-Sahaabah , by ‘Abdul-Mun’im Al-Haashimee, Daar ibn
Katheer, Third Edition, 1421 H (2000).

133) “Ageedah Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jamaa’ah Fis-Sahaabah Al-Kiraam,
by Dr. Naasir ibn ‘Ali “Aaidh Hasan Ash-Shaikh,
Maktabatur-Rushd, Riyadh, First Edition, 1413 H (1993).

134) Al-’Ageedah Fee Ahlil-Bait Bainal-lfraat Wat-Tafreet, by Dr.
Sulaimaan ibn Saalim ibn Rajaa As-Suhaimee, Maktabah Al-
Imam A\-Bukhaaree, First Edition, 1420 H (2000).

135) AL-’Amaliyyaat At-Ta’arrudiyyah Wad-Difaa’iyyah ‘Indal-
Muslimeen, by Ar-Raaid Nihaad “Abbaas Shihaab Al-
Jabbooree, Daar Al-Hurriyyah, Baghdad.

136) Al-‘Awaasim Minal-Qawaasim, published under the
supervision of Muhibb-ud-Deen Al-Khateeb, and prepared
by Muhammad Sa’eed Mubayyad, Daar Ath-Thaqaafah,
Ad-Dauhah, Second Edition, 1989.

137) ‘Uyoon Al-Akhbaar, by Abu Muhammad “Abdullah ibn
Muslim ibn Qateebah, Daar-ul-Kutub Al-‘Thmiyyah, First
Edition, 1406 H (1986).

The Letter “Faa”’
138) Fathul-Baaree, As-Salafiyyah Printing Presses, Second

Edition, 1401 H.

139) Futooh Al-Buldaan, by Abul-’Abbaas Ahmad ibn Yahya Al-
Balaadhiree, Muassasatul-Ma’aarif, Beirut, Lebanon, 1407
H (1987).

Bibliography 779

140) Futooh Ash-Sham, by Muhammad ibn “Umar Al-Waagidee,
Daar ibn Khuldoon.

141) Faraaid Al-Kalaam Lil-Khulafaa Al-Kiraam, by Qaasim
‘Aaashoor, Daar Taweeq As-Sa’oodiyyah, First Edition,
1419 H (1998).

142) Al-Fasl Fil-Milal Wal-Ahwaa Wan-Nihal, by Abu
Muhammad ibn Hazm Adh-Dhaahiree, Maktabah ‏للخ‎
‎Khaanyee, Eeypt.

143) Fadaail As-Sahaabah, by Abu ‘Abdullah Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Hanbal, Daar ibn Al-Jawzee, Saudi
Arabia, Second Edition, 1420 H (1999).

144) Fighut-Tamkeen Fil-Qur’an Al-Kareem, by Dr. ‘Ali
Muhammad As-Sallaabee, Daar Al-Wafaa Al-Mansoorah,
First Edition, 1421 H (2001).

145) Fighush-Shoorah Wal-Istishaarah, by Dr. Tawfeeq Ash-
Shaawee, Daar Al-Watfaa Bil-Mansoorah, Second Edition,
1413 H (1992).

146) Al-Fann Al-‘Askaree Al-Islaamee, by Dr. Yaaseen Suwaid, Al-
Matboo’aat Company for Distribution, Lebanon, First
Edition, 1409 H (1988).

147) Fit-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Dr. Shaugee Abu Khaleel, Daar
Al-Fikr Al-Mu’aasir, Beirut, Second Edition, 1417 H (1996).

148) Fee Dhilaal Al-Qur’an, by Sayyid Qutub, Daar Ash-Shuroogq,
Ninth Edition, 1400 H (1980).

The Letter “Qaaf”’

149) Qiraa’ah Siyaasiyyah An-Nabawiyyah, by Muhaammad
Qal’ajee, Daar An-Nafaais, Beirut, Lebanon, First Edition,
1416 H (1996).

150) Qissah Ba’th Jaish Usaamah, by Dr. Fadi Uaahee, Daar ibn
Hazm, Beirut, Second Edition, 1420 H (2000).

780 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg #

151) Al-Qiyaadah Al-"Askariyyah Fee ‏قلف‎ Ar-Rasool #8, by Dr.
‘Abdullah Muhammad Ar-Rasheed, Daar Al-OQalam,
Damascus, First Edition, 1410 H (1990).

The Letter “Kaaf”’

152) Al-Kaamil Fit-Taareekh, by Abul-Hasan “Ali ibn Abee Al-
Makaarim Ash-Shaibaanee — who is better known by the
name ibn Al-Atheer — published under the supervision of
‘Ali Shairee, Daar Ihyaa At-Turaath Al-‘Arabee, Beirut, First
Edition, 1408 H (1989).

153) Kaifa Naktub At-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Muhammad Qutub,
Daar Al-Watan, Saudi Arabia, First Edition, 1412 H.

The Letter “Laam”
154) Lataaif Al-Ma’aarif, by ion Rajab Al-Hanbalee.
The Letter “Meem”

155) Ma’aathir Al-Inaafah Fee Ma’aalim Al-Khilaafah, by Al-
Qalgashandee, published under the supervision of “Abdus-
Sattaar Ahmad Al-Farj, ‘Aalam Al-Kutub, Beirut.

156) Majma’ Az-Zawaaid Wa-Manba’ Al-Fawaaid, by Noor-ud-
Deen ‘Ali ibn Abu Bakr Al-Haithamee, Daar Ar-Rayyaan,
Egypt, Daar-ul-Kutub Al-‘Arabee, Beirut.

157) Majmooatul-Fataawah, by Tagiyyud-Deen Ahmad ibn
Taymiyyah Al-Harraabee, Daar Al-Wafaa, Maktabah AI-
‘Abeekaan, First Edition, 1418 H (1997).

158) Majmoo’ah Al-Wathaaig As-Styaasiyyah Lil-‘Ahd An-Nabawee
Wal-Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah, by Muhammad Hameedullah,
Daar-un-Nafaais, Fifth Edition, 1405 H (1985).

159) Muhammad Rasoolullah, by Muhammad Saadiq “Urjoon,
Daar Al-Qalam, Second Edition, 1415 H (1995).

Bibliography 781

160) Mathnatul-Muslimeen Fil-‘Ahd Al-Makkee, by Dr. Sulaimaan
As-Suwaikat, Maktabatut-Tawbah, Riyadh, First Edition,
1412 H (1992). -

161) Al-Murtada: Seerah Ameer Al-Mo’mineen Abul-Hasan ‘Ali ibn
Abee Taalib, by Abul-Hasan An-Nadawee. Daar Al-Qalam,
Damascus, Second Edition, 1419 H (1998).

162) Maradun-Nabee Wa-Wafaatihi Wa-Athariht ‘Alal-Ummah, by
Khaalid Abu Saaleh, Daar Al-Watan, First Edition, 1414 H.

163) Murooj Adh-Dhahab Wa-Ma’aadin Al-Jawaahir, by Abul-Hasan
‘Ali ibn Al-Husain ibn ‘Ali Al-Mas’oodee, Daar Al-Ma’rifah,
Beirut, 1403 H (1982).

164) Marwiyyaat Abu Mukhannag Fee Taareekh At-Tabaree (‘Asr Al-
Khilaafah Ar-Raashidah), by Dr. Yahya Ibraaheem Al-Yahya,
Daar Al- Aasimah, Riyadh, First Edition, 1410 H.

165) Al-Mustadrak ‘Alas-Saheehain, by Abu ‘Abdullah
Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah An-Naisaabooree, Daar Al-
Kutub Al‘Tlmiyyah, Beirut, Lebanon, First Edition, 1411
H (1990).

166) Al-Mustafaad Min Qisas Al-Qur’an, by “Abdul-Kareem
Zaidaan, Muassasatur-Risaalah, First Edition, 1418 H
(1997). |

167) Al-Muslimoon War-Room Fee ‘Asrin-Nubuwwah, by Dr.

“Abdur-Rahmaan Ahmad Saalim,.Daar Al-Fikr Al-Arabee,
1418 H (1997) Edition.

168) Mavaarik Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed | Didd-al- Furs, by ‘Abdul-
Jabbaar Mahmood As-Saamiraaee, Ad-Daar Al-Arabiyyah
_ Lil-Mausoo’aat, Lebanon, First Edition, 1984 H.

169) Ma’aarik Khaalid ibn Al-Waleed, by Dr. Yaaseen Suwaid, Al-
Muassasatul-’Arabiyyah Lid-Diraasah Wan-Nashr, Fourth
Edition, 1989.

170) Mo‘jam Al-Buldaan, by Yaaqoot Al-Hamawee, Daar Saadir,
Beirut, 1397 H (1977).

782 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg ‏حك‎

171) Al-Mo jam Al-Kabeer, by Abul-Qaasim Sulaimaan ibn Ahmad
At-Tabaraanee (60 H-360 H), Daar Maktabatul-"Uloom
Wal-Hikam, Second Edition, 1406 H (1985).

172) Al-Maghaazee, by Al-Waaqidee Muhammad ibn “Umar ibn
Waaqid, published under the supervision of Marsdon
Tonas, “Aalam Al-Kutub, Beirut, Third Edition, 1404 H
(1984).

173) Mugaddimah ibn Khuldoon.

174) Mugawwamaat An-Nasr Fee Dau Al-Qur’an Was-Sunnah, by
Dr. Ahmad Abu Ash-Shihaab, Al-Maktabah Al-‘Asriyyah,
Beirut, First Edition, 1420 H (1999).

175) Malaamaih Ash-Shoorah Fid-Da’wah Al-Islaamiyyah, by
‘Adnaan ‘Ali Ridaa An-Nahwee, Second Edition, 1404 H
(1984).

176) Min Daulah ‘Umar Ila Daulah ‘Abdul-Mahik, by Tbraaheem
Baidoon, Daar An-Nahdah Al-‘Arabiyyah, Beirut, 1411 H
(1991).

177) Min Ma‘een As-Seerah, by Saaleh Ahmad Ash-Shaamee, Al-
Maktab Al-Islaamee, Second Edition, 1413 H (1992).

178) Minhaaj As-Sunnah, by ibn Taymiyyah, published under the
supervision of Muhammad Rashaad Saalim, Muassasah
Qurtubah.

179) Manhaj Kitaabatut-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Muhammad
Saamil Al-‘Ilyaanee, Daar Tayyibah, First Edition, 1406 H
(1986).

180) Mawaagif As-Siddeeq Ma’an Nabee Fee Makkah, by Dr. ‘Aatif
Lamaadah, Daar As-Sahaabah Lit-Turaath, Furst Edition,
1413 H (1993).

181) Mawaagif As-Siddeeq Ma’an Nabee Fee Al-Madeenah, by Dr.
“Aatif Lamaadah, Daar As-Sahaaba Lit-Turaath, First
١ Edition, 1413 H (1993).

Bibliography 783

182) Mausoo’atut-Taareekh Al-Islaamee, by Dr. Ahmad Shaakir,
Maktabatun-Nahdah Al-Misriyyah Al-Oaahirah, Twelfth
Edition, 1987. |

183) Mausoo’ah Figh Abu Bakr As-Siddeeg, by Dr. Muhammad
Rawwaas Qal’ajee, Daar An-Nafaais, Second Edition, 1415
H (1994).

184) Mausoo’ah Nadhrahtun-Na’eem Fee Makaarim Akhlaag Ar-
Rasool Al-Kareem, authored by a team of scholars under the
supervision of Saaleh ‘Abdullah ibn Humaid, the Imam and.
Khateeb of Al-Haram Al-Makkee, Daar Al-Waseelah, Jeddah,
First Edition, 1418 H (1998).

The Letter “Noon”

185) Nasab Quraish, by Abu “Abdullah Mus’ab ibn “Abdullah ibn
Al-Mus’ab Az-Zubairee, Daar Al-Ma’aarit, Cairo.

186) Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fil-lslam, by “Aarif Abu “Eed, Daar An-
Nafaais, Jordon, First Edition, 1416 H (1996).

187) Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fish-Sharee’ah Wat-Taareekh Al-Islaamee , by
Dhaafir Al-Oaasimee, Daar An-Nafaais, Beirut, Third
Edition, 1407 H (1987).

188) Nidhaam Al-Hukm Fee ‘Ahd Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen, by Hamad
Muhammad AL-’Amd , Al-Muassasatul-Jamaa‘iyyah for Research,
Publishing, and Distribution — First Edition, 1414 H (1994).

189) Nidhaam Al-Hukoomah Al-Nabawiyyah, At-Taraateeb Al-
Idaariyyah, by Muhammad ‘Abdul-Hayy Al-Kattaanee Al-
Idreesee Al-Hasan Al-Faasee, Sharikah Al-Argam ibn Abee
Al-Argam, Beirut.

190) Nagd ‘Ilmee Li-Kitaab Al-Islam Wa-Usool Al-Hukm, by
Muhammad At-Taahir ibn ‘Aashoor.

191) An-Nihaayah Fee Ghareeb Al-Hadeeth, by Ibn Al-Atheer,
published under the supervision of Taahir Ahmad Az-
Zaawee and Mahmood Muhammad At-Tanaahee.

784 The Biography of Abu Bakr As-Siddeeq ‏د‎

192) Noontyyatul-Qahtaanee, by Abu Muhammad ‘Abdullah ibn
Muhammad Al-Andaloosee Al-OQahtaanee, Daar As-
Sawaadee, Saudi Arabia, Third Edition, 1410 H (1989).

The Letter “Haa”’

193) Al-Hijrah An-Nabawiyyah Al-Mubaarakah, by Dr. ‘Abdur-
Rahmaan Al-Birr, Daar Al-Kalimah, Al-Mansoorah, Egypt,
First Edition, 1418 H (1997).

194) Al-Hijrah Fil-Qur’an Al-Kareem, by Ahzamee Saami’oon
Jazwalee, Maktabatur-Rush, Riyadh, First Edition, 1417 H
(1996).

The Letter “Wauw’”’

195) Al-Wahyee Wa-Tableegh Ar-Risaalah, by Dr. Yahya Al-Yahya
(from whom I received a copy before it was published).

196) Wagaa’ai Nadwatun-Nudhum Al- islaamiyyah, by Abu
Dhabyee, 1405 H (1984).

197) Wilaayatush-Shurtah Fil-Islam, by Al-“Ameed Dr. Namr ibn
Muhammad Al-Humaidaanee, Daar ‘Aalam Al-Kutub,
Riyadh, Second Edition, 1414 H (1994).

198) Al-Wilaayah “Alal-Buldaan Fee “Asr Al-Khulafaa Ar-Raashideen,
by Dr. “Abdul-“Azeez Tbraaheem Al-“Umaree, Pirst Edition,
1409 H.

The Letter “Yaa”’

199) Al-Yemen Fee Sadril-Islam, by Dr. ‘Abdur-Rahmaan Shujaa’,
Daar Al-Fikr, Damascus.

