The Hist ag Of,

By: Akbar Shah NajeebaBadi
Revised by, Safi-ur-RahmanMubarakpuri

The History

of Islam
(Volume Three) ~ —
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED @ tides ‏جميع حقوق الطبع‎

tilized in any
this book may be reproduced or ui
‏ساد اسيا‎ any means, electronic or mechanical, including

information storage and
unused photocopying and recording or by gen
i veweaeiton. without the permission of the publis!

First Edition: April 2001

Supervised by
ABDUL MALIK MUJAHID
Headquarters: ‏كلقا‎
‎P.O. Bosc 22743, Riyadh 11416, KSA ‘@ London: Darussalam Intemational Publications Lid,
Tet: 00986-1-4033962/4043432 P.O, Box: 21855, London E10 6*0
Fax00968-1- 4021650 Tet: 044-7947 306 706 Fax: 0044-208 925 6996
E © Birmingham: Al-Hidaayah Publishing & Distribution
Pilsen ‏لل‎ 436 Coventry Road, Birmingham B10 OUG
: Tel & Fax: 00966-1-46 14483 Tet: 0044-121-753 1889 Fax: 121-753 2422
Branches & Agents: © Lakempa NSW: ICIS: Ground Floot 165-171, Hakdon St
sa Tet: (61-2) 9758 4040 Fax: 9758 4030
‏الاير بي‎ Tot: 00966-25712299 Fax: 6173448 MaLavsia
© AiKhober: Tel: 00066-3-6948 106 © E&D BOOKS SDN.BHD.-321 B rd Floor, Suria Koc
WAL Kuala Lumpur City Center 50088
© Yat: 00071-6-8511293 Fox: 5511204 Tek: 00603-21663433 Fax: 459 72032
359 ‏ععوعموياه‎
‎5 @ Muslim Converts Association ‘of Singapore
50 Lower Mal, Lahore Si 424484
Tot: 009242724 0024 Fax: 1954072 Tel: 0065-440 6924, 348 9344 Fax: 440 6724
° Gamat Market, Ghazsi Stoet SRLLANKA
Bazar, Lahore
Tek: 0092.42 1 vara © Darul Kitab 6, Namal Road, Colombo-4
7120054 Fax: 7320703. ‏:ب‎ Tet: 0094-1-589 038 Fax: 0004-74 722499
. Houston: PO, Box: 79184 Tx.27279 © Islam Presentation Committes
Met 001-743-722 0419 Fax001-793-722 0441 Entightment Book Shop
nal: Sales @y 3 2 P.O. Box : 1613, Safat 19017 KUWAIT
© New 2] ‘www.dar-us-salam.com Tot: 00965-244 7526, Fax: 240 0057
fork: 572 Attantic Ave, Brooklyn BANGLADESH
New York-11217. i
Tat: 001-718-625 ‏ووو‎ 1 © 30 Maitola Road, Onaka-14

Tek 0008-02-8657214. Fax toon og 5
The History
of Islam

(Volume Three)

By
Akbar Shah Naj eebabadi

Revised by
Safi-ur-Rahman Mub aralpuri

Edited by
Abdul Rahman Abdullah
Formerly
Raymond J. Manderola
Fordham University, USA
and

Muhammad Tahir Salafi

a.
DARUSSALAM

DARUSSALAM

GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS
Riyadh ٠ Jeddah e Sharjah ¢ Lahore
London « Houston * New York

In the Name of Allah the Most
Beneficent, the Most Merciful
Publishers Note

We are presenting before you the third volume of the book History of
Islam. This book was originally written in the Urdu language in 1922
(1343 AH) by Akbar Shah Khan Najeebabadi. This was the time about
25 years before the partition of Indian Subcontinent into Pakistan and
India. For the purpose of brevity, the compiler has presented the
authentic events in concise form from the famous histories of Islam
written in the Arabic and Persian languages by the great Muslim
historians like Tabari, Ibn Athir, Mas‘udi, Abul-Fida’, Ibn Khaldin
and Suyuti, apart from getting benefited from the authentic books of
Ahadith for the compilation of the part about the biography of the
Prophet Muhammad 3%. So, this compilation is actually the extract of
the works of the famous Muslim historians:

In the first volume, starting with the introduction of the history asa
subject, the country, people and conditions of Arabia prior to the
advent of Islam were discussed, and an account of the life of Prophet
Muhammad _% was presented including the hardships and opposition
he faced while propagating the message of Islam, and the details of
migration and the period after it until his death. After that the

description of Rightly Guided Caliphate was also discussed in its full
Perspective.

6 . 776 History of Islam

In this second volume, starting with the Caliphate of Banu Umayyah,
the martydom of Imam Husain ‏رقو‎ and the Caliphate of the Abbasids,
all areas have been covered as far as the expansion of Islam was.

This third volume begins with the description of the conditions of
Spain before and after the rule of Muslims and the role played by
Umayyad, Abbasid, Almoravid and Almohad Caliphs there and their
encounters with the Christian Armies. Then some mention of the
conquest of Morocco and North Africa has been given along with the
details of Idrisia and Aghlabs rule there. After that detailed accounts
of Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mangols have been
produced. After that Islamic history of Persia is described giving the
accounts of Saffariah, Samanid, Delmid, Ghamavid, Seljuk, Ghourid
and Muluk Dynasties with the periods of Khwarizm Shah, Atabeks
and Sistan Kings rule there. Then the Islamic history of Egypt and
Syria is covered desckibing the Ubaidullah, Ayyubid and Mamluk
Dynasties, and the rule of Atabek and Abbasid Caliphs. In the end,
something about the Ottoman Dynasty and its Empire is dicussed
including the description of the conquest of Constantinople.

We hope that the readers will find this volume also of great help in the

study of Islamic history. The famous scholar Safi-ur-Rahman
Mubarakpuri has revised the Urdu edition before its trai

nslation to
check the authenticity aspect.

The translation was done b
Darussalam, and every care h
and_ the names of the persons
thank all the persons who
task and produce it before
accept our humble efforts

blessings on’ our Prophet
followers.—Amins

y the Translation Department of
as been taken to reproduce the events
and places as accurately as possible. We
have cooperated with us to complete this
you into a presentable form. May Allah
in this regard and send His peace and
Muhammad, his Companions and his

Abdul Malik Mujahid
General Manager
Darussalam

Table of Contents

Publishers Note...

Chapter-1

Spain before the Muslims.
Geographical Conditions
Produce and Climate ‏لمع .ل‎
Details of Provinces and Territories.

Phoenician, Carthage, Roman, Gothic Rules in Spain
Phoenician Rule
Roman Rule in Spain ..

End of Gothic Rule..
Accession of Roderick (Larziq)...
Factors Leading to the Muslim Invasion of Spain
Musa bin Nusayr....
First Islamic Corps to Spain Under Tariq
Tariq bin Zeyad Ordered to Invade Spain...

Chapter - 2
Islamic Rule In Spain 31

The Strange Order of Tariq....

The History of Islam

The First Stage of the Islamic Force ‏م لم م مل و سم‎
The Attack of a Christian General and His Defeat
Preparations of Roderick.
The First Battle...
Roderick’s Escape from the Battlefield ..
Causes of the Christians’ Defeat..........
Tarig’s March to Cordova
Conquest of Toledo .....
Musa bin Nusayr in Spain..........
Fuil Islamic Control over Spain
Musa Summoned
Accession of Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik
End of Tariq .....e.ccccccceccssssesecs
Death of Musa bin Nusayr
A False Episode......
First Ruler of Spain ....

Shapter-3
Abdul Aziz bin Musa
Religious Freedom .
Assassination of Abdul Aziz
Ayyub bin Habib................
Transfer of the Headquarters
Harb bin Abdur Rahman Thagafi.
Samh bin Malik
Census in Spain
Expedition to Southern France
Martyrdom of Sambo.
Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafqi
Abdur Rahman’‘s Deposition
Anbasa bin Suhaim Kalbi..........
Conquest of Southern France
Martyrdom of Anbasa.
Urwah bin Abdullah Fihri
Yahya bin Salma

ates

Rulers of Spain
Table of Contents 9

Uthman bin Abi Ubaidah Lakhmi
Hudaifah bin al-Ahwas Qaisi

Hathim bin Ubaid ............
Deposition of Hathim.

Muhammad bin Abdullah Ashjai 2
Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafqi Reinstated 46
Uthman Lakhmi rebels....
Uthman assassinated..
Fighting in the City of Tours..
Martyrdom of Abdur Rahman...
Abdul Malik bin Fihri...............-
Abdul Malik’s Deposition
Utbah bin Hajjaj Saluli............
Deeds of Utbah ....
Death of Utbah.
Abdul Malik bin Qatn...
Kulthum bin Ayaz
Kulthum bin Ayaz at the Fort of Ceuta
Hanzala Appointed as Governor .
Abdul Malik bin Qatn killed
Mutual! Discord
Thalba bin Salamah.
Deposition of Ibn Salamah..............
Abul Khattab Hisam bin Darar Kalbi.
Political Mistake of Abul Khattab .
Thalba bin Salamah............-.-:--0
Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman Fihri
Spain is divided into Provinces....
Impact of Change in Central Rule over Spain.
The Rule of Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil..............
A Summary of the First Phase of Islamic Rule in Spain.
Sovereign Christian Rule in the Northern Areas..
Hilly Ranges of Spain ..

10 The History of Islam

Chapter “4

The Spainish Caliphs
Abdur Rahman bin Mu’awiyah, the Umayyad
Habits and Traits of Character ..

Emigration...
Abdur Rahman in Africa.
Abdur Rahman’s Plan to Found His Rule in Africa
Abdur Rahman in Spain..

Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman assassinated ..
Managing Home Affairs.......ssesesssses

Abbasids’ Action against Abdur Rahman..
Courageous Act of Abdur Rahman.
Macabre Joke........escessesssssseseecssescssssees 68

Rebels annihilated ............... 69
Reasons behind the Revolts 272
Death of Abdur Rahman... 76
An Assessment of Abdur Rahman’s Life.. 76

His Features and His Children.......

Order and Discipline..... 78
Hisham bin Abdur Rahman 80
1 80

80

81

Brothers pardoned. 81
Attack on France... 82
Punishing the rebellious Christians 82

Construction of the Cordova Mosque.
Insurgence in Cataluna put down...

Cordova Mosque completed
LT: ‏مل‎

Assessment of Hisham’s Life .
The Crown Prince.

Table of Contents 11

Hakam bin Hisham..
Sulaiman and Abdullah Rebel.
Defensive Measures of Hakam...
End of Sulaiman and Abdullah.........

An Organized Conspiracy of the Christians.
New State Founded against the Muslims......
Treacherous Muslim Governors encouraged
Causes of Opposition to Hakam
Eradication of Rebels
Skirmishes with the Christians
Fresh Recruiting Drive
Malkites’ Opposition

Flames of Antagonism reach the Royal Palace

Hakam’s Presence of Mind

Exile of Malkites .. 95
Invasion of France. 06
Disasters of Famine and Drought.

Death of Hakam
Assessment of Hakam’s Character.

Opposition from Family Members.
Ali bin Nafe honored...........
Reforms in Mode of Life
Progress of Malkite Schoo! of thought in Spain
Rebellion Curbed
Emissary of the Caesar of Constantinople
Abdur Rahman’s Sense of [Islamic Honor .
Portuguese Revolt.
Revolt in Toledo ....
The Next Emissary of Caesar of Constantinople
The Revolt of Commander Musa bin Musa...
Revolt of the Christians of the Northern Frontier.
Fresh Mischief of Christians of South Spain.......
Death of Abdur Rahman..........0-
Assessment of Abdur Rahman’s Rule
Heir Apparent...

12 The History of Istam

Accession of Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman II
Muhammad's First Step ..
Rebellions Curbed...
New Religion Invented
Death of Sultan Muhammaad..................

Assessment of Sultan Muhammad’s Rule.
Accession of Mundhir bin Muhammad

Death of Sultan Mundhir
Accession of Abdullah..............
First Weakness of Abdullah. aoe
Condition of the Umayyads during the Rule of Abdullah ......119
Abdullah’s Action.

Chapter - 5

Two Rival Forces.
First Campaign...
Revolts Curbed .
Conspiracy Against the Sultan...
Details of the occupied Christian Territories
The Governor of Saragossa (Sarcat) revolts..
Battle of Trenches ....... ccc
The Abbasid Caliphate suffers .
Navy and Army Strengthened.........

Worldwide Glory of Abdur Rahman .
Three Petitioners in the Court of the Caliphate
Patronizing of Scholars
Construction Works...
Piety oo...
Land Revenue. l
Death of the ‏ةي ة 12 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ااال‎

Table of Contents 13

Assessment of Abdur Rahman’s Rule.

Accession of Hakam bin Abdur Rahman III
A Review of the Administration ..
Revolts of Bordering Christian States.
Awe-Struck Christian Rulers........
Revolt of the Moroccan Rule..

Assessment of Caliph Hakam’s Rule
Hakam’s Love of Learning...
Personal Library of Hakam..

Honoring Scholars and Accomplished Persons...
Favoring Scholars -...-cssressscsceccsstseveeresssesssteeeeee
Distinctive Characteristics of Hakam’s Rule ...........-.5
Hisham II bin Hakam If and Mansur Muhammad bin Abi Aamir
Consultations among the Leaders of the Court ..
ACCESSION .......eessecseneseseeseeesncecnesteaenaears
Muhammad bin Aamir as Adviser...
Muhammad bin Abi Aamir’s life
Deeds of Muhammad bin Abi Amir.
Jihad against the Christians.

Assessment of Muhammad bin Abi Aamir’s Rule
Showing Regard to Leaming
Hisham’s Deposition.
Mahdi bin Hisham bin Abdul Jabbar.
Military Rule
The Plot against Mahd:
Flight from Death of Sulaiman bin Hakam .
Civil War ١ .
Sulaiman & Mahdi both seek Help from the Christian King..... 156
Deposition of Mahdi 3
Peace with the Christian King.
End of Hisham

14 The History of Islam

Musta’in Billah..
Assassination of Musta’in .

End of the Umayyad Rule..
Assessment of the Umayyads...

Chapter - 6

* Bani Hamud’s (Hammudid’s) Rule....... 161
Ali ‏ل‎ 162
Assassination of Ali bin Hamud . . 162

Qasim bin Hamud.... 162
Yahya bin Ali bin Hamud.. +163
Qasim Re-Enthroned ...... 163
Massacre of the Umayyad. . 3

Abdur Rahman bin Hisham... 164

State of Anarchy... essence,
Banu Abad, Banu Dhun‘nun, Banu Hud etc.
Seville and Western Spain (Banu Abad or Abbadids)
Abul Qasim Muhammad
Abu Umar Abbad.............
Mu’tamid bin Mu’tazid bin Ismail...
Alfonso's Plunder of Istamic Cities
Alfonso demanding Tribute...
Mu'tamid Seeks Yusuf bin Tashfain‘s Help
Historical Battle with the Christians
Banu Aftas Rule in Badajoz ....
Yusuf bin Tashfain’$ Occupation of Badajoz...
Ton Jamhur's Rule in Cordova ceecceescscseocec
Abul Waleed bin jamhur bin Muhammad,
Abdul Malik bin Jamhur.....
Ibn Habus’s Rule in Granada .
Banu Dhun‘nun’s Rule in Toledo..
Banu Hud’s Rulers in Saragossa ....
{slands of Eastern Majorca, Minorca, and Sardinia

Table of Contents 15
Chapter -8

Christian Brutality in Spain.
Almoravid Rule ..........0...
Yusuf bin Tashfain Occupies Spain

Yusuf bin Tashfain’s Death...........
Abul Hasan Ali bin Yusuf bin Tashfain
Abu Muhammad Tashfain...........0000
Tashfain Din Ali... 1 1 1 1 1 ‏يي ةي ذ‎
Effect of the End of the Almoravid Rule On Spain.

Chapter - 9

Almohads (Al-Mowahad) Rule in Spain.
Muhammad bin Abdullah Tumart...

Declaring Himself as Imam Mahdi..

... 3

Abdul Mumin’s Conquest of Spain..
Abu Yaqub

A Review of Abu Yaqub’s Reign
Abu Yusuf Mansur.................
Abu Abdullah Muhammad ..
Yusuf Mustansir
Abdul Wahid ....

- 185

++ 186
1....186

190

... 1

Abdul Wajid Adil. 191

End of the Almohads’ Rule ‏لو ممم م لله‎ 191
Chapter - 0

Anarchy again in Muslim Spain 193

Banu Hud State... ++ 194

+194

Chapter - 11

197

197

Abu Abdullah Muhammad .. 198
Muhammad Makhlu’ a... 198
Sultan Nasr bin Muhammad 1%
Abul Waleed ‏ال‎ “8

16 TheHistory of Islam

King Muhammad.
Sultan Yusuf,
Sultan Muhammad Ghani Billah .
Sultan Ismail
Sultan Yusuf II...
Sultan Muhammad VII
Sultan Yusuf Il.........
Sultan Muhammad IX ..
Yusuf bin Al-Ahmar ....
Sultan Ibn Ismail
Sultan Abul Hasan...
Sultan Abu Abdullah Zaghal.
End of Islamic Rule in Spain...
Peace Treaty with the Christians.
Christians’ Atrocities on the Muslims’ of Spain.
A Glance at the Islamic Rule in Spain

Chapter - 12

Morocco and North Africa
Idrisia Rule...

Muhammad bin Idris
His Death...
Ali bin Muhamma
Yahya bin Muhammad.
Yahya bin Yahya.........
Yahya bin Idris bin Umar.
End of Idrisite Rule...
The Aghlabs of Africa

Table of Contents 17

Conquest of the Island of Sicily. 229
His 000000 ‏ب‎ 232
Aghlab bin Ibrahim Abu Igat Aghlab. 3-3 232
‘Abul Abbas Muliammad......sessscssssessssssesssusticesseeceestsssssstveetse 232
Abu Ibrahim Muhammad. 22

Ziyadatullah.
Abul Gharaniq
Ibrahim bin Ahmad
Abul Abbas ..
Abu Mudir Ziyadatullah.
End of Aghlabia Dynasty .

Chapter-13
Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli...
Abu Abdullah.......... .
Ubaidullah Mahdi..
Abu Abdullah Assassinated..
Revolts.
The Founding of Mahdiya City
Death of Ubaidullah
Abul Qasim Nazar .
Skirmishes with Abu Yazid
Death of Abul Qasim.
Isma’il bin Abul Qasint.
Abu Yazid’s Arrest and Death ...
Death of Isma‘il.
Muiz bin Isma’il......
Conquest of Egypt ....-csiscsocsecsssecees
٠ Transfer of the Capital to Cairo
Encounters with the Qaramatians
Conquest of Damascu....csso.ssce
Death of Muiz and Succession of Aziz..:
Aziz bin Ubaidi
Invasion of Uftagin..
Arrest of Uftagin and His Ministry......

18 The History of Islam,

Death of Aziz
Mansur Hakam bin Aziz Ubaidi
Rebellion of Waleed bin Hisham and His Assassination
Hakim’s Death
Zahir bin Hakim Ubaidi..

Hasan bin Sabbah Takes Ba’it
Abdul Qasim Mustali Billah Ubaidi

Death of Abul Qasim...
Abu Ali Amir Ubaidi...

Death of Hafiz Ubaidi

Zafir bin Hafiz Ubaidi...,

Zafir’s Assassination .

Fa’iz bin Zafir Ubaid

Death of Fa’iz Ubaidi .

Azid bin Yusuf Ubaidi.....

Nuruddin Muhammad Zangi Turns to Egypt...

Egyptians Seek Help From the Christians.

Consequences of Indiscretion ..

Azid Turning to Nuruddin Zangi for Help

Salahuddin Ayubi as Prime Minister of Egypt....

Death of Azid Ubaidi

A Short Commentary on the Ubaidite Dynasty...
_Chapter-14

Qaramatians of Bahrain

Yahya bin Faraj Qaramate..

Husain Mahdi...

Abu Tahir‘s Plunder
Invasion Of Makkah

Table of Contents 19

Abu Mansur ;
Sabur’s Assissination. :
Hasan Azam, The Qaramite .
J‘afar And Ishaq

Chapter-15
Kingdom Of The Qaramatians Batinians Of Persia
Ahmad Bin Attash...

Hasan Bin Sabbah ..
Death Of Hasan Bin Sabbah
Kiya Buzurg Ummid.
Ruknuddin Khurshah
Those Assassinated By The Fidais..
Chapter-16
Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols ‏سم مه مم للد‎ 285
Removal Of A Doubt ‏ممعم مم م م م م م ل‎ 285
Application Of ‘Turk . 286

Turkan Ghez
Seljuks...
Mongols And Tartars...
The Word ‘Mongo!’
Fara 11 ‏ممم م ع م سق 1ق‎
Removal Of A Misunderstanding....
Genghis Khan............
Features Of The Mongol.
Administration Of The Mongols
Qachuli’s Dream occ
Interpretation Of Tumna Khan...
Birth Of Genghis Khan...
Dream Of Genghis Khan ..
Change Of Name.........
Religion Of The Mongols.....
Sultan Muhammad Khawarizm Shah.
Curse Of Three Saints On Khawarizm

Peace Steps Of Genghis Khan Toward

5 Khawarizm.

20 The History of Islam

Cowardice Of Khwarizm Shah... +» 298
Death Of Khwarizm Shah. 1.299
Jalaluddin Bin Khwarizm.. 2299

End Of ‏ملكت 181ة[‎ 302
Genghis Khan’s Interest In Islam 302

Nomination Of A Successor... 303
Death Of Genghis Khan... 304

A Review Of The Genghis Khan‘s Reign. +304
Ogdad Khan. ccscscssscsessesensssssnesepeee 3 306
Guyuk Khan... 307

Death Of Guyuk Khan...
Mungku Khan...
Death Of Mungku Khan
Kublai Khan...

Abagha Khan’s Death

Gaykhatu Khan 316
Gaykhatu Khan's Martyrdom.. 316

+ Baydu Khan ‏ل‎ 316
Assassination Of Baydu Khan. 317
Mahmud Khan Ghazan Khan.... 317
Death Of Mahmud Ghazan Khan. 318
Sultan Muhammad Khudabanda Olfeitu.. 318
His Death ‏مله‎ 318

Abu Sayeed Bahadur Khan, 318
Abu Sayeed’s Death 319

١ Arpa Khan. 1 ..9
Assassination Of Arpa Khan. 320

Musa Khan

Progency Of Juchi Khan..

Table of Contents 21

Offspring Of Chogatai Kha
AGlance At Genghisid Mongols
Chapter-17

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia.......... ‏مس‎ 329
Saffariah Dynasty...
Samanid Dynasty ..
Ghaznavid Dynasty .
Seljuk Dynasty ..........
Khwarizm Shah Dynasty
Ghourid Dynasty..
Atabeks Of Shiraz

Al Mut Atheists’ Dynasty
Chapter-18

Brief Supplement Of The Islamic History Of Egypt And Syria.......... 353
Syrian Atabek Rule 353
Ayyubid Dynasty Of Egypt And Syria .. 354
Mamluk Dynasty Of Egypt (Category I) 356
Mamluk Dynasty Of Egypt (Category II) .. 357
Mamiuk Dynasty of Egypt (Category Ill).
Abbasid Caliphs of Egypt

Ottoman Dynasty ...

Sultan Bayazid Khan Yaldaramm 0 0  0ذ--‎ 382

22 ‏ش‎ The History of Islam

The Battle of Ankara... peresteeteanccsssteaseseesce
Bayazid's Sons at War
Sultan Muhammad I...
A Review of Muhammad’s Reign..
Murra IE... ‏لمم ممم مومع ممم مه ممم‎
Sultan Muhammad II, the Conqueror of Constantinople.
Conquest of Constantinople ................
History of the City of Constantinople
The Remaining Deeds of Sultan the Conqueroi
A Review of Muhammad II's Rule

Chapter-21
Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror.
The Story of Prince Jamshed

Conquest of Egypt and Syria.
Clash between the Mamluks and the Ottomans in Egypt...
A Review of the Reign of Sultan Salim

Chapter 1
Spain before the Muslims

Geographical Conditions

On the map of Europe is a peninsula in the southwest, which joins
Europe with the African continent. The southern part of this peninsula,
by joining the northern part of Morocco, intended to form an isthmus
but the Mediterranean Sea prevailed in joining hands with the Atlantic
Ocean, with the result that Europe and Africa remained about ten miles
apart from one another. The Mediterranean Sea and the Bay of Biscay
were making an attempt to form an island but the Pyrenees mountain
range, by raising its high wall, separated this peninsula from France
without allowing it to become an island. This southwestem peninsula of
Europe came to be called Spain, Iberia, Hispaniah and Andalus
(Andulus). It covers an area of about two hundred thousand square miles.

Produce and Climate

Its climate is terhperate and better than all the other countries of Europe.
It has a fertile land and may be compared to Syria and Egypt with

Tespect to agricultural production. It is famous for silver mines and
other precious minerals.

24 The History of Islam

Two big rivers, Ebro River (Tagus) in the northeast and that of the
Guadalquivir (Wadi Al-Kabir) River i in the southwest, flow to make this
peninsula a bed of flowers. This peninsula is enclosed in the north by
the Bay of Biscay and the Pyrenees, in the east by the Mediterranean
Sea, in the south by the Mediterranean, Gibraltar (Jabal Tariq) and the
Atlantic Ocean, and in the west by the Atlantic Ocean.

Details of Provinces and Territories

The details of the noted provinces and territories of this peninsula are as
follows: Portugal falls in the west, Galicia in the northwest, the
provinces of Asturia, Castile, Arbunia, Aragon in the north, the
provinces of Catalonia in the northeast, and Andalusia in the southeast.
Toledo lies at the center of Spain while the famous cities of Cordova and
Granada fall in the province of Andalusia, in the southern part of the
peninsula. Seville was also famous in the southwestern part. The most
fertile and valuable area of the peninsula falls in the southern part,
Andalusia and this part of the peninsula remained under the Muslim
control for a longer period than the other provinces.

Phoenician, Carthage, Roman, Gothic Rules in Spain

Phoenician Rule

Phoenicia or Canaan was a country that was the western part of Sham
and forms part of the eastern coast of the Mediterranean Sea (including
present day Syria, Lebanon and Israel). Several hundred years before
Musa (Moses) a very powerful trading people lived in this. country and
historians call them Phoenicians. Phoenician ships would carry
merchandise throughout the Mediterranean Sea. Vast wealth let them
lay the foundation of a unique society and civilization and by capturing
Palestine and establishing a Red Sea port, they established relations with
{ndia and China. Through the Mediterranean Sea and crossing Gibraltar,
they spread their trade routes to England. The northern and southern
Ports of the Mediterranean Sea were under their control and they had
the mightiest Navy in the world. They set up colonies at various places.
Among those colonies was Carthage (Tunis) a city of northem Africa,
which was later made the capital of an independent state.

Spain before the Muslims 95

Cities, towns and ports were established by them on the coastal areas
of Spain. Gradually, the Phoenicians began to rule there and Spain
became a province of their state. At the decttne of Phoenician rule
some of their members set up a mighty empire in Carthage (Tunis).
They ruled for hundreds of years. They were worshippers of fire and
stars. Their civilization had no parallel in their times. The Carthaginians
rule of Spain left a deeper effect than the Phoenicians because they
were nearer to Spain than Syria.

Roman Rule in Spain

When the Roman ‘Empire was founded in Italy confrontations took
place between the Romans and the Carthaginians. After victory over
the Carthaginians, the Romans set up their rule in Spain. They ruled
over Spain for five hundred years. Viceroys were sent to Spain from
Rome who collected annual tribute from the country and sent it to the
ruling parties of the Roman Empire. 1

Goth Rule

With the acceptance of Christianity the Roman Empire suffered a two-
fold calamity. One, the Goths, resembling the Mongols, -rose from
middle and eastern Europe and started launching attacks on Rome.
The pleasure loving Romans'could not withstand the onslaught of the
hard-working Goths. During the same time, the Roman Empire was
divided into two parts. One had Rome as its capital and the eastern
Roman Empire made Constantinople. its capital. These Gothic
plunderers later accepted. Christianity in the same manner as the
Seljuk Turks accepted Islam adopting the religion of those they
conquered. Just as the Seljuks had, after accepting Islam, founded
their rule so, after accepting Christianity the Goths crossed the
Pyrenees captured Spain and established their rule.

Like the eastern and western Roman Empires, the Goths also founded
two separate states named Eastern Goth and Western Goth. Since the
westem Goths became rulers and adopted religion simultanewusly,
they kept themselves independent of the Roman Pope. Moreover,
their acceptance of Christianity was more a matter of expediency than
faith. But the power and influence of the spiritual leaders cast its

26 The History of Islam

effects on Spain too with the spread of Christianity in other countries
of Europe. With the passage of time, the bishops gained so much
power that they had their say in the election and enthronement of
kings and it was not easy for a king to curtail their power. The Goth
dynasty, which took its shape by 500 C.E., ruled over Spain for two
hundred years.

During this period, the fighting qualities and ferocity of the Spanish
Goths were changed into a life of luxury, pleasure and adornment.
Even though the Goths had brought with them soldierly qualities and
a fighting spirit they changed their outlook and way of life. Since the
Goths had no character or high standard of living of their own, they
crossed all limits by indulging in the pleasures of life under the
influence of the Spaniards. In Short, Spain was the sum total of many
Civilizations. But it was not bereft of academic and other kinds of

developments of the age. Christianity had also influenced it deeply by
its growth and practices.

The Gothic dynasty ended after 700 C.E. and an eastern nation raised
the standard of Islam in Spain by ending the mule of Persia, Rome,
Syria, Egypt and Greece and by replacing Christianity and idolatry.

End of Gothic Rule

A religious sense grew within the Gothic state with the passage of
time. It had a church of its own. The laws of the country were dictated
by Christian narrow-mindedness, with the result that the Jews were
put to disgrace and the Christian population treated them like their
slaves. Their properties were confiscated and they had to serve the
Christians in all manners. Concerning their rights, they had few and
were reduced to the state of animals. The Spanish Christians were
dominated by all kinds of superstitions. In respect to culture, the arts,
science, trade and discipline the Jews were superior to the Christians
who were Senerally pleasure loving and lazy while the Jews were
hardworking. However, the Jews were a small minority and they
could not fight for their salvation. The bishops went so deep into the
State's affairs that the kings could not go against them. They had large
estates and fertile lands. Their residences were made to look like
wonderlands and their assmblivs were resplendent with pleasures

Spain before the Muslims 27
and luxuries and whatever they desired. No one had the courage to
interfere with their evil acts. The verdicts and decrees issued by the
pishops made the most respectable of people bow down. Each of the
bishops possessed ‘one or two hundred slaves and an injunction issued
bya bishop had no appeal to any higher body whatsoever. Gothic rule
had its capital in Toledo. The Archbishop of Spain lived in the capital.
The Archbishop enjoyed so much power that he could order the
deposition of a king. In other words, the Christian clerics were the

total rulers of Spain.

Accession of Roderick (Larziq)

With regard to grandeur and magnificence the expanse of Gothic rule
had reached its peak. They had under there sway most of the islands
around the Mediterranean besides the Spanish peninsula. Some of the
parts of the northern coast of Africa were also under their control. On
the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, Byzantium/nes (Eastern Romans)
ruled gloriously. When the Muslims had driven away the Romans
from Syria and Palestine, the Goth king Witiza ruled in Toledo. When
he noticed the bishops rising in power and their inhurnan treatment to
the Jews, he made an attempt to cut them down to size. Being
informed of the plan, they accused the king of favoring the Jews and
brought about his deposition. They replaced him with Roderick, a
military commander, who belonged to the royal family. This was the
end of Gothic rule and beginning of Roderick’s rule. He was a
seasoned commander of 70 or 80 years of age. On assuming the
throne, he ruled with power and peace and did nothing to antagonize
the Church.

Factors Leading to the Muslim Invasion of Spain

The Ceuta fort on the northem coast of Africa (Morocco) was still
under Christian possession and a man named Count Julian was the
garrison commander. He was a Roman commander and was deputed
on behalf of the Caesar of Constantinople. Except for this fort, all other
occupied territories of Africa had come under Muslim control. Julian
had established friendly relations with the Christian rulers of Spain
with the consent of Caesar of Constantinople. Since Spain was nearer

28 , The History of Islam

to Ceuta, it was expedient from the standpoint of security. The last
Gothic king, Witiza had married his daughter to Julian. The
deposition of Witiza and the enthronement of Roderick displeased
him but the support of the bishops kept Julian silent. Julian had a
daughter named Florenda who was the maternal grand daughter of
king Witiza. As per the practice of that time, young sons of kings,
governors, commanders and men of high status were sent to live in
the king’s palace to learn etiquette and manners. The king treated
them like a father and sent them to their parents after attaining
puberty. Similarly, they would send their daughters to _the queens
with the same purpose in view. Florenda, the daughter of Julian, when
she became a young lady, was raped by Roderick. Informed of this,
Julian grew furious and whoever among the Goths heard of this felt
annoyed. However, Count Julian kept his displeasure a secret and
arrived in Toledo. He met King Roderick and pretended that his wife

was seriously ill and wanted to see her daughter, Florenda before her

death. Roderick could not oppose her departure. Thus, Julian took his
daughter and came back to Ceuta. The Archbishop of Seville came to

Julian to share his pain and both of them sat together to find out how
to do away with Roderick’s rule.

Musa bin Nusayr
‏لدان ده نات‎

task ahead. ‘n Damascus seeking his pe

Spain before the Muslims 29

First Islamic Corps to Spain Under Turaif

Musa bin Nusayr then ordered five hundred soldiers under Turaif to
accompany Julian in his ships and land on the coast of Spain to
acquire first hand knowledge about the state of affairs there. Turaif
landed on the Spanish coast and returned safely after making some
small-scale raids for plunder. After a short time the Caliph permitted
them to invade Spain but with the utmost caution.

Tariq bin Zeyad Ordered to Invade Spain

Acquainted with the state of affairs in Spain Musa bin Nusayr sent
orders to Tariq bin Zeyad, the Governor of Tangiers to invade Spain.
Tariq led a force of seven thousand in four boats. He was still on the
way when he was overtaken by drowsiness and saw in dream that the
Prophet (3) gave him the good news of the conquest of Spain at his
hands. Shortly after this, his eyes opened and he was sure of his victory.

Chapter 2
Islamic Rule In Spain

The Strange Order of Tariq

Tariq landed on the coast of Spain along with his men and his first
order was to set the boats on fire and sink them. This was
undoubtedly strange but in fact, it was an act of matchless bravery. As
a seasoned military commander, he knew that compared with the
huge enemy force he had with him a very small one. His soldiers
might lose heart or a discouraging situation might lead them to retreat
or wait for reinforcements before engaging the enemy. By sinking the
warships, he let his forces know that retreat was out of the question.
They were standing between their enemy and the sea. They were left
with no choice but to go ahead and push their enemy back. They
needed courage, determination and quick action because lack of
courage and fighting spirit would lead them to annihilation.

The Firse Stage of the Islamic Force

The place Tariq landed on was called Lines Rock but from that day on
it came to be called Jabal Tariq or Gibraltar.

32 . The History of Islam

The Actack of a Christian General and His Defeat

Tadmir, the military Commander of Roderick was very experienced
and had led his force to victory ina number of encounters. He was
encamped in the vicinity of Tariq’s forces with a strong army. He
launched a powerful attack before the Muslim forces had a chance to
get settled. However, Tariq gave him a smashing defeat and he fled
from the battlefield. He then wrote to Roderick the following day from
a safe place: 0 . 1

“O Emperor! Some strange people have invaded our territory.
We fought with courage and bravery but tasted defeat and our
troops could not withstand their onslaught. What is needed is
your personal engagement. | am quite unaware of their identity
and whereabouts”.

Preparations of Roderick

Soon. after receiving the horrible news Roderick set about building his
army. He came from Toledo to Cordova where troops from all parts of
the country began to concentrate. He ther ‘marched ‘against ‘the
invaders at the head. of one hundred thousand troops. Tadmir also
joined’ him with his force, while all the seasoned commanders of Spain
came forward to play important rolés. But Tariq did not sit idle during
this period. He ‘continued his march occupying cities and towns and
reached up to the Lorca valley.’ - 1

an

The two forces.clashed.on-the bank of a small:river near Janda Lagoon
adjoining Sidonia city on 28 Ramadan.92:.4.H. (J uly 711.C.E.). Shortly
after the departure of the Muslim: forces under. Tariq, Musa bin
Nusayr dispatched five thousand soldiers as reinforcements, which
joined Tariq before the confrontation. Now the twelve thousand men
of Tariq bin Zeyad had to face a strong Christian force of one hundred
thousand. The Muslim fprce. knew little of ‘the state of affairs: of the
country they had invaded. The Christian troops were the natives of
the country and ‘had‘come to the battlefield to save their motherland.

Islamic Rule In Spain 5

Tariq bin Zeyad, the Governor of Africa was the freed slave of Musa bin
Nusayr who did not command extraordinary value. The Emperor of
Spain was himself leading the army and all the resources of the country
were at his command. The Muslim force had its greater part based on
convert Berbers while the Christian force was inspired and encouraged
by eminent bishops and religious guides. Had Tariq’s force been
defeated in this battle it would have been known as one of the
insignificant events of history. But since twelve thousand Muslim troops
defeated one hundred thousand well-equipped Christian troops, it came
to be knownas one of the most glorious/battles ever fought by humans.
While drawing his battle line Tariq made a fervid speech to the Muslim
fighters, which fired them with new spirit, zeal and detertnination.

The greater part of Christian force consisted of cavalry clad in armor,
while the Muslim side had only foot soldiers. The cavalry movement
of the Christians was quite terrifying and it appeared very clear that
they would crush the Muslim troops under their hooves without
giving them an opportunity to take up their arms against the
Christians. But the glittering Islamic swords dispelled the hovering
clouds of the Christian force and left many lying dead and wounded.
Their takbir (Allah-o-Akbar Allah is Great) rent the air and subdued ali
other shouts and noises on the battlefield.

Roderick’s Escape from the Battlefield

Roderick fled the battlefield leaving behind not only a large number
soldiers dead and wounded but also his wide experience, courage and”
determination.

Causes of the Christians’ Defeat

The Christians tasted defeat not because of their lack of courage but
simply because of the daring deeds of Muslim fighters. Had they been
cowards they would not have left behind great commanders, princes
and bishops dead and wounded. The actual number of dead Christian
soldiers is not known but history tells us that the horses left by the
dead horsemen were sufficient for the entire Muslim army. The
Christian soldiers could have escaped on horseback but they preferred
to die fighting. -

34 , The History of islam

The Muslims were crowned with this victory on 5 Shawwal 92 A.H.
(711 C.B.). This was the beginning of Muslim rule in Spain. Tariq bin
Zeyad sent the good news of the Muslim victory to Musa bin Nusayr
the same day and he himself marched ahead to win the province of
Andalusia. Musa bin Nusayr grew happy and dispatched the glad
tidings to the Caliph. He then left Qairwan for Spain at the head of
eighteen thousand soldiers. Before his march, he sent orders to Tariq
not to go ahead but consolidate his position in the conquered
territories. However, Tariq had conquered Andalusia before the letter
reached him. But some big cities of the Peninsula and its capital,
Toledo still held military camps of the Christians and a joint attack
was possible at anytime. Thus, his march to the north and the conquest
of these cities was necessary to Zeyad who assembled his Commanders

and read out the order issued by Musa bin Nusayr. They were all

unanimous against the order pleading that if the campaign against the

Christians were stopped at the present stage the Christians would

with attacks on all sides, make the task of the conquest of the entire

Spain most difficult. Count Julian also supported this view.

Tariq’s March to Cordova

The Governor of Cordova belonged to the royal family. The fugitives
of the battle of Lorca valley had taken refuge in the city. The fort of the
city was very strong and formidable. Tariq first asked them to yield in
a friendly manner but on their refusal, he besieged the fort. He then

appointed Mughith, the Roman, to continue the siege and he
proceeded to Toledo. 1

Conquest of Toledo

Tariq conquered Toledo rather easily in Rabia al-Thani 93 A.H. From
the royal treasury of Toledo he captured twenty-five crowns of former
Gothic kings. Every crown bore the name and tenure of the king.
Every king had a new crown to wear and it was preserved in the royal
treasury after his death. Tariq then marched to the remotest northem
Province of Spain. Mughith, the Roman, in the meantime, conquered
Cordova and its surroundings. Thus, Tariq brought under his control
the Spanish peninsula from the south to the north. But the eastern and
western parts were yet to be conquered.

Islamic Rule In Spain 35

Musa bin Nusayr in Spain

Meanwhile, Musa bin Nusayr stepped into Spain along with his force.
Count Julian, who was put by Zeyad there to look after the
administration, gave a hearty welcome to Musa. Finding Musa angry
with Tariq for overstepping his orders, Julian advised Musa to lead
his campaign against the cities of the western provinces. Musa
ted the advice. Tariq joined him in Toledo. Musa not only
reprimanded Tariq for disobeying his orders but also held him as a
captive for a short time. After a few days, Musa sent Tariq in front at
the head of a large army and proceeded at his back. While Tariq and
Musa were engaged in conquering the northern and northwestern
cities Abdul Aziz, the son of Musa started conquering the southern
and southeastern territories. Tadmir, the commander of king Roderick,
was then in the southeast. He came out to face Abdul Aziz. A number
of battles took place. Tadmir retreated to the hills for safety and took
to guerrilla attacks. At last, a peace accord was signed between the
two on condition that Tadmir would give no shelter to the enemies of
islamic rule and religious freedom would be kept intact. On the
finalization of the agreement, Abdul Aziz gave a small territory to
Tadmir to rule over. Musa and Tariq also signed peace treaties with
each city on easy terms including religious freedom for the Christians,
disputes between the Jews and the Christians to be settled according
to their religious scriptures, no interference on anyone accepting
Islam, and safety for the Christians and their property. Musa and
Tariq had also directed their troops not to kill old men, women and
children except those who rose in arms to fight against the Muslims.

Conquering northern and western provinces Tariq and Musa marched
up to the Pyrenees and then stepped into the southern territories of
France and conquered them. But the Islamic force came back to the
Pyrenees owing to the severity of the winter and shortage of supplies.
He had a plan to conquer France, Austria, Italy, and the Balkans
before arriving at Constantinople.

Full Islamic Control over Spain

Following his arrival in Spain and before his departure from Toledo, the
capital towards the north Musa bin Nusayr sent Mughith, the Roman to

36 The History of Islam

Damascus with valuable gifts and news of the conquest of- Spain,
Mughith came back from the headquarters of the Caliph after Musa had
conquered Galicia province. However, the order of the Caliph issued to
Musa bin Nusayr and brought back by Mughith was rather frustrating.

Musa Summoned

The Caliph ordered Musa to meet him in the court of the Caliph and in
pursuance of the order Musa bin Nusayr deputed his son Abdul Aziz in
Spain and left for the headquarters in the company of Mughith and
Tariq. He took with him the treasure of Spain, golden utensils,
ornaments and one-fifth of the total possessions captured along witha
large number of slaves and slave-girls, He reached Damascus at a time
when Caliph Waleed bin Abdul Malik was on his deathbed. His brother
Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik was about to succeed him. When Sulaiman
heard of Musa’s arrival near Damascus he sent him (Musa) word not to
make a hasty entrance into Damascus. But Musa paid no heed to the
message of Sulaiman and appeared before Caliph Waleed bin Abdul
Malik. On receiving such large and costly gifts from Musa bin Nusayr,
Waleed became very happy. But the courtiers and ministers felt jealous.

Accession of Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik

Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik succeeded his brother Waleed bin Abdul
Malik on Jamad al-Thani 96 A.H. Following the death of the latter
immediately after coming to the throne Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik
called Musa bin Nusayr to account in a severe manner and when Musa
failed to clear the account received as tribute from the western countries
he confiscated Musa’s wealth and property. He put him in Prison for
failure to pay two hundred thousand gold coins he owed to the State.

End of Tariq

With the punishment given to Musa bin Nusayr, Tariq bin Zeyad also
could not remain unaffected. He was neither shown any respect nor
sent back to assume charge of Spain or Morocco. All the conquered
territories in the west were under the control of Musa’s sons. Spain
was ruled over by Abdul Aziz bin Musa, Qairwan by Abdullah bin
Musa and Morocco by Marwan bin Musa. Since Sulaiman bin Abdul
Malik could not ignore their being at the helm, he held back Tariq who

Islamic Rule In Spain 37

was considered as & member of Musa’s family. He was allowed to be
retired on pension and to settle in a city of Syria. On intercession,
Musa bin Nusayr was released and sent to live in al-Qura valley after
paying as much money as he could.

Death of Musa bin Nusayr

In a state of frustration Musa bin Nusayt passed away the next year 97
AH. Historians have targeted Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik for his unkind
treatment of Musa bin Nusayr. But he could not be blamed for what he
did. Umar Farooq had already done the same in the case of Khalid bin
Waleed and had him deposed from his command. Musa bin Nusayr
remained in power for about sixteen or seventeen years and owed a lot
of wealth to the public treasury. Had the case been overlooked it would
have set a very bad example for other Governors, present and future.

Moreover, Sulaiman’s ministers, advisers and courtiers never made
him the target of their criticism for his treatment of Musa and Tariq
nor have Muslim historians ever condemned him for his behavior.

European historians have very wrongly stated that Roderick suffered
defeat owing to his weak power. Some others say rather baselessly
that Roderick’s subjects had revolted against him and went over to the
Muslims side. Although the Spanish population had begun to look
upon the Muslim character and style with respect, except for Count
Julian and a bishop who had asked the Muslim ruler to invade Spain,
no one lent any support to the Muslims. Moreover, the Muslims in the
presence of their power of Faith and strength of heart were not in
need of any intrigue or plots or outside help. 1

A False Eptsode

European historians have, in fact, fabricated many such stories to
degrade the achievements of the Muslim forces. One of these says that
when Tariq proceeded to the north from Toledo he meta group of
fugitives who had a table or low wooden seat of Sulaiman (#)
studded with gems and jewels and valued in the millions and Tariq
wrested it from them. When Musa reached Spain he demanded the
table, Tariq handed over the captured table after removing a leg of it
and concealing it, he told Musa that he had received it in the same

38 . 116 History of Islam

state. Musa bin Nusayr fitted a golden leg onto it but it looked
different from the others, Presenting the table to the Caliph, Musa bin
Nusayr submitted that he had found it in the spoils of war. Finding a
leg different from others the Caliph inquired about it and Musa
submitted that he had received the table from the Christians in the
same state. Tariq then took out the fourth leg from under his clothes and
said to the Caliph, “This is the fourth leg of the table”. When the Caliph,
came to know that Musa had taken the credit for the deed performed by
Tariq he grew very angry and put Musa bin Nusayr in prison along
with such a heavy fine that he would not be able to pay. European
historians have invented many such stories with ulterior motives. One
cannot, however, find a reason for Tariq to play such a heinous trick on
his leader and immediate commanding officer, Musa bin Nusayr.
Moreover, how could have Musa remained in the dark for so long
although thousands of men were aware of such a plot. It means an
ambitious and far-sighted coriqueror like Musa bin Nusayr was so mean
that he would snatch the credit from his freed slave, Tariq. Furthermore,
nobody could in the packed court notice the hidden leg of the table.
Among the historians of Spain and_ western countries, Ibn Khaldun is
the most reliable and he has made no mention of such an event.
According to Ibn Khaldun, the Caliph grew angry with Musa because
the latter had resolved to conquer all of Europe by putting the Muslims
into danger and it was for this reason he was called to headquarters.

As already mentioned, Musa bin Nusayr had entrusted Spain, Morocco
and the other occupied territories to his sons. Thus, it was out of question
that the Caliph would have taken Musa to task so severely over the leg
of a table. It also seems strange that the Caliph made no attempt to
depose his sons when he was so angry with their father. Even when,
after sometime, he sent Muhammad bin Yazid as governor to look after
the westem countries, he left Abdul Aziz bin Musa to rule in Spain.

First Ruler of Spain

Although Musa and Tariq were the conquerors of Spain and they
Spent a long time conquering and making peace with the Christian
Powers, the person to be called the first ruler of Spain was Abdul
Aziz, the son of Musa bin Nusayr.

Chapter 3
Rulers of Spain

Abdul Aziz bin Musa

With the departure of Musa bin Nusayr from Spain most of the cities
rose in revolt. Abdul Aziz bin Musa had to put down the revolts with
determination and a heavy hand. Since the commanding officers in ©
the different cities were not sufficient in number, the Christian
population felt encouraged to take up arms. But very soon, it dawned
upon them that it.was not an easy task to drive away the Muslims
from Spain. Moreover, they had the feeling that Islamic rule was far
better than the Gothic rule and a blessing from Allah Almighty.

Religious Freedom

The Muslims were the first to announce religious freedom. The Christian
Population also enjoyed it fully provided they would live in peace with
the Muslims. The Christians of Spain had a large number of slaves who
worked very hard. When Abdul Aziz announced that the slaves accepting
Islam would enjoy full freedom from slavery, large number of slaves
under the Christians embraced Islam and became free from slavery. This

40 The History of Islam

was not only a great service to humanity but also a device to increase the
Muslim popuiation.

Abdul Aziz had married Ajilona, the widow of Roderick and left her
to follow her religion. The Muslim population also followed suit. They
occupied the vacant Christian houses and began to live with them.
Abdul Aziz appointed Christians as the administrators of cities and
towns. Ajilona very soon began to influence her husband in state
affairs. Although the Arabian Commanders disliked it, they could not
dg anything about it.

The new Caliph, Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik had accused Musa bin
Nusayr of the case of non-payment of the spoils of war instead of
holding him in honor for his conquests. Abdul Aziz had not uttered a
word against the Caliph but Ajilona and other Christians began to
take advantage of Abdul Aziz’s agitated feelings. He also tried to win
the support of Ajilona and the Christians to free Spain from the
control of the Caliph. But in order to keep Caliph Sulaiman unaware
Abdul Aziz sent a substantial amount along with gifts to Damascus.
The correspondents of Caliph had already informed him of the
dangerous designs of Abdul Aziz and those who carried spoils of war
and gifts from Spain also supported the report.

Assassination of Abdul Aziz

The Caliph sent orders to five Muslim Commanders in Spain to kill
Abdul Aziz if his evil intentions became dangerous. Abdul Aziz had his
capital in Seville. When the Caliph’s message came to Habib bin
Ubaidah, he consulted the other four Persons. Now all the five decided
to kill Abdul Aziz. Thus, they arrested Abdul Aziz and assassinated

Rulers of Spain 41

Abdul Aziz bin Musa was assassinated in 98 A.H.

Ayyub bin Habib

After doing away with Abdul Aziz the “group of five” convened a
meeting of the courtiers and commanders and obtained their consent
for Ayyub bin Habib. However, he was elected on condition that his
election was to be considered valid subject to the approval of either
the governor or the Caliph otherwise it would be set aside forthwith.

Transfer of the Headquarters

With an eye on the large Christian and Jewish population and their
growing influence Ayyub bin Habib shifted his capital to Cordova. It
was a historic deed of the new ruler because Cordova, from then on,
became the center of world attention. Ayyub also invited Berber and
Arab tribes of Africa and Morocco to settle in Spain. Thus with the
substantial increase in the Muslim population the possibilities of
Christian insurgence was minimized to a certain extent. A number of
forts ‘were built on the frontiers and were manned by garrisons.
Besides, Ayyub made an extensive tour of the country and managed
to fulfill the needs of the different areas. Ayyub ruled for only for six
months when a deposition order came. Muhammad bin Yazid of
Qairwan feared his growing power and influence particularly because
he belonged to the family of Musa and Abdul Aziz. He sent Harb bin
Abdur Rahman bin Uthman to assume the post of governor. The
Caliph latter sent his approval.

Harb bin Abdur Rahman Ghafgqi

Shortly after coming to power Harb bin Abdur Rahman began to
make the officials of Musa and Abdul Aziz’s time the target of his
excesses. He indulged in taking violent action against the Christians
and the Jews. They had enjoyed kind treatment from the Muslim
tulers in the past. At last, they sent a deputation to Qairwan to seek
Harb’s transfer from Spain. But Muhammad bin Yazid paid no heed.
Following their failure they took the daring step of sending a
deputation to Damascus. It took place when Caliph Umar bin Abdul
Aziz had taken charge after Caliph Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik. When

42 The History of Islam

the deputation approached the new Caliph, he took the immediate
step of deposing Harb bin Abdur Rahman and replaced him with
Samh bin Malik Khulani. Harb ruled in Spain for two years arid eight
months,

Samh bin Malik

Even though Samh bin Malik was a military man and was also among
the companions of Tariq bin Zeyad, he worked hard to promote justice

and prosperity among the people. His rule was, in fact, the reflection
of Umar bin Abdul Aziz’s noble caliphate.

Census in Spain

Caliph Umar bin Abdul Aziz ordered a census in Spain to know the
exact number of tribes and sections of People in the country. Samh
then populated the Berbers in the deserted areas and induced them to
take to agriculture and crafts, which they did with success. He then
drew a geographical map of Spain delineating the population of every
city and town, its physical position, distance between cities, rivers,
mountains and other important details. The map was sent to the
Caliph. Rules and regulations regarding trade and commerce,
agriculture, Jiz’yah (poll tax) ash’r (one-tenth), khum’s (one-fifth) and
tribute were enacted . Besides, he built a number of mosques and
bridges in various cities. Peace and justice prevailed over all of Spain.
Samh achieved the same position among the Muslim Governors in
Spain that Umar bin Abdul Aziz had among the Muslim umayyad
Caliphs.

Expedition to Southern France

In view of Samh bin Malik’s earlier style of governance nobody could
expect that he would also be a great warrior. After finishing his task of
consolidating and regulating his administration, he led his forces into
southem France. This part of France had some strong states. The most
. belligerent to the Muslims was ruled by the fugitive Goths from Spain
who had fled with as much possessions as they could carry with them.
They were the worst enemy of the Muslims and their state was
supposed to be strong and formidable. The-Gauts ruled another State,

Rulers of Spain 43

their capital was in Toulousse. Crossing the Pyrenees Governor Samh
invaded anc captured Narbonne city and then the whole State. They
also captured substantial spoils of war. His next target was Toulousse.
After a fierce battle, the Muslim troops laid siege to the city. When
Toulousse city was about to fall, the Duke of Acton, a Christian ruler
appeared with a large force. Governor Samh had already much fewer
troops, some of whom had been left in Narbonne. However, Samh drew
the battle line dauntlessly and made an impassioned speech to his force.
Thus, the scene of the battle between Tariq and Roderick was repeated.

Martyrdom of Samh

At a time when the Muslims were pushing the Christians back, an
arrow hit the throat of Samh and he succumbed to it. Although the
Muslim force felt discouraged, they did not give in. They elected
Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafqj as their leader and commander
who drew back with enough caution to deny the Christians any
opportunity to chase them. 7

Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafdi

Historians have generally admired the courage and caution with
which Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafqi pulled out his force safely
from the battleground. While coming back from Toulousse to
Narbonne, the Muslim forces could have been plundered on the way.
But whenever and wherever the Christians made such attempts, they
suffered a disaster. Having arrived in Narbonne Abdur Rahman
Ghafqi set about bringing back courage, strength and normalcy to the
Muslim force. He then marched against those who had shown signs of
revolt owing to the Muslim setback in Toulousse.

Abdur Rahman’s Deposition

While marching to France Governor Samh had deputed Anbasa bin
Suhaim Kalbi to look after the administration. He had also dispatched
reinforcements from Spain but Abdur Rahman had already finished
his task, On his return from the battlefield, he (Abdur Rahman) was
left to work as Governor. But in a short time, Abdur Rahman was

deposed on charges of concentrating power in the hands of the army

44 The History of Islam

inistrati i dover to Anbasa bin
the administration was once again hande
Sahaisn Kalbi. Abdur Rahman paid allegiance to Anbasa without
delay. Later, Anbasa appointed Abdur Rahman the Governor of
eastern Spain where he had held the same post in the past.

Anbasa bin Sahim Kalbi

Upon taking charge of the Governorship Anbasa began many
activities beneficial to everyone. During the early days of his rule, a
Christian named Pelayo revolted in the mountainous areas and
brought many Christians to his fold. Islamic force put down their
insurgence with heavy hands and Pelayo, along with thirty men,
escaped to the hills. The Muslims ignored their escape. They later took
to robbery and plundering in the nearby areas. With scattered groups
of Christians joining them, they gained strength and gradually laid the
foundation for a parallel rule in Spain.

Conquest of Southern France

After managing the affairs of his country, Governor Anbasa invaded
France. Since Narbonne was under Muslim rule, he experienced no
difficulty in passing through the Pyrenees. He conquered Southern
France and spread. his troops towards the east and the west from the
center. At one point, the Christian forces gave a good account of

themselves but they could not withstand the heavy onslaught of the
brave Muslims.

Martyrdom of Anbasa 1
The conquest was heading towards the final stage when Anbasa left
his troops behind and stormed into the enemy ranks and was honored
with martyrdom. Urwah bin Abdullah Fihri replaced him as the
commander who was able to retreat safety and brought back his forces
to Spain. This event took place in 107 A.H.

Urwah bin Abdullah Fihri

Urwah bin Abdullah was one of the renowned Commanders of
Spain. People belonging to his family and tribe lived in Spain in
large numbers. He was very honest, brave and sober. However, some

Rulers of Spain 45

people became angry with him and complained to the govemer of
Africa about him and he was replaced by Yahya bin Salma.

Yahya bin Salma

Yahya bin Salma Kalbi came to power at the end of 107 A.H. He was
an extremist and unyielding by nature, with the result the people of

Spain turned against him and he was deposed and replaced by
Uthman bin Abi Ubaidah Lakhmi.

Uchman bin Abi Ubaidah Lakhmi

Uthman was appointed Governor by Ubaid bin Abdur Rahman, the

ruler of Africa. Five months after his appointment he was replaced by
Hudaifah bin al-Ahwas Qaisi.

Hudaifah bin al-Ahwas Qaisi

Hudaifah ruled Spain until the end of 110 A.H. But was deposed and
replaced by Haitham bin Ubaid the next year.

Haitham bin Ubaid

Haitham bin Ubaid Kilabi belonged to the Syrian race and was
inclined to harsh treatment and hard decisions, because of this the
People of Spain tumed against him. The Muslims and the Christians -
united in standing against him. Thus, a deputation left Spain to lodge
a complaint to the Governor of Africa about Haitham as they had
done in the past. The African ruler paid no heed to the complaint nor
did he depose the ruler-of Spain.

Meeting with failure the deputation approached the Caliph in
Damascus. He sent Muhammad bin Abdullah Ashjai to investigate the

matter in disguise. In the case Haitham was.proved a wrong doer he
was tobe deposed instantly and the Governorship was to be assumed
by Ashjai, otherwise Haitham was to be left in his place.

Deposition of Haltham

Haitham bin Ubaid waged Jihad on Manshah (La Mancha), conquered it
and stayed there ten months. After a rule of two years, he was deposed.

46 The History of ‏بوه ادا‎

Muhammad bin Abdullah Ashjal

Muhammad bin Abdullah Ashjai came to Spain, looked into the
charges and found Haitham guilty. The investigator then assembled
the people and placed before them the order of the Caliph. With the
active support of the people, he deposed and arrested Haitham and
sent him to the Caliph in chains. Muhimmad bin Abdullah Ashjai
then devoted all his time and energy to put the administration right.
After being satisfied with the state of affairs in Spain, he made Abdur
Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafqi governor in Spain and left for
Damascus. This event took place in 113 A.H.

Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ghafqi Reinstated

assuming charge of the administration, he made an all-out effort to
put it back to normal. As a part of his welfare works, he built
madrasas (schools), mosques and bridges in most of the cities and
towns. Finding time from working on the welfare projects, he set
about making preparations.to invade France.

Uchman Lakhmi rebels

As mentioned above, Uthman Lakhmi had also ruled Spain for a short
period of five months. On being deposed, he was given a northern
province to rule. The Pyrenees was in his province. Since he was
reduced to the position of a ruler of a small piece of land, he felt
indignant and agitated and was restless to form his own sovereign rule.
Since Uthman belonged to the Berbers, he had little sympathy with
Arabs and Syrians. He rather considered them his rivals, The Duke of
Acton, the Gothic king, ruled over a large part of France. Following the
battle of Toulousse, he wanted to strengthen his position against Charles
Martel, the king of the northern part of France. In order to overpower
his rival the Duke extended a hand of friendship towards Uthman. With
4 strong desire to win Uthman’s friendship, he not only sent costly gifts
but also gave him his daughter, famous for beauty, in marriage. In

return for this marriage, the Duke of Acton made Uthman put in writing

that he would not force his daughter to abandon Christianity and also

refrain from using force against him (the Duke).

Rulers of Spain . 47

Uthman assassinated

When Abdur Rahman Ghafqi, the Governor of Spain decided to lead
his campaign against France and pass through the Pyrenees he sent
Uthman word to be ready to join his command with military forces
and_ supplies. He showed his unwillingness to obey these orders. And
when Abdur Rahman Ghafqi reached there, Uthman put up resistance
to Ghafqi’s forces in the pass of the Pyrenees. Abdur Rahman Ghafqi
sent a commander ahead with some troops who fought Uthman and
killed him, His Christian wife was captured and brought before
Abdur Rahman.

Finishing his task in the Pyrenees Abdur Rahman Ghafqi entered
France and set about conquering city after city. The Duke of Acton
had already joined hands with Charles Martel under compulsion and
came to the latter along with his forces and encouraged him to face the
Muslims. Charles swung into action and began to make large scale
preparations for all out war. The Bishops began to arouse Christian
feelings against the Muslims. The Islamic forces landed across the
river Jourdanne. The Christians were completely routed and the
Muslim troops seized the city of Poitiers.

Fighting in the City of Tours

Muslim forces proceeded to the city of Tours, which lies in central
France. Both forces remained encamped in front of one another for
seven days. The Muslims were strange to the territory while the
Christians were trying to save their country and were led by seasoned
commanders like Charles Martel and the Duke of Acton. They had
gone mad with anger and zeal. The Muslim force, one-tenth of the
Christian troops, faced its enemy with exemplary courage. The two
forces clashed on the eighth day and a fierce fight broke out which
went on until evening. Taking advantage of the dark night the Duke
of Acton made an ambush with his forces. The next day, at a time
when the Christian forces were about to leave the battlefield the Duke
attacked the Muslim force from behind. The front row of the Muslim
forces was engaged with the invaders while the Christians who were
retreating halted.

48 The History of Islam

Martyrdom of Abdur Rahman

The sudden and unexpected two-pronged Christian attack tore a
the Muslim ranks. In such a state of confusion, Abdur Rahman Ghafgi,

following the practice of his predecessors, drew his sword and

plunged into the enemy ranks killing them in large numbers. At last,

he was honored with martyrdom. The Muslim forces kept fighting the
whole day despite the loss of their Commander. However, they
retreated in the night. The next morning the Christians did not find
the Muslims on the battlefield but they could not muster enough
courage to chase them for fear of their having set an ambush. They left
the battlefield in a hurry to avoid a sudden Muslim onslaught. The
Christians left large numbers of troops dea

d and the biggest tragedy
on the Muslim side was the loss of their Commander. The event took
Place in 114 A.H.

part

Abdul Malik bin Fihri

When the Governor of Africa, Ubaid bin Abdur Rahman came to
know of the outcome of this battle and the martyrdom of Abdur

Rahman Ghafqi he appointed Abdul Malik bin Qatr as Governor of
Spain. He ordered him to avenge the martyrdom of Abdur Rahman
Ghafqi on the French. Abdul

Malik bin Qatn Fihri took charge of the
Spanish administration in 115 A.H. and soon after streamlining the

administration of the country, he set about making military
Preparations against France.

Abdul Malik bin
hopes of future
his force against

Qatn being experienced and bright, ericouraged high
Successes. However, he made the blunder of leading
France during the rainy season, wii h the result that
the swollen rivers and streams made his way very difficult. In view of
the troubles faced by the Muslim force, Christian guerillas began to
snipe at them. At last, Abdul Malik decided to withdraw but only

after mudh loss of life and time.
Abdul Malik’s Deposition

The African Governor was angry and replaced him by Utbah bin
Hajjaj Saluli,

Rulers of Spain 49

Utbah bin Haijjaj Satuli

Utbah bin Hajjaj took charge of the Spanish administration in 117 A.H.
and appointed Abdul Malik bin Qatn Fihri as Governor of a small
territory. It was a mistake committed by the new Governor. Instead of
oringing him down in position, he should have sent him back to Africa.

Deeds of Utbah

He was very intelligent and just. He first brought about peace in
Spain. He set up separate police departments to make the routes safe
for travelers. He recruited horsemen to patrol all the streets and lanes.
He also set up separate courts in every village to lighten the burden of
the central courts. He opened at least one madrasa (school) in every
village and settlement and. set aside a portion of the total revenue to
run these institutions. Wherever required he built mosques witha
madrasa attached to each one. The Berber population in Spain had
increased and their acts of barbarity had increased in the same
proportion. Utbah engaged them in constructive jobs in a manner that
they became disciplined and civilized. He brought down the rates on
revenues and tax collection to a level that made all classes of society
happy and satisfied.

He then turned to the French territories under Muslim control. He”
strengthened and fortified the occupied cities and territories, built
forts and during this period, he defeated alt French attacks.

The Berbers rose in revolt in Africa in 121 A.H. The African Governor
called Utbah from Spain to tackle the situation and he punished the
tebels adequately. But disorder and anarchy prevailed throughout
Spain during his absence. It proved a heyday for conspirators and
those with vested interests. Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman was then the
Junior Commissioned officer of the territory north of the Pyrenees
with the city of Narbonne as its capital. The Duke of Marseilles, the
tuler of eastern France sought help from him against Charies Martel
and offered his allegiance to Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman. Charles Martel
attacked Marseilles, the capital of the Duke and reduced it to ashes.
But he had to withdraw unsuccessfully from Narbonne.

50 The History of Islam,

Death of Utbah

When Utbah returned to Spain from Africa, he found clear signs of
insurgence. Abdul Malik bin Qatn, the man once deposed by him, had
already brought under his control a large section of the Spanish
people and staked his claim to the Goverorship of Spain. Utbah was
planning to deal with the new developments when he was overtaken

by death in Cordova in 123 A.H. Thus Abdul Malik bin Qatn captured
Spain rather easily.

Abdul Malik bin Qatn

Abdul Malik bin Qatn Fihri was an old man of hundred years, but he
was very active with a sound mind and youthful courage. He was
originally an inhabitant of Madinah and had taken part in many
battles fought in Madinah, Syria, Egypt, Iraq, Morocco and Spain. His
body showed scars of hundreds of wounds. The Arabs looked-down
upon the Berbers of Africa and Morocco. The Berbers felt it deeply.
When they found the Umayyads, the Arabs, showing signs of national
Superiority and arrogance they abhorred it. This is the reason why
they joined every movement against the Arab rulers.

Kulchum bin Ayaz

A Syrian Commander, Kulthum bin Ayaz was sent by the Caliph to
replace Ubaid bin Abdur Rahman, the Governor of Africa. The Berber
Chief Maisarah was at that time plundering and creating trouble for
the people. Kulthum took some rather reckless Steps to put down the
Berber uprisings. The Berbers had, on the other hand, made much
Progress and development with the blessings of Islam. They had
become very experienced fighting side by side with the Arab soldiers,
and they brought about setbacks for the Syrians.

Kulthum bin Ayaz at the Fort of Ceuta

Leaving a large number of soldiers dead on the battlefield Kulthum
_ bin Ayaz took refuge in the Fort of Ceuta along with ten thousand
Syrian soldiers. This fort was situated on the southern coast of the

Rulers of Spain 51
Gibraltar Straits. Even though it was beyond the power of the Berbers
to conquer the fort, food grain ran short and the besieged Syrians had
to face starvation. Kulthum bin Ayaz sought the supply of food grains
from Abdul Malik bin Qatn, the Governor of Spain but he gave no
such help for his dislike for the Syrians. When a merchant of Spain,
Zaid bin Amr came to know of the wretched plight of the besieged
Syrian force in the Ceuta Fort, he dispatched several ships loaded with
food grains. When it came to the knowledge of Abdul Malik, he killed
Zaid bin Amr in disgrace.

Hanzala Appointed as Governor

When Hisham bin Abdul Malik the Caliph of Damascus came to know
of the sad plight of Syrian force he sent Hanzala at the head of a large
army. He defeated the Berbers and freed the Syrians. During the same
period, Kulthum bin Aydz passed away and Hanzala became the
Governor of Africa.

Abdul Malik bin Qatn killed

With the news of Berbers’ large-scale killings the Berbers of Spain rose
as one man and attacked Abdul Malik bin Qatn and defeated him
more than once. When he found putting down of Berber insurgence
beyond his power, he wrote to Balj bin Bishr bin Ayaz Qushairi, the
nephew of Kulthum bin Ayaz and Commander of a ten thousand man
Syrian force to come to Spain and bring the situation under control. Balj
bin Bishr put down the revolt in a short time. When the Syrian force
narrated to the Spanish Arabs about their starvation and sufferings and
the cruelties of Abdul Malik bin Qain in the Ceuta Fort, Balj bin Bishr
arrested Abdul Malik bin Qatn with the support of the people of
Spain. Even though he wanted to keep Abdul Malik in captivity, his
companions and the enemies of Abdul Malik forced him to kjll the old
man of 100. The event took place during the last days of 123 A.H.

Mutual Discord , 1
ee 3

Shortly after the control of Balj bin Bishr aver Spain, Umayyah bin
Abdul Malik and Qain bin Abdul Malik, the two sons of Abdul Malik
bin Qatn Fibri started making secret plans against Balj bin Bishr. Yusuf

52 The History of Islam
bin Abdur Rahman the Governor of Narbonne also joined them, with
the result that even the Berbers, previously opposed to Abdul Malik,
joined the camp of Abdul Malik’s sons. Together they marched on
Cordova. Balj bin Bishr also came out to face the attack. Thus two strong
Muslim forces came face to face in central Spain, Balj was seriously
injured and fell from his horse unconscious. However, the Syrians drove
away their enemies. Balj succumbed to his injuries. This event took place
in 124 A.H. He ruled Spain for eleven months. The Syrians and the
Spanish Arabs jointly made Thalba bin Salamah the ruler of Spain.

Thalba bin Salamah

Thalba bin Salamah, being a Yemenite,
of Yemen. The sons of Abdul Malik Qa
their defeat, refrained from offering
Salamah and went about looting and plundering all over the country.
The Arab tribes, on the other hand, rose against Thalba because of his
excessive favor to the Yemenites and his hostility to the other Arabs.
At last, they lodged a complaint to African Govermor Hanzala bin
Safwan about Ibn Salamah with the request of sending a new Governor.

excessively favored the people
tn, who had escaped following
their allegiance to Thalba bin

Deposition of Ibn Salamah

Abul lchattab Hosam bin Darar Kalbi wa
warmly welcomed by the
charge of the administration,

5 sent to Spain and was
People. He deposed Ibn Salamah and took
. The event took place in 125 A.H.

Abul Khattab Hosam bin Darar Kalbi

Abul Khattab deserved to be ruler by ail accounts. The People of Spain
were fed up with the fighting and the discord that had become an
everyday experience. Almost all of them Sreeted the new ruler outside
of Cordova with great fanfare and displayed their total submission.

The sons of Abdul Malik also came and offered their allegiance.
Hosam started his rule with the utmost justice, tolerance, love and
Benerosity. He looked into the Tei

al causes of the disturbances and
managed to settle each tribe in 8 separate territory. In this way, he
very wisely spread the Syrians to distant places who had been
creating troubles of all kinds. ١

Rulers of Spain 53

Political Mistake of Abul Khattab

The only political blunder Abul Khattab made was his excessive favor
of the Yemenites. A strong undercurrent of dissatisfaction set in
against him. Tribe after tribe began to express themselves against him.
In the meantime, a dispute arose between his cousin and an Arab from
the Canaan. The case came to the court of the ruler who gave his
verdict in favor of his cousin despite his being in error. Displeased and
dissatisfied with the court judgment the victim lodged a complaint
with Bakr Damil bin Hatim bin Shimr Dhil Joshan, the chief of the
Qais tribe about the ruler. Damil bin Hatim was very powerful and
popular among the Arabs. He came to the ruler and protested against
his improper attitude. After a hot exchange of words, the ruler asked
his men to turn the chief out of the court. While pushing him out of
the court, they struck a few blows at his neck so that his turban hung
to one side of his head. When fie came out of the court in a state of
utter disgrace, someone asked him to put his turban right. He replied
that, if willing, his people would set it right. On reaching home, he
called the chieftains of his tribe and other influential Arabs and
related to them what had happened. All of them promised to extend

their help to him.

Damil bin Hatim then
influential people everywher
treatment meted out to him.

went on tour around the country and met.
e to give an account of the disgraceful
Since almost all of them were displeased

with Abul Khattab, they lent their support to him. When he became
satisfied that the people of Spain were against the ruler, he set up his
center in the city of Sidonia and called his friends and men belonging
to his tribe to come together. When they were concentrated at his
headquarters he marched on Cordova. Thalba bin Salamah, 2 |
Yemenite and the former Governor of Spain also joined Damil bin
Hatim. As a result of the clash between the two forces, Abul Khattab
was defeated and arrested and sent .to one of the strong forts of
Cordova as a captive. Following this both Thalba and Damil occupied
Spain. The event took place in 127 AH. However, shortly after that he
was released with the efforts of Abdur Rahman bin Hasan Kalbi. On

— |

54 ___ The History of Islam

being released, Abul Khattab left Cordova and met his people to win
their support. Thus, a large number of Yemenites gathered round him,
Damil and Thalba also rose to face him. It all happened at a time
when the caliphate of Damascus was the target of the Abbasids’
intrigue and the caliphate was passing through a state of chaos and
disorder. The Umayyad Caliph Marwan was desperately seeking a
decisive defeat of his enemies.

There was no one to look towards Spain as the seat of power itself was
in danger. Abul Khattab remained as a captive in Spain between 127
AH. and 129 AH. and was then put to death. In 128 A.H., Thalba bin
Salamah went to Abdul Rahman bin Habib, the ruler of Africa. With
the news of Abul Khattab’s assassination, the Governor of Africa sent
Thalba bin Salamah as the Governor of Spain in 199 A.H.

Thalba bin Salamah

Thalba bin Salamah took the reins of power in Rajab, 129 A.H. and
Damil bin Hatim, being his close friend, took over as the Chief
Minister and Commander. Since Thalba too was a Yemenite, Damil
bin Hatim brought peace between the Yemenite and other tribes.
Thalba bin Salamah died a few days after. The people of Spain chose
Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman Fihri as their ruler. As his abilities and
services were known to everyone, there wasn’t any objection raised.

Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman Fihri

Since Spain was no longer attached to the center of the caliphate and
was inhabited by Muslims of many different tribes internal conflict
began to build up and powerful men were aggrieved at the election of
Yusuf. The Christians of the territory incited Abdur Rahman bin
Algama, the ruler of Arbonia to revolt but he was killed before he could
take up arms. He was replaced by Ibn al-Waleed, who conquered Seville
and proceeded to Cordova where Yusuf defeated and killed him.

Spain is divitied Inco Provinces

Having put down the revolts Yusuf turned to streamlining the internal
administration. The entire Spain was divided into four provinces and

Rulers of Spain 55

the French territory under Muslim control was made the fifth one.
Names of the provinces are given below:

No. Name of the province Famous cities of the province
1. Andalusia Cordova, Carmona, Seville, Sidonia,

Malaga, Ilbira, Jaen

2. Toledo Ubeda, Boeza, Marbella, Villena,
Valencia

3. Merida (Galicia) Merida, Lisbon, Badajoz, Salamanca

4. Saragossa Saragossa, Tarragona, Barcelona,
Lerida

5. Arbonia (Catalonia) Narbonne, Tolousse, Pampalona,
Lugo

Impact of Change in Central Rule over Spain

Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman Fihri did not belong to any group. But when
the news of the end of Umayyad caliphate and the establishment of
Abbasid rule spread, Syrians everywhere began to face troubles
because of the Abbasids. Damil bin Hatim was also surrounded but
the people of the Qais tribe saved him. The entire country was torn by
strife. Among the supporters of the Umayyad Abu Uthman
Ubaidullah bin Uthman and Abdullah bin Khalid were two of the
main. supporters who were also related. Abu Uthman was the father-
in-law of Abdullah bin Khalid. Together they ruled in Ilbira, the city
of Andalusia. The city was dominated by Syrians. Yusuf bin Bakht
and Husain bin Malik Kalbi were two famous chiefs. On refusal of
help to Damil bin Hatim by Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman it was Abu
Uthman and Abdullah bin Khalid who extended their help. Badr, the
slave of Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil joined before they had left. They
persuaded Damil bin Hatim to invite Abdur Rahman ai-Dakhil to
Spain. Damil favored the proposal, apparently because he did not
want to embitter his relations with Yusuf. Abu Uthman and Abdullah
bin Khalid then took leave from Damil and came to Hbira and began

56 116 History of islam

to spread their point of view secretly among the people. Later they
came to know that Damil bin Hatim was not sticking to his promise
and liked the rule of Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman. Now losing hope of
support from the Qais and Fihir tribes, Abu Uthman filled the
Yemenites with the zeal of opposition, with the.result that the
Yemenite Commanders raised their standard in revolt. Thus both
Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman and Damil bin Hatim became engaged in

punishing them.
The Rule of Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil

When Abu Uthman found the Yemenite tribes in a state of fighting
and killing he sent Badr along with eleven men by ship to bring
Abdur Rahman bin al-Dakhil from Africa. Abdur Rahman bin al-
Dakhil reached Spain in 138 A.H. and was received with great fanfare
by Abu Uthman and the followers of the Umayyads. Abu Uthman
collected for him a large number of supporters. Yusuf bin Abdur
Rahman was then engaged in putting down revolts in the Saragossa
Province. With the news of Abdur Rahman.al-Dakhil’s arrival in Spain
he finished his task quickly and came to Toledo and met Damil bin
Hatim, he had made the blunder of killing all the captives he had
already promised safety of life to. This act of his displeased many of
his commanders who deserted him and joined Abdur Rahman al-
Dakhil. With this news the Arab chiefs who were scattered in different
places, particularly the Yemenites, joined Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil.
Now Yusuf and Ibn Hatim were left alone with the Fihri and Qais
tribes. The Syrian support for Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil was logical
but the Yemenites who previously opposed the Syrians lent their
Support because of their hostile attitude towards Yusuf and because
Abdur Rahman had come to take the leadership from Yusuf. Even the
Fihri and the Qaisi liked the Umayyad prince but they were with
Yusuf and fbn Hatim because of their towering personalities. One
reason of Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil’s success was that he had, before
his arrival, become a household name due to his high morals and
character. His sympathetic attitude to the Hijazi and Yemenite Arabs
also gained him a lot of popularity. Thus, even those hostile to the
Umayyads looked upon him with love and sympathy.

Rulers of Spain 57

Finally, Ibn Hatim and Yusuf marched to Cordova from Toledo and
Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil proceeded from the other side. The two
forces clashed on DAbl Hijjah 10, 138 A.H. (May 14,756 CE.) and
Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil won the battle after fierce fighting. Yusuf's
son was captured along with some others while Yusuf and Ibn
Hatim fled to safety. Ibn Hatim took refuge in Merida and Yusuf in
Jaen, Abdur Rahman al-Dahkil then entered into Cordova and
announced security of life to those who obeyed. Ibn Hatim and
Yusuf collected forces once again. But finally, they were also forced
to obey. Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil gave them peace and security on
condition that they would live in Cordova and appear in the court
once a day. In this way Abdur Rahman al-Dakhil and his
descendants began to rule in Spain and the first phase of Islamic rule
of Spain came to an end.

A Summary of the First Phase of Islamic Rule in Spain

Spain was far from Damascus, the seat of the Caliphate. The way to
Spain passed through Copt and Berber territories. Messages took a
long time to arrive from one another. Spain was conquered at a time
when the provinces of Iraq, Syria and Iran had engaged the attention
of the renowned commanders and statesmen of the Caliphate. Because
of these circumstances, Spain never attracted the proper attention it _
needed. This was the reason why Spain generally remained under the
Governor of Africa. Since Spain had become famous for
its fertility and opportunity, many people of the Hijaz, Syria and Iraq
who had no important engagements in there own territories shifted to
Spain. These Arabs were welcomed and treated with much respect
and high posts were offered to them. The Berbers of Africa had come
to Spain in the very beginning and continued to arrive. This is how
Spain became a Muslim colony in such a short time. Fhe country was
mainly populated by Christians, who showed total submission to the
Muslim rule. A large number of Jews also formed part of the
population. Thus, the mixed population of Spain consisted of different
elements. Scores of rulers came to Spain during the first fifty-years of
Muslim rule. The Spanish Muslims retained their sense of freedom
together with a democratic temperament. The Christian population

control of the

58 1 . The History of Islam

never suffered any trouble and they had ample opportunity for
economic development and academic progress. They received ail of
this simply in return for their allegiance.

At first, the Muslims had a great zeal for victory and reached the
central areas of France. But very shortly in Spain, civil wars broke out
and their military advances were halted and the Christian powers had
time and opportunity to contemplate their plight. During these fifty
years of Muslim rule, a different caliber of ruler came into power and
the Spanish population saw an era of all-round development.
Moreover, the victorious Muslim rulers began to marry Christian
women who played a very effective role in softening their attitude to
the Christians. They were no longer the objects of hate for them and
the Muslims did-a lot to educate and train the Christians. Gradually,
they grew so strong that they would seek military help from their
Muslim neighbors during their internal disputes.

When the Muslims came to Spain and the rule of Christian Goths
came to end, the bishops and the commanders who had once fought
the Muslims fled to the north. Muslim invaders had entered Spain
from the southern side, which was fertile, pleasant and relatively
warm and they populated this part of the country: The Arab people
did not like the northern part, which was hilly and cold and less
fertile. The Muslim invaders conquered the southern part but they
entered the hilly areas of the Pyrenees only when they were chasing
fugitives. Although this resulted in the Muslim conquest of Catalonia
and Narbonne civil war broke out among the Muslims, and because of
this they held back their advances,

Sovereign Christian Rule in the Northern Areas
Hilly Ranges of Spain
Pelayo

A minor act of negligence on the part of the early Muslim conquerors
Proved very costly in future. It has already been mentioned that
Anbasa had left unpunished a privateer named Pelayo who had

Rulers-of Spain 59
eluded the Muslims in the passes of the Pyrenees . When he set up
his camp in the Pyrenees, he attracted the Christians who had been
scattered and the bishops who brought the valuables of the Spanish
churches. Thus, Pelayo’s group in the hills grew strong in a very
short time. Even though Pelayo’s seat of power was, on all sides,
surrounded by Muslim territories all of them ignored this group
and never made a campaign against them thinking that they
would never pose any real danger to the Muslims. It was logical to
some extent for neither Pelayo nor the Christians ever mustered

enough courage to descend from the high hills to take on the
Muslims in the lowlands.

But the bishops who brought valuable gifts and relics to Pelayo made
him a religious leader and a protector of the Christian relics. He
remained confined to a small hilly area for about twelve or thirteen
years. During this period he kept receiving supplies from the
Christians. With the passage of time Pelayo rose in glory and the
Christians would visit him from far off places, and pay him regards
and see the relics. The negligence of Muslims encouraged the
Christians to consider this an empire on its own and declared Pelayo
their king and protector of their religion.

Alfonso

On Pelayo’s death -his son came to power but he too expired after
two or three years. Then Alfonso, the son-in-law of Pelayo was
elected king and commander. The Muslims, on the other hand, were
so deeply engaged in civil wars that they did not turn their attention
to the emerging hilly State. Alfonso invited the Christians of Galicia,
Aragon, and Catalonia to settle in the hills. He went to the extent of
taiding and capturing those Christians who were reluctant to leave

their fertile lands and brought them to populate the areas around
his capital,

The Capical of the Christian State

Asturias was made the capital of this sovereign rule of the Christians.
Constant sermons of the bishops made the unwilling Christians come
live there in peace. Gradually, the Christian population rose to such an

60 The History of Islam

extent that the area occupied by them became crowded. Although
they could achieve no success in the open areas, they were able to
capture hills along the Pyrenees. This became the foundation of a
small Christian state. They had no connection with either the Christian
tulers of France or of Italy the religious bigotry present there was
stronger than that of France or Italy. Their rules of governance were
enacted and supported by the bishops. In 138 A.H. Abdur Rahman al-

Dakhil brought about the end of the caliphate era and Alfonso also
died the same year.

Chapter 4
The Spainish Caliphs

Abdur Rahman bin Mu’awiyah, the Umayyad

Habits and Traits of Character

Abdur Rahman bin Mu’awiyah bin Hisham bin Abdul Malik bin
Marwan bin Hakam was born in 113 A.H. His father, Mu’awiyah
was cut short in the prime of his life when Abdur Rahman was only
5. His grandfather, Hisham bin Abdul Malik was then on the throne.
He devoted his full attention to the education and training of his
grandson. He had in mind to appoint Abdur Rahman his crown
Prince. But Hisham died when Abdur Rahman was only 12 years of
age. Hisham’s nephew Waleed replaced him. Abdur Rahman had in
him Kingly qualities from an early age. He kept away from evil and
foul practices, He was well versed in courtly manners and the art of
governance. He had also enjoyed the company of religious scholars

and courtiers. As a young man, he learned swordsmanship and the
art of warfare.

62 The History of Islam

Emigration

When the Umayyad caliphate ‘saw its end in 132 A.H. and the
Abbasid caliphate came into power Abdur Rahman was 20 years
old. Abdur Rahman had an estate on the bank of the Euphrates,
While the Umayyads were being massacred by the Abbasids in
Damascus, Abdur Rahman was away at his estate. When he came to
know of the death of the Umayyad’s, he shifted to a forest and
encamped there for safety.

One day when Abdur Rahman was in his camp and his four-year old
son, who was playing outside, rushed into the camp shocked and
frightened. When Abdur Rahman went outside, he noticed the black
Abbasid flag flying and moving towards him. He took his son and
fled towards the river. He was ori way to the river when the Abbasids
appeared chasing and promising him peace and safety. He paid no
heed to their promise. He plunged into the river with his son stuck to
his chest and swam across the river. His enemies saw him helpless
and held themselves back from jumping into the river.

Abdur Rahman in Africa

Abdur Rahman wandered from village to village in the guise of a
traveler with his child on his lap. In such a wretched state, he reached
Palestine where he came across his father’s slave Badr who was

“heading for Egypt in the same state. Badr had with him some money
and an ornament of Abdur Rahman’s sister, which he gave to Abdur
Rahman to improve his condition. He then started a journey asa
merchant in the company of Badr and reached Egypt and contacted
supporters of the Umayyads. After a short stay in Egypt, he left for the
other territories of Africa.

Abdur Rahman's Plan to Found His Rule in Africa

The Govemor of Africa showed Abdur Rahman his love and respect.
However, when he came to know that Abdur Rahman wanted to
found his rule in Africa and at the same time that the Abbasid
caliphate was growing strong, he made a pian to arrest Abdur
Rahman and send him to the Abbasid Caliph. But the plot was

The Spainish Caliphs 63

discovered and Abdur Rahman went into hiding along with his son
and slave. Since the Governor of Africa had announced a substantial
reward for the arrest of Abdur Rahman, the search was intensified
and Abdur Rahman, the victim of circumstances, had to run for safety
through forests and deserts facing starvation.

Once Abdur Rahman took refuge in the hut of an old woman. When
a search party came to the hut, the old woman covered Abdur
Rahman with cloth. Taking it to be a heap of clothes the party left
the hut. Abdur Rahman was reduced to a plight that he neither had
bread or shelter. After passing four or five years of a life fraught
with dangers and beset with sorrows and suffering he came into
contact with the Banu Nafusa, a branch of the Kinana tribe. When
they discovered that Abdur Rahman’s mother belonged to. their
tribe, they treated him like a relative and promised him all kinds of
help and support. Abdur Rahman settled in Ceuta, an area where
Banu Nafusa was in a majority. During all these years Abdur
Rahman had learnt that it was not an easy matter to snatch power
from the Governor of Africa. In Ceuta he had the opportunity of
receiving intimate knowledge of the state of affairs in Spain as Ceuta
was near to Spain. When he learned that Spain was continuously
experiencing internal disturbances and discord and Yusuf, the ruler
was preoccupied with the task of curbing violence and uprisings,
Abdur Rahman a man of high ambition and exemplary courage and
determination saw an opportunity for himself. He made no delay in
sending his slave Badr to Spain with letters from him to the chiefs
and other influential men sympathetic to the Umayyads.

Abdur Rahman in Spain 3

Badr contacted Abu Uthman and Abdullah bin Khalid and informed
them of the task ahead. They called the Syrian and Arab chiefs and
Placed the matter before them. They all agreed on inviting prince
Abdur Rahman to Spain. Fortunately, the supporters of the
Umayyads inhabited the southeastern coast of Spain and Abdur
consistin experienced no trouble in landing there. When the party
Ceuta ie of eleven men sent to invite Abdur Rahman landed in

, Mey approached him with Badr at their head while Abdur

64 ___ The History of islam

Rahman was performing prayers. When the head of the party, Abu
Ghalib al-Tammam saluted Abdur Rahman and told him that the
people of Spain were awaiting his presence the latter asked his
name. Abdur Rahman knew him to be Abu Ghalib al-Tammam who
grew very happy at this recognition and announced that Spain was
within his reach. Following this, Abdur Rahman boarded the ship

without loss of time, upon landing he was greeted by men numbering
in the thousands.

Cordova Occupied
re

The Umayyads and the Syrians in Spain rushed to offer their total
submission and loyalty. Following this nearby cities and towns were
seized. The rainy season stopped Yusuf’s march to Cordova. Because
of this, Abdur Rahman had a Tespite of seven months before he had to
face Yusuf’s attack, which finally resulted in Yusuf’s defeat and
Abdur Rahman, captured Cordova. After the victory was won a
Yemenite chief, Abu Sabah said addressing his People that they had
now revenged themselves against Yusuf and they should now kill
Abdur Rahman to establish their own rule instead of the Umayyads.
Since Abdur Rahman's forces had a large number of Syrians and

Berbers, his opponents could Not rise up against him. However, they

kept waiting for an Opportunity to cause Abdur Rahman some kind
of setback. When he discovered their desi 1

some fault he had committed.

The Appointments of Abdur Rahman

Since Abdur Rahman, the Umayyad was quite
Govemors,

The Spainish Caliphs 6

Rebellions
Repelto™

Despite showing no favor to any one section, he had to face a number
of revolts in the initial stages of his reign. Yusuf Fihri was at that time’
kept in Cordova and was not allowed to leave. Two years after the

conquest of Cordova, Abdur Rahman still had to devote most of his
time and resources to curbing the opposition to his newfound rule.

During these actions against his opponents, he felt the need to

organize a force based on the Umayyads who survived the Abbasid

onslaught. He felt that any such force could play a sincere role in

safeguarding against opposing forces. Among the Umayyads

surviving the Abbasid massacre in Egypt were Abdul Malik bin Umar

bin Marwan bin Hakam and his son Umar bin Abdul Malik. Having

heard of the conquest of Spain, they along with a dozen Umayyads ’
came to Abdur Rahman. Welcoming their arrival Abdur Rahman

appointed Abdul Malik bin Umar as the Governor of Seville and

Umar bin Abdul Malik the governor of Moruba.

Since Abdur Rahman was alone in this strange country and he
doubted the courage of the different groups and tribes to oppose the
Abbasids, he kept himself confined to the rank of the Governor of
Spain. He delivered addresses in the name of the Abbasid Caliph,
although, he was their enemy at heart and considered the Abbasids
his enemies. Due to this situation Abdur Rahman deemed it necessary

e his friends and close relatives high positions. Thus, when he

to giv
appointed Abdul Malik and his son Umar as Governor he was
d the country was

opposed even more vehemently than before an
heading towards crisis and revolt.

Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman assassinated

On being incited by the people Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman, the former
ruler of Spain escaped from Cordova but his sons Abu Zaid Abdur
Rahman and Abul Aswad could not. And the minister of Yusuf bin
Abdur Rahman Eihri Damil bin Hatim also failed to escape from
Cordova. All three of them were put in prison. Yusuf Fihri reached
Toledo and as per their resolution, his supporters from all sides
gathered round him. In a very short time twenty thousand troops

66 The History of Islam

collected under his banner. Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman then invaded
Seville and surrounded Abdul Malik bin Umar. But, in order to save
time, he raised the siege and proceeded to Cordova. When Umar, the
son of Abdul Malik heard of the siege on his father he proceeded to
Seville. Both the father and son chased Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman’s
force. When Abdur Rahman found out about Yusuf's march at the
head of twenty thousand men, he came out from Cordova to face
Yusuf, Abdur Rahman attacked from the front and Abdul Malik and
Umar came from behind. A large number of Yusuf’s troops were
killed and Yusuf fled to Toledo. Having reached near Toledo the
Yemenites held consultations and considered that if they killed Yusuf
and carried his head to Abdur Rahman he would forgive them for
joining the revolt. They implemented their plan.

Yusuf Fihri was a brave and renowned Commander and had served
Spain as Governor. He was known for his benevolence and politeness.
But he was gullible too. He could believe his friends and supporters
blindly and, at last, he lost his life because of this. In the wake of this
bitter experience, Abdur Rahman was within his rights to kill the sons
of Damil bin Hatim and Yusuf and he did so. However, Abul Aswad
was put ina fort because of his young age. In order to create awe and
terror in his enemies. Abdur Rahman hung the dead bodies of the
insurgents in public but such a brutal action created less fright and
more sympathy for the Fihri family.

Abul Aswad bin Yusuf Fihri who was a captive’ in a fort declared
himself blind after sometime. Every moming he went to the bank of the
river outside the fort to answer the call of nature and then requested
someone to take him back to the fort. Anyone of the soldiers moving
about would return him back to the gate of the fort. When his blindness
was fully established, his supervisors stopped keeping watch over him.
In the meantime a slave of Abul Aswad began to pay regular visits to
him. Abul Aswad set about sending messages to his friends and

sympathizers through him and one day he escaped.
Managing Home Affatrs

After doing away with Yusuf Fihri, Abdur Rahman paid his attention
to affairs at home. Having displayed a good deal‘of royal power and

The Spainish Calipks 67

andeur he declared his sovereignty and expunged the name of the
Abbasid Caliph from any official addresses in 146 A. H. The Abbasid
caliphate was newly founded in the east and it was not yet free from
dispute. With the news of Abdur Rahman’s occupation of Spain, he
felt aggrieved but could not dispatch an expedition against the newly
proclaimed ruler. He was satisfied that addresses were still delivered

in his name.

Abbasids’ Action against Abdur Rahman

The Abbasid Caliph grew very upset when he knew that Abdur
Rahman had removed his name from his addresses. He then wrote to
Ala’a bin Mughith, the Commander in Africa to invade Spain. Ala’a
bin Mughith marched to Spain. Hashim bin Abdu Rabbih, a relative of
Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman Fihri, and the chief of Toledo was deeply
frustrated at the damage done to the Fihris. He then lured away a
large number of Berbers besides those who joined him out of their
hate for the brutalities committed against the Fihris.

Hashim Fihri then sent word to Ala’a bin Mughith to invade Spain
without delay and counted upon his support and sent a black flag
representing the Abbasids. The message fired the courage of Ala‘a bin
Mughith. Abdur Rahman was quite unaware of the impending
danger. Hashim raised his banner of revolt in 146 A.H. and captured
northern Spain and fortified Toledo. Abdur Rahman proceeded from
Cordova at the head of a force to curb the revolt and besieged Toledo.
The insurgents from Toledo took on the attack bravely, with the result
that the siege dragged on for several months without yielding a
conclusion. Meanwhile, Ala‘a bin Mughith landed at Beja with the
~wblack flag sent by Caliph Mansur, the Abbasid.

Taking Ala’a bin Mughith to be deputed by the Caliph of the Muslims
».the people of Spain gathered under the banner of the Caliph. They
cosidered Abdur Rahman to be a rebel. He grew very anxious over this
a -erucial moment for him because the insurgents of
northert Spaittwere. still beyond his control. Abdur Rahman raised his
siege of Toledo and turned to the fresh threat. He had reached Carmona

near Seville when Ala‘a bin Mughith appeared on the scene. A large
number of Abdur Rahman's soldiers rushed to Ala’a bin Mughith. The

68 The History of Islam
1 1 ‏مسن‎ to reinfor

Je of Toledo, being free from the siege, sent a co: ce
ees troops. Abdur Rahman had to take refuge in the fort of Carmona,

Courageous Act of Abdur Rahman

After surrounding Carmona Ala‘a bin Mughith sent troops to nearby
areas on a mission to plunder for supplies. The Berbers of Spain and
other people also followed suit. The entire country of Spain was
plunged into killings, plunder and disorder. Abdur Rahman remained
besieged in the fort of Carmona for two months. In such a state of
despair, Abdur Rahman told his companions that the time had come
to go down fighting rather than to die of hunger. They started a large
bonfire in the open and seven hundred fighters put the sheaths of
their swords into it to declare that they would either become
victorious or die fighting. Thus they threw open the gates of the fort
and fell upon the enemy. The invaders had, after such a long siege,
become careless about the besieged and were no longer on the alert.
Seven hundred fighters like hungry lions launched an attack so heavy
and unexpected that the besieging force fled leaving behind seven
thousand corpses and Spain was restored to Abdur Rahman.

Macabre Joke

On this occasion Abdur Rahman played a macabre joke with Caliph
Mansur Abbasi. He cut off the heads of Ala’a bin Mughith and ail the
Commanders of Abbasid force, he made holes in the ears of each one
and fastened a Paper in each one with his name and post. He then put
all the heads in trunks and dispatched them very cautiously with the
wens of the pilgrims to Makkah. From there, it was sent to Caliph
wane When the trunk containing the head of Ala‘a bin Mughith
Mughin wet there was a letter from Mansur directing Ala‘a bin
by wa to invade Spain. It aiso contained the pieces of black flag sent |
roman on f° 0 Mughith, Mansur saw the heads and passed the simple |
we Again nk Allah there lies a sea between Abdur Rahman and
and pret v He said one day, “I am amazed at the courage, wisdom
Prudence of Abdur Rahman that he founded his ‏عابم‎ in a far off

The Spainish Caliphs 69

Rebels annihilated

Following the conquest of Carmona Abdur Rahman came to Toledo
with the force headed by his slave Badr and Tammam bin Alqama
who defeated the insurgents of the territory after a fierce battle.
Prominent chiefs like Hisham bin Abdu Rabbih Fihri, Hayat bin
Waleed Yahsabi and Uthman bin Hamza bin Ubaidullah bin Umar bin
Khattab were arrested and killed by the order of Abdur Rahman.

A number of Yemenite tribes had joined Ala‘a bin Mughith and most
of them were killed by Abdur Rahman and his men in the battle of
Carmona. The people of Yemen developed a deep desire to avenge
their blood. In 147 A.H. Sayed Yahsabi, known as Matri rose in revolt
and captured Seville. Abdur Rahman proceeded from Cordova to
punish Matri. Matri then -took refuge ina fort of Seville, which was
besieged by Abdur Rahman. Attab bin Algami was then in Sidonia
city and had promised Matri to join him in the revolt. Thus, he
marched at the head of an army.

Having heard this news Abdur Rahman sent his slave Badr at the head
of an army to go and stand between Attab and Matri. Matri was killed
and Khalifa bin Marwan was appointed as Commander. Nevertheless,
they had to. seek peace. Abdur Rahman granted the petition but
demolished the fort. He then came back to Cordova. Following this,
Abdullah bin Khrasha Asadi of Jaen rose in revolt. Abdur Rahman
mobilized his army but Abdullah's companions deserted him with the
result Abdullah Asadi sought forgiveness and was pardoned.
Ghayath bin Mir Asadi revolted in 150 A.H. The Governor of Beja
gave battle and Ghayath was killed in action and his force was
defeated and dispersed. The same year, 150 A.H., Abdur Rahman
laid the foundation stone of the fortification of the city of Cordova.

In 151 A.H., a person named Shaqna (Ion Abdul Wahid) 8 teacher
escendant of Husain bin Ali

by profession claimed that he was the ‏لك‎
‎and his name was Abdullah bin Muhammad. Very soon the credulous
Berbers gathered around him while others also followed suit. When

the number of his followers grew strong, he raised his standard of
revolt in Pelencia, the northern province of Spain and captured
Santarem. Abdur Rahman proceeded to punish him.

70 . 1776 History of ‏ببرهادا‎

Having heard of the march of Abdur Rahman, Ibn Abdul Wahid fleq
to the hills. Abdur Rahman returned to Cordova. He then appointed
Habib bin Abdul Malik as the Governor of Toledo and directed him to
punish Ibn Abdul Wahid. Habib bin Abdul Malik deputed Sulaiman
bin Uthman bin Marwan bin Uthman bin Affan to punish Ibn Abdul
Wahid. But the latter captured Sulaiman and killed him. Following
this he captured some nearby territories.

Having heard this Abdur Rahman himself proceeded from Cordova in
152 A.H. Ibn Abdul Wahid fled to the hills once again and Abdur
Rahman had to retum without engagement for the second time.

Abdur Rahman sent his slave Badr in 154 AH. to attack him but Ibn
Abdul Wahid took refuge in the hills. Later in 154 A.H., Abdur
Rahman himself led.an expedition but again could not get him.

In 155 AH, Abdur Rahman sent Abu Uthman Ubaidullah bin
Uthman at the head of a strong army but it proved an exercise in
futility. Ibn Abdul Wahid killed a large part of Abu Uthman’s force by
playing a trick and plundered several cities as well. Compelied by the
situation Abdur Rahman once again led his force in 155 A.H. and
deputed his son Sulaiman in Cordova. When he arrived at the
Santarem fort, he was informed that the Yemenite tribes and the
people of-Seville had revolted against him. He had to leave his task
unfinished and he hurried back. He ordered Abdul Malik bin Umar to
go ahead an attack Seville.

Abdul Malik reached Seville and sent his son Umayyah to snipe at the
enemy. But, finding the people of Seville alert, he came back without
doing his job. On inquiry, he gave the reason for his return. Abdul
Malik accused his son of coming back for fear of death. He then
charged him with cowardice and cut off his head. Following this he
said addressing his men: “We all know how mercilessly we have been
killed and had to leave our country. Now that we have this piece of
land, Spain, to live on and we can’t afford to lose it too. It is our
obligation to keep it even at the cost of our lives.” All of them
supported the idea and vowed to lay down their lives for the purpose.

The Yemenite tribes had a large and strong force in Seville and it was
the last extension of their power. Because of this, the conquest of

Seville was not an easy job. Abdul Malik bin Umar launched a

‘The Spainish Caliphs 7

werful attack and his force gave him very active support. The

ple of Seville tasted defeat. Even though Abdul Malik received
several injuries, he showed exemplary bravery and steadfastness in
the battle. When at the end of the battle, Abdul Malik wanted to put
down his sword his fingers refused to open out and the sword
remained in his hand. Meanwhile Abdur Rahman appeared and said,
seeing the blood stained sword in his hand and hearing the account of
the battle: “ Brother Abdul Malik”, I wanted my son Hisham to marry
your daughter.” Following this remark Abdur Rahman appointed
Abdul Malik bin Umar as his minister.

Two chiefs of Seville named Abdul Ghaffar bin Hamid and Hayat bin
Flagash and the rulers of Banila city and Seville respectively and Amr,
the ruler of Beja fled the battlefield. They gathered the Arab tribes
once again. Abdur Rahman attacked them in 157 A.H., and defeated
and killed them and their supporters. These events created doubts and
misgivings in the mind of Abdur Rahman concerning the Arab tribes.
As a result of this, he began to recruit non-Arabs and slaves to curb
the rising of Arab tribes against the throne. The same reasons had
perhaps, compelled ‘the Abbasids to prefer other forces to the Arabs
even though they were themselves Arabs. They always feared their
treason. Abdur Rahman sent an expedition in 160 A.H. against Ibn
Abdul Wahid, which besieged Santarem Fort but returned unsuccessful
after one month. At last, in 162 A.H., Ibn Abdul Wahid came out of
the fort and went to a village and two persons among his companions
assassinated him and took his head to Abdur Rahman. Thus came to
an end the mischief that had disturbed Abdur Rahman for so long.

Before the assassination of Ibn Abdul Wahid, Abdur Rahman bin
Habib known as Saqlabi built a force in Africa in 161 A.H. and
Planned to invade Spain. The two forces were arrayed against one
another in the field of Tadmir. Many Berbers of Spain joined his
campaign. Abdur Rahman bin Habib then sent word to Sulaiman
Yagazan, the ruler of Seville to either obey the Abbasid <aliphate or be
ready to face attack. On refusal, Abdur Rahman bin Habib attacked
Sulaiman but was defeated and driven away. On being informed
Abdur Rahman the Umayyad marched from Cordova. With the news
of the approach of Abdur Rahman, he (Abdur Rahman bin Habib) fled °

72 , 176 History of Islam.

to the hills. On the announcement of a reward for Abdur Rahman bin
Habib, one of his companions aut off his head and presented it to
Abdur Rahman the Umayyad and got his reward.

Shortly after that, Dihya Ghassani took refuge in fort of Almeria in 163
A.H. and raised his standard of revolt. Abdur Rahman sent Shaheed
bin Isa to punish him who defeated and killed the rebel. After a short
while the Berbers raised theit heads in revolt under Ibrahim bin
Sajrah, Abdur Rahman sent Badr to deal with him. Badr killed
Ibrahim and dispersed the Berbers. During the same days, a
Commander named’ Salama escaped to Cordova and rose in revolt
after seizing Toledo. Abdur Rahman sent Habib bin Abdul Malik to
punish Salama. Habib surrounded Toledo and Salama died during the
siege and his companions dispersed.

Reasons behind the Revolts

Abdur Rahman could not rule peacefully and the reasons are not hard
to find. The Muslim population of Spain had in those days developed
a taste and temperament for rivalries and insurgence. They also could
not obey anybody sincerely. They could not tolerate the reign of
Abdur Rahman because his dynastic rule had perished in the East. The
main reason behind the worries of Abdur Rahman was that the Abbasid
caliphs were continually hatching plots against him. The Abbasid
caliphs had chosen Baghdad to be their Headquarters, which was far
from Abdur Rahman and a large sea kept Baghdad and Spain apart.

They would hear about the power and strength of Abdur Rahman’‘s
rule but were unable to do away with him due to the great distance
between them. Twice they tried to invade but every time their
commanders were killed and the Abbasid campaigns had to face
ignominious defeat. Failing to achieve military victory, they made use
of the same secret planning against Abdur Rahman that they had
already used to bring about the ruin of the ancestors of Abdul
Rahman the Umayyads. They began to propagate their favor among
Arab tribes and men of treasonous nature and to win their support for
the Abbasid caliphate. Thus, most of the Arab chiefs and the Berbers
who had recently accepted Islam stood by the Abbasids. They rose in

The Spainish Caliphs n

revolt repeatedly and every time they incurred a setback, but they did
not receive any help from Baghdad.

The shortsighted rebellious chiefs kept Abdur Rahman engaged in
dealing with their insurgent activities and provided the Christians of
Asturias with an opportunity to get stronger.

Alfonso’s son Fruela had enough time to gather Christians around
him and to think of ways to develop plans for the future. The forces of
Cordova on the other hand did not have an opportunity to extend any
help to the Muslims occupying southern France. If Abdur Rahman
had dispatched his forces to take on the French, he could not have
saved Spain. .

Now, in view of the constant revolts by the Abbasid supporters, the
French invaded and besieged the city of Narbonne. The Muslims of
the city faced the rigor of the siege for six years without any help from
outside. But, at last, southern France slipped out of their hands after
being under their possession for forty years.

After Abdur Rahman bin Habib, the Commander of the Baghdad
caliphate had been killed two persons named Husain bin Asi and
Sulaiman. bin Yaqzan were left to carry out the subversive activities of
the Abbasids. They ruled in Saragossa and its surrounding areas. They
entered into correspondence with the Caliph Mahdi who was very
pious. However, human nature demanded him to hate the Umayyads.
They got the support of Baghdad and then they urged Charlemagne,
the king of France to invade Spain and assured him that Mahdi
Abbasi also supported the proposal of doing away with Abdur
Rahman and his rule. Charlemagne could not have got a better
opportunity to win Spain for nothing could have added more to his
glory and dignity. Since Muslim bravery and determination were well
known to him, he made no haste in making an attack. Besides making
large-scale military preparations, he collected information of all kinds
through the insurgents and the traitors. Together they made it a point
to bring about the release of Abul Aswad, the son of Yusuf Fihri from
a fort adjoining Cordova so that broader Muslim support could be

expected. It has already been mentioned how Abul Aswad escaped by

declaring himself blind. Charlemagne prepared to fight with several

74 The History of Islan

hundred thousand troops and the expulsion of the Muslims from
Spain and the foundation of Christian rule were advanced as the two-
fold purpose of the invasion. The insurgents of Saragossa took up
arms before the invasion of Charlemagne. Abdur Rahman was not
fully aware of the moral impact of the Baghdad Caliphate, plots
hatched by the Muslims of Spain and the huge Christian preparations,
Abdur Rahman sent his Commander Thalba bin Ubaid to punish the
insurgents of Saragossa. After a series of battles Sulaiman bin Yaqzan
arrested Thalba and sent him to Charlemagne to convince him of his
power and support. Thalba’s troops fled the battlefield, joined Abdur
Rahman in Cordova and informed him of the power of the insurgents.

Shortly after the king of France, who was lying on the other side of the
Pyrenees, moved ahead. The number of troops was so large that they
had to go through two separate passes to meet under the fortification
of the city of Saragossa . When the Muslims of Saragossa heard of the
huge Christian army and their plan to wipe out all Muslim signs and
traces from the face of Spain, they reproached Sulaiman bin Yaqzan.
Husain bin Asi too shuddered to think of such a consequence and shut
the door of Saragossa. When Charlemagne felt that the Muslims

would withdraw their support from him and join the camp of Abdur
Rahman, he returned to France without achieving any success.

While Charlemagne was marching to Spain, the Christian State of
Asturias had extended its support to him considering him the savior
of the Christians. When he began to march back to France because of
fear of the Muslims, the Christians of the hilly state started raiding the
rear of the Christian force. By the time it had reached thé northem

Part of Spain some of the renowned Commanders and a large part of
the force had been killed.

On the retum of Charlemagne Husain bin Asi assassinated Sulaiman
bin Yaqzan and took over the leadership of the insurgents.
Meanwhile, Abdur Rahman also reached Saragossa from Cordova at
the head of a strong force and laid siege to the city. Husain bin Asi
Sought peace at the cost of his obedience and Abdur Rahman
cenceded to it. Now, in consequence of the French King’s march on
Spain Abdur Rahman proceeded to France and reached the French

The Spainish Caliphs 75

plains. During this march, Abdur Rahman ignored the Christians
occupying the hilly areas.

Abdur Rahman ravaged the southern part of France and demolished
forts and the fortifications of several cities. Charlemagne escaped to
the northern part of France and did nothing to save the southern
provinces. However, Abdur Rahman could not stay in France for long
because he was well aware of the state of affairs in his country. He
had hardly passed a few months in Cordova when Husain bin Asi
rose in revolt in Saragossa. Abdur Rahman sent Ghalib bin Tammam
bin Alqama to put down the revolt. They fought against one another
for about a year without any result. Now Abdur Rahman himself
marched to Saragossa in 166 A.H. and killed Husain bin Asi and puta
large number of rebels to death. During all these years of turmoil and
turbulence Abul Aswad kept aloof from court politics and was left to
keep the banner of rebellion flying. However, the relatives of those
killed by Abdur Rahman were burning with anger and shock. Finally,
they persuaded Abul Aswad in Talun to take up arms and they
gathered around him. But Abdur Rahman fought and drove him
away. He took refuge in the mountains. Abul Aswad came out once
again in 169 A.H. but fled again leaving behind four thousand men
dead and lost. Abul Aswad died in 170 A.H. His companions who
were still leading a life of robbing and plundering elected his brother
Qasim bin Yusuf their chief and very soona large number of troops
came under his banner. Abdur Rahman attacked and killed him.

In the same year, 170 AH. Harun Rashid came to the throne.
Charlemagne, in order to gain peace, sought an agreement with Abdur
Rahman and offered his daughter in marriage. The Muslim ruler while
granting his peace offer declined to marry his daughter. Historians have
explained this refusal in a number of ways. Charlemagne knew very
well that the Caliph of Baghdad was the. enemy of Abdur Rahman.
Although he expected no help from Harun Rashid, but anticipating his
campaign against Abdur Rahman he sent emissaries to Baghdad to seek
his friendship. He was very hopeful of the success of his mission
because he had once led his force to Spain in response to the request of
Mahdi, the father of Harun Rashid. Charlemagne was right. Harun
Rashid greeted his emissaries warmly and sent to Charlemagne a watch
as a gift. Charlemagne, in fact, had in mind the destruction of Mustim

76 The History of Islam

rule in Spain. Harun Rashid also had his own interest in view. But
neither one of them could achieve their purpose.

Death of Abdur Rahman

Following the peace agreement with Charlemagne, Abdur Rahman
had very little to threaten him. He was completely and firmly in
control of the situation after putting down all opposition internally
and externally. However, in 171 A.H. his slave Badr and some of his
relatives joined hands to seize the throne of Spain. Abdur Rahman
uncovered the plot and banished them to Africa. He died in 172 A.H.
at the age of 58 or 59 after ruling his country for 33 years and 4 months.
In accordance with his will, he was succeeded by his son Hisham.

An Assessment of Abdur Rahman’s Life

Twenty years of his early life he passed in study and the assemblies of
the scholars. Swordsmanship was a must fora youth in those days.
After twenty years of a comfértable life, he passed through a period
where he had to hide himself like a thief and everyone appeared to be
thirsty for his blood. He had neither bread to eat nor clothes to wear.
After wandering for years in forests and deserts and from one country
to another, he became the king of a country. However, this power
proved to be a crown of thorns. Had he been anyone else they would
have perished right from the beginning but he was lion-hearted and
irrepressible. He came to Spain a stranger with no sympathy and no
support from any quarter but he turned the tide in his favor by virtue
of his far-sightedness and wisdom.

He proved his mettle as a commander and a swordsman although he
had no such experience before arriving in Spain. His performance as a
commander was beyond criticism. He achieved success in campaigns
where his renowned and seasoned commanders met with failure. On
no occasion did he lose hope or courage despite revolts and sufferings
of the worst nature. No one of his contemporaries could ever fathom
the depth of his courage and fortitude.’

His life was full of campaigns and adventures but his love for art and
learning remained undiminished. He opened educational institutions

The Spainish Caliphs 77
all over his country to spread learning and wisdom to the masses.

Abdur Rahman fortified all the cities of his state and built mosques
wherever they were needed. The Grand mosque of Cordova has no
parallel in grandeur and magnificence. Although Abdur Rahman could
not complete it in his lifetime the foundation of the mosque revealed the
lofty ambitions of the Muslim ruler. The beauty, magnificence and
dimensions of the mosque brought men of weak faith to consider it on
par with the Ka’bah in glory and sanctity although all mosques deserve
an equal respect. His fondness for constructing buildings was greater
than that of Shah Jahan of India and in prudence, he excelled Aristotle.
For him, to found his rule in Spain was far greater than all the victories
of Tamerlane and Napoleon put together.

In patronage of the arts and learning even the Caliphs Harun Rashid
and Mamun Rashid did not surpass him. Moreover, the Abbasid
dynasty did not produce, after Harun and Mamun, such rulers who
could value the real worth of the arts and learning as the children of
Abdur Rahman did, with the result that Cordova surpassed Baghdad
in fame and glory.

Tbn Hayyan writes that Abdur Rahman was very kind, courteous and
cultured. He spoke very eloquently; his understanding was deep and
insight sharp. He never formed an opinion about matters in haste but
once it was formed, he stuck to it firmly and strongly. However, he
would consult his courtiers and advisors on all important issues.
Abdur Rahman was brave and.attacked his enemy first. His face was
awesome for friends and foes alike. He delivered the Friday sermon in
the grand mosque himself, attended the sick and joined public
assemblies and marriage parties.

During his rule his guards and caretakers were changed one after
another and they included Tammam bin Algama, Yusuf bin Bakht,
Abdul Karim bin Mahran, Abdur Rahman bin Mughith, and Mansur,
the eunuch, Although Abdur Rahman appointed same persons as his
Minister but he never acted blindly on their advice. He had formed a
committee of nobles and notables, which advised him in administrative
affairs. This consultative body consisted of Abu Uthman, Abdullah bin

Khalid, Abu Ubaida, Shaheed bin Isa, Thalba bin Ubaid, and Athim
bin Muslim.

78 The History of Islam

0

His Features and His Children

Abdur Rahman was a handsome man having a commanding stature
and little flesh, fair complexioned and gray haired. As per some
historians, he had a weak sense of smell. He eft behind nine
daughters and eleven sons, Sulaiman being the eldest. However, he
appointed his second son Hisham as his crown prince. Sulaiman was
the son he had fled with from the bank of the Euphrates. However, he
knew Hisham was more able and was more worthy of throne.

Order and Discipline

As per the statements of a western historian, Abdur Rahman was kind
and benevolent but the rebels and traitors compelled him to deal with
them harshly. He was inclined to learning and literature but his
situation made him an alert and experienced commander. Abdur
Rahman passed the earlier part of his life in luxury and faced adverse
conditions happily and courageously. Before consolidating his position
as a ruler he called the Umayyads and their associates to Spain at his
own expense and offered them high posts and positions according to
their caliber and abilities. Abdur Rahman could put up with trouble and
suffering silently and even his opponents admitted and admired this.

Abdur Rahman had divided his country into six provinces and puta
commander in each of them. Every commander had under him two
administrators and six ministers and each official was assisted by a
Qadi (judge) and other officials. Abdur Rahman would always
consider the welfare of his people. He enacted laws to what brought
prosperity to the masses and granted them freedom to possess
property without fear of interference.

Abdur Rahman was very fond of spréading knowledge and
education. He constructed roads throughout Spain, set up a postal
system and kept horses at every halting point to carry news and
information to the capital from all over the country.

Abdur Rahman did away with the robbers and bandits with a heavy
hand and the Berbers who used to create disturbances every now and
then were kept silent. He would tour extensively around his country

The Spainish Caliphs 79

to assess the situation and gain first hand knowledge of the
rformance of his Governors and officials. Wherever he went he
started welfare schemes for the needy and the masses as a whole.

Abdur Rahman's benevolence was for one and all and everyone was
benefited by it. Although he built mosques and other buildings in
large number to serve as welfare centers throughout the country, he
showed exemplary interest in and fondness for making the capital,
Cordova, the most beautiful and magnificent city. He planted a date
palm tree in the courtyard of his royal palace and it was the first date
palm tree in Spain. He held the scholars and intellectuals in esteem
and he provided the best of education for his sons and ordered them
to take part in all royal and legal affairs.

In order to create in the common people a love for learning he would
organize meetings of poets to recite their poems and he rewarded
them. He personally would often attend these meetings. Regardless of
the luxurious surroundings and abundance of wealth, he never lost
his military character nor did he ever lack in piety and abstinence. The
most suitable spot for building the world famous mosque of Cordova
was owned by the Christians. Abdur Rahman refrained from
acquiring it by force. He accepted it only when the Christians sold it to
him. Furthermore, he allotted to them lands at several other places in
the city to build churches. Abdur Rahman had ail the qualities of head
and heart needed to be a successful king. The day Abdur Rahman
came to the throne, Spain became free from the control of the Eastern
Islamic caliphate. But Abdur Rahman was wise enough not to claim
the caliphate for himself. He included his name in the weekly
addresses only after ten years of his rule. He knew very well that there
was a section in Spain, which disliked the Umayyads and loved the
Abbasids and they recognized the Islamic center of the East only. Had

Abdur Rahman claimed the caliphate for himself a large number of
Muslims would have taken up arms against him. However, he gradually,

brought about the change and turned it in his favor to be called the
caliph of the Muslims and Commander of the Faithful. One historian

said he spoke eloquently and effectively and was very sober, shrewd

and a great administrator. He never liked to pass his time in fun and

sport nor took rest without need. He liked white clothes and ate with

the poor and needy if any such person would turn up at meal times.

80 The History of Islam

Abdur Rahman was one of those great men who brought a nation to
life and changed the course of history.

Hisham bin Abdur Rahman

Since Abdur Rahman was called Caliph, his son-Hisham and his
descendants can be known as Sultan or Caliph.

Birth

Sultan Hisham bin Abdur Rahman was born in Shawwal 139 A.H.
after the entry of his father into Spain. Hisham’s mother, Halal, was
presented as a gift to him by the former ruler Yusuf Fihri after

finalizing a temporary truce. Abdur Rahman martied her after freeing
her and he loved her intensely.

Accession

Hisham became the ruler of Spain at the age of 32 or 33 years of age as
per the will of his father. He had been in Merida as Governor when
his father breathed his last. He ascended the throne there and his
name was reiterated in the Friday sermons throughout Spain. His
Brother Abdullah was in Cordova and he lost no time in occupying
the royal palace and the capital Cordova. His brother Sulaiman was at
the time Governor of Toledo. Hisham marched on Cordova and
arrested Abdullah after a short engagement.

He forgave his brother and gave him a large estate and included him
among his ministers and advisors.

Brother’s Revolt
eS Revolt

Spain was inhabited by people of varied naturé and they could easily
ise in revolt following the death of Abdur Rahman, But the deceased
ruler had broken the back of these elements so violently that they
could not muster courage to take up arms against the new ruler.
However, Hisham’s brothers began to create troubles for him.
Sulaiman, the Governor of Toledo revolted and declared his
Sovereignty. Abdullah on the other hand escaped to his brother

Sulaiman. Sultan Hisham pardoned the fault of his brothers and
expected their return to correct behavior.

The Spainish Caliphs 51

Battle

Ghalib Ghafqi was the minister of Sulaiman in Toledo and had been
very loyal to Abdur Rahman. He advised the two brothers to keep
from rebelling against the center of the government but they became
angry and put him to prison. On being informed of this event, Hisham
wrote to them against the imprisonment of such a loyal and trusted
old servant. Sulaiman and Abdullah turned violent and reacted by
killing Ghalib Ghafqi in the presence of Hisham’s emissary and saying
this was the reply to his letter. In consequence of such a harsh reply,
Sultan Hisham marched to Toledo at the head of a twenty-thousand
man army and the two forces clashed at a little distance from Toledo.
Sulaiman and Abdullah suffered defeat and took refuge in the fort of
Toledo, which was well known for its strength. The fort being hard to
conquer Hisham laid a siege around Toledo. Leaving his son and
Abdullah in Toledo, Sulaiman took a company of soldiers and
marched on Cordova. Abdul Malik, the Governor of Cordova came

‎and greeted Sulaiman with swords and arrows. Sulaiman fled to‏ كلام

‎Murcia and took to plundering. Hearing this Sultan Hisham deputed

‎a Commander’ to continue the siege of Toledo and proceeded to

‎Cordova to keep an eye on the movement of Sulaiman.

‎Brothers pardoned

‎Fed up with the long siege Abdullah entrusted himself to Sultan
Hisham without seeking the safety of his life. Hisham not only forgave
his brother’s fault but also showed him love and respect and allotted
him an estate in Toledo to settie in.

‎Sulaiman collected a large number of men in Murcia. Hisham sent by
young son Umar at the head of an army, which defeated Sulaiman
and drove away the rebels. After wanderings for two years, he sought
‏د‎ forgiveness of Sultan Hisham who not only granted him
Srgiveness but also gave him a respectable position in his. court.
_ man then expressed his desire to settle in Africa. Hisham granted
Permission and purchased his estate in Spain. Sulaiman settled in

‎Affica but took to playing the role of an Abbasid agent and kept the
People of Spain incited against Sultan Hisham.

2 The History of Islam
8 ;

Attack on France

After dealing with his brothers successfully Sultan Hisham led a forty.
thousand-man force against France and conquered the entire south of
France and regained control of Catalonia province. He collected an
unimaginable amount of wealth and possessions from these campaigns.
The Christians of the Pyrenees made an attempt to intercept the
retreating army as they had done with Charlemagne’s army in the past.

Punishing the rebellious Christians

Having reached Cordova in 175 A.H. Sultan Hisham sent his minister
Yusuf bin Bakht to punish the Christians who had established
themselves as an independent force in the hills. He invaded the State
of Asturias and ravaged it thoroughly. Its ruler Bermundo was
arrested. Since the territory was not worthy of living in it was restored
to its ruler in return for his loyalty and tribute.

Construction of the Cordova Mosque

The Muslims received an enormous amount of spoils of war from the
campaign in southern France and the Christian provinces. One-fifth of
it was presented to Sultan Hisham, which amounted to 45 thousand

gold coins. The Sultan spent all of this for the construction of the
Cordova Mosque.

Insurgence in Catafuna put down

During the campaign Abdul Malik, the Governor, issued a strange
order. He had a large number of Christian prisoners from Galicia,
Asturias, Catalonia and south France. Asa price for their liberty, he
Ordered them to demolish the fortifications of Narbonne and carry the
stones to Cordova. They did it with much difficulty and the Sultan

released them all. Those stones were used for building a part of the
eastern wall of the Cordova Mosque. Moreover, the Christian States
were restored to thi

m after they promised to obey the Muslim rule. It

t the Arab chiefs disliked the cold climate of those
Northern hilly states. This is the reason that the Muslim population in
the southern provinces was far larger than in the north, with the result

The Spainish Caliphs 83

that the Christians in the southern part embraced Islam more than in
other parts.

Cordova Mosque completed

Sultan Hisham paid exclusive attention to the completion of the
Cordova Mosque whose foundation was laid by his father Abdur
Rahman bin Muawi'yah. Sultan Hisham appointed his son, Hakam as
the Govemor of Toledo in 175 A.H. The bridge, over the Guadalquivir
river (from the Arabic Wadi al-Kabir) in Cordova, was rebuilt in 176
AH. The bridge was first constructed by the governer Samh during the
caliphate of Umar bin Abdul Aziz. Sultan Hisham made it wider,
stronger and more beautiful. Abbasid agents kept making secret plans
in Spain. Sulaiman, the brother of Sultan Hisham kept misleading both
the Muslims and the Christians in Africa (Morocco) and Charlemagne in
the north had established friendly relations with Caliph Harun Rashid
of Baghdad against Sultan Hisham and the new-born Christian State of
Galicia began to show signs of revolt. Sultan Hisham sent Abdul Karim
bin Abdul Wahid bin Mughith to Galicia without delay. Muslim troops
reached Galicia and returned only after punishing the insurgents and
making them obey the Muslim rule. Meanwhile, the Berbers gathered
together and took up arms against Sultan Hisham. Abdul Qadir bin
Aban bin Abdullah was sent to deal with the insurgents who killed a
large number of Berbers and drove away the rest. The event took place
in 178 A.H. The people of Galicia rose against the Muslim rule once
again with the French supporting them. Sultan Hisham sent Abdul
Malik bin Abdul Wahid bin Mughith ai the head of an army with the
instructions to make inroads into France after punishing the people of
Galicia and to meet the Muslim troops advancing into France from the
other side. Sultan Hisham -had sent another army to France. Being
informed of the advance of the Muslim forces, the Christian chief deserted
the city and kept fleeing ahead of the invading troops. The Mustim
commander then tumed to France, he met the other Muslim force and
Tavaged most of the French cities and forts and retumed victoriously.

Death

Sultan Hisham bin Abdur Rahman died in Safar, 180 A.H. at the age
of 40 years and 4 months after ruling for 7 years and some months.

84 The History of Islarn

Assessment of Hisham’s Life

Abdur Rahman had spent 80 thousand dinars on the foundation of the
Cordova Mosque, while Sultan Hisham expended one hundred ang
sixty thousand dinars for the construction and completion of the
mosque. Hisham would, like his father, wear white but very simple
cheap garments. He was fond of hunting but not at the cost of the
state's administration and_his religious duties. He had abandoned all
this during his last days. He always kept his court open for the poor
and the needy and they | could find. access to him without any
hindrance. He sacrificed even his rest and sleep for the peace and
welfare of his people and felt pleasure and satisfaction in patrolling
the streets’ and lanes of the city to be acquainted with the problems and
sufferings of his subjects. What was charged asa fine from offenders
was spent on public welfare instead of being placed in the public
treasury. If any of the Muslims were taken captive by the Christians,
they were liberated by paying their ransom from the public treasury.

During the period of Sultan Hisham, rich people of Cordova built
beautiful and magnificent. buildings, which added to the beauty of the
city. Although academic centers and assemblies were strong during the
tenure of Abdur Rahman, Sultan Hisham further promoted leaming by
declarit.g Arabic compulsory in all Madrasas. The result was that the
Christians of Spain learned Arabic and became able to learn the Qur’an
and Islam directly and they accepted Islam in large numbers. Now the
Muslims were no longer a terror to them, they became so close that the
Muslims began to marry Christian women: And the Christians chose to
dress like the Muslims. In habits, traits and style of life Sultan Hisham
resembled Umar bin Abdul Aziz to a great extent. The entire population
of Spain addressed him as “Sultan, The Just.”

Sultan Hisham was more pious and religious-minded than his father.
Abdur Rahman. While Abdur Rahman's court was dominated by
religious and spiritual men, Muslim jurists and scholars grew in
Power and influence during the reign of Sultan Hisham.

It was during his reign that the four different schools of Muslim jurists
were brought into practice. Imam Malik bin Anas was very famous in

The Spainish Caliphs 85

Madinah at that time and his doctrine was largely practiced by the

ple of Hijaz. A group of Muslims from Spain came to imam Malik,
stayed with him for sometime and then returned to Spain. Being
acquainted with the style and functioning of Sultan Hisham, he
expressed his love and respect for him. He used to say that Hisham
bin Abdur Rahman alone deserved to be called Caliph of the Muslims.
He was right. In devotion and piety, wisdom and bravery, fighting
qualities and leadership Hisham was like his father but in devotion
and practice he even excelled his father.

These utterances of mam Malik caused irritation among the Abbasids
and they, in tum, began to put the Imam in trouble. During the early
period of Hisham some Muslim jurists of Spain like Firaun bin Abbas,
Isa bin Dinar and Sayeed bin Abi Hind met Imam Malik on the
occasion of Hajj. They benefited enormously from the company of the
Imam and they returned to Spain and began to preach his legal
system. Under the influence of their preaching Abu Abdullah Zaid,
the Chief Justice of Spain also accepted Imam Malik’s doctrine. Sultan
Hisham too became a devotee of the Imam and ordered the treasurer
to bear all expenses of those who wanted to go to Imam Malik for
learning Figh and Hadith. Now ail legal judgments were delivered
according to Imam Malik’s school of law.

The Crown Prince

Sultan Hisham appointed his son, Hakam as his crown prince and
took the oath of allegiance for Hakam from the courtiers. On this
occasion Hisham said to Hakam:

“You must not make any difference between the poor and the
rich, Treat your subordinates with kindness but punish any
atrocious governor heavily. Keep full control over your forces
and see that these forces are used for serving the country not
destroying it; fulfill your promises; make every effort to keep
your subjects happy for angry people pose a threat to the
Stability of the administration.

Never ignore the farmer. Be careful that their Crops are not
destroyed nor their meadows. Behave well and the people wilt

86 The History of Islam

invoke blessings on you. In the case that you put this advice
into practice you will be put in the category of the most
successful kings.”

Sultan Hisham passed his whole tenure fighting and invading his
enemies. But his religious, moral, academic and social-deeds lead us to
disbelieve that his military character was the most dominant. The
reason behind the foundation of Umayyad dynasty in Spain and its
survival for three hundred years was that its founder was Abdur
Rahman and his successor was Hisham. Even though Hisham had a
short tenure of seven years and eight month his son, Hakam became
an able and sensible ruler.

Hakam bin Hisham

Hakam bin Hisham succeeded his father in 180 A.H. But he had to
begin with insurgencies and revolts.

Sulaiman and Abdullah Rebel

Sultan Hisham‘s brother Sulaiman had been staying in Africa
(Morocco). He was engaged in creating disturbances in Spain.
Abdullah, another brother of Hisham was then stationed in an estate
adjoining Toledo. With the news of Hisham’s demise Abdullah went
to his brother Sulaiman. The latter had a large number of Berbers and
bandits at his command. The two brothers decided to capture
Cordova and become the rulers of Spain. Sulaiman was already in
contact with Charlemagne, the King of France and other frontier
chiefs. {t was suggested that Abdullah should make a personal visit to
Charlemagne and invite him to invade Spain and lend support to the
revolt they were going to launch. Charlemagne agreed to the proposal
and sent his son at the head of a strong army. Abdullah then 6
back, instigated the Governor of Toledo to rise in revolt and he captured
the city, Sulaiman on the other hand reached Valencia province ard
declared his sovereignty as the true successor of the dynastic rule.

Close on the heels of Sulaiman and Abdullah's revolt the son of
Charlemagne set his foot on the plane of Spain after crossing the
Pyrenees seized a number of cities and besieged Barcelona. The

The Spainish Caliphs 87

Governor of Barcelona offered his allegiance to Charlemagne but
refused the Christian army‘s entry into the fort. Sulaiman and
Abdullah on the other hand captured important central cities and
rovinces. The Christians launched a massive attack on northern
pain and ravaged it. Spain was about to slip out of Muslim hands.

Defensive Measures of Hakam

Sultan Hakam bin Hisham, first of all, took action against Toledo and
besieged it. Abdullah rose in defense. Hakam was still engaged there
when he heard of the Christian invasion of Spain. Considering the
Christian attack more dangerous he raised his siege of Toledo and
rushed to the north. Having heard of Hakam’s arrival Charlemagne’s
forces vacated Barcelona and its suburbs in haste and made no halt
until they reached France. Sultan Hakam then turned to Huesca and
Lerida but the Christian forces fled the territory. Hakam after getting
the Christians out of Spain marched ahead and ravaged the southern
part of France and wrested Narbonne from the Christians. Having
heard of Hakam’s engagement in France Abdullah. and Sulaiman
began dislodging Hakam’s Governors and occupying Spanish cities.
The two brothers marched ahead conquering city after city and met at
the river Tagus. At this point, they discontinued their march. They
began to wait for the consequences of Hakam’s campaigns in France.
They had a plan to occupy alll of Spain in case Hakam was killed in
France. Hakam’s Governors were also waiting restlessly the result of
his hasty invasion of France. They were mentally prepared to obey
Sulaiman and Abdullah in case Hakam was killed in France for; after
all, they were the sons of Abdur Rahman. But awe-stricken and
frightened French forces, instead of facing Hakam took to their heels
everywhere. Hakam returned to Spain to face his enemies in Spain
instead of consolidating his position in the occupied territories of France.

End of Sulaiman and Abdullah

ens Ubaidah bin Umairah the Governor of Toledo Sulaiman and
triers a moved ahead to stop Hakam on the way. Hakam’s
def Phant march had already frustrated their ambition. They faced

‘eat and fled to the eastern mountain range of Spain. Sultan Hakam

88 The History of Islan,

deputed his Commander Amr bin Yusuf to besiege Toledo ang he
himself marched in pursuit of Sulaiman and Abdullah. After several
months of hide-and-seek campaigns, they came face to face on the
plane of Murcia. During fierce fighting, an arrow hit Sulaiman and he
dropped dead on the spot. With the end of Sulaiman, his forces fled the
field along with Abdullah who took refuge in Valencia and sought
forgiveness from Hakam. Granting the petition of his uncle immediately
Hakam asked him to send his sons Asbah and Qasim as ransom and
go to Tabkhiv in Morocco to settle there. Abdullah carried out the
conditions without loss of time. Hakam treated both his cousins with
love. He married his daughter to the elder and appointed the younger
as the Governor of Merida city. At a time when Sultan Hakam was
chasing Sulaiman and Abdullah, Umar bin Yusuf conquered Toledo
and killed Ubaidah bin Umayr. He later made his son Yusuf bin Umar
the Governor of Toledo and appeared before the Sultan with the head
of Ubaidah. Following this Saragossa rose in revolt, Umar bin Yusuf
went there and punished the insurgents. The series of revolts, which
started in 181 A. H., came to an end in 184 A. EL and peace and safety
prevailed over the whole of Spain.

An Organized Conspiracy of the Christians

It has already been mentioned that the Christian forces could not
withstand Hakam’s invasion of France and fled for safety. Three years
of Hakam’s engagements with his insurgent relatives offered the
Christians an opportunity to look into their weaknesses and find out
ways and means of guarding themselves against Muslim invasions in
the future. They had the state of Asturias in the western part of the
Pyrenees joining the border of France, Galicia and the Bay of Biscay,
another very strong State that was founded by the chiefs of the Goths
after their expulsion from Spain. A large part of France was ruled over
by Charlemagne. Moreover, rebellious Christians dominated the
Population of Barcelona, Aragon, Catalonia, and Galicia.

Finding Sultan Hakam preoccupied with the task of putting down
internal rebellions the Christians held a large scale consultative
meeting in Talur city. As a result of these deliberations, a massive
united front came into being against the Muslims. Waves of peace and

The Spainish Caliphs 89
friendship rose to bring together Christian rulers who had been
opposing one another.

New State Founded against the Muslims

Charlemagne, the King of France formed a small State on a piece of

land in the south France and appointed a chief named Borrell as its

ruler. The State was named “Gothic March” and one of their chiefs

was appointed as the ruler with the instruction that he should make
the Pyrenees impossible to pass for the Muslims and keep ever ready
to stop any advancing march. Strong forts were built at different
places at the foot of the Pyrenees and friendly relations with the
Governors of northern Spain were established with a view to set them
against their ruler. The Caliph of Baghdad was kept informed of their
intentions and preparations and Caliph Harun Rasheed also showed
encouraging friendly gestures by sending them precious gifts, The
new Gothic State also occupied the eastern and southern parts of the
Pyrenees and the Christians of northern Spain extended all help and
facilities. In short, “Gothic March” rose as a strong State on the pattern
of Asturias and the bishops. declared all-out help and support to it a
religious obligation. Disgruntled Christians from various States came
to settle in the new State and this deserted territory turned into a
strong, well-populated and splendid piece of land.

Treacherous Muslim Governors encouraged

Hakam had hardly won peace during the last days of 184 A.H. when
the Christians stormed northern Spain in 185 A-H. And at sucha
crucial moment, the Governors of the northern cities lent support to
Charlemagne considering him a friend and ally of the Caliph of
Baghdad. Moreover, the spies employed in Spain by the court of
Baghdad played a very active role in setting the governors against
Sultan Hakam who refused to obey Hakam and accepted the King of
France as their ruler.

Similarly, the Governors of Galicia and Biscay including the ruler of
Saragossa declared their allegiance to the Christian rulers and rose
against Hakam. But, despite these disturbances Sultan Hakam did not
move from Cordova for the atmosphere in the capital was not at all

90 ___ The History of Islam

peaceful. However, he sent his commander Ibrahim to save the
northern part of the country. Ibrahim invaded Galicia and Saragossa
first and wrested the territories after fierce fighting. The rebel
governors fled to Charlemagne along with the Christian forces and
common people and persuaded him to invade Spain. Encouraged by
the Muslim governors, consultations were held in France. It was
decided that the port of Barcelona should also be annexed to the
“Gothic March” State. The Governor of Barcelona, Zaid was already in
correspondence with King Charlemagne and Count Louis and had
offered his allegiance to them. Thus, in 188 A.H., Christian forces
along with the troops of Gothic March reached Barcelona plundering
the northeastern parts of Spain. But Zaid shut the doors and refused to
hand over Barcelona to the Christians. Thereupon, the Christian forces
laid a siege around Barcelona and tightened: it gradually. Since Zaid
received no help from any quarter, the Christians occupied Barcelona
on the condition that the Muslim population would be allowed to
vacate the territory safely. A Christian Governor took over the

Govermorship of the city. The newly conquered territory became a

part of the Gothic March State. Now the Islamic forces had to face two

fronts in northern Spain, the State of Asturias and Galicia on one hand

and the Gothic March and Barcelona on the other. Both the fronts
were receiving help from France.

In 189 A.H., rebel Muslim Governors of Spain persuaded the Christians
to invade Toledo. The Christians marched from Barcelona and the
northern cities to Toledo. Yusuf bin Umar attempted to-defend the city.
They, at last, surrounded Toledo. The Christian population of Toledo
city and its suburbs extended all help and facilities to arrest Yusuf bin
Umar and capture Toledo. When the news of the fall of Toledo reached
Umar bin Yusuf, the,father of Yusuf bin Umar, he marched from
Saragossa to Toledo and conquered it and he freed Yusuf driving away
the Christians, Although the Christians of Toledo deserved heavy

punishment from Umar bin Yusuf, he, in view of the demand of the

situation, accepted their excuses and restored Peace to them.

Causes of Opposition to Hakam

Sultan Hakam was a brave

young man but right from the day he came .
10 the throne he remained

engaged in constant fighting. Some parts of

The Spainish Caliphs 91

Spain slipped out of his hands. The Christians were getting stronger
and the Muslims were losing ground. Hakam’s relatives, on the other
hand, left no stone unturned in opposing him militarily. They resorted
to secret planning and instigating the Christians against Hakam.
Moreover, the Christian world had become united to weaken the
Muslim rule. The antagonistic activities of the Abbasids were
encouraging Hakam’s relatives and the hostile Christians at the same
time against him. The religious scholars and guides of the Malik
School had also turned against Hakam. They were quite influential
during the period of Hisham but Hakam had cut them down to size.
Since they still had their influence over the masses their criticism of
Hakam’s style of governance made an important difference. They
started issuing verdicts against Hakam and he could not withstand
their onslaught. All these factors jointly made the hostile Christians
very bold and strong eriough to make a challenge to the Muslim rule
in Spain.

The religious leaders decided to carry out their plans in 190 A.H. The
Chief Justice, Yahya bin Yahya and the jurist Talut assembled and
held consultations regarding the deposition of Hakam. Following this,
a deputation headed by Yahya called on Qasim bin Abdullah, the
cousin and son-in-law of Hakam and expressed the desire to bring
him to the throne of Spain. Qasim asked them to let him know the
names of those whose support could be relied upon. He then asked |
them to turn up the next day with the list of such powerful and
reliable persons who would be able to depose Hakam. Qadi Yahya,
along with his party went to Qasim bin Abdullah who had already
had Sultan Hakam hiding behind a screen. When Qadi Yahya began
to dictate the names to the clerk of Qasim. The clerk of Hakam also
began to write down those names sitting beside Hakam. Since
Hakam’s clerk was afraid of the revelation of his own name, he was
mn the paper without writing anything. But
writing sound. Thus with the very thought

the pen began to produce a t
that somebody else was also writing down those names behind the
ne by one. But many of them

screen they started leaving the room 0 y ١
were caught and killed. Following this, the opponents raised their
standard of revolt openly. They lived in localities towards the south of

simply running his pen o

92 _ The History of islam

the river Guadalquivir (Wadi al-Kabir). They surrounded the palace of
Sultan Hakam but Hakam put down the revolt after a short and
bloody encounter.

The same year, in 190 A.H. Sultan Hakam established peaceful and
friendly relations with the newly formed sovereign Idrisid State in
Morocco. Thus, the freedom of the Idrisid rule from the Baghdad
caliphate proved a blessing for Spain and Sultan Hakam made no
delay in extending the hand of friendship towards the Moroccan rule.
Shortly after curtailing the influence of the religious leaders of
Cordova and forming friendly relations with the Moroccan rule,
Sultan Hakam turned to the northern provinces.

Eradication of Rebels

After 2 good deal of thinking Sultan Hakam arrived at the conclusion
that Toledo was the center of all the Christian conspiracies. Because of
being strong and tumultuous, the Christians of Toledo had become the
focus of Christian as well as Muslim attention. Sultan Hakam held
consultations with Umar bin Yusuf and as per his advice, he replaced
his son Yusuf bin Umar in Toledo. Taking over the administration of
Toledo Umar bin Yusuf began to show favor and kindness to the
people of Toledo. After winning their confidence, the new Governor
told some of the nobles that the Umayyad dynasty must be dislodged
from power. The people of Toledo expressed great joy at this and
promised their whole-hearted support to the plan. After knowing the
minds of the citizens, Umar suggested the construction of a strong fort
adjoining Toledo as the first step in the way of destroying the
Umayyad rule. With control of sucha fort, Sultan Hakam would not
be able to besiege Toledo. This proposal added much to the jubilation
of the people and they contributed largely to the fund. Shortly after
the construction of the fort, the frontier Governor, according to their
plan, sought military help from Sultan Hakam against Christian
threats. Hakam sent his son Abdur Rahman at the head of a huge
army, When the force reached Toledo, Umar bin Yusuf came out to
Breet it and had the prince stay in the new fort as an honorable guest.
Umar asked the people of Toledo to show their hospitality to Abdur
Rahman, the crown Prince to win his heart and make him careless

The Spainish Caliphs 93

about them. They liked the suggestion, and all those who were willing
to put an end to the Umayyad dynasty sought permission to appear
before the crown prince to offer their salutation. The prince granted
them permission with pleasure and called them all at a fixed time.
When all the corrupt elements entered the fort, they were all caught
and put to death. Their corpses were thrown into a trench dug for this
purpose, which was leveled with earth. In this way, all sorts of disorder
and disturbances came to an end in Toledo. Others also lost heart in
making a revolt in view of the consequences of these antagonists.

Skirmishes with the Christians

After getting rid of the hostile elements in Toledo, Hakam sent a small
company against the Christians who were in occupation of northern
Spain up to Barcelona. He did not choose to launch any forceful attack
with the result that fighting between the Muslims and the Christians
lingered on for seven or eight years. During this period, both the
parties tasted victories. Hakam by this way provided the Christians of
Gothic March, Asturias and Galicia an opportunity to vent their desire
for military exercises on the battlefield with a minimized impact. He
could not use another strategy because he could not trust the people of
Spain.

Fresh Recruiting Drive

During this period Sultan Hakam made concerted efforts to build a
strong military force. He, very cautiously, recruited those Christians
who had settled in the southern territories of Spain and had nothing to
do with the insurgent Christians of the north. Thus, the Christians of
the south were considered more loyal and reliable than the Muslims of
doubtful nature. Since the recruited Christian forces were not enough
to keep the entire of Spain under contro] and crush the insurgents, he
started purchasing slaves and prisoners from Abyssinia, Middle
Africa, Asia Minor and other Asian countries. Now he had a strong
slave-based force. Since Arabic was unknown to these soldiers they
were called non-Arab and they knew nothing except to obey and fight
for their master and ruler. They. could neither establish friendly
telations with others nor enter into any secret planning against the

94 ___ The History of islam

administration. Sultan Hakam was the first ruler to devise - sucha
means to keep his rule safe and strong. Later, the Ayyubid dynasty
followed in the footsteps of Hakam and in this way the Mamluks of
Egypt founded a strong rule. Being satisfied with the performance and
fighting capabilities of the newly built force Sultan Hakam turned to
deating with the insurgent Christians of the northern territories and
invaded the French. However, internal insurgencies had not yet ended.

Asbah bin Abdullah, the ruler of Merida, led by some misunderstanding,
took up arms against Hakam. Asbah bin Abdullah was the cousin and
brother-in-law of Sultan Hakam. Hakam himself rose to face the
offence and arrested him but Hakam’s sister removed the

misunderstanding and gained liberty for her husband. He was then
forgiven and allowed to live in Cordova.

Malkites’ Opposition

The Maliki religious scholars raised their heads once again in 198 A.H.
When the Sultan began to build his force out of the Christians and the
non-Arabs, the Muslim religious leaders began to issue verdicts against
the new policy of the Sultan and held it a curse on Cordova. The last
conspiracy against Hakam was hatched under the leadership of Qadi
Yahya. Since the people of Spain held him in high esteem, Hakam
neither charged nor punished him. But he did not mend his ways and
kept misleading the Muslim religious leaders and their followers
against the administration with the result the people of Cordova hated
the non-Arabs and would kill them if one were found alone.

Flames of Antagonism reach the Royal Palace

One day a non-Arab came into a clash with a 1 1
this news, all the Malkites liv; with a Malkite supporter. With

The Spainish Caliphs 95

violent and disorderly situation. The Sultan replied, “Foolish one had
I not used oil how could the rebels have known that it was the head of
a king while cutting it off?.”

Hakam’s Presence of Mind

Historians have quoted this narrative to establish the firmness of his
mind in such a treacherous situation. He then called his cousin Asbah
and ordered him to go out and set the southern locality on fire. Asbah
left the siege and sent word to a military camp of Cordova to go to the
southern locality fully armed and set fire to that locality. Meanwhile a
‘force from the military camp arrived at the scene. When the insurgents
besieging the royal palace noticed flames and columns of smoke rising
from their locality, they rushed to save theif burning houses. Taking
advantage of the situation Sultan Hakam hurried to the spot at the
head of his bodyguards, ‘while Asbah bin Abdullah joined him from
another side and put many of them to the sword. Following a large-
scale massacre, he ordered the killing to stop and start catching the

- culprits. The Royal forces from other camps also appeared on the
scene and captured thousands of rebels. ١

Exile of Malkites

Taking stock of the situation Sultan Hakam issued orders for the
Malkites to leave the territories of Cordova and its suburbs.. However,
the Sultan pardoned Qadi Yahya for his faults once again with the
purpose of benefiting from his wide knowledge and erudition. It
looked rather strange that Qadi Yahya was allowed to join the royal
court and become Hakam’s trusted adviser. About eight thousand
exiled Malkites having wives and children with them showed an
interest in going to Morocco to settle there. The ruler of Morocco, Idris
welcomed them to settle in the city of Fez and add to its beauty.
Fifteen thousand of them reached Alexandria (Egypt) on board ship
and occupied the territory but they were driven away from there too.
They later occupied Carat Island and founded their tule, which lasted
for about a century.

Hazm bin Wahab revolted in Beja but was defeated and he sought
forgiveness and Sultan Hakam pardoned him.

96 ____ The History of Islam

Invasion of France

Twenty years had passed since Hakam’s enthronement and the whole
period had been spent in putting down revolts and he could not, .
therefore, find time to invade the Christians. Finding the situation
relatively peaceful, Sultan Hakam sent a force headed by Abdul
Karim towards the north to attack the Christians. He led the force
straight to France and took it by storm. The expedition was dispatched
to France in 200’ A.H. Sultan Hakam and his commanders had
conunitted a blunder by keeping their invasions confined to
Charlemagne’s armies. They almost always ignored the Gothic March
and never tried. to wipe it out or reduce its size. They - remained
satisfiéd with, the submissive attitude of the newly formed Christian
State. They so often invaded! France. to gain Permanent peace by
subjugating it to their rule. Moreovér, the hilly States ‘algo cregted
trouble: for Sultan Hakam by joining hands with the king of France.

A few years Sater, Commander. Abdul Karim returned from France

safe and sound, His campaign was successful and the French were

thoroughly Punished and beaten. But nothing was done against the
States of Gothic

March and Asturias. The Muslims conquered France

hy sections of the country.

The Spainish Caliphs 97

Disasters of Famine and Drought

Sultan Hakam enjoyed a period of peace and order after 203 A.H.
because there was no serious force to invade Spain or to create
disorder and disturbances in the country. However, at the time when
everything seemed all right, famine and drought overtook Spain. The
famine proved utterly disastrous and distressing and the afflicted part
of the country was overwhelmed by a spell of theft and armed
robbery. Sultan Hakam faced the situation with his usual courage and
determination. He opened houses for the destitute in every city and
town and arranged food supplies from abroad. He also deployed
special police and military squads to keep the situation under control.
In most cases, Hakam himself rose to silence the disturbing elements.
In short, he served his people so kindly and gracefully during the
terrible famine that they began to love him, and the waves of hate
raised by the Muslim religious leaders against him subsided.

Death of Hakam

Sultan Hakam is so often described as a man of the sword anda
bloodthirsty Muslim ruler. He killed many, no. doubt, but it isan
undeniable fact that they all deserved nothing but death. Sultan
Hakam died on 25 Dhul Qada 206 A.H. at the age of 52 years and
some months and left behind twenty sons and twenty daughters. His
son Abdur Rahman HI succeeded him.

Assessment of Hakam’s Character

Sultan Hakam was brave, benevolent and far-sighted. He was an
enemy of the hypocrites and subversives but he was very generous
and gracious to his friends. He valued religious scholars and spiritual
leaders highly and was a great patron of the poets. He remained firm
and determined on the battlefield and forgave faults whenever he
expected something good from it. He was a great and magnificént
king of Spain. His devotion and sense of divinity can be judged from
the fact that once, in a state of violent anger he ordered the
amputation of his servant’s hand. Ziyad bin Abdur Rahman, a great
scholar came in and said addressing Sultan Hakam “Malik bin Anas

98 The History of Islam

has narrated from the Prophet % that whoever controls himself ina
state of violent anger will be given peace by Allah Almighty on the
Day of Judgment”. As these words were uttered, the Sultan’s wrath
disappeared and the servant was forgiven.

Sultan Hakam’s 27-year reign was fraught with strife? turbulence and /
insurrection. He boldly faced these situations, which were not of his
own creation. Had there been on the throne of Spain a man of unstable
mind and infirm determination the Umayyad dynasty would have
been wiped out of Spain.

Abdur Rahman II

Sultan Abdur Rahman II was born in Toledo in Shaban 176 A.H. and
succeeded his father in 206 A.H. At the time of his accession, there

was an atmosphere of peace on the surface but he had to deal with
internal disturbances created by his own relatives.

Opposition from Family Members

As already mentioned, Abdullah, the uncle of Sultan Hakam had settled
in Morocco. Although old at the time of the demise of Sultan Hakam, he
reached Spain and proclaimed himself as the ruler of the country.
Abdul'ah’s three sons were then the governors of three different

‎of Spain. He had therefore, expected active support from his‏ كعم م امام

‎sons but that was his sheer folly. Royal forces took on Abdullah who

‎fled to Valencia after being beaten thoroughly. His sons sided with

‎Abdur Rahman 11. and asked his father not to oppose the Sultan any
More. At last Abdullah sought forgiveness from his grandson Abdur
Rahman

‎IL, who not only pardoned him but appointed him as the ruler
of Murcia where he died after ruling for three or four years.

‎Ali bin Nafe honored

‎In 206 AH, the very first year of Abdur Rahman’s accession, Ali bin

‎Nafe, the disciple of Ibrahim ‘Musali and known. as Farabi came to
Spain. He was well versed in-music and was an erudite scholar of
Arabic

‎disciplines. Sultan Hakam had invited him to visit Spain for he
Was not given proper recognition in Syria and Iraq. But the Sultan had

The Spainish Caliphs 99

died before Ali bin Nafe reached Spain. When Sultan Abdur Rahman
][ became aware of the standing invitation, he issued orders to all his
Governors to accord a fitting ovation to the visiting guest of honor
and present him slaves, horses and precious gifts. Thus, the well

renown scholar and musician arrived in Cordova and became close to
the Sultan.

Reforms in Mode of Life

Ali bin Nafe brought about many strange reforms in the life style and
mode of living which gained wide popularity very quickly. With his
efforts, water pipes were set up all over Cordova and then in other
cities of Spain. He also originated many sumptuous foods and
fashionable garments. His inventions and creations became popular
not only in Spain but found popularity with the Europeans as well.
Eating with a knife and fork is one of his inventions and the
Europeans learned it from the Muslims of Spain. Even though Ali bin
Nafe was very close -to the Sultan, he never interfered in political
affairs. He kept his attention exclusively focused, on reforms in the
mode of living. Due to this position, he had no one oppose him. The
people of Spain learned from him not only the ways and modes of
living but music too. In other words, Ali bin Nafe made an all out
effort to change the martial life of the Muslims of Spain into pleasure-
loving Muslims fond of a luxurious life.

Progress of Malkite School of thought in Spain

It has already been mentioned that Qadi Yahya bin Yahya Maliki had
launched a very serious revolt in Cordova during the rule of Hakam.
As a result of which one-fifth of the southern locality had become
under populated because twenty to twenty five thousand people were
exiled from Spain. Later the Qadi joined the courtiers and advisers of
Sultan Hakam. Following the accession of Sultan Abdur Rahman II he
had been so close to him that he once offered him the post of Chief
Justice but the latter refused to accept it, with the result that he was
Considered higher than the Chief justice. The people of Spain were
immensely devoted to him and he had the last word on religious
Matters. The Qadi had penned a-large number of books and had the

100 The History of Istan

distinction of being the student of Imam Malik. He learned Islamic
sciences from the Imam for some years. During the rule of Sultan
Abdur Rahman, he brought about the complete change in his style
and function. He was now making full use of his abilities, His
recommendations and intercessions were never rejected” As a result of
this, all those religious scholars who wanted a post in the judicia;
would bring Malkite doctrine into practice resulting in the influence of
the doctrine all over Spain. Since Sultan Abdur Rahman II was deeply
involved in the political and administrative affairs of his country, he
had gained a lot of experience and was able to take cautious steps in
the matters related to the religious scholars and spiritual leaders.

1

Rebellion Curbed

At the time of the accession of Abdur Rahman I the entire northern
territory of Spain including the southern coast of the Bay of Biscay and
the southern foot of the Pyrenees were under the occupation of the
Christians. But all these Christian chiefs paid tribute to the Islamic
State and accepted the supremacy of the Cordova court, which was
satisfied with that much. Barcelona too was under the possession of
the Christians and a Viceroy of the Gothic March State ruled there. A
part of the eastern and northern coast of Spain was under the
occupation of the Christians. Asturias State had now stretched up to
Leon and Galicia and the new city of Castile had become its capital-
Although the Muslims did not want to do away with this State, they
followed a policy of keeping it terrified so that it would never be able
to invade Spain with the support of France. The city of Ibira lay to the
north where the Governor was appointed by Cordova.

When the Sovernor of Itbira committed atrocities on the people and
entered into secret Planning with the Christians, Sultan Hakam had
him killed and seized his possessions. However, a shoit time after
Sultan Hakam passed away, on the accession of Abdur Rahman II the
frontier Chrigtians drove the force and the people back to Cordova.
They made a demand for all their seized possessions saying that they
all belonged to the People, which were forcibly taken by the governor
killed by Hakam. These people rose to protest at the gate of the royal
Palace of Cordova in 207 A.H. Royal guards were sent to punish them

The Spainish Caliphs 101

with the result that many of them fell fighting and the rest fled for
safety. In this way, the Christians made an opportunity to create more
disturbances on the borders.

The same year, 207 A.H. Modaria and Yamania, two Arab tribes
clashed in Tadmir. Royal forces were sent to keep peace. On the return
of the royal forces, they again resumed fighting, and once again the
voyal forces were sent. Their fighting lingered on for about 7 years.
The Arab character of the days of Ignorance once again came to the
fore. in 208 A.H., the Christian States of Asturias and Galicia refused
to pay tribute and rose in open revolt. They later made inroads into
Islamic territories and plundered some cities. Sultan Abdur Rahman II
sent his renowned commander Abdul Karim bin Abdul Wahid bin
Mughith at the head of an army and he drove the Christians away
after beating them repeatedly. Abdul Karim pulled down Christian
forts and forced them to obey and resume paying tribute to the Islamic
State. After attaining success in his mission, Abdul Karim came back.
Again, the same force under the same Commander was dispatched to
Barcelona from where news of war preparations was received. The
Royal Army conquered the entire territory and forced the enemy to

flee to the hills. However, the conquered territory was restored to
them after their total submission.

Emissary of the Caesar of Constantinople

In 209 A.H., an emissary from the Caesar of Constantinople called on
Abdur Rahman II to establish friendly relations with Spain. Baghdad
already had cordial relations with France and the latter was constantly
persuaded to invade Spain. Cordova knew it well.

Constantinople was under constant attack and had, therefore, sought
the friendship of the Sultan of Spain because of his courage and
bravery. Sultan Abdur Rahman was naturally sympathetic to
Constantinople for Caesar was an enemy of Baghdad. Abdur Rahman
accorded a warm welcome to the envoy from Constantinople. The
envoy presented him precious gifts and tried his utmost to convince
Abdur Rahman that he with a massive military power at his back
would be able to take back the lost territories

of Syria, Iraq, and
Arabia from the Abbasids. Abdur Rahman acte

d very. wisely and

102 . The History of Islam

promised that he could help Caesar only when he was having peace a
home. However, he sent back the envoy with many precious gift,
along with his emissary, Yahya Ghazalah.

Abdur Rahman’s Sense of Islamic Honor

Yahya al-Ghazalah went to Constantinople and inspected every.
thing carefully and returned after assuring Caesar of Abdur
Rahman's friendship. But, in fact, Sultan Abdur Rahman was not in
favor of helping a Christian ruler against a Muslim Caliph.
Although a little military and monetary help to Caesar could not
make any difference to Abdur Rahman 11 but his sense of Islamic
honor did not allow him to do so.

Portuguese Revolt

The same year the Christians of the southwest territories of Spain,
now called Portugal rose in revolt under the leadership of the people
of Merida city. Ubaidullah bin Abdullah was sent to punish the rebels
who returned in 210 A.H. after beating them and pulling down their
fortifications. They again raised their heads and Ubaidullah had to go
there once again to bring the situation under control. Behind these
revolts were the clergymen who would come from Galicia and
Castillia to generate hostile feeling among the citizens. The Christian
priests knew, well that their advantage lay in internal troubles and
infighting among the Muslims. The People of Merida were crossing all
limits in their hostile moves against the Muslim rule. They had
expelled the Governor from the city and had fought with the Royal
forces twice. When Sultan Abdur Rahman ordered to throw the stones
of the demolished fortifications of Merida into the river, the people
once again rose in revolt, expelled the Governor again and seized the
city. They rebuilt the fortifications and readied themselves against
attacks. ft is amazing that the Muslims formed the greater part of the
insurgents and Mahmud bin Abdul Jabbar, a Muslim was theii\head.
Royal Commanders repeatedly advanced into their territory but failed
to eradicate the hostile activities.

At last, Sultan Abdur Rahman himself led his army against Merida in
218 A.H. No sooner had he besieged the city when he had to return to

The Spainish Caliphs 103

Cordova. However, the city was conquered in 221 A.H. and a governor
was sent there. The revolt of the people of Merida was the worst ever in
Spain. The city had forty thousand armed warriors and received help
from Asturias and Galicia. After the conquest of the city in 220 A.H.
Mahmud bin Abdul Jabbar fled Merida to take refuge in the state of
Asturias where he died serving as the garrison commander. .

There were two main causes that set the Christians against the
Muslims. First, the Christian wives of the Muslims who were left free
to practice their faith and second, the Christians of the northern States
who were supposed to be sympathetic to the Muslims and who had
free access to Muslim circles could propagate their faith easily and
openly. 16 was once rumored that the new tax imposed by Sultan
Abdur Rahman II in addition to Zakat was an attempt on his part to
capture the public’s wealth and property. This poisonous propaganda
enraged the Muslims and this rage and dissatisfaction led to the worst
consequences. ;

Revolt in Toledo

Since the curbing of revolts in Merida took time and the Muslim rebels
had put the royal force to much difficulty, antagonistic elements once
again began to raise their heads. Toledo, where the Christians were in
majority, took up arms under the leadership of Hashim Zarab, and the
Muslims joined them as well. They jointly expelled the governor and
consolidated their position in Toledo. Seeing Hashim in a commanding
position another frontier Governor Muhammad bin Wasim also joined
him. Sultan Abdur Rahman II sent his son Umayyah at the head of a
huge army but his campaign proved fruitless. Umayyah came out of
Toledo and the retreating Royal Force clashed with the rebels. The Royal
force lay in ambush and when the people of Toledo passed through the
area the Royal Force launched a surprise attack and they after incurring
héavy losses, fled back to Toledo and tock refuge in their fort. The city
however, could not he conquered despite repeated sieges.

At last, Sultan Abdur Rahman sent his brother Waleed in 222 A.H. at
the head of a huge army. Waleed laid siege around Toledo and cut off
all supplies, with the result-the people of Toledo laid down their. arms.
Hashim Zarab died in the action and Muhammad bin Wasim fled into

104 ٠ The History of Islam

the city. He collected a group of insurgents and occupied Toledo after
a surprise attack on the city.

In 224 A.H., Sultan Abdur Rahman himself marched on Toledo at the
head of forty thousand troops, invaded Toledo, punished the rebels
with a heavy hand and brought peace. From there, he sent a force
headed by Ubaidullah bin Abdullah to Alva and Alcala. He punished
the insurgent Christians and forced them to obey. Ubaidullah had not
yet completed his mission in the northem territories when the French
army on the borders made inroads into the city of Salem in the Islamic
State and plundered it. Ubaidullah took the Governor of the territory

with him and attacked the Christian forces and beat back Larziq, their
commander and the King of France. soe

In 225 A.H., Sultan Abdur Rahman II invaded Galicia and forced them
to obey. He also came down heavily on the Christians of Asturias
State, had them obey and pay tribute. He then set up his military
camp inside the State of Asturias and dispatched his forces to France
both from the land and sea routes. After accomplishing his military

missions, Abdur Rahman retumed to Cordova with a large amount of
booty and prisoners of war.

The Next Emissary of Caesar of Constantinople

The same year the Caesar of Constantinople sent another emissary to
Cordova of the same nature as was sent in the past. Abdur Rahman
welcomed them as warmly as he had done in the past. This time the
Caesar of Constantinople was under tremendous pressure from the
Caliph of Baghdad and very insistently sought help from Abdur
Rahman and had very high expectations. Possibly, Abdur Rahman ][
could have extended help to Constantinople but, during the same
Period, the Normans of Northern Europe who still worshiped fire and
idols and were not yet Christians had made inroads into southwestern
Spain. They had left Germany in their boats and reached the Spanish
coast by crossing the English Channel. Sultan Abdur Rahman Ii
dispatched his forces from the land route and sent orders to the ports
Of the eastern coast to send warships towards the Strait of Gibraltar so
that the invading warships would be seized and the escaping enemy
soldiers blocked. When the Norman invaders found out about the

The Spainish Caliphs 105

movement of the fifteen warships to block their route they retreated in
their boats.

The Revolt of Commander Musa bin Musa

Close on the heels of the end of the Norman raid Musa bin Musa, the
renowned Commander of Abdur Rahman II guarding the northern
frontiers revolted and joined the Christian camp. Harth bin Badi‘a was
sent to punish him. Musa bin Musa came out along with the Christian
force to atttack on the Royal Force. But Harth defeated and drove him
away. Musa stayed in Toledo while Harth halted at Saragossa. After a
long-drawn battle, Musa left Toledo and shifted position and Harth
occupied Toledo. Following this, the Christian King Garcia came to
reinforce Musa’s troops, which gave rise to new encounters. At Alva
Harth was captured and sent to the King of France in 218 A.H. Abdur
Rahman was terribly shocked at this news. He sent his son Mundhir at
the head of a strong army. By that time, Musa had seized Toledo.
Mundhir killed the ruler of Navarre ina battle in 229 A.H. who had
come to help Musa. Musa sent his son as a hostage for gaining peace.
Mundhir granted peace and appointed Musa as the ruler of Toledo.

Revolt of the Christians of the Northern Frontier

In the presence’ of the disturbances on the northern frontiers the
Christians of the northeast started large-scale preparations to rise in
revolt. The people of Barcelona made inroads into the Islamic territory
and began to plunder it. Killing many Islamic forces they advanced
towards southwestern areas. Sultan Abdur Rahman II sent his famous
Commander Abdul Karim bin Abdul Wahid bin Mugith to Barcelona
in 231 A.H. Abdul Karim cracked down on the rebels of Barcelona and
its suburbs and ravaged the Spanish March State, but restored it to
them after obtaining their submission. He then advanced into French
territories and stormed all the areas up to Gerona but the Islamic
forces did not stay in France for long and returned after a tremendous
show of force.

The Christians and the enemies of the Umayyads tasted defeat despite
all their secret planning. When all the uprisings subsided and
Normalcy returned, the Christians of France and the northern frontier

106 ___ The History of Islam

States of Spain called a meeting to ponder over the prevailin,
situation. The clergy of Galicia took it upon themselves to keep the
frontiers safe from the onslaughts of Cordova. They did this so that
the Christian countries could find time enough to make joint efforts in
military preparations, building forts, bringing the northern Governors
to their side and striking at the Islamic State to bring about its end,
This attempt was declared a religious struggle. A very zealous bishop
was deputed to arouse among the Christians of Cordova and other
cities a sense of sacrifice and the faith of Christ. The Muslims of Spain
had conferred on the Christians complete liberty of practicing and
preaching their faith. Religious matters were examined and decided
by Christian judges and church expenditures were met by the royal
treasury. Muslims and Christians took part in one another's festivals
and beth peoples had equal rights in commercial and agricultural

spheres and there was no material reason to set the Christians against
the Muslims.

Fresh Mischief of Christians of South Spain

Nevertheless the Christians of the northern part and their supporters
had spread into the south of Spain. They had made ita practice to
abuse Muhammad (3) openly in markets and public gatherings. They
also put the Qur’an to disgrace and created among the Muslims a
deep sense of provocation. At first, some of the foul-mouthed
Christians were arrested and produced in the court of law. But there
too they uttered blasphemous words. When one was put to death,
another one appeared in the law court and abused the Prophet of -
islam and also met his doom. it was discovered that these Christians
would come to thé courts only to have a sacred death and dignity
among men of their faith. After meeting such a death, they were
Supposed to have received a very lofty spiritual status and their
graves were made a place of worship, deep love and respect. In view
of this, the Sultan and the Qadi took to overlooking and forgiving
their faults. However, Sultan Abdur Rahman was ina fix and could
not find a way out. Finally, the bishops, distinguished Christian
leaders and the clergy of Cordova and Seville convened a huge
religious assembly. The issue discussed was whether abusing the
Prophet of Islam and desecrating the Qur’an was an act of reward in

The Spainish Caliphs 107
Christianity and should those laying down their lives in this manner
be taken as martyrs or not. Bishops and Priests made fervid speeches
on the topic and declared such an act totally against the Christian faith
and principles. However, in a strange decision, it was announced that
those who already had been killed must be considered as martyred
but those killed in future would be taken as offenders committing a
major sin. The decision taken by the council impressed the Spanish
‏سوا‎ But the clergies of the northern States who thought they
hadsattained a high spiritual position by this device did not abandon
their practice. The Muslims were growing opposed to the Sultan for
his soft attitude towards the offending Christians, with the result they-
were encouraged to revolt. The illiterate section of the Christians
started reproaching their religious leaders who had declared the
Christian martyrs offenders. In the wake of ali this, the cordial relations
between the Muslims and the Christians began to deteriorate.

Death of Abdur Rahman

Abdur Rahman 11 died in Rabia al-Thani 238 A.H. after ruling for
thirty-one years and some months and his son succeeded him.

Assessment of Abdur Rahman’s Rule

Although Sultan Abdur Rahman’s reign was not free from fighting
and disturbances he never neglected the welfare of his subjects and
other progressive works including the arts and literature. Abdur
Rahman was an erudite scholar, philosopher and well versed in the
Islamic sciences. He added a number of new chambers to the Cordova
Mosque and constructed tnany other mosques, bridges, forts, citadels,
and new roads. He provided many other facilities for the spread of
education and left no town and village without a madrasa (school). In
every city and town, he built magnificent buildings for the Governors
and Magistrates to ran their administration and also constructed
public bathrooms everywhere.

Sultan Abdur Rahman II was very fond of adornment and
magnificence. He seldom appeared before the public but was very 1
Kind and merciful. He was not inclined to use harsh punishment and
killing. During his tenure, the public treasury had become much

108 The History of Islam

richer. He brought more beautiful coins to the public and planted
some fruit gardens on both sides of the river Guadalquivir (Wadi al
Kabir near Cordova) and made them a public trust. He had books of
Greek philosophy translated and set up academic councils. Locust
swarms once ate up all the crops and failure of rain brought famine to
vast areas of the country. The Sultan extended immense help to the
masses and made it a practice to purchase large quantities of food with
funds from the royal treasury to be kept in stock for such eventuallities.

Heir Apparent

Sultan Abdur Rahman had a wife named Tarub whom he loved. She
bore a son for the Sultan and had a desire that her son Abdullah be
declared crown prince. But his son Muhammad was more deserving
because of his intellectual and spiritual qualities. She had once
attempted to his murder him. In order to carry out her plot against
Muhamunad she took a, kha‘ja sara, eunuch, named Nasr into her
confidence who contacted the court physician who was treating
Muhammad. He was attracted by the lure of large profits to mix
poison with Muhammad's medicine. The royal physician outwardly
agreed but informed the Sultan of the secret planning. When the cup
of poison was brought, the Sultan asked Nasr to drink it. He drank it
and died on the spot. Thus, he fell in the ditch he had dug for
Muhammad. A few days after Sultan Abdur Rahman passed away,
Prince Muhammad came to the throne with the support of the Royal
Guards. Land revenue during the period of Abdur Rahman |
amounted to three hundred thousand dinars, which reached up to six
hundred thousand dinars however, the total amount of revenue came
to one million dinars during the reign of Abdur Rahman Il. The total
income was. divided into three parts; one Part was spent on the
salaries of the armed forces, another on the salaries of the officials and
courtiers and the third was deposited in the royal treasury to be spent
on public welfare and construction works. Abdur Rahman II had

added to his revenue by taxing the merchandise and this action of his
turned the people against him.

It_ is said that the number of Abdur Rahman’s children was more than
a hundred. His people called him “al-Muzaffar” (the victorious). He

The Spainish Caliphs 109

was wheat-complexioned, long-bearded and a tall person with deep
eyes. He colored his beard with henna. 45 of his sons were alive when
he died.

During the rule of Abdur Rahman 11 Christians were appointed as
heads of important posts. They generally spoke Arabic and could,
therefore, manage administrative affairs well. Thus, the Muslims
served as soldiers while official responsibilities were entrusted to the
Christians.

Accession of Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman II

During the Rule of Sultan Abdur Rahman II the Christians had
dominated administrative affairs. The Muslim Jurists observed these
developments rather silently. However, they were annoyed at the
growing power and mischief of the Christian officials.

Muhammad's First Step

Succeeding his father in Rabia al-Thani, 238 A.H. Sultan Muhammad
began to appoint Muslims in charge of high posts and deposed those
Governors and officials unworthy of running the administration well.
This first action of Sultan Muhammad was highly appreciated by the
Muslim religious scholars and spiritual leaders. During the same
period, the Hambali School of thought entered into Spain through
those Muslim spiritual leaders who had visited Syria and Arabia
during the Hajj (pilgrimage). This started many religious debates and
dialectics between the Hambali and Malki spiritual leaders of
Cordova. The situation deteriorated to the extent that they were ready
to take up arms against one another with the result that Sultan
Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman II had to intervene in these disputes
and decide the issue. In order to divert their attention from
contentious issues, he launched a recruitment drive for jihad anda
strong army was built and sent to campaign against the northern
Christian States.

During this time, the ruler of Asturias or Castile State had seized some
Muslim cities. Other Christian rulers were making advances in their
own way. The newly built Muslim force was headed by Musa bin

110 The History of Islam

Musa, a Goth who had converted to Islam. Other converts like him
were appointed as commanders and governors. But this army
achieved almost no success worth mentioning and returned empty-
handed. However, the Sultan sent the same force to Barcelona for the
Christians there had also overstepped their limit. Also, from there the
force came back with very little booty.

Rebellions Curbed

In view of the dominance of the Muslim jurists in Cordova and the
killing of the Christians as per the resolution passéd by the Christians
of the north, the peopie of Toledo began to make preparations against
Muslim rule in 239 A.H. As an initial step, they arrested the Governor
of Toledo and sent word to Cordova to send back those made
hostages by Sultan Abdur Rahman II otherwise the Governor would
be put to death and they would declare their sovereignty.

Sultan Muhammad accepted to their demand and sent the hostages
back. However, the people of Toledo instead of adopting the right
course according to their promise rose in open revolt considering this
kind gesture as a weakness. They fortified Toledo strongly and sought
help, from the northern Christian States. Strangely, in spite of repeated
revolts in Toledo no Muslim king ever thought of demolishing its forts
and fortifications. The sole reason was the benevolence of the Muslim
rulers, which held them back from such an action against the northern
Frontier States.

Sultan Muhammad himself marched in 240 A.H. from Cordova to
Toledo at the head of a strong force. Sultan Muhammad had not yet
reached Toledo when the forces of Asturias State and warriors from the
hills marched into Toledo to lend their help. Finding the conquest of
Toledo an uphill task Sultan Muhammad hid a large part of his troops
behind the hills, mounds and bushes and advanced with a small force.
The people of Toledo seeing a small army mustered their courage to go
ahead and attack the Muslim force. When the actual battle started, the
Muslim force in large numbers rose from all sides and the Christians
fled. in fear and confusion but the Muslim troops surrounded and killed
twenty thousand Christian forces, which destroyed the defenses of the

The Spainish Caliphs 111

ple of Toledo. Sultan Muhammad occupied Toledo easily and
established a small military presence therein.

The Christians of Toledo had suffered such a crushing defeat that they
did not repeat their action against Muslim rule. However, they had
now formed relations with the Northern Christian States. At this time,
many Commanders of the Royal Force and Governors had secretly
entered into correspondence with the rulers of Asturias, Gothic
March, Galicia, and France they then hatched a conspiracy against
their own ruler. They once again rose in revolt in 242 A.H. Sultan
Muhammad invaded Toledo again and returned after punishing the
rebels. However, they took up arms again under the leadership of a
Christian chief. Sultan Muhammad had to go there yet again. At last,
in 248 A.H. Sultan agreed to confer sovereignty on the people of
Toledo after their submission to Muslim rule. They were given
freedom to choose their ‘own Governor who should send a fixed
annual amount to Cordova. Toledo was left free to manage its own
affairs. By acceding to this condition Sultan Muhammad showed not
only his weakness but allowed the Christians to lay the foundation
stone of Christian rule in Spain once again. He, in this way, dug a hole
into the very foundation of Muslim rule in Spain, which led to its end.
The people of Toledo wanted to appoint the son of Musa bin Musa as
Governor. Sultan Muhammad gave it his approval. Following this
Christians from the northern hilly States and warring Christians began "
to join the state of Toledo in large numbers and they started uprooting
Muslims from there. The city of Toledo turned out to be another
model based on the Asturias State. Musa bin Musa had, on the other
hand, entered into a secret pact with the. Christian States and this
family of traitors played a fundamental role in weakening the Islamic
rule although they were overtly considered. a Muslim family.

The same year the Normans descended on the western coast of Spain
and made inroads into the coastal areas but the ships of Sultan

Muhammad captured fifty of their boats and they fled without
inflicting much loss.

In Rajab, 251 A.H. Sultan Muhammad sent his son, Mundhir towards
the north to Alva and Alcala to punish the insurgent Christians and he
himself set out behind him towards Galicia. Father and son both were

112 The History of Islam

crowned with victory. But the insurgent Christians were fully aware
ot the war policy of the Muslim rulers. Facing an attack of a strong
Muslim force, they escaped to the hills and then sought forgiveness
and recaptured their lost territory on the return of the invading
troops. This was repeated once again, as the Royal Force retreated to
Cordova, the Christians made their advances. Prior to this, the
Christian attacks were meant for plundering Muslim territories but
now, in view of the inherent weakness of the Muslim rulers of recent
times, they would appoint their Governors to manage the affairs of the
occupied land and carry out expansionist activities. They were restless
to descend on the eastern coast after capturing Barcelona and they
kept occupying the western coast and brought the Portuguese
territory under their control. Although Sultan Muhammad built a war
fleet and dispatched it to attack Galicia, it was overtaken by a violent
storm and returned after incurring heavy losses. Following this the
very thought of a sea campaign was abandoned.

Insurgencies rose in a number of cities and every city witha large
Christian population claimed sovereign rule. Sultan Muhammad
never had total peace.

New Religion Invented

Abdur Rahman bin Marwan also took up arms against Sultan
Muhammad. He had already revolted more than once but was still
holding a high post in the area of Merida as a concession. Sultan
Muhammad invaded the territory and after three months of encounters,
Abdur Rahman bin Marwan, instead of leaving for Baghdad, invented
a new faith in Spain. The new faith consisted of tenets of both Islam
and Christianity. Many vagabond elements amongst the Muslims and
the Christians joined it. Since the wind of willfulness and anarchy
were blowing throughout the country, a large number of misguided
people joined Abdur Rahman bin Marwan and in this way, a strong
force came into being in the area of Galicia and Portugal under the
leadership of Abdur Rahman. Sultan Muhammad sent a force headed
by his Prime Minister, Hashim bin Abdul Aziz. Abdur Rahman
deluded Hashim by running away in front of him and led the
Pursuing Muslims to a place where his force was lying in ambush,
which surrounded them on all sides, and killed all the troops and

The Spainish Caliphs 113

captured Hashim. Abdur Rahman bin Marwan was already in
correspondence with Alfonso, the ruler of Asturias. He sent Hashim to
the Christian ruler to make a show of his strength and thus
strengthening his friendly ties with him. Sultan Muhammad wrote
Abdur Rahman bin Marwan to release Hashim. Abdur Rahman bin
Marwan demanded a sum of one hundred thousand dinars. After
corresponding for a few months Sultan Muhammad agreed to Abdur
Rahman bin Marwan’s rule over Badajoz (Arabic: Batalyaws) and its
environs without paying any tribute and after receiving ransem for
the release of Hashim. When Hashim came out of captivity, he found
Abdur Rahman bin Marwan a strong and sovereign ruler. According
to Ibn Khaldun Prime Minister Hashim was released in 265 A.H. after
passing two and half years in prison.

In short, Abdur Rahman bin Marwan, an ordinary insurgent chieftain
now considered himself a ruler equal in position to Sultan Muhammad.
He also strengthened his friendly relations with the Asturias State. This
event resulted in a series of revolts in almost every part of the country
and the fear of the Umayyads rule went out of their minds.

Musa bin Dhun‘nun, governor of Shant Briah revolted and invaded
Toledo but was defeated. He attacked once again and the trial of
strength continued. Asad bin Harth bin Badi’a raised his standard in
revolt. Sultan Muhammad sent Prince Mundhir to take on Musa bin
Dhun‘nun. Mundhir conquered a number of cities and came back to
Cordova. In short, Sultan Muhammad could not get even a day's

respite from these engagements.

At this crucial period Umar bin Hafsun, a Christian from the Spanish
peninsula organized a group of bandits in the southeastern hiils.
Making his fortress in a difficult hilly place as his center Umar bin
Hafsun started-his plundering and robbing activities. Governors of the
Nearby cities and towns invaded the area a number of times but
Suffered defeats. Finally, a strong army was sent from Cordova in 267
AH. to punish him but he sent a petition seeking peace and promising
normalcy in the area and the hilly fortress was left under his control.

In 268 A.H., Sultan Muhammad sent his son, Mundhir at the head of a
huge army to punish the insurgent Christians of the northern Parts.
Prince Mundhir first went to Saragossa and put the insurgents in

114 The History of Islam
order and then marched to Alva and Aleala. He also restored peace in
Lerida and returned after appointing Ismail bin Musa as the
administrator there but with the return of Mundhir the ruler of
Barcelona attacked Ismail but Ismail latter defeated him.

In 270 A.H., Umar bin Hafsun raised his head again and broke the peace
of Malaga. Hashim bin Abdul Aziz, the Prime Minister of Cordova
marched from Cordova to punish Umar bin Hafsun. After some initial
encounters, Hashim contacted Umar bin Hafsun and tried to bring
him to reason and made him agree to accompany him to Cordova.
Prime Minister Hashim was very happy with the bravery of Umar bin
Hafsun. He took the matter to Sultan Muhammad and had him
appoint Umaz bin Hafsun the Commander-in-chief of the Royal Force.

In 271 A.H., Prime Minister Hashim took Umar bin Hafsun and
marched to the North at the head of a strong army. The people of
Saragossa had once again raised their heads and Asturias was also
threatening the peace. Umar bin Hafsun won much acclaim during

these campaigns and both of them returned witha large amount of
booty.

Umar bin Hafsun was not content with the leadership of Islamic forces
since, in his present state, he could not hope to establish a Gothic state.
He broke away from Hashim on the way back and werit straight to his
old fort. His old friends and supporters joined him there and Umar
bin Hafsun proclaimed his sovereign rule in Malaga. Abdur Rahman
bin Marwan, on the other hand, started plundering Seville and its
suburbs. Sultan Muhammad sent his son Mundhir and Prime
Minister, Hashim to Seville at the head of an army. Because of these
attacks and the Sultan’s being kept busy. in other areas Umar bin
Hafsun found time to strengthen his power. Seville and its suburbs
remained under the shadow of strife and fighting for about two years.
Finally, peace was bought from Abdur Rahman bin Marwan in 272
A.H. by giving away some more territories.

Following this Prince Mundhir was sent to Umar bin Hafsun. Umar
bin Hafsun had now become more civilized and far-sighted. He had
learned a lot from Cordova and Prime Minister Hashim and he was
no longer a robber and bandit. He had now donned the mantle of a
ruler. As his first step, he eradicated theft and robbery from the

The Spainish Caliphs 115

bounds of the territory under his control and took to punishing
offenders and criminals very harshly. His people enjoyed perfect
peace and safety and extended their support to their ruler.

Death of Sultan Muhammad

Sultan Muhammad had sent his crown prince Mundhir bin
Muhammad to punish Umar bin Hafsun. During early encounters
Umar bin Hafsun suffered setbacks and he was about to be arrested or
killed for he was wounded and his troops had. fallen in disorder.
Umar was about to lay down his arms when Mundhir was shocked to
hear the news of his father’s death and he rushed to Cordova. Thus
Umar bin Hafsun was saved from total disaster.

Sultan Muhammad was born in 207 A.H. and he died in 273 A.H.,
after ruling for 34 years and some months, his son succeeded him.

Assessment of Sultan Muhammad’s Rule

The entire tenure of Sultan Muhammad was overtaken by conflict and

disturbances and he did not enjoy peace even for a single day. The

never-ending revolts and external threats and conspiracies kept him
engaged and troubled all the time. During the rule of Sultan
Muhammad, the Umayyads had lost much of their Power and
prestige and even ordinary men took up arms against the throne. The
Christians reaped the most benefit from the weakness and disruption

in the Muslim ranks. They had now started envisioning setting up
their rule once again in Spain.

Sultan Muhammad was brave and prompt but intemal disturbances
and rebellions of Muslim commanders had sent the country into chaos
and untold miseries. Christian countries and the Abbasid Caliphs
Were playing their roles in creating discord and disunity among the
uslims. Moreover, the Muslim jurists also contributed in dividing
the Muslims on doctrinal lines. Prior to the situation during his rule,
tians in large numbers had come to the fold of Islam and despite
the discouraging Propaganda of the Christians of the Northern States,
Sensible Sections of them felt attracted to the Islamic character and
Way of life.

116 The History of Islam

However, during the period of Sultan Muhammad the religious
spiritual leaders and jurists issued verdicts, which went against the
legal Islamic rights of the Christians. Those Muslims converted to
Islam also felt unsafe, with the result, that apostasy raised its head and
many converts began to revert to Christianity. Nothing was more
unfortunate than Muslim spiritual leaders and jurists Causing a large
group of new Muslims to be categorized as apostates, this proved very
dangerous and that danger was right in the heart of Cordova. Due to
che tight grip the Muslim spiritual leaders and jurists held over the
oroclamation of legal verdicts and the competition between rival
3roups of scholars, justice one of the outstanding attributes of Islam,
suffered tremendously and the people reacted in kind.

During the last days of Sultan Muhammad different groups emerged

vith different purposes in view:

1) Pure Arab race: they were disunited and had different groups like
Syrians, Yemenites, Hijazi, and Hadramis (people from
Hadramaut, southern Yemen) and they had in most cases accepted
their superiority as a given fact.

2) Mixed: those who were from Arab fathers and Christian mothers
from Spain and Berber fathers and Spanish mothers.

‎The new-Muslims: those who were Christians before their‏ رذ
‎conversion to Islam. Their offspring were also called new-‏
‎Muslims and they would follow Islam strictly. ١‏

‎( Pure Berbers: they were originally North Africans and were
found in large numbers.

‎) The Magi: They were the progeny of those who were bought as

‎slaves from various countries and were not large in number.

‎) Jews: They were old citizens of Spain. They were traders by
profession and kept aloof from insurgent activities.

‎» Christians: They followed their faith freely and they were in large
number.

‎Apostates: They were those who had reverted to Christianity during
the period of Sultan Muhammad. Along with them, there was a
group that followed no faith and lived on plundering and robbery.

The Spainish Caliphs 117

The first four Muslim groups were considered the real Islamic force. The
ruler as well as the Muslim spiritual leaders and jurists should have
given equal treatment to all but Sultan Muhammad made a grave
mistake by treating the Mixed group as inferior, although they were
larger in number. The emerging discord among. the religious leaders
and their doctrinal differences dampened the spirit of the new-Muslims.
The Berbers too were affected. All this resulted in the loss of spirituglity
and the weakening of the morality of the Muslims of Spain as a whole.
The spirit of Jihad was almost lost. The swords that were unsheathed in
the way of Allah were now serving personal causes and self-interest.
Special interest groups began to appear. The more the Sultan added to
the power and influence of the Muslim jurists the more he lost the
confidence of the people. This loss of confidence led the people to lose
love for Islam and prefer a materialistic approach to life.

While Muslim rule was on the decline in every respect, the Christian
States had expanded to equalize the Muslim State and were
progressing rapidly. Alfonso, the ruler of Asturias was planning to
drive away the Muslims from the bounds of Spain. Portuguese
Christians were ready to establish their separate rule. Seville was
under the rule of Ibn Marwan while Malaga was under the control of
fbn Hafsun. Toledo had expanded its territories up to the
surroundings of Cordova, Galicia, and Aragon the state of Toledo had
power from the Pyrenees to the western coast of Spain. In short,
Sultan Mundhir had come to the throne at a very turnultuous time.

Accession of Mundhir bin Muhammad

Mundhir bin Muhammad was born in 229 A.H. He succeeded his
father in Safar, 273 A.H. His entire life had been passed. in fighting. He
had served as Commander several times during the tenure of his father.

Deeds

Shortly after his accession to the throne he did away with Hashim bin
Abdul Aziz, the Prime Minister of his father who was condemned to
death by the religious leaders. Getting rid of Hashim, he attacked Umar
bin Hafsun and went ahead conquering forts and driving off enemy
troops. Ibn Hafsun sought peace and Mundhir accepted it. But Sultan

118 The History of Islam,

Mundhir was_ yet to arrive in his capital when he heard of Ibn Hafsun’s
revolt. He turned back right from there and surrounded the city. Ibn
Hafsun begged pardon very humbly and agreed to accompany the
Sultan to Cordova. Sultan Mundhir took him to the capital with honor,

Sultan Mundhir had decided to invade Toledo shortly after reaching
Cordova and only would considered something else after conquering
Toledo. He was wise enough to understand the importance of Toledo
with respect to its situation while his predecessors had failed to
recognize this fact. Toledo was situated in the middle of Spain and
was strong enough to curb the territorial ambitions of the Northern
Christian States. Although Sultan Mundhir had decided to utilize
Umar bin Hafsun’s abilities in some suitable job, Ibn Hafsun thought
of the fate of Hashim bin Abdul Aziz and fled away by hiding from
Mundhir’s men. He once again went straight to his fort and took
tefuge therein and his people rejoined him.

Death of Sultan Mundhir

Sultan Mundhir turned back once-again and besieged the fort. Umar bin
Hafsun put up a strong fight with the result the siege dragged on. The
fort was yet to be conquered when Sultan Mundhir died in 275 A.H. at
the age of 46 years after ruling for less than two years. He had no male
child so the nobles made the oath of allegiance to his brother Abdullah.

Accession of Abdullah

Abdullah recognized the rule of Umar bin Hafsun. He then took the
funeral bier of his brother and moved towards Cordova. Arab
commanders started criticizing him on the way and _ their
condemnation rose to such an extent that all but less than a hundred

soldiers deserted him by the time Abdullah stepped in Cordova with
the body of Sultan Mundhir.

First Weakness of Abdullah

The first mistake committed by Sultan Abdullah bin Muhammad

shortly after accession was that he immediately recognized Umar bin
Hafsun as a ruler, aithou;

gh he could have won much support if he
had conquered the fort. ١

The Spainish Caliphs 19

Condition of the Umayyads during the Rule of Abdullah

At the time of the accession of Abdullah the condition of the Umayyad
dynasty in Spain had touched a new low. The treasury was empty.
The annual revenue, which had once gone up to one million dinars
had now come down to one hundred thousand dinars annually. Apart
from the Christian States Cordova had given birth to two strong
rivals, which were equal to the central rule. On one side was Umar bin
Hafsun and Ibn Marwan on the other. Ibn Hafsun was wiser and his
style of governance had attracted a larger number of people and they
liked to be governed by him. But since he was declared an apostate,
many Muslims withdraw their support from him and turned towards
his rival Ibn Marwan. Ibn Hafsun had no truck with the Christians
despite his being labeled an apostate but Ibn Marwan, despite being a
Muslim had friendly relations with Alfonso, the ruler of Asturias and
others. Some Arab chiefs had their estates in the environs of Seville
and_had settled there. But in view of the turbulent situation, they rose
in revolt and occupied Seville. The same types of feudal rulers seized
Granada. Thus, two more power bases rose as Ibn Hafsun and Ibn
Marwan’s rivals. These four all took up arms against each other and
Cordova had no power to punish any of them. He sometimes played the
role of a peacemaker because each of them recognized Abdullah bin
Muhammad as his king, although they were all independent in practice _
paying no tribute to the king. But since the Arab chiefs did not treat the
new-Muslims well they in large number left to join Ion Marwan.

During the same period, two Governors of the Northern cities inflicted
a heavy setback on the Christian plans to end the Muslim occupation
of Spain. Governor Lab bin Muhammad of Talsuna with a small band
drove away the forces of the king of Asturias when he moved towards
the south. Abdur Rahman bin Marwan on the other hand sent word to
his friend, the king of Asturias that he would be the first man to take
him on in case he overstepped his bounds. This waming silenced the
Christians for sometime for they knew well that their invasions would
help to bring the warring Muslim powers together.

nded with Aghlabid dynasty of

fbn Hafsun very cleverly correspo! ‏م‎
‎4 x he Abbasid Caliph issue him

Africa. and requested to make t

120 The History of Islam

credentials for ruling Spain. Although Umar bin Hafsun failed in
his attempt, Cordova was shocked to hear this news and it invaded
Ton Hafsun. Sultan Abdullah knew very well that any such
credentials from the Abbasid Caliph would turn the people to him,
Sultan Abdullah could not gather together more, than fourteen
thousand troops while Ibn Hafsun had thirty thousand soldiers
under his command. When the rival forces came face-to-face, Sultan
Abdullah displayed extraordinary valor, defeated and drove Ibn

Hafsun and his troops back to hills. This victory brought some
prestige to Cordova.

Abdullah’s Action

During the same days Abdur Rahman bin Marwan made peace with
Ibrahim bin Haijjaj the Sovereign ruler of Seville and tried to
strengthen his power. Sultan Abdullah thought it necessary to break
the back of Ibn Marwan. He then sent his Prime Minister Ahmad bin
Abi Ubaidah to take on Ibn Marwan who sought help from Seville.
Ibrahim bin Hajjaj rose to help him but Ahmad bin Abi Ubaidah
defeated the joint forces following which Ibrahim bin Hajjaj offered his
allegiance to Abdullah who appointed him as the Governor of Seville.
This victory added even more to the prestige and power of Cordova.
Following this event Abdur Rahman bin Marwan died and his sons
began to rule Toledo. But Ibrahim bin Hajjaj annexed some of their
territories. On the return of the Sultan, Umar bin Hafsun came out of
the hills and began to increase his power once again.

Alfonso the king of Asturias clashed with his brothe
renew his peace treaty with Sultan Abdullah who wel
The Sultan made peace on the condition that both si
each other's territorial integrity. This peace treaty
favor of Alfonso for he now enjoyed peace and
Muslims who claimed the territories under his rule.

The people had become fe
began to express themsely
the rebels. Thus, all the ‏ب‎
‎their respective States,
Tespect to Cordova,

rt and sought to.

Icomed the offer.

ides would honor
was however, in
safety from the

4 up with all the frequent disorder and
€s against rising in revolt or supporting
arious rulers enjoyed peace for a time in
However, all of them would show due

The Spainish Caliphs 121

Children

Sultan Abdullah had eleven sons and out of those Mutrif and
Muhammad were mature enough to take part in the administrative
affairs of the State. However, with the passage of time they felt enmity
towards one another. Most of the able and sensible men had already
shifted to Seville because scholars and intellectuals were held in
esteem there. Cordova‘s treasury had run out. The emerging State of
Seville under [brahim bin Hajjaj had become enviable even to
Cordova. The low-spirited courtiers and nobles left no stone unturned
to aggravate the enmity between the two brothers. Mutrif did a lot to
poison his father’s ears against his brother Muhammad and his
supporters among the courtiers confirmed his allegations.
Circumstantial compulsion made Muhammad escape from Cordova
and join Umar bin Hafsun. Shortly thereafter, he felt his mistake and
sent a message to his father that he was ready to return to Cordova
provided he was given safety of life. Abdullah acceded to his request.
Now Mutrif had an opportunity to turn his father against Muhammad
even more than before, with the result Abdullah confined his son to a
portion of his palace. Sultan Abdullah had to leave Cordova for a few
days. He appointed Mutrif as the ruler of Cordova to look after the
State affairs during his absence. Mutrif took advantage of the
opportunity and had Muhammad assassinated. Abdullah was shocked
at this event. He then began to raise Muhammad's son Abdur Rahman
with much love and care. After sometime Mutrif assassinated the Prime
Minister Abdul Malik bin Umayyah under some trumped up charges.
Sultan Abdullah grew furious and had Mutrif killed in retaliation.

Death

Sultan Abdullah died on 1 Rabia al-Awwal 300 A.H. at the age of 42
years after ruling for 25 years. His whole period of rule was passed in
dealing with riots, strikes and disturbances, which weakened his rule.
Evidently, there was no hope of restoration of the past glory. His
grandson Abdur Rahman succeeded sultan Abdullah.

Chapter 5
Abdur Rahman Il

Accession

Abdur Rahman succeeded his grandfather Abdullah on 1 Rabi-al-
Awwal 300 A.H. at the age of 21 years. The country that had been
conquered by Tariq and Musa and the rule founded by Abdur
Rahman al-Dakhil was torn into pieces and was on the verge of going
to the Christian fold. But divine decree had decided to. give some
more time. The young Sultan had a number of uncles who claimed the
throne by virtue of their age and rights. Either because of their noble
sentiments or their being disinterested in ruling a rotten and wretched
State they kept silent.

First Order

Shortly after succession the young Sultan issued orders that all sorts of
taxes and duties levied on the people by his predecessors particularly
Sultan Abdullah to fill the public treasury be curbed. And those
against the Islamic code were abrogated. This proclamation produced
a good effect and the Sultan was lavishly praised for this action.
124 The History of Islam

Following this he proclaimed that those obeying the rule and promising
firmness in their loyalty would get his past faults pardoned without any
distinction of faith. Since the people had become fed up with anarchy
and civil wars, strife and disorder almost all the rulers of the small
States adjoining Cordova appeared before the Sultan to confess their
loyalty to him. The public revenue rose to fill the treasury and mitigate
the losses of the canceled taxes.

Two Rival Forces

Now only two mighty powers were left who could challenge Cordova
and both were not far away. On one hand was Umar bin Hafsun, the
ruler of Malaga, Rayyu and Bashter who wanted to destroy the rule of
Cordova with the support of the Fatimids of North Africa and he would
also receive help from the northem Christian rulers. The Christians liked
him because of his reversion to Christianity. The Arabs on the other
hand, ruled Seville and its power and grandeur had excelled the Court
of Cordova. Abdur Rahman, first of all, tumed to Seville and pressed it

to confess loyalty to him. Many chiefs of Seville offered their allegiance
to his central rule.

First Campaign

When Sultan Abdur Rahman 111 felt safe conceming Seville, he sent his
freed slave Badr to Umar bin Hafsun at the head of a strong army. Badr
started conquering Umar bin Hafsun forts one after another. After
losing a large part of his plains, he took refuge in his‘hilly forts. Badr
returned safe and sound and this victory attracted a large number of
People to join Abdur Rahman’s army.

Revolts Curbed

Sultan Abdur Rahman Il invaded Seville to punish the disobedient Ibn
Maslama. Ibn Maslama sought help from Umar bin Hafsun who
Promptly came to his aid. When the royal force advanced towards
Seville, Umar bin Hafsun’s force moved from the rear. However, Abdur
Rahman beat it back and defeated Ibn Maslama too who was captured.
Sultan Abdur Rahman Lil sent his own governor to Seville. He was able
to do it without any difficulty because the relatives of Maslama and his

Abdur Rahman Ill 125

courtiers also wanted Seville to be annexed by Cordova. One of the
famous Commanders of Seville named Ishaq bin Muhammad came to
Cordova and after judging his worth Sultan Abdur Rahman I, made
him Prime Minister of Cordova and on his death the post was given to
his son Ahmed bin Ishaq.

At this point, the greatness and glory of Cordova touched a new high
and Sultan Abdur Rahman built his force to deal with Umar bin Hafsun.
He invaded his territories in 304 A.H. Umar bin Hafsun sought help
from. the Fatimids but Sultan Abdur Rahman intercepted their warships
with his own and didn’t allow them to reach Ibn Hafsun. All the ships
were captured at sea. Ibn Hafsun lost all hope and sent a petition to the
Sultan seeking pardon and promising his submission and loyalty to
Cordova in the future. The Sultan seized all his green and fertile lands

and left Ibn-Hafsun a small territory. Achieving peace and success, he
returned to Cordova.

Following this, the Sultan sent a force under the command of Prime
Minister Ishaq bin Muhammad to punish Murcia and Valencia. Ishaq
brought the insurgents to order and invaded Carmona and removed its
ruler Habib bin Suwarah and annexed it to Cordova. The same year the
freed slave Badr invaded Lablah, captured the rebel chief Uthman bin
Nasr and sent him to Cordova. In 306 A.H., he conquered the fort of
Sambarah and forced the rebels to obey.

Conspiracy Against the Sultan

In 308 A.H. Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar bin Sultan Muhammad in
collaboration with Qadi bin Sultan Muhammad, hatched a plot to
assassinate Sultan Abdur Rahman III and capture the throne.
However, one of the plotters informed the Sultan of the situation. The
Sultan, instead of taking any hasty steps, kept investigating the matter
and killed both of them only after the charge was substantiated. Since
their crime had become known, nobody raised any objection to their
punishment.

Tarsawi Fort was conquered in 309 A.H. The same year Ahmad bin
Adkhi Hamdani who had occupied Jama and was defiant offered
allegiance on his own and sent his son to Cordova as a hostage. The

126 The History of Islam
other chiefs who had established their independent rule were one by
one either made to obey or killed. The territory of Cordova expanded
and the condition of the country considerably improved. Now the
country that had been divided into scores of fragments rose again as a
mighty Islamic state.

Details of the occupied Christian Territories

A hilly area adjoining the southeastern coast occupied by Ibn Hafsun
had turned Christian. Ibn Hafsun’s wide experience had made it a
strong Christian State. However, it had made peace with the central rule
of Cordova. Toledo was a strong and formidable city, which had
become a sovereign state during the period of Sultan Abdullah. The
state was situated in the middle of Spain. There were Christian States in
Barcelona and Catalonia and Navarre also had a strong State adjoining
Catalonia, which was ruled by the French. Asturias had risen as a very
large State stretching into the plains of Spain having Galicia, Leon and
Castile under its sway.

In addition to these, several small Christian States were established on
the Portuguese coast on the Atlantic Ocean and were subordinate to
Galicia. These conquered Christian territories fel within the bounds of .
Spain. Besides’ those mentioned, there were Christian states of
southeastern France, western France and northern France, which were
bent on opposing Spain. The only corner of Muslim rule stretching out
towards the north was Saragossa, which was ruled over by a Muslim
governor. He had friendly relations with the Christians and nobody
objected to it for Sultan Abdullah and Alfonso IIT themselves had signed
a peace treaty, which was violated by none.

Getting rid of all the rebels within a few years Sultan Abdur Rahman IIE
invaded Toledo. Before the invasion, the Sultan sent word to the people
of Toledo to obey him and join his camp. Toledo gave a bitter reply and
started making military preparation of large proportions besides asking
the Christians everywhere to rise up to save Toledo. Sultan Abdur
Rahman marched on Toledo with the utmost care and caution. The
Sultan conquered Toledo after a concerted effort, striving and fighting
for about one year. He treated the conquered kindly and softly and
tetumed to Cordova after putting the administrative affairs of Toledo

Abdur Rahman III 127

right. Since the Fatimids of Northern Africa were torn by internal strife,

they posed no danger to Cordova. Spain was now safe because Morocco
also came under the occupation of Sultan Abdur Rahman III.

The Governor of Saragossa (Sarcat) revolts

Internal feuds of the Christian powers came to an end in 322 A.H. The
Christians then had Muhammad bin Hisham as the Governor of
Saragossa rise against the central rule and promised him all their help.
Now the whole territory from Barcelona to Galicia rose up against
Sultan Abdur Rahman II. The annexation of Morocco had infuriated the
Christians and so they decided to break the back of Abdur Rahman by
setting the Governor of Saragossa against the Muslim ruler.

Abdur Rahman turned to the north to chastise the Governor and found
the Christians ready to take him on. He won a decisive victory and
amested Muhammad bin Hisham while the Christian forces fled to.their
respective territories. Abdur Rahman singled out each of them and
made them the target of his attack and made each of them to submit.
Sultan Abdur Rahman returned. to Cordova after serving a warning to
the Christians, punishing Muhammad bin Hisham thoroughly and
appointing Umayyah bin Ishaq as the governor of Saragossa.

Battle of Trenches

In 327 A.H. a brother of Umayyah bin Ishaq was charged with
hatching a plot and the Sultan put him to death. Umayyah bin Ishaq
was shocked and distressed at this action. The Christian powers
extended their sympathy to Umayyah and set him against the Sultan.
The Christian king Ramiro was very clever and experienced.
Umayyah revolted and shifted to Galicia with as much treasure and
force as he could take away with him. Forces from other Christian
States rushed to join him. This was in fact the greatest demonstration
of Christian might in Spain, which was joined by a Muslim governor
with all the power at his command. Besides, he gave some secret

1 information and significant advice. The presence of Umayyah bin
Ishaq was very encouraging. On hearing this new development,
Sultan Abdur Rahman III declared jitad with the result that people in
large numbers joined his camp.

128 The History of Islary
The number of Muslim troops rose to fifty thousands. As the Muslim
force advanced towards the north, the Christian troops concentrated in
Simancas. The Christians fortified the city and made a trench in front of
it along with having a huge army. Ramiro was the Commander-in-chief
of the allied Christian forces and Umayyah bin Ishaq was his supporter
and adviser. The Muslim army initiated the attack and the Christian
troops came out to meet the challenge. The Christians were defeated in
every engagement. A few days after the initial engagements, the
Christian force was besieged in the fortifications of Simancas. The
Muslim force advanced into the fortifications and they conquered three
walls one after another. But as they crossed the last wall, the Christian
troops snipped at the surrounded Muslim army and they could not
move ahead or go back and they fell into the trenches only to die. Only
49 fighters were able to save their lives and Abdur Rahman III was the
50th person to remain alive. He was pulled out of the trench with much
difficulty. Ramiro wanted to send a squadron in pursuit of the fifty men

including Sultan Abdur Rahman III but Umayyah bin Ishaq advised

against this risky step for the Muslim force might attack from an

ambush. Abdur Rahman suffered an immense setback. Never since the

first Muslims had set foot on the soil of Spain had the Muslims suffered

such a heavy setback. The battle was known as the Battle of Trenches.

When Umayyah bin Ishaq at the end of the bloody battle witnessed the
battlefield filled with the dead bodies of fifty thousand Muslims, he was
shocked to: the core and repented his mistake and his conscience
reproved him for what he had done. He senta petition to the Sultan
seeking pardon for his fault and he deserted the Christians. Having
returned to Cordova Sultan Abdur Rahman built a huge army and sent
it to the Christian countries. It went on beating and defeating the
Christian forces and deprived them of taking advantage of the Muslim
setback of the Battle of Trenches. The Muslim force reached to the
French territories and returned with a large amount of booty.

The Abbasid Caliphate suffers

The same year, 327 AH, the Abbasid Caliph Muqtadir was
assassinated and the Fatimids laid their claim to the caliphate. In view of
the absence of any threat from the Abbasid caliphate and the Fatimids

Abdur Rahman il 129

unpopularity among the Sunni Muslims, Sultan Abdur Rahman
adopted the title of Amir-Al-Mominin (Commander of the Faithful) and
chose for himself the appellation of “Nasir-Ledinillah” (The Victor for
Allah’s Religion). Nobody objected to this and, in fact, in the entire
world of Islam he alone deserved to be called Caliph of the Muslims.
Shortly after this, Abdur Rahman tumed to constructing palatial
buildings and beautifying Cordova. However, for the next eight to ten
years he kept sending forces against the northern Christian States every
year. The Christians were thus subdued to such an extent that they came
to the Muslims for peace, safety and security.

The events mentioned so far bring to surface one glaring mistake of
Caliph Abdur Rahman 111 that in spite of gaining full control over the
situation he neglected the most necessary task of annihilating the
northern Christian States for their. insurrections. It was also, perhaps,
because that in those days no one could think that the descendants of
the Muslims of Spain would ever be so poor and weak and would not
be able to withstand the Christian onslaughts of the future and they
would get wiped out without leaving any trace behind.

Navy and Army Strengthened

From 328 A.H. starts by and large the period of peace for Abdur
Rahman II and nothing was apparently able to threaten him. During
this period the Muslim ruler paid his exclusive attention to the |
strengthening of his navy and army, he built warships and his flee:
became the strongest of all time. The Caliph’s supremacy on the
Mediterranean Sea was recognized by everyone, He built a magnificent
building adjoining his old royal palace and added to the beauty and
adormment of the Cordova Mosque. Academic discussions were held
and facilities given to traders who began to go to far off places with their
commodities.

Worldwide Glory of Abdur Rahman

Very soon the fame of Caliph Abdur Rahman encircled the World. In
336 A.H., Constantine the king of Constantinople sent his emissaries to
Cordova with precious gifts. In this way, he attempted to display his
wealth and grandeur on one hand and win the friendship of Caliph

130 __The History of Islan

Abdur Rahman on the other. When Caliph Abdur Rahman came to
know of the approaching emissaries, he issued orders to decorate the
entire city of Cordova. His forces in glittering uniforms stood in two
rows. And the emissaries were left in amazement at the work of golden
embroidery on the curtains hanging along the doors and walls and the
other kinds of decoration and began to look down upon the presents
brought by them. Passing through the marble pillars and mosaic floors
the emissaries entered the magnificent palace where Caliph Abdur
Rahman III was sitting on his throne with his nobles, scholars, poets and
commanders standing in order. The emissaries were astonished to
witness such an exhibition and awesome scene. However, they
recovered from their state of wonderment, made obeisance to the Caliph
and handed over the letter from their king. In a sky blue cover with
some thing written in gold letters was wrapped a small box witha
heavy golden seal, on one side of the seal was engraved the image of
Christ and_ that of Constantine on the other. There was a smaller crystal
box within the small box with golden and silver floral designs engraved
on it and inside of it was a beautiful silken envelope in which was a
letter written in letters of gold ona sky blue thin skin. On the top, the
Caliph Abdur Rahman was addressed with glorious appellations. The
Caliph had the letter read out. Following that he suggested that
Muharimad bin Abdul Barr should make an improvised speech for
whict he was famous. The jurist spoke a few words but the splendor
and awe of the assembly overpowered his mind so much so that he fell
down unconscious. He was followed by Abu Ali Ismail bin Qasim who
rose to speak but could not say a word after glorifying Aliah Almighty.
He appeared overpowered by anxiety. Witnessing this an ordinary
religious leader Mundhir bin Sayeed stood up and began to speak
without any fear or hesitation. The speech was so pleasant, fervid and
Suitable to the occasion that it attracted loud applause. The Caliph
became so pleased that he appointed Mundhir bin Sayeed Chief Justice
of the caliphate. The court was then adjourned and the emissaries were
treated as honored guests. After enjoying the royal hospitality for a few
days, the ambassadors took leave accompanied by Hisham bin Hudhayl
who was sent to the king of Constantinople by Caliph Abdur Rahman as
his emissary. He ‘was instructed to bring a friendly agreement from
Constantine. Hisham did it successfully and came back to Cordova.

Abdur Rahman Hl 131

Following this, the envoys of Italy, Germany, France and Sicily came to
the Caliph one after another to have good relations and friendship with
Cordova. Every ruler of Europe vied with each other to win the support
of Cordova to keep safe from their enemies.

Caliph Abdur Rahman made his son Hakam his heir apparent.
Another son Abdullah was inclined to religious practices and was
called “the pious”. A Muslim jurist of Cordova tempted him to take
the throne by assassinating the Caliph. Abdullah in collaboration with
Abdul Bari, the jurist, hatched a plot to assassinate the Caliph and
the crown prince. Many others were made to join the conspiracy. But
the plot was unearthed on 10 Dhul Hijjah, 339 A.H. and both Abdur
Rahman and Hakam were saved. Abdullah and the jurist Abdul Bari
were put in jail. On the first day of their imprisonment, the Caliph
executed his son Abdullah and Abdul Bari committed suicide in the
prison.

On the death of Ramiro the king of Galicia in 334 A.H., his son Ordono |
succeeded him and sent his envoy to Cordova to seek permission for his
accession. The Caliph acceded to his petition and granted him
permission to rule in Galicia. In 345 A.H., Ferdinand the ruler of Castile
sent a petition recommended by Ordono IV to the Caliph to grant
permission for ruling and he was also given permission.

Sancho had occupied his ancestral State Leon and his maternal
grandmother Tota was the ruler of Navarre State. Sancho became
Victim of fatness to such an extent that he was unable to even walk.
Ferdinand and Ordono dislodged him from Leon. Sancho came to his
grandmother in Navarre State where he also had a maternal uncle.
However, his grandmother ruled the State because of her abilities and
experience and played her role as the guardian of her son, Sancho’s
maternal uncle. Queen Tota sent precious presents to the Caliph and
€ntreated his help for the restoration of Leon and Galicia, which was
forcibly occupied by Ferdinand and Ordono and also to send a

Physician for treating fatness. The Caliph promptly responded to the

entreaty and sent at once a physician to Navarre. However, the

Testoration of the lost State of Leon was put off to some other date.

Sancho responded to the treatment and was cured and he regained his

health and was able to be active again.

The History of Islam,
132

Three Petitioners in the Court of the Caliphate

In 447 A.H. Queen Tota decided to personally visit Cordova to persuade
the Caliph to restore Leon. She left along with her son the King of
Navarre and her maternal grandson, Sancho the King of Leon. These
three Christian rulers set out from the French territories to appear
before the Caliph. It was a very absorbing scene. People thronged the
route they were traveling to have a glance at the passing royal party.
On reaching Cordova, they were accorded a warm welcome. On
entering the palace, they were subdued by the awe and grandeur of
the Caliph and his court. The Caliph was so deeply moved by their
visit that he sent with his guests some troops to restore Leon and
Galicia back to Sancho, which they did. Ordono fled to Castile to be
with Ferdinand. In view of the consequences of what happened to
Ordono, the King of Barcelona and the chief of Tarragona sent their
envoys to Cordova to confess that they were but the slaves of
Cordova. They considered their ability to rule as an endowment from
the caliphate and they were ready to fulfill all the conditions of their

rule with a deep sense of obedience and loyalty. The Caliph granted
them permission to rule in their respective territories,

Patronizing of Scholars

Caliph Abdur Rahman 11 made it a poi i
Point to call those whi led in
every walk of life t his coune aie who excell

: h the result that scholars and men of
skill om Baghdad, Constantinople, Cairo, Damascus, Madinah,
Makkah, emen, iran, and Khorasan joined the court of :

all belonged to different faiths and nationalities. of Cordova THY

Construction Works
Ee

every succeeding
Mosque. Caliph Abdur
The length of the mosque

Abdur Rahman IIT 133

from the east to the west was five hundred feet while its arches were
based on one thousand four hundred marble pillars. Close to the main
arch lays a high pulpit of pure ivory and of thirty six thousand
wooden pieces of different, colors and designs and studded with
jewels of all kinds. The pulpit had taken seven years to be completed.
Caliph Abdur Rahman III had a new minaret erected for the mosque
eight hundred feet high after removing the old ones and the new
minaret had one hundred and seven ascending and descending steps.
The mosque contained ten thousand big and small chandeliers for
providing light out of which three of the biggest all were made of pure
silver and the rest were of brass. The big chandeliers each had one

thousand four hundred eighty lighted cups, Three hundred employees
maintained the mosque.

Caliph Abdur Rahman 111 built for his Christian wife Zahra a
magnificent palace at the foot of Jabal-al-Urus four miles away from
Cordova. The building was so broad-based that it came to be called
Madinat-al-Zahra (Zahra city) instead of Qasral-Zahra (Zahra palace).
The expanse of the palace can be understood from the fact that its
walls had fifteen thousand high steel doors. The palace was four miles
long and three miles wide. The foundation stone of the palace was laid
in 325 A.H. and it was completed in 350 A.H. Ten thousand masons
and architects and four thousand camels and donkeys were brought to
serve daily during the construction period. The palace had four
thousand three hundred and sixteen towers and was supported by
thousands of pillars made of marble and other precious stone. Some of
the pillars were presented to Caliph Abdur Rahman III by the kings of
Constantinople and France. Marble in large quantity was brought
from Africa by royal engineers like Abdullah Hasan bin Muhammad
and Ali bin Jafar. The biggest golden fountain had a very beautiful
foral pattern and embellishment brought by Ahmad the Greek and
the priest Rabi'a from Constantinople. A fountain of green stone was
brought from Syria. It was filled with twelve birds and animals having
faces of gold and jewels. From the mouth and beak of every animal
and bird would shoot out fresh water and the workmen displayed
such skill and handicraft in the construction of the fountain that it left
all those who viewed in wonder.

134 ___ The History of Islam

(Qasr al-Khulafa‘a) Palace of the Caliphs was a part of this palace ang
was an amazing sight. Its roof was made of pure gold and transparent
marble that one could look at like a mirror. A beautiful and jewel
studded fountain was installed in the middle and upon its head was
set the famous pearl presented to Abdur Rahman [I by the king of
Greece. Besides the fountain, a fountain-like tray was kept in the
middle filled with mercury. The palace had around it very beautiful
mirrors framed in ivory. Jewel studded doors of different kinds of
woods were set in marble and crystal. When the doors were opened
the house would be illuminated with the sun's rays, they were so
bright that you could not look directly into them. The mercury would
be set in motion in such a way that it looked as if the entire palace was
moving and those unaware of its secret would experience fearfully the
sensation that the palace was moving.

Thirteen thousand seven hundred and fifty servants and thirteen
thousand three hundred eighty two Christian slaves were employed.
to serve and maintain this palace. Six thousand women served in the
harem and_ twelve thousand loaves of bread in addition to other food
were dropped in the reservoir just to feed the fish. “Zahra City” was
such a unique palace that travelers from far off places and distant
lands would visit this wonderful building to see the expanse of marble
palaces within a palace, the splendor of the royal court, the orchards
and beautiful settings where thousands of fountains, lakes and
reservoirs flowed. The Arabs had turned the palace into the exhibition
of their skills, construction work and handicraft. Unfortunately, when
the Christians occupied Cordova, they razed Zahra Palace to the

ground, pulled down its mosques, demolished the tombs and even
dug up its graves,

Piety

word to the Caliph
conditions were fulfilled:

Abdur Rahman Il 135
1. in case of dire need.

2 If destruction of property is feared.

3, If the property brings profit to the orphans.

But at present none of the three conditions are being fulfilled for the
price offered by the royal officials was too little. The Caliph kept
silent. Justice Mundhir feared that the Caliph might take the house
and so he had the house pulled down. Afterwards, the official bought
the land at double the price. When the Caliph came to know of this, he
sent for the Justice and inquired about the reason for demolishing the

house. He replied that when he had ordered demolition of the house
he was thinking about the Quranic verse: So they both proceeded,
until, when they embarked the ship, he (Khidr) scuttled it. Musa
(Moses) said: “Have you scuttled it in order to drown its people?
Verily, you have committed a thing Imr (a Munkar — evil, bad,
dreadful thing).” (Q. 18:71)

Hearing this the Caliph kept silent and from that day, he began to
show more respect for Justice Mundhir. This event brings to light the
sense of piety of both the Caliph and the Chief Justice. The Justice died
in 355 A.H. five years after the Caliph. The Caliph Abdur Rahman Ill
died on Ramdan 2, 350 AH. at the age of seventy-two and some
months at the Zahra palace.

Land Revenue

During the tenure of this Caliph twenty five million four hundred and
eighty thousand dinars came to the royal treasury as land revenue
while seven hundred and sixty-five thousand dinars were received
through other sources. The whole income was spent on public welfare.
The amount received by way of tribute and poll-tax collected from the
Christians and the Jews was deposited with the main royal treasury
Out of which one-third was fixed as expenses for the Sultan and the
test was spent on construction of buildings, bridges, and roads.

Death of the Caliph

Following the death of the Caliph some memoirs were found in his
Papers where he had penned .the account of some days during the

136 The History of Islam

fifty years of his life as a ruler when he had free time, they totaled
only fourteen days. He left eleven sons at the time of his death Hakam
bin Abdur Rahman was the crown prince.

Assessment of Abdur Rahman’s Rule

The period of Caliph Abdur Rahman III was the golden period of
Islamic rule in Spain. The country enjoyed complete peace and trading
activity was at its peak. The people of Spain had set up trade centers in
far off places of Africa and Asia. The naval force was matchless and all
the seas were practically ruled by the Caliph’s navy. The Caliph never
let his commanders and officials share royal powers and looked after all
important administrative affairs himself. He gradually limited the
powers of the Arab commanders and jurists and enhanced the powers
and position of his sincere supporters and sympathizers. He built a
squad of security guatds from his personal slaves. Nothing remained
out of his sight and he kept his eyes on everything big or small.

The most significant performance of the Caliph was the annihilation of
feuds and group conflicts. Every party and group enjoyed the rights
they deserved and none of them were hostile to the central rule. This
was the secret of his success asa ruler and it is because of this that the
entire world looked upon the Spanish Muslims with respect.

During the tenure of this Caliph, the non-Muslims, Christians and
Jews, were treated very kindly and gently. The Christians living

within the territorial bounds of Caliph Abdur Rahman III loved him
no less than the Muslims. ١

He reminded the narrow-minded and rigid Muslim spiritual leaders
of the kind treatment the Prophet of Islam (3) would give to the non-
Muslims and he forced them to be aware of and put into practice the
true Spirit of the Qur’an and the Hadith. The Caliph succeeded in his
mission.

The Caliph was not lacking in waging jihad and fighting against the
enemies of Islam. His military actions were remarkable. In the fields of
public welfare, social reforms, building construction and development

of agriculture and economic Progress and promotion of arts and
literature he was unique.

Abdur Rahman Ht 137

During his period, not only Cordova but all of Spain had become a

model of paradise. Not a piece of land was left uncultivated and there
was an abundance of beautiful gardens, which turned the country into
a bed of flowers. No city or town or village was lacking in beautiful
and towering buildings. The Spain, which was the seat of anarchy
and disorder turned into a center of peace and prosperity with his
advent to the throne. The palatial buildings of Cordova and other
cities far exceeded the splendor of Baghdad and Damascus. In
comparison. to Spain, all of Europe looked like a desert without a trace
of culture or manners. The revenue of all the European kings put
together did not equal that of Caliph Abdur Rahman III. The number
of his registered troops reached one hundred and fifty thousand but
the might of his paramilitary force was unknown. The personal
security force of the Caliph consisted of eight thousand horsemen and
four thousand infantry.

There was a network of roads and highways throughout the Spanish
peninsula. Police posts were set up at short distances from each other
to give protection to the wayfarers and a large number of police were
deployed on patrol duty. Messengers would deliver the mail using a
postal service based on a system of fast running horses. News from
one place to another reached with amazing speed. Numerous towers
were built to keep a watch over enemy activities. Construction of these
buildings used large amounts of money from the royal treasury
because they were constructed for the public welfare and safety. Such
construction also provided jobs for both the skilled and unskilled
laborers. As a result, the territories under Muslim occupation had the
largest number of palaces, forts and bridges. Official houses were
provided for the sick and destitute and they were taken care of by
official expenditure. The entire country had orphanages where the
orphans were brought up and educated and the Caliph personally

bore their expenses.

The population of Cordova had reached one million during Caliph
Abdur Rahman's rule. Neat and clean roads and streets, beautiful
houses of marble, admirable drainage systems were some of the
distinctive marks of his remarkable administrative acumen. He had
set up a special department, which worked day and night, for keeping

138 The History of Islam

the city clean. Attractive and graceful gardens dotted the city and the
countryside. The city had approximately one hundred and thirteen
thousand houses excluding palaces and citadels of the Caliph,
Ministers and Nobles. Besides, the city had eighty thousand and four
hundred shops, seven hundred mosques, nine hundred public baths
and four thousand and three basement warehouses for preserving
merchandise and commercial commodities. Cordova had men,
garments and coins of from all countries. The city was twenty-four
miles long and six miles wide and stretched along the banks of
Guadalquivir (Wadi al Kabir). The main city was strongly fortified
and covered an area of fourteen square miles. If anyone covered ten
miles in a straight direction passing through the bazaars, he would
find his path completely lighted by glittering lamps. No one could
draw a_ parallel between Cordova and any other city on the earth. No
other city had handwritten books and manuscripts in such large
numbers, as Cordova possessed. Fresh mountain water entered the
city through pipes, which covered a distance of two and half miles. A
network of water pipes spread throughout the city. Every madrasa,
mosque and inn had a separate set of pipes at their gate. Seven big
gates of the city were kept locked. The city was divided into five parts
within the fortifications each of them had their own separate
fortification. Among_ those five parts, one was the royal palace. It had
its own citadel where the caretakers of the royal administration lived.
Not only in Cordova but all over Spain there were no beggars asking
for alms. Sultan Abdur Rahman 111 had shifted to Zahra city during
the last days of his rule. This city near Cordova had assumed a

separate position and left Cordova behind in beauty and grandeur.

Spain nen abounded in fruits of all kinds, which were very cheap in

A large number of schools and coll ing i i
Poetic sympccis, colleges were running in the capital.

F intellectual gatherings and academic discussions
were held in many places. These gatherings were patronized and
attended by the princes, nobles and the Caliph himself. The presence
° qomonomers, physicians, philosophers, jurists, scholars of Hadith
Io commentators of the Qur’an enlightened Cordova. Boarding and

‎expenses of all the Pupils were paid for from the royal‏ ملام

Abdur Rahman III 139

treasury. During the last days of his life, Caliph Abdur Rahman III
had entrusted a greater part of the administration to the crown prince
and began to devote most of his time to prayers.

Caliph Abdur Rahman 111 finally departed from Spain at a time when
bordering Christian rulers had after the struggle and failure of a
hundred years come to serve and obey the Islamic rule of Spain, even
those Christian rulers who were far off from Cordova tried hard to win
the pleasure of the Caliph. Abdur Rahman ‏آلآ‎ passed away at a time
when Morocco, the Mediterranean Sea and all other oceans were ruled
by the royal fleet and the country was internally peaceful and safe.

Accession of Hakam bin Abdur Rahman III

The third day after the demise of his father Caliph Hakam came to the
throne of Spain at Zahra-Palace on 5 Ramadan 350 A.H. at the age of
forty eight years. Ministers, Commanders, Nobles and the pillars of the
administration appeared before the new Caliph to offer their allegiance.
They took the oath of allegiance after the Chief Justice and other judges
followed by the Caliph's brothers and princes. The servants and slaves
took the oath last of all. The accession of Hakam was celebrated with
great pomp and show. Hakam adopted the appellation of (Mustansir
Billak) “The one who is victorious by Allah.”

A Review of the Administration

Caliph Hakam took a review of all the administrative departments
minutely. He visited the office of each minister, examined military
registers and made himself aware of the number of soldiers serving the
royal forces. He tried to gain knowledge about everything in his
administrative organization although he was already aware of what was
going on. Following this, he issued letters confirming every official and
thus established his prestige as a shrewd and timely ruler.

Revolts of Bordering Christian States

Caliph Hakam was’ extremely fond of reading books and acquiring
knowledge since his childhood. When he ascended the throne of Spain,
he was already mature and wise. Even great scholars and spiritual

140 The History of Islam

leaders felt embarrassed when speaking before him. No country
perhaps has ever had on its throne such a learned and erudite king.
Since his love of learning and scholarly attitude had gained fame far and
wide before he came to the throne, the Christian rulers, thought that he
would not be able to be a brave commander and so they began one by
one to rise up in revolt against him.

The king of Castile began to make inroads into the bordering Islamic
cities. Hakam led his forces against Castile and delivered a smashing
defeat to the Christians and took the battle deep into Galicia.

But the audacious Castilians forgot the punishment and rose up again.
Caliph Hakam sent his freed slave Ghalib at the head of the royal
forces and directed him to chastise them harshly. Ghalib found the
enemy forces much larger than his own however, he launched a fierce
attack relying on Allah Almighty. The Christian forces were defeated
and driven away and Ghalib came back after ravaging a greater part
of Castile and pulling down their citadels.

Shortly after this event news about a revolt by Sancho and the
Christian forces from Leon, Navarre and Castile concentrated their
efforts to help him. Caliph Hakam directed Yala bin Muhammad, the
tuler of Saragossa to punish the rebels. He took on the allied Christian
forces all alone and defeated all of them and appeared before the
Caliph with the captured booty. Yala bin Muhammad was still in
Cordova when news about Barcelona’s rebellion and also of war
preparations by Castile reached Cordova. Caliph Hakam sent Ghalib
to Barcelona and deputed Hudhay] bin Hashim to punish Castile. The
Christians suffered a heavy setback and they had to confess their
allegiance once again.

When Caliph Hakam gave his enemies a number of defeats during the
very first phase of his rule that they all felt dejected and lost hope.
They understood that Caliph Hakam II was not lacking in courage
and determination. Frontier Christians showed open defiance but Yala
bin Muhammad and Qasim-bin Mutrit put them in order. The same
year the Normans invaded the western coast of the Spanish peninsula
and plundered the city of Lisbon. The Caliph ordered his Navy
Commander Abdur Rahman to block the pirates and he himself
marched at the head of an army against them. But the citizens of the

Abdur Rahman II 141

city had driven away the pirates from the land and sea before the
Caliph and the Navy Commander appeared on the scene.

Awe-Seruck Christian Rulers

Ordono the cousin of Sancho and son-in-law of Ferdinand, the ruler of
Castile was the ruler of Leon. When Caliph Abdur Rahman II!
restored Leon to Sancho, Ordono had gone to Ferdinand. Now
Ordono along with twenty men from Galicia reached Salamanca city
in 355 A.H. on the way to Cordova. But Ghalib, the caretaker of the
northern borders stopped him because he was visiting Cordova
without permission of the Caliph. Ordono, the former ruler of Leon
argued that he considered himself an ordinary slave of the Caliph and
was, therefore, going to appear before his master and needed no
permission. However, Ghalib held him in Salamanca and informed
the Caliph about Ordono. The Caliph granted him permission and
sent a commander to welcome him to Cordova.

On entering Cordova, Ordono went to the tomb of Caliph Abdur
Rahman 111, got down from his horse, kept praying for a long time and
moved ahead after offering his prostration to the departed Caliph. The
Caliph allowed him to appear in the court in a white garment, which
was considered a sign of honor among the Umayyads. Abdullah bin
Qasim, the bishop of Toledo and Waleed bin Khairun, the magistrate
of the Christians of Cordova had accompanied him. Appearing before -
the Caliph, Ordono was astonished and awe-stricken by the splendor
and magnificence of the court and took off his cap in a state of
bewilderment. However, his Companions. escorted him towards the
throne and he fell down in prostration before facing the Caliph. He
then raised his head and moved ahead on his knees and lay prostrate
Once again. He reached the spot fixed for him lying in prostration
repeatedly. At last, he sat in the chair put for him. Even though he
made several attempts to utter something, he failed to be able to
Speak. The Caliph in view of his state of bewilderment kept silent for

Sometime and gave him time to collect himself. At last the Caliph
broke his silence and said:

“O Ordono, 1 am happy to see you here. My royal favor will do
the needful for you.”

142 The History of Islam

Having heard this remark from the Caliph, Ordono rose in a fit of joy
and then fell down in prostration once again. He could say only this
much “O my master, | am an ordinary slave of yqurs”. Thereupon the
Caliph said “I reckon you among the well-wishers of my rule and
grant your petition. Do submit it if,you have any desire”. Hearing this
Ordono fell down in prostration once again and lay in this state a little
longer and then raised his head and submitted with all the humility at
his command: “Sancho is my cousin. He appeared before the former
Caliph in this very place. He had none to help him. His subjects were
unhappy with him. The late Caliph granted his petition and made him
king. I did not go against the order of the Caliph and left the country
although the subjects were happy with me. [have now appeared with
my heartfelt passion and a sense of respect for you and entreat you to
grant my rights and restore my lost rule”. Having heard this the
Caliph said, “I understand your object. If your right to the throne is
more than that of Sancho, you will be restored to your country.
Hearing this Ordono fell down in Prostration yet again. The Caliph
adjourned the court and ordered an escort for Ordono to the
guesthouse. On the way to the guesthouse, he saw a throne, which
was used by the Caliph sometimes. Ordono bowed down before the
vacant throne as if the Caliph was sitting upon it. Following this, the
Prime Minister J’afar offered him a costly royal garment on behalf of
the Caliph. After a few days, the Caliph sent Ordono back in the
company of his commanders to have him seated on the throne. Shortly

after that, Sancho and the heads of Zamora:and Galicia sent petitions
to the Caliph with costly presents to confess their loyalty. The rulers of
Barcelona and Tarragona also followed suit.

Following this, the rulers of France, Italy and other Christian States
started sending their emissaries to express their loyalty. The Christian
ruler of western Galicia who had. then grown’ powerful sent his
mother to the Caliph to seek credentials for the rule of her son. The
Caliph treated her honorably and conferred on her what she sought.

Revolt of the Moroccan Rule
Moroccan Rule

The Idrisid ruler of Morocco deputed by the Caliph rose in revolt in 361
AH. The Caliph sent Yala bin Umayyah to Morocco. On hearing of the

Abdur Rahman Ill . 143

invasion, the Moroccan ruler sought help from Muizz Ubaidi, of the
Fatimid Dynasty, and he offered his allegiance to him. The fight
between the two forces was fierce and Yala bin Muhammad was killed
in action and the campaign suffered a setback.

Cordova was shocked to hear of this setback. The Caliph sent Ghalib
to Morocco. With the arrival of Ghalib Hasan, the ruler of Morocco
advanced to take him on. After a number of encounters, Ghalib forced
Hasan to shut himself in a citadel and then he surrender. The ruler of
Morocco was then arrested and sent to Cordova. The Caliph treated
him honorably and kept him as a guest with a daily allowance. After a
short stay, he was sent to Alexandria as per his desire. Ghalib stayed
in Morocco and fortified the administration and returned to Cordova

in 363 A.H. with a large number of prisoners of war. He was accorded
a warm royal welcome.

Crown Prince

The Caliph appointed his son Hisham as crown prince in 365 A.H. and

took from the nobles, ministers and courtiers their oath of allegiance
for him.

Death

Caliph Hakam II died of paralysis in Cordova on Safar 2, 366 A.H. at
the age of sixty-four years after ruling for sixteen years. His son
Hishani was then 11. He came to the throne the next day. Muhammad
bin Abi Amir was made his Prime Minister as per the proposal of
Caliph Hakam 1.

Assessment of Caliph Hakam’s Rule

Caliph Hakam II of Spain was reckoned among the most eminent
scholars. Had there been more engagements and campaigns, he
would have established himself as a commander of the first rank.

His forces quickly put down the few encounters and disturbances
that did occur.

He. passed the _greater part of his time in academic engagements. His
Prime Minister Jafar was equa! to the Prime Minister of Caliph Harun

144 The History of Islam

Ar-Rashid in ability and fame, J’afar Barmaki. Moreover, the Caliph had
spared much of his time by increasingly entrusting important
administrative affairs to his Prime Minister. During this period,
religious fanaticism was absent and every person enjoyed complete
freedom and the court of Cordova was free from narrow mindedness
and low ideals. He was very particular about maintaining justice with
the result that all his subjects were happy with him.

The Caliph observed Quranic injunctions strictly and made the
Muslims keep to them. Prior to his administration, a section of the
Muslim Spaniards had indulged in drinking but he had put a
complete ban on making, selling and the using of winé. He spent a
large amount daily on giving alms. Every city had schools and
colleges. Students from foreign lands were treated as royal guests for
the period they would be studying and acquiring knowledge. The
Caliph appointed his brother Mundhir as the Head of the Education
department.

Hakam’s Love of Learning

Caliph Hakam 11 was well versed in all the sciences. His agents kept
moving in Damascus, Baghdad, Constantinople, Cairo, Makkah,
Madinah, Kufa, and Basra and at places of learning and literature
would purchase any or every good book for the Caliph that became
known. Authors were persuaded to send their books to the Caliph and
he encouraged scholars to come to Cordova and they were elevated to
a high position and a place of abundant wealth. In every city, copyists
were appointed to copy books for the Caliph. The Caliph had friendly
relations with almost all the kings and rulers of the world and they

had given facilities to Hakam’s copyists and translators to provide
rare books to him in any form.

The Caliph of Cordova gained fame far and wide as a great patron of
the arts and leaming. Even writers in Baghdad and Basra dedicated
their books to the Caliph and sent them to him. Hundreds of scholars
were deputed to translate books of Greek and Hebrew. The Caliph

had created such an academic atmosphere all over the country that
every house had a private library.

Abdur Rahman Il 145

Not only Cordova but also every big city had a government library.
Anyone who had a desire to be honored by the Caliph came to him
with a rare and useful book.

Personal Library of Hakam

The personal library of Caliph Hakam was in no way inferior to the
royal palace in grandeur and magnificence. The building was made of
marble with marble grounds and mosaic work of marble and black
stone. Bookshelves were made of Sandalwood, ebony and other
precious wood. Every bookshelf had written in golden letters the
subjects of the books. The royal library had thousands of bookbinders
and _calligraphers. The numbers of books were more than six hundred
thousands.

Catalogue of the Library

The catalogue of the library books consisted of forty-four volumes. The
catalogue had simply the names of the books and their authors. There
was in the library hardly any book, which hadn’t been gone through by
the Caliph. Almost every book had marginal notes from the Caliph and
the first page of each book had the names of the book and the author
and the genealogy of the author in his handwriting. He had an
extraordinary power of memory. He was a critic of the first rank and
could write prose and poetry of all kinds with amazing ease.

Hakam’s Books

The Caliph was particularly very fond of history. He had himself
Penned the history of Spain but it was destroyed with the passage of
time. Cordova had become the center of arts and learning during his
tenure.

Honoring Scholars and Accomplished Persons

Abu Ali Qali of Baghdad had come to Spain during the period of Abdur
Rahman 111. Sultan Hakam never allowed him to leave his company.
Abu Bakr al-Arzaq, a renowned spiritual leader belonged to the family
of Salmah bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan. He had reached Cordova in

146 The History of Islam

349 A.H. and died in Cordova in 385 A.H. at the age of 58 years and
was buried in Cordova. Caliph Hakam showed him great respect.
Ismail bin Abdur Rahman bin Ali belonging to the family of Ibn
Zam‘a had come to Spain from Cairo and joined the circle of scholars.
Thagqr al-Baghdadi and Qayas bin Amr were famous calligraphers and
were held in esteem by the Caliph. Hakam had once sent one
thousand Dinar each to Abul Farh Asfahani and Abu Bakr Maliki.
Muhammad bin Mafraj was an accomplished scholar of Fiqh and
Hadith. Ibn Mughith, Ahmad bin Abdul Malik, Ibn Hisham Al-gawi,
Yusuf bin Harun, Abul Waleed Yunus and Ahmad bin Sayeed
Hamdani were eminent poets. On the order of Caliph Hakam,
Muhammad bin Yusuf Durrani wrote the history of Africa along with
its geography. Isa bin Muhammad, Abu Umar Ahmad bin Faraj,

Yaeesh bin Sayeed were famous historians and scholars in the court of
Caliph Hakam.

Favoring Scholars

An episode regarding Caliph Hakam’s fondness of knowledge is
worth mentioning. One day a fakih named Abu . Ibrahim was
delivering a sermon in the Abu Uthman Mosque. A royal mace-bearer
came and asked the fakih (Jurist) to accompany him to the Caliph
without loss of time and he was waiting outside. The fakih told him to
tell the Caliph that he was engaged in a divine task and could not,
therefore, go to him. The mace-bearer was astonished to get such an
answer and conveyed to the Caliph the reply from the fakih with the
utmost sense of fear. The Caliph asked the mace bearer to go and tell
the fakih that he became happy to hear the reply and wanted him to
visit the court only when his divine duty was over and until then he
would be waiting for him in the court. Abu Ibrahim asked the mace-
bearer to tell the Caliph that his old age allowed him neither to go
tiding nor on foot through the far off gate called Saddah Gate.
However, if the nearby Sana Gate was opened for him he could make
his entry into the court. That gate was usually kept closed and was
Opened only on special occasions. Abu Ibrahim resumed his sermon
while the mace-bearer returned to him with the Caliph’s answer, the
mace-bearer politely sat through the sermon. When the sermon was
over, the mace-bearer told him that Sana Gate was opened for him

Abdur Rahman UI 57

and the Caliph was awaiting his arrival. When Abu Ibrahim arrived at
the gate, he found the ministers and nobles there to accord him
welcome. He went into the court, talked to the Caliph and came back
honorably through the same gate.

Distinctive Characteristics of Hakam’s Rule

Hakam II may rightly be called the greatest Caliph of Spain. It is
because during his period there was peace and order throughout and
power, wealth, agricultural and commercial development was at its
peak. But the progress of arts and learning had left everything else
behind. During Hakam’s tenure, the sun of learning had reached its
meridian, even the Caliphs Harun, Mamun, or Mansur did not share
this exclusive achievement. Caliph Hakam was fortunate enough to
preside over a glittering assembly of scholars. kings, and those powers
patronizing the arts and learning. However, in spite of his amazing
wisdom and learning he was overpowered with love for his son
whom he appointed as his successor although he was only eleven
years old at the time of his demise. One would have expected of
Hakam II alone to have done away with the practice of hereditary rule
but, unfortunately, he too could not break the malaise.

her Mughira would have been a better successor
with his abilities to run the administration. But appointing his son, a
minor as his crown prince and depriving Mughira of the throne,
Hakam II gave the throne to the last Muslim Caliph of Spain. Althoug!
the Umayyad dynasty dragged on for sometime after the demise ‏نه‎
‎Hakam IL, it virtually came to an end with the end of his life.

Hisham [i bin Hakam il and,
Mansur Muhammad bin Abi Aamir

‎demise in 366 A.H. and the accession‏ و
‎persons held powerful positions in‏

‎Caliph Hakam’s brot!

‎At the time of Caliph Hakam I's

‎of his son Hisham I, the following

‎the Islamic Caliphate of Spain.

‎1. Jafar bin Uthman Mustafi, the 9
from the period of Caliph Hakam IL.
respectable.

‎Prime Minister. He held the post
le was able, learned and

148 The History of Islam

2. Queen Sabah, the Christian wife of Hakam and the mother. of
Hisham. She had much influence in the administration and was
deeply loved by the Caliph.

3. Ghalib, the Commander-in-Chief of the Spanish forces. He was the
freed slave of Hakam II and commanded the love-of the troops and
the citizens alike.

4 Muhammad bin Abi Aamir bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin
Aamir bin Muhammad Waleed bin Yazid bin Abdul Malik Ma‘afri.
His ancestor Abdul Malik Ma’afri had come to Spain in the
company of Tariq bin Zeyad, the Conqueror of Spain.

5. Fa’iq, the (Khawaja sara) eunuch and Commanding officer of the
guards of the royal palace and inspector of the wardrobe.

6. Jodhar, the (khawaja sara)eunuch and caretaker of all the bazaars of
Cordova. These two eunuchs were so powerful that even
distinguished nobles feared them and tried to eam their pleasure.

Consultations among the Leaders of the Court

Fa‘iq and Jodhar were present when Caliph Hakam passed away. On
the death of the Caliph, both of them were unanimous that the
accession of prince Hisham was not safe and therefore Hakam’s
brother Mughira should’ be put on the throne for he alone could bear
the burden of the caliphate. Jodhar was of the opinion that Prime
Minister J’afar Mustafi should be assassinated so that the accession of
Mughira might not be obstructed. But Fa’iq was in favor of taking
Prime Minister J’afar Mustafi into confidence and if he differed with
their opinion he would be put to death. J’afar was called in. When the
news of Hakam’s death was broken, he was informed of their point of
view. The Prime Minister understood their intentions and promised to
act according to their opinion. However, he pleaded for the
participation of some other important persons as well. In this way, he
deluded them and came out safely. Shortly after that, he called the
leaders of the caliphate and informed them of the demise of the Caliph
and the opinion of Fa‘iq and Jodhar. He further advised to kill both
Mughira and Hisham to put an end to all the controversies. All those
present supported the decision but none’of them rors to assassinate a

Abdur Rahman II 149

boy of such a tender age. Finally, Muhammad bin Abi Aamir stood up
and went to the house of Mughira who was sleeping unaware of the
death of his brother Hakam. When he woke up and heard of the
demise of his brother, he grew very sad and expressed his intention to
offer his allegiance to his nephew Hisham. When Muhamunad bin Abi
Aamir informed J’afar Mustafi of the loyalty of Mughira for Hisham,
he suggested imprisonment for Mughira instead of assassination.
Jafar threatened that he would send some other person to carry out
his order if he (Abi Aamir) was unable to do the job. Having heard
this Muhammad bin Abi Aamir assassinated Mughira.

Accession

Hisham was then put on the throne. Fa’iq and Jodhar failed in their
mission. They rose to create a stir among the people and drew their
attention to the assassination of Mughira and a feeling of dissatisfaction
overtook the country. Because of this, Christian tributaries of the
northern frontiers attacked the Islamic areas furiously. In such a
turbulent situation, Prime Minister J‘afar did not prove his worth and
embarrassed himself.

Muhammad bin Aamir as Adviser

At last, at the instance of Queen Sabah, Muhammad bin Abi Aamir
was made .to share the administrative responsibilities with J‘afar. Ina
few days Muhammad bin Abi Aamir prevailed over the administration
and took over power from J’afar.

Muhammad bin Abi Aamir’s life

Muhammad bin Abi Aamir was born at Tarkash in Spain in 357 A.H.
where his family was living. His ancestor Abdu! Malik M’afari was a
Yemenite soldier and most of his children received a military education.
Muhammad bin Abi Aamir was still in his mother’s womb when his
father died in Tripoli on the return journey after performing Hajj. The
young Muhammad bin Abi Aamir came to Cordova and joined a
government madrasa. After completing his education, he adopted the
profession of letter and petition writing ina rented shop adjoining the
toyal Palace. This was his only source of income. By chance, Queen

150 The History of Islam

Sabah, the mother of Hisham needed a clerk to write down the
accounts of her own property. A certain eunuch mentioned the name
of Muhammad bin Abi Aamir and he was called to join the task. His
skill and the recommendation of the Queen led him to be appointed as
the collecting officer of Seville. Since he remained far away from
Cordova, he approached the Queen to recommend his name to Caliph
Hakam to have him appointed in Cordova. He was then appointed as
manager of the mint. Muhammad bin Abi Aamir preformed well in
this high office. He also kept Queen Sabah happy with presents and
drew sympathy from the Prime Minister and other nobles as well. In
short, he earned so much confidence that Caliph Hakam made him the
instructor of his son Hisham before his death.

Deeds of Muhammad bin ‏أطخ‎ Amir

When Hisham came to the throne after the death of Caliph Hakam
and the assassination of Mughira the entire administration came
under the control of Prime Minister Jafar Mustafi. Ghalib was
apparently considered a rival to J‘afar. Queen Sabah was very deeply
involved in the affairs of State. Everyone respected her and she was
more sympathetic to Muhammad bin Abi Aamir. Muhammad bin Abi
Aamir, first of all, broke the back of the eunuchs by persuading J’afar
and Ghalib to take action against them. Fa’iq was exiled to Mallorca
and he died there an unknown. Jodhar was forced to resign and their
group was destroyed. It was in this situation that news came that the
Christians of the North had refused to pay tribute and invaded the
Muslim’s territory. Prime Minister J’afar sent Muhammad bin Abi
Aamir at the head of an army to punish the Christians. He gavea
series of defeats to the Christians and returned safely. This victory
enhanced the prestige of Muhammad bin Abi Aamir. The people of
Cordova accorded him a warm welcome and his influence was
strengthened. He joined hands with Ghalib and had Mustafi deposed
and disgraced by putting him into prison where he died.

Since Ghalib was Popular throughout the military, it was not easy to
challenge him. Muhammad bin Abi Aamir launched a recruiting drive
and admitted Christians of the northern hill areas and the Berbers
from Morocco and Tripoli. Ibn Abi Aamir was now the unchallenged
Prime Minister of Spain, However, he showed great respect for Ghalib

Abdur Rahman HI 151

and married his daughter. He was not in danger of losing anything to
Ghalib. Since Muhammad bin Abi Aamir was a very ambitious
person, he did not want to share power with anybody else. As a
matter of planning, he removed a part of the old army and the rest
were deployed to unimportant fronts to disintegrate the organized
power of the forces. He then gradually increased the number of forces
and made new rules and regulations. In this way, he very cleverly
weakened . the position of Ghalib. Following this he also removed
Ghalib from his way without any protest. fbn Abi Aamir and Ghalib
once exchanged hot words, which developed into an armed clash,
with the result Ibn Abi Aamir received a minor wound and Ghalib
fled to the Christian king Leon. On getting rid of his rivals, he put an
end to the power of Queen Sabah and interned Hisham II in a part of
the palace.

Hisham could not go out ‘of the palace but he was provided with all
the pleasures and luxuries of life. Nobody was permitted to see
Hisham. Ibn Aamir then turned to his forces and won their love and
support by giving them unparalleled facilities.

Jihad against the Christians

He then waged Jihad (holy war) against the Christian States,
annexed some of them while some others were punished so harshly
that his name sent them into.a state of terror. The matter became so
serious that some Christian rulers and commanders joined his force
and played an active role in ravaging the Christian States and
started to pull down churches on their own. However, Abi Aamir
stopped them from desecrating the churches and destroying them.
He then turned to Africa and expanded the Spanish territories there.
He waged Jihad fifty six times and won every battle. During the last
days, he adopted the appellation “Mansur” and came to be known

as Mansur the Great.

Death

While returning from the last Jihad in Cas
Salamanca after ruling for twenty-seven years.

tile in 394 A.H., he died in

152 The History of Islam

Assessment of Muhammad bin Abi Aamir’s Rule

Mansur the Great preferred to be called the Prime Minister of Spain
even though he acted as a sovereign ruler in all the affairs of the
country. He built a palace at a distance of few miles from the Cordova
palace, which was like a citadel. He carried all his offices and
treasures to this stronghold. Addresses were delivered in the name of
Hisham along with Muhammad bin Abi Aamir. Nobles and the
leaders of the caliphate showed him the same respect as they did to
the Umayyad Caliphs.

Ibn_Abi Aamir's presence was a blessing to Spain and the Muslim rule
in Spain. He made Leon and the principalities around it a part of the
Cordova caliphate. He succeeded in making Barcelona, Castile and
Navarre tributaries of Cordova. Once an emissary of Ibn Aamir
visited a Christian State whose leader was called Garcia. Garcia
accorded him a warm welcome and led him ona tour of his whole
country. During the tour, the emissary found out that a Muslim lady
was being kept prisoner by some monks. On his retwm while relating
to the Caliph the condition of the State visited by him, he referred to
the woman in confinement. Mansur the Great led an army against that
state immediately. When he reached near Garcia's territory, Garcia
came out submissively and begged to know whether he had
committed any wrong. Mansur told him that in spite of his promise
that his state would not keep any Muslim prisoner a Muslim woman
was in confinement in a certain church. Garcia released the woman at
once and pulled down the Church.

Mansur the Great marched to Coria city on 24 Jamad al-Awwal 387

_AHL and after conquering it entered into Galicia. The Christian
Commanders rushed to seek employment. He took with him those
newly employed Christian Commanders and marched along the
coastal areas punishing the audacious elements and demolishing their
Citadels and conquered some small islands in the Atlantic Ocean. After
conquering the coastal cities of France and demolishing the buildings
functioning as the centers of conspiracies he came back to Cordova.
This was his forty eigthth Jihad.

Abdur Rahman III 153

Showing Regard to Learning

Mansur the Great was very fond of learning like his predecessor
Caliph Hakam II. He was himself a scholar and held scholars in esteem.
His childhood class fellows grew jealous of his glory and grandeur.
They hatched a plot against their Caliph and charged him with being
inclined to philosophy and atheism. But Mansur denied the allegation
by convening a meeting of the religious scholars. He built a number of
bridges, extended Cordova mosque and added to the welfare and
prosperity of his subjects. He led his forces where no Muslim ruler
had ever reached. His name sent terror into the hearts of the
Christians more than anybody else’s did. He rose to the pinnacle of
power and glory. He commands a place of highest distinction among
the most respectable and ambitious men in history. When he died in
394 AHL, the Umayyad dynasty was taking its last breath due to the
ineptitude of Caliph Hisham I] but its glory had touched a new high.

When the news of Mansur’s demise reached Cordova, the well wishers
and supporters of the Umayyads grew happy to think that Caliph
Hisham IL, virtually a pawn, would now be able to take his place as
the sovereign ruler. Some of them called on Hisham to give him the
“good news” of Mansur’s death but Hisham was shocked and
frustrated. When Mansutr’s elder son Abdul Malik came to Cordova to
bury his father, Hisham called him and made him Prime Minister of
the Muslim State and conferred on him the title of “Muzaffar”, the
victorious. Muzaffar followed in the footstep of his father and died in
399 A.H. after ruling for six years. Muzaffar invaded the Christian
countries eight times and every time he came back victorious. The arts
and learning flourished during his period and the power and awe the

tule established during the tenure of his father was not diminished in
- the-least.

On the death of Muzaffar his brother Abdur Rahman bin Mansur alse
known as Abdur Rahman Sanchuelo, became the Prime Minister and
adopted “Nasir” as his appellation. Even though both Muzaffar and
his father Mansur were the real sovereign rulers of Spain, they liked to
simply be called the Prime Minister of the state. However,

in view of
the wide support for Nasir in the court, with the comman

ders and the

154 The History of Islam
friends of his father, he proclaimed his sovereignty and began to show
slackness in paying his respect to the Caliph.

Following this Nasir forced Hisham to proclaim him as the successor
of the caliphate. Thus, Hisham put his signature on a paper prepared
by Nasir who circulated it among the Governors of all Muslim
provinces. The royal proclamation described Nasir as a man froma
respectable family commanding qualities of mind and spirit. The
proclamation was made in the Grand Mosque of Cordova as well.
Although Nasir was very happy with this development in his favor,
this elevation in his position as the successor of the Caliph proved
fatal for him.

Hisham’s Deposition

In the very first year of his tenure Nasir, following the practices of his
predecessors, led his forces against the frontier Christians. The
Quraish and the Umayyad felt aggrieved at the transfer of power from
the Umayyads to another family. Due to this, they secretly began to
arouse the people in support of the Umayyads. When Nasir was
fighting on the northern frontier along with his forces, they killed his
military officers in Cordova. They installed Muhammad bin Hisham
bin Abdul Jabbar bin Caliph Abdur Rahman III, the great grandson of
Caliph Abdur Rahman 111 with the title of “Mahdi Billah”. Installing
Mahdi, they deposed Caliph Hisham II. Nasir marched to Cordova
but as he came near to it most of his Commanders and Berber soldiers
deserted him and joined the camp of the Caliph Mahdi. When Nasir
was left with a very small number of troops, one of his companions
put him to death. His head was sent to Caliph Mahdi. Thus, the rule of
Bani Aamir ended and Spain fell prey to anarchy.

Mahdi bin Hisham bin Abdul Jabbar

In view of the desire of the people Hisham II undertook his deposition
in writing for the second time. Muhammad bin Hisham addressed as
Mahdi interned him in a part of the palace, brought to the throne his
cousin Muhammad bin Mughira and appointed another cousin
Umayyah bin al-Haaf as the police chief of Cordova. Following this he
sent his forces towards the city of Mansur the Great and his palace. The

Abdur Rahman Ii 155

citizens opened the gates of the city without any resistance. Caliph
Mahdi’s forces razed the palace and the other buildings to the ground.
This event took place in 399 or 400 A.H. Following the event of Nasir’s
assassination and the end of the rule of Ibn Abi Amir’s dynasty and as
the fourth Islamic century and three centuries of Islamic rule in Spain
approached its end the doors of anarchy opened.

Military Rule

The Berber troops had played a major role in the deposition of Caliph
Hisham II and the installation of Caliph Mahdi. They were involved
with the Quraish and the Umayyads in the process of the change of
power and they dominated the scene in the administrative affairs of
Caliph Mahdi. The reins of actual power came to the military, which
began to perpetrate a reign of terror on the people. Finally, the people
lodged a complaint to thé Caliph. However, the Caliph paid no heed
to their grievances for fear of the displeasure of the military. Thus,
even those who played an active role in bringing Mahdi to power
turned hostile against him and began to find ways and means of
getting rid of his passive rule. Being fed up with the atrocities of the
Berbers the people killed a few of them and Caliph Mahdi killed the
killers in retaliation. The situation became worse, with the different
factions looking for any Umayyad prince to be the figurehead of their
faction to lend authenticity to their claims.

The Plot against Mahdi

Caliph Mahdi was devoted to breaking the back of the Berber’s power.
However, they got wind of the secret planning of the Caliph against
them and as a counter measure, they set prince Hisham bin Sulaiman
bin Abdur Rahman III against Mahdi by tempting to give him the
throne if he helped in deposing the Caliph. When the plot was
unearthed, Caliph Mahdi arrested Hisham bin Sulaiman and his brother
Abu Bakr and killed them in order to curb the trouble.

Flight from Death of Sulaiman bin Hakam

e assassination of these two relatives one

On hearii news of thi ١
ot ee Hakam fled Cordova for safety. The

Umayyad prince Sulaiman bin

156 The History of Islam

Berbers were looking outside Cordova to find a Person to replace the
present Caliph, When Sulaiman bin Hakam approached, they grew
very happy. They lost no time in proclaiming him as the Caliph under
the title “Musta’in Billah” and persuaded him to launch an attack on
Cordova. Sulaiman bin Hakam counseled against any hasty steps and
pleaded in favor of increasing their military strength. With this plan in
mind Sulaiman, bin Hakam, known as Musta’in went to Toledo and
appointed Ahmad bin Naseeb as his Prime Minister.

Civil War

Musta‘in took troops from Toledo and marched to Salamanca. Mahdi
sent his slave Qaisar at the head of a squadron of horsemen to help
Wadah Aamiri, a commander of the northern provinces and the freed

slave of Mansur bin Abi Aamiri. Qaisar was killed during the fight
and Wadah closed himself inside the fort.

Sulaiman at Mahdi both seek Help from the Christian King

In view of failing to win the battle and the shortage of provisions
Musta’in wrote the Christian king Ibn Alfonso to supply food and
forces so that he could conquer Cordova and take the Caliphate. On
hearing this news, Mahdi also sought help from the Christian king

with the promise of handing over all the frontier forts and cities to
him. However, the Christian king preferred Musta’in and sent him
one thousand oxen, fifteen thousand goats and other necessary
Provisions accompanied by Christian forces. Now Musta’in marched
to Cordova instead of fighting with Wadah. Wadah also marched
behind Musta‘in but he commitied a blunder by attacking Musta’in’s
force. In the wake of a bloody battle, Mahdi’s army was defeated
losing twenty thousand of his men. He fled to Toledo with the rest of
his troops while Musta’in entered Cordova victoriously. Since the
victory was won with the military support of the Christians, they were
warmly welcomed although a large number of Muslim scholars and
intellectuals were killed by these savage Christian troops. Caliph
Mahdi once again wrote to the Christian king from Toledo and sought
his military help. This was an excellent opportunity to set Muslim
against Muslim and weaken their power and unity. Mahdi attacked

Abdur Rahman Ill 157

Cordova with the help of some Christian troops. After a bloody battle,
Musta’in was defeated while Mahdi entered Cordova victoriously and
regained his throne. The Christian forces, which had been with
Musta’in, joined the camp of Mahdi. This battle took a heavy toll on
the Muslims. Musta‘in left Cordova and stormed through the rest of
the country. The Christian troops on the other hand let loose a reign of
terror against the Muslims of Cordova, while Mahdi fell into a life of
pleasure and luxury. Thus Spain, which had been enjoying peace and
order, became a center of looting, arson and anarchy.

Deposition of Mahdi

Wadah Aamiri was an ally of Mahdi but when he noticed the country
was in jeopardy he indulged in extensive consultation with the
influential persons of Cordova about the deposition of Mahdi and the
restoration of the throne’ to Caliph Hisham 11. They had Mahdi
assassinated by a slave in the open court and Hisham II was taken out
of prison and put on the throne once again.

Peace with the Christian King

Wadah Aamiri, the freed slave of Mansur bin Abi Aamiri, became the
Prime Minister. Wadah sent the head of Mahdi to Musta’in and wrote
to him that Caliph Hisham had come to the throne once again and it
was proper for him to offer his allegiance to the Caliph. But Musta’in
Tejected the message with contempt and Musta’in invaded Cordova
with the help of the Christian king Alfonso. Cordova was surrounded
after the adjoining areas were ravaged.

Being fed up with the long siege and in order to bring about a
separation between the Christian king and Musta’in, Hisham H gave
away two hundred citadels and a few big cities adjoining the Christian
kingdom. He signed a peace treaty with the Christian king who broke
his relations with Musta’in. But Musta‘in continued the siege with the
result that the stress of the trial of strength began to show on both
sides. Sometimes the citizens of Cordova would drive away the
Berbers and at times, the Berbers would make progress into the city.
The Christian powers took advantage of this disturbing situation and
took away a number of States from Cordova.

158 ___ The History of Islam

End of Hisham

At last Musta‘in occupied Cordova in Shawal in 403 A.H. Hisham II
was either killed or had disappeared without leaving any trace
behind. Wadah Aamiri had already "been killed a few days prior.
Musta‘in thus came to the throne of Cordova.

Musta’in Billah

Musta’in was now the Caliph of Cordova. But various provinces had
become independent of the central rule of Cordova. Ibn Ubad began
to rule in Seville, Ibn Aftas in Badajoz, Ibn Abi Aamir in Valencia and
Murcia, Ibn Hud in Saragossa and Mujahid Aamiri in Denia and
Alzira. The northern Christian states took full advantage of the
turbulent situation. Every Christian State annexed the territories

adjoining it. The era of anarchy took hold of the Islamic caliphate,
which was tom into pieces.

Assassination of Musta’in

Musta’‘in ruled Cordova and its suburbs til! Muharram, 407 A.H. and
after ruling nominally for a period of three years and a few months
Musta‘in was arrested and killed shortly after being defeated on a
battleground adjoining Seville. This led to the end-of the Umayyad rule.

End of the Umayyad Rule

Although the rute of the Umayyad dynasty had come to an end in 407
A.H. with the assassination of Musta’in some of the Umayyads tried
to regain power and in some cases gained nominal success, by 408
A.H. the end was complete. Ali bin Humud came to the throne in 407
A.H. after killing Musta’in. He and his brother ruled Cordova until
413 A.H. Ibn Jumud’s rule ended in 413 A.H. and Abdur Rahman bin
Hisham bin Abdul Jabbar, the brother of Mahdi came to the throne in
Ramadan 414 A.H. with the support of the people of Cordova. He
adopted the title of “Mustahzhir”. Within two months Muhammad
bin Abdur Rahman bin Ubaidullah bin Abdur Rahman won the
throne of Cordova and began to rule with “Mustakfi” .as. his title,

Abdur Rahman Ul 159

Yahya bin Ali bin Humud attacked Cordova in 416 A.H. and Ali bin

Humud fled to the North and died there. Yahya bin Ali bin Humud

continued to rule in Cordova until 417 A.H. But Prime Minister Abu

Muhammad Jamhur bin Muhammad bin Jamhur took the oath of

allegiance from Hisham bin Muhammad the Umayyad in his absence.

Hisham bin Muhammad was with Ibn Hud in Lerida. Having heard
of the allegiance to him, he shifted to Bidant. He stayed there for three
years and adopted the title “Mutamid Billah’. When the nobles
clashed with one another, Hisham bin Muhammad was brought to
Cordova and they installed him as their ruler. But the troops rose
against him in 422 A.H. and deposed Hisham bin Muhammad.
Hisham came to Lerida and died in 428 A.H. with the end of Hisham
bin Muhammad ended even the nominal caliphate.

Assessment of the Umayyads

Abdur Rahman I had laid the foundation of his rule in Spain in 138
A.H. This rule lasted for two hundred ninety years and met its end in
428 A.H. with the death of Hisham bin Muhammad. Among the
progeny of Abdur Rahman | there were a few ambitious and
adventurous rulers who made Spain the pride of all countries. They
not only made the country advanced and prosperous but developed
arts and learning to such an amazing extent that the whole world
praises them even to this day. Europe owes most of its progress in the
realm of arts and learning to Muslim Spain. The Spanish Caliph had
burnt the candle of learning that enlightened all of Europe. The might
and grandeur of the Muslim rulers of Spain had made them a terror to
the Europeans who would go down to any level to win the pleasure of
the Muslim Caliphs. The sole reason behind the annihilation of the
Muslim rule in Spain was the rulers making a distance between
themselves and the Islamic Code and the sublime teachings and
character of the Prophet (3). Islam was totally against the concept of
dynastic rule, However, the Muslims later made the transfer of the
tule to be hereditary, as was the practice before Islam. The Prophet (#)
had done away with this practice but the Muslims later embraced this
evil practice with the result inept and unworthy persons came to
power. A negligent way of following the injunctions of the Qur’an and
the Code of Islam resulted in disunity in Muslim ranks and constant
infighting, which strengthened the powers hostile to the Muslims.

Chapter 6
Bani Hamud’s (Hammudid’s) Rule

The Idrisid dynasty referred to above was founded in Morocco
during the caliphate of Harun Rashid Abbasi and it had already
become extinct. Two full brothers, Ali and Qasim, accompanied
the Berbers who had come to Spain from Morocco during the
period of Ibn Abi Aamir. These two were the sons of Hamud bin
Maimun bin Ahmad bin Ali bin Ubaidullah bin Umar bin Idris. Ali
and Qasim were descendents of the founder of the Idrisid dynasty
and they joined the services of Ibn Ali Aamir’s forces. They fought
valiantly against the Christians and Ibn Abi Aamir was very
happy to appoint them as officers in the army. As high-ranking
Officers of the Berber regiment, they enjoyed support and
Satisfaction of the soldiers particularly because their dynasty in
Morocco had been very influential. These two brothers played a
Pivotal role in uprooting Ibn Abi Aamir’s rule and made Musta’‘in
the Umayyad Caliph of Spain. On coming to the throne in Cordova

usta‘in appointed Ali bin Hamud the Governor of Tangiers and
١ other provinces.
162 The History of Islam

Ali bin Hamud_

Since various provinces had been proclaiming their independent rule
during the short tenure of Musta‘in, Ali bin Hamud also declared
himself a sovereign ruler of Tangiers. He later forged an alliance with
Khairan, the Governor of Almeria and sent a force to Spain. He
deputed his son Yahya in Tangiers and he marched to Cordova and
spread the rumor that he had come to avenge the blood of Caliph
Hisham II. Musta‘in fought Ali bin Hamud on the battlefield of
Malaga. In Muharram, 407 A.H. Musta’in suffered a smashing defeat.
Ali_ marched ahead and captured Cordova, killed Musta’in and sat on
the throne with the title “Nasir-Li-Dinillah’. Since Ali bin Hamud
enjoyed the support of the Berbers, he had no opposition. The earlier
part of Ali bin Hamud’s rule was graceful for he tended to keep justice
but later he tured his people against himself. He started levying tax
after tax on the people with the result that both the military and the
civilians turned against him. In view of this development, Khairan the

Governor of Almeria recognized Abdur Rahman bin Muhammad as
the king of Spain.

Assassination of Afi bin Hamud

Ali bis Hamud had some Saqlabi among his special slaves. These
slaves were supported by Khairan who was from the Saqlabi

(former slaves) and they killed Ali bin Hamud in the bathroom in
408 A.H.

Qasim bin Hamud

The people generally rejoiced at the assassination of Ali bin Hamud.
In. spite of this, the Berbers called Qasim bin Hamud the brother of Ali
bin Hamud to Cordova from Algeciras and put him on the throne.
However, the Berber regiment was in favor.of Yahya the son of Ali.
Khairan Saqlabi on the other hand toured the country along with
Abdur Rahman bin Muhammad and the people started favoring
Abdur Rahman but a few days later the Governor of Granada, a

Berber Commander killed Abdur Rahman bin Muhammad on the
‏وزع مع اقم‎

Bani Hamud’s (Hammudid’s) Rule 163

Yahya bin Ali, the Governor of Malaga, had a brother named Idris
bin Ali bin Hamud. After winning the support of his brother, he
entered the territory of Spain by ship and staked his claim to the
throne in opposition to his uncle. Khairan Saqlabi joined Yahya even
though Idris, the brother of Yahya brought to his attention the
mischievous nature of Khairan but Yahya ignored it saying that he
could benefit from his help at the time. Yahya marched on Cordova
with his army and Qasim fled from there and took refuge in Seville
with Qadi Ibn Ubad.

Yahya bin Ali bin Hamud

Qasim fled from Cordova on 1 Jamad al-Awwal 410 A.H. and Yahya
bin Ali sat on the throne unopposed with “Mut'ali” as title. Yahya made
himself to be the ruler of Spain after coming on the throne of Cordova
although nobody recognized him as the ruler outside of Cordova
because everyone else had already declared their own sovereignty.
The negligence and stupidity of Yahya led the people to rise up
against him and many commanders of the Cordova forces went to
Seville to persuade them to invade Cordova. Upon being aware of
these developments, Yahya grew so afraid that he fled to Malaga.

Qasim Re-Enthroned

With this news Qasim came to Cordova in 413 A.H. and began to rule
it. Yahya began to rule in Malaga. But his brother wrested power from
him and he (Yahya) shifted to Tangiers: Thus Cordova came to be
ruled by Qasim, Malaga by Idris and Tangiers by Yahya bin Ali.

Massacre of the Umayyad
w displeased with Qasim before long. The people
her hand began to think of an Umayyad prince

they could put on the throne. But Qasim started killing and arresting
the Umayyads without discrimination. The people raised their voice
against these atrocities. Qasim used the Berber force to put down the -
insurgence of the citizens. The citizens rose up as one man and drove

away Qasim and his troops by defeating them openly. The Berber
troops conceded defeat and fled to Malaga while Qasim went to

The Berber chiefs gre
of Cordova on the ot!

164 __ The History of Islam

Seville. Qasim had made his son the Governor of Seville and
appointed Muhammad bin Ziri and Muhammad bin Ubad as his
advisers. When they heard of Qasim’s return after his setback they
shut the doors of Seville and decided to fight him. Qasim stayed
outside the city and sent word to the chiefs to send his.¢on out so that
they could leave for anywhere else. They sent out his son and his
other relatives. Qasim took his relatives along with his Negro slave
and took refuge in Sarish Fort but Yahya bin Ali conquered the Sarish
Fort in 415 A.H. and put Qasim in prison. In 427 A.H., Qasim was
killed by the order of Yahya.

Abdur Rahman bin Hisham

When Qasim left for Seville after his defeat,-Cordova remained
without a ruler. During this period, three princes staked their claim to
the throne. The people of Cordova elected Abdur Rahman bin Hisham
to the throne with “Mustazhir” as his title. On coming to the throne,
he set Abu Imran, a Berber free against the will of his ministers and
appointed him as his Commander. Buta plot hatched by Abu Imran
led to Mustazhir’s assassination on 3 Dhul Qada 414 ‏.كلم‎

Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Mustakfi

Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah sat on the throne with
“Mustakfi” as his title. Yahya bin Ali bin Hamud who had already
arrested his uncle, Abul Qasim and conquered Sarish, Malaga and
Algeciras marched on Cordova. Mustakfi grew so terrified that he fled
to the northern borders and died there on 25 Rabia al-Awwal 416 A.H.
Yahya entrusted Cordova to an officer named Ibn Ataf and left to
Malaga and started military preparations to conquer Seville. Shortly
after that, the people of Cordova drove away Ibn Ataf and his troops
from Cordova.

Among the people of Cordova was one very influential person
named Abu Muhammad jamhur bin Muhammad. Advised by this
person the people of Cordova accepted Hisham bin Muhammad
staying at Lerida as their Caliph. He was not able to arrive in
Cordova for three years. However, he came to Cordova in 420 A.H.
and ascended the throne with “Mutamid Billah” as his title. Two

Bani Hamud's (Hammudid’s) Rule 165

years after the people and troops of Cordova deposed and drove
him away in 422 A.H. and he went back to Lerida and lived there
until 428 A.H. Yahya bin Ali surrounded Seville and kept Cordova
under threat. On the departure of Hisham from Cordova, the people
declared their allegiance to Yahya. Yahya made Seville obey him in
426 A.H. Thus, Yahya bin Ali became one of the stronger leaders in
this state of anarchy. Abu Qasim bin Ubad, the ruler of Seville died
the same year. His son Mu'tazid succeeded him. Seville took up
arms once again and Yahya bin Ali attacked Seville but was killed.
This event took place in 427 A.H. With the killing of Yahya bin Ali,
his supporters shifted to Malaga the center of his power. Idris bin
Ali ascended the throne with the title “Mu'taid Billah.” Abu
Muhammad Jamhur set up a democratic rule and the members of
the Council elected him as its president and Cordova came back to
peace and order. Idris bin Ali formed an alliance with the Governors
of Carmona and Almeria and invaded Seville. This campaign
covered a period of three or four years during which Idris bin Ali
passed away in 431 A.H. Some of the Commanders made an attempt
to bring his son Yahya bin Idris to the throne of Malaga while others
accepted the claim of Husain bin Yahya, the governor of Ceuta.
Finally, the latter came from Ceuta and ascended the throne under
the title “Mustansir”. But Husain’s cousin the daughter of Idris
poisoned him to death. From that time, Malaga was ruled by the
slaves and servants of their family.

Idris bin Yahya Hamudi

At last Idris bin Yahya bin Ali bin Hamud occupied the throne of
Malaga in 443 A.H. Grariada and Carmona States offered their
allegiance to him. Idris bin Yahya adopted “Aali” as his title and
entrusted Ceuta’s mule to his father’s slaves Sukut and Zarquilah.
Muhammad bin Ali bin Hamud revolted in 448 A.H. and Idris bin
Yahya suffered a defeat and fled to Carmona. Muhammad bin Idris
ascended the throne in Malaga under the title of “Mahdi” and
appointed his brother "Sanai" his successor. Muhammad bin Idris died
in 449 A.H. and with his death, Idris bin Yahya ascended the throne
again. He died in 450 A.H. ١

166 __ The History of Islam

Muhammad Asghar-the Last King of Hamud Dynasty

After this Muhammad Asghar bin Idris bin Ali bin Hamud sat on the
throne of Malaga. Baris bin Habus, the king of Granada invaded
Malaga and dislodged Muhammad Asghar from Malaga. Muhammad
Asghar came to Almeria and stayed there in a state of frustration. On
the request the people of Melilla (Africa) he went there and ruled until
460 A.H. Muhanunad Asghar was the last king of the Hamud dynasty
who ruled Malaga until 451 AH. Qasim bin Muhammad entitled
“Wathiq Billah” ruled over the Province of Algeciras until 450 A.H.
He also belonged to the Hamud family. Mu’tazid bin Abul Qasim bin

Ubad, the ruler of Seville occupied Algeciras in 450 A.H. and arrested
Muhammad, This was the end of Hamud dynasty in Spain.

Chapter 7 ١
State of Anarchy

Banu Abbad, Banu Dhun’nun, Banu Hud etc.

The rule of the Umayyads came to an end with the end of the fourth
century Hijrah. We have covered a period up to 450 A.H. while
dealing with the Hamud dynasty although Hamud only ruled some
small territories of the Spanish peninsula. There were other
contemporary dynasties, which had sovereign rule over separate parts
of the peninsula. Since their coverage will not consume much space,
we are mentioning them 25 whole. We have chosen only those who
exemplify the realities of the era and maintain the continuity of the
historical events. The separately ruled states had their beginning when
the Northern Christian powers were making a total effort to expand
their territories and took advantage of the situation by setting one
Muslim ruler against another.

Seville and Western Spain (Banu Abbad or Abbadids)

Among the Abbad was a man named Muhammad bin Ismail bin
Quraish of the town of Tashana who would lead the prayers. His son
Ismail was appointed minister in the court of Seville in 413 A.H.

168 . The History of Islam

1 1 hamumad becanie the
il bin Muhammad’s son Abul Qasim Mu! |
Ondi and Minister of Seville. When Qasim bin Hamud came to Seville,
Abul Qasim Muhammad the Qadi of Seville and Muhammad bin
Zubairi blocked his entry into the city.

Abul Qasim Muhammad

Shortly after that, Abul Qasim Muhammad tumed Muhammad bin
Zubairi out of Seville and occupied Seville on his own. Qasim bin Hamud
left for Carmona where Muhammad bin Abdullah Barzali had set up his
soverdign rule in 404 A.H. After a short time Qasim bin Hamud left for
Fort Sarish and Muhammad bin Abdullah continued his mule in Carmona.

Abu Umar Abbad

Abu Umar Abbad ascended the throne of Seville after his father Abul
Qasim Muhammad and called himself “Mu'tazid”. Mu'tazid fought
several battles with Muhammad bin Abdullah, the ruler of Carmona.
Ismail bin Qasim bin Hamud killed Muhammad bin Abdullah and
captured Carmona. Shortly after that Ismail went to Algeciras and
Carmona was occupied by Muhammad bin Abdullah's son Aziz known
as Mustazhir. A short time later Mu’tazid conquered Carmona, Sarish,
Arcos, and Ronda. Abdul Aziz Bakari was the sovereign ruler of Adinah
and Silves. Mu’tazid, the ruler of Seville invaded his territories but Ibn
Jamhur, the Prime Minster of Cordova intervened and brought peace
between the two. Soon after the

death of Ibn Jumhur, Mutazid conquered
Adinah and Silves and sent his son Mu’tamid to rule over the annexed

territories. Muzaffar, the ruler of Setubal died in 422 A_H. and Mu’tazid
annexed Setubal too in 443 A.H. by dislodging Muzaffar’s son.

Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Yahya had set up his rule in Lablah in 414
AH. He died in 433 AH. and was succeeded by his brother
Muhammad bin Yahya. Mu‘tazid invaded Lablah. Muhammad bin

Yahya left Lablah and joined his nephew Fath bin Khalaf bin Yahya in
Cordova, Mu'tazid occupied Cordova too in 445 A.H. He also wrested

ia from Rashiq and Martelah from Ibn Taighar and gradually
expanded his territories and thus estal

a lished the rule of the Abbads.
Badis bin Habus had i
and Mu’tazid ‏مك‎

with one another and the matter was still
undecided when Mu'taz:

id died in 461 A.H.

State of Anarchy 169

Mu’tamid bin Mu’tazid bin Ismail

He was succeeded by his son Mu’tamid bin Mu’tazid bin Islamil.
Mu’tamid too, like his father, started expanding his territories. Badis
bin Habus conceded to the supremacy of Mu’tamid. Ferdinand, the
Christian King of Castile and Leon because of the fighting among the
Muslims took advantage of the opportunity and attacked Seville with
fuli force. The Mustim rulers had in order to overpower their Muslim
rivals agreed to pay tribute to Ferdinand and seek his help. Mu’tazid
also agreed to pay tribute to the Christian king to avoid his expected
attack. Ferdinand I died in 458 411. He was succeeded by his son
Alfonso VI. He was very arrogant. Mu’tamid fortified his military
strength by 468 A.H. and stopped paying tribute to the Christian king.

Alfonso’s Plunder of Islamic Cities

Besides Banu Abbad in western Spain some chieftains were also
having territories under their sovereign rule. Those independent of
Banu Abbad had gone under the influence of the Christian king.
Alfonso VI had grown very strong by plundering Islamic cities and
teceiving tribute from the Muslim Chiefs. He built a huge force and
wrested Toledo from’ Qadir, the last king of Bani Dhun‘nun in 478
AH. He then became a source of trouble to all the Muslim States.

Alfonso demanding Tribute

Alfonso’s Jewish emissary Ibn Shalib called on Mu'tamid and
demanded tribute. Mu’tamid gave it immediately. But the emissary
sent it back to Mu’tamid saying that he would not accept silver coins
and wanted the tribute in gold ones. On receiving this message,
Mu’tamid called the emissary and punished him by driving nails into
his hands and feet. Finding himself on the point of death, he entreated
that in case he was forgiven he was ready to give him gold equal to his
weight. But Mu’tamid paid no heed and killed the emissary and
arrested those accompanying him. Mu’tamid was now sure of
Alfonso’s invasion. Alfonso grew very furious when he found out
about the death of his emissary. The Muslims on the other hand were
‏مه‎ strife-tomn that they could not save Spain from Christian occupation.

100 The History of Islam

Mu’tamid Seeks Yusuf bin Tashfain’s Help

In view of the looming disaster Mu'tamid told Yusuf bin Tashfain, the
tuler of Morocco that without his help Islamic rule in Spain would
meet its doom. Yusuf bin Tashfain was a renowned and victorious
king. On the request of Mu’tamid, he - rushed to Spain and reached
Seville. Alfonso also marched to Seville from the other side.

Historical Battle with the Christians

On the Battleground of Zallacca both forces came face to face in 480

A.H. (October 23, 1086 C.E.). The joint army of Yusuf bin Tashfain and

Mu’tamid went up to twenty thousand while the Christian army had

sixty thousand troops ready to fight. This battle is reckoned among the

most significant battles of Spain because it fortified the Muslims power
in Spain for several hundred years and they became a terror for the
Christians once again. The dimensions of fighting may be measured
from the simple fact that, according to Ibn Athir (The famous historian),
Alfonso VI escaped from the battlefield with not more than three men
while the rest fell fighting. In the wake of such a major victory the
Muslims gained an opportunity to put their ranks right but this hope
was not to be realized. Shortly after the return of Yusuf bin Tashqain to
Morocco, large-scale infighting started among the nobles and chiefs of
Spain once again. Even though Mu’tamid was fond of learning and was
a patron of the scholars with the conquest of Zallacca his style of life
took a change for the worse. Yusuf bin Tashfain came to Spain once
again and instructed his governor in Spain to keep an eye on the
troublemakers and later he annexed Spain. He arrested Mu’tamid and
confined him at Aghmat in Morocco where he died after four years in
488 A.H. Thus came the end of Bani Abbad’s rule.

Banu Aftas Rule in Badajoz

In the wake of Spain being taken over by disorder Abu
Muhammad Abdullah bin Maslama, commonly known as Ibn
Aftas, occupied Badajoz and declared his sovereignty. After his
death, his son Abu Bakr Muzaffar succeeded him. He was
involved in fighting with Banu Dhun’nun and Banu Abbad and
had to remain confined to his fort. At last, fon Jamhur brought

State of Anarchy 171
peace between the hostile parties. Muzaffar died in 660 A.H. and

was succeeded by his son Abu Hafs bin Muhammad known as
Sajah with "Mutawakkil” as his title.

Yusuf bin Tashfain’s Occupation of Badajoz

Yusuf bin Tashfain captured Badajoz in 489 A.H. and did away with
Mutawakkil and his progeny. He was punished very harshly for his
entering into secret correspondences with the Christians to invade

Spain and to put an end to the influence of Yusuf bin Tashfain on
the country.

Ibn Jamhur’s Rule in Cordova

Jamhur bin Muhammad with Ibn Hazm as his filial name came to the
throne of Cordova with the support of the people. He formed an
executive committee under his leadership and ruled with common
consent. He also disliked being called a king or Sultan. He was a pious
and virtuous man and his rule was commendable. He would attend

patients and join public assemblies. He died in 435 A. H. and was
buried in his house.

Abul Waleed bin Jamhur bin Muhammad

Jamhur bin Muhammad was succeeded by his son. Abul Waleed
Muhammad _ bin Jamhur with the unanimous support of the people of
Cordova. He also valued scholars and religious divines like his father.
On his death, he was succeeded by his son Abdul Malik, who the
people began to hate.

Abdul Malik bin Jamhur_

Banu Dhun‘nun invaded Cordova. Abdul Malik sought help from
Banu Abbad. Abbadid forces drove away Dhun’nun but they
occupied Cordova and put Abdul Malik in prison. This was the end of
the Jamhur dynasty in 461 A.H. Mu’tazid Abbadi appointed his son
Sirajuddaula as the Governor of Cordova however, he was poisoned
to death shortly after being appointed. Following this Mu 'tazid seized
Cordova and began to rule.

172 The History of Islam

Ibn Habus’s Rule In Granada

At the time Banu Hamud set up their rule a Berber Chief Zadi bin Ziri
Manad had founded his rule in Granada. When Spain was overtaken
by civil war, chief Zadi deputed his son in Granada artd he went to the
king of Qairwan in Africa. In his absence, his brother Maks bin Ziri
seized Granada and dislodged his nephew. Maks bin Ziri died in 429
A.H. His son Badis known as Ibn Habus succeeded him. bn Habus
clashed several times with Dhun‘nun and Ibn Abbad. He had a Jew
named Ismail as his Prime Minister. Ibn Habus died in 467 A. H. He
was succeeded by his grandson Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Balkin
bin Badis with “Muzaffar” as his title. He appointed his brother
Tamim as Governor of Malaga as per the will of his grandfather.
Yusuf bin Tashfain’s of the Almoravids (from the Arabic Murabitun
those serving at the frontier out posts) deposed and exiled both the
brothers to Aghmat in Morocco.

[Editors Note: The name Almoravids is a corruption of the Arabic:
Murabitun (from the Arabic root for rabat or outpost), which was
made by orientalist historians and remains in this corrupted form in
the history books of the west until today.]

Banu Dhun’nun’s Rule in Toledo

At a time when Spain was stormed by riots and violence, Ismail bin
Zafir bin Abdur Rahman Sulaiman bin Dhun’nun seized Aqlanteen
Fort. Yaeesh bin Muhammad bin Yaeesh, the Governor of Toledo
declared his sovereignty. When he died in 427 A.H. the commanders
of the forces of Toledo called Ismail from Aqlanteen Fort to seize
Toledo. Thus, Ismail occupied Toledo without any resistance and
began to rule successfully. Ismail bin Zafir died in 429 A.H. and was
succeeded by his son Abul Hasan Yahya with “Mamun’” as his title.
Mamun became a very strong ruler in a state where there was nothing
but anarchy in the atmosphere. He fought several battles with the
Christian chiefs. Among the offspring of Mansur the Great was a man
named Muzaffar, who had occupied Valencia province. Mamun
distodged him in 435 A.H. and annexed Valencia. Mamun then invaded
Cordova and took it away from the Banu Abbad. Following this, his

State of Anarchy 173

son Abu Umar was killed by the people of Cordova. Mamun was also
poisoned to death in 467 A.H. Then Toledo came under the control of
his grandson Qadir bin Yahya bin Ismail. Alfonso, the Christian king
of Castile invaded Toledo. Qadir bin Yahya vacated Toledo but sought
Alfonso 1/15 help in the occupation of Valencia. Valencia was then

under the control of Qadi Uthman bin Abu Badr bin Abdul Aziz.
When the citizens of Valencia, came to know of Alfonso’s possible
attack on Valencia they deposed Uthman bin Abu Bakr and brought
Qadir bin Yahya to power. Qadir passed away in 481 A.H.

Banu Hud’s Rulers in Saragossa

When Spain was overtaken by riots and violence at the end of the
Umayyad Dynasty, Mundhir bin Mutrif titled Mansur proclaimed his
independent rule in Saragossa. He entered into a pact with the
Christian rulers. Mansur died in 414 A.H. and was succeeded by his
son, Muzaffar. Toledo was then under the rule of Abu Ayub bin
Muhammad bin Abdullah (the freed slave of Abu Hudayfa). Sulaiman
bin Muhammad bin Hud who was a commander in the Northern
territories, overpowered and killed Muzaffar and seized Saragossa
and also took the title Musta’in. Muzaffar’s son Yusuf then began to
rule in Lerida and set out on a new series of battles.

Sulaiman ibn Hud, known as Musta’in died in 437 A.H. and was
succeeded by his son Ahmad with Muqtadir Billah as his title.”
Mugtadir Billah sought help from the Christian rulers of Southern
France and the. Basque country and they came to his help. Yusuf
fought valiantly and surrounded both Muqtadir and the Christians in
Saragossa. This event took place in 443 A.H. Yusuf met with failure in
this siege and. the Christians returned to their respective lands.
Mugtadir died in 474 A.H. after ruling in Saragossa for 37 years.

His son succeeded him in Saragossa with “Mu’tamin” as his title. He
was well versed in mathematics. He wrote a number of books on this
subject. He died in 478 A.H. the same year the Christians wrested
Toledo from Dhun‘nun. His son Ahmad with Musta‘in 11 as his title
succeeded Yusuf Mu’tamin. During his tenure, the Christians surrounded
Huesca. Ahmad Musta’in marched from Saragossa in 489 A.H. and took
on the Christians at Huesca but was defeated leaving ten thousand

174 The History of Islam

Muslims dead. Ahmad Musta‘in returned to Saragossa and continued to
rule. Since the victory at Huesca had encouraged the Christians, they
built a strong army and attacked Saragossa in 503 A.H. Ahmad Musta’‘in
came to out of Saragossa to take on the enemy and was killed in the battle.

Ahmad Musta’in was succeeded by Abdul Malik in Saragossa with
Imaduddaula as his title. But the Christians seized Saragossa in 512

A.H. and dislodged Imaduddaula. He took refuge in the citadel of
Rueda and died in 513 A.H.

His son Ahmad ascended the throne in the citadel with Saifuddaula as
his title. He tried his level best to restore his ancestral country from the
Christians but failed in his efforts. At last, he sold the Rueda citadel to

the Christians and began to live in Toledo along with his relatives and
died in 536 A.H.

Islands of Eastern Majorca, Minorca, and Sardinia

Isam Khulani conquered. Majorca in 290 A.H. and was appointed the
Governor of the territory by the Sultan of Spain. Isam was succeeded
by his son, Abdullah, as the Governor of Majorca. He ruled until 350
A.H., Caliph Nasir then appointed his servant Muwaffaq the
Governor of the island. Muwaffaq waged jihad on France several
times. He died in 359 A.H. His servant Kauser was appointed the
Governor of the island. He passed away in 389 A.H. Mansur then sent
his slave Mugatil to the island as the new Governor. He died in 403
A.H. Following him Mujahid bin Yusuf bin Ali Aamiri was appointed
the Governor of Majorca. Abdullah became the Governor after him and
he conquered and annexed Sardinia in 415 AH. A man named
Mubash’shir became the Governor in 468 A.H. until then the islands of
Majorca, Minorca and Sardinia were governed by anarchy however,
Mubash’shir brought them together to make a united country and
waged jihad against France. At last, the Christian rulers of Barcelona and

France surrounded Majorca on alll sides, Mubash’shir sought help from

Ali bin Yusuf bin Tashfain. Ali sent his warships without loss of time

and drove away the Christians. Following this, the Almoravids began to

mule the islands and then shifted to the Almohads and during their last

days, the Christians seized these islands. ,

Chapter 8
Christian Brutality in Spain

Almoravid Rule

The Almoravids take their name from the Arabic Al Murabit and in
Azabic, they were called the Murabitun. The name is derived from the
Arabic for those dwelling in frontier fortresses. We will have to go"
back to bring about the continuity of events. When the Muslim
kingdoms were over taken by chaos and disorder, the Christian states
of the northern frontiers began to see the opportunity for
advancement and prosperity. They first tried hard to aggravate
anarchy and internal fighting in the Muslim ranks. Alfonso VI built his
force to fight the Muslims. He persuaded all the Christian States
bordering Muslim Spain to attack and achieved success in his mission.
He took Toledo from the control of Qadir Billah and annexed it. He
asked the Christian clergy to convert the Muslims to Christianity
through sermons but in the wake of a total failure in this mission,
Alfonso VI began to perpetrate atrocities against the Muslims and
could not stop himself from demolishing mosques and converting
grand mosques into churches.
: 6 The History of Islam
17

istian ki Aragon massacred Muslim forces pretending
me Cer ‏ادش‎ to invade Valencia. Rodmir, the Christian king
wrested Saragossa from the Muslims and did not hesitate in the least
from pulling down mosques. It is worth mentioning that the Muslim
powers had so many times defeated the Christians and entered into
their cities victoriously but never showed any brutality nor killed
innocent Christian women and children.

After conquering Toledo Alfonso made an attempt to step into the
territory of Barcelona. Mu‘tamid bin Mu’‘tazid Abbadi, the king of
Barcelona was then engaged in fighting with the king of Almeria so he
sent tribute to Alfonso to avert trouble. Alfonso sent word to
Mu’tamid that he wanted to keep his pregnant wife in the Cordova
Mosque until she delivered and so he should make arrangements for
the delivery and Zahra Palace should also be vacated for him.
Cordova was then under the control of Mu’tamid but Mu’tamid
rejected the petition point blank and killed his envoy as a punishment
for. his impertinence of requesting gold instead of silver, as already
mentioned. Hearing this Alfonso VI marched ahead and made the
demand, after encamping on the bank of Guadalquivir, that the city
and its palaces be vacated for him. Mu'tamid replied on the back of
his letter that he would not take much time in teaching him a lesson.
This brief answer sent terror into the heart of Alfonso and he held
back from attacking. However, he spread the rumor throughout that
Mu‘tamid had invited Yusuf bin Tashfain from Morocco to help him.
He did this because the Muslim chiefs of Spain disliked the entry of
the Moroccan king into their country and considered it a matter of
utter disgrace, yet they felt no shame in Paying tribute to the
Christians. In the wake of such a tumor, the Muslim rulers wrote
letters decrying such an injurious step taken by Mu’tamid. Mu’tamid
wrote back the following to one and all:

41 prefer watching the camels to favoring the pigs”

What he meant was that if Alfonso captured him he would make him
serve his pigs while Yusuf bin Tashfain would take him to Morocco
and ask him to graze his camels if he occupied Spain. He would,
therefore, never like to become the prisoner of Alfonso, Following this
Mu’tamid sent an ambassador to Yusuf bin Tashfain to seek his help

Christian Brutality in Spain Yow

against the Christians. Yusuf bin Tashfain rushed to Spain. Alfonso
tio started preparations to face such a formidable enemy and
collected sixty thousand brave and seasoned warriors from various
sources. Then looking at his huge army, Alfonso remarked with the
utmost arrogance that even the angels from heaven could not
defeat his force. Following this, he wrote a letter to Yusuf bin Tashfain
who was with Mu’tamid in Seville. Referring to his large army and
military strength he hurled a stream of abuses at him. Yusuf asked his
secretary to write a reply. He drafted a lengthy well formatted letter in
reply. Yusuf rejected it saying that such an ornamentation of style was
not needed and wrote with his own pen on the back of Alfonso’s
letter;

“One who remains alive will see”

Alfonso grew terrified with the brief reply. Both forces faced each
other on the battleground of Zallacca. The Muslim force was not more
than twenty thousand in number. When the Muslim force moved
ahead on Wednesday, Rajab, 479 A.H. Alfonso sent word that he
requested to go to war on Saturday. Yusuf and Mu’tamid granted his
petition. However, Alfonso had actually deceived the Muslim army
and _ he launched a sudden attack while the Muslims were in a state of
complete unawareness. However, they rose very cautiously and
courageously to stop the invading Christian force and began to fight
valiantly. Three horses fell dead under his thighs but he felt no terror
and as Yusuf bin Tashfain made his charge the Christians sustained
heavy losses of men. Alfonso VI received deep injuries and fled the
battlefield of Zallacca on Rajab 20, 479 A.H. with only a few hundred
soldiers. Muslim forces stayed on the battleground for four days.
Mu’tamid asked Yusuf about the distribution of the spoils of war, he
teplied that he had come to help not to secure spoils of war. Both
Yusuf and Mu‘tamid went together to Seville. Yusuf took a rest for
Several days and then retuned to Africa. Alfonso lost his senses after
this smashing and disgraceful defeat however, the Muslim chiefs
didn’t take advantage of the terrible setback of the Christians and
continued to engage in mutual conflict and feuds. In view of the
Plight of the Muslims the Christians began to muster courage once

again and began to conquer Muslim cities including some of the
Citadels of Seville.

178 . The History of Islam

In response to the petitions of Spanish Muslim nobles, Yusuf bin
Tashfain came to Spain once again. Muslim discord had risen to such
a height that they even started quarrelling in the presence of Yusuf bin .
Tashfain. He grew so disappointed that he left for Morocco without
doing anything.

Two years after that Yusuf bin Tashfain came to Spain again in 483 A.H,
to punish the audacious Christians. The Spanish Muslim rulers had
already acknowledged him as their patron. This time Yusuf bin Tashfain
reached near to Toledo pushing back and defeating the Christian forces
and besieged it. During the siege he asked the nobles of Spain to come to
his help to make the siege a success. However, nobody paid any heed to
his call, particularly, Abdullah bin Balkin, the king of Granada.
Therefore, Yusuf bin Tashfain raised the siege and returned from
Toledo, the capital of Alfonso VI. Then he decided to set the nobles of
Spain in order, he arrested Abdullah, the ruler of Granada and his
brother Tamim, the ruler of Malaga and sent them to Africa.

Following this, in Ramadan, 483 A.H., Yusuf bin Fashfain left his
nephew and commander Sair bin Abi Bakr bin Tashfain with the force
in Spain to punish the Christians and went back to Africa. He attacked
Alfonso and wrested a few places from him. It was essential for the
Muslim rulers of Spain to reinforce the Moroccan Commander but
they refused flatly to do anything for him. Paying no attention to the
unworthiness of the inept rulers of Spain, he kept marching against
the Christians and took large amounts of territory including Portugal
and forced some Christian rulers to obey him. When he consolidated
his position in the conquered territories, he informed Yusuf bin
Tashfain of his conquests along with fact that the Muslims of Spain
extended him no help and they actually kept friendly relations with
the Christians in a situation when the very integrity of Islam was at
stake, he asked the Moroccan ruler to issue orders for his next step.

Yusuf bin Tashfain wrote him to keep waging Jihad on the Christians
and make fresh attempts to seek the help of the rulers of Spain. If they
take part in his mission, he should not oppose them. However, in case
they lend support to the Christians against him, it is better that he
should occupy their territories. He should make it a point to first

occupy the Muslim states bordering the Christians so that those

Christian Brutality in Spain 179

territories could not join the Christians. This instruction was
implemented in letter and spirit and Sair bin Abi Bakr first turned to
Ibn Hud, the king of Saragossa. At the time, Saragossa was under the
control of the Christians. The Muslim king of Saragossa was then
staying in Rueda and ruling over the surrounding areas. Sair
conquered Rueda rather easily. He then wrested Murcia from Abdur
Rahman bin Tahir in Shawwal 484 A.H. and sent him to Africa.
Shortly after that he annexed Almeria and Badajoz and conquered
Carmona, Baiha, Bhalat, Malaga, and Cordova. Mu’tamid, the king of
Seville then started preparations against the Almoravids. He was at
the time the strongest of ail kings in Spain and he also sought help
from Alfonso. Alfonso sent a force to reinforce Mu’tamid. Having
heard of the approaching Christian help Sair bin Abi Bakr besieged
Seville on one hand and sent a commander to stop the Christian force
on the other. The stated commander defeated and drove away the
Christians. Sair bin Abi Bakr conquered Seville and arrested and sent
Mu’tamid along with his family to Africa where he lived in detention
and died in Rabia al-Awwal 488 A.H.

Yusuf bin Tashfain Occupies Spain

The entire Islamic Spain came back under the control of Yusuf bin
Tashfain, and the state of anarchy ended. Spain was ruled by Yusuf
bin Tashfain, king of the Almoravid’s Viceroys and Governors. The
Strife-torn country of Spain, which was about to go to the Christian
fold, was saved by a Muslim king. All hopes entertained by the
Christians of taking back Spain were dashed to the ground. Although
the Christians were in control of the northern areas of the Peninsula, a
large part of the populated and fertile area was under Muslim rule.
Muatadi Bi‘amrillah, the Caliph of Baghdad sent him a garment and a
Standard and conferred on him the title of “Amir-ul-Muslimin”
(Commander of the Muslims).

Yusuf bin Tashfain’s Death

From the time of his occupation of Spain Yusuf bin Tashfain remained
alive for fifteen years and died in 500 A.H. It was a peaceful time in
Spain. The citizens of the Arab race distiked the Almoravid rule because

180 The History of Islan;

they hated the Berbers ruling over them but this was their mistake.
Had the Berber Muslims not been ruling over them the Christians
surely would have.

Abul Hasan Ali-bin Yusuf bin Tashfain

Abul Hasan Ali bin Yusuf bin Tashfain succeeded his father at the age
of 33 years. He surrounded Toledo in 503 A.H. The city could not be
conquered owing to its strong fortifications and its situation. But Ali
conquered Hijarah valley and its surrounding cities. The same year he
wrested Lisbon and the remaining cities from the Christians. Ali bin
Yusuf appointed his brother Tamim bin Yusuf as the viceroy of Spain.
When Tamim heard of the military preparations of Alfonso I bin
Ramirez, the king of Barcelona he attacked and stopped their advance
and conquered and annexed Saragossa. The king of Barcelona sought
help from the king of France and besieged Saragossa in 512 A.H. The
Muslims could not withstand the invasion of the very large Christian
force and in the face of the scarcity of food, they opened the.gates of
the city of Saragossa. The Christians conquered other cities and
citadels also. The news of the fall of Saragossa came as a shock to Ali
' bin Yusuf. He lost no time and rushed to Spain in 513 A.H. and passed
through Barcelona and Cordova on route to Saragossa and conquered
all the areas won by the Christians and returned to Morocco in 515
AH. after punishing the Christians and obtaining their submission.
Alfonso VI who had made Toledo his capital died in 513 A.H. But
Alfonso I of Aragon was still alive and was known as Ibn Ramirez.
With the retum of Ali bin Yusuf to Morocco Ibn Ramirez attacked the
Islamic occupied areas with the support of the Christian citizens of
Toledo and they were committed to the invasion of Granada. Ramirez
advanced with a large army but Tamim bin Yusuf bin Tashfain gave
them such a crushing defeat that he fled to Barcelona after losing half
of his troops. A large number of Christians inhabited Grenada and its
environs and they kept plotting against the Muslims. In the wake of
such a situation Ali bin Yusuf came to Spain in 516 A.H. and sent a
large number of Christians inhabiting Granada and its surroundings
to Africa and scattered others in various places throughout Spain.

Abu Tahir Tamim bin Yusuf appointed his son Tashfain bin Tamim

Christian Brutality in Spain 181

bin Yusuf bin Tashfain as the viceroy of Spain. Ali bin Yusuf died in
Rajab, 537 A.H. after ruling for thirty-six years and seven months. '

Abu Muhammad Tashfain

Ali son Abu Muhammad Tashfain succeeded him. Ali bin Yusuf had
come to Spain for the last time in 516 A.H. He became involved in the
controversy regarding Muhammad bin Abdullah known as Mahdi,
the Promised in Morocco. The strife became aggravated to such an
extent that even Ali’s son Abu Muhammad Tashfain could not escape
it after coming to the throne and could not pay attention to Spain.

Tashfain bin Ali

When Tashfain bin Ali succeeded his father in Morocco in 537 A.H.
He appointed Yahya bin Ali bin Ghania as the viceroy of Spain. Yahya
did his level best to save Spain and reduce the power of the
Christians. The Almoravid rule on the other hand showed signs of
weakness and decline and at last, Tashfain bin Ali died in 539 A.H. in
a state of frustration after sustaining a defeat from Abdul Mumin, the
leader of the Almohads and follower of Muhammad. Abdullah.

Effect of the End of the Almoravid Rule On Spain

in view of chaos and anarchy prevailing in the seat of power of the _
Almoravids the rulers of various Spanish territories declared their
sovereignty as had happened following the end of the Umayyad
dynasty. Muslim Spain was then so terribly fragmented that every city
and town had its separate rule and every ruler had his own chosen
title. But the worst was their unfriendly and hostile attitude of one
towards another and the entire Muslim Spain was engulfed by strife
and fighting. The Christians had an opportunity to seize the whole
Peninsula. Yahya bin Ali, the Viceroy of Spain, had joined the
anarchists by seizing Cordova. He was not the strongest of all. {n such
a turbulent atmosphere Abdul Momin, the ruler of the Almohads
dislodged the Almoravids from Morocco and deputed his own
commander in Spain and occupied it in 542 AH. and after a short
period of anarchy, Spain joined the Almohads rule.

182 The History of Islam

During the Almoravid rule, Muslim jurists were very strong. Both the
kings, Yusuf and Ali followed the Maliki doctrine and valued the
jurists very highly. The highly learned and pious rulers had gone to
the extent of being labeled as the enemy of philosophy and scholastic
philosophy. Qadi Ayadh had made the royal court issue orders
against the works of Imam Ghazali and any body possessing any piece
of his work was subject to capital punishment.

Chapter 9
Almohads (AI-Mowahad) Rule in Spain

Muhammad bin Abdullah Tumart

Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Tumart, known as Tbn Tumart, was
born in the village of Sus in Morocco. He belonged to the Berbers of
Mauritania. He later claimed to have descended from Ali bin Abu .
Talib carrying his pedigree from Hasan bin Ali.

In 501 A.H. he left his territory in quest of knowledge and stayed in
the eastern countries for about 14 years. He took lessons in Fiqh from
Abu Bakr Shashi and learnt Hadith from Mubarak bin Abdul Jabbar
and other scholars. He achieved the honor of drinking from Imam
Chazali’s fountain of knowledge. He turned towards his motherland
halting at Alexandria. Even in this short duration he campaigned
against practices foreign to the Islamic Shari’ah, which led to his
expulsion from the city. However, he feared none in spreading good
and eradicating evil. He was, by all standards, a pious and righteous
person. Ibn Khaldun reports his piety and purity in clear and strong _
words. He lived a life of utmost simplicity in food and clothes. He -
commanded grace and dignity and showed a cheerful disposition. But

184 1 ١ The History of Islam

his creed regarding the attributes of Allah was a mixture of Ashairah,
Sheiates and Philosphers. He could speak Arabic fluently and the
Berber language was his mother tongue. In 515 A.H. he returned to his
motherland and plunged heart and soul into preaching to his

countrymen.

Declaring Himself as Imam Mahdi

He claimed for himself the status of Imam Mahdi and formed various
classes of his followers. He called the first as Muhajirin and the second
Muminin. There were seven or eight classes in total. When the number
of his followers increased he brought them under the command of
Abdul Mumin and asked him to wage a war against the Almoravid
Rule. In the first encounter Abdul Mumin's Army was defeated and
later due to a power struggle among the Almoravids it gave them a
hold over a considerable part of Morocco. Ibn Tumart had started
military activities in 517 A.H. and died in 524 A.H. after 7 years of
hectic military activity. He appointed Abdul Mumin as his successor
with the title of “Amir al-Muminin’. By this time Ibn Tumart'’s dynasty
had become a formidable power and a rival of the Almoravids.

Abdul Mumin

At the same time, Abdul Mumin, a man from the Berbers came to him
and joined his circle of disciples. In his thoughts and feelings he was
very much like Ibn Tumart. The ruler of the couritry showed dislike
for Tumart’s thoughts and activities and decided to do away with
him. However, Ali bin Yusuf stood in the way and argued that he saw
no reason for his elimination. Following the insistence of the Muslim
jurists, he was expelled from Morocco. Ibn Tumart set up his
headquarters in the High Atlas Mountains and shifted there with his
followers. A large number of Berbers came and joined his camp.

His father’s name was Ali who belonged to Kaumia Clan among the
Berbers of Mauritania. He was born in 487 A.H. Shortly after the
demise of Ali bin Yusuf bin Tashqain in 537 A.H. the whole of
Morocco came under the sway of Abdul Mumin. Since the main
message of the teachings was belief in the perfect oneness of God his
followers came to be called Mowahads [(from the Arabic root of the

Almohads (Al-Mowahad) Rule in Spain 185

word one: wahid) those who believe in perfect oneness, the name
was corrupted to be Almohads by orientalist scholars and remains in
this form in the western history books until today, we continue to use
this corrupted name in this volume for the sake of easy reference for

the reader.

Abdul Mumin’s Conquest of Spain

After taking charge of Morocco Abdul Mumin sent General Abu
Imran Musa bin Sayeed to Spain in 536 A.H. He first conquered
Tarifa. He then marched to Saltes and Seville and then brought
Cordova under his control. In 541 A.H., Abdul Mumin decided to
come to Spain but the news of uprisings on his eastern borders
stopped him. However, he sent his sons to Spain. Thus Abu Sayeed
bin Abdul Mumin won Alzira and Cordova fell to Yahya bin Maimun,
a general of Abdul Mumin, in 545 A.H. Abdul Mumin laid the
foundation for the city of Rabat (camp or outpost) and named it Al-
Fath (Victory), this is the present day capital of Morocco. It was there
that he quartered troops for the jihad on Spain. Abdul Mumin crossed
the Strait of Gibraltar and made inroads into Spain. It was from there
that the chiefs and rulers of a number of territories thronged to extend
their loyalty to him. Thus the flag of Islam fluttered over Spain.

In 555 A.H. Abdul Mumin appointed his son, Abu Sayeed, the
Governor of Granada and viceroy of Muslim Spain. However, Abu
Sayeed had to go to Morocco in response to a call from his father.
During his absence, aman, Ibrahim by name, captured Granada and
declared his independent rule. Abu Sayeed proceeded to Spain along
with his brother Abu Hafs. Ibrahim came out with his troops and gave
a fierce battle, which resulted in the defeat of Abu Sayeed and the
death of Abu Hafs. Abu Sayeed took refuge in Malaga. He kept his
hope intact and built a large army to avenge his defeat. Abdul Mumin
dispatched his third son Abu Yaqub and General Abu Yusuf bin
Sulaiman to assist Abu Sayeed. The Almohads became victorious after
extensive bloodshed. [brahim conceded defeat and sought forgiveness,
which was granted. After winning peace all around Abdul Mumin
began to build a huge army to advance further into European
territories. At last he was able to raise 5 hundred thousand fighters

186 , The History of Islam

from Africa, Spain and Moracco. He was about to move forward with
his massive army when he passed away in Jumad al-Thani 558 A.H.

Abu Yaqub

His son, Abu Yaqub Yusuf caine to ‘the throne as his successor, he
failed to fulfill his father’s dream because of some internal problems
and impediments. The Christians, on the other hand, captured some
of the western districts of Spain. Abu Yaqub moved forward at the
head of ten thousand men and retook the territories captured by the
Christians. He than laid siege around Toledo but raised it to go back
to Morocco. In 580 A.H. the Christians of Santaren city rose once again
against the Muslim rule. Abu Yaqub Yusuf rushed to Spain and

besieged Santaren. During the siege that took over a month he fell ill
and died in Rajab, 580 A.H.

A Review of Abu Yaqub’s Reign

Abu Yaqub was good-natured, enlightened and a great lover of
learning. Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Tufayl, a leader in Philosophy
was his courtier and adviser, another scholar, Abu Bakr bin Sane,
known as Ibn Maja was among his main advisers. At the insistence of
Ybn Tufayl, Abu Yaqub called Abul Waleed Muhammad bin Ahmad
bin Muhammad bin Rushd from Cordova and enlisted him among his
honorable courtiers. He is the same Ibn Rushd who was a renowned
philosopher and critic of Aristotle's philosophical thoughts. He very
ably highlighted the inherent weak points in the Philosophy of the
Greek scholar. During the reign of Abu Yaqub all the countries from
Morocco to Tripoli and the entire Spain including the Island of Sicily
and. other Mediterranean Islands came to the fold of Islam.

Abu Yusuf Mansur

After Abu Yaqub, his son, Abu Yusuf took the throne at the age of 32.
He was born of a Christian mother named Sahira. During his reign in
Spain, Muslim power and welfare remained the dominant factor. In
his qualities of mind and spirit Mansur was similar to his father. He
held the religious scholars in high esteem and was fond of books. He
passed his life mostly in Spain. In 585 A.H. he eliminated Christian

Almohads (Al-Mowahad) Rule in Spain 187

influence from the western parts of Spain. Alfonso, the King of Castile,
was eager to sign a peace treaty for five years with him. Mansur
granted his entreaty. Being safe from Muslim invasion he embarked
on his plan of building a strong army from all the Christian lands
including Spain.

Since Mansur had a very strong navy, Salahuddin Ayubi sent his
envoy and poet Abdur Rahman bin Mungad to Mansur with a letter
requesting him to reinforce the Muslims with his warships against the
Christian forces and help him guard the coastal areas of Palestine.
Since Sultan Salahuddin Ayubi recognized the Caliph of Baghdad as
the Caliph of the entire Muslim Ummah, he did not address Mansur
with a title. This attitude of Salahuddin Ayubi enraged Mansur.
Although, he greeted the poet and emissary he paid no heed to the
request of Salahuddin and simply kept delaying the matter.

Alfonso 11 of Castile, enjoying peace with the five-years no war-pact,
plunged himself heart and soul in making massive military
preparations against the Muslims. He gave the ensuing war the air
of a Crusade and thus attracted active help and support from the
entire Christian community. At last, he arrived at Alarcos in Badajoz
along with several Christian rulers and their forces in Rajab, 591
A.H. The two forces clashed on the battlefield of Alarcos. Although
the Muslim fighters were much less in number, the Christians
suffered a crushing defeat and fled the field leaving behind one
hundred and forty-six thousand killed and thirty thousand captives.
It was a great victory indeed. The volume of preparations made
against the Muslims can be gauged from the fact that the fleeing
Christian fighters left on the battlefield one hundred and fifty
thousand tents, eighty thousand horses, one hundred thousand
mules, four hundred thousand donkeys and sixty thousand coats of
mail of different designs. Mansur very generously distributed
among his soldiers all the spoils of war.

Alfonso fled for his life and 'took refuge in the Alarcos Fort with the
rest of his troops. But Mansur moved forward at his back and laid
siege around the fort, Alfonso escaped and went to Toledo. He was so
overwhelmed with grief and anger that he had his head and beard
shaved and vowed while holding the Cross that he would not enjoy

The History of Islam

188
comfort and luxury unless he avenged the killing of the thousands of

Christians by the Muslims. When Mansur came to know of this, he
rushed to Toledo immediately, besieged the city and began to destroy
the fort, its walls and ramparts with his war machine. In this grim
situation Alfonso II, acted very disgracefully by sending his mother,
wife and daughters to the court of Mansur. They came bareheaded,
and Alfonso’s mother begged forgiveness for her son. She cried and
bewailed so pitiably and Mansur was moved so deeply by the scene
that he not only forgave his sworn enemy but also treated the ladies
honorably and sent them back laden with costly gifts. He then raised
the siege of Toledo and went back to Cordova. The thirty or forty
thousand Christian prisoners languishing in confinement were sent to
Morocco to settle there.

Mansur was good-natured, pious and a staunch follower of the
Surah, the practices of the Prophet Muhammad (3). Following his
order, the persons leading the Muslims in prayer would recite
Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim aloud preceding Al-Hamd in prayers. He
died in Safar, 595 A. H. after reigning for fifteen years. King Richard
of England died the same year.

Abu Abdullah Muhammad

His son, Abu Abdullah Muhammad came to the throne in Safar 595
AH. at the age of 17 with Nasir LI-Din-Allah as his appellation. With
the beginning of his reign, the eastern parts of Morocco faced
insurgence and disorder and some of the chiefs of the Almoravids
started capturing territory. Nasir had to stay in Morocco to put down
the uprisings. The Christians, after being defeated by Salahuddin
Ayubi in Syria and pates time fled back to Europe burning with anger.
They worked out a plan to invade Spain and Morocco to avenge their
crushing defeat in Syria and Palestine. They gave a call to the Christian
world to join the crusade against the Muslims. The Archbishop of
Rome proclaimed a crusade against the Almohads. At the same time
the nobles rose against John, the King of England and the Archbishop
proclaimed the King excommunicated from Christianity. John sent a
three-member deputation to Nasir in Morocco. They met Nasir and
gave his letter to the Muslim ruler, which sought his military help to

Almohads (Al-Mowahad) Rule in Spain 189

put down the insurgencies in his country. He had also written about
his readiness to embrace Islam by renouncing Christianity. Bishop
Robert was the leader of the delegation. He also spoke strongly in
support of the letter. Nasir grew doubtful of the letter and their intent
and greeted them rather coldly. He thought that they wanted to
change their religion for worldly gains. He was sure that the King of
England would proclaim his acceptance of Islam despite his cold
attitude if Islam had actually entered his heart.

Nasir was a man of polite nature and hated unnecessary bloodshed.
His army, which was very strong, active and spirited during the reign
of his father, had now lost much of its vitality and fighting spirit.
Besides, his predecessor would give each of the soldiers a quarterly
reward in addition to their monthly salaries but Nasir abandoned the
practice, which led to the frustration of the troops and their Generals.
King Alfonso set up a military camp in Toledo where Christians from
Europe and other countries rushed to join. Spain was nearer to Europe
in comparison to Syria and Palestine and they could mobilize their
military might much easier.

When Nasir heard of the military preparations of the Christians, he
mobilized his troops from Morocco and Spain and declared Jihad
against the Christians. About six hundred thousand Muslim fighters
gathered at Seville while Alfonso’s forces encamped at Al-Uqab near
Salem. Nasir’s troops also reached Al-Ugab. The Christians were
growing mad with rage and their defeat in Syria had ignited the fire of
revenge against the Muslims. The state of the Muslim Army was the
opposite. Almost the entire fighting machine was in a state of revolt
and they presented a scene of disorder. The soldiers had received no
salary for some months not to speak of gifts and rewards. The
commanding officers intended defeat as the only course left to win the
attention of their ruler to gain their rights and welfare.

When the battle line was drawn between the rival forces, some of the
Generals left the battlefield with the troops under their commands. In,
‘the midst of fighting a large number of Muslim fighters buried their
spears in the ground instead of piercing them into enemies’ bodies,
while others threw their swords towards the enemy’s rows. Others
refused to obey the orders of Nasir. Thus those sincere and spirited

190 The History of Islam

fighters lost their courage when they watched others indulge in
activities injurious to the Muslim cause and the very safety of Islam.
The miserliness of Nasir coupled with disgraceful deceit and
disloyalty of the Muslim soldiers inflicted an untold loss to Islam and
its followers. Never in the whole history of Islam had Muslim forces
taken the field in such a large number and had the bulk of the Muslim
troops not been treacherous the Christian Army would have tasted the
most smashing and ignominious defeat. They would have been
crushed more relentlessly then what they experienced in Syria and
Palestine. How pitiful it is that six hundred thousand men conceded
such a shameful defeat and only one thousand of the whole army
remained alive to mourn the disaster. Nasir fought gallantly but his
sword could not change the defeat into victory. Almost all the soldiers
of the defeated Muslim army were either killed in the battlefield or
slaughtered in captivity.

Nasir came back to Seville, defeated and frustrated. The Christians
went wild and started plundering cities and killing Muslim men,
women and children in as many numbers as they could. When
Alfonso noticed the Christians’ large-scale indulgence in loot, arson
and massacre he tried to bring the situation under his control. But it
resulted in their opposition to the King. Moreover, the Christians from
other countries began to leave for their respective countries, Alfonso
saw this development with a sense of satisfaction. The damages
caused by the Christians brought the decline of the Muslim rule in
Spain. Many towns, villages and settlements had a deserted look and
none of them could escape from death. In Shaban, 610 A.H. Nasir
came to Morocco from Seville and died shortly after that.

Yusuf Mustansir

Nasir was succeeded by his son Yusuf on Shaban 11,610 A.H. and

. adopted the title of Mustansir. He was only 16 when he ascended the
throne. He died after tuling the country for a decade. He was lacking
in courage and spirit and lived a very luxurious life. Most of Spain
was captured by the Christians during his rule. During his entire
tenure of ten years not even once did he leave Morocco and he never
went to Spain after becoming king.

Almohads (Al-Mowahad) Rule in Spain 191

Abdul Wahid

His brother, Abdul Wahid came to the throne after Mustansir. After a
short tenure of nine months he was dethroned and assassinated by his
nobles and courtiers.

Abdul Wajid Adil

At that time another son of Nasir and the brother of Abdul Wahid was
the Governor of Murcia, a province of Spain. He staked his claim to
the throne when he heard the news of Abdul Wahid’s assassination
and he came to the throne in Murcia with the title of Adil.

The same year 621 A.H. the Christians attacked him and he was
defeated in the battle. Following this he appointed his brother Idris as ©
his deputy in Seville and went to Morocco. The people of Morocco
had enthroned a young boy of 16, Yahya bin Nasir and gave battle to
Adil. Adil was arrested, knowing of this Idris came to the throne with
the title of Mamun. It was at the time when the Almohads had lost
their power and influence all over Spain and Morocco. Banu Marin
were taking over the lead in Morocco while the nobles of Spain
refused to accept men from Morocco and Berbers to rule their destiny.
They also feared that weak Moroccan rulers would surrender their
country to the Christians leaving them to pass the rest of their lives as
slaves. Thus a person from Bani Hud named Muhammad bin Yusuf,
rose to the occasion and laid the foundation of his rule.

End of the Almohads’ Rule

Thus was erased the name of Almohads from the face of Spain by 625
A.H. Mamun set up his center in Ceuta fort and died there. His son,
Rasheed succeed him. Bani Marin were gradually and Steadily
developing their might with the result they captured Morocco
completely ending the Almohad Rule.

Chapter 10
Anarchy again in Muslim Spain

As has already been mentioned, many sovereign states emerged out of
the ruins of Banu Umayyad and the Christian Kings took advantage of
their constant rivalries. They expanded their territories by taking
Muslim lands. Later the Almoravids came to power in Muslim Spain and
small Kingdoms united under one Muslim rule. Almohads establishe?
their rule on the debris of the Almoravid dynasty. The Christians’ gains
from the prevailing anarchy were not insignificant and whatever the
Almohads had established as a result of the united Muslim front was
lost on the battlefield of Al-Ugab. It was an opportunity for the
Christians to wipe out: all traces of the Muslims from the face of Spain
but the corrupt practices of the Christian fighters invited hatred and
opposition to the Christians in Spain. When the Almohad Rule came to
its end, more than half of the northern part of Spain and all the western
provinces had already come under Christian control. Muslim Spain was
overtaken by anarchy once again. Muslim rule was again broken into
small fragments each at war with another. Every Muslim chief invited
the Christian troops against another and offered them some cities and
forts in retum for their military help. This depravity of the Muslim
rulers was very pleasing and encouraging for the Christians.
194 The History of Islam

Banu Hud State

Muhammad bin Yusuf

In 503 A.H., Ahmad Musta’in bin Abu Amir Yusuf Mutamin bin Abu
Jafar bin Hud was martyred fighting against the Christians. During
the last days of the Almohad dynasty he passed a life of luxury and
comfort. When he noticed cracks in the structure of the central rule, he
joined a band of robbers and within a short period became its chief.
He first set himself to the task of increasing his strength and then
attacked Abul Abbas, the Governor of Murcia and captured the
province. He conquered Granada, Malaga, and Almeria and then
captured Cordova by expelling King Mamun from Spain. By 625 A.H.
the entire Muslim Spain came under his control. The same year the
Christian King of Barcelona expelled the Almohad Governors
following his conquest of Majorca and Minorca islands. Following in
the footsteps of Muhammad bin Yusuf several other ambitious leaders
raised their heads and set up their own independent states. When
Muhammad bin Yusuf felt that it was next to impossible to subdue the
chiefs and bring their subjects around to his policies, he wrote a letter
to the Abbasid Caliph of Baghdad saying: “I have conquered the
whe.e of Spain in your name and established my government here. I
request you with the utmost regard that I be appointed as the ruler of
this country and a royal certificate authorizing me for the throne of
Spain be issued. The Caliph of Baghdad thought it to be an event from
the unseen and conferred upon him the certificate along with royal
garments. As a follow-up action, Muhammad bin Yusuf ordered the
people to assemble in the Grand Mosque of Granada and appeared in
the royal attire with a black standard in his hand. He then read out the
edict from Caliph Mustansir Abbasi and greeted the Muslims asa
whole. This device left a positive impact on the nobles and the people
in_general gave him support. It was however just a passing event. The
nobles’ could not continue with Muhammad bin Yusuf for tong. Their
ald antagonistic activities came to the surface once again. The result
was internal disturbances and civil war. The Christians found an
>pportunity to capture Muslim cities one after another. In 627 A.H.,
they captured Merida city, the biggest city after Cordova. On being

Anarchy again in Muslim Spain 195

informed Muhammad bin Yusuf came with his army and attacked
Alfonso, the Ninth. After a fierce encounter he was defeated. He came
back frustrated and chose Murcia as his ruling center. In 629 A.H., Ton
alAhmar staked his claim on Spain and captured a number of cities.
‘About the same time a chief, named Abu Marwan captured Seville. fon
abAhmar developed a friendship with Abu Marwan and increased his
military power. In 632 A.H., Ibn al-Ahmar stepped into Seville as a
friend but captured the territory by assassinating Abu Marwan. The
people of Seville expelled Ibn al-Ahmar from Seville and showed their
obedience to Muhammad bin Yusuf. The Muslim ruler appointed fbn
Al-Ramimi as his Minister and entrusted most of the official work to
him. He was later appointed as the Governor of Almeria where he rose
against the central rule. Muhammad bin Yusuf proceeded to punish the
rebel when Ibn Ramimi’s spies strangled him to death while he was
sleeping in his camp. Following this Tbn Ramimi declared himself the
sovereign King of Almeria. However, Murcia remained under the
children of Muhammad bin Yusuf who showed their obedience to [bn
al-Ahmar. Finally, the dynasty saw its end in 658 A.H.

In addition to Banu Hud, Ibn al-Ahmar, Ibn Marwan, fon Khalid, and
Ibn Mardiansh established their separate rules and Ferdinand played
a fundamental role in setting one State against another. The King of
Barcelona began to invade the Muslim States one after another. The
Christians would extend military help to one against another and then
fought against the one, which was once given help. Their sole purpose
was to expand the Christian territories. In Shawal, 636 A.H., the King
of Castile conquered Cordova, the capital of the central rule and
established their government by ravaging the grandeur of this
magnificent city. It was indeed the end of Islamic splendor. In this era
fraught with sufferings and disturbances one wise step taken by Ibn
al-Ahmar was to make peace with Ferdinand and to strengthen his
own power under the shadow of peace won in lieu of some cities and
forts. This spell of peace he utilized to win victories over Granada,
ea. Lorca, and Jaen. Thus he established a strong rule over one-
Mush of Spal , 4 rule which spanned over 250 years. The capital of
slim Spain had changed to Granada from Cordova.

Chapter 11
Granada

Ibn Al-Ahmar

Nasr bin Yusuf, known as Ibn Al-Ahmar, had captured Granada and
Malaga in 632 A.H. after befriending Ibn Khalid, the ruler of Seville.
In 643 A.H., the ruler of Almeria extended his obedience to him and
the people of Lorca accepted him in 663 A.H. as their King. Until that
time he had the support of Ferdinand. However, when the Muslim
States began to fall one after another, the Christians thought of
usurping the State of Tbn Al-Ahmar but Ibn al-Ahmar was wise enough
to have already established friendly relations with King Yaqub Abdul
Haq of Bani Marin. King Yaqub had become the ruler of North Africa
and Morocco after the end of the Almohad’s d ty. Thus, whenever,
he was threatened by the Christian powers, He received help from
Yaqub Marini without delay. By this device, Ibn al-Ahmar defeated
the Christians repeatedly and saved his small State. Ibn al-Ahmar laid
the foundation of Al-Hamra Palace in Granada, which is still
considered as one of the Seven Wonders of the World and a relic of
the declining years of Muslim grandeur. However, it bears no
198 The History of Islam

comparison with the Zahra Palace of Cordova, which was pulled
down by the savage Christians. Ibn al-Ahmar was on his way back to
Granada after giving a disastrous defeat to the Christians when his
horse stumbled near his fort and he fell down. Even though he had
not sustained any deep injury, he succumbed to it on 29 Jumad al-
Thani 671 A.H.

Abu Abdullah Muhammad

His son, Abu Abdullah Muhammad, succeeded him. He was 38 when
he came to the throne. In accordance with the will of his father, he
kept friendly relations with Bani Marin and devoted himself whole-
heartedly to campaigning against his enemies. In 673, the Christian
forces invaded Granada, Muhammad asked Yaqub bin Abdul Haq
Marini for help. He immediately sent his son to Spain at the head of a
strong army and he followed him with another force, Algeciras was
taken from a rebel Chief and tured it into his military cantonment.
Muhammad, on his part, offered Zarifah Fort to Yaqub to set up his
own cantonment. Sultan Muhammad and Sultan Yaqub launched a
joint attack on the Christians and gave them a crushing defeat on
Rabia al-Awwal 15, 673 A.H. Following this defeat the Christians built
a strong army and launched another attack on the Muslims but were
defeated again. In Muharram, 695 ‘A.H. the King of Castile began to
concentrate his army on the borders of Granada. Being informed
Sultan Muhammad stormed into Qajata and its surroundings and
conquered the military base of the Christians. In 699 A.H., Sultan
Muhammad wrested some frontier forts from the Christians. Sultan
Muhammad died on Shaban 8, 701 A.H. after an eventful reign of

about 30 years. He is also known as Sultan Muhammad Fagih for he
was very fond of books.

Muhammad Makhiu’a

Muhammad was succeeded by his son Muhammad Makhlu’a. He
handed over all Powers to his Minister, Muhammad bin Muhammad
Hakam Lakhmi. In 703 A.H., Abu al-Haj bin Nasr, the ruler of Gaudix
rose against Muhammad Makhlu‘a, which was suppressed with a
heavy hand and the rebel was put to death. The majority of people

Granada 499

were angry with the Minister and they persuaded Muhammad
Makhlu’a‘s brother Nasr bin Muhammad to rise in revolt against the
government, plunder the house of the Minister and arrest and depose
Muhammad Makhlu’a after which Nasr bin Muhammad was enthroned.

Sulean Nasr bin Muhammad

Nasr bin Muhammad came to the throne and appointed Nasr, the son
of the assassinated Abul al-Hajj, to his administration. The event of
enthronement had taken place on the Eid Day in 708 A.H. The next
year the King of Castile invaded Algeciras. Although this city
remained unconquered Jabl-i-Tariq (Gibraltar) was captured by the
Christian King. The same year the King of Barcelona attacked Almeria
and King Nasr dispatched his army to save Almeria. The battle was
still on when Abu Sayeed, the nephew of Ibn al-Ahmar and the ruler
of Malaga rose against him. Abul Waleed, the son of Abu Sayeed.
conquered both Almeria and Malaga. Thus started a civil war in
Granada and the rule over Granada was divided into two. The situation
was still out of control when Nasr fell ill and his condition turned almost
hopeless. They attempted to enthrone Muhammad Makhlu’a in place of
Nasr but King Nasr recovered and killed Muhammad Makhlu’a in
prison. Following this Abu Sayeed and his son, Abul Waleed started
ruling the occupied territories by making Malaga their capital. In
Muharram 713 A.H., Abul Waleed proceeded with his troops and
camped near Granada. Nasr came out from Granada with his own army
but was defeated by Abul Waleed on Muharram 13, 713 A.H. and he
took refuge in Granada. He then started a peace process but the peace
treaty was still to be finalized when the citizens of Granada held him
back from signing any treaty and persuaded him to take over Granada
completely. When he found some chiefs of Granada sympathetic to him,
he became ready to attack. The two forces clashed at Sardonia and Abul
Waleed achieved victory. Nasr took refuge in Al-Hamra Palace. At last
he abdicated the throne in favor of Abul Waleed.

Abul Waleed

After coming to the throne of Granada he gave Nasr permission to
settle in Ash valley. Abul Waleed took over the administration of

200 The History of Islam
Granada and began to run it skillfully. The Christians who were until
then happy over the civil war among the Muslim states grew worried
at the firm rule of Abul Waleed. They now engaged themselves in
preparing to go against Granada. The King of Castile attacked and
captured some border areas of Granada. Abul Waleed faced the
challenge with firmness and determination and drove away the
Christians from his land. In view of Abul Waleed’s supreme military
operations the Christians declared it a holy war and roused the entire
Christian world against the Muslim rule. Bishops and clergies ignited
in their people the fire of anger and revenge against the Muslims as a
whole. The Archbishop personally took part in the Christian
campaigns. Christian forces were concentrated in Toledo and their
number rose to two hundred thousand. They seemed determined to
wipe out all Muslim signs and traces from the face of Spain. Crown
prince Batardah of the Castile dynasty was given the command of a
huge Christian force. About twenty-five Christian rulers from Europe
joined the holy war. The Archbishop spread his hand over the head of
every general and the bishops all over Europe supplicated for the
annihilation of the Muslims.

The Battle of Aibirah

The Muslims of Granada grew anxious to hear of the massive military
preparations by the Christian world. Abul Waleed sent a call for help
to Abu Sayeed but his call received no response with the result that
the Muslims of Granada felt even more anxious. They were expecting
their extinction. Abul Waleed could muster only five thousand and
five hundred troops from ail over Granada, which was virtually
insignificant in comparison to the huge Christian army of several
hundred thousand. However, Abul Waleed marched out of Granada
at the head of a handful of men relying wholly and solely on the help
and support of Allah Almighty. He sent General al-Ghazat as the
vanguard with five hundred troops under his command and he
himself marched at the head of five thousand troops. They covered

the entire route discussing ways and means of winning victory over
such a large Christian army. However, the vanguards of both sides

clashed at first and the result was a reverse for the Christians. Abul

Granada 201

Waleed then hid one thousand cavaliers behind the brush adjacent to
Albirah. He then sent General al-Ghazat ahead with a column of five
hundred soldiers with instructions that they should retreat after
coming face to face with the Christians troops so that the chasing
Christians would be suddenly attacked by the hidden Muslim troops.
Abul Waleed himself was waiting at a suitable place with only three
hundred horsemen under his command. The rest of the troops were
given to another General to lead slowly towards the enemy. Following
the plan general al-Ghazat moved near the Christian troops early in
the morning of Jumad al-Awwal 6, 719 A.H. The Christians found the
Muslim side very poor in number and made no delay in attacking
them. General al-Ghazat began to move back while the sea of
Christian forces pursued the retreating troops with a desire to crush
the Muslims. When the Christian troops moved in front of the bush,
the one thousand strong Muslim column sprang from behind the thick
bush and fell on the Christian troops. In the meantime, General al-
Ghazat fought back the embarrassed Christians while Abul Waleed
launched his attack from the third side. The rest of the troops also
caught the enemy unaware. Although the Muslim troops were no
match for the Christian army their tactics and the supreme sacrifice of
lives paid them rich dividends. The four-pronged fierce attack of the
gallant Muslim troops tore off their battle-lines and made them flee
from the scene of their death and destruction leaving behind one
hundred thousand dead. It is quite amazing that the number of
Muslim martyrs did not exceed 13. This event is, indeed, one of the
marvels of the history of war. The Commander-in-Chief of the
Christian army along with his twenty-five guards was also found
among the dead. His wife and son were among the seven thousand
captives of war. It was a backbreaking defeat for the Christians. It now
dawned upon them that the annihilation of the Muslims from
Granada was not an easy task. Abul Waleed thanked Allah Almighty
for the unexpected victory and then conceded to the peace offer made
by his enemies. When he returned to Granada victoriously, his
nephew treacherously assassinated him. The assassin was also killed
in qisas (punishment by retaliation) and the throne was given to
Muhammad, the son of Abul Waleed.

202 The History of Islam

King Muhammad_

Sultan Muhammad appointed Abul Ala Uthman as his minister. But
when Uthman consolidated his power beyond all limits and his
activities proved injurious to the throne, Muhammad Had assassinated
him in 729 A.H. In 733 A.H., Sultan Muhammad cleared Gibraltar of
the Christian military. The Christians launched an attack with Army
and Navy but failed to save Gibraltar. On his way back to Granada,
the sons and relatives of Abul Ala Uthman assassinated him.

Sultan Yusuf

Sultan Muhammad was succeeded by his brother Yusuf who was then
16 but he was very wise, brave and God-fearing. He held together vital
components of his government with caution and prudence and avenged
the blood of his brother. Meanwhile, the Christian powers began to raid
Gibraltar and its surrounding areas. Sultan Yusuf drew the attention of
Abul Hasan Marini, the King of Morocco towards this. Abul Hasan sent
his son towards Gibraltar with a detachment. Sultan Yusuf reached there
from another side. The Christian troops tasted defeat in the encounter.

When the Moroccan army was on its return journey, the Christians
sniped at it and inflicted heavy casualties. In 740 A.H. Sultan Abul
Hasan marched to Spain at the head of sixty thousand fighters while

Sultan Yusuf came from another side to lend his support to Abul Hasan,

A huge and well-equipped Christian army gave a heavy blow to the

Muslim forces and captured a part of Granada. After this Sultan Abul

Hasan went back to Morocco and Sultan Yusuf took refuge in Granada.

In 749 A.H., Sultan Yusuf appointed Lisanuddin Ibn al-Khatib as his
Prime Minister and set himself to Preparing for avenging his defeat. In
755 A.H., when Sultan Yusuf was quite ready to take on the Christians

a stranger killed him with his spear while he was performing the Eid
Prayer and was in prostration,

Sultan Muhammad Ghani Billah
His son,

Muhammad with the appellation of Ghani Billah, succeeded
Yusuf. Sometime after coming to the throne he sent Lisanuddin Ibn al-

Granada 203

Khatib to Abu Salim bin Abul Hasan Marini, the King of Morocco to
seek his help against the Christians. Abu Salim dispatched a
detachment. No large-scale encounter took place and no Purpose was
served. Ridwan, the caretaker of Sultan Muhammad’s government
made inroads into his thoughts and feelings and was at the helm of all
administrative affairs. Because of this, Ismail, the stepbrother of Sultan '
Muhammad captured the Granada Fort when Muhammad was away
from the city at Generalife, the name of the garden resort for the
Sultans of Granada (corrupted from the Arabic Jannat al-Arif and is
considered part of the Al Hamra palace). When King Muhammad
heard about this, he went straight to Gaudix and began to build his
Army. He also sent a letter to the King of Castile requesting him for
his help. He had not yet received any satisfactory. reply from the
Christian King when Abu Salim bin Abul Hasan Marini, the King of
Morocco, sent Abu al-Qasim bin Sharif as his envoy to Sultan

Muhammad and requested him to come to Morocco. He went to
Morocco and was greeted with honor.

Sultan: Ismail

Sultan Ismail also entered into correspondence with the King of
Castile asking for his hand of friendship. Since the Christians were
at war with the King of Barcelona at that time, they considered this
offer of peace and friendship as a sign from providence. However,
on 4 Shaban 761 A.H. Abu Yahya, the brother of Sultan Ismail
killed Ismail and his coterie and captured the throne. On 27 Shawwal,
Sultan Muhammad returned to Spain with the help of the King of
Morocco and captured parts of Granada. Abu Yahya Abdullah,
finding himself too weak to face the onslaught of Sultan Muhammad,
tushed to the King of Castile for help. The Christian King had him and
his Comrades killed at Seville on 2 Rajab 763 A.H. and captured all
their possessions. 1

Sultan Muhammad Makhlu’a, on the other hand, captured Granada
and came on the throne. For several years the Government of Granada
had become a tributary of the Christian rule of Castile. Sultan
Muhammad captured Granada and made all efforts to consolidate his
Position. Luckily, civil war started among the progeny of Abu Salim of

204 The History of Islam

Morocco after his demise. The King of Castile was locked in battle
with his own brother. Sultan Muhammad took advantage of these
civil wars. He captured Gibraltar and refused to give tribute to Castile
and _ the Christian powers could do nothing except keep silent. During
Sultan Muhammad's rule, Granada flourished in every field and he
became a terror for the Christian forces.

Sultan Yusuf II

Sultan Muhammad died in 793 A.H. and was succeeded by his son,
Yusuf 11. He was peace loving and wise and he finalized a peace treaty
with the King of Castile. Among his four sons Yusuf, Muhammad, Ali
and Ahmad, Muhammad was the cleverest one of them.

Sultan Muhammad VII

Yusuf 11 died in 798 A.H. Muhammad came on the throne by passing
his elder brother Yusuf. Since a number of men in the family were
given “Muhammad” as their name, Muhammad bin Yusuf the second
is known as Muhammad, the seventh. A few days after the
enthronement of Muhammad VIL, clashes with the Christians took a
fresh start. It resulted in the defeat of the Christians and the Muslims
captured a number of Christian territories. During this time the King
of Castile passed away leaving behind his suckling son John. After the
baby was put on the throne, his Uncle Ferdinand took charge of the
operation of affairs and acted as regent. The Christian troops were
much greater in number so Muhammad the Seventh kept the
Christian troops engaged on the battle front and invaded Jaen city
with the rest of his army. This caused the Christians to send a
considerable number of their men to save the city and the pressure on
both fronts was so heavy that Ferdinand was forced to sign a peace
treaty with Muhammad VIL. By this technique the fighting between
the two ended. However, in 803 A.H.a fresh encounter between the
Tival forces broke out’ and no side was able to subdue the other. The
Christians once again requested peace and a peace treaty was signed,
which served its Purpose for only eight months. The terms of the
treaty were still to be completed when Sultan Muhammad fell ill and
died. His interned brother Yusuf, the third, succeeded him.

Granada 205

Sultan Yusuf HH

Immediately after coming to the throne Yusuf 111 sent general
Abdullah to Ferdinand to extend the term of the peace treaty for two
years. When this two-year peace term was about to end, Sultan Yusuf
Ill sent his brother Ali to the King of Castile as his envoy requesting
him for a further extension. The Christian King thought his seeKing
peace was due to Yusuf's weakness and he told Ali that the request for
an extension could be granted only with the payment of tributary. Ali
rejected the conditional peace terms and left for Granada. Close on the
heels of this rejection Ferdinand invaded Granada with a huge army
and after a heavy encounter, the Christians took a part of Granada.
The battle was going on when a detachment from Morocco launched
an attack on Gibraltar under the command of Prince Abu Sayeed.
Hearing of the onslaught Yusuf III sent his brother Ahmad at the head
of an army to save Gibraltar. But the two princes entered into peace
instead of fighting. Abu Sayeed then came to Granada as a guest of
Ahmad. In the meantime the King of Morocco and elder brother of
Abu Sayeed wrote Yusuf 111 to kill Abu Sayeed while he was in
Granada. Yusuf III gave the letter to Abu Sayeed and told him that his
brother had asked him to invade Gibraltar simply as a plot to kill him.
Abu Sayeed was shocked at the nefarious plan of his brother. He then
set himself to making preparations in Spain and then attacked _
Morocco with the help of Sultan Yusuf IH. He dispossessed his brother
and came to the throne. He thanked his benefactor, Sultan Yusuf III

for his help and support.

The same year 820 A.H., King John of Castile took over the reign and
deposed his uncle Ferdinand. He made peace with Yusuf 111 on the
advice of his mother. Yusuf III was a lover of justice and most of the
Christians would make him their mediator in personal disputes and
would agree to his decision. Yusuf 111 passed away in 822 A.H.

Soon after coming to the throne Sultan Muhammad VII, the son of
Sultan Yusuf 111 renewed the peace and friendship treaty with Castile
and Morocco and appointed Amir Yusuf as his Minister. Unfortunately,
after sometime Muhammad VIII joined the company of the people
having low and base conduct. Finally, Muhammad IX captured

206 The History of Islam

Granada and Muhammad VIII fled for his life and went to the King of
Tunis in the guise of a poor boatman. He greeted him with honor and
promised him help.

Sultan Muhammad IX

After coming to the throne Sultan Muhammad IX made the nobles his
supporters. But he committed the mistake of antagonizing the
minister, Yusuf who began indulging in activities injurious to the
administration. Yusuf, the minister, left Granada with one thousand
five hundred men and came to Murcia and went to the King of Castile
with his permission. He then tried to have John, the King of Castile
lend his support to Muhammad VIII: The Christian King thus had an
excellent opportunity to set the Muslims against each other. He
advised Yusuf to send a deputation of selected persons to the King of
Tunis and seek his help as well. The King of Tunis gave five hundred
cavaliers and a substantial amount by way of help and sent
Muhammad VIII on board his ship to Spain. When Muhammad VIII
landed on the coast of Spain, he found the inhabitants of Almeria
supporting him in the wake of efforts made by Yusuf. Muhammad IX
sent his army to take on Muhammad VIII. When the rival forces came
face to face a greater part of Muhammad IX’s army changed sides and
joined the rival camp. The rest fled back to Granada. Muhammad VII
advanced towards Granada and conquered it in 833 A.H. Muhammad
IX was arrested and put to death.

After regaining the throne Muhammad VIII changed his ruling style
on the advice of Yusuf and set himself to the task of bettering the lot of
his subjects. He also attempted to make permanent peace with the
Christian King but he agreed only on the condition of tribute, which
Muhammad VIII declined. However, the King of Castile was himself
facing disturbances in his territories and he could not challenge the
Muslims. He invaded Granada in spite of his troubles. Both sides were
engaged in a long drawn out battle in which victory and defeat came
to both of them. The battle was still going on when Yusuf bin al-
Ahmar, a close relative of Muhammad VIII rose in revolt against him.
He staked his claim on the throne of Granada and entered into
correspondence with the Christian King of Castile. He promised to

Granada 207

pay annual tribute to the Christian King if he captured Granada
besides helping him with his army. The Christians took it as a gift
- from providence. The King of Castile then sent his forces to reinforce
Yusuf’s men. Muhammad VIII launched an attack and a heavy battle
broke out. The King of Castile was himself present at the battle but
the battle remained undecided. At last the King of Castile returned

to Cordova along with Yusuf Ibn al-Ahmar and Muhammad VIII left
for Granada.

The King of Castile held his court in Cordova and appointed Yusuf
Ton al-Ahmar as the King of Granada and promised all possible help.
He then dispatched Yusuf at the head of an army to capture Granada.
He reached Granada and stormed the city with the active help of the
local Christians. The Christians were satisfied that the two Muslim
sides were set against each other inviting death and destruction upon
themselves. Sultan Muhammad VIII sent his Minister Yusuf to punish
Yusuf Ibn al-Ahmar but the latter killed the former. On hearing this
news the people of Granada felt disturbed and they expressed
themselves against Muhammad VIII. Muhammad VIII saw the writing
on the wall and left Granada for Malaga along with all his treasures
and possessions.

Yusuf bin Al-Ahmar

Yusuf bin al-Ahmar captured Granada and sent a letter to the King
of Castile expressing his loyalty to him. He then started preparing
to send an army to Malaga to arrest Muhammad VIII but he had

not even sent the army when he passed away after ruling for only
six months.

Immediately after hearing the news of Yusuf [bn al-Ahmar’s demise
Muhammad 1/111 hurried to Granada and sat on the throne for the
third time. He appointed Abdul Haq as his minister and Abdul Barr
as his Commander-in-Chief. The Christians invaded Granada once
again but the Commander-in-Chief fought them back. This defeat
brought about discouragement in the Christian community and the
rule of Granada became formidable once again. Unfortunately, civil
war broke out at a time when there was an opportunity to improve the

20 The History of islam

lot of the Muslims and strengthen their military power. Ibn Uthman,
the Governor of Almeria and nephew of Sultan Muhammad Vill
revolted against him and instigated the people of Granada against
their administration. When they favored his plan, he came to Granada,
took over as the chief of the insurgents and captured Al-Hamra Palace
and put Muhamunad VIII in prison after dethroning him for the third
time. Abdul Bar, the Commander-in-Chief fled from Granada,
collected the well wishers and began to think of ways to release Sultan
Muhammad VIII. He knew that if he brought to the surface any
demand for the release of Muhammad VIII he would be done away
with. With this in mind he incited another nephew of Muhammad VIII
named Ibn Ismail to stake his claim to the throne. Ibn Ismail agreed to
the proposal. He met Abdul Bar after exchanging letters with the King
of Castile and after getting permission from him to take over. It was
an opportunity for the Christians to make a political gain. Thus Sultan
Ibn Uthman’s territories faced a two-pronged attack from Ibn Ismail.
and the King of Castile. The campaign continued for a long time. In 852
AHL, the King of Aragon and King Arbonia (Catalonia) both
Christians waged a war against the King of Castile. When he himself
suffered a setback, he pulled back his army from the Muslim front.
Because of this, Ibn Ismail also kept silent until the end of the civil
war. When Sultan Ibn Uthman came to know that the King Aragon
and King of Arbonia (Catalonia) formed an alliance against the King
of Castile, he sent his envoy to both the Kings and extended his hand
of friendship besides ensuring them of his help when needed. Thus
Sultan Ibn Uthman attacked Castile in 854 A.H. and forced the
Castilian troops to flee. He ravaged Murcia province and came back to
Granada with huge spoils of war. The next year he launched an attack
on Andalusia and plundered it like he did to Murcia. He could have
captured Cordova but he paid no attention to it. Ibn Uthman
continued to help the two Kings against the King of Castile until 858
A.H. The Christian King of Castile then dispatched Ibn Ismail to attack
fbn Uthman the next year. Since Ibn Ismail enjoyed the support of the
majority of Muslim nobles Ibn Uthman was defeated. He fled and

took refuge in the mountains while Ibn Ismail came to the throne of
Granada.

Granada 209

Sultan [bn Ismail

Shortly after the enthronement of Ibn Ismail, John, the King of Castile
died and was succeeded by his son. After John, his sons and
grandsons .resumed the battles against Ibn Ismail and the fighting
lingered on until 870 A.H. During this series of battles Ibn Ismail’s
son, Abul Hasan achieved much renown. Ibn Ismail died in 870, and
was succeeded by his son, Abul Hasan.

Sultan Abul Hasan

Since Sultan Abul Hasan was also an experienced Commander, he
continued to fight the Christians adequately. But the doom of Muslim
rule was not far away. Ferdinand, the young King of Castile was
married to Isabella, the princess of the Kingdom of Aragon and with
this marriage Aragon and Castile joined to make a mighty Christian
state. Both Ferdinand and _Isabeila were great fanatics and hated the
Muslims as a whole. They, therefore, decided together to wipe out
Muslim rule from Spain. Unaware of what was going on against him
Abul Hasan felt it expedient to make peace with the Christians. But
his friendly gesture was rudely responded to with the demand of
annual tribute from him. Abul Hasan not only rejected the demand
rather disdainfully he also wrote back that his (Abul Hasan’s) mint
was minting swords instead of gold coins so that the heads of the
Christians could be cut off. This bold reply sent terror into the heart of
Ferdinand and he didn’t invade the Muslim territory for several years.
Abul Hasan had made a firm resolve to live a life of freedom and
Sovereignty and preferred death to being ruled by the Christians.

Having heard of the Christian preparations Abul Hasan himself made
an advance and took the Sakhra Fort from the Christians. Ferdinand
was shocked to hear of the loss of the fort. By way of retaliation, he
invaded Al-Hamma Fort treacherously and captured it rather easily
for there was no garrison to put up any resistance. Muslim fighters
had inflicted no harm on the Christians while invading the Sakhra
Fort but the Christian troops mercilessly massacred Muslim men and
Women. When the sad news of the fall of Al-Hamma Fort reached
Granada, there arose a tremendous outery. Sultan.-Abul Hasan sent an

he History of Islam
210 The ry of

and he went and besieged it. Hearing of

this the ruler of Cordova set out at the head of an army to save Al-

mma ing i 1 hief left a part of his
+ Being informed of this, the Arab ¢ part 0
tro oa 3 iege while the rest of them he took with him to

atinue the sit

stop’ the advancement of troops from Cordova. When the two forces
clashed, the ruler of Cordova fled the battlefield. However, the ruler
of Seville, another Christian chief, appeared with a huge army. Since
the number of troops outside the fort was very few, the Muslim troops
raised the siege and returned to Granada and the fort was not
restored. Since Al-Hamma Fort was very strong and lay near Granada
it was a heavy loss for the Muslims.

In Jumad al-Awwal 887 A.H., Sultan Abul Hasan found out that
Ferdinand was moving towards Granada at the head of a huge army.
Abul Hasan also came out of Granada with his troops and both the
armies clashed at Loja on the border of Granada. Ferdinand was
defeated and the winning side collected heavy spoils of war.
Unfortunately, Abu Abdullah, the son of Abul Hasan revolted against
his father. Thus, close ‏هه‎ the heels of his victory over Ferdinand, he
was informed that his son had pronounced himself sovereign after
capturing Almeria, Alpujarras and Granada. Abul Hasan had to
remain at Malaga while Granada and half of the eastern areas came
under the sway of Abu Abdullah Muhammad. However, the other
half of the western part remained with Sultan Abul Hasan. Thus the
division of this small Islamic state -attracted the greedy eyes of the
Christian rulers and Abu Abdullah Muhammad set himself to making
preparations for taking the other half from his father. Thus, the allied
Christian forces of Seville, Ecija (known as Estadja by the Arabs) and
Sarish first attacked Malaga but they were defeated and the rulers of
Seville and Sarish were arrested along with two thousand troops. The
test were either killed or forced to flee for their lives. When Abul
Hasan returned to Malaga he found his son ready to capture Malaga
too. Thus the father and the son faced each other and the fate favored
the father. The son, Abu Abdullah Muhammad fled to Granada. When
Abul Hasan entered Malaga victoriously, he became Paralyzed and
lost his: eyesight. With this news, Abu Abdullah Muhammad felt safe
‏سد‎ eather and attacked the Christian territories. He stormed into

commander of the Christian forces played a trick on

1

Arab chief to recover the fort

Granada 211

the inexperienced Muslim ruler. He attacked the Muslim troops from
an ambush while they were going back carelessly laden with booty.
All the troops were put to death and Abu Abdullah Muhammad was
captured and sent to the King of Castile. Now the people of Granada
invited Abul Hasan to take over the administration of Granada. The
Sultan declined the offer due to his disability and asked his brother
Abu Abdullah Zaghal to sit on the throne of Granada and he himself
abdicated the throne and took to a life of seclusion.

Sultan Abu Abdullah Zaghal

Having come to the throne Abu Abdullah Zaghal embarked on his
plan to regularize and improve his administration. But a huge
Christian army attacked Malaga province and captured the forts lying
mismanaged and neglected. They also besieged Baqwan Fort and
shelled it so heavily that one wall of the fort gave it. The besieged
Muslims although few in number came out and fought so gallantly
that the huge Christian army suffered a heavy loss. At last the brave
Muslim fighters succumbed to their injuries one by one, and the fort
went to Christians. On Shaban 19, 890 A.H., Sultan Zajhal left
Granada to manage the affairs of the bordering areas and was
camping in a’ field when a Christian army caught them unaware and
began to kill Muslim troops. When the fighting and killing began to
advance towards Sultan Zaghal, the Muslim fighters stood in the way
and charged at the enemy so violently, that the Christian fighters took
to their heels leaving behind thousands of dead and injured. The
Muslims gave them chase and captured their artillery. King Ferdinand
was also moving forward with a huge army when he came across the
runaway defeated Christian soldiers. When he heard that the Muslim
fighters had captured their artillery and had strengthened the fort
with it, he decided to return.

Despite some successes, here. and there Ferdinand was utterly
convinced that the annihilation of the Muslims, as a whole was not an
easy proposition. Even though the area of the Islamic state was much
reduced they could have won the whale of Spain with their swords if
they had made a joint venture and fought like one man as they had
done during the times of Tariq and Musa. The wisdom and far-

212 The History of Islam

sightedness of Ferdinand stopped him from further campaigns against
Muslims. He thought it better to use tricks and deception. Abu
Abdullah Muhammad bin Abul Hasan the prisoner of the battle of
Lucena was in his possession.

He called Abu Abdullah Muhammad before him and-talked to him in
very polite words and instilled in his mind that he was the rightful
heir of the Granada rule and his uncle Zaghal had usurped his right to
rule. He also assured him all help in case he was able to take Granada
from Zaghal. He tried to bring home to him that his only interest lay
in a good Islamic State enjoying peace and prosperity behaving like a
good neighbor. Abu Abdullah came straight to Malaga highly excited
and intoxicated with the sense of ensuing success in his mission. He
met the people and asked them to follow him to victory and safety
from Christian invasions. Since they were desperately in need of peace
and safety they made no delay in extending their support for him. He
easily became the ruler of Malaga. Even though Zaghal attempted to
put down the insurgence, active support from the Christians
inhabiting the Muslim territories caused his mission to fail. Abu
Abdullah then asked his uncle, Zaghal for the important center of Loja
and promised a joint attack on Ferdinand in lieu of this coveted gift.
When Zaghal found most of his people inclined to the demand of Abu
Abdullah, he gave away Loja to his nephew but Abu Abdullah very
treacherously handed over Loja to Ferdinand. Abu Abdullah then left
to besiege the forts of Albirah, Maslin and Sakhra and he gave away
all these forts to Ferdinand after capturing them with the active help
of the Christian King. Thus what was a Herculean task for Ferdinand
became easier with the support of Abu Abdullah. Now the eyes of the
Muslims opened and they charged him as an agent of the Christian
King who captured cities and forts and handed them over to the King
of Castile. Now the people of Malaga renewed their loyalty to Sultan
Zaghal and removed ail signs and traces of Christian rule. Ferdinand
attacked Malaga with a huge army and sent warships to the coast of
Malaga as well. Zaghal came out from Granada to arrive at Malaga
but Abu Abdullah Muhammad captured Granada in his absence.
Zaghal moved: towards Granada leaving Malaga under the siege of
Ferdinand. When he heard that Abu Abdullah Muhammad captured
Granada, he stopped in Guadix. The people of Malaga checked the

Granada 213

advances of the Christian troops with exemplary courage and
determination and requested the rulers of Morocco, Tunis, Egypt and
Turkey to save them from the jaws of the Christian monsters.
However, none of them paid heed to their entreaty, and in a state of
utter disappointment, they handed over Malaga to the Christians,
When they met their doom as a result of their disunity and discord
and felt it deeply, they extended their hand of friendship towards the
Christians but they rejected the request scornfully and demanded the
key of the city. When the Christian ruler subdued Malaga, he ordered
the arrest of every Muslim and seizure of their wealth and property.
They enslaved fifteen thousand Muslims and the rest were banished
from Malaga without goods and chattels and many of them died of

starvation. Some of them reached the African coast and settled there.
Ferdinand then ravaged the surrounding areas of Malaga and
destroyed the cities and. forts and drove away all the Muslim
population. The Christian ruler was set to obliterate all signs of
Muslim rule from Spain. He then arrived in Gaudix and extended his
hand of friendship towards Zaghal and témpted him with the rule of
Granada. Zaghal welcomed the friendship of Ferdinand for he wanted
to see Abu Abdullah Muhammad's disaster. Thus, he gave away
Gaudix to Ferdinand and accompanied him. Ferdinand won Almeria
without any difficulty with Zaghal on his side. Abu Abdullah
Muhammad was happy to find his uncle, Zaghal in the clutches of
Ferdinand. Sitting in the magnificent al-Hamra Palace he was
dreaming of his exclusive rule in Granada. At last calamity knocked at
Abu Abdullah’s door. He received a letter from Ferdinand ordering
him to hand over Granada. Shocked and stunned he read out the
calamitous letter to the influential people of Granada. He then said to
the people that Zaghal had persuaded Ferdinand to take possession of
Granada and al-Hamra Palace and also to fight with him. The people
of Granada were fully aware of the depravity of Abu Abdullah
Muhammad in destroying the Islamic rule and his role as a stooge in
sey né the nefarious design of Ferdinand at the cost of Muslim honor
and unity. They favored fighting with the enemy. Abu Abdullah
Muhammad had to bow before public opinion. Consultations were
still going on when Ferdinand of Castile arrived with a huge army
and laid siege around Granada. The citizens rose with courage and

214 _ The History of Islam

determination and fought gallantly against the Christians. Aware of
the bravery and resolution of the Muslim fighters the shrewd
Ferdinand decided to’ put off his campaign against Granada for the
time being. He raised the siege and went back, Abu Abdullah took
advantage of the respite and marched to some of the forts that had
already been captured by the Christians. He recovered those forts and
put a large number of Christian fighters to death. He then came back
to Granada, strengthened his troops and came out again for further
attacks. During his fresh campaigns, he captured some of the towns in
Alpujarras and restored the Andarsh Fort and unfurled the flag of
Islam atop by throwing away the Christian one. The entire population
of Alpujarras showed their loyalty to the Muslim ruler.

Abu Abdullah’s uncle Zaghal was also staying somewhere in
Alpujarras. He felt terrified with the rising power of Abu Abdullah
and informed Ferdinand that the growing strength of Abu Abdullah
could prove menacing for the Christian rule if not checked right away.
Zaghal utterly ignored the cause of Islam and rose to resist the
advancement of Abu Abduilah’s forces with the help of Christian
troops. The courage and bravery of the people of Granada filled Abu
Abdullah with so much enthusiasm that he pounced upon Hamdan,
Mankab, and Shalobania. Before the victory of Shalobania Abu
Abdullah came to know that Ferdinand of Castile was proceeding to
Granada and so Abu Abdullah turned towards Granada. Putting
aside Granada Ferdinand reached Gaudix and committed a large-
scale massacre of the Muslims and banished the rest. He also razed
the Andarsh Fort to the ground and retumed after rampaging through
the cities and forts that came in his way.

On the way back to Castile, Ferdinand told Zaghal rather rudely that
he was no longer in need of him and the maximum he could do for”
him was to allow him to go out of the bounds of his country. With this
order, Zaghal left Spain and went to Africa and passed the rest of his
life at Tlemcen (city in Northwest Algeria) in obscurity. Ferdinand
practiced utmost patience and endurance in implementing his plans of
gradually wiping out all signs and traces of the Muslims from the face
of Spain. The people of Granada also lost courage with the constant
news of the massacre of Muslims and the devastation of their cities.

Granada 215

End of Islamic Rule in Spain

On 12 Jumad al-Awwal 896 A.H., Ferdinand reached Granada along
with Queen Isabella at the head of huge army with heavy artillery.
With his arrival he embarked on a rampage ravaging greenery,
gardens, crops and the populated areas and set a river of Muslim
blood to flow. He set up a military cantonment in front of Granada
and besieged the city. Discouraged and disheartened, the Muslim
population once again broke the siege and plunged into fighting
against the surrounding troops sacrificing their lives. The siege
continued for eight months and this was the last Muslim population in
the whole of the Spanish peninsula. When winter set in and snow
capped the mountains and obstructed supply routes, they told Abu
Abdullah to go to war with the Christians. They showed their
determination to go down fighting on the battlefield rather than to die
of starvation. They reminded him of Tariq bin Zeyad when he crushed
one hundred thousand well-equipped Christian soldiers with a
handful of troops, and their Muslim fighters numbered nearly twenty
thousand so they had no reason to fear one hundred thousand
Christian troops. Abu Abdullah was now fully convinced that the
surging flood of his people, if ignored, would result in open revolt
against his rule. He convened an emergency meeting of his ministers,
nobles, religious scholars and celebrities of the surrounded city at al-
Hamra Palace. Abu Abdullah could not say addressing them that the
Christian forces would never raise their siege without capturing the
city what could then be done to tackle the problem? Abu Abdullah
was so depressed than nothing more could be expected of him at that
moment, and then the entire audience said in one voice, “Tt is better to
sign a peace treaty with the King of Castile”. Commander Musa bin
Abul Ghassani got up in zeal and said, “There is still hope of success.
We must not lose hope and fight to the finish. I hope we shail be able
to drive the Christians away and force them to raise the siege”.
Although the citizens had the same opinion that Musa had expressed
none among the audience supported his advice. They expressed fear
that in case they lost the battle none of the Muslims would be left
alive. They wanted peace and safety for their lives and property. Since
the subjects and soldiers had expressed themselves in favor of giving

216 The History of Islam

battle to the enemy, Abu Abdullah Muhammad sent his minister,
Abul Qasim Abdul Malik on a secret mission to buy peace from
Ferdinand. Since the Christians also were tired of the long-drawn
siege of the Muslim city and they wanted some honorable course to
arrive at a final decision, they welcomed the peace proposal and
readily agreed to sign it. In order to keep the peace talks a secret Abul
Qasim would go to the Christian camp in the darkness of night. The
peace treaty was, however, signed by Abu Abdullah Muhammad and
Ferdinand after some initial differences.

Peace Treaty with the Christians
The peace document contained the following conditions:

1. The Muslims will enjoy the liberty of either living in the country ‏نه‎
‎leaving it. No harm will be caused to the life and property of any
Muslim.

2. The Christians will not seek to interfere in religious affairs of the
Muslims.

3. No Christian will intrude into mosques.
4. Mosques and trusts will remain intact.

5. Muslim affairs will be decided by Muslim judges according to the
Codes of Shari‘ah

6. Prisoners on both sides will be set free.

7. A Muslim intending to go to Africa will be sent on board ship.

8. The converted Christians will not be forced to abandon Islam.

9. The spoils of war possessed by the Muslims will not be recovered.
10. No tax other than the existing ones will be levied on the Muslims.

11.No tax will be realized from the Muslims for a period of three
years; they will also remain exempt from the existing tax for this
period.

12.The Government of Al-Bashrat will be handed over to Sultan Abu
Abdullah.

Granada 217

13. After sixty days from the signing of the treaty Al-Hamra Palace
and the artillery and other means of warfare, which it contains,
will be given to the Christians.

14. Within sixty days from signing, the treaty will be completed with

all its conditions.

15. Granada city will be left free for one year. After one year the

Christians will capture it fulfilling the conditions mentioned
above.

The treaty was signed on 1 Rabia al-Awwal 897 A.H. The event could
not remain a secret from the people of the city and the Army. There
was widespread discontent and Abu Abdullah was charged with
destroying the Muslim state. He grew extremely anxious and handed
over Al-Hamra Palace to the Christians for fear of public insurgence.
Ferdinand asked Mandhurah, the Archbishop of Spain to first step in
the city and set a cross atop of the highest tower of Al-Hamra Palace
pulling down all Islamic signs so that the King along with his queen
can watch the change before making their entry into the city. When
Abu Abdullah noticed the arrival of Mandhurah in the Palace, he
came out at the head of fifty chiefs on horseback. The entire city
looked deserted and its people grief-stricken and deeply distressed.
Abu Abdullah then moved forward to the King of Castile and handed
over the keys, saying: “O Mighty King! We are now your subjects and
entrust this country of ours to you for it was the Will of Allah. We
trust that you will treat your subjects gently and generously”.
Ferdinand wanted to utter some consoling words but Abu Abdullah
went ahead and left for al-Bashrat after meeting Queen Isabella. His
felatives and goods and chattels had already been sent ahead.
Meanwhile the silver cross glittered atop the tower in the sunshine
and the Christian King stepped into al-Hamra Palace with royal
grandeur. When Abu Abdullah reached a mountain top, he tured
towards Granada and recalled his past magnificence and burst into
tears. His mother who accompanied him remarked:

“When you could not save your country despite being a
brave soldier what is the use of shedding tears like wornen
now?”

218 The History of Islam

Christians’ Atrocities on the Muslims’ of Spain

Seon after capturing Al-Hamra Palace the Christians forgot al} the
conditions mentioned in the peace treaty. They captured Granada and
bought Alpujarras from Abu Abdullah for a paltry sum of money,
with the result Abu Abdullah went to Morocco and became an
employee of the King of Morocco and died after serving the King for
many years. Ferdinand set up a Christian law court throughout the
country where Muslims were brought on untrue and fabricated
charges and were burnt to death as punishment enjoined by the law
court. Actually, they were punished for being Muslims.

A general order was issued in 904 A.H., to confess Christianity or face
death, with the result that the Muslims escaped to the hills and
accepted a miserable life instead of renouncing Islam. Some of the
Christians who had already converted to Islam were baptized. But
they, however, kept sticking to Islam and worshipped Allah inside
their houses.

Those Muslims who opted for migrating to Africa were provided with
ships and they boarded the ships with their books and other
valuables. However, many of the ships were sunk in the sea before
reaching the African coast.

Finally, not a single Muslim was to be found in the whole of Spain.
They were all put to the sword or burnt or drowned.

A Glance at the Islamic Rule in Spain

Even though Arabian rule in Spain was autocratic like the righteous
era it was, however, dominated by a democratic temper. The
command of Caliphs and the Codes of Shari'ah were applied equally
to all and sundry. A certain Christian lodged a complaint against
Abdur Rahman II of the Umayyad dynasty in a law court and the
ruler lost the case and had to fulfil! his obligations like a slave. The
judge in the Muslim courts had full power to punish the Caliph. Police
administration was at its best. Government officials roamed about tne
market-place checking business transactions and the Prices 0
commodities. They had set up hospitals and dispensaries an

Granada 219

network of roads and canals all over the country. Caliph Hisham had
built a giant bridge across the river, Wadi al-Kabir. In the art of
warfare Muslims were the most civilized of all. The Muslims of Spain
were the first to invent tools for dismantling forts. During their 800-
year rule Muslim rulers taught savage Christians a lesson on how to
behave in a civilized and humane manner in the wake of victory.
While the Christians behaved wildly and violently massacring Muslim
men, women and children, the Muslim conquerors spared the
Christian population following their victories. Moreover, they brought
about peace and prosperity to the Christian lands in the wake of their
victories. They developed agriculture to the extent that it became a
perfected art. They turned hundreds of thousands of square miles of
barren and deserted land in Spain into gardens of fruits, trees and
greenery. Spain and the entire European continent came to know of
rice, cotton, saffron, pomegranate, and peach through the Muslims.
They produced olives and dates in Andalusia and Seville and grapes
in Sarish, Granada and Malaga, besides other agricultural development.
They were the first to find mineral deposits in Spain and explore
mines of gold, silver, iron, mercury, copper, ruby, and sapphire.
Granada was the last sign of Muslim rule in Spain but even that small
rule left magnificent monuments of Muslim glory and grandeur. The
Muslims of Spain invented cement of such an amazing quality that Al-
Hamra Palace is still an object of wonder for the tourists of the world.
It was built by the Muslim rulers of Granada ona very high mound
under the shade of the snow-clad peaks of the Sierra Nevada. It had
within its walls such beautiful and green gardens and fruit trees that
the like of which was never witnessed by the sky. During their rule,
the Muislims established all over the country universities, schools,
laboratories and magnificent libraries, which contained resources for
academic research of all kinds. En the universities of Cordova, Seville,
Malaga, Saragossa, Lisbon, Jaen, and Toledo students from Ttaly,
France, Germany, and England would come to receive education in
various sciences. and arts. The Muslim scholars translated books on
Greek philosophy into their own languages. Ibn Rushd too was a
Muslim of Spain who was superior even to Aristotle. Muslim
scientists set up such laboratories and developed Astronomy to such
an extent that the entire Europe followed them. The astrolabe, the soul
of all laboratories, was invented by none but the Muslims of Spain. In

220 The History of Islam

medical science and surgery they made such progress that until recent
times the whole of Europe benefited from their books. They made
advances in Zoology and Botany and they developed separate
gardens and factories for this purpose. Manufacturing paper out of
cotton and jute was their remarkable achievement. '.. terms of modern
warfare Alfonso XI has written:

“Muslims of the city would hurl resounding objects and apple-
sized iron shells. These shelis covered such a long distance that

they hit the enemy ranks directly and at times fell beyond the
lines.”

This statement makes it clear beyond a doubt that when the Muslims
used artillery and gunpowder the Christians were unaware of all
these things. The writer of Senin al-Islam writes that some of the
Muslims of Spain had discovered America as far back as 441 A.H. but
this discovery was not made famous. It was Columbus who later
achieved fame as the man who discovered America.

16 was the Muslims’ deep love for knowledge and their great fondness
for the arts, literature and philosophy that opened the doors of art and
science for the Europeans. For eight hundred years the Muslims were
the teachers of the Europeans. Christian nobles, during this long
period, took pride, in learning from and following the Muslims in
language, style, expression and other things of this kind. They wrote
Arabic prose and poetry purely in Muslim style. In French and Italian
languages most of the words related to shipping and naval activity
come from Arabic. And this provides ample proof that they learned
about shipping activities from the Muslims. Most of the words
concerning hunting and recreation are Arabic in origin while names of
medicines and astronomical terms that are current in European
languages belong to Arabic.

It is worth-mentioning here that when Muslim fighters conquered Spain
in the first century Hijra they didn’t force a single person to accept
Islam. They would embrace Islam because of its inherent traits and
superiority. But, when, the Christians captured Muslim territories they
put all kinds of pressures upon the Muslims to confess Christianity and
when they failed in their mission they massacred hundreds of
thousands of Muslims, burned them alive and drowned them.

Chapter 12
Morocco and North Africa

Some historians are of the opi

inion that the Progeny of Ibrahim isa
Bani Israel settled in Morocc

0. Roman and Greek dynasties also ruled
these territories. The world-renowned Carthage belonged to North

Africa. The Goths had also taken Morocco by storm as they did in
Iberia (Spain). The Berbers inhabited Morocco and its adjoining
eastern territories and were formed, in fact, from the totality of the
Arabs, Syrians, Egyptians, Greeks, Persians, and Romans. Territorial
conditions and climatic influences carved them out as a people distinct
from all others in respect of taste, temperament and disposition which
made them inclined to harshness, cruelty and barbarity and they
Temained so until they embraced Islam. Whenever they forgot their
Islamic discipline their old sensé of enmity, rivalry and feuds rose
again.

Morocco was conquered by Uqba bin Nafe. Even though it revolted
against the Muslim rule each time it was subdued. Musa bin Nusayr,
Governor of Africa and Morocco had entrusted the rule of Morocco to
Tariq bin Ziyad. Tariq and. Musa bin Nusayr then conquered Spain.
Shortly after the conquests of Morocco and Spain, the Berbers started
222 The History of Islam

insurgent activities. In Spain they were easily crushed but their
uprising in North Africa lingered on for a longer period. Such a
disturbing situation drew the attention of forces antagonistic to Islam
towards this country.

Idrisia Rule

Idris

We have already made rhention of Imam Muhammad bin Abdullah
and his family while dealing with the Abbasid dynasty and how they
were ruined in Makkah. A member of the same family named Idris
reached Morocco along with his servant. He settled in Prolila whose
chief Abdul Hameed greeted him honorably. Gradually Idris become
popular among Zawagha, Lawata, Zanata, Sadrota, Meknes and the
Ghanaza clans of the Berbers. With the efforts of Ishaq bin Muhammad
bin Abdul Hameed most of the Muslim clans among the Berbers took
the oath of allegiance to Idris’s Caliphate. Ina very short period Idris

anxious. However, he sent his slav
Idris. Sulaiman appeared before |
Idris believed him and eulogized

His Death

Sufaiman
death and

Idris It

dris as an opponent of Harun Rashid.
him among his courtiers,

gave Idris a kind of tooth powder,

which choked him to
Sulaiman escaped safely.

anzah was pregnant by
make the oath of allegiance to the

Morocco and North Africa 223

child after its birth. In this way, Rashid was able to keep intact the
country ruled by Idris. The Berber slave-girl gave birth to a male child.
Rashid asked the people to take ba’it at the hand of the child and the
people did accordingly. They made ba’it when he was weaned and
once again when he was a boy of twelve. The same year Ibn Aghlab,
the Governor of Africa incited the Berbers against Rashid and he was
killed. However, this did not break the ba’it. The boy was also named
Idris and came to be known as Idris II or Idris Junior. After Rashid,
Abu Khalid bin Yazid bin Ilyas Abdi was appointed as his instructor.

Conquests

Being aware of the art of statesmanship Idris II appointed Mus’ab bin
Isa Azdi as his Minister. He then gradually expanded his territories
and captured almost the whole of Morocco. Men in large numbers from
Arabia, Spain, Africa, Egypt, Syria and other far off places came to
Idris Il in search of peace and prosperity and added to the splendor and
activity of the country. Idris shifted his capital from Prolila, a small
town Fez where he laid the foundation of a new.city, which flourished
very quickly. After initial conflicts with the Berbers Idris succeeded in
dominating every tribe and Morocco become a country wholly and
solely ruled by Idris II, independent of the Abbasid Caliphate.

Muhammad bin Idris

Idris II or Junior died in 213 A.H. and was succeeded by his son
Muhammad. It so happened about the same time that Sulaiman bin
Abdullah bin Hasan bin Muthana bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib, the
full brother of Idris I reached Tlemcen via Egypt and Africa. The
Berbers took the oath of allegiance at his hand he was able to found
his rule in Tlemcen.

Kanizah, the mother of Idris 11 and the grandmother of Muhammad
bin Idris put forward a suggestion that Muhammad alone should not
rule the entire country and his brothers should also be given various
Parts of the country to set up their independent rule. Her proposal
was accepted. Accordingly, Muhammad was given Fez and its
surrounding areas while among his brothers, Qasim got Tangier,
Sayut received Taitwan, and Umar was given Tabkisyan, Targha and

224 The History of Islam

the rule of Dahajah and Ghamrah tribes. Daud received Hamarah,
Matalsol, Tazi and Meknes and Gheyatha tribes. Abdullah got Baghwat,
Nafis, Jibal, Madamdah, Lamata, Saus, al-Aqsa. Yahya got Basila, Ara’ish,
Darogha and Isa was given Shala, Sala, Azmur and Tamasna and Hamza
got Walila and its outskirts. Those who were still young boys were put
under the care of their grandmother, Kanizah. Tlemcen was already
captured by Sulaiman bin Abdullah. Thus, the mighty Empire of
Morocco was cut into pieces by acting upon the suggestion of a woman.
After a short time Isa of Azmor attacked his brother Muhammad bin
Idris. Muhammad asked his brother Qasim to help in the fight but he
refused to obey. He then sent Umar to face Isa and the former
defeated the latter and attacked the occupied territories. Muhammad
then asked Umar to punish Qasim who had defied. his order.

Umar attacked Qasim and Qasim was defeated after a bloody
encounter. Qasim passed the rest of his life in seclusion, practicing
piety and purity of life. Umar attacked the territory of Qasim and thus
added to his strength and power yet he remained loyal to his brother,
Muhammad. When Umar died in 220 AH. Muhammad made his son
Ali bin Umar his father’s successor.

His Death

Seven months after the death of Umar, Muhammad bin Idris also died
in 221 A.H. He had appointed his 9 year old son, Ali as his successor
and crown prince before his death.

Ali bin Mahammad

After Muhammad the courtiers and the powerful section of the society
were pleased to pledge their support to Ali bin Muhammad. He set
himself to rule his country properly. He kept peace throughout his
thirteen-year rule. He died in 234 A.H. and appointed his brother
Yahya bin Muhammad as his successor at the time of his death.

Yahya bin Muhammad .

Yahya bin Muhammad added much to the power and splendor of his
rule. During his tenure the Idris Caliphate came to be counted among

Morocco and North Africa 225

the most magnificent states in the world. The population of Fez
flourished, trade reached its peak and religious scholars and
intellectuals came to join his court.

Yahya bin Yahya

Yahya bin Muhammad was succeeded by his son Yahya bin Yahya.
His misconduct displeased his people and they rose in revolt against
him under the guidance of Abdur Rahman bin Abi Suhail and
deposed Yahya bin Yahya and banished him from Fez. Ashamed and
dishearten he died shortly after that. Ali bin Umar was still the ruler
of his state and after the shameful exit of Yahya bin Yahya he came to
Fez and ascended the throne. Shortly after that, Abdur Razzaq Kharji

rose in revolt and captured most of their territory and the Idrisi
dynasty passed though a precarious state.

Yahya bin Idris bin Umar

Yahya bin Idris bin Umar bin Idris Junior became strong enough to
capture Morocco in 292 A.H. and restored the lost splendor of Idrisi
dynasty. He is considered the greatest King among the Idrisi leaders.
At that time, the Ubaidite (Fatimid) ruled over Africa. The Ubaidite
army invaded Morocco in 305 A.H. Yahya bin Idris came out to give
battle but was defeated after fierce fighting. Yahya came back to Fez
and made efforts to buy peace. He was given peace on condition that
he would show obedience and pay some money annually in cash as a
token of loyalty. When Talha bin Yahya bin Idris, the son of Yahya bin
Idris became the ruler he was captured by the Ubaidite troops. He had
to pass two years in captivity and settled in Mahdiya after being
released and died there in 331 A.H.

By 309 A.H., Morocco and Fez came under the rule of the Ubaidites
(Fatimids). In 313 A.H., Hasan bin Muhammad bin Qasim bin Idris
rose against Raihan Katami, the Ubaidite Governor of Fez and
established Idrisite rule once again in Fez. But the Ubaidite
commander, Musa bin Abi al-Aliya invaded and captured Fez and
Hasan was put to death. Most of the small districts of Morocco were
still ruled by the Idrisities. They at last turned towards the Sultan of
Spain who captured Morocco and drove away the Ubaidites. Morocco
become a province of the Cordova rule.

226 _ The History of islam

"End of Idrisite Rule

Sulaiman bin Abdullah, already mentioned, was brother of Idris
senior or Idris I. He had established his rule in Tlemcen and Tiaret.
Muhammad bin Sulaiman succeeded his father but civil war broke
out among Banu Sulaiman with the result the country broke into
small pieces. ١

The Aghlabs of Africa

During Umayyad dynasty the viceroy of the Berber countries of
Northern Africa lived in the Qairwan city of Tripoli and the
governors of Morocco and Spain were appointed on the advice of
the Viceroy of Qairwan. During the Abbasid rule, when Spain and
Morocco broke away from the central government, the status of the
Viceroy of Qairwan was reduced to Governor. Since this territory
was also like Morocco with respect to the political climate and the

Berbers that inhabited it, changing of Governors and revolts had
become common.

Ibrahim bin Aghlab

in the wake of frequent changes of the Governor, Muhammad bin
Mugatil took over the province, once again he had to face the
displeasure of the citizens. They wrote Ibrahim bin Aghlab to request
the Caliph for the province. Following this message Ibrahim bin
Aghlab submitted to Caliph Harun Rashid that he spent one hundred
thousand dinars from the Egyptian revenue to run the administration
of Tripoli while the Province gave nothing in return. After this
statement he promised to send forty thousand dinars annually from
Tripoli without asking for a farthing from the central government if
the province was given to him. Caliph Harun Rashid agreed and
issued Ibrahim bin Aghlab a letter of authority to take over the

administration of the province. Since the change was in the public

interest peace prevailed in the entire territory. Ibrahim bin Aghlab
took over the rule of Tripoli and founded a new city adjacent to
Qairwan and named it Abbasia.

Morocco and North Africa 227

Battles

A person named Hamdis rose against the Abbasids. Ibrahim bin
Aghlab sent Imran bin Mujahid at the head of a strong army to put
down the revolt. Hamdis was crushed after a fierce battle and ten
thousand insurgents lost their lives. Following this Ibrahim bin
Aghlab paid constant attention to the far west. Idris had already died
in Morocco and Rashid was running the administration in the name of
Idris Junior. Ibrahim Aghlab attracted the Berbers with costly gifts and
rewards with the result that a party of the Berbers beheaded Rashid
and sent his head to Ibrahim bin Aghlab in Qairwan. But, during this
period, the citizens of Tripoli rose in revolt against Sufyan bin
Muhajir, the Governor of Ibrahim bin Aghlab and forcibly drove him
out of the province. Ibrahim sent troops to Tripoli and regained his
lost territory. Imran bin Mujahid rose strongly against Ibrahim in
Tunis in 195 A.H. and captured Qairwan. Ibrahim bin Aghlab dug
trenches around Abbasia and took refuge in his guarded city. Imran
besieged the city for a long period of nearly one-year. Although a
number of encounters took place between them, neither one of them
gained any advantage. Ibrahim informed Caliph Harun Rashid about
the state of affairs and requested money, which the Caliph sent
without delay. Ibrahim bin Aghlab then attracted a large number of
Imran’s troops by the lure of large sums. Imran grew anxious with the
deteriorating condition of his military power, raised his siege and
went to Zabin, Ibrahim then sent his soh, Abdullah, to Tripoli in 196
AHL, but a few days after assuming power he suffered a serious
military revoit with the result he was surrounded in his palace. He
was given peace only on the promise of leaving Tripoli. Abdullah
came out of Tripoli but stayed on the outskirts where he began to
collect some Berbers around himself by the power of the purse. He
then invaded Tripoli and captured it. A few days after this event
Ibrahim bin Aghlab deposed Abdullah from Tripoli and appointed
Sufyan bin Mudar as Governor. The people of Tripoli revolted again
and forced him out of Tripoli and Sufyan went straight to Ibrahim in
Abbasia. Ibrahim sent Sufyan again to Tripoli along with his son,
Abdullah and after a large-scale blood bath peace came to Tripoli mt
for a very short time. It was actually a lull before the storm. Abdu

228 The History of Islam

Wahab bin Abdur Rahman bin Rustam then invaded Tripoli-at the
head of a strong Berber force and killing and bloodshed broke out.

His Death

fbrahim bin Aghlab passed away in Abbasia in 196 A.H. When the
news reached Tripoli, Abdullah made peace with Abdul Wahab He
gave the outskirts of Tripoli to Abdullah and kept the city of Tripoli
under him. He then went towards Qairwan.

Abdullah bin Ibrahim

Ibrahim bin Aghlab appointed his son Abdullah as his crown prince
before his death and exhorted his second son Ziyadatullah to obey his
brother. Abdullah bin Ibrahim bin Aghlab arrived at Qairwan in 197
A.H. and took over the administration and succumbed to a wound to
the ear in 201 A.H., after ruling for five years. His brother,
Ziyadatullah, succeeded him.

Ziyadatullah

Ibrahim Aghlab had received the authority of ruling the country on
contract from Caliph Harun Rashid. After coming to the throne
Ziyadatullah received a letter from Mamun Rashid ordering him to
invoke for Abdullah bin Tahir from the pulpit. Ziyadatullah felt this to
be problematic and while bidding farewell to the messenger of the
Caliph he sent some valuable gifts along with a few dinars bearing the
stamp of Idrisite rule making clear that he could at anytime, build up
his relation with the Idrisite government.

Revolts

Shortly after that Zeyad bin Sahl, one of his military officers, revolted
against him and besieged Bajah city. Ziyadatullah sent his army,
which captured Zeyad and put him to death. Mansur Tirmidi revolted
in Tanjah (Tangier) and invaded Tunis and Ismail bin Sufyan,
Governor of Tunis was killed in the encounter. Mansur captured
Tunis. Ziyadatullah sent his cousin and Minister Aghlab bit Abdullah
at the head of an army and told him at the time of departure that he

Morocco and North Africa 209

would kill him if he came back defeated. Mansur defeated Aghlab bin
Abdullah. On the way back to Qairwan his troops killed him out of
fear for their lives and joined Mansur. Mansur became powerful and
captured Qairwan. Ziyadatullah took refuge in Abbasia. After a siege
of forty days Ziyadatullah became victorious and Mansur fled to
Tunis. Various generals of his Army captured different parts of the
country and only a very small part remained under the possession of
Ziyadatullah. However, he gradually subdued all other rulers and
annexed their territories.

Conquest of the Island of Sicily

The Caesar of Constantinople ruled over Sicily where his governor
carried out his orders. Caesar sent a crusading General, Qaseal to
replace him and he appointed a Roman named Femi as Admiral of the
Navy. Femi took the African coast by storm and established himself as
a force to be feared on the sea. At this time, Caesar wrote to the
Governor of Sicily to arrest and send the Admiral to him. When the
Admiral came to know of this order, he went into Sicily and captured
the city of Martusa. Fierce fighting took place between the Governor
and the Admiral in which the former was killed. Admiral Femi then
captured the whole of the Island and declared himself the sovereign
ruler. He then put a person named Blat as the administrator of part of
the Island. Mikhail, the cousin of Blat ruled over another part of the
Island. These two brothers jointly rose against Femi. After a number of
encounters they captured Syracuse. Femi took refuge with his fleet,
and then came to Ziyadatullah for help. He sent Asad bin Furat, the
Qadi of Qairwan with him at the head of a detachment.

The island of Sicily was first invaded by the Muslims during the
Caliphate of Muawiyah bin Abu Sufyan and was led by Abdullah bin
Qays Fazari it was done asa strategy to destabilize the Romans and
this happened in 33 A.H. Musa bin Nusayr, the Viceroy of Africa,
invaded the Island in 85 A.H. and the Island was attacked again by a
commander of Caliph Yazid bin Abdul Malik in 102 A.H. Bishr bin
Safwan Kalbi attacked it in 109 A.H., during the Caliphate of Hisham
bin Abdul Malik. The Muslims won victories in all these encounters
ahd brought large amounts of booty and many captives. Mustanir bin

230 , The History of Islam

Harth, the General of Ubaidah bin Abdur Rahman Qaisi, the viceroy
of Tripoli launched an attack on Sicily but it failed due to a storm at
sea and the sinking of his ships. In 122 A.H., Ubaidullah bin Hijab, the
Governor of Africa sent Habib bin Ubaidullah along with his son,
Abdur Rahman bin Habib to Sicily. Abdur Rahman bin Habib got off
at the coast and started winning victories and made his way into Sicily
up to Syracuse, its capital. The ruler of Sicily agreed to hand over the
Island to Abdur Rahman bin Habib but the Island was taken out of
Islamic rule before long. The ruler of Africa once again made an

assault on Sicily in 135 A.H. but the Muslim powers could not look
towards Sicily until 212 A.H.

Femi came to Ziyadatullah and persuaded him to conquer the Island.
Ziyadatullah sent the Qladi of Qairwan, Asad bin Furat witha fleet of
one hundred ships besides the ships of Femi. He instructed the
commander to annex Sicily and set up a permanent Islamic Goverrument
after winning it and obliterating all signs and traces of the Romans. The
war fleet left in the middle of Rabia al-Awwal 212 A.H. and reached the
coast of Sicily after the third day. Blat, the ruler of Sicily sent an army to
face the Muslim invaders. A battle between the two forces broke out and
the Muslim troops moved ahead crushing the Christian fighters. Even
though Femi was accompanying the Muslim army, he was growing sad
and dejected with the winning spree of the Muslim fighters. He started
sending secret information and advice to the Christians, which proved

injurious to the Muslim strategy. However, the forward march of the
Muslim troops could not be checked and it resulted in the death of Blat.

Femi also met his doom when the Christians of Sicily appointed another
man as their ruler in place of Blat and kept fighting the Muslim army.

Qadi Asad bin Furat laid a siege around Syracuse but he died during

this siege in Shaban, 213 A.H.

The Muslim troops elected Muhammad bin Abul Jawari in place of
Qadi Asad bin Furat. Close on the heels of this development ships
laden with troops were sent from Constantinople. But, after fierce
fighting the fresh reinforcing troops were fought back. Unfortunately
an epidemic broke out among the Muslim troops, which proved more
injurious than the Christian attacks. It took a heavy toll of Muslims
lives. Because of this they raised their siege and decided to go back to

Morocco and North Africa 231

the occupied cities and regroup to comeback and conquer the Island.
While they were moving back, they found the warships from
Constantinople surrounding the area and the Christian forces proceeded
to attack the retreating Muslim soldiers and surrounding them in their
camps. Muhammad bin Abul Jawari died during the attack.

The Muslim troops immediately chose Zuhayr bin Auf as their
commander. The Muslims were besieged for some time when by
chance, a fleet of Muslim warships from Spain was sailing in quest of
waging Jihad and happened to be in the Mediterranean Sea. When the
besieged Muslims of Sicily found out about this, they contacted the
fleet and brought to their attention the precarious state of the Islamic
forces. Responding to the call for help three hundred boats were
directly sent to the coast of Sicily. They landed on the coast and
started fighting the Christians and forced them to raise their siege and
flee. After their freedom, the Islamic forces resumed their conquests.
The Spanish fleet after doing the needful took leave. The African
Islamic forces besieged Palermo and set up their government over the
occupied territories again and in the meantime, reinforcements from
Africa in the form of military boats arrived.

The army that had come with Asad bin Furat numbered ten thousand
and seven hundred in all, ten thousand infantry and seven hundred
cavalry. Palermo had not been conquered when Muhammad bin
Abdullah bin Aghlab, the cousin of Ziyadatullah arrived after
becoming Governor of Sicily. Palermo was ruled by the Romans. The
southem half of Sicily was under Muslim rule while the northern part
Was controlled by the Christians and they received constant help from
the Caesar of Rome. However, the Muslim were continuously
expanding their territories and after the conquest of Palermo, Sicily
Virtually became a province of the Aghlab rule and a Muslim
Govemor presided over it.

The greatest accomplishment of Ziyadatullah’s rule was the inclusion
of Sicily to the Islamic lands, Muslim rule continued on the island for
almost three hundred years. Civil war among the Muslims caused it to
be lost to the Christians and they wiped out all the Muslims from
Sicily as they did in Spain.

232 . The History of Islam

His Death

Ziyadatuliah died in 223 A.H. and his brother Aghlab bin Ibrahim
Aghlab succeeded him.

Aghlab bin Ibrahim Abu [qal- Aghlab

He kept his subjects happy and any revolts were, quickly dealt with.
He died in 226 A.H., after a peaceful rule of two years and seven
months. His son Abul Abbas bin Ibrahim bin Aghlab succeeded him.

Abul Abbas Muhammad ١

Abul Abbas also ruled like his father. But Abu Jafar, the brother of
Abu Abbas rose in revolt in 240 A.H., and deposed Abul Abbas and
set up his own rule. Abul Abbas rebuilt his army and drove him out of
Egypt and regained the throne in 242 AH. Abul Abbas died and was
succeeded by his son Abu Ibrahim Ahmad bin Abul Abbas.

Abu Ibrahim Muhammad

After coming to the throne Abu Ibrahim brought about an increment
in the salaries of his fighters built forts at various places. He also
continued fighting with the Romans of Sicily.

in Shawwal, 247 A.H., the Muslims won a great victory over the
Romans and a large number of captives were brought to Africa. They
were sent to the Caliph Mutawakil in Baghdad from the Aghlab
family despite having their own independent rule, they were attached
to the Baghdad Caliphate’s authority. Abu Ibrahim Ahmad died in
249 A.H. and was succeeded by his son Ziyadatullah who gained
fame as Ziyadatullah the Younger.

Ziyadatullah

Ziyadatullah’s rule was similar to his elders but he did not rule for
more than one year when his brother, Muhammad bin Abu Ibrahim
entitled Abul Gharaniq came to the throne.

Morocco and North Africa 233

Abul Gharaniq

Abul Gharaniq came to the throne in 250 A.H. following the death of
his brother, Ziyadatullah. He was fond of fun and sport. During his
period the Romans conquered a part of Sicily. However, shortly after
that the Muslim forces took it back from them. He built a number of
forts along the border of Morocco and in the coastal areas. He died in

261 AH. after ruling for eleven years and was succeeded by his
brother Ibrahim bin Abu Ibrahim.

Ibrahim bin Ahmad

Ibrahim bin Ahmad was a wise person. He began well and made his
administration strong and stable and minimized the possibility of
insurgence. Egyptian forces invaded Africa in 267 A.H. but Tbrahim’s
troops repelled the attack. An interval of insurgence broke out in 269
A.H. and took a heavy toll of Muslim lives before coming to an end.
The Khawarij attack against the government in 280 A.H. took the
entire country by storm. Ibrahim faced the disturbance with
exemplary courage and determination and put down the uprisings by
sending his troops to every corner of the country. Following this event
he recruited Sudanese fighters for his forces and horsemen from the
Sudanese slaves rose to thirty thousand. Ibrahim came to Tunis from
Qairwan in 281 A.H., built a palace and settled there.

News came from Sicily in 287 A.H. that the people of Palermo had
revolted. Ibrahim sent his son, Abul Abbas Abdullah at the head of a
fleet consisting of one hundred and sixty warships. Abul Abbas
reached Sicily and gave repeated reversals to the Christian insurgents
and brought peace to the entire island. He then moved ahead with his
boats and invaded the coastal areas of France and returned after a
long campaign of one and half years. On his return, Ibrahim himself
attacked the coastal areas of France and the French feared him much.
He was still besieging some areas when he passed away in 289 A.H.
and was buried in Palermo. During the rule of Ibrahim a Shi'ite named
Abu Abdullah Husain bin Muhammad began to preach love for the
Ahl-e-Ba'it (members of the Prophet's family) in Kutama city towards
the south of Mount Atlas lying between Morocco and Africa. He gained

234 The History of islam

i i the
much ularity and strength and started putting Pressure on the
Aghlab rule after capturing Kutama. On the death of Ibrahim Aghlabi,
his son Abul Abbas Abdullah came to the throne.

Abul Abbas

Abul Abbas chose Tunis as his capital. He sent his son Abul Khul at
the head of an army who massacred the followers of Abu Abdullah
the Shi'ite. Abu Abdullah again built his army and launched an attack
on Abu Khul. After a day and night encounter Abu Khul was defeated
and came back to Tunis. He collected fighters again and proceeded to
attack Abu Abdullah, the Shi‘ite but the latter sniped at his.army,
which fled in disorder. He built his army once again and marched on
Abu Abdullah’s territories. Unfortunately, his brother, Ziyadatullah
bin Abul Abbas hatched a conspiracy with the servants of his father
and did away with Abul Abbas and came to the throne in Shaban, 290
A.H. On getting news of the event Abu Khul came back to Tunis but
was arrested and killed. Ziyadatullah killed his other brothers and

uncles too. His appellation was Abu Mudir.

Abu Mudir Ziyadatullah

After Abu Mudir Ziyadatullah’s accession to the throne Abu
Abdullah, the Shi'ite captured Setif city and his power expanded
greatly. Abu Mudir passed a life of luxury and lacked courage. He left
Tunis and settled in Raqgadah, and sent his General, Ibrahim bin
Habeesh to take on Abu Abdullah the Shi'ite, Ibrahim bin Habeesh
marched with an army of forty thousand men and stayed in Ksar el-
Kabir for six months, During this period, he collected fighters from far
and near, which at last rose to one hundred thousand. He then

advanced towards Kutama but was unexpectedly defeated and fled
back to Qairwan. 1

Abu Abdullah conquered and _ killed the Governor, Fath bin Yahya.
The victories won by Abu Abdullah stirred the people of Qairwan and

other cities, Ziyadatullah spent money like water to restore peace and
order and kept the recruiting process going but Abu Abdullah
continued Moving ahead, capturing one city after another until he
conquered Qamudah,

Morocco and North Africa 8

End of Aghlabla Dynasty

In the wake of the fall of the city of Qamudah Abu Mudir
Ziyadatullah left Raqqadah by ship laden with goods and chattels and
moved towards the east. He first wanted to land in Alexandria but the
Governor did not allow his entry. He then landed on the Syrian coast
and settled and died in Riga. This virtually was the end of Aghlabia
dynasty. Abu Abdullah, the Shi'ite then captured all the territc-ies of
the Aghlabia dynasty and took an oath of allegiance from the people
for Ubaidullah Mahdi and this was the beginning of Ubaid (Fatimid)
dynasty. It was the same year that Abu Ubaidullah, the Shi'ite
captured Qairwan and Raqqadah and sent Hasan bin Khazir Katami
as the Governor of Sicily. However, the people of Sicily put Hasan bin
Khazir in captivity in 299 A.H because of his rudeness and evil

disposition and requested Ubaidullah Mahdi to replace him with
someone else.

Chapter 13

Ubaidullah Dynasty
in Egypt and Tripoli

Abu Abdullah

With the beginning of Abbasid Caliphate, the Alwis (type of Shites)
Started antagonistic activities against the Abbasid administration. The
Alwis tried repeatedly to disrupt the Islamic caliphate and each time
they met with failure. Abdullah bin Saba, the Jew had sown the seeds
of discord among the people and conspiracies against the central
administration. Their nefarious plan was aided and abetted by the
Magians, Jews, and Berbers who carried out their activities in the garb
of new Muslims. When the Abbasid dynasty showed signs of weakness,
Some Jews and Magians tried to present themselves as Alwis to
benefit from the situation of their increased power. Since Berber
territories were far from Baghdad, the center of the ruling power, they
took advantage of this situation. A person named Muhammad Habib
who lived in Salmia near Homs, Syria towards the end of the third
century Hijra came on the scene claiming descent from imam Jafar
Sadiq’s elder son Isma’il. He tried to take advantage of his relation
238 The History of Islam

with the Imam. Imam J’afar Sadiq’s influence had spread throughout
Yemen, Africa and Morocco. He used all his means, devices and force
to get the people ready to expect ‘the arrival of Imam Mahdi in the
immediate future and indoctrinated them with the idea that he would
be from among the Alwi Fatimid. Habib sent one of his confidants
Rustam bin Hasan bin Hoshab to Yemen to convince the people there
of the arrival of Imam Mahdi in the near future and he performed his
duty with the utmost care and tact.

Following this a man named Abu Abdullah Hasan bin Muhammad
bin Zakariya, a Shi'ite by faith, and a staunch supporter of the Alwis
came to Habib. Habib found him promising and sent him, after the
necessary instructions, to be in the company of Rustam bin Hasan for
a short time and learn from him the art of preaching and then to go to
the Berber territories to perform his duty. Muhammad Habib also told
Abu Abdullah that his son, Ubaidullah was Imam Mahdi and that he
was being sent as one of those inviting people to him. Abu Abdullah
arrived in Yemen, took lessons in preaching and reached Makkah in
the Hajj season. He came close to the wealthy and powerful people of
Kutama, from North Africa, who were in Makkah for Hajj and
accompanied them to Kutama when the Hajj was over. He plunged
himself into preaching and influenced a large section by exhibiting his
piety and dedication to the prayers. Abu Abdullah, the Shi‘ite came to
Kutama on 15 Rabia ai-Awwal 288 A.H. and began to convince the
people of the advent of Imam Mahdi without experiencing any
difficulty. The people of Kutama built a house for Abu Abdullah and
he set up his preaching center there. He was able to convince the
People around him that the place where imam Mahdi would appear
was to be Kutama and he was very sure that Kutama was the place
that the Imam would appear. They were told by him that they should
keep ready and be alert to welcome, follow and support him.

When Ibrahim bin Ahmad bin Aghlab, the ruler of Africa, came to
know of these activities of Abu Abdullah, he ordered him to stop it
otherwise he would be punished. By this time, the entire area of
Kutama and the surrounding tribes had accepted the doctrine
preached by Abu Abdullah. Finding himself strong enough Abu
Abdullah showed disrespect to the envoy of the ruler and sent him

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 239

back with rude and harsh words. The people of Kutama on reflection
feared punishment from the ruler and decided to save the situation by
tuming Abu Abdullah out of Kutama and sent him to Ibrahim bin
Ahmad, the ruler of North Africa. However, the religious leaders
opposed this proposal and united to help him. With their efforts
Harun Ghassani, the Governor of the province invited him to
Touggourt. The people of Kutama also reversed their stand and
extended their strong support to Abu Abdullah and his power and
influenced increased to a great extent. With all the help and support
and favorable circumstances Abu Abdullah gathered so much
strength that he became the ruler of the western part of the country
and it all happened within a short period of one and half years.

When Ibrahim Aghlabi’s son Abul Abbas Abdullah bin Ibrahim came
to throne, he sent his son, Abu Khul to take on Abu Abdullah. At first
Abu Abdullah lost the battle to Abu Khul but later Abu Khul was
killed and Abu Abdullah’s problem was solved. When Ziyadatullah,
the last ruler of the Aghlabi dynasty came to power, Abu Abdullah
had ample opportunities to expand his area of influence. He then
began to preach with full force that the advent of Imam Mahdi was at
hand. Messengers of Abu Abdullah came to him and informed him
that his rule had already been established in the western territory and
Ubaidullah, then known as Ubaidullah al-Mahdi was requested to
take over the administration of these territories. Ubaiduliah was
accompanied there by the people of Salmia and his son, Abul Qasint
and a slave went with him. They proceeded in the guise of a trade
caravan and chose a zigzag path instead of straight one. Spies
informed the Abbasid Caliph Muktafi that such and such person had
left from Salmia to the western territories. Muktafi issued orders to
Governor of Egypt, Isa Nawishtri, to arrest the man of such and such
features on his way to the western territories via Egypt. The Governor
rounded up the caravan but later left Ubaidullah go due to a lack of
positive identification. Ubaidullah reached Tripoli and sent word to
Abu Abdullah in Kutama of his arrival. The Governor of North Africa,
Ziyadatullah Aghlabi, stood in the way of their meeting. The
Governor had already been informed that Ubaidullah was heading
towards Abu Abdullah, following this alert he posted his men at
several places to catch him. The person who had been informed of

240 The History of Islam

Ubaidullah’s arrival was Abu Abdullah’s brother, Abul Abbas, who
was sent along with his men to escort Ubaidullah. Abul Abbas was
arrested in Qairwan and Ziyadatullah put him to prison. When
Ubaidullah came to know of the arrest of Abul Abbas, he fled to Ksar
el-Kabir and then to Sijilmassa where al-Yasa the servant of the
Governor, Ziyadatullah Aghlabi, took him to be a”tradesman and
treated him honorably. When the Governor issued orders to arrest
Ubaidullah he was captured by al-Yasa. Abul Abbas.and Ubaidullah
Mahdi suffered the bitterness of captivity for three or four years in
Qairwan and Sijilmassa respectively. During this period Abu
Abdullah, the Shiite kept conquering territories. By 296 A.H., he
collected a huge army of two hundred thousand and took his brother,
Abul Abbas, out of the prison after conquering Qairwan in 296 A.H.
He then appointed Abul Abbas as Governor of Qairwan and
proceeded to Sijilmassa. Various tribes on the way showed their
loyalty to him and when he reached near Sijilmassa, he wrote a very
soft letter to al-Yasa bin Madra‘a seeking peace. When the envoy of
Abu Abdullah met al-Yasa, he killed the envoy, tore up the letter and
came out to fight with Abu Abdullah. Following a fierce encounter al-
Yasa‘s troops fled to safety and al-Yasa and his men followed suit.
Following his conquest Abu Abdullah stormed into the city went
straight to the prison and freed Ubaidullah Mahdi along with his son,
Abul Qasim. He then had Ubaidullah Mahdi and his son Abul Qasim
mounted on horseback and followed Ubaidullah shedding tears of joy
and saying: “This is your master. This is your master.” He escorted
him to camp, had him seated on his throne, took ba‘it and made the

others follow him. Al-Yasa was brought in chains and was ordered to
be put to death.

Ubaidullah Mahdi

Abu Abdullah and Ubaidullah set out towards the west after passing
forty days in Sijilmassa and Qairwan. Abu Abdullah presented all his
Possessions to Ubaidullah. Ba’it of Caliphate for Ubaidullah Mahdi
was administered. His name came to be mentioned in the Friday
address and Preachers were sent to the Berber territories to teach them
the new doctrine. All the people were forced to accept their faith. The
People of Kutama had been supporting Abu Abdullah and so gained

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 241

the upper hand in the army and the administration. Abu Abdullah
and his brother, Abul Abbas were active in governmental affairs. It
was Abu Abdullah who had brought such a great empire into
existence. He was instrumental behind uprooting the Aghlabi dynasty
and called Ubaidullah to take charge of the administration.

After coming to the throne and finding himself a sovereign ruler,
Ubaidullah wanted to wipe out the influence of Abu Abdullah and his
brother, Abul Abbas. At this point Abu Abdullah’s eyes opened. The
people of Kutama had more faith in Abu Abdullah and they had
accepted Ubaidullah as Imam Mahdi with the efforts of Abu
Abdullah. Abu’ Abdullah began to convince the people secretly that
the identification of Ubaidullah as Imam Mahdi was his mistake, and
that he was certainly not the Imam, the Innocent. He was, in fact, a
usurper and a man-eater. The real Imam Mahdi was yet to come. Most
of the people of Kutama sided with him and when Ubaidullah came to
know of this, he began to kill the people hatching the conspiracy
against him. With the mutual consultations of Abu Abdullah and the
people of Kutama, Sheikh al-Mashaikh the leading religious leader of
Kutama, a very pious and noble person of the city, was sent to
Ubaidullah Mahdi. He went and asked him to show any sign of his
being Imam Mahdi. Ubaidullah foresaw the lurking danger and he
signaled his slave and Sheikh al-Mashaikh was beheaded. The people
of Kutama were violently engaged and wanted to kill Ubaidullah.

Abu Abdullah Assassinated

In view of the deteriorating situation Ubaidullah invited two of the
Most influential chiefs of Kutama named Aruba bin Yusuf and his
brother, Habasa_ bin Yusuf to his special place of retreat and talked to
them very sincerely and affectionately. Later, he asked them to kill
Abu Abdullah and his brother Abul Abbas. His order was duly
implemented and both the targets were attacked and done away with.
This event took place in 298 A.H.

Revolts

fn the wake of this event the supporters of Abu Abdullah revolted
against Ubaidullah who faced the situation and put down the

242 The History of Islam

insurgence. After a short time, the people of Kutama rose up against
Ubaidullah and he once again put it down with a heavy hand. Since
the atmosphere of the country was deteriorating, Ubaidullah stopped
preaching the Shi'ite creed. Following this Ubaidullah Mahdi gave
Bajah to Aruba bin Yusuf, Barqah (Cyrenaica) to Habasa bin Yusuf
and appointed his son Abul Qasim as his crown’prince. After a few
days, the people of Kutama appointed a youth as their chief and
declared him Imam Mahdi and very violently revolted against
Ubaidullah. They also declared this youth a Prophet. Ubaidullah sent
his son Abul Qasim at the head of a huge army to punish the people of
Kutama. Abul Qasim defeated the people of Kutama and ravaged
Kutama and the young Mahdi was also captured and killed. The
people of Tripoli revolted in 300 A.H. Abul Qasim was sent to face the
uprisings and he conquered Tripoli after a long siege.

_ Abul Qasim led a strong navy and invaded Egypt and Alexandria in
301 A.H. Habasa bin Yusuf also accompanied the navy. Alexandria
was conquered, When Caliph Muqtadir Abbasi of Baghdad received
the news he dispatched an army under the command of Sabugtagin
and Munis, his slave. They were able to force Abul Qasim and Habasa
out from the borders of Egypt. The Ubaidite forces returned to
Qairwan. Habasa once again launched an attack on Alexandria in 302
A.H. but Munis, the slave forced him to flee after a few encounters.
Seven thousand of Habasa‘s troops lost their lives and Habasa
escaped miraculously. Ubaidullah Mahdi killed Habasa the same
year. Following the killing of Habasa his brother Aruba revolted
against rule of Ubaidullah. The people of Kutama lent their support to

’ Aruba. Ubaidullah chose ‘his slave, Ghalib to punish Aruba. He

assaulted Aruba with a huge army and defeated and killed him along
with his cousins and comrades. Soon after that Sicily revolted and
drove out the Governor, Ali bin Amr from the territory. They then
sent word to Caliph Muqtadir Abbasi showing their loyalty to him:
Ubaidullah sent Hasan bin Khazir at the head of a war fleet to punish
the people of Sicily. Ahmad bin Qahrab defeated and killed Hasan bin
Khazir after a fierce encounter. The people of Sicily feared punishment
from Ubaidullah so they caught Ahmad bin Qahrab and sent him to
Ubaidullah and sought his forgiveness. Ubaidullah killed Ahmad and
appointed Ali bin Musa bin Ahmad as the Governor of Sicily.

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli : 30 ‏6د‎

The Founding of Mahdiya City

Since Ubaidullah Mahdi was an Isma’ili Shi'ite and one who claimed
to be Imam Mahdi, he was in constant fear of uprisings against him,
particularly when the whole North Africa did not accept his claim. He
planned to found a new city for his capital. He visited the coastal
areas and chose a narrow rocky peninsula on Cape Ifriqiya and laid
the foundation of a city. He named it Mahdiya. The city was
strengthened with strong fortifications and iron doors. When the work
was completed, Ubaidullah Mahdi said laughingly, “I have today,
won peace for Bani Fatima. They are now safe”. The same year he set
up a boat factory, which built nine hundred boats for his fleet in the
first year. He then sent his son, Abul Qasim to invade Alexandria in
307 A.H. Abul Qasim conquered Alexandria ‘and captured the Nile
Delta. After receiving this news Caliph Muatadir of Baghdad sent his
slave, Munis, to Egypt. After a number of encounters and trials of
strength Munis was victorious. Ubaidullah had sent a fleet of eighty
war ships to reinforced Abul Qasim but he had been defeated and
forced to flee before the reinforcements arrived. The fleet was
unaware of the defeat of Abul Qasim and they continued moving
ahead. The fleet met its doom when Munis smashed it, set the boats on
fire and killed them all.

The next year 308 A.H. Ubaidullah Mahdi sent Mudala bin Habus to
invade Morocco. He came into conflict with Yahya bin Idris bin Amr
more than once. Finally, Yahya became subordinate to Ubaidullah
Mahdi, and Ubaidullah appointed Musa bin Abi al-Afiya Maknasi as
the caretaker of the Moroccan provinces. In 309 A.H., other provinces
of Morocco were also annexed under the Ubaidite rule. Fez was then
under the rule of Yahya. The same year Musa bin Abi al-Afiya lodged
4 complaint against Yahya and by the order of Ubaiduilah Yahya’s
Part of the territory was also annexed to Ubaidite rule. When the
Idrisite rule was no longer in effect, some individuals of the dynasty
shifted to Rif (Northeastem Morocco) and Ghumarah (Northwestern
Morocco) and established their governments there. After dealing with
Morocco Mudala invaded Sijilmassa and handed it over to his cousin
by killing family members of the Madrar Maknasi tribes, who were
antagonistic to the Ubaidites. Mudala was a great commander who

244 7 The History of Islam

had played a pivotal role in setting up Ubaidullah Mahdi’s rule in
Moroceo. However, his expansionist policy, violence and bloodshed
made the Berbers rise up against him. A number of encounters took
place and Mudala was finally killed. With his assassination Morocco
was overtaken by revolt and it went out of the control of the Ubaidites.

Ubaiduliah sent his son, Abul Qasim to Morocco in 215 A.H. When
Muhammad bin Khazar, the chief of the Zanata tribes realized Abul
Qasim was moving towards him he changed his way and tumed to
the southern deserts. Abul Qasim proceeded towards the west
conquering city after city. He besieged Hasan bin Abi al-Atish in
Jerada city (Northeastern Morocco). The siege dragged on and Abul
Qasim had to return without any gains. On the way back, he arrested
Banu Kaman, the ruler of the city of Masila and banished him to
Qairwan. He then reconstructed Masila, named it Mohammedia and
entrusted it to Ali bin Hamdan along with Zab city. He gave the
general rule and vigilance to Musa bin Abi al-Afiya but, very shortly,
he rose against Ubaiduliah Mahdi and accepted the leadership of the
Umayyad dynasty of Spain and the name of the Caliph of Spain
formed part of all official addresses all over Morocco.

Hearing this Ubaidullah sent Ahmad Maknasi to Morocco at the head
of a strong army. After a number of encounters Musa bin Abi al-Afiya
moved towards Spain and Ahmad Maknasi went towards Mahdiya
after ra‘aging Morocco.

Death of Ubaidullah

Ubaiduliah Mahdi died in Rabia al-Awwal, 322 A.H. after completing
twenty-four years on the throne. He was succeeded by his son Abul
Qasim Muhammad Mahdi under the title “Qaim Bi Amrillah”. He is
also known as Abul Qasim Nazar. .

Abul Qasim Nazar

On coming to the throne he first put down the uprisings that had
broken out in the wake of Ubaidullah’s demise. He then tumed to
Morocco. It was again taken over by Musa bin al-Afiya. By 324 A.H.,
the whole of Morocco except Fez once again came under the rule of
Abul Qasim. Following this Abul Qasim sent a General named Ibn

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 245

Ishaq at the head of a massive navy to conquer the northern coastal
line, Ibn Ishaq conquered the whole territory up to Genoa followed by
the island of Sardinia. Ibn Ishaq then sent his slave, Ziran to Egypt
with an army that captured Alexandria. After these events Abul
Qasim became involved with the disturbances created by a man
named Abu Yazid and continued to be occupied with this.

Skirmishes with Abu Yazid

Abu Yazid Mukhallad bin Kirad belonged to Qastila and would
frequently visit Sudan as a part of his trading activities. His son, Abu
Yazid was born and brought up in Sudan. The Sudanese were inclined
to Kharji creed and opposed the Shi'ite sect. Yazid was also influenced
by their religious thoughts. He then came to Nahert and took to
teaching. It was the period when Abu Abdullah, the Shi'ite had
commenced his preaching’ work among the Berbers. Abu Yazid
continued preaching his thoughts and creed among the people and
watched Abu Abdullah’s activities silently. Both Abu Abdullah and
Ubaidullah were aware of the preaching efforts of the teacher but
important administrative affairs and military activities did not give
them an opportunity to uproot Abu Yazid’s antagonistic ideas. When
Ubaidullah Mahdi died and the country was overtaken by disturbances,
Abu Yazid started preaching with force and determination and gave
himself the title Sheikh al-Muminin. People in large numbers started
coming and joining him as disciples. He was able to build a strong
army out of his disciples. When. the ruler of Bejaia came to know of
Abu Yazid’s war preparations, he attacked Abu Yazid but was
defeated. Abu Yazid moved ahead and besieged Bejaia, which
lingered on for a long time and he left in disappointment. Berber
tribes lent their support to him and he ordered them to mention the
name of Musa bin Nusayr, the Caliph of Spain in addresses from the
pulpit. With the help and support of the Zanata tribes Abu Yazid
Btadually rose to power and city after city went out of Abul Qasim’s
control. Even though Abul Qasim sent seasoned Generals and
Commanders, each one was defeated. Abu Yazid’s army captured
Qairwan and Abul Qasim was forced to take shelter in his fort. Abu
Yazid then spread his troops all over Tripoli and bloodshed and
plunder broke out. Abul Qasim wrote to some governors still free

246 The History of Islam

from the sway of Abu Yazid. The people of Kutama came to his help.
However, the people of Kutama fled the battlefield when the other
forces, which took the field on behalf of Abul Qasim, were beaten. After
that Abu Yazid led his troops up to the fortifications of Mahdiya city but
failed to make progress there. At last, Abu Yazid moved back to
Qairwan and Abul Qasim’s troops began to snipe at his retreating army.

Death of Abul Qasim

Abu Yazid’s son Ayub invaded Mahdiya and besieged it in 324 A.H.
During this siege, Abul Qasim died in Mahdiya. Abu Yazid was then
laying siege around Susah city.

Isma’il bin Abul Qasim

Isma‘il bin Abul Qasim succeeded his father and entitled himself Al-
Mansur. Isma’‘il raised the siege of Ayub bin Abu Yazid and sent a
contingent to reinforce the army in Susah. Abu Yazid made an all out
effort to obstruct the launching of the enemy fleet but met with failure.
The reinforcing troops landed on the coast and took the battlefield
against Abu Yazid with the active support of the people of Susah. Abu
Yazid was beaten and his military camp was plundered. He moved to
Qairwan in distress because of his defeat, the people of Qairwan
tured out his Governor from Qairwan and stopped Abu Yazid from
coming into the city. At the same time they declared their loyalty to
Abui Qasim. Abu Yazid then moved to Sabha. Following this Isma‘il
bin Abul Qasim came to Qairwan and consoled the citizens. Abu
Yazid invaded Qairwan with a massive army in 334 A.H. Ismail faced
the invasion but conceded defeat after 4 number of encounters.
However, he rebuilt his army in a very short time by collecting his
scattered fighters and defeated Abu Yazid after a fierce attack. Abu
Yazid moved to Bejaia, defeated and disappointed and the people
closed the door of the city on him. At last, Abu Yazid besieged the city.

Hearing this {sma’il bin Abul Qasim led his army to Bejaia. When Abu
Yazid heard of Ismail’s arrival, he left Bejaia and besieged another
fort. He was unsuccessful for Isma’il also went there as well to
Support that fort. Abu Yazid continued to wander from here to there
and at last Abu Yazid and Isma’il came face to face near the mountain

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 247

of Kutama. Abu Yazid was injured and escaped leaving ten thousand
fighters killed and wounded. Although Abu Yazid plunged himself into
the task of collecting troops once again, his Governors and allied tribes
joined the camp of Isma’il bin Abul Qasim by seeking his forgiveness. In
that way ail the territory, which until then was ruled by Abu Yazid,
came under the control of Isma’‘il Abul Qasim bin Ubaidullah.

Abu Yazid’s Arrest and Death

When Abu Yazid was captured from Fort Kutama he was badly
injured and died of his wounds before long. Isma‘il then went to
Qairwan. Shortly after that he was informed that the Governor of the
western territory, Hameed bin Baslin, had revolted against the
Ubaidite dynasty and submitted himself to Umayyad dynasty of
Spain. Ismail led his army to punish the rebel Governor and they
faced one another at Tiaret. Hameed was beaten and about the same

time Fad] bin Abu Yazid, besieged Bejaia. Isma’il turned to punish him -
but before the occurrence of an event someone beheaded Fadl and

sent it to Ismail. After attaining peace for a short period he deposed

Khali! bin Ishaq from Sicily and replaced him with Husain bin Ali bin

Abul Husain.

Death of isma’il

In 340 A.H. Isma’il built a massive war fleet and asked Husain bin Ali
bin Abul Husain, the Governor of Sicily to be ready to join the fleet.
The southern part of Italy was conquered and the victorious army
returned to Qairwan and Mahdiya rich with spoils of war in 341 A.H.
but Isma‘il had already died.

Muiz bin Isma’it

His son, Muiz, succeeded Isma’il. The first year of his coming to the
throne some Berber tribes expressed their loyalty to him. In 344 A.H.,
he sent word to Husain bin Ali bin Abul Husain, Governor of Sicily to
invade Murcia, on the coast of Spain. Husain carried out the orders
and returned with booty and prisoners. As a retaliatory action, Nasir
ad-Dinuilah of Spain ordered his slave, Ghalib to lead a fleet to invade
the coast of Africa. But Muiz‘s forces were ready to face them and 1

248 The History of Islam

Ghalib had to return without attainting any success. However, the
Spanish fleet successfully invaded the coast of Africa in 347 AH. and
retumed with a large number of captives and huge amount of valuables
as booty after completely ravaging the coastal areas and cities.

Following this Muiz turned to building up his military power,
regularizing the administrative machinery of the country and
expanding his territories. The persons mentioned below governed the
following provinces:

Province Person

Ifkan and Tiaret (Northwestern Algeria) Yala bin Muhammad

Ashir (North Central Algeria) Ziri bin Manad Sanhaji
Masila (North Central Algeria) J’afar bin Ali, the Spanish
Bejaia (Northeastern Algeria) Caesar of Sicily

Fez (North Central Morocco) Ahmad bin Bakr bin Abi Sahl
Sijilmassa (Southeastern Morocco) Muhammad bin Wasal Maknasi

During the last days of 347 A.H., Muiz
Muhammad was plotting against his rul
Sicily to punish Yala with the help of J’
the Governors of Masila and Ashir res
also accepted the challenge. The Go:
Tose up in revolt.

arrested in 348 A.H.
and Muhammad bin

got the news that Yala bin
le. He sent his scribe, Johar of
afar bin Ali and Ziri bin Manad,
pectively. Yala bin Muhammad
vemors of Fez and Sijilmassa also
After fierce fighting and bloodshed, Yali was
and Fez and Sijilmassa also fell. Ahmad bin Bakr
Wasal were also caught and brought to Qairwan.

During the Abbassid rule one of the banishe

0 groups from Spain
landed on the banks of E

‘Sypt and captured Alexandria during the
h bin Tahir. He surrounded them and

land with a fleet of seven hundred
warships. After a heavy toll of Muslim lives, the island fell to the
Christians, ntinople and Muiz’s navy clashed in
354 AHL, lefeat of the Christians. Muslim forces

The Caesar of Consta:
which ended in the ‏ل‎

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 249

marched ahead captured a number of cities and forced the Caesar of
Constantinople to pay the Jizyah (poll tax) and tribute. A short time
after this event Muiz came to know that, following the demise of
Kafur Akhashedi, the Governor of Egypt, disorder and disruption had
spread all over Egypt.

Conquest of Egypt

Muiz gave his minister and scribe, Johar a huge army in 355 A.H. and
ordered him to march to Egypt, he proceeded gradually regularizing
the administrative affairs. Akhashedi’s troops could not withstand the
assault; with the result that Johar stormed into Egypt on 15 Shaban
359 A.H. and delivered an address in the name of Muiz from the
Grand Mosque of Egypt. In Jumad al-Awwal 359 A.H. Johar offered
his prayer in Grand mosque of Ibn Tulun and ordered them to add,
“Hayya ala Khair il amal.”

This was the first adhan, which was pronounced in Egypt with this
addition. After capturing the entire country of Mahdia Johar arrested
all the relatives of the Akhashedi family and sent them to Muiz in
Egypt. He then sent his Genera! J’afar bin Falah Katami to Palestine
and Syria at the head of an army. He captured Damascus in 360 A.H.
It added to the joy of Muiz who then resolved to make Cairo his
capital. He then appointed Balkin bin Ziri bin Manad as viceroy of the
western territories and asked him to reside in Qairwan and conferred
on him the title of Abul Futuh. In Shawwal 361 A.H. he left his capital
Mahdiya and stayed near Qairwan.

Transfer of the Capital to Cairo

Shortly after the departure of Muiz from Mahdiya all his treasures,
possessions and belongings were sent to Egypt along with the troops.
Balkin bin Ziri escorted him for a stage or two. Balkin was then
dispatched to Qairwan and Muiz himself set out towards Bargah and
arrived at Alexandria in Shaban 362 A.H. The citizens came out to
greet and lead him honorably into the city. He reached Cairo on
Ramadan 5, 363 A.H. The journey from Qairwan to Cairo took about
one year. Before this Bani Tabghaj ruled over Damascus and they paid
tribute to the Qaramatians. When J’afar bin Falah captured Damascus,

The History of Islam

250

ibute to the Qaramatians. The King of the
‏ا بالا‎ attacked Damascus. J’afar fought the Qaramatians
back. They launched a massive attack on Damascus once cea in ve
A.H. Although J’afar faced the assault gallantly, he was killed on
battlefield and Damascus fell to the Qaramatians. Their next target
was Ramla. After capturing Ramla, they started preparing for the
invasion of Egypt. Muiz came to know all this during his journey. When
he arrived in Cairo, he was informed that the Qaramatians had besieged
Jaffa and their forces were concentrating on the borders of Egypt.

Encounters with the Qaramatians

Shortly after reaching Egypt Muiz wrote a long letter to A’‘sim, the
King of the Qaramatians detailing the submission and subordination
of his elders to those of his own and to banish from his mind ail
thought of fighting. He wrote back:

“Your letter reached me. It is Poor in content and lavish in words. We
are about to attack you”.

A’sim dispatched the letter to Egypt and ordered his troops to get
ready for battle. He then led the army himself and entered the borders
of Egypt halting at Shams. Hassan bin Jarrah Tai, the Chief of Arabia
joined A’sim with a large group from Tai. A’sim and Hassan held
talks and then spread small fighting groups to ravage the towns and

kept fighting, sim and his fighters lost their nerve. Although they

te taken as prisoners of war. Muiz sent his

, Abu Muhammad at th 530
drove them out of Egyptian territory. * back of the ‘ugitives and he

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 251

Conquest of Damascus

After this conquest Muiz killed all the Qaramatians prisoners’ of war.
He then sent Zalim bin Mawhub Adgili as the Governor of Damascus.
Zalim reached Damascus, arrested the Qaramatian Governor and sent
him to Egypt where he was put in prison. In 362 A.H., the Ubaidite flag
was unfurled over Damascus. The same year, the people of Makkah and
Madinah accepted Muiz’s rule under compulsion and the Friday
addresses were delivered there in his name. The people of Damascus
were not happy with the Ubaidite rule. In the beginning of 365 A.H.,
Uftagin, who was among the servants of Izz ud-Daula bin Boya,
captured Damascus and turned out Muiz’s Governor from there. The
people of Damascus were happy with his arrival. When Muiz came to
know of this event, he wrote a letter to Uftagin requesting him to keep
ruling over Damascus and that he would shortly issue him a letter
authorizing him to rule. The one condition was that he should deliver
the Friday addresses in Muiz’s name and sever his relations with the
Caliph of Baghdad. But Uftagin turned down the proposal and kept
delivering the addresses in the name of the Caliph of Baghdad. Muiz
became angry-and marched on Damascus at the head of a strong army.

Death of Muiz and Succession of Aziz

Muiz reached Babbis when he received the message of his death on 15
Rabia al-Awwal 365 A.H. He had to bid farewell after reigning for 23
years. He was the first Ubaidite King who succeeded in conquering
Egypt. His son, Nazar under the title, “Aziz Billah”, succeeded him.
Nazar kept the death of his father a secret for a few months. On Eid al-
Adha 365 A.H. he announced his father’s death and formally came to
the throne.

Aziz bin Ubaidi

Invasion of Uftagin

Having heard of the death of Muiz, Uftagin invaded Egypt and
besieged Sadia. Zalim bin Mawhub and other Ubaidite chiefs came

252 The History of Islam
out to fight but fled back after being beaten. Uftagin moved ahead and
captured Rakka followed by Tabariya. After that he returned to
Damascus. Aziz bin Muiz sent his scribe, Johar at the head of a strong
army to take on Uftagin and conquer Damascus. Johar besieged
Damascus and fighting between the two forces continued for a long
time. Being tired of the siege Uftagin wrote to the Qaramatian King
A’sim for help. With the receipt of the letter A’sim marched towards
Damascus at the head ofa strong army. With the news of his arrival
Johar raised the siege of Damascus and left the place. Uftagin and
A’sim chased Johar jointly. He first went to Ramla and then to
Asqalan. When Johar was surrounded at Asqalan, he requested
Uftagin to let him go to Egypt and he would have his King, Aziz bin
Muiz, send goods in return for the obligation. Even though A’sim
advised Uftagin to decline the offer Uftagin did not listen to him and
let Johar go. Johar went straight to Aziz and advised him of the
impending danger. Aziz reacted very sharply and marched to invade
putting Johar in charge of the vanguard.

Arrest of Uftagin and His Ministry

In 367 A.H. Aziz besieged Ramla and sent words to Uftagin to join
him by severing ties with A’sim on condition that ‏عط‎ would be
appointed. the commander-in-chief of his army and given the rule of
the part of the country he would choose to possess. Uftagin rejected
the offer and launched an attack instead. Aziz was about to be
defeated when he took to the battlefield firmly and fought back the
joint forces of A’sim and Uftagin. Twenty thousand of their fighters
fell dead. After winning victory Aziz announced a reward of one
hundred thousand dinars for the one who would bring Uftagin to him
alive. Someone captured Uftagin deceptively and received his reward.
Aziz held Uftagin in high esteem and appointed him as his Prime
Minister. He also sent his messenger to A‘sim and asked him to meet
him. On his refusal Aziz sent ten thousand dinars with the promise
that he would be getting the same amount annually. However, A’sim
declined the offer and left Tabariya for Ahsa. Aziz went to Cairo along
with Uftagin. The former Prime Minister, Yaqub bin Maksi grew
jealous of Uftagin and poisoned him to death. Aziz arrested him and
put him in prison for forty days and ordered him to pay five hundred

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 253

thousand dinars as a penalty. After that Yaqub was again given the
post of the Prime Minister.

When Uftagin was chasing Johar, he had put a man named Qassam in
Damascus as his substitute. However, Uftagin never had an opportunity
to get back to Damascus since that time. Qassam in the mean time had
consolidated his position there. When Qassam heard of the departure
of Uftagin to Egypt, he commenced delivering addresses in the name
of Aziz, When Aziz sent Abu Muhammad bin Ibrahim as the
Govemor of Damascus, Qassam blocked his entry to the territory.
Aziz sent reinforcements to punish Qassam. Bakchur, the servant of
Saif ud-Daula, who was the ruler of Hims, sent supplies to the Egyptian
ruler. Mufrij bin Jarrah, the chief of Arabian tribes also rose to fight.
After a series of encounters Aziz appointed Bakchur as the Governor
of Damascus. Bakchur turned out the supporters of Yaqub bin Maksi,
the Prime Minister of Egypt from Damascus for he had opposed the
appointment of Bakchur as the Governor of Damascus. Shortly after
that Yaqub turned Aziz against Bakchur. An army was sent from Egypt
to dislodge Bakchur who fought with the Egyptian troops but was
defeated. Saif ud-Daula invaded Syria and the King of Constantinople,
launched an assault on his own. In short, Damascus remained in the
grip of large-scale fighting and bloodshed until 385 A. H.

Death of Aziz .

On receiving the news of the movement of the Roman forces towards
Damascus Aziz himself led an army to Damascus and proclaimed
Jihad against the Romans. However, he fell ill at Balbis. It is strange
that his father too had fallen ill at this very same place and died there.
In short, Aziz also succumbed to his illness at the end of Ramadan 386
A.H. and his son Abu Mansur came to-the throne.

Mansur Hakam bin Aziz Ubaidi

Mansur entrusted the administration to Hasan bin Ammar Katami.
After wielding power in the country the Katamis put the population to
reat trouble. Some members of the Dailmi family of the east had,
being Shi'ite, shifted to Egypt to lend active support to the Ubaidite
rule. Moreover, they added to the numbers of the easterners who had

254 __ The History of Islam

already been counted as a force in Egypt. Because of this, a serious
conflict broke out between the Eastern and Western sections, which
led to civil war of the worst nature. Damascus and Hijaz also showed
signs of revolt, in such a state of confusion and disorder Damascus
was ruled over sometimes by the Arabs and at times by.Turkish slaves
and Egyptian chiefs.

Rebellion of Waleed bin Hisham and His Assassination

In the meantime Waleed bin Hisham, known as Arkoh made a bid for
power. When after gaining power in Spain, Mansur bin Abi Amir
started killing and arresting the princes of Banu Umayyad, Waleed,
the son of the last Caliph of the Banu Umayyad of Spain, fled for his
life and first reached Qairwan and then to Syria via Yemen and
Makkah. Syria was at that time passing through a state of chaos and
disorder so he went to Egypt. He gained acceptance at Barqah. At first
Hakim Ubaidi paid no attention to his movement. However, the
people were unhappy with the reign of Hakim Ubaidi and tribe after
tribe clustered round Waleed bin Hisham. Gaining strength and
manpower he captured Barqah and invaded Egypt. Now the eyes of
Hakim Ubaidi opened. He sent an army to eliminate the threat in its
beginning but they met with defeat. The exercise was repeated several
times. The entire territory of Egypt and Tripoli was about to fall when
Hakim Ubaidi tried another strategy and played a trick and drew
some of the Generals of Waleed to his side by the power of his purse.
They led Waleed to be arrested treacherously. Hakim Ubaidi had him
killed and this was the end of these disruptive activities. In order to
bring the people round to his line of thinking he proclaimed liberty for
the people to either confess Sunni or Shiite faith or pronounce “hayya
ala khair al-amal” or not.

Hakim’s Death

Hakim Ubaidi believed in the influence of the stars on human life and
was greatly inclined to astronomy and astrology. He had built a house
on mount Magqtam adjacent to Cairo. He used to go there alone to
imbibe the spiritual power of the stars and perform other religious
tituals. On 17 Shawwal 411 A.H. he went as usual alone to mount

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 255

Magtarn riding on his donkey. His officials and courtiers waited for

him for a couple of days and when he did not return, they moved

ahead in search of Hakim. After covering some distance the donkey

was found dead and then they found Hakim’s garments covered with

bloodstains. However, his dead body was never found. As per one
narration, Hakim’s sister had illicit relations with some men and when
it come to the knowledge of Hakim he reproached her violently. Then
she hatched a conspiracy with some of the Katami chiefs to kill him,
because of his blasphemous beliefs and spiritual practices. Confirming
Hakim’s death the courtiers brought to the throne his minor son, Ali
bin Hakim. Zahir Li-Din Allah was his appellation and his father’s
sister was made the caretaker of the administration.

Zahir bin Hakim Ubaidi

Zahir’s paternal aunt died and he had to run his Government with the
help of the nobles and courtiers. Saleh bin Mirdas captured Syria and
Damascus in 420 A.H. and dislodged the Ubaidite rule. Zahir ordered
Zariri, the Governor of Palestine to launch an attack and he restored

Damascus and Palestine, but Syria remained constantly dominated by
fighting and revolts.

His Death

Zahir died in 427 A.H. His son Abu Tamim M’ad with the appellation
of Mustansir succeeded him. Abul Qasim Ali bin Ahmad was his
Prime Minister. After Mustansir’s accession to throne Abul Qasim
took over the running of the Government.

Mustansir bin Zahir Ubaidi

During the reign of Mustansir Arab tribes captured Syria and
Damascus in 433 A.H. and the country went out of the control of the
Ubaidites. Muiz bin Baris raised the banner of revolt in Tripoli and
began to deliver addresses in the name of the Caliph of Baghdad.
Meanwhil® Mustansir deposed his Minister, Abul Qasim and replaced
him with Husain bin Ali Tazwari. He then dispatched an Arab army
towards Tripoli. It halted at Barqah and did not attack Tripoli. In view
of this Mustansir started buying slaves to counter the Arabs and the

256 The History of Islam

number of these slaves rose to twenty-three thousands. The Arab
tribes now fighting for themselves marched ahead and set up their
rule at various places including Tripoli and Atij. The Arab tribe Banu
Adiy stormed the whole of Africa. Later these Arab chiefs sent their
emissaries to Muiz bin Baris, who received them with warmth and
honor, for he hoped they would abandon their life of plunder but they
belied his hope and finally Muiz decided to punish the Arab tribes
with the help of twenty thousand Berber tribesmen. Although the
Arab tribes numbered only three thousand in all, the result of the
fierce fighting went against Muiz. Muiz bin Baris fled and took refuge
in Qairwan. Muiz collected his Berber fighters once again and
attacked the Arabs on Eid al-Adha 10 Dhul Hijjah 446 A.H. but was
again defeated. His third attack also ended in failure. The Arabs then

chased him out of Qairwan and he went to Mahdiya. Yunus bin Yahya
captured Qairwan.

Civil War

In Cairo Mustansir’s mother had every order she wanted issued
according to her will. Her power and influence had increased beyond
all limits. In view of protecting themselves the ministers ‘began to
recruit Turkish men. The army was dominated by a few powerful
groups the slaves, the Katami clan, the Berbers and the Turkish. Nasir
ud-Daula bin Hamdan, a Sudanese rose to the high position of
Commander-in-Chief and became the leader and Commander of the
Turks. Various administrative wings were being separated from the
main body. Power struggles had started among the fundamental parts
of the Government, Mustansir and his mother in Cairo. Each of them
was trying hard to erode the power of the other. Civil war broke out
between the Turks and the slaves and the army was divided into two
factions one fighting against another. At last, Mustansir signaled for
Badr Jamali ruling in Aakka to come. He came to Egypt with a huge
Armenian army and appeared before Mustansir who appointed him
as his minister, He also made the Turks understand that Nfsir ud-
Daula had plunged them into the flames of fighting and killings
without any rhyme or reason. The Turks put Nasir ud-Daula to death
for their own safety. Badr Jamali then become the chief of the Turks.

Ubaiduliah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoti 257

He gained tremendous power and influence, regularized the

administration and won the confidence and satisfaction of everyone.

With his internal peace and strength he was able to force the revolting

chiefs to obey him and wrested Tripoli from the Arabs. All the

territories of Palestine were annexed urider his rule. Damascus was

passing through a state of flux and anybody could capture and
establish his authority but the Friday addresses were delivered in the
name of the Egyptian Ubaidi ruler and the Cairo court was satisfied
with that much. In 468 A.H., Badr Jamali was able to ‘put the
administration of Mustansir right to a great extent, Amir Aqdas
captured Damascus and his address was delivered in the name of the
Caliph of Baghdad. In 469 A.H. Atsaz bin Ufaq, the Commander of
the Seljuk army attacked Damascus. Badr Jamali dispatched his
troops, which besieged Damascus. In 470 A.H., Sultan Malik Shah
Seljuk entrusted Syria to Tatish Seljuk and authorized him to take the
portion of Syria conquered by him. Thus Tatish made progress into
Syria and attacked the city of Halib (Aleppo). When they refused to
surrender, he laid a siege around Halib at the same time Atsaz was
still under siege in Damascus. He ‘sent word to Tatish that he was
surrounded by Egyptian forces and if he failed to extend his help he
would be forced to hand over Damascus to them. Tatish marched to
Damascus immediately. On getting the news the Egyptian forces
taised the siege and fled back to Egypt. Tatish reached Damascus
killed Atsaz and captured Damascus.

Following this Halib also came under the rule of Tatish and
gradually the whole of Syria. Hearing this Badr Jamali collected a
huge army and invaded Damascus but failed to gain victory over
Tatish. After this, the Egyptian forces attacked Syria several times
but every time they met with failure. In 484 A.H. the Christians took
Sicily away from the Muslims. Badr Jamali died in Rabia al- Awwal,
487 AH. at the age of eighty years. Mustansir also died shortly
thereafter. The early period of Mustansir was fraught with troubles
and the Ubaidi dynasty was on the brink of being ruined. But Badr
Jamali infused new blood and saved it from a certain death.
Mustansir had three sons, Ahmed, Nazar and Abul Qasim.
Mustansir had appointed Nazar as his crown prince:

258 . The History of Islam

Hasan bin Sabbah Takes Bait

Hasan bin Sabah came to Egypt from Iraq in the guise of a merchant
during the reign of Mustansir. He took ba‘it at the hand of Mustansir
and asked him about the next Imam. Mustansir said that his son
Nazar would be his next Imam. Following this Hasan bin Sabah
sought Mustansir’s permission to go back to Iraq and start preaching
in favor of his Imamat (Shiite Leadership) and Caliphate. Mustansir
granted permission and sent him as his preacher. Hasan bin Sabah

came to Iraq and started his work with missionary zeal and gradually
captured Al-Mut Fort.

Mustansir had appointed Muhammad Malik as minister after the
death of his father Badr Jamali. Muhammad Malik and Nazar were
not having good relations at that time so, after the demise of
Mustansir, Muhammad Malik made Mustansir’s sister declare that
Mustansir had appointed Abul Qasim as his successor to the throne.
Thus the people pledged their support to Abul Qasim who came to
throne with the appellation of “Mustali Billah”,

Abdu! Qasim Mustali Biflah Ubaidi

Three ays after Abul Qasim’s accession t
Alexandria. Badr Jamali’s slave Nasi:
Governor of Alexandria. But, on hea
he rose in revolt and lent his support
the throne he enthroned Nazar in A
allegiance to him and gave him t
dinillah”. With this news Abul 025
rushed to punish Nazar and besiege
the long siege the people sought ‏بم‎
‎handed Alexandria over to Muham
sent him to Cairo where Abul Qasim had him killed immediately. His

minister carried Nasir ud-Daula Uftagin with him to Cairo. Abul
Qasim put him to death as well.

‘o throne Nazar left Cairo for
‏؟‎ ud-Daula was then the
ring of Abul Qasim’s accession,
to Nazar. Accepting his right to
lexandria and took the oath of
he appellation of “Mustafa Li-
im’s minister, Muhammad Malik
0 Alexandria. Being distressed at
eace at the cost of their city and
mad Malik. He arrested Nazar and

it has already been mentioned that T;

ajuddaula Tatish Seljuk captured
the entire country of Syria. Soon a

fter the demise of Tatish his sons

Ubaiduilah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 259

Waqaq and Ridwan fell out with each other, which led to civil war.
Wagaq had occupied Damascus while Ridwan possessed Halib.
During this period, the Christians of Europe launched a joint attack to
take Bait al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) from the Muslim’‘s Possession. They
laid siege around Antioch (Antakya). Yaghisan, the Seljuk Governor
fled for his life and he was killed by an Armenian who cut off his head
and brought it to the Christian camp. The fall of Antioch and the
assassination of Baghisan stirred Syria. Buqa, a Seljuk chief and ruler
of Mosul, advanced towards the Christian invaders and camped at
Marj Dabiq. Hearing this Waqaq bin Tatish and Sulaiman bin Ratiq,
the ruler of Hims joined Buga with their forces. All of them jointly
marched ahead to combat the Christian troops. Muslim troops
numbered much less than the Christian forces and they were beaten
after a bloody fight. Thousands of Muslims laid down their lives on
the battlefield. The Christian fighters plundered the Muslim camps.
Following this the Christians captured Hims and then besieged
Aakka. The Turk Seljuks did not give in despite many hardships.

The Christian troops were still besieging Aakka and all the Syrian
Muslims had their attention centered on Syria when Muhammad
Malik, the minister of Abul Qasim led a strong Egyptian force and
invaded Bait al-Maqdis (Jerusalem). This Shi‘ite assault benefited the
Christians and. the Islamic Syrian forces could not withstand the two-
Pronged attack. Sulaiman and Ilghazi were engaged with the Shi’ite
assault on Bait al-Maqdis and could not extend any help against the
Christians, with the result that Bait al-Maqdis fell to the Egyptians.
Sulaiman and lighazi left towards the east. The Egyptians could not
keep it in their possession for long. The Christians won Bait al-Maqdis
on Shaban 23, A.H. after a siege of forty days. They stormed into the
city a committed the large-scale massacre of Muslims. Muslims took
tefuge in the Arch of Daud (8) so that the Christians would hold
themselves back from their killing spree but there was nothing to put
a check on their madness. Seventy thousand Muslims were put to
Sword in Al-Aqsa Mosque and Sakhra-e-Sulaiman. All the valuable
Possessions of the Aqsa Mosque including chandeliers of gold and
Silver were looted. The rest of the Muslims reached Baghdad in a very
wretched state and narrated the tales of sufferings and woes to the
Caliph of Baghdad. The Caliph wrote to the Seljuk Kings Barkayaraq,

260. The History of Islam

Muhammad and ‘Sanjar to save Syria but they were engaged in civil
wars so deeply that they could not pay any attention to the message,
with ‘the result ‘that Syria, was reduced to ashes. The Egyptian minister
who had provided the Cheistians with an opportunity to conquer Bait
al-Magqdis once again led an army to restore it. However, the Christian
forces came an and. fought him back and none of the runway

Abul Qasim died ¢ on Safar 1 15; 495. A: 3 00 ‏كؤاية‎ succeeded by his five-
year son; Abu Alli. with: the ‘appellation’ A Anti¥ bbithkamillah”.
Brn ay 5

Abu Ali Ari. Ubaidi:

With the acgessio 0 of A 9 Ali te ‘the Hirone. his minister took charge of
all administrative affa $,, had. wiel id er duringsthe reign of
Abul Qasim) who’ never téok any action without him. The minister
built’ 4 “strong°army! and sent it Mgairist the ‘Christi
command of his fathér Badr Janiali’y Slave'S'adtiddaula. The Egyptian
troops ‘were beaten. With: the news éf the déféat he ‘dig ispatthed’: a hige
army: led by his son; Sharaf'al-Ma ali: THE two forces: elaghed’ Vat Raita

and the Christians’ were ‘defeated.’ Sharaf al{Ma‘al® mov
and . bésiéged Ramla; whieh fell to hith after tw Weeks: Peat hh
Christians ‘were “killed and’ ‘three huridred ‏واس‎ { prisohier:
Christian’ Cothmiatide?! ‘left -Ramta" foi Jafta arid‘ 0 ‏اق ةمه‎
towatds’ Bait  al:Magdis (Jefsaleni ‏سن‎ with thé Ghiidtian pitgrins:
from Europe’ to’ the -sdcted ity of Jertisaletn! Hearirig oF the | presence

of the. pilgritns ‘Sharaf al‘Ma‘ali' left “for Egypt ‏مقط اس‎ fightirig. The’
Christians then captured Asqalan without an encounter’ However, the
Egyptian: army made’ a’ fresh ‘attack atid”todk ‘Asdalaint from” the’
Christians. This event oceurréd’ in ‘Dhul’ Hija 496'AH. aes

Following this the Egyptian army attacked, the Christians once again
in 498 A.H. and the Turkish army in Damascus also.came io help but
the fighting bore no fruit, Among the cities on the Syrian coast Tripoli,
Saur, Saida and Beirut were then under Egyptian ryle. The > i

war fleets sprang into action and captured Syria after canqugring: all,

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 261

the cities one by one. They conquered Bait al-Maqdis later and
appointed a King for the country built on the debris of the conquered
cities and territories. This set up Christian rule in Syria. It continued to
gain strength and power because of the constant military and
economic help from the European continent. Ubaidite rule remained
inactive even though the new Christian country came into being from
the Egyptian cities and territories won by the Christians. The Christian
army failed to conquer Damascus, which was then under the rule of
Seljuk chiefs, nor could they muster courage to invade the eastem
parts of Syria. Had the Seljuk Kings and commanders abandoned their
internal feuds and civil wars and paid their attention to Christian
invaders they could not have stepped into Bait al-Maqdis.

Amir Ubaidi could not put up with the expanding influence and
power of his minister and had him killed in 515 A.H., and appointed
another man as his minister with the appellation of “Jalal al-Islam.”
A few years after he grew angry at Jalal al-Islam too and had Jalal
Killed along with his brother Mu‘taman and his well wisher
Najibuddaula. 1

Assassination of Amir Ubaidi

At last, some Qaramatians killed Amir Ubaidi in 524 A.H. when he
was getting on his mount. Since he had left no son, his cousin, Abdul
Majeed, who adopted “Hafiz Li-Dinillah” as his appellation,
succeeded him. The people in general pledged. their oath of
allegiance to him on the condition that if the pregnant wife of Amir
delivered a male child he would be considered as the true successor
to the throne.

Hafiz Ubaidi

After accession to throne Hafiz Ubaidi killed many ministers one by

One. At last he appointed his son as his minister. He also hatched a

Conspiracy to wrest the throne from his father. Hafiz Ubaidi then

Teplaced his son by a man named Ridwan who belonged to the Sunni

Muslims. He faced joint opposition from the Shiites and Imamites and

relinquished his position as minister. Following. this Hafiz Ubaidi
_ carried out his administrative business without a minister.

262 The History of Islam

Death of Hafiz Ubaldi

Hafiz Ubaidi died at the age of 70. His son Abu Mansur Ismail who
adopted “Zafir billah” as his appellation succeeded him.

Zafir bin Hafiz Ubaidi

Zafir appointed Adil bin Salar, Governor of Alexandria as his
minister. Being at the helm of affairs, Adil turned Zafir into a
figurehead. The Christian army besieged Asqalan in 548 A.H. The
people of Asqalan sent a message for help to the court of Cairo. Adil
sent Abbas bin Abi al-Futuh to Asqalan to combat the besieging
Christians. Zafir and Abbas jointly made a secret plan to do awa y with
Adil. Abbas himself went away with the army and halted at Balbis.
Abbas’s young son Nasir killed Adil while he was sleeping. On
receiving news of Adil’s assassination Abbas returned to Cairo and
handed over the ministry to him. During all of this nobody paid any
attention to the distress of the people of Asqalan. Finding no way out
they surrendered to the Christians,

Zafir’s Assassination

Nasir invited Zafir to a feast during Muharram 549 ‏تم‎ and then
Nasir killed Zafir and his companions and had them buried in that
very house. The next day Abbas bin Abi al-Futuh, the minister came
to the royal palace as usual and inquired about King Zafir. They

i left the palace. The court officials then

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 263

acquainted him with all the events and requested him to punish Abbas.
Because of this Saleh bin Zarik collected his fighters and marched to
Cairo. Knowing that even the people of Cairo had risen against him he
took his son, Nasir and friend, Osama bin Mangad and left for Syria and
Iraq along with the main body of his forces. On the way he came into a
dash with the Christians. During the encounter Abbas was killed, Nasir
was held and Osama escaped and reached Syria. Saleh reached Cairo in
Rabia al Thani, 559 A.H. after the departure of Abbas. He dug out the
dead body of Zafir from Nasir’s house and had it buried in the royal
graveyard. He then took oath of allegiance to Zafir’s son, Fa’iz and gave
him the appellation of “Malik al-Saleh.”

Fa’iz bin Zafir Ubaidi

Saleh became the minister and started regularizing the administration.
He then came into correspondence with the Christians and had Nasir
bin Abbas repatriated in return for a settled amount. When Christian
officials brought him to Cairo, Saleh put him to death and hung his
body on public display. Saleh was a staunch follower of the Imamia
sect and a great well wisher of thé Ubaidite dynasty.

After getting rid of Nasir he turned towards the rebel chiefs who had
the courage to oppose the central government. Two of the most
prominent among them were Taj-ul-Mulk Qaimaz and Ibn Ghalib
Saleh he deputed Generals and troops to capture them but being
informed before hand, they escaped to unknown places. However, his
action proved effective so much so that the other Generals submitted
to his rule. He also replaced ail the old guards and officials with his
own men. He then transferred the valuable assets of the royal palace
to his own house. Fa‘iz Ubaidi’s paternal aunt was watching the
growing power of Saleh with anxiety and she began to ‘think of how to
get tid of him. Saleh came to know of the plot against him and he
went to the royal palace and put her to death.

Death of Fa’iz Ubaidi

After a nominal rule of six months King Fa’iz Ubaidi died in 555 A.H.
Following this Saleh bin Zarik asked the guards to bring the boys of
the royal family before him so that one of them might be chosen for

264 , The History of Islam

the throne. Thus Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Yusuf Hafiz Ubaidi
was given the throne with the appellation of “Azid Li-dinillah . He
was then at the age of puberty. Saleh gave his daughter in marriage to
the new King Azid.

Arid bin Yusuf Ubaidi

Since Saleh was the virtual ruler and Azid was considered the
nominal one. The nobles and courtiers disliked these developments.
The younger paternal aunt of Azid vowed to avenge the blood of her
elder sister by putting Saleh to death. At last. she persuaded some
Sudanese nobles to do away with the culprit. One of them struck Saleh
with his lance so that he fell down and died shortly after coming to his
house. Before his death he advised Azid to appoint his son as his
minister. Azid did accordingly and entrusted the ministry to Saleh’s
son with the appellation of “Adil”. Shortly after assuming charge as
minister he killed Azid‘s paternal aunt and the Sudanese noble with
the permission of Azid. As a first step in bringing about the
administrative reforms, Azid deposed Shadar S'‘adi, the Governor of
Sa‘id and put Amir bin Raq’a in his place. Shadar rose in revolt
against Adil and led an army to Cairo. Adil could not face him and
fled away. Shadar entered Cairo with his colors flying in 558 A.H. and
Zarik Adil was caught and brought to Cairo and was killed. Shadar
made no delay in taking over the office of the minister and Azid
conferred the post of Prime Minister on him. Nine months after the
event Dergham, the Inspector of the Palace grew in power and forced
Shadar out of Cairo and took the office of the minister. Shadar left for
Syria. Dergham killed Ali, the son of Shadar in Cairo and did away
with all the Generals and nobles he feared.

Nuruddin Muhammad Zangi Turns to Egypt

Shadar teached Sy:
what was going

Nuruddin asked h
Shadar fo Cairo a
appoint Shadar a
the forces stand:

tia and narrated to Nuruddin Muhammad Zangi
on in Egypt. After many deliberations, Sultan
is Commander Asaduddin Sherkoh to accompany
t the head of an army. Sherkoh was instructed to
5 the minister by deposing Dergham and fight back
ing in the way. After dispatching Shadar and Sherkoh

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 265

to Egypt Sultan Nuruddin himself led an army towards the Christians
so that they would not stop the movement of Sherkoh’s troops.
Sherkoh and Shadar moved smoothly up to Balbis where Nasiruddin
and Fakhruddin, the brothers of Dergham challenged them on the
way. Sherkoh repulsed their attack and captured both of them and
entered Egypt victoriously. Dergham fled for his life but was caught
on the way and killed. Similarly, both Nasiruddin and Fakhruddin
were put to death. Shadar took over as Prime Minister once again.
However, after holding the high post Shadar committed a breach of
promise and Sherkoh had to leave Egypt in frustration. Instead of
giving thanks to Nuruddin and Sherkoh, Shadar joined hands with
the Christians against Nuruddin’s rule. In view of the notoriety of
Shadar, Sherkoh invaded Egypt in 562 A.H. after seeking permission
from King Nuruddin, and captured a number of Egyptian cities.

Egyptians Seek Help From the Christians

Shadar sought immediate help from the Christians. They were already
waiting for such opportunity and sent their military help without any
loss of time. Asaduddin Sherkoh’s comparatively small army of two
thousand men was nothing in comparison to the heavy joint forces of
Shadar and the Christians. However, Sherkoh took the field in the
name of Allah and fought so gallantly that both the forces suffered
ignominious defeat. Sherkoh, already some one to be feared by the
Egyptians, moved ahead towards Alexandria and the citizens
welcomed his arrival by opening the doors of their city. After
appointing his nephew, Salahuddin bin Najmuddin Ayub, Governor
of Alexandria, Sherkoh marched to Sa‘id. As he left Alexandria for
59104 the Egyptian force concentrated in Cairo started getting ready to
attack Alexandria. On receiving this information Sherkoh rushed to
help his nephew, Salahuddin. However, in the meantime, Shadar had

able to lure away some of the Generals of Sherkoh who were
found fighting rather half-heartedly. In such an anxious moment
Sherkoh received a message from Shadar with the request to leave
Alexandria after receiving some indemnity from him. After much
deliberations and looking into the pros and cons, Sherkoh decided to
Brant the petition with honor. He took the indemnity, vacated
Alexandria and returned to Syria.

266 The History of Islam

Consequences of Indiscretion

Shadar had to withstand the worst of his indiscretion. The Christian
force, which had come to Egypt at the call of Shadar, would not agree to
leave the country at any cost. They rather laid the foundation for
capturing Egypt. They finally put forward a number of conditions for
their departure, which Shadar had to concede under circumstantial
compulsion. The conditions were the following: (1) The Christian army
would remain in Cairo. (2) An administrator would reside in Cairo on
behalf of the Christians. (3) The Christians will keep control over the
doors of the fortified city.(4) The Egyptian ruler would continue to give
to the Christian King one hundred thousand dinars annually.

When the Christians set their feet firmly on Egyptian soil, they started
meddling with the administrative affairs of the central government.
They annexed Balbis under Christian rule. Their next step was to
capture the capital, Cairo. In order to carry out their nefarious design
they, with the active support of Shadar, called a large Christian army,
demanded two hundred thousand dinars instead of one hundred
thousand and large quantities of grain. Azid Ubaidi grew very
anxious at these excesses on the part of the Christians.

Azid Turning to Nuruddin. Zangi for Help

Azid sent his envoy to Sultan Nuruddin Zangi to help take away the
Christian possession of Egypt. On being informed Shadar made an all
out effort to hold Azid back from seeking help from Nuruddin and Azid
kept silent. Sultan Nuruddin asked his Commander, Sherkoh to march
in the company of his nephew, Salahuddin and other Generals.
Asaduddin Sherkoh marched to Egypt. He ravaged the Christian camp
and appeared before King Azid who held him in high esteem and
served him and his army as his honored guests. One day Azid drew
Sherkoh’s attention to Shadar’s friendship with the Christians and his
enmity with themselves and proposed to get rid of the scourge. Sherkoh
agreed and ordered his Generals to kill Shadar. Shadar’s head was
brought before Azid in a few days. Being overjoyed and highly satisfied
Azid offered the highest office of the Prime Minister to Sherkoh, which
he accepted with the permission of Nuruddin Zangi. However, he could
enjoy this envious position only for a few months and died in 565 A.H.

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 267

Salahuddin Ayubl as Prime Minister of Egypt

Azid appointed Sherkoh’s nephew, Salahuddin as Prime Minister.
Salahuddin kept his relations with Nuruddin intact. Like Sherkoh,
Nuruddin entrusted full authority to Salahuddin. Both Sherkoh and
Salahuddin were staunch followers of Imam Shafe’i. Salahuddin took
the drastic step of replacing the Shi‘ite Jurist and Judges by scholars of
the Shafe’i school of thought. He also laid the foundation of Shafe’i
and Maliki madrasas (schools). Since 565 A.H. when Sherkoh assumed
the post of the Prime Minister, he had not only driven away the
Christian troops from Egypt but also stopped paying tribute to them.
The Christians grew anxious at the unity forged between Damascus
and Cairo for under such circumstances it was impossible for them to
keep control over Bait al-Maqdis (Jerusalem). They sent messages to
the bishops of Sicily and Spain for immediate help to save Bait al-
Maqdis. Following this the bishops and clergies began to deliver
sermons on joining the crusade against the Muslims, with the result
that the Christian forces from Spain and the rest of Europe started
concentrating on the coast of Syria. After gaining strength, as a result
of the massive help they received from ali over Europe, the Christians
marched ahead and surrounded Damyat. The Governor, Shamsul
Khawas Mankur informed Salahuddin Ayubi. The Shiites of Egypt
were angry with Salahuddin Ayubi, the Egyptian minister.
Salahuddin sent an officer named Bahauddin Qaraqush to Damyat at
the head of an army. He also wrote Sultan Nuruddin Zangi to keep an
eye on Damyat, as he himself could not Jeave Egypt for fear of the
disruptive activities on the part of the Shiites and the Sudanese. Thus
Nuruddin Zangi invaded the coastal areas of Syria to divide the
power and attention of the Christians. When they raised the siege
under compulsion and moved back towards their cities, they were
shocked to find them ruined and deserted. After this Salahuddin
Ayubi called his father, Najmuddin Ayub to Egypt from Syria. King
Azid came in person to greet him and held him in great honor. Azid
was a great admirer of the services of Salahuddin and he had
Practically nothing to do with the administrative affairs. However, the
Egyptian Shiites were opposed to the growing power and influence of

268 The History of Islam

Salahuddin. Moreover, the Sunni Muslims were flourishing during his
time. However, Ammarah, Yemeni, Zubaidi, Awirash and others
made a secret plan to hand over Egypt to the Christians. They also
thought of arranging a secret meeting between Azid and the Christian
envoy. With this purpose in view they tried, on one hand, to bring
Azid around to their own opinion and entered into correspondences
with the Christians on the other. Accidentally, one of the letters
addressed to the Christian King was intercepted on the way and was
produced before Salahuddin. He first tried:to find who were the real
culprits, he recorded their statements in an open court of law and
put all the criminals to death. Bahauddin was appointed as inspector
of the royal palace. This event led the Sudanese, numbering fifty
thousands, to become angry and they rose against Salahuddin and
the Turkish troops. At last, fierce fighting broke out between the
Turks and the Sudanese and the Turks won the battle. A large
number of Sudanese either fell fighting or escaped. The Turkish
soldiers ransacked their houses. However, Salahuddin restored
normalcy and rehabilitated the Sudanese and gave them back their
houses. Because of these events, the strength and influence of the
Sudanese diminished to a great extent. Sultan Nuruddin Zangi
wrote to Salahuddin to begin delivering his addresses in the name of
Caliph Mustadi Abbasi instead of Azid. At this time Azid was
seriously ill and was near to death. In Muharram 567 A.H., the
Friday address was delivered in the name of the Abbasid Caliph of
Baghdad from the pulpit of the Grand Mosque of Cairo and nobody
opposed the change. From the next Friday the addresses were
delivered in the name of the Caliph of Baghdad from the pulpit of all
the mosques of Egypt.

3

Death of Azid Ubaidi.

King Azid Ubaidi died on 10 Muharram 567 ‏كلم‎ With his demise
ended the Ubaid dynasty and the Abbasid Caliphate staged a
comeback. Egypt once again became apart of the Abbasid Caliphate
of Baghdad. Salahuddin Ayubi was given from the caliph of Baghdad
a royal order to rule Egypt with royal attire and scepter. It was the
beginning of the Ayubi dynasty in place of Ubaidites.

Ubaidullah Dynasty in Egypt and Tripoli 269

A Short Commentary on the Ubaidite Dynasty

Ubaidi dynasty (also known incorrectly as the Fatimids) ruled for two
hundred and seventy years. It was first set up in western area of Africa
and Tripoli. They later captured Egypt and chose Cairo as their capital.
The Idrisite rule of Morocco is generally considered as the Alwis Shi‘ite
tule. But in fact, Idrisite rule was that of the Berbers and was, therefore
only semi-Shi'ite. Idrisites had nothing in their creed and action that
could be construed as being superior to the Sunnis, nor did the Idrisite
have any enmity with the Sunnis’. However, the foundation of this rule
was laid down by Idris who used the Ahlil Bai’t (family of the Prophet
#) to succeed in drawing the masées towards him. Except for this,
nothing was done as Shiite as we know the practices of the Shiites to be.
However, Ubaidite rule was Shi‘ite, but certainly not the Alwi type of
Shi'ite. Ubaiduliah’s grandfather, writes Sayuti in Tarikh al-Khulfa, was
a Magian and a blacksmith. Although Ubaidullah Mahdi claimed to be
Fatmid during his visit to the western territory the majority of experts in
lineal genealogy decline to accept his claim. Aziz Ubaidi wrote a letter to
the Umayyad Caliph of Spain, which contained abuse and satire about
the Caliph’s family. The Caliph wrote back that he (Aziz) had passed
satirical remarks about the Caliph’s family because he knew about his
ancestors but he (the Caliph) could not do the same and pass such
remarks because his (Aziz’s) ancestors were unknown to him. Although
Aziz was disgusted at these remarks he kept silent. The Ubaid are
generally known as Fatimids but this shows sheer ignorance of the
tealities and this name is only based on a false claim. Ubaid were
Benerally Isma‘ili Shiites. They are also called Batnis. One of their
branches was founded by Hasan bin Sabah, which had Al Mut Fort as
its capital. This is also called Fida’is’ rule and they also were not Alwi.

Thousands of devout Muslims were killed during the Ubaid dynasty
simply because they refused to disgrace the Companions of the
Prophet ‏.كه‎ The Ubaidite dynasty did no service to Islam nor did they
leave any record of deeds in any field that could make one be proud
of and some of our religious scholars have declared them apostate.
Some of them including Azid Ubaidi claimed to know the unseen.
Wine was also permissible according to them.

Chapter 14
Qaramatians of Bahrain

Yahya bin Faraj Qaramate

Bahrain is a country, which has the Persian Gulf towards the east, Oman
towards the south, Yamama towards the west and Basra towards the
north. The country is called Bahrain after the name of one of its cities.
Sometimes Bahrain is called Hajar after another city. A third city named
Hafiriya was ravaged by the Qaramatians and they founded another
city named Ahsa. Hence the country is known as Ahsa as well. This city
was the center of the territory of Ahsa. Ubaid and Qaramatian dynasties
came into being about the same time. Both were Ismaili Shi'ite and had
almost the same creed. In 275 A.H. a person named Yahya bin Faraj
appeared on the outskirts of Kufah. He introduced himself by the name
of Qaramate and claimed to be the envoy of Imam Mahdi. He passed
most of his time in prayers. He charged from his followers one dinar
each in the name of Imam Mahdi. When his followers rose in number,
he sent some of his disciples as preachers to various parts of the country.
Being acquainted with these activities, the Governor of Kufah arres' “
him. A few days after Qaramate escaped from the prison on
disappeared. His disappearance led his disciples and followers
believe that he was undoubtedly the envoy of Imam Mahdi.

272 The History of Islam

Qarmate’s (Caramate) teachings were strange. The way of performing
Salat (prayer) was quite different and they observed fasts on
particular days of particular months instead of Ramadan. He had
declared wine lawful and nabeedh unlawful. Wudu (ablution) was
enough after sexual pollution. Tail-bearing animals and those having
five toes were prohibited. A few days after Yahya bin Faraj, known as
Qarmate, appeared again after his disappearance and began to collect
people around him by adopting the appellation “Qa‘im bil-Haq”
(Who stands up with Truth). The Governor of Kufa Ahmad bin
Muhammad Ta‘i attacked him with his troops and dispersed his men.
Following this event, some Arabian tribes became his followers. He
again gathered strength and attacked Damascus in 290 A.H. but Balkh

the Governor of Damascus, after a series of encounters, killed Yahya
and dispersed his party.

Husain Mahdi

Husain, the brother of Yahya appeared on the scene with the appellation
of “Mahdi Amirul-Mominin”. He collected some people, especially the
desert-dwellers and continued plundering the outskirts of Damascus
and Syria. Abbasid Generals were deployed to catch them. One of his
sons Abul Qasim escaped but “Mahdi Amirul-Mominin” was caught
and killed. This event occurred in 291 A.H. Husain’s brother also fled
the territory and thus saved himself. He later collected a band of desert-
dwellers and plundered Tabriya and San‘a city and occupied Yemen.
They also created disturbances in Yemen, Hijaz and Syria.

Yahya Il

Close on the heels of Yahya bin Faraj’s escape from the prison a
Person also named Yahya appeared in the town of Qatif adjoining
Bahrain and claimed in 281 A.H. to be the real envoy of the Imam
Mahdi. Giving, news that Imam Mahdi was to appear in the
immediate future he claimed that he had also brought a personal letter
from the Imam Mahdi. Hearing this, Ali bin Mualla bin Hamdan, an
extremist Shiite, assembled his community in Qatif and read out to the
audience the letter claimed to be brought by Yahya from the Imam
Mahdi. The contents of the letter sent the Shiites into great jubilation.

Qaramatians of Bahrain 273

The news spread ‘like wild fire in the outskirts of Bahrain. Among
them was an influential and respectable person named Abu Sayeed
Hasan bin Bahram Janabi. Shortly after that, Yahya disappeared and
reappeared again with another letter from Imam Mahdi enjoining his
followers to contribute thirty-six dinars each to Yahya. They did it
with all pleasure. Soon after collecting the money he disappeared once
again and came back with a third letter from Imam Mahdi ordering
each of his followers to deposit with Yahya one-fifth of their possessions
in the name of the Imam. This order was carried out as well.

Abu Sayeed Janabi

Since Abu Sayeed Janabi was an influential person, he began his
preaching mission in Bahrain too. Gradually, a large number of
desert-dwellers turned towards Abu Sayeed. Abu Sayeed trained his
followers in warfare and proceeded with his men from Qatif to Basra.
When, Ahmad bin Muhammad Yahya came to know of the
preparations of Abu Sayeed he finding himself weak, informed the
Caliph of the new developments. The Caliph sent orders to Abbas bin
Umar Ghanwi, the Governor of Persia to save Basra. Abbas marched
to the trouble spot at the head of a two thousand man army. During
the encounter, Abu Sayeed captured Abbas and plundered his
military camp. Abbas was released shortly but his men were put to
death. This initial success encouraged Abu Sayeed and he attacked
and occupied Hajr and founded his capital there. He appointed his
Son, Sayeed as his crown prince. This step angered Abu Sayeed’s
younger brother, Abu Tahir Sulaiman. He assassinated Abu Sayeed
and declared himself the Chief of the Qaramatians.

Abu Tahir

Soon after assuming power, Abu Tahir attacked Basra in 288 A.H. and
returned to Bahrain after plundering Basra. Caliph Muatadir grew very
anxious and he ordered the immediate fortification of Basra. Abu Tahir
continued to rule Bahrain rather successfully. During this period, he
corresponded with Ubaidullah Mahdi (Fatimid Dynasty of North
Africa) and the latter expressed his satisfaction over Abu Tahir’s way of
governance. Abu Tahir attacked Basra again in 311 A.H. and ravaged it

274 The History of Islam
totally. The Grand Mosque of Basra was also demolished and was not
rebuilt for a long time. The marketplaces were reduced to ashes.

Abu Tahir’s Plunder

Abu Tahir came out in 312 A.H. to pillage the caravans of pilgrims
(Hajjis). He arrested the royal commander, Abul Haija bin Hamdun
accompanying the caravan and looted the Pilgrims completely and
went back to Hajr. Abu Tahir then attacked Iraq in 314 A.H. and
ravaged the outskirts of Kufa like Basra. Once back in Bahrain he
plunged heart and soul in populating the city of Ahsa and doing
extensive construction work there. During this period, he built palaces
for his fellows and made the city his permanent capital. Abu Tahir
attacked Oman in 315 A.H. The Governor of Oman took refuge in
Persia and Abu Tahir declared Oman as a province under his rule. He
began a series of attacks towards the north in 316 A.H. Caliph
Muqtadir Abbasi called Yusuf bin Abi As’saj from Azerbaijan,
conferred on him the authority to rule Wasit and then ordered him to
fight with Abu Tahir. After a heavy fight, Yusuf was beaten and
arrested. This news created quite a sensation in Baghdad. Abu Tahir
set out from Kufa to Anbar. The Caliph deployed Generals like Munis
khadim, Muzaffar, and Harun but all of them came back to Baghdad
after being beaten by Abu Tahir. He then proceeded to Rahba and
ravaged it too. Jazirah province experienced the same plight at his
hands and nobody advanced to check his wanton excesses.

Invasion Of Makkah

Abu Tahir invaded Makkah in 317 A.H. During his wild action, he
killed a large number of Hujjaj, plundered Makkah, uprooted the
doors of Ka’bah, pulled off the cover of Ka’bah and distributed its
pieces among his army. He also removed the Hajr al-Aswad (Black
Stone) and carried it with him saying that the next Hajj would be
performed in his territory. Many influential chiefs corresponded
with Abu Tahir to return the Black Stone and they offered up to
fifty thousand dinars for the return of the sacred stone but he did
Not agree. He continued his Tuinous activities and went on

rampaging Iraq and Syria, He levied heavy taxes on the people of
amascus too.

Qaramatians of Bahrain 275

Abu Mansur

His elder brother Ahmad succeeded Abu Tahir. He is known by his
filial appellation of Abu Mansur. A section of the Qaramatians refused
to recognize him as a ruler and acknowledged Abu Tahir’s elder son
as the real one. In order to sort out the controversy the Qaramatians
sent their messenger to Tripoli to put the case before Abul Qasim
Ubaidi who was to them all the envoy of Imam Mahdi. Abul Qasim
Ubaidi passed his judgment that Abu Mansur should be recognized as
the ruler and Sabur ibn Abu Tahir as his successor. They happily
agreed to the decision. Abul Qasim Ubaidi died in 334 A-H. and was
succeeded by Ismail Ubaidi in Africa. Abu Mansur sent felicitations
upon his accession through his envoy. Isma‘il Ubaidi wrote to Abu
Mansur more than once to send the Black Stone back to the Ka’bah.
Abu Mansur finally returned the Stone. During the reign of Abu
Mansur, the Qaramatians launched very few attacks on other
countries and he paid more attention to internal stability and
administrative reforms.

Sabur’s Assissination

In 358 A.H., Sabur bin Abu Tahir arrested Abu Mansur and killed his
brothers and supporters who had aided and abetted in the crime
conceming the Black Stone. Sabur captured the throne but he could
not save himself from the opposition of his brothers. They stormed the
capital and took out their uncle Abu Mansur from the prison. After
coming back to the throne, Abu Mansur assassinated Sabur and
banished his supporters to Awall Island. Abu Mansur died in 359
AH. Abu Ali Hasan bin Ahmad with the appeliation of “Azam
succeeded him. On coming to the throne, he banished all the sons of
Abu Tahir to Awall Island. .

Hasan Azam, The Qaramite

Hasan Azam was moderate in his thought and beliefs. He was not so
devoted to the Ubaidi nor did he hate the Abbasid Caliphate. It has
already been mentioned that Abu Tahir had levied an annual tribute

276 The History of Islam

on Damascus and the rulers of Damascus had to send the amount to
the Qaramatian king to avoid the death and destruction of their
people. At the time of the enthronement of Azam, Vatar bin Falah
Katami had conquered Damascus and established his rule. Azam
demanded the tribute from the new ruler but he refused it completely.
Azam dispatched an army to Damascus. Mu‘iz Ubaidi was moving
from Qairwan to Cairo when news came to him of this development,
he wrote to the Qaramatians to hold back Azam from such an action,
otherwise, he would proclaim the deposition of Azam by declaring the
sons of Abu Tahir the rightful heirs to the throne. When Azam knew
of this, he rose against the Ubaidi and started delivering addresses in
the name of Abbasid Caliphate in all his territories. The army
dispatched at first by Azam to Damascus was defeated by J’afar
Katami in 360 AH. Then Azam himself led an army in 361 A.H. and
captured Damascus by killing’ J’afar Katami on the battlefield. He
brought peace to the people of Damascus and then marched to Egypt.

During the time when Azam the Qarmate was engaged in Syria and
Egypt, Mu’iz Ubaidi wrote to the sons of Abu Tahir, who were then
confined on Awall Island that they should go ahead and capture
Ahsa. He himself Pronounced in Bahrain that he had bestowed the
tule of Bahrain on the sons of Abu Tahir by deposing Azam. Asa
result of this, the sons of Abu Tahir ravaged Ahsa. Having seen this,
Ta’i Abbasi, the Caliph of Baghdad wrote a letter to the sons of Abu
Tahir not to create any disturbances and they should obey his orders.
Azam was not Paying attention to the events, when finally he came
back to Ahsa and put them right. Meanwhile Mu‘iz Ubaidi’s troops
captured all of Syria in 363 A.H. Then Azam came back to Syria at the
head of his army, beat and pushed out the Ubaidi forces from Syria
and made progress into Egypt up to Balbis. Mu‘iz Ubaidi lured away
a large part of Azam's army and a number of Generals. In this way,

alienated from their natural allies the Ubaidi

Qaramatians of Bahrain 277

and aligned with their historical enemies and they rose up against
him. The revolt succeeded in great part because Azam was then
engaged in Syria far away from his capital. When Azam returned
from Syria, he found everyone antagonistic to him and his cavalry also
joined the insurgents. They arrested Azam and replaced him jointly by
Jafar and Ishaq. Azam and his relatives were banished to Awall
Island. Abu Tahir’s progeny were already passing their lives in

banishment on the island, and they killed the newcomers to the island
right away without delay.

Jafar And Ishaq

Jafar and Ishaq took hold of the Qaramatians and immediately after
assuming power they tured away from the Abbasids and acknowledge
the Ubaidites (Fatimids). They started delivering addresses in the
name of the Ubaidite king. They then attacked Kufa and occupied it.
Izz ud-Daula bin Boya dispatched an army to punish the Qaramatians
but was thoroughly beaten and chased up to Qadsiyah. Then enmity
arose between J’afar and Ishaq and each of them attempted to destroy
the other to rule alone. It resulted in weakness and frustration among
the Qaramatians. Other Qaramatian Generals also staked their claims
to kingdom, with the result that Asgher bin Abul Hasan Taghlabi
captured Bahrain and Bani Mukarram occupied Oman. They offered
their allegiance to the Abbasids and Taghlabid dynasty wiped out all
signs of the Qaramatian from Bahrain by 375 A.H.

Chapter 15

Kingdom Of The Qaramatians
Batinians Of Persia

Soon after the destruction of the empire the Qaramatian creed
underwent a drastic change. Even though the belief of Azam, the King
of the Qaramatians’ of Bahrain were different from other Qaramatians
and he vehemently hated the Ubaidite king of Egypt, the Qaramatians
in general jooked upon the Ubaidite ruler with love and respect and
accepted him as their king. Now when the Bahrain ruler slipped out of
their hands and they had already lost Iraq and Syria as a shelter, they
took to forming their own groups, and even though they kept mixing
with the Muslims, they continued their preaching mission secretly.
Like the Ubaidites, they appointed their preachers for different places.
These preachers kept their activities a secret. They would go to people
in the guise of devotes and divines and make their disciples from
among them. And among these disciples, they entitled those as
“Rafiq” (comrade) whom they found of kindred spirit. They then
taught such people their own lessons. They created two classes, the
Preachers and the “Rafigs” (comrades). These preachers spread all
Over Syria, Iraq, Persia and Khurasan (northeastern fran, southern
Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan). The Ubaidite king helped
280 The History of Islam

and patronized them. These preachers used to get all kinds of help
secretly from Egypt. In this way, the Ubaidites imperceptibly spread
the net of the Qaramatian preachers into various Islamic countries,
The Seljuks kept occupying Islamic countries and were unaware of
their secret enemy. After the fall of the Qaramatiansin Bahrain, the
Qaramatian teachings and the entire congregation turned into a group
of preachers. The Ubaidite rule, therefore, felt no need to send its
members from Egypt to Iraq as they were constantly supporting the
clandestine activities of the Qaramatian preachers. At times, these
preachers would turn into robbers and bandits with the help of their
“Rafigs.” They had taught their disciples and followers to kill anybody
outside their creed without any sense of crime. The Muslims in
general had to suffer too much as their rage multiplied. They made it
a regular feature of their operations to kill Muslim chiefs, generals and
commanders whenever they found an opportunity. However,
kept quiet wherever they found the ruler alert and vigilant, but
flourished in the territories of weaker ones. Since the Qaramatians
donned the attire of piety and divinity and deceiving a Muslim wa:
‘act of virtue and reward to them, they found opportunities to
positions of power in various Muslim
their group was once appointed as a ga
the fort a center to let loose a teign of te:
the entire surrounding

they
they
had
5 an
secure
‘ourts. A certain person from
rrison commander. He made
rror, banditry and looting on

area. Since the Party carried out its activities
clandestinely, it came to be called Batiniah (hidden). These Batiniahs

gradually became Strong enough to seize the Shahwar Fort of Isfahan.

him his pupil.
Ahmad Bin Actash
ee

ed Ahmad who commanded respect among his
People like his father. Ahmad took leave of his group, he had the
Ithy young man and he met the garrison
‘ar Fort and became employed there. Within a
wed such an example of duty and responsibility

commander of Shahw,
few days, Ahmad sho

Kingdom Of The Qaramatians Batinians Of Persia 281

that he was appointed as a deputy to the garrison commander and
was entrusted with all the powers in decision making. Shortly after
that the garrison commander died Ahmad secured the same post for
himself. Being at the helm of affairs Ahmad bin Attash released all the
prisoners of the Batiniah group who fell under his jurisdiction. Soon
after being released, they went on a rampage in Isfahan, looting and
killing people throughout the territory. During the same period Hasan
bin Sabbah was spreading his conspiratorial net all over the areas of
Taliqan and Qazwin.

Hasan Bin Sabbah

Hasan bin Sabbah was the classmate of Nizamul Mulk Tusi the prime
minister of Malik Shah bin Alp of the Arsalan Seljuks. He first tried to
find access to the royal court through Nizamul Mulk but later changed
his mind and came to the service of Abu Muslim, a relative of the
Nizamul Mulk who was a garrison commander. As an aide to him, he
began to spread the net of his plots. Meanwhile, Abu Muslim came to
know that spies from the Ubaidite ruler of Egypt would come to
Hasan bin Sabbah. He interrogated Hasan bin Sabbah about the
matter and when Hasan bin Sabbah saw that his secret was disclosed
he escaped the territory and went to Mustansir Ubaidi in Egypt who
showed respect to him. Hasan then offered his allegiance to
Mustansir, who became happy and sent him ona preaching mission to
Persia and Iraq by conferring on him the post of Head of the
Preachers. He was entrusted with the task of inculcating in people the
spirit to support Mustansir’s leadership and caliphate. Mustansir
Ubaidi had three sons named Ahmad, Nazar and Abul Qasim. On the
eve of taking leave Hasan bin Sabbah asked Mustansir who would be
chosen as Imam after him. “My son Nazar”, Mustansir replied. Nazar
Was virtually made crown prince by Mustansir. But, the Minister and
the sister of Mustansir, after the demise of the king, joined hands and
brought Abul Qasim to the throne through a conspiracy. But Hasan
bin- Sabbah declined to accept the leadership of Abul Qasim and
Supported Nazar as the rightful successor to the throne. It is because
Of this that Hasan bin Sabbah’s party is also called Nazaria. Hasan bin
Sabbah left Egypt and reached Khurasan via Asia Minor and Mosul.

282 The History of Islam
The Governor tuling Taliqan and Qahistan had entrusted the Alamut
Fort to an Alwi. Hasan bin Sabbah went to the Alwi who greeted him
with respect and asked him to stay as his honored guest. Hasan
enjoyed his stay in the Fort as a devout Muslim but kept his mind
engaged in planning how to bring the Fort under his centrol. With the
completion of his plan, he turned the Alwi out of the Fort and began
to rule it. This event took place during the period of Malik Shah
Seljuk. When his Minister Nizamul Mutk Tusi heard of this event, he
sent an army to chastise Hasan bin Sabbah. By then Hasan bin Sabbah
had gained strength and stabilized his position. Fighting between the
two broke out and lingered on. In the meantime, Hasan bin Sabbah
persuaded a section of the Batiniah sect to do away with Nizamul
Mulk. He was killed and the army he was leading went back. This
initial success worked as a great encouragement and Hasan bin
Sabbah’s expansionist urge began to increase. During these days a
man, named Munawwar from the Sassanid dynasty was the Governor
of Qahistan. His relations with the Seljuk rulers worsened and the
situation took such a_ serious turn that Munawwar sought help from
Hasan bin Sabbah who gave it without loss of time and he captured
Qahistan. Hasan bin Sabbah’s power and_ influence progressed
rapidly. In the meantime, civil war broke out among Seljuk chiefs, and
they had to seek help from Hasan bin Sabbah instead of making an
offensive against him. As a result of this, the area of his power and
influence kept expanding very rapidly. King Berkeyaruq had to seek
help from the Batiniyah sect to take on his brother Muhammad. Such a
development added only to their importance. However, King
Berkeyaruq then ordered the massacre of the Batiniyahs.

Ahmad bin Attash had established his own rule after occupying
Shahwar Fort but the Seljuks surrounded Ahmad bin Attash and his
companions and many of them had to buy peace on the condition of
leaving Isfahan and its outskirts and joining Hasan bin Sabbah in
Alamut Fort, They were granted amnesty on these terms alone.
Ahmad bin Attash was arrested and killed and his wife committed
suicide. This was how the Batiniyah sect met its doom in Isfahan
however, the power of Hasan bin Sabbah increased more and more.
Hasan bin Sabbah was the founder of a strong rule also he was the

Kingdom Of The Qaramatians Batinians Of Persia 283

founder of a new faith and sect. He came to be addressed as “Sayedna”
by his followers. He passed thirty-five years of his life in the Alamut
Fort and he did not come out of the Fort for a single day.

Death Of Hasan Bin Sabbah

He died on Rabia al-Akhir 28,518 A.H. at the ripe old age of 90. He
collected human material from wild and savage men of hilly areas and
turned them into such a fortified band and they would do anything at
the command of their leader. They were known as the party of
“Fidais” (pledged devotees). Aided and abetted by these “Fidais” it
became easy for him to get powerful kings, commanders and
antagonists assassinated in their own houses and, in this way, he had
became a terror to everyone.

Kiya Buzurg Ummid ©

After the demise of Hasan bin Sabbah, one of his disciples named Kiya
Buzurg Ummid, succeeded him and occupied Alamut Fort. His
dynasty reigned up to 655 A.H. Kiya Buzurg Ummid was succeeded
by his son Hasan bin Muhammad who was succeeded by his son
Muhammad, the second bin Hasan who was succeeded by Alauddin
Muhammad bin Jalaluddin Muhammad who was finally succeeded
by Khurshah bin Alauddin.

Ruknuddin Khurshah

He was the last king of the “Fidais” who was arrested by Hulagu
Khan the grandson of Genghis Khan and part of the Khan dynasty
and his country and empire were destroyed with the destruction of
Baghdad. Although the Fidais ruled over Alamut Fort and its suburbs
for about one hundred years, during this long period the entire
territory witnessed no sign of progress or development. When
Genghis Khan began to ravage Mustim countries, the Fidais also
Sprang into action with their expansionist designs. They were still
fulfilling their plans when they were invaded by Alauddin Khwarizm
Shah who struck a deadly blow to their power. He wrested from them
all the forts and razed them to the ground allowing them all to take
tefuge in Alamut Fort. At Jast, Hulagu Khan put them all to death.

284 , The History of Islam

Those Assassinated By The Fidais

Among those killed by the atheist Fidais were Khawaja Nizamul
Mulk Tusi, the Prime Minister of King Alp Arsalan and Malik Shah
Seljuk, Fakhrul Mulk bin Khawaja Nizamul Mulk, Shams Tabrizi,
Maulana Rum, Nizamul Mulk Ma‘ud bin Ali, Minister of Khwarizm
Shah, Sultan Shahabuddin Muhammad Ghouri, some Christian
kings of Europe and others. Sultan Salahuddin Ayubi and Imam

Fakhruddin Razi were also threatened with murder but they
remained unharmed.

Chapter 16

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks
and Tartar Mongols

Removal Of A Doubt

A student of history faces difficulty in making differences among the
Turks, Mongols and Tartars, Turkmen, Kara Tartars etc. and their
origins. He sometimes finds that the Seljuks, Aip Arsalan and Tughril
Beg were Turks and Genghis Khan appears to him as a Mongol. At
another place, he comes across the same Genghis Khan who is a Turk,
and a third place his campaigns are being mentioned as the trial of the
Tartars. Now he comes to the natura) conclusion that the Mongol,
Turk and Tartar are one and the sime people. But, later on, he finds
the Mongols and the Turks fighting with one another, which gives him
to believe that the Mongols and the. Turks do not have common origin.
When he goes through Indian history, he finds to his wonder that
some Generals and Commanders are called Turks and they have
entered into relations with the Mongols and in the 105 century A.H.,
we find India ruled by the Mughals. It also comes to his notice that the
Mongols are called as “Mirza and they necessarily carry ‘Beg’ as their
title. But the reader finds ‘Mirza’ attached to the names as @ title when

he meets the Persian Kings in the pages of history. Uthmanid Turks

286 ___The History of Islam

have also adopted Bek, Bey or Beg as titles. European historians
sometimes describe the Mongol empires as Turkish empires. Therefore,
it appears proper to clarify the differences between the Turks and the
Mongols so that the student of history faces no confusion while going
through the books of history.

Application Of ‘Turk’

Adam, the Second, Prophet Nuh (Noah) (#4) had three sons named
Ham, Sam and Yafith. The progeny of Yafith inhabited the eastern
countries, China etc. From among them was a man named ‘Turk’
whose progeny spread all over China and Turkistan and were all
known as ‘Turk’. Some people consider Afrasiyab also as a Turk
although he belonged to the Keyanid royal family of Persia and was
the descendant of Faridun. Since he was the king of Turkistan, he is
mistaken as belonging to Turks. The progeny of Turk bin Yafith
flourished in China, Turkistan, and Khatan etc. In order to keep
themselves organized and united they came under a chief and,
gradually, every emerging tribe had its separate chieftains. However,
ail the chieftains were considered subordinate to the main chief. Every
tribe belonging to the Progeny of Turk bin Yafith came to be called

‘Turk’ and ail the people inhabiting China, Khatan, Turkistan were
known as Turks.

Turkan Ghez

Some of these Turk tribes crossed the river Oxus and committed
robbery and banditry in the interiors of Persia, Khorasan (between the
Amu Darya [Oxus] and Syr Darya-rivers in modern Uzbekistan and -
Kazakhstan). These tribes are known as Turkan Ghez. Historians have
found proof of their teaching up to Europe, Africa and Morocco.

Seljuks

Among these same tribes was one tribe known as the Seljuk. Among
the progeny of Turk bin Yafith this Turkistan tribe of Seljuk was,
perhaps, the first to confess Islam and it gave birth to great and

powerful kings like Tughril and Alp Arsalan whose names spread into
every nook and corner of the world.

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols . 287

Mongols And Tartars

Before the Seljuks’ embracing Islam and before their exodus to
Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern
Afghanistan), two new tribes emerged by the name of two full
brothers and came to be known as Mongol and Tartar. About the time
of the Seljuks converting to Islam and gaining fame, these two tribes
were almost a nonentity. Gradually, the progeny of the Mongol and
Tartar multiplied and both the tribes settled in different countries and
separate territories under various chiefs.

It happened that among the Turks there was a person named Anjah
Khan who had twin sons named Mongol and Tartar. They raised two
separate peoples and they were called by these names, Mongol and
Tartar. Mongol Khan’s son was Qara Khan whose son was Arghun
Khan who was the chief of his tribe. During his time, a man of his tribe
invented a cart for carrying loads. Arghun Khan liked the carriage and
entitled the inventor as ‘Qangli.’ Thus, a carriage or conveyance is
called Qangli in Turkish. His progeny brought the Qangli tribe into
being. Arghun Khan had a number of sons, and one of them was
Tanghez Khan whose son was Mangli Khan and his son was named
‏لاع‎ Khan and his son was called Qeyan. Qeyat tribe emerged from the
Progeny of Qeyan Khan who was succeeded by his son, Temur Tash
whose son was Mangti Khan and his son was Yeldoz Khan Junea
Bahadur who had a daughter named Alan Quwa. She was married to
her cousin Dububayan and gave birth to two sons Yalkadai and
Yakjudai. Alan Quwa’s husband Dububayan was the ruler of his tribe.
But he died leaving his two sons of tender age behind. The Mongol
tribe entrusted Alan Quwa to be their chief after the demise of their
chieftain Dububayan, the husband of Alan Quwa.

One night Alan Quwa went to bed. She had not yet slept when she
Noticed a light coming through the window of her room. This light
entered her mouth. She got up in embarrassment and informed her
mother and girl friends of this event. A few days later, she showed
Signs of pregnancy. When the news spread, the people rose to
condemn her. But the queen Alan Quwa assembled the elders and

288 The History of Islam

asked them to stay for a few days near her room to know the facts,
They saw with their naked eyes that a light descended from the sky,
entered the room of the retiring queen and then went back to the sky.
Now they believed the statement of the queen and accepted her
pregnancy as miraculous. On the completion of the pregnancy, Alan
Quwa gave birth to triplet sons who were named Bugun Qaiqi,
Yusfain Salji and Buzbakhar Khan. Thus, she became the mother of
five sons, two from Dububayan and three without a father.! While
Yalkadai and Yakujdai’s progeny formed the Darlekin tribe, Bugun
Qaiqi’s progeny came to be known as Qaiqain tribe and those of
Yusfain Salji’s were called Saljeut; the progeny of Buz Bakberqan
gained fame as Buzbakhar. Buzbakhar succeeded his mother Alan
Quwa after her demise. He called himself the son of the son. This

Buzbakhar produced Genghis Khan, Temur and many other famous
Mongol tribes.

As mentioned above, there came aman named Anjah Khan from the
Progeny of Turk bin Yafith who had twin sons named Mongol Khan
and Tartar Khan. The Progeny of these two brothers came to be
known as Mongol and Tartar. Their people chose two different areas
to settle in. The Mongol tribe settled in China and Mongolia, while the
Tartar tribe inhabited the area along the bank of the river Oxus and
the region became known as Tartar or Turkistan. Since from the
Keyanid royal family of Persia Faridun’s son Tur ruled the territory in
the past, it is also called Turan. 1

In the Keyani ruling dynasty of Persia, Afrasiyab attained great fame
and found a prominent place in the Shahnema of Firdausi. The progeny
of Afrasiyab lived in Turkistafi or Turan and mixed with the Tartars.
Since Turkistan was closer to Islamic territories, the tribe of Turks that
first’ made progress into Islamic territory was the Tartars, which
consisted of many sub-tribes. Among them was the tribe of the
Progeny of Afrasiyab. They were ambitious and respected and they

١ This and same these Vevents and stories describe the old nations to
magnifects their rulers and monorchs to link their relations with heavenly
Power, but these stories have no any base and ground.

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 289

inning of a magnificent empire. The saying of Seljuk, the
Creat eee eue when he said: “We are the progeny of Afrasiyab.” A
man named Seljuk in the suburbs of Bukhara was the first to confess
[slam along with his tribe. The progeny of this Seljuk is called the Seljuk
tribe. Seljuk had five sons. Among them, one was Israel and another one
Michael (Mika’il). Sultan Mahmud, the Ghaznavid imprisoned Israel in
the Fort of Kalinjar and Mahmud’s son Sultan Mas’ud freed him then
he rejoined his tribe. Mika’‘il’s son was Sultan Tughril while another
brother of Tughril named Chughri preg had a son who was Sultan Alp
Arsalan Seljuk. If the Seljuk tribe is acknowledged to be the
descendent of Afrasiyab, it was not totally Turkish in origin but also
Persian Keyani. The Turks or Tartars living in Turkistan invaded Iran
and Khurasan more than once. One among those tribes, the Seljuk’s,
laid the foundation of the Ottoman Empire, which came to be known
as Turkish Ottoman.

The Word ‘Mongol’

It is a fact that the Mongol Tribe comes from Mongol! Khan's progeny
and every individual of that tribe is called Mongol. The short form of
Mongol is Moghal. Some people consider ‘Mongo!’ as the plural of
Moghal, which is totally wrong. 1 1

Fara Tartar

Mongol and Tartar would most frequently go to war because they haa
inhabited different territories and would compete for each other's
land. The Keyani dynasty kept lending support to the Tartars until it
tuled Turan and the Mongols remained ‘subdued. During these
battles, the Tartars captured Mongol women and children and from’
these women their offspring were called slave girl children and had
‏مم‎ right to property. When such children became numerous and were
Married to their same class they all together made a separate people.

Some historians believe, that such people were called Turkaman. It is
because of the Tartar’s dislike of the Mongols that they did not

consider the children from Mongol women on par with their own,

other than this tribal distinction The Mongol tribe and the Tartar tribe

were actually the offspring of the same father.

290 The History of Islam

Removal Of A Misunderstanding

Some people mistake the Uzbeks for the Tartars, although the Uzbeks
are a tribe raised from the progeny of Genghis Khan. This

misunderstanding took route because the Mongol kings kept fighting
with the Uzbek rulers. The Uzbeks those days were the kings of,
Turkistan and so some historians mistook them for the Tartars.

However, the Ottoman Empire came from the Tartars. Mongol tribes

had a number of branches like Qachag, Ighor, Khalj, Qachar, Afshar,

Jala‘ir, Arlat, Daghlat, Qantrat, Saldoz, Arghun, Qauchin, Tarkhani,

Taghai, and Qaoshal.

It might have been clear by now that the word ‘Turk’ is a general term
applied to all the tribes of the Mongols and the Tartars for both the
Tartars and the Mongols are two branches of the Turkish tribe. Later
on, the Tartars came to be called ‘Turks’ and the term ‘Turk’ was
particularly applied to the Tartars. With the passage of time Turk and
Mongol gained fame as two different peoples.

Being stronger than the Mongols, the Tartars came out of Turkistan
and took Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and
northem Afghanistan), Persia, Iraq, Syria, and Asia Minor by storm
and spread over these territories leaving Turkistan behind. They had
learned cultured manners and had become civilized by that time.

Genghis Khan

Features Of The Mongol

The features of the Mongols as described by the historians make them
resemble the Turks to a great extent. They are known for their wide
chest, flat face, small buttocks and wheatish complexion, quick action
and sharp intellect. When they plan an endeavor, they never express
their opinion and pounce upon their enemies catching them in a state
of utter unawareness and do not allow them to retaliate. Their women
fight along with men and never lag behind in the art of combat with ;
their enemies. They eat flesh of all kinds and reject nothing. No spy

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 291

can intrude their land for he is easily recognized by his features and
movements. They make no concession, in killing anybody and kill
women, children, the old and young alike. When attacking their
enemies, they ravage the entire population. It seems that they are
governed by a sense of greed and they rather enjoy devastating the
entire human world.

Administration Of The Mongols

The territory ruled by the Mongols was divided into six provinces or
parts, each governed by one person. All these governors were
subordinates to one sovereign ruler who lived in Tamgach. One of
these provinces or parts was ruled by Buzbakhar ibn Alan-quwa until
the leadership came to the period of Tumna Khan ibn Bayasnagar
Khan. Tumna Khan had eleven sons out of which nine came from one
mother and two were born as twins from another mother. He had
named these two sons as Qabl Khan and Qachuli Bahadur.

Qachuli’s Dream

One night Qachuli Bahadur had a dream that a star emerged from the
collar of his brother, Qabl Khan and rose to the sky and began to give
light to the earth. Shortly after that, the star disappeared then another
star appeared in the same spot. That too went out of sight after a little
while giving place to the third one. Following the disappearance of the
third star the fourth one appeared so brightly and forcefully that the
entire world was illuminated. When this big star too went out of sight,
3 few small stars became visible and with this sight Qachuli Bahadur’s
eyes opened. He was still musing over the interpretation of the dream
when he again fell asleep. In a fresh dream, he saw that this time one
Star came out of his own collar, rose to sky and began to shine in the
sky, It was followed by the second and the third and thus seven stars
in all, appeared. Following the seventh one appeared a very big and
bright star, which illuminated the whole world. The disappearance of
this big star was followed by the appearance of a number of small
Stars. Following this Qachuli woke up and he related both these
dreams to his father.

292 The History of Islam

Interpretation Of Tumna Khan

Tumna Khan interpreted the dream by saying that a great king would
emerge in the fourth generation from Qabl Khan and another great
king in his (Qachuli Khan’s} eighth generation and thus his dynasty
would rule for long. Following this Tumna Khan counseled his both
sons to keep united. He then wrote down a document and had his
sons to sign it and then he handed it over to his treasurer to preserve it
for the coming generations and he put his own signature on it before
putting it under lock and key. The document stated that the empire
and rulers would come from the progeny of Qablt Khan while the
military leadership would remain with the Progeny of Qachuli
Bahadur. Accordingly, Qabl Khan came to the throne following the

demise of Tumna Khan.
Birth Of Genghis Khan

٠. Maisuka Bahadur,
Qadah 20, 549 A.
Tamuchin died.

the descendent of Qabi Khan had a son born on Dhul
H. The same year the Great Khan of Mongolia, King,

For this reason Maisuka Bahadur named his son
Tamuchin and who later

gained fame by the name Genghis Khan. When
Maisuka Bahadur died i -H., Tamuchin was only 13 when he
came to the throne of his small kingdom.
him because he was a child and they showed signs of revolt.

Dream Of Genghis Khan

Tamuchin dreamed that he.had_ swords in his both hands and when
he stretched his hands towards

the east and the west, the tips of the
swords touched both the horizons. When he narrated the dream to his
» she was convince:

0 that her son would shed blood and
carnage. She also knew that

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 293

sought help from Aurang Khan, the euler of the bordering state and
practically took refuge with him. Aurang Khan welcomed him whole-
heartedly and looked after him like his own son. Shortly after that,
Genghis Khan sprang into action against his benefactor and hid in a
protected mountain pass along with his comrades. In a fierce
encounter Aurang Khan was fatally injured by an arrow shot by Amir
Qaracha and another chief, Yang Khan, killed him while he was
escaping. Peace between Tamuchin and Yang Khan was the most
expected outcome because Yang Khan had helped him by killing
Aurang Khan. However, following this victory, Genghis Khan attracted
a number of tribes around him and they, finding him brave and
determined, offered their allegiance to him. With a large band. of
organized fighters, Genghis Khan led an attack on Yang Khan who
was killed during the encounter and his vast territory fell to Genghis
Khan. As a result of these victories, Tamuchin rose as a center of power
and leadership among all the Mongol tribes. He then emerged as rival to
the ruler of Mongolia and the power of the Great Khan himself.

Change Of Name

Meanwhile, a man named Tankiri, who commanded respect from
among the Mongols for his piety and devotion, came to Genghis Khan.
He said to him, “I saw a red man in red garments mounted on red
horse asking me to tell the son of Maisuka Bahadur to-change his
name from Tamuchin to Genghis Khan for God Almighty has decided
to make you the emperor of many countries.” Although Genghis Khan
took him to be a liar, nevertheless, he began to be <alled Genghis
Khan. In Turkish “Genghis” means emperor or’ is a synonym for
emperor. A few days later, some dispute arose between Tankiri and a
courtier of Genghis Khan. He caught Tankiri by his neck and knocked
him so violently on the ground that he died on the spot.

Gradually, Genghis Khan brought all the tribes and Mongolia under
his control and after the killing of the Great Khan ir an encounter
Genghis Khan was acknowledged as the Great Khan. Following this
Genghis Khan tured to the Tartar tribes. The Tartar king found
himself too weak to face Genghis Khan and bought peace by giving
his daughter in marriage to Genghis Khan. In the wake of this peace

294 The History of Islam

treaty, Tartar chiefs rose against their king and they sought Renghis’s
help. After large-scale bloodshed, the Tartar king poisoned himself to
death and Genghis’s territory expanded again. ٠ Genghis Khan was
very brave and shrewd among the Mongols. His performance bears
testimony to his wisdom and intelligence.

Religion Of The Mongols

The Faith and religion of the Mongols lie in the darkness of history.
However, they had the concept of one Powerful Creator, they believed
in God Almighty. They worshipped much in the way as the non-Aryan
inhabitants of India did. A Prophet must have been sent to that region
but the Mongols had sent him into oblivion with the passage of time
along with his message. They had lost sense of right and wrong,
lawful and unlawful. They ate what they found and did anything they
liked. Due to the climatic effect and tribal feuds, some historians have
written that their religion was simply killing men. They also
worshipped stars and natural phenomena. They were not Magi even
though they worshipped fire. Genghis Khan rose as a reformer ina
people so low in moral decay and immersed in abject ignorance. He
first established a mighty empire in a comparatively short time and
then he took time to bring about reforms in the moral and social
conditions of the Mongols.

Sultan Muhammad Khwarizm Shah

During this time, Sultan Muhammad Khwarizm Shah had been in full
- control of fran, Khurasan, Kabul, and Turkistan and was planning to
annihilate Baghdad, and was undoubtedly considered the mightiest
Muslim king on the Asian continent, When a dispute between the
Abbasid Caliph Nasiruddin and Muhammad Khwarizm Shah took a

of Khwarizm Shah. He addressed

counseled them to hold back from plundering Baghdad. Khwarizm
Shah said “Sheikh! You are a great admirer of the Abbasids, therefore
you go back to Baghdad. I, myself, prefer the Alwis to the Abbasids

and want to help the Alwis by devastating the Abbasid caliphate. I
shall invade Baghdad by all means.”

the king and the courtiers and

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 295

Curse Of Three Salnts On Khawarizm

Sheikh Shahabuddin Sahrwardy‘s mission failed to bring any fruit
and he cursed Khwarizm Shah saying: “O Allah! Set some tyrants
over him”. When Khwarizm Shah led his army, he found the way
closed with heavy snowfall and he had to postpone his campaign until
the next year. One day, in a state of inebriation, he ordered to put
Sheikh Majduddin to death and he was martyred. When he returned
to consciousness, he expressed deep regret and sent blood money to
Sheikh Najmuddin. He remarked: “The ransom for the martyred
Sheikh is the head of yours and mine and thousands of Muslims will
be killed in retaliation”. They say that Khwarizm Shah was overtaken
by calamity because he invited curses from Sheikh Shahabuddin
Suhrawardy, Sheikh Majduddin and Sheikh Najmuddin.

Peace Steps Of Genghis Khan Towards Khawarizm

When Genghis Khan established a mighty empire out of small states
conquered by him, he thought it proper to establish peaceful friendly
relations with his rival Sultan Khwarizm Shah for their borders were
meeting each other. As a prelude to peace efforts, Genghis Khan sent 2
letter to Muhammad Khwarizm Shah through his emissaries, which
contained, “I have conquered vast lands and I have under my banner
such a large number of warring tricks that I have no desire to win any -
other country. Similarly, you are also in occupation of many countries
and happen to be a great king. Thus it seems proper that we establish
friendly relations between us and promise to live in peace and
harmony so that each of us pay attention to human welfare and
prosperity.” He had further written in the letter, “Eshall keep you
dear like my own son.” Having received the letter Khwarizm Shah
evidently signed a peace document and showed the utmost courtesy
to the emissaries but he disliked the last sentence which treated him as
his son’, which appeared somewhat degrading to him. According to
the peace treaty, both the rulers agreed to free trading activities
between the two empires and the traders enjoyed full freegom of
Crossing one another's borders. Genghis Khan, though an unbeliever.
1S praiseworthy for winning peace against the threat of a formidable

298 The History of Islan

to Bukhara accompanied by his youngest son, Tolui Khan, Being
informed of the Mongol invasion Khwarizm Shah dispatched a force
of sixty thousand troops to the administrator of Anzar and thirty
thousand cavaliers to Bukhara, he deployed two hundred and ten
thousand men to keep Samarkand safe and sixty thousand fighters to
fortify the Fort and tower and he himself left Samarkand for Khurasan
(northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan).

Cowardice Of Khwarizm Shah

The biggest mistake or an act of timidity on the part of Khwarizm
Shah was his personal evasion of Genghis Khan. His departure to
Khurasan was certainly discouraging for his army. Even more
disheartening and injurious was his remark at the time of his
departure that if Mongols dropped their whips into this trench it
would get totally filled. This remark filled the force of Samarkand
with great terror. Khwarizm Shah first reached Balkh and dispatched
his wives and children and treasures to Mazandan. It is here that he
held consultations with his nobles and courtiers about adopting the
ways and means to combat the Mongols. Among the seven sons of
Khwarizm Shah, one named Jalaluddin, having seen his father
extremely terrified said, “You may go to Iraq with pleasure but confer
on me the command of the army and I shall attack the enemy and
Allah willing, I shall pitch my tents across the Oxus River. Moreover,
Jet me guard Mawaraunnahr (between the Amu {Oxus] and Syr
rivers in modern Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) and you take the
responsibility of Iraq and Khurasan (northeastem Iran, southem
Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan)”. But Khwarizm Shah did
not like the suggestion. He proceeded from Balkh to Herat.
Meanwhile, the news of the seizure of Bukhara by the Mongols and
the massacre of the whole population came to him as a great shock.
He hurried to Nishapur and indulged in luxury.

In 617 AH, a commander of Genghis Khan crossed the river Oxus at
the head of thirty thousand troops. This news sent terror into the heart
of Khwarizm Shah who dispatched his wives and children and
treasure to Qarun Fort and he himself left for Asfarain. The Mongols
felt utterly encouraged when they found Khwarizm Shah evading

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 299
engagement and running away from one place to another for his
safety. With this in mind, they embarked on chasing him and
surrounded Qarun Fort where he had kept his wives and children and
his possessions. He then ran away to Asterabad and then to Amal.

Death Of Khwarizm Shah

From Amal he fled to an Island and took refuge there. It was there
that he got the soul shattering news that the Mongols had seized
Qarun Fort his possessions, wives and children. He succumbed to the
shock and was buried in the garments he was putting on. Next, the
Mongols took the entire Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern
Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan) and Persia by storm and
filled the territory with death and destruction. Only one of his sons

named Jalaluddin, a brave, courageous and ambitious young man
saved himself. 1

During this period, the Mongols conquered Bukhara and Samarkand
and plunged the entire population into a river of blood. Genghis Khan
himself crossed the river Oxus in Rabia al-Awwal 617 A.H. and
massacred the population of Balkh and Herat. When the wives and
children of Khwarizm Shah were produced before Genghis Khan, he
took no pity and ordered them all to be put to death. This large-scale
Massacre also enveloped Nishapur, Mazandan, Amal, Rayy,
Hamadan, Qum, Qazwin, Debal, Tabriz, Tiflis, and Maragheh where
nobody, old or young, women or child, was spared. This scene of
¢arnage and destruction filled the Muslim hearts with so much terror
that an alone Mongol woman could ransack a house without any
Tesistance. The people of Hamadan: spared until then had mustered
enough courage to assassinate a weak Mongol Governor bore the
brunt of the Mongols’ wrath in such a wild and violent way that no
One has ever repeated such a brutal action ever since.

Jalaluddin Bin Khwarizm

Soon after the death of his father Jalaluddin bin Khwarizm came to
Tabriz from an island in the Caspian Sea. He took some brave friends
with him. Although the Mongols attempted to arrest him, he tore
apart their ranks and escaped along with his friends. He reached

300 ___The History of Islam

Ghazni and received the support of a band of persons there. The
nearby Mongol troops attacked his party but he fought them back and
this was perhaps, the first defeat conceded by the Mongols at the
hands of Jalaluddin. With this news Genghis Khan rushed to Bamyan
where his grandson the son of his son Chogatai Khan was killed by an
arrow. Genghis Khan grew so furious that he ordered the death of
everyone. Even the pregnant women were not spared and their babies
were taken out by splitting their wombs and _ killed, Following the
defeat of the Mongo! troops, Jalaluddin fortified his position and took
the field against Genghis Khan. Unfortunately, some Generals
changed sides during the engagement and went over to the Mongols.
Jalaluddin was left with only seven hundred fighters. He didn’t lose
gainst the mighty force of Genghis Khan.
Jalaluddin showed exemplary bravery and spirit and he pushed back
the Mongols wherever he turned a gainst them. He frustrated the
attempts of the Mongols and a large Mongol army always had to come
to their rescue. However, Jalaluddin could not win the battle owing to
dearth of fighters on his side. But he succeeded in establishing his
prestige in the heart of Genghis Khan. He did not yield even when
only one hundred fighters were left to fight under his command. In
such an hour of crisis, he took off his coat of mail and threw it away,
took his crown in his hand and plunged his horse into the river Indus.
His companions followed suit. Even though Genghis Khan wanted to
ive chase to that valiant fighter and his followers it was not easy for
his troops to face the surging waves of the deep river. Genghis Khan
and his troops stopped at the bank of the river Indus and began to
shower their arrows at the handful of fighters braving the dashing
waves of the river. Many of them lost their lives bravely and only
seven of them were left to stand by valiant Jalaluddin across the river.
He put off his garments and spread them over the bushes to dry them
and stuck his lance into the ground and put his crown on its and lay
down under it to take a rest. He also put off the saddle of his horse
and placed it in front of himself to dry out.

his courage and dashed a

Genghis Khan was watching all this from the other bank witha feeling
of surprise. He called his sons and commanders and said: “I have
never seen the like of such a brave and courageous person. His
companions are also matchless in bravery and crossing such a vast

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 301

and turbulent river is the work of brave men only. I am afraid, if this
man remains alive, he will erase the name of the Mongols from the
face of the earth. Let us work out a plan to do away with him as soon
as possible”. But, finding no way to fulfill his plan, Genghis Khan
returned disappointed. This event took place in 620 A.H.

Following this Sultan Jalaluddin won some victories in the Sind
province. His supporters and well wishers kept joining him here. A
few days later, he crossed the river and reached Kirman an and then
to Shiraz. In the meantime, he inflicted defeats on the Fidai known as
Batini and razed their forts to the ground save the Al a Mut Fort. The
Fidai or Batini people were happy with the news of the Muslim
massacre and destruction at the hands of the Mongols. Since they
were themselves, sworm enemies of the Muslims like the Mongols they
were not at all afraid of the Mongols. They had expanded their
territories in the wake of the Muslim disaster. The uprooting of the
Qaramatians should be reckoned among the deeds of Sultan.
Jalaluddin. It was the time when the Mongol flood was raging in the
north. Sultan Jalaluddin proceeded to Baghdad to seek Caliph

Nasiruddin’s help and support so that the Mongol campaigns against

the Islamic countries could be warded off. Since Nasiruddin hated

Jalaluddin’s father he deployed his nobles to stop Jalaluddin and

drive him out of the territory. Facing this situation, Jalaluddin took the

field and fought back the nobles. He then tumed to Tabriz instead of

Baghdad and moved to Girijistan after occupying Tabriz. He was

greeted by the nobles with honor and they expressed their satisfaction

over his arrival.

Now Sultan Jalaluddin gained strength and stability once again and
when he came face to face with the Mongols near Isfahan, he repulsed
the attack and drove them back. Now the whole country of Girjistan
and its suburban territories came under the occupation of Jalaluddin.
The Mongols attacked Jalaluddin once again with large-scale
Preparations. In view of the massive Mongol attack, Jalaluddin sent
his emissaries to Baghdad and other Islamic countries to seek heip but
none rose to his help because they did not want to invite any risk to
their countries by lending help to such a valiant fighter like
Jalaluddin. At last he alone rose to face the Mongol attack but on
account of being misinformed by his spies that the Mongol troops

302 The History of Islam

were far away from him he was caught unaware by the Mongols in a
midnight attack and lost the battle in spite of fighting gall 53 ly. In 2
state of utter disappointment, he went away to an unknown place arv
remained untraceable for the rest of his life.

End OF Jalaluddin

Two kinds of narratives have gained currency concerning his end.
According to one, he took refuge in a hill where someone assassinated
him for his costly garments and horse. Another one says that he joined
the company of Muslim Sufis and saints and passed the rest of his life
in long journeys, piety and prayers. °

Genghis Khan’s Interest In Islam

Being relieved of the campaigns of Sultan Jalaluddin Khwarizm,
Genghis Khan left his son, Chogatai Khan in Makran and came back
to Mongolia in Dhul Hijjah 521 A.H. after an absence of seven years.
In route to his native land and upon reaching Bukhara he ordered to
produce before him the most learned Muslim scholar to learn from
him the facts about Islam. Seven years of fighting and carnage had
impressed upon him that although, the Muslims had become weak
at the time, Islam was not an ordinary religion it had a magnificent
system and high moral teachings. Qadi Ashraf and a learned
Muslim scholar were produced before Genghis Khan. On inquiring
about Islam, those two Muslim scholars first explained to him about
faith in one God (T. awhid). Genghis Khan acknowledged the faith:
Following this. they put before him the creed of Prophethood which
he readily accepted saying that God Almighty used to send His
envoys for the guidance of mankind. He also accepted the prayer
and fasting as obligatory. However, he held pilgrimage to Ka’bah as

unnecessary. Qadi Ashraf declared Genghis Khan a Muslim but
another scholar differed.

From Bu

kindness to the Muslims there. During seven years of his absence from
his homeland, he kept Plundering and ravaging Muslims indiscriminately
was now coming home but Spiritually defeated and dominated by
Islam. Genghis Khan's grandson Kublai Khan-‘and Hulagu Khan were

Ganghisid- Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 303

then ten and nine years old respectively. Both of them came out to
welcome Genghis Khan home, hunting a rabbit and a deer on the way.
Since it was the first hunting affair of the boys Genghis Khan
celebrated the occasion with a feast and festivities,

Nomination Of A Successor

After everything being settled Genghis Khan assembled his sons,
grandsons and commanders at a place where he said, “Since my last
days are approaching and I have won a vast country for you all, I
want you to choose someone as my successor.” They all said in one
voice, “We are perfectly obedient to you. We shall, therefore, obey
anybody of your choice.” Genghis Khan said, “If you leave the matter
to me, I shall nominate Ogdai Khan as my successor. Now, it is your
duty to obey him and carry out his orders.” Following this he ordered
to take out the document made out by Tumna Khan and signed by
Qabl Khan and Qachuli Bahadur. He showed the document to
everyone and had all of them sign it. He then declared that the deserts
of Karakrum (in modem Turkmenistan) and Khazr (southeastern
section of modern European Russia), Alani (Russia northeast of the
Black Sea), Russia, and Bulgar (territory at the confluence of the Volga
and Kama rivers) would be ruled by Juchi Khan. Mawaraunnahr
(between the Amu [Oxus] _and Syr rivers in modern Uzbekistan and
Kazakhstan), Khwarizm (territories of present day Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan), Kashgar (city in extreme western China), Badakhshan (in
Present day Afghanistan), Balkh, Ghazni and the territory up'ts Indus
River would go to Chogatai Khan. Moreover, Qatachar Chogatai Khan
and Amir Qachar would keep the same relation as stood belween
Qarachar and himself. Chogatai Khan would be the king and Amir
Qachar his Commander-in-chief, Both would remain faithful and loyal
to one another. He then made out a fresh document bearing the new
Settlement and put ‘his own seal and signature on it. Amir Qarachar
Was the great grand son of Qachuli Bahadur. A part of Mongolia and a
Part of the command of Ogdai Khan would remain attached to Tolui
Khan. He then ordered that all the brothers would consider their elder

brother Ogdai Khan as their monarch and never think of turning away
from him.

304 . ___ The History of slam

Death Of Genghis Khan

Genghis Khan died in the Ramadan 624 A.H. at the age of 73 after a
reign of 25 years. He was buried under a tree as per his will. In the
first year, a thick forest grew around his grave ‘until it became
impassable and invisible and untraceable by the ensuing generations.

A Review Of The Genghis Khan’s Reign

Genghis. Khan emerged among the Mongols asa very wise and far-
sighted man. It was due to him alone that the unknown Mongol race
achieved renown all over the world. He had established firm and
appreciable principles of governance. He grew well aware of the basic
fact that a savage and ignorant people like the Mongols must not be
allowed to go without engagements otherwise they would perish by
killing each other. On one hand, he taught the Mongols the virtues of
unity and solidarity but worked out such laws and principles that
would not leave the Mongol army out of action on the other. He also
compiled a set of laws for the purpose, which came to be known as the
“Torah of Genghis”. The Mongols revered this book of statutes of
Genghis Khan like a divinely religious book. The Torah of Genghis
contains laws and principles for hunting as well, it was incumbent on
Mongol kings to go hunting along with their troops when there were
no campaigns to launch.

Along with the carnage and plunder, it is worth noticing that Genghis
Kha, would avoid the use of haughty words. Ina letter toa king, he
would generally say; “Obey me, otherwise, God Almighty knows,
what will happen.” He would never claim to have a strong and
formidable army to crush the enemy. Similarly, he would never hold
his huge army responsible for the victory. He would always say that
his victory was only due to the Grace of God and He was the One who
made him king. Moreover, he would not allow anybody to write
about him words of acclaim and lofty praise. He would do ordinary
work like ordinary soldiers. He covered long distances on horseback
and had his soldiers to do it as well. He would so often say, “We

should be adopted to hard labor and diligence. Our excellence and
leadership lie therein.”

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 305

Genghis Khan himself was tall, strong and stout. During battle, he
was in the first row and dispersed the enemy ranks wherever he
charged at them. The secret of his outstanding victories also lay in
the fact that his sons were also mighty warriors and had been
endowed with soldierly qualities and semper. Furthermore, he had
done away with tribal feuds and rivalries and forged unity and accord
among the Mongols.

He married five wives and every wife belonged to a different tribe. In
this way, he won the confidence and support of all those tribes. One of
the laws of his book of statutes entitled the “Torah of Genghis” was
that, in case of the conquest of a new city, a large-scale massacre was a
must, for it created deep terror in the hearts of the defeated people,
never allowing them to gather courage to rise against the victor.
Genghis Khan practiced it in all of his victories. It is an undeniable fact
that in those days, no ruler was above the danger of revolt and
murder and such insurgencies and uprisings caused untold miseries
and sufferings to the population at large. The revolts of the Persians,
Shiites and Ubaidites never ceased to occur. When Genghis Khan was
acquainted with these ways and practices throughout the conquered
territories, he used this device to create awe and fear in his subjects
and it paid him dividends.

The Mongols of that time had conquered the entire Asian continent
and some parts of Europe except Iraq, Arabia and India. The Islamic
States suffered most at the hands of the Mongols and their swords
Killed large numbers of Muslims. At times, it appeared that Islam
would go out of existence but Allah Almighty saved His Religion
and only the deviated Muslims were overtaken by the calamity.
With the passage of time, the anti-Islamic force of the Mongols
surrendered to the mighty moral and spiritual forces of Islam. The
swords, which were used to wipe out all traces of Islam, were now
being used to guard it. When Christianity made an attempt to turn
the Mongols might and magnificence towards itself the Mongols
found nothing in it to attract an ambitious and adventurous people.
Mongols were, in truth, like a clean slate concerning religion and
faith and had nothing against others. Allah Almighty had taken the
Mongols out of the mountains to make a victorious entry into Asia

306 The Hi istory of Isiam

and to become civilized and enlightened. This is a splendid sign of
the truth of Islam that it has the power to cast its impact both on the
victor and the vanquished.

Ogdai Khan

After the demise of Genghis Khan his elder son, Ogdai Khan
succeeded him while his brothers took charge of their respective
territories as allotted by Genghis Khan. Two years later, Ogdai Khan
invited his brother to join him ina feast and other festivities. At the
end of the celebrations, Ogdai Khan said addressing his brothers, “1
now abdicate the throne and you all are at liberty to choose someone
else as your Great Khan”. But Chogatai Khan and the other brothers
and commanders insisted on him to continue as emperor. They seated
him on the throne and worshipped the sun according to their practice.
Hatu Khan, the son of Juchi Khan and grandson, Guyuk Khan and
Mungku Khan, the sons of Tolui Khan were commissioned to invade
Russia, Cherkessia (southwestern Russia) and Belgrade. These princes
conquered all those countries after fighting long campaigns over
seven years. The commander Arghun was then entrusted the duty of
rehabilitating the cities of Khurasan, which were once devastated by
the Mongols.

Ogdai Khan, the son of Genghis Khan was very sober and gentle. He
paid heed to welfare programs and developmental plans for his
subjects at large. He was particularly very sympathetic to the
Muslims. He held them in high esteem and paid them special
attention. Taking a bath by diving into the water was a major crime
according to the Mongol law. Ogdai Khan and Chogatai Khan were
going together somewhere. They noticed a Muslim having bath ina
river. Chogatai Khan issued an order to have him executed. Ogdai
Khan immediately ordered to arrest the Muslim and have him
executed in full view of the public. Ogdai Khan then met the Muslim
in private and advised him to say that he had a purse full of gold coins
which he wanted to hide under the water for fear of robbers and that
was his sole purpose for entering the river. Ogdai Khan then hada
1 purse dropped into the river at the spot where the Muslim was
bathing. When the accused Muslim was brought for execution, he

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 307

advanced the same argument as was instructed by Ogdai Khan.
Following his statement, men were sent in search of the purse and it
was found. In this way, the truth of the statement of the Muslim was
established and Ogdai Khan set the Muslim free along with the purse
and with a few others by way of reward for his truthfulness.

Once a certain person came to Ogdai Khan and said, “Last night I saw
Genghis Khan in dream. He told me to convey to Ogdai Khan my
utmost desire that the Muslims must be wiped off of the surface of the
earth without any delay.” Ogdai Khan said to him, “Do you know the
language of the Mongois?” He said, “I know only Persian and can
speak and understand this language alone.” Thereupon Ogdai Khan
said, “Genghis Khan knew the Mongol language and could neither
speak nor understand Persian. How did you know what he said?”
Saying this Ogdai Khan ordered that he be killed for he was a liar, and
ne was put to death on the Spot.

11 was a common opinion about Ogdai Khan that, even though he had
not confessed Islam openly he had secretly embraced it by
acknowledging its power and virtues. His capital was Karakorum
where he had stored the gems and jewels and other possessions they
had collected asa result of their pillaging and plundering all over the
world. But the proverbial generosity of Ogdai Khan attracted men
from far off places like Khurasan and Syria to Karakorum who would
come back rich and prosperous. The atrocities and bloodshed from
which the father had collected phenomenal wealth the son distributed
it among the people with exemplary generosity, kindness and
sympathy. In consequence of this the awe and terror of the inhuman
treatment and wanton behavior of the Mongols turned into love for
Ogdai Khan. Even though Genghis Khan laid the foundation of the
Mongol Empire, it was, in truth, Ogdai Khan who lent stability and
Solidity to it.

Guyuk Khan

When the end of Ogdai Khan came _ his son, Guyuk Khan was far
away from Karakorum. Thus, in accordance with the Mongol
Practice, they gave the throne to Turkina the widow of Ogdai Khan
So that the empire could be spared any trouble: When Guyuk Khan

308 The History of Islam

returned to Karakorum, he spoke nothing about the throne
following the Mongol practice and the Torah of Genghis and passed
his days like a common person. After sometime Turkina sent
invitations to the kings and rulers all over the world to attend a
great occasion. The Kings of Khurasan, Persia, Kipchak, Rome,
Baghdad, and Syria sent their ambassadors as their representatives.
The Caliph of Baghdad sent his Chief Qadi Fakhruddin and Amir
Arghun came from Khurasan, while Sultan Ruknuddin Seljuk came
from the Seljuk Sultanate of Rome (modern Turkey), Shahabuddin
and Shams from Ala-Mut and Qahistan and envoys from the
European kings. Two thousand camps were pitched for the Muslim
guests; this let us know the scale of the celebration and the number
of visitors and participants. Now the question of choosing a worthy
man for the throne was raised. All men present on the occasion
chose Guyuk Khan for the job. Mungku Khan, the son of Tolui Khan
caught hold of the hand of Guyuk Khan, made him sit on the throne
and put the crown on his head. Guyuk Khan’s wife was a Christian
woman; therefore, Christian representatives received special attention

and honor. However, the representatives of the Batiniyah sect were
turned out with disgrace.

He showed hospitality to the Muslims too. But the Christians made an
all out attempt to make Guyuk Khan hate the Muslims. At last, they
succee.ed in causing Guyuk Khan to write an edict enjoining all the
commanders to rise as one man to wipe out the Mustims from the face
of the earth. When he came out after putting his signature and seal on
the order, his hunting dogs charged at him and chewed his testicles.
Although Guyuk Khan remained alive, he was seriously injured and
from that day on the Christians were terrified and they could not
muster courage to oppose the Muslims.

Death Of Guyuk Khan

A short time later Guyuk Khan went to Samarkand and died there.
When Ogdai Khan was alive, his younger brother-and the youngest
son of Genghis Khan, Tolui Khan lived with him and was. the
commander of his army. Tolui Khan loved Ogdai Khan very much.
Once Ogdai Khan fell ill, Tolui Khan Prayed to God to either heal him

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 8 309

or give him death instead of Ogdai. From that time, Ogdai Khan
began to recover and Tolui Khan's health started deteriorating. At last,
Ogdai Khan was completely cured and Tolui Khan passed away.
Tolui Khan left his four sons behind namely, Mungku Khan, Kublai
Khan, Arigh Boke and Hulagu Khan. Ogdai Khan loved them most.
Guyuk Khan also showed his kindness to them all. After the demise of
Guyuk Khan, Batu Khan, son of fuchi Khan, the king of Qabchag was
considered strong and wise. The majority of them turned to Batu Khan
for the choice of the Great Khan however, some of them opposed his
right to choose but the choice of Batu Khan prevailed and Mungku
Khan came to the throne with a broad consensus.

Mungku Khan

Mungku Khan entrusted the reign of Khitai (northern China) to his
brother Kublai Khan and sent another brother Hulagu Khan towards
Persia at the head of a huge army. Mungku Khan came to the throne
in 648 A.H. and treated the Muslims kindly and favorably.

Death Of Mungku Khan

Mungku Khan died in 655 A.H. after reigning for 7 years. A year
before his death Mungku Khan wrote to the Chinese king to obey him
and invaded China upon his refusal.

Kublai Khan

Mungku Khan died in Chankad during the same journey and his
brother Kublai Khan, who had accompanied Mungku Khan on the
JCumey was enthroned in Chankad right away. On receipt of this
‘ews, Arigh Boke advanced his claim on.the throne at Karakorum and
declared himself the king of the Mongols. When Kublai Khan turned
‘o him, Arigh Boke came out to meet him with his army. The two
brothers faced each other at Kuluran and Arigh Boke was defeated
after a fierce battle. But he escaped unhurt. Kublai Khan entered

Takorum and sat on the throne. Arigh Boke collected troops in

tai (northern China) and rose again to fight against his brother but
‘asted defeated once again and fled to Kashgar (city in western China)

310 , The History of Islam

and attacked Kublai Khan again. In short, fighting between the two
brothers spread over a period of four years. At last, Arigh Boke was
arrested and put in prison where he breathed his last.

After coming to throne in 655 A.H. Kublai Khan sent orders to Hulagu
Khan that he was responsible for looking after the territory from
across the Oxus river to Syria as the ruler. As a consequence of long
battles between Arigh Boke and Kublai Khan, the central rule of the
Mongols and awe of the Karakorum court was diminished to a great
extent and the heads of a number of provinces threw off the burden of
the central rule and declared their sovereignty. These events happened
at a time when a number of princes of the Genghis Khan dynasty had
embraced Islam and Islam was spreading among the Mongols.

Getting rid of Arigh Boke, Kublai Khan invaded China and won the
whole of China after a protracted battle. He then laid the foundation
of a new city named Ta Tu (later Pei-p’ing corrupted to Peking by
westerners and now known as Beijing) and shifted his capital from

Karakorum to this city and forced Siam, Burma, and Japan to pay
tribute.

Kublai Khan appointed four ministers belonging to four different
religions one among them being a Muslim named Amir Ahmad
Banakti. All other Mongol rulers acknowledged the sovereignty of
Kublai Khan. At this time, the Mongol rule spread from China to
Europe. Muslim rule was then weak and unimpressive. The
Christians, Magians and Jews, after getting access to the Mongol court,
made ‏للد‎ out efforts to instigate the ruler against the Muslims. Abaqa
Khan, the son of Hulagu Khan once wrote to Kublai Khan from
Khurasan: “The Jews and the Magians have informed me that the
Qur'an, the Book of the Muslims enjoins upon them to kill the
Polytheists wherever they find them. What's your opinion about this
injunction? In case, the Muslims are bound by their faith to kill us
without discrimination their very existence is a menace to our own.”
Kublai called some Muslim religious scholars and sought their
Opinion saying “Does your Quran contain such an injunction?.” “Yes

there is such an order inthe Qur'an.” Thereupon Kublai Khan said,
“Why don’t you kill us?” They said, “It is because we don't have
power to do so. We shall start killing you when we get such a power.”

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 311

At this Kublai Khan said, “Since we have such a power at present, we
should kill you.” Saying this he had the Muslim scholars killed and
issued orders to kill the Muslims wherever they were found. Having
heard this Badruddin Baihagi and Hamiduddin Samarkandi reached
the court of Kublai Khan and asked the reason behind his orders for
the mass killing of the Muslims. Kublai Khan said to them, “What do
you mean by “kill the idol worshippers.” Both the scholars explained,
“Allah Almighty had commanded His Prophet and his Companions to
kill the idol-worshipers because they had thirst for Muslim blood. It
was just a safety device. But this order doesn’t apply to you for you
hold God Almighty as one and write the name of God at the head of

your orders and edicts.” Hearing this Kublai Khan grew happy and
abrogated his first order.

This event proves beyond doubt that Mongols had a very sensitive
feeling regarding religion. But they kept coming close to islam with
mental development and cultural progress and all efforts to present a
distorted view of Islam fell flat on the ground.

Death Of Kublai Khan

Kublai Khan died at 73 after reigning for 35 years and was succeeded
by his grandson, Temur Khan who came to the throne in China.
During his reign, the publi¢ administration suffered a setback and
complete disorder. Temur the Great Khan died in 700 A.H. Although
a number of rulers succeeded him one after another following the final
departure of Temur Khan, it was more a formality than actual rule.
The Mongol empire had, in fact, ceased to exist from the death of
Temur Khan.

Hulagu Khan

When Mungku Khan took charge of the Mongol empire in Karakorum,

teceived the complaint that Batiniyah Ismaili’s mischief had
crossed all limits and they hated everyone holding a high position like
kings, commanders, high officials and men in power. They passed
sleepless nights owing to their acts of murder and terror. Along with
this he also got the news that the Caliph of Baghdad, although
Considered a weak ruler, could prove formidable to the Mongols by

312 1716 History of Islam

virtue of his glory and magnificence, if he rose to face the challenge.
Mungku Khan sent his brother Hulagu Khan at the head of a huge
army of one hundred and twenty thousand men and instructed him
not to launch an attack if the Caliph meant peace but to fight him to
the finish in case he showed signs of belligerency. Moreover, he was
asked to annihilate the Ismailites and their ruler by attacking the Ala-
Mut Fort. Amir Ichol, son of Amir Qarachar was ordered to accompany © 1
the army as commander.

Hulagu Khan reached Khurasan and [ran in 651 A.H. The Rulers of
Azerbaijan, Shirvan (part of modern day Azerbaijan) and Girjistan
presented themselves before Hulagu Khan and offered their allegiance
to him. Arghun Aga Obrat proceeded from Khurasan to meet Mungku
Khan. Hulagu Khan arrived in Khurasan and, being acquainted with
the prevailing situation, paid attention to the disturbances created by
the atheist Ismailites and went on seizing their forts one by one. Ala
Mut Fort fell in Dhul Qadah 656 A.H. Ismailite ruler, Shah Ruknuddin
Khurshah was arrested and produced before Hulagu Khan, who sent
him to Mungku Khan in Karakorum with the instruction that he
should be done away with on the way. His order was implemented
and Ruknuddin’s wife, children and relatives were all put to death.
However, Khawaja Nasiruddin Tusi who was one of the courtiers of
Khurshah received a position as a courtier of Hulagu Khan by virtue |
of his flattery and cleverness. Alll the treasiires and buried Possessions
of the Ismailites were plundered by the Mongols and their reign met
its doom.

Shortly after that, Nasiruddin Tusi persuaded Hulagu Khan to invade
Baghdad and the Minister of the Caliph of Baghdad, Algami
conspired with Hulagu Khan through Nasiruddin, which resulted in
the devastation of Baghdad. Hulagu returned from Baghdad to his
capital Maragheh laden with gems and jewels and immense valuables
and slave-girls and sent all this to Mungku Khan in Karakorum.
Atabak S’ad bin Abu Bakr, the ruler of Persia, Badruddin Lulu, the ruler
of Mosul, and Sultan Azizuddin Seljuk, the ruler of the Seljuk Sultanate
of Rome (modern Turkey) appeared before Hulagu and offered their
allegiance. In Ramadan 657 A.H. Hulagu sent some renowned
Generals at the head of an army as vanguards towards Syria. He then

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 313

quering Nasibain, Harran, and Halab massacring,
d Damascus and won Damascus in the same way.
He then put Syria under his governor Kasuga and turned towards
Khurasan. Shortly after that, the Egyptian army invaded Syria and
fought back the Mongol troops. Hulagu was enraged and decided to
restore Syria but the death of Mungku Khan stopped him. During the
same time discord began between Hulagu and Berke Khan the son of
Juchi Khan the ruler of the Kipchak Khanate (the Golden Horde).

It is said that a close relative of Berke Khan lived with Hulagu Khan.
Berke who was killed by Hulaqu. Khan became infuriated and
remarked, “Hulagu Khan killed the Caliph of Baghdad and massacred
a large number of Muslims without any rhyme or reason. I shall
avenge him for all his crimes.” He then dispatched an army against
him and Hulagu‘s army was defeated. However, the fight continued
until at last, Hulagu Khan himself led his army against Berke Khan in
661 A.H. and won the battle. Shortly after that, Berke Khan launched a
massive attack on Hulagu Khan and gave him a decisive defeat. This
ignominious defeat left Hulagu Khan dejected and frustrated.

moved ahead con
ple and reache

Hulagu Khan’s Death

After losing the battle to Berke Khan, Hulagu Khan sent a General to
Syria to bring tribes of the Kara Tartar to be dispatched against Berke
Khan. The General went to Syria and winning the Kara Tatar tribes to
his side, revolted against Hulagu Khan. When Hulagu received this
shocking news in Maragheh, his capital, he suffered such a deep
frustration that he died in 663 A.H. ina state of coma, at the age of 48
years and after reigning for 8 years. In Maragheh, he set up a
planetarium with the help of Nasiruddin Tusi and other scientists. He
gave the reign of Iraq and Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern
Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan) to his son Abagha Khan
and Azerbaijan to his second son. Dayar-e-Bakr and Dayar-e-Rabi’a he
ee to Saidoz, the ruler of Turan and appointed Khawaja Shamsuddin
‏مه‎ Jawini as his Minister. Ata al-Mulk Alauddin, the son of
Wad ein Jawini was made the ruler of Baghdad. Hulagu Khan
Insteed in a strange manner according to the Mongol practice.
Ate oO! a normal grave, a grave room was made ready for burial.

putting the dead body in the grave room, a few young girls,

314 The History of Islam

1 arments and ornaments, were brought to the grave
eS ee the dead man and be his companion in solitude.
Following this, the opening of the grave Toom was firmly closed
leaving the beautiful young girls to die with the dead man. Sultan
Balban ruled over India during the reign of Hulagu Khan. Although
he used to keep himself. acquainted with the events and affairs
taking place under Balban he never attacked India. Although some
Mongol Generals invaded India from time to time the credit goes to
their leaders who repulsed their attacks every time. At a time when
the entire world of Islam was overtaken by disturbances and
disruptions, India was one country where the Islamic rule was
strong and mighty and so this country remained safe from the
Mongol’s expansionist designs.

Abagha Khan

Shortly after the death of Hulagu Khan, the nobles and courtiers
convened a meeting of the Mongol celebrities and chose Hulagu Khan's
son Abagha Khan for the throne. However, Abagha Khan refused the
throne in the absence of permission from the Mongol Emperor Kublai
Khan. He yielded to the insistence of the Mongol court and came to the
throne on Ramadan 2, 663 AH. He lavished rewards on Mongol
Generals and soldiers and made his brother Bashmut the ruler of
Shirvan (part of modem day Azerbaijan), Mazandaran (historic region
of northern Iran, bordering the Caspian Sea on the north) and Khurasan
to his next brother, Teshen. Rome (modern day Turkey) was given to
Tuhan Bahadur, the son of Sonjak. The territories near Rome (modern
day Turkey) were given to Turan, the son of Jalair Darlakin. Arghun
Aga was given the duties of Finance and Khawaja Shamsuddin was
made Prime Minister and Arghun Khan was appointed the instructor
of his son Mehrtaq Nawyan Birlas.

Abagha Khan resumed fighting against Berke Khan who died during
these battles. The Generals and relatives of the Mongol rulers targeted
Abagha Khan on all sides. Baraq Khan Chogatai captured Khurasan
and Abagha Khan defeated him after a series of fights and, gradually,
te-established his rule. Attempts to expand to the southwest failed

and every time the Mongo! arm: clashed with the Egypti i
tasted defeat. 8 ‏ا[ 0 ةا‎

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 315

Abagha Khan’s Death

Abagha Khan died in 680 A.H. He was a great devotee of Sheikh S‘adi

Shirazi and Jalaluddin Rumi and would often attend them. His son,
Nakudar Aghlan, succeeded him.

Nakudar Aghlan

Nakudar Aghlan called Ahmad Khan had embraced Islam during
the time of his father. He adopted the appellation of Ahmad Khan
shortly after coming to throne and appointed Sheikh Kamaluddin
Abdur Rahman al-Rafe’i as his Minster. Sultan Ahmed provided all
facilities for the Muslims and conferred upon them high posts. He
obliterated the blasphemous rites and Practices of the Mongols and
made an all out effort to Propagate Islam. With the efforts of Ahmad
Khan, other Mongols also came to the fold of Islam. With an eye to
the harm caused to Mongol’s glory and leadership at the hands of

Ahmad Khan, as a Muslim ruler, his brother Arghun Khan started to
plot a revolt against him.

Martyrdom Of Nakudar Aghian

Arghun Khan, the son of Abagha Khan brought other courtiers and
Generals around to his view and revolted against Ahmad Khan.
Sultan Ahmad’s army also joined hands with the conspirators, with
the result Sultan Ahmad Khan was arrested and martyred after a
reign of 3 years. This event took place in 683 A.H.

Arghun Khan

Arghun Khan came to throne and appointed S’adullah, a Jew as his
Prime Minister and issued orders, at the instance of his Prime
Minister to kill Muslim religious scholars in every city under his
tule. In the wake of this order, thousands of Muslim scholars were
Put to death, Arghun was deeply devoted to a Hindu ascetic and
Feceived from him a herbal medicine to extend his age, but it

tTesulted in producing one disease after another and he succumbed
to disease in 690 A.H.

316 The History of islam

Gaykhatu Khan

Arghun Khan (son of Abagha Khan) was succeeded by his brother
Gaykhatu Khan. The first use of currency notes in 693 A.H. is a
notable event of his reign. The Mongols called it “Yut.” It was a small
piece of paper bearing Testimoney of Faith (There is no God but Allah
and Muhammad is His Messenger) on its both sides and the name of
the king and the value thereof were written below. This created a
great outcry throughout the country and caused a bad effect on trade
and commerce. The people looked upon the piece of paper with
amazement and remarked: “How can we accept this piece of paper
instead of gold coin.” Thus, due to strong opposition from his subjects,
Gaykhatu Khan discontinued its circulation.

Gaykhatu Khan’s Martyrdom

Mongol commanders martyred this king too for his attachment to
Islam.

Baydu Khan

Baydu Khan, the cousin of Gaykhatu Khan succeeded him. He was the
grandson of Hulagu Khan. Arghun Aga Awirat, who ruled over
Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern
Afghanistan) for about 30 years on behalf of the Mongol kings, died in
696 A. H. Prior to his death his son Amir Nawruz Beg went to Prince
Ghazan Khan, son of Arghun Khan, grandson of Abagha Khan, joined
his court and persuaded him to accept Islam. Ghazan Khan was then
the Governor of Khurasan. Since Ghazan Khan, considered himself the
rightful heir to the throne it became the Point of discord between
Baydu Khan and Ghazan Khan. Led and persuaded by Nawruz Beg,
Ghazan Khan called for Sadruddin Hamwi and Ghazan Khan
embraced Islam at his hand; his Islamic name was Mahmud Khan. In
the wake of his acceptance of Islam, many other Mongol Commanders
became Muslim. Following this, the gulf of differences between Baydu

Khan and Sultan Mahmud (Ghazan Khan) wideried so much that it
resulted in fighting and killing.

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 317

Assassination Of Baydu Khan
Sultan Mahmud Khan won the battle and had Baydu Khan assassinated
and he came to the throne in 694 A.H.

Mahmud Khan Ghazan Khan

Sultan Mahmud Ghazan Khan was the son of Arghun Khan and the
grandson of Abagha Khan. Having come to throne, Mahmud Khan
appointed Nawruz Beg as his Minister and Commander and engraved
Kalimah-e-Taiyabah on the coins and ordered to write “Allah, the Most
High” at the head of the Seal and on all edicts. A short time later, he sent
Nawruz Beg to Khurasan as the Governor. Two Mongol commanders,
named Istimur and Arsalan agreed on a plan to do away with Suitan
Mahmud Khan and Nawruz Beg and the same date was fixed for the
event by each of them. However, their plan failed and one was killed
by Sultan Mahmud Khan and another by Nawruz Beg. Following this
some commanders and ministers conspired to turn the king against
Nawruz Beg by inventing stories about Nawruz Beg’s secret plans to
revolt against him. As a result of constant conspiratorial campaigns,
Sultan Mahmud brought about the death and destruction of Nawruz
Beg and his family members. The Minister, Khawaja Sadruddin also
met his doom at the hands of the same conspirators and Khawaja
Rashid uddin took his place. The event took place in 699 A.H.

When the situation returned to normal, Sultan Mahmud Ghazan Khan
wrote to his counterpart in Egypt that since his ancestors had
conquered Syria and it remained occupied by his ancestors and the
Egyptian army had usurped it, it was better to vacate the territory and
offer allegiance to him. But the Egyptian reply was rather degrading.
Moreover, the Egyptians came out and invaded some of the territories
under the occupation of Sultan Mahmud Ghazan. The Egyptian troops
even desecrated mosques and massacred the Muslims indiscriminately.
Sultan Mahmud Khan invaded Syria at the head of 90 thousand
troops in 699 A.H. The Egyptian king also came out to combat the
Mongols. The battle broke out in Hims and the result was a defeat for
the Egyptians. Mahmud Khan then occupied Syria and Damascus and
appointed his ‘viceroys to govern them. The Egyptian king invaded

318 The History of Islam

Syria once again and the Mongol commanders in Syria fought valiantly
but conceded defeat and Taitaq, the Mongol commander was arrested
while fighting gallantly. Hearing this Mahmud Khan resolved to
invade Syria once again. However, news came to him that Juchi’s
offspring ruling over Kipchak Khanate (the Golden Horde) had staked
their claim to Persia and Khurasan. Sultan Mahmud Khan changed his
mind and he never had the opportunity again to turn towards Syria.

Death Of Mahmud Ghazan Khan

Sultan Mahmud Ghazan died in 703 A.H. During the tenure of this
king Islam flourished among the Mongols and the Muslims were
largely benefited from his favor. On the eve of his death, he made a

will that he would be succeeded by his brother Oljeitu, known as
Muhammad Khudabanda.

Sultan Muhammad Khudabanda Oljeitu

He came to the throne in Dhul Hijjah, 703 A.H. and adopted
“Muhammad Khudabanda’” as his appellation. All the great commanders
greeted him on the eve of his enthronement. Soon after becoming the
king, he ordered to enforce Islamic codes all over the country and to
obliterate all anti-Islamic practices. His rule gained quick popularity and
he was acknowledged as a sovereign ruler from Russia, Khwarizm
(territories of present day Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan), Belgrade,
Seljuk Sultanate of Rome, Syria to Karakorum, Sind and Iraq.

His Death

The noble and pious king breathed his last on the night of Eid-ul-Fitr,
716 AH. after reigning for 13 years. He had founded a new city
named Sultania, made it his capital and was buried in the same city.
His son Abu Sayeed Bahadur succeeded him.

Abu Sayeed Bahadur Khan

Abu Sayeed was 14 at the time of his enthronement. Although feuds
erupted among the Mongol commanders, they controlled their
differences knowing the consequences. Sultan Abu Sayeed appointed

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 319

commander Chaupan as his Prime Minister and enhanced his power
and position. Commander Hasan Jalair, the son of Commander
Chaupan was married to a woman named Baghdad Khatun. Sultan Abu
Sayeed fell in love with this woman and he wanted her to be divorced
by commander Hasan. But commander Chaupan did not agree to this
and their differences took such a turn that Commander Chaupan rose in
revolt and occupied Khurasan. Herat was then ruled over by Chogatai
dynasty and they had a strong hatred against the Hulagu dynasty.
However, one of the Chogatai commanders named Turma Shirin Khan
was brought around to Commander Chaupan’s view and gave his
active support. Sultan Abu Sayeed Bahadur Khan prepared for a fight,
and after a series of encounters, Commander Chaupan was arrested and
assassinated. His son, Commander Hasan Jalair divorced Baghdad
Khatun and gave Sultan Abu Sayeed an opportunity to marry her.

Abu Sayeed’s Death

Uzbek Khan, the king of Kipchak Khanate (the Golden Horde)
invaded Persia with a huge army. Sultan Abu Sayeed also proceeded
to take on the enemy. But he fell ill at Shirvan (part of modern day
Azerbaijan) because of the unfavorable climate and succumbed to it
on Rabia al-Awwal 13, 736 A.H. Since he was without children,
anarchy and troubles of the worst nature overtook his kingdom.

Arpa Khan

Arpa Khan came to the throne with the common consent of the Mongol
commanders. He proclaimed that he needed no comforts and luxuries in
life and preferred a mace toa golden waistband, a felt cap to a jeweled
crown. Since he was about to face Uzbek Khan's force, Arpa Khan was
bent on making preparations courageously and wisely and he deployed
troops to stop the invaders. Meanwhile, Uzbek Khan received shocking
News of an emerging insurgency in the Kipchak Khanate (the Golden
Horde). He left the capital to put down the revolt. Then Amir Ali rose
up against Arpa Khan. Amir Ali succeeded in his attempt particularly
because Arpa Khan had started killing the offspring of Hulagu Khan
wherever he found them. Most of the commanders grew disheartened
with these new developments. Two different camps developed one
Supporting Arpa Khan and one supporting Amir Ali.

320 1 The History of Islarn

Assassination Of Arpa Khan

The two forces faced one another in 736 A.H. It resulted in the arrest
and assassination of Arpa Khan. After achieving success, Amir Ali
seated Musa Khan, the son of Baydu Khan and the great-grandson of
Hulagu Khan, on the throne.

Musa Khan

With the enthronement of Musa Khan, the power and influence of
Amir Ali Aviran and other Avirat commanders took firm root and

flourished. Amir Hasan, the Governor of Rome (modern day Turkey),

invaded Musa Khan, fought against him and killed Amir Ali.

Defeated and fmistrated Musa Khan was succeeded by Sultan

Muhammad Khan, the son of Qatlaq Khan the descendant of Hulagu '
Khan. His rule was also weak like that of Musa Khan. A few others

succeeded each other from the Hulagu dynasty but only in name. By

744 A.H., Hulagu Khan’‘s descendants ceased to rule and the countries

conquered by Hulagu Khan came to be ruled by a number of other

sovereign rulers.

Progency Of Juchi Khan

Juchi Khan was the eldest son of Genghis Khan. Soon after conquering
Khwarizm (territories of present day Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan),
Juchi Khan won Kipchak Khanate (the Golden Horde) and settled
there. The other sons of Genghis Khan were not sympathetic to Juchi
Khan. Like him, his country also fell far off from the center of Mongol
authority. Most of Juchi Khan’s descendants were called Uzbek. Juchi
Khan expired during the lifetime of Genghis Khan, who then
entrusted his vast territory to.his son Batu Khan who was eldest
among Juchi Khan’s seven sons.

Batu Khan

When Batu Khan marched from Kipchak to invade Khazr and Russia,.
Ogdai Khan, ihe son of Genghis Khan ordered his son Guyuk ‘Khan,
Tolui Khan, the son of Mungku Khan and a son of Chogatai Khan to

4

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 321

accompany Batu Khan on his mission. Batu Khan first conquered the
whole of Russia and attacked Moscow and won it before invading
Poland and occupying it. Being informed of the advancing troops of
Batu Khan, the European powers concentrated their army in a vast
field to collectively combat their common enemy. Batu Khan had a
large number of Muslims as well in his army. When Batu Khan came
to know that the Christians had collected troops several times more
than the Mongol army had, he ordered the Muslim section to assemble
at a place to invoke victory. The Battle broke out thereafter and the
Christians were ignominiously defeated, and Batu Khan conquered
the whole of Hungary. Batu Khan founded a new city in Europe and
named it Sarai (near modern day Volgograd). The rest of Batu Khan’‘s

life passed in conquering and administering European territories and
he died in 654 A.H.

Berke Khan

His brother Berke Khan succeeded Batu Khan. Batu Khan was a
Muslim in name like Genghis Khan but Berke Khan openly embraced
Islam, with the result that the Muslims enjoyed peace and safety from
the Mongols’ excesses during his tenure. Hulagu Khan killed a
telative of Berke Khan, he was terribly enraged at this action, and
Berke Khan sent Buga Khan at the head of thirty thousand troops to
invade Hulagu’s country. Hulagu also sent a commander to face the
enemy, but he was defeated. Hulagu Khan's army was defeated at
first but Berke Khan's forces were later repulsed.

Thirty persons among the progeny of Juchi Khan came to the throne
One after the other. Berke Khan was succeeded by his son Mungku
Temur Khan who was later succeeded by Tugtai Khan. A fierce battle
Was fought between Tugtai Khan and Tugai Khan and Tugtai Khan
Was victorious and embarked ona peaceful administration. He then
Wrote to Ghazan Khan that Hulagu Khan and his descendants had
annexed Azerbaijan within their country although, according to the
allotment of Genghis Khan, Juchi Khan's offspring had a right to the
territory, it is therefore proper for this territory to be handed over to
him (Tugtai) otherwise; he had the power to capture it by force.

zan Khan replied in the negative and expressed his readiness ta

322 The History of Islam

take on the invaders. But the situation was saved as Tugtai-Khan
changed his mind.

Tugtai Khan was succeeded by his son, Tughril Khan and his son,
Uzbek Khan came to the throne after his demise. Uzbek Khan is
renown as the founder of the Uzbek tribe, which was named after
him. Uzbek Khan had a large number of descendants and all of them
were known as Uzbek. The Uzbeks invaded Sultan Abu Sayeed
Bahadur Khan, the king of Persia in 718 A.H.; they plundered some of
the Persian area and returned. Uzbek Khan launched another attack
on Persia in 735 A.H. Sultan Abu Sayeed came out to face the
invading force but died on the way and Arpa Khan came to the
throne. Uzbek Khan abandoned his campaign and returned and died
after a long reign.

Jani Beg Khan Uzbek then came to the throne. The progeny of Juchi
Khan, who as we have stated are known as Uzbek broke away from
the central rule and set up their own separate kingdoms. Jani Beg
Khan was succeeded by his son Bairwi Khan. A king named Shadi
Khan‘ ruled over Tabriz in 809 A.H. Urs Khan Uzbek was a
contemporary of Temur Sahabe Qur’an (the companion of the
Qur’an). Urs Khan’s son was Temur Malik Khan Uzbek whose
successor was Tugtamish Khan Uzbek who ruled over the Kipchak
Khanate (the Golden Horde) who was defeated by Temur Sahabe
Qur'an. Faulad Khan Uzbek conquered and ruled over Turkistan in
815 A.H. Sultan Sayeed Mirza Shahrukh married a girl of his family.
Muhammad Khan Uzbek came to the throne after Faulad Khan.
Burraq Khan Uzbek, from the progeny of Urs Khan, took help from
Ulagh Beg Temuri and attacked Muhammad Khan Uzbek and
occupied Turkistan. Ulagh Beg Khan Temuri and Burraq Khan then
clashed with each other and Ulagh Beg was defeated. As a result of
this defeat, Sultan Sayeed Mirza Shahrukh Khan attacked and
punished Ulagh Khan. Following the invasion of Mirza Shahrukh
Khan, Burraq Khan returned from Samarkand. However, Sultan
Mahmud Khan and Buraq Khan were later assassinated and with this
ended the Uzbek Empire.

In 855 A.H., Sultan Abul Khair Khan and Badaq Khan Uzbek captured
Samarkand and established their rule. Abul Khair Khan’s son was

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 323

Badaq Khan and Badaq Khan’s son was Abul Fath Muhammad Khan,
who was the contemporary of Zahiruddin Babar. This Sultan Abul
Fath Muhammad Khan Uzbek is also known as Shebani Khan Uzbek
who was killed fighting with Ismail Safwi. He was a gallant fighter
and had dislodged Babar from Turkistan and Farghona (eastern
Uzbekistan). Sultan Abul Fath Khan Uzbek was later seated on the
throne by the Uzbeks.

Jani Beg has found mention above; his son was Iskander Khan whose
son was Abdullah Khan, who defeated the Persians decisively.
Abdullah Khan Uzbek was the contemporary of king Akbar of India.
He was also in correspondence with Akbar. Abdullah Khan died in
1006 A.H. and was succeeded by his son Abdul Momin Khan but was,
within a few days, killed at the hands of his uncle, Rustam Sultan.
Following this event the Uzbek kingdom was torn into pieces.
Abdullah Khan’s sister's son Wali Muhammad Khan occupied
Turkistan after Abdul Momin Khan, entrusted Mawaraunnahr
(between the Amu [Oxus] and Syr rivers in modern Uzbekistan and
Kazakhstan) to Imam Quli Khan and Badakhshan (in present day
Afghanistan) to his sister's son Nazar Muhammad Khan. Within a
short time, Wali Muhammad Khan was dislodged: by Nazar
Muhammad Khan. He took refuge with King Abbas of Persia. The
Uzbeks had previously established a kingdom in Khwarizm
(territories of present day Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) but it was
AOt strong or impressive.

Offspring Of Chogatai Khan

Genghis Khan had given Turkistan, Khurasan, Ghazni and the entire
territory around river Indus to his sun Chogatai Khan and made
Commander Qarachar Birlas his commander-in-chief. After the death
of Genghis Khan, Chogatai Khan always remained loyal and faithful
to his younger brother Ogdai Khan. Chogatai Khan was very brave
and wise. He died in 640 A.H. Following the death of Chogatai Khan
Prime Minister Qarachar seated Qarabalaku Khan, the grandson of
togatai Khan on the throne. Guyuk Khan, son of Ogdai Khan
ted to this arrangement on the plea that how could the grandson
enthroned in the Presence of Chogatai Khan‘s son Maisu Mungku

324 ___ The History of islarn

Khan. Thus, Maisu Mungku Khan was enthroned by dethroning
Qarabalaku Khan. But, shortly after the demise of Maisu Mungku
Khan, Qarabalaku Khan was brought to the throne once again. After
his death, his wife Warghana Khatun was seated on the throne and
Alghu Khan of Chogatai tribe succeeded her. But, he too died after

reigning for one year. His son Mubarak Shah Chogatai then became
the king of the Mongols.

Chogatai tribe joined hands with Tolui Khan’s progeny in all their
campaigns and adventures even though these two tribes were rivals in
the past. The progeny of Tolui Khan, son of Genghis Khan had
attained utmiost greatness and grandeur due to Hulagu Khan’s style of
governance and Chogatai Khan’s progeny had fallen behind in this
field. Even though the Chogatai kept their control over Herat and its
adjoining territories, they by time, conceded to the authority and
supremacy of Hulagu Khan and his progeny and sometimes declared
theix own sovereignty. Among them Sultan Ghayasuddin Muhammad
Buraq Khan, son of Maisun Tuwan Khan had attained much fame and
came into serious conflict with Abagha Khan in Khurasan. His
descendant Turma Shirin Khan came to the throne and invaded
Qandahar. He also fought against Amir Hasan Saldoz in the suburbs
of Ghazni in 716 A-H. and lost the battles. Turma Shirin Khan had also
launched an attack on India. After Turma Shirin Khan his brother,
Faulad Khan became the king of the Chogatai tribes and died in 735,
A.H. He was succeeded by Aghlan, son of Dawa Khan.

During his tenure, Amir Temur Sahabe Qur'an came to the throne of
Khurasan. A series of battles were fought between Temur Sahabe
Quran and Khidr Khawaja Khan. At last, Khidr Khawaja was defeated
and bought peace and safety from Temur by giving his daughter,
Khanam Khan in marriage. Khidr Khawaja Khan was succeeded by
his son Muhammad Khan and then his brother Jahan Aghlan son of
fbn Khidr Khawaja Khan came to throne. Jahan Aghlan was succeeded
by Sher Muhammad Khan who came into conflict with Ulagh Temuni,
King of Khurasan and Mawaraunnahr in which Sher Muhammad
Khan was defeated. Among his descendants were Mahmud Khan and
Ahmad Ulja Khan, sons of Yunus Khan. Zahiruddin Muhammad
Babar sought hetp from these two brothers against Shebani Khan
Uzbek and they gave it, but both the brothers were captured fighting

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 325

on the battlefield. They were produced before Shebani Khan and he set
them free. But both of them conunitted suicide out of shame shortly
after being released and thus the Chogatai dynasty came to an end.

Although Mansur Khan, son of Sultan Ahmad Ulja Khan became the
king of Mongolia it was only in name and the territory was actually
ruled over by Shebani Khan.

The Mongol dynasty may be divided into two parts or classes
Genghisid Mongols and Temuri Mongols. The Genghisid Mongols
have already been mentioned above and will now be summarized. We
will then-discuss the Temuri Mongols.

A Glance At Genghisid Mongols

The greatest event of Islamic world was the devastation of Baghdad
caused by Hulagu Khan. Prior to this, Hulagu’s grandfather Genghis
Khan had reddened Iran and Khurasan with Muslim blood. Their
plunder and carnage had turned the Genghisid Mongols into a curse
and scourge in the eyes of the Muslims. Dynastic rule had germinated
so many ills and paved the way to the throne for such a large number
of unworthy souls that the Islamic character was dreadfully eroded
and Islamic glory was brought down. During this era of depravity,
nothing was practically done to reform the situation and to puta
check on the fail and decline of Islamic values.

By the end of the sixth century Hijri, Islamic rule particularly the
Caliphate of Baghdad had become incorrigible. The Seljuks and other
mighty empires could, in spite of having glory and magnificence, did
not dare to do away with the Caliphate. The creed that none save the
Abbasid dynasty could do any good for the Muslims had gained firm
§tound in Muslim minds. This wrong creed proved very harmful
because dynastic rule had spread over a very long period and almost
Stopped _ the birth of able and worthy rulers. Fortitude, determination,
enterprise and soldierly attributes of Muslims had disappeared. In
Such a precarious state of degeneration, Allah Almighty brought to
the fore unknown and unnoticed, savage and ignorant Mongols to
Punish the unworthy and depraved Muslims and then to inject pure
and fresh blood into the veins of Islam. The Genghisid Mongols,

The History of Islam
326 1

i rson and large-scale bloodshed’ of the
ro ‏اعد اسن 5 2 ب‎ ‘heir own empire and demolished the so-called
caliphate carried by evil and unworthy elements in the name of Islam:
This caliphate was, in truth, a deep scar on the spotless face of Islam.
Islam is a system of governance, which let the uncivilized and
unequipped Muslims conquer the magnificent Empires of Caesar and
Choroes. But the day they renounced the teachings of Islam they kept
falling into the quagmire of disgrace and ignominy. The Mongols won
victories over the Muslims not because they deserved it more; they
did it because Allah Almighty wanted them to become a source of a
tude awakening to the inert and forgetful Believers iri Islam.

The Mongols, as a whole, were neither sympathetic nor antagonistic to
Islam. Even when they developed in them a natural desire to be
acquainted with the teachings of Islam, they accepted what they could
comprehend and rejected outright what lay outside their power of
comprehension. Now it can be safely said that the Muslims gained
more from the Mongols morally and spiritually than they lost
physically and materially. Islamic tule, instead of losing its existence,

was rewarded substantially when the pure and truthful teachings of
Islam subdued their minds and conquered their hearts. The conquerors
were themselves conquered by the

mighty sword of Islamic values.
Countless Mongol swords once raised against Islam became devoted
to the service of the Religion of

Allah Almighty. Had the wild and
wanton conquests, plunder and carnage not been committed by the
dashing and haughty conquerors like Genghis Khan and Hulagu
Khan the might and dominating spirit of Islam which conquered their
hearts in a very short time could not have been comprehended.
Moreover, their forthright feelings and straightforward behavior
allowed Muslim scholars and

Very few historians have
an easy access t
Syria, Egypt,

paid attention to the fact that Islam received
6 Mongolia, China, and Turkistan while the people of
Tripoli, Morocco, fran, Khurasan, and Baluchistan put

Ganghisid Mongols, Turks and Tartar Mongols 327

obstructions in the way of Islam and resisted its entry into their
territories. They turned to Islam only after large-scale bloodshed and
destruction.

Islam had stepped in eastern Turkistan and Tibet during the Caliphate
of Uthman Bin Affan #. Flourishing fast in China and Turkistan Islam
had enveloped the entire population by the very first century Hijrah.
However, conspiratorial activities of the Alwis and the destruction of
the Umayyads had caused damage to the growing tree of Islam.
Moreover, selfish designs and personal rivalries of the Governors
blocked the preaching efforts and the army of Islam and thus lost
attraction for the non-Muslims even though China and Turkistan had
fertile lands for Islam. Seljuk tribes embraced Islam without fear or
greed and did splendid service to Islam. Ghaznavid Turks had entered
the Islamic countries as robbers and plunderers and confessed Islam
of their own. Even today, Islam has a large number of followers in
China and they have all embraced Islam not due to any military
campaign; they are direct descendants of the ancient inhabitants of
China. Genghis Khan and his comrades had victoriously stepped into
Islamic territories but they showed their interest in being acquainted
with the reality of Islam from the very outset. They accepted this
Religion of Truth and served it with sincerity. The offspring of Genghis
Khan also accepted and served Islam through difficulty and ease. It is
3 strange fact that in the countries to the extreme west, Morocco and
Spain they marched victoriously with swords in their hands while in
the countries of the extreme east, China and the Pacific islands traders
and preachers conveyed Islam to the bulk of population. They
Preached the message of Islam both as a vanquished and a victor.

It is human nature that during the days of ignorance, the most suitable
form of governance is autocracy. Democracy in a state of ignorance
can bring only lawlessness, disorder and disruption. The Mongols also
lived in the hills and mountdins like Bedouins and the ignorant. They
had 4 very high concept of a chief or a king. Their leaders wielded so
Much power that the tribes looked upon them in the same position. It
May rather be safely said that king-worship was a characteristic
feature of the eastern countries. Since the Mongols had seized the
‘frowns and thrones of the eastern countries after some time, and the

328 . 1716 History of Islam

earlier concept of king-worship remained intact with them and it
continued even after their becoming civilized and well mannered.
Both Istam and human nature go against king-worship. But this king-
worshipping proved beneficial to Islam as the acceptance of Islam by
two or three Mongol kings led all of their subjects to the fold of Islam
with the exception of Juchi Khan and his progeny who were late in
embracing Islam because of their being at such a great distance from

the world of Islam. The Uzbeks welcomed Islam with open arms and

history bears no evidence that the Mongols ever rose against their

tulers simply because of their coming into the domain of Islam. Even
when they revolted against their Muslim kings, the sole reason was

Chapter 17
ee

Brief Supplement Of the
Islamic History Of Persia

Even though a greater part of Persian history has found place in the
history of Islam as a whole, those who have written an exclusive
history of Persia have’ followed quite a different order in mentioning,
events and their order was defined to suit their Purpose. Since
Muslims have been more closely attached to Persian history it seems
Proper to narrate it. briefly so that some of the events left out during

Placement by the majority of historian and their classification can find
4 proper reference.

Saffariah Dynasty

In the history of Persia, the Saffaria dynasty finds an important piace
‏كه‎ a sovereign rule. Since Abbasid caliphate had received active
Support from the Persians, it was not reluctant at all in Providing the
rsians opportunities to expand their power and influence against
the Arabs. It came into their minds the thought of establishing their
Own royal empire. But the Persians could not attain success while the
Abbasid dynasty retained their fighting quality, fortitude and
determination, However, when Abbasid Caliphs took to a life of

330 The History of Islam

luxury and comfort and lost their spirit and courage, Yaqub bin Laith
succeeded in setting up his own independent regime. He belonged to
a family of brass vessel makers therefore he was called “saffar”, which
comes from the word brass in Arabic. He achieved this success simply
because of his soldierly character. Yaqub was matchless in friendliness,
generosity and simplicity. He easily made friends and served them
wholeheartedly even at the cost of his own comfort. Due to these
honorable traits, he was able to gather around him a very large circle
of friends, supporters, followers and well wishers. As a king, he never
ignored his childhood friends and gave them opportunity to attain
high social and political positions. Even during his tenure as a ruler,
he behaved like an ordinary soldier. He never showed any reluctance
in sleeping on the ground and digging trenches. He abhorred the life
of luxury and debauchery. He showed firmness and determination in
whatever task he performed. These are the reasons why he reached
the pinnacle of power and glory from a very humble position. He
became so mighty and formidable that the Caliphate of Baghdad was
never able to overpower him by any means.

Following the death of Yaqub, bin Laith, his brother Amr bin Laith
came to the throne. He expanded his territory. Even though he is said
to be superior to Yaqub in wisdom and sagacity, he lacked the
soldierly character and simplicity of his brother. He was once defeated
by Muwaffaq, the brother of Caliph Mu’tamid. But he lost no time in
restoring his position and became a terror for the caliphate. At last, the
caliph sent Ismail Samani, Governor of Mawaraunnahr to take on Amr
bin Laith. Ismail Samani came out with twenty thousand horsemen
against Amr bin Laith’s seventy thousand strong cavalry, which had
come across the river Oxus to give battle to his enemy. However,
during the fierce fighting Amr bin Laith’s horse carried him to the
battle line of Ismail Samani’s army where he was easily captured.

Ismail Samani sent him to Baghdad and thus the greatness and
grandeur of the Saffaria almost met its doom.

The greatest difference between Yaqub bin Laith and Amr bin Laith
lay in the fact that, while Yaqub could live on dry bread and face
hardships with a dmile on his lips Amr bin Laith lived a luxurious life
with all the royal comforts and splendor at his command.

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 331

In the morning of the day Amr bin Laith was captured his cook had
complained that three hundred camels were not enough to carry the
load of his kitchen so he needed more beasts of burden. The same
evening Amr bin Laith was captured, he complained about hunger to
his cook who was also in prison with him. The cook found a pot there,
which he put on with some water and a little half-ground cereal.
Nothing else was available to eat. Amr bin Laith was impatiently
waiting for the food and at last the cook removed the pot from the
stove and left the spot for an urgent piece of work. Meanwhile, a dog
came in, caught the edge of the pot in his mouth and made off with
the pot. Amr bin Laith called out to his cook and said to him, “In the
morning you had complained to me that three hundred camels were
not enough to carry the load of the kitchen. Behold now! How a-single
dog is carrying my entire kitchen.”

Since the demise of Amr bin Laith, his descendants ruled over the
limited area of Sistan (eastern Lran and southwestern Afghanistan) but
only in name. Yaqub bin Laith’s maternal grandson named Khalaf
took over as the ruler and ruled over Sistan until the time of Mahmud
Ghaznavi. Khalaf’s son rose against him but he was killed by Khalaf.
The citizens of Sistan complained to Mahmud Ghaznavi against
Khalaf to save them from the atrocities of Khalaf. King Mahmud
Ghaznavi invaded Sistan. In the wake of the fall of his fort, Khalaf
appeared before Mahmud Ghaznavi, kissed his stirrup and said after
tubbing his beard with his feet, “Forgive me O’ Sultan.” Mahmud
Ghaznavi liked the word “Sultan” from the lips of Khalaf and adopted
it as his appellation. He gave Khalaf no punishment. He took him to
Ghazni where he passed away after four years.

Samanid Dynasty

Asad bin Saman reckoned himself among the descendants of Behram
Chaubin. He: took his four sons to Caliph Mamun Rasheed Abbasi at
Merv. Mamun had succeeded against his brother, Amin in coming to
throne with much active support from the Persians. Therefore,
Mamun had a favorable attitude towards Asad bin Saman and his
Progeny, which evoked no wonder. From that day, the Samanids
made rapid progress and consolidated their position. Ismail, the
8tandson of Asad bin Saman attained the position of a king after

332 The History of islam

i 1 1 1 inally. attached
bduing Amr bin Laith. The Samanids remained nominally.
to the Caliphate of Baghdad positioned against the Saffar dynasty.

Ismail Samanid ruled over Mawaraunnahr (between the Amu [Oxus]}
and Syr rivers in modern Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) and Khurasan
(northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan)
for seven or eight years. Caliph Mu’atazid Abbasi of Baghdad had
issued him credentials to rule over Khurasan. His son Abu Nazir
Ahmad succeeded Ismail.

Ismail was noble and. good-natured and relied exclusively on Allah

Almighty. He was well aware of the Principles both of conquests and
administration. His subjects loved him.

But Ahmad bin Ismail displeased his courtiers and relatives. His six-

year rule was fraught with conspiracies against him and at last, his
slaves assassinated him.

His son Nasr bin Ahmad succeeded him at the tender age of 18. He
took after his grandfather, Ismail. Shortly after accession, he expanded

his territory and ruled for thirty years with all his energy. Nasr bin
Ahmad died and was buried in Bukhara.

His son, Nuh bin Nasr acceded to the throne and died in 343 A.H.
after ruling for thirteen years and was succeeded by his son Abdul
Malik bin Nuh. He died falling from his horse while Playing polo.

His brother, Mansur bin Nuh came to the throne as his successor. He
married the daughter of Ruknuddaula Dailmi. His rule was
acknowledged in the provinces of Iraq and Persia too. His Minister,
Abu Ali bin Muhammad had the history book of Tabari translated
into Persian. He had tenure of fifteen years.

His son, Abul Qasim Nuh II succeeded him. With his accession, the
Samanid dynasty was overtaken by decline and calamity and his
courtiers rose against him and invited Bughra Khan, the king of
Mongolia to attack him. Bughra Khan defeated him and seized
Bukhara. But Bughra Khan died following his conquest of Bukhara
and his army retumed to its country. Nuh II then occupied Bukhara
and consolidated his rule. It was the time when Ghazni was ruled by
Sebuktigin, the founder of the Ghaznavid Dynasty.

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 333

After getting rid of Bughra Khan, Nuh II wanted to chastise his
unfaithful and insurgent nobles. But they escaped, took refuge with
Fakhruddaula and with his support invaded Bukhara. Nuh II sought
help from Sebuktigin once again who took on the insurgents near
Herat and repulsed their attack after a fierce fight. Sebuktigin’s son
Mahmud Ghaznawi showed his swordsmanship and gatlantry in
this battle. Nuh Il grew happy and conferred upon Mahmud
Ghaznawi the title of Saifuddaulah. Nuh Il ruled for 22 years but his
reign was beset with feuds, battles and reyolts. He continued
fighting his enemies his whole life as a king and yet lost his
provinces one by one. ~

Nuh Il was succeeded by his son, Mansur IL. His father’s detractors
and opponents kept him anxious and embarrassed all the time and, at
last, forced him out of Bukhara. Later on, they acknowledged him as a
king but took the administrative affairs under their own control and
appointed a new ruler for Khurasan. But Mahmud Ghaznawi drove
their new ruler out and captured Khurasan.

During this period, the commanders dethroned and blinded Mansur
and seated his brother Abdul Malik 11 bin Nuh II on the throne. Then
they led him to attack Mahmud Ghaznawi. But Mahmud Ghaznawi
defeated Abdul Malik II and his troops and drove them towards
Bukhara. Elaj Khan, the ruler of Kashgar (a city in the extreme western
part of China) seized Khwarizm (territories of present day
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) and attacked Bukhara, with the result
Elaj Khan arrested Abdul Malik 11 and. occupied Bukhara. Abdul
Malik II's third brother Muntasir escaped from Bukhara in disguise
and was killed after wandering with pirates for a short time and with
this the Samanid dynasty came to an end. 2

Delmid Dynasty

The Delmid and the Samanid dynasties were contemporary but rival
powers. The Samanids had occupied Mawaraunnahr (between the
Amu [Oxus] and Syr rivers in modern Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan),
Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern
Afghanistan) while the Delmids ruled over Persia, Iraq, and Azerbaijan.
All of Persia was ruled over by these two dynasties for a short period.

136 History of Islam
334

Although the Samanid Dynasty was replaced by the Ghaznavids, the
Delmids’s weak and wretched rule dragged on for some time.

Ghaznavid Dynasty

Abdul Malik bin Nuh had appointed Alaptagin as the Governor of
Khurasan. When Mansur bin Nuh, the Samanid succeeded Abdul
Malik in 350 A.H., Alaptagin came to Ghazni for he had expressed
himself to be against the accession of Mansur. Ghazni was thena

small settlement. Alaptagin consolidated his position there and
established a sovereign state.

On the death of Alaptagin in 367 A.H., his son {shaq Ghaznawi came
to the throne, but, in a very short period, he proved himself unworthy
and was either deposed by the military commanders or died a natural
death. With his end, they acknowledged Sebuktigin, the commander-
in-chief and son-in-law of Alaptagin as their king.

It is said that Sebuktigin was the slave of Alaptagin but it so happened
only by circumstance. Some robbers once found him alone on the road
and _ sold him in Bukhara. Sebuktigin’s lineage nieets with that of King
Yazdgard. However, it is difficult to prove “the authenticity of this
him as a Turk, while others have
5 father’s side and Persian from his
mother’s. Nevertheless, he was a noble person by his birth and
genealogy. In accordance with the Asian Practice the nobles,
commanders and men enjoying high positions did not feel any
disgrace in calling themselves a slave of the king. May be, Sebuktigin
would have called himself the slave of Alaptagin owing to being the
commander-in-chief of his army. Sir John Malcom, The History of Persia
from the Early Period to the Present Time (1815) holds the same view.
Sebuktigin conquered scores of cities and ruled for about twenty
years. He won the battle of Herat and defeated and arrested Raja
Jaipal Singh of the Punjab and Sind who had invaded his country and
released him only on promising tribute. But Jaipai Singh committed a
breach of promise and launched another attack with a huge army of
three hundred thousand. However, Sebuktigin gave hima smashing
defeat with a few thousand troops and captured him again but set him
free on the promise of being loyal to him. Nuh bin Mansur had offered

claim. Some historians have held
claimed that he was Turk from hi

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 335
son Mahmud was entitled with
panded the Ghaznavid rule before his
is son, Ismail succeeded him in Balkh but
y his brother after a fight.

Mahmud bin Sebuktigin came to the throne of Ghazni in 387 AH.
Caliph Qadir Billah Abbasi conferred upon him the title of
Yaminuddaulah and Aminul Millat. After accession, Mahmud
Ghaznawi began his campaigns very ably. The opponents instigated
Abdul Malik against Mahmud but he was defeated at the hands of
Mahmud and fled to Bukhara. 81 Khan or Elek Khan, the king of
Kashgar (a city in the extreme west of China) captured Bukhara and
arrested Abdul Malik. Mahmud Ghaznawi attacked Ele] Khan, son of
Bughra Khan and annexed Bukhara. He later defeated the Mongol
Commander Tugha Khan, son of Altu Khan and expanded his
territory up to the Caspian Sea, besides occupying Khwarizm
(territories of present day Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan). While
Sistan (eastern Iran and southwestern Afghanistan) and Khurasan
(northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan)
were already part of the Ghaznavid dynasty from the time of
Sebuktigin, Mahmud defeated Majuddaulah Delmi and occupied
Isfahan. He also launched a number of attacks on India. In short,
Mahmud Ghaznawi extended his rule from Sule) River (the sarees of

: 8 t give the Punjab, meaning five rivers, its name) to
ne Cospian Sea and from Mawaraunnahr (between the Amu [Oxus]
and Syr rivers ‏ممع مص مأ‎ Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) to Baluchistan

and Iraq in a comparatively short period.

Mahmud Ghaznawi is reckoned among the mightiest and most
renowned emperors of the Asian continent. During his tenure, the
Persians made rapid progress. He was a true and pious Mus im an da
great lover of learning. It was: during his period t . indaus
composed Shaknameh, The Book of Kings. The Samanid cour co ferred
upon him the Sef “Am oa eign ruler and dropped the
A.H., Mahmud declared himself a

name of Abdul Malik Samani from the address.

Mahmud Ghaznawi was born on Muharram 9, 361 AH. and died at
the age of 60. He was the mightiest Muslim emperor 0 95 :

him the title of Nasiruddin and his
Saifuddaulah. Sebuktigin ex
final departure in 387 A.H. Hi:
was subdued and deposed b

336 The History of Islam

had divided his empire between his two sons during his lifetime;
giving Khwarizm (territories of present day Turkmanistan and
Uzbekistan), Iraq, Persia, and Isfahan to his elder son Mas ud and
Mawaraunnahr (between the Amu [Oxus] and Syr rivers in modern
Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan), Khurasan (northeastern Iran, southern
Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan), Ghazni, and Punjab to his
younger son, Muhammad. However, shortly after the death of
Mahmud both the brothers fell out with each other. Muhammad
seated on the throne of Ghazni and Mas’ud came to the throne of
Rayy (southeast of Tehran). First of all the two brothers came to clash
over the question of the order of mentioning their names in the official
addresses. Mas‘ud, being the elder brother, wanted his name to be
placed above that of Muhammad. However, Muhammad contended
that his name should be mentioned above for he was seated on the
throne of his father. All of the discussion was just a false pretence,
they, in fact, wanted to subdue one another. At last, Mas‘ud attacked
Ghazni, captured it and blinded Muhammad after having him arrested.

Mas’ud then occupied Baluchistan (in modern day one Province of
Pakistan) and Makran (on the Persian and Pakistan coastline). Family
feuds resulted in a series of revolts and Sultan Mas’ud bin Mahmud
could not maintain his territorial integrity. The Seljuk Turks started
their acts of plunder in Khwarizm (territories of present day
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan). Provisional Governors in the Punjab
and other parts of India also rose in revolt, with the result his empire
began to disintegrate. But Sultan Mas‘ud showed his courage and
determination and came out to put down the rebellions. He gavea
series of defeats to the Seljuks of Khwarizm and Khurasan. In the
meantime, he invaded India as well and demolished the strong forts
of Sarsuti (northwestern India, on the edge of the Great Indian, Thar,
Desert) and Hansi {northwestern India in Haryana state). He then
hurried back to Ghazni where he found a large number of Seljuks
arrayed against his country.

Sultan Mas‘ud had recruited a large number of Hindus in his army.
He had under him a number of Hindu regiments and he had
appointed some of the Hindus as commanders. Mas‘ud loved to build
Hindu regiments by giving them military training and teaching them

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 337

manners. With this purpose in view, he sent some Hindu commanders

to India to recruit their relatives and bring them to Ghazni. When
Hindu soldiers came to Ghazni, Mas’ud paid them salaries more than
what he would pay to the Persians and the Afghans. A Hindu named
Tilak was given the title of Maharaja and was appointed as the
commander-in-chief of his army. Since Maharaja Tilak was the son of
a Hindu barber, his high position disheartened most of the Muslim
commanders and nobles and they lodged complaints to Mas‘ud
against appeasing the Hindu fighters. Even the fall of Makran due
only to the timidity of the Hindu regiment did not alter his mind or
change his policy, although they had escaped from the battlefield
pushing Sultan Mas’ud and the Afghan troops into an arena of death
and destruction. Mas’ud saved his life with the sacrifice of his true
and faithful companions and he brought with him a feeling of shame
arising, out of his ignominious defeat. He took a very strange decision
to eliminate his sense of ‘shame and frustration. He left his Minister
and son, Maudud in Ghazni, loaded all his treasures and possessions
on elephants, camels, bullock carts and men and proceeded towards
India in the company of his Hindu commanders and their regiments
with a plan to make Lahore the seat of his Government. Since Sultan
Mas‘ud had already disclosed his plan, his nobles and commanders
tried their level best to persuade him to change his mind and they also
tried to ensure that the defeat could be successfully avenged.
However, he would not pay any heed to their pleas. He left Ghazni .
after removing the treasures and took away all the jewels, ornaments,
gold, valuable utensils and costly garments. Before his departure, he
wrote to his son Maudud who was then in Balkh and Badakhshan (in
Present day Afghanistan). “I hereby appoint you ruler of Ghazni and
Khurasan. You keep obeying the orders I shall be issuing in your
name. Moreover, you should make an all out effort to end the Seljuks’
Occupation of your land.”

As soon as Sultan Mas‘ud crossed the Indus River the Hindu
fegiments and their Hindu commanders betrayed him and fell upon
the royal possessions and robbed all, of what Sebuktigin (founder of
the Ghaznavid dynasty) and Mahmud Ghaznaw! had collected over 2
span of 40 or 50 years. They left leaving Sultan Mas’ud at the mercy 0
@ small band of his Muslim comrades.

338 The History of Islam

In the wake of this soul-shattering event, this small body of the
Muslims deposed him for his mental imbalances and brought his
blinded brother Muhammad to the throne after releasing him from
prison. With the enthronement of Muhammad, many of the evasive
Hindu soldiers gathered round him for they no longer feared any
punishment from Mas’ud.

When Mas’ud was produced before Muhammad he, instead of taking
revenge for his blindness, he asked him what was his preference.
Mas’ud told him that he should be allowed to stay in Kiri Fort and

Muhammad conceded his request forthwith and sent him there along
with his wife and children.

Ahmad, son of Muhammad, went to the Kiri Fort without permission
and without his father’s knowledge and avenged his father’s blindness
on his uncle, Mas’ud. Muhammad expressed his deep regret -at this
unpleasant event. In a letter to his nephew in Balkh Muhammad
informed him that he had no hand in the assassination of his father,
Mas‘ud and that Ahmad had committed this heinous act of his own
accord. Maudud marched at the head of an army to fight for his rights.
Muhammad's troops made an attempt to stop him at the bank of the

tiver Indus but Muhammad’s army was defeated and Maudud captured

Muhammad and his wife and children and killed them all. Following
this Maudud went to Ghazni and sat on the throne in 435 A.H.
Maudud also fou,

father, Mas‘ud

over them.

Maudud bin Mas’ud
throne. His son,
he was killed b:
throne but wa
Mas’ud came to

died in 440 A.H. then his son Ali came to the
Abdur Rashid, succeeded him but in a ma
Y 4 commander named, Tu,
5 assassinated by the noble:
the throne in 444 ‏م‎

tter of days,
ghril who occupied the
5, and Farkhzad, son of

Farkhzad showed his courage and caliber. He built his army to force
out the Seljuks from Khurasan and he succeeded in his initial

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 339

campaigns. However, his fight against Alp Arsalan Seljuk proved
disastrous to him and he could not win Khurasan.

Ibrahim bin Mas‘ud, the brother of Farkhzad succeeded Farkhzad in
450 A.H. Sultan Ibrahim was virtuous, pious, brave and wise. He
made peace with the Seljuks. Following this treaty, they began to
consider themselves within their rights to rule over Khurasan
(northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan).
After winning peace on this front Sultan Ibrahim turned to India. In
the wake of feuds and fights against the Seljuks, they could not
maintain sufficient attention on India for very long. A number of
commanders and Rajas (Kings) showed defiant attitudes and stopped
giving tribute. Sultan Ibrahim launched a number of attacks on the
insurgents in India and consolidated his rule. He died in 493 A.H.
after reigning over a span of 42 or 43 years.

Mas’ud bin Ibrahim then came to the throne and died in 509 A.H.
after a reign of 16 years. Mas‘ud bin Ibrahim had also made Lahore
his capital for a short period.

Mas‘ud was succeeded by his son Arsalan and ruled for three years.
Sultan Sanjar Seljuk conquered Ghazni and brought Behram bin
Mas‘ud bin Ibrahim, brother of Arsalan to the throne of Ghazni.

Behram reigned for 35 years. He also invaded India several times to
punish the insurgents. He passed most of his time.in Lahore. The book
entitled Kalila wa Dimna and the Khamsa Nizami were written during
his rule. During the last days of his rule, the Ghouries invaded Ghazni
and ousted him from Ghazni. He escaped to India and died in Lahore
in 347 A.H.. The Punjab was left to be ruled by the Ghaznavids while
Ghazni came under the rule of the Ghouries.

Following the death of Behram his son, Khusrau Shah came to the
throne. He made a great effort to take Ghazni out of the clutches of the
Ghouries but his attempts failed to materialize any positive results. He
died in Lahore after reigning for 8 years. 1

His ‘son, Malik bin Khusrau was seated on the throne in lahore in 2°
A. H. The Ghouries captured Malik bin Khusrau and occupied the
Punjab. This ended the Ghaznavid dynasty.

340 The History of Islam

Seljuk Dynasty

A_ Turk named Waqaq with Temur Taligh as his appellation was
related to Paigu, the king of Turkistan. His son was Seljuk by name.
He claimed his genealogy to be meeting with that of Afrasiyab in the
thirty forth generation. He also had access to the court like his father.
Seljuk became displeased with Paigu and shifted to Samarkand and
Bukhara along with his sons. This occurred when Nuh II Samani was
ruling over Bukhara. Persuaded by the Muslim Governor of Jund,
Seljuk embraced Islam; the Jund was a tributary of Paigu, the king of
Turkistan. A short time later, Paigu’s collectors came to collect tribute.
Thereupon Seljuk told them that the idea of the Unbelievers collecting
tribute from the Muslims was intolerable to him. Seljuk’s courage
infused new spirit into the people and they with Seljuk attacked the
collectors sent by Paigu and were successful. Seljuk shot in to fame
and his act of valor was inspirational for everyone. The people of his
tribe rushed to cluster round him. When Elej Khan attacked Nuh II,
Seljuk sided with Nuh 11 and fought valiantly. Seljuk’s son, Mika’il
was killed in the battte. Mika’il’s two sons were then raised by Seljuk.
Seljuk had four more sons named, Israel, Yunus, Yanal and Musa.
Showing exceptional valor during a battle was the best way to power
among the Turk and Mongol tribes. Thus, Seljuk and his sons attained
renown and power in a very short time and the Turks gathered
around them. Elek Khan and Paigu joined hands to destroy the
Seljuks. Meanwhile, Seljuk died. His grandson Chager Beg wanted to
march on Armenia to wage a holy war against the Christians.
However, the province of Tus (in the area of present day Meshed,
fran) was in between Bukhara and Armenia, which was a part of the
Ghaznavid Empire. However, the Governor of Tus let him pass
through the territory as a matter of cooperation with his holy
campaign. Mahmud Ghaznawi was a sensible and far-sighted man.
When he came to know of the Seljuk army’s passing through his
territory, he called for an explanation from the Governor of Tus for he
anticipated a possible assault and plunder on his territory by them. On
way back from Armenia, their strong force had grown stronger, and
they started grazing their animals in the suburbs of Balkh and they
halted there for this purpose. Being acquainted with the state ‏أت‎

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 341

affairs, Mahmud Ghaznawi called the Seljuk chief to his court through
his governor. With respect to age and sensibility Israel, the elder son
of Seljuk was considered more suitable for the job. When he appeared
before Mahmud Ghaznawi, he was greeted with esteem. After a
preliminary chat, Mahmud Ghaznawi. came to the point and said,
“How many men can you provide if I am in need of troops?” Putting
his arrow before Mahmud, Israel replied, “If you send this arrow to
our tribes in the forest you: will find one hundred thousand men
standing before you.” Thereupon Mahmud said, “In case I need some
more men how many more could you give me?” Placing his bow
before him Israel said, “If you send this bow to our tribes, two
hundred thousand men will turn up to serve you.” Now Mahmud
Ghaznawi could easily determine the strength of the Seljuks. He then
held Israel as a guarantee for peace and sent him to India where he
remained a captive in the Kalinger Fort for 7 years. The Seljuk rule
went to Tughril Beg and Chagher Beg, these two brothers ruled over
the tribes with accord and amity.

Mahmud Ghaznawi gave a piece of land to the Seljuks in
Mawaraunnahr (between the Amu [Oxus] and Syr rivers in modern
Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) to serve as a pasture. Moreover, he
allowed them to cross the river Oxus and settle in Khurasan. Objecting
to this decision Arsalan Jadeh, the Governor of Tus and Baikh
questioned, “Why do you allow them to come across the river Oxus?
They are a contentious people and they are bound to give trouble”.
‘Mahmud was aware of his own strength and besides, he has a plan to
tecruit them into his army to serve his purpose plus Israel’s confinement
was still a point in his favor, which he could exploit. When Mahmud
Passed away, Sultan: Mas‘ud set Israel free and he joined his nephews.
With his arrival, the Seljuks rose to power. Sultan Mas’ud had not yet
consolidated his position when Chagher Beg seized Merv and Herat and
Tughril Beg occupied Nishapur. When Mas‘ud Ghaznawi decided to
Punish them, they gave him so many anxious moments that, at last, he
8ave the entire territory of Khurasan to them.

Tughril Beg then shifted his capital to Rayy, while Chagher Beg stayed
in Merv. The official addresses carried the names of both the brothers.

gher Beg then annexed Khwarizm (territories of present day
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) and made a successful attack on the

342 The History of Islam

Romans (present day Turkey). They reached Baghdad and put an end
to the Delmid rule. He was then appointed as the prime Minister of
the Caliph of Baghdad and received a title and royal robes from the
Caliphate. Tughril Beg’s name was mentioned in the address delivered
in Baghdad in 447 A. H. He died in 455 A.H. at the age of 70, while
Chagher Beg had already passed away in 451 A.H.

Since Tughril Beg died without any children his nephew, Alp Arsalan
bin Chagher Beg succeeded him. After reigning for nine years, he died
in 465 A.H. He was a devout Muslim and the greatest Muslim king of
his time. He once defeated a huge Christian force of three hundred
thousand soldiers with a cavalry of 12 thousand and also captured the
Caesar of Constantinople Romanus IV Diogenes.

Malik Shah Seljuk came to the throne after his father,
Qawurd, the brother of Al
captured and killed. Malik

had an empire even larger th:

Alp Arsalan.
Ip Arsalan opposed his nephew but was
Shah then annexed Syria and Egypt. He
an Alp Arsalan’s. He died in 484 A.H.
His son, Barkeyaraq succeed him and this was the beginning of the
decline of the Seljuks. His brother, Muhammad bin Shah came to the
throne in 496 ‏م‎

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 343

Ten kings, the progeny of Qawurd, the brother of Alp Arsalan, are

known as the Kermanid Seljuks. Kerman is bounded by Baluchistan

and Sistan on the west, Yazd on the north, and Khorasan on the

northeast. Their capital was Hamadan (west central [ran). Qawurd

was killed in 465 A.H. opposing Malik Shah his nephew. His son,

Shah Kerman succeeded him by the order of Malik Shah, son of Alp
Arsalan. When he died after reigning for 12 years his brother, Turan
Shah came to the throne and ruled for 13 years, and was succeeded by
his son; Iran Shah and his end came after a reign of 42 years. His son,
Mughithuddin then got the throne and held it for 14 years and made
his final departure leaving behind his son, Mohiuddin Tughril Shah to
occupy the throne and he ruled for 12 years. His son Behram Shah
came to power after whom a number of persons namely, Arsalan
Shah, Turan Shah, Muhammad Shah came to the throne one after the
other ending the Kermanid Seljuk Dynasty.

Sultan Alp Arsalan Seljuk had sent Sulaiman Qatlamish bin Israel bin
Seljuk to Asia Minor as Governor. He founded an independent state
there. His progeny produce 14 kings who were called the Seljuks of
Rome. The city of Konya was their capital. They ruled until the end of
the seventh century Hegira and continuously fought against the
Romans. They were followed by Ottoman Empire.

Khwarizm Shah Dynasty

A Turkish slave of Malik Shah Seljuk named Qutbuddin bin
Anustegin had access to Sultan Sanjar. Sultan Sanjar Seljuk appointed
Qutbuddin as the Governor of Khwarizm. Whenever Qutbuddin came
to Sultan Sanjar, he would serve him as usual in his royal garments.
He served as governor of Khwarizm fora long time and came to be
known as Khwarizm, His descendants also adopted the same title.

Qutbuddin remained loyal to Sanjar Seljuk but following Sanjar’s
arrest by the Oguz Turks, he (Qutbuddin) proclaimed sovereignty and
invaded Mawaraunnahr. He was succeeded by his son Atsaz
Khwarizm Shah.

Atsaz died about 540 A.H. and was siicceeded by his son Arsalan Shah
in 557 A.H. He and his brother, Ala ad-Din Texish remained at odds

344 The History of Islam

with each other all the time, which often led to armed conflict. At last,
Ala ad-Din Tekish came out victorious and became the Khwarizm Shah.
Ismail bin Hasan, author of Dhakirah-e-Khwarizm and the poet, Khakani
belonged to his period. He had Tughril 111 Seljuk assassinated and
expanded his own territories by capturing Khurasan (northeastern Lran,
southern Turkmenistan, and northern Afghanistan) and Iraq.

After his death his son, Khwarizm Shah Muhammad bin Tekish came
to the throne in 590 A.H. He ruled for 21 years and brought about a
major territorial expansion. During this expansion, his relations with
the Caliph of Baghdad deteriorated. After the demise of Shahabuddin
Ghouri, Khwarizm Shah’s territory extended up to Ghour and Ghazni.
He defeated Atabak S’ad of Persia as well as Atabak Uzbek, the king
of Azerbaijan. He then revolted against the Caliph of Baghdad and led
an army against him intending to replace the Caliph by his spiritual
guide, Sayed Ala al Mulk Tirmidhi. The caliph sent Sheikh Shahabuddin
Sahrawardy to. meet Muhammad Khwarizm Shah and have him
reconsider such an action and to make peace. The mission bore no fruit
and Muhammad Khwarizm Shah was determined to complete his plan.
However, a natural calamity in the form of a heavy snowfall forced him
back from attacking Iraq and he had not yet retumed to his capital from
this campaign when his country was stormed by Genghis Khan.

Sultan Muhammad bin Tekish Khwarizm Shah was a mighty king of
his time. Even far off kings feared him. But, following the misfortune
of snowfall, he suffered such a swift decline that he died in a state that
he did not even have a burial shroud.

Sultan Muhammad ibn Tekish Khwarizm Shah had seven sons and
three of them namely, Ruknuddin, Ghaythuddin and Jalaluddin were
Governors of the different provinces however, they all had strained
relations, with the result they could not join ranks to face Genghis
Khan and they were all routed one by one.

Jalaluddin Khwarizm Shah was the most famous among them. He
fought Genghis Khan valiantly at the bank of Indus but without any
result. He went to India but returned after a short stay in the Sind. On
his way, back he broke the back of the atheists of the Alamut Fort. He
fought the Mongols on one hand and the Romans on the other. He

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 345

won victories no doubt but the opposition was so powerful that he
failed to regain his lost empire and died unknown and unnoticed.
Historians mention his name with love and respect because of his
bravery, which he had proved on several occasions. His end brought
about the end of the Khwarizm Shah dynasty. .

Ghourid Dynasty

Ghour (modern day Ghowr) is a vast region in the west central of
Afghanistan. Mahmud Ghaznawi conquered it and made it a province

of his empire. The Ghourid people confessed Islam in the beginning of

the second century and none but the Afghans inhabited the entire

region. Mahmud Ghaznawi appointed a noble man as the Governor of

Ghour whose ancestors enjoyed this position for a long period.

Circumstantially, the relations between Sultan Behram Ghaznawi and ١
Qutbuddin, the Governor of Chour became strained and resulted in

an armed conflict in which Qutbuddin was killed. Qutbuddin

Ghouri’s brother, Saifuddin invaded Ghazni and turned out Behram

Chaznawi from Ghazni and won the throne. Behram Ghaznawi

secured help from the surrounding countries an attached Ghazni and

had Saifuddin mercilessly tortured to death.

rmed of the event his third brother, Alauddin, in order to

avenge the assassination of his two brothers, invaded Ghazni. Behram

Ghaznawi made an attempt to lure away the enemy troops with gems

and jewels and win peace by this way but the memory of the

ignominious and torturous assassination of Saifuddin did not allow
their burning anger to be appeased with wealth. Thus, the crafty
device of Behram failed and Alauddin conquered Ghazni. Behram
Ghazni fled to India, but Alauddin Ghouri, by way of revenge
committed a large-scale slaughter of the people of Ghazni. He
demolished the tombs of Ghaznavid kings and set the houses on fire
and this carnage continued for a week. Because of his wild and
wanton carnage, he came to be known as Alauddin “Jahan Soz” (the
burner of the world). He also took with him a large number of
captives, put them all to death and used their blood for kneading the
ed to be used in the fortification of the city. This event took place in

7 AH.

Being info:

346 The History of Islam

Alauddin Ghouri left for Ghour after appointing a viceroy for Ghazni
and Ghazni became a province of Ghourid Empire.

Since Behram Ghaznawi had acknowledged the leadership of Sultan
Sanjar Seljuk, he dispatched a letter to him from India informing him
of the events. Sanjar Seljuk conquered both Ghour* and Ghazni the
next year and brought Behram back from India to rule over them. He
arrested Alauddin and took him to his country.

What Alauddin did to devastate Ghazni was out of a sense of revenge
and retaliation that overpowered his senses otherwise; he was a
farsighted, able and sensible Sultan. Sanjar was so impressed with the
behavior and abilities of Alauddin that he set him free and he came
back and took over the reign of Ghour. Shortly thereafter, the Oguz
Turks arrested Sanjar and this diminished the awe and power of the
Seljuks. Sanjar passed four Years in captivity. But it was a confinement
similar to king Jehangir’s of India by Mahabat Khan. The Oguz Turks

nsidered as the first Sovereign King of
the Ghourid dynasty. His son, Saifuddin II Sat on the throne of Ghour
and was assassinated by his own Commander during a battle with the
Oguz Turks,

Alauddin Ghouri‘s nephews, Ghayas ud-Din and his brother named
Shahab ud-Din Ghouri had Practical experience in leadin

td: ١ ig Campaiy
and administration, were co-rulers like the two brothe Bee

under their

control | 1 1 i
Punjab was he entire territory ruled by the Ghaznavids. The

then under the rule of the descendants of Behram

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 347

Ghaznawi. Shahab ud-Din wrested the Punjab from them and he
arrested Khusrau Malik Ghaznawi in Lahore in 582 A.H. and sent him
to his brother, Ghayas ud-Din Ghouri in Ghour and he himself
occupied Lahore and began to rule over it.

Ghayas ud-Din Ghouri died in 599 A.H. and was succeeded by his
younger brother Shahab ud-Din. He had invaded India during the reign
of his elder brother, Ghayas ud-Din and arrested and killed Prithivi Raj.
He appointed his slave Qutbuddin Aybak as ruler in India. During his
tenure as king Shahab ud-Din went to India. On his return journey, the
Fidais or the Kakhars killed him by mistake. Following the death of
Shahab ud-Din Ghouri, the Ghourid dynasty came to an end.
Qutbuddin Aybak consolidated his position and laid the foundation of
the Slave Dynasty in India . The throne of Firozkoh (south of the Central
Elburz mountains in Iran) was occupied by Shahab ud-Din’s nephew,
Mahmud Ghouri, son of Ghayas ud-Din Ghouri.

Mahmud Ghouri was also assassinated in 607 A.H. His son,
Bahauddin who was later arrested by Khwarizm Shah, succeeded
him. Ghour was then ruled over by a number of nominal kings related
to Shahab ud-Din and thus came the hasty end of Ghourid Dynasty.

Atabeks Of Shiraz

Atabeks were the teachers to whom were entrusted the Seljuk princes
for their education, training and learning of high morals. Gradually,
these teachers or Atabeks rose to such heights that they were given the
high post of ministers and rulers. In the wake of the Seljuk dynasty‘s
decline, these Atabeks established their own sovereign rule in various
countries and provinces. A number of Atabek dynasties remained in
Power in Syria, Iraq, and Persia and some of them attained eminence
in the world of Islam.

During the reign of Sultan Sanjar Seljuk, Muzaffaruddin Sangar bin
Maudud Salghari was the Governor of Persia. Following the death of
Sultan Sanjar, he chose the title of “Atabek” and established his
Sovereign rule over Persia. He died in 556 A.H.

He was succeeded by his brother, Muzaffaruddin Atabek and ruled
\mtil 571 A.H. and his son came to the throne after his demise and
Niled for 20 years.

348 __ The History of Istam

Following his death, Atabek S‘ad bin Zangi acceded and died in 622
A.H. after reigning for 28 years. Sheikh Muslehuddin Shirazi adopted
“S‘adi” as his pen name after Atabek S’ad.

After his death, his son Atabek bin S’ad Zangi acceded to the throne
and it was during his tenure that Baghdad was annihilated by
Hulagu Khan. He had accepted to give tribute to the Mongols and
survived.

Following his demise, his grandson Atabek Muhammad sat on the
throne. In short, this dynasty ruled over Shiraz and Persia until 663
A.H. but remained a tributary to the Mongols throughout.
Afterwards, viceroys were sent by the Mongols to look after the
administration of Shiraz. When the Mongols showed signs of decline
and disturbances, Shiraz once again had an independent sovereign
rule, which was then taken over by the Temur era.

Sistan Kings

Sistan (eastern Iran and southwestern Afghanistan) is also called
“Nimroz.” King Sanjar Seljuk had appointed a man named Abul ‏اعد‎
‎Tajuddin as the Governor of this country. In the wake of the
degeneration taking place in the Seljuk Dynasty, he claimed an
independent rule. His son Shamsuddin succeeded him but his
atrocities attracted the hate and anger of his people. At last, his
subjects mobbed and assassinated him and brought a man named
Tajuddin Herb bin Izzul Malik to the throne who belonged to the
same dynasty. He was good-natured and able. During his reign,
Khurasan was a part of Ghourid Dynasty. He ruled over a span of 6
years and following his demise, his son Yaminuddin Behram Shah
acceded to the throne but was killed by atheists. His son Nusratuddin
came to the throne after him. His brother Ruknuddin staked his claim
to the throne, which led to armed conflict between the two.
Nusratuddin was killed by Ruknuddin and Ruknuddin was killed by
the Mongol invaders. Tajuddin Herb‘s son Shahabuddin Muhammad
then was seated on the throne as the last member of the dynasty but

he too was arrested and killed by the Mongols and with him, his
dynasty desisted.

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 349

Muluk Dynasty In Karat And Herat

A man named Izzuddin Umar belonging to Seljuk Dynasty was the
Minister of Ghayas ud-Din Ghouri. Ghayas ud-Din later sent him as
the Governor of Herat where he built royal palaces and mosques. He
came to be known as Izzuddin Karat. He was succeeded by his son,
Ruknuddin in 643 A.H. They came to be considered as kings of Herat
in the aftermath of the destruction of the Ghourid Dynasty.
Shamsuddin Karat sat on the throne of Herat. He and his father both
had offered their allegiance to the Mongols like the Atabekan of
Shiraz. The Mongols caused no harm to their rule and left them to rule
over Herat as their viceroys.

Ruknuddin, son of Shamsuddin Karat sat on the throne of Herat
following the death of Shamsuddin Karat. Abagha Khan, the Mongol
king had conferred upon him the title of Shamsuddin Kahin”. His son,
Fakhruddin came to the throne after the demise of his father.
Fakhruddin was succeeded by his brother, Ghayathuddin and
Ghayathuddin by his son Shamsuddin in 729 A. H. Shamsuddin was
Succeeded by his brother, Malik Hafiz and he by his brother,
Muizzuddin Husain in 721 A.H. He died as a king of Herat in 771
A.H. His son, Ghayathuddin Babar Ali came to the throne after him.
During his tenure, Temur arrived in Herat and he rose to obey Temur
while Temur gave his daughter to him in marriage.

Atabeks Of Azerbaijan

Among King Mas‘ud Seljuk’s slaves was a man named Shamsud Din
Eldeguz who was racially a Turk. He made a start as an ordinary
Servant but gradually, he rose to the position of a teacher and then
‘gan to show his power and influence in administrative affairs. At
st, he was married to the widow of Tughril II and he became the
vernor of Azerbaijan. He was then appointed the Prime Minister
and ‘Commander-in Chief of the Seljuk Dynasty and brought much of

350 _ The History of Islam

post. He then assassinated Tughril III and captured the throne but he
died the day he was to be crowned. Following this event Ata Beg Abu
Bakr took over the reign and consolidated his position by confining
himself to Azerbaijan and began to rule peacefully. Suddenly, Abu
Bakr’s brother Qatlagh Khan rose in revolt against him. Qatlagh was
defeated in the encounter. He escaped and took refuge with
Khwarizm Shah and persuaded him to attack Azerbaijan. However, a
commander of Khwarizm Shah assassinated Qatlagh. Ata Beg Abu
Bakr died after a few days and was succeeded by his brother Ata Beg
Muzaffar. He also occupied Iraq and ruled for fifteen years. Finally,
Jalaluddin Khwarizm Shah the last of his dynasty conquered
Azerbaijan. Thus, the end of the dynasties of the Khwarizm Shah and
Eldeguzid of Azerbaijan came at about the same time with the
onslaught of Genghis Khan.

Alamut Atheists’ Dynasty

Hasan bin Sabbah founded his rule by capturing the forts of Alamut
and Qazwin at the time when the Seljuk Dynasty was going very
strong. Many things have been mentioned by historians about Hasan
bin Sabbah. His physical strength may be measured with the event
that when once his two sons disobeyed him, he grew angry at both of
them and with one slap to each of them they fell down dead.

He led a very simple life and wanted the same life for his wife and
children. Once, anticipating the Seljuks’ siege of the fort and attack, he
felt the need of shifting his wife and children to another fort. He
instructed the officer in charge of the fort not to provide them food
and drink like a guest and leave her to earn it herself by spinning yarn.

Following the death of Hasan bin Sabbah, Kiyabuzurg sat on the
throne and fought with King Muhammad Seljuk until the death of
Muhammad Seljuk. Kiyabuzurg then seized several’ forts of the
Seljuks and plundered Gilan.

On the death of Kiyabuzurg, his son Muhammad _ took the throne.
During his period, the Fidais began to kill kings and the celebrities
here and there. When such events crossed all limits, the Persians
appeared before King Sanjar Seljuk ard cried out for assistance and
the religious scholars also gave their fatwa (verdict) against the Fidais

Brief Supplement Of the Islamic History Of Persia 351

and declared their killings as invalid. However, king Sanjar sent his
emissary to Alamut to determine their greed and actions. An assembly
was convened to make arguments and counter-arguments. The
atheists defended their beliefs and actions with all the arguments at
their command with the result that the matter remained, undecided.
King Sanjar practiced caution in ordering their massacre at large.

Three years later Muhammad bin Kiyabuzurg Umid died and was
succeeded by Hasan bin Muhammad. He promoted atheism beyond
ali limits. When he died in 561 A.H., his son, Alauddin Muhammad
came to the throne. During this period, Imam Fakhruddin Razi came
from Azerbaijan to Rayy and began delivering sermons and wise
counsel. He used to target the atheists’ beliefs to keep people from
joining the Fidais. In view of his campaign, they reached Rayy and
threatened him with death. Following this, the Imam shifted to Ghour
and joined Ghayathuddin Ghouri and his brother. Shahabuddin
Ghouri had accompanied the latter during his journeys to India. He
was appointed as Imam to lead the Muslim army in prayers. In the
wake of Shahabud-Din’s attachment with the Imam, the Fidais
assassinated him in 602 A.H. Imam Fakhruddin Razi then went to
Khwarizm Shah.

After Alauddin his son, Jalaluddin Hasan took the throne. He
renounced the faith of his father and grandfather and informed the
Muslim world of his conversion to the true faith. Following this he
came to be known as Jalaluddin, the neo-Muslim (convert to Islam).
Caliph Nasir Abbasi grew happy with him. Thus, when Jalaluddin
Hasan’s mother went to perform the Hajj, King Muhammad Khwarizm
Shah’s standard was kept behind that of Jalaluddin Hasan’‘s mother.
This was done simply to appreciate and encourage Jalaluddin Hasan.
However, King Muhammad Khwarizm Shah took exception to this
and this resulted in his campaign against the Caliph of Baghdad. Since
Jalaluddin Hasan‘s son was only. 9 at the time of accession
disturbances and disruptions overtook the entire country. Nasiruddin
Tusi belonged to this period. Muhammad passed away in 653 AH.
and was succeeded by his son, Ruknuddin Khurshah. Hulagu Khan
attacked and arrested Ruknuddin and demolished his forts and with
this came the end of the dynasty.

Chapter 18
Brief Supplement Of The Islamic
History Of Egypt And Syria

Following the decline of the Seljuks, the Seljuk Dynasty itself broke into
pieces and established several separate independent states. In the same
way, Atabeks also set up their own states. Thus, there appeared a large
number of small Muslim states in Persia, Khurasan, Iraq, Iran, Syria and

Asia Minor. Konya was the capital of the Asia Minor rule, which came
to be known as the Seljuks of Rome. This dynasty existed until the

Ottoman Empire came into being. Similarly, an independent Atabek rule

Was established in Syria, which was known, as the Syrian Atabek Rule.

Syrian Atabek Rule

Atabek Imaduddin Zangi laid the foundation of his sovereign rule in
Syria in 521 A.H. when he died in 544 A.H. he left behind three sons
Nuruddin Zangi, Saifuddin Zangi and Qutbuddin Zangi. Each of them
set up separate states in different cities of Syria and. chose Nuruddin

1 as their emperor. Like the Seljuks of Rome, the Atabeks of Syria
Were preoccupied with countering the Roman Christian attacks.

Sultan Nuruddin Zangi was very brave, devout and good-natured.
Bait al-Maqdis was under the possession of the Christian since 490
354 , The History of Islam

A.H., and they had founded their rule there. This Christian rule in Bait
al-Maqdis had the help and support of the whole European continent. In
spite of all efforts, bravery and determination Sultan Nuruddin Zangi
failed to take Bait al-Maqdis from the Christians during his lifetime.

‎was for Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi to fulfill this mission. The Abbasid‏ )ل
‎Caliph of Baghdad had conferred upon Nuruddin the title of “Sultan”‏
‎and credentials to rule over Syria. During this Sultan’s rule, the‏
‎Christians exerted pressure on Egypt. Thereupon, Azid, the Egyptian‏
‎tuler and the last among the Ubaidi rulers sought Sultan Nuruddin’s‏
‎help. Responding to this request Nuruddin sent his commander‏
‎Sherkoh along with his nephew Salahuddin to Egypt, within a short‏
‎time the Ubaidi ruler passed away and Egypt came under the control of‏
‎Salahuddin. Nuruddin Zangi died as well during this time period and‏
‎his son Malik Saleh succeeded his father on the throne of Damascus in‏
‎Syria. Shortly thereafter, Saifuddin bin Qutbuddin established his‏
‎separate rule in Mosul and finally/Syria too came under the possession‏
‎of Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi. Salahuddin Ayyubi practiced favor and‏
‎concessions to the children and family members of Nuruddin and they‏
‎enjoyed ruling in Syria until the invasion of Hulagu Khan. However,‏
‎they were rulers in name while Salahuddin was the virtual ruler.‏

‎Ayyuhid Dynasty Of Egypt And Syria

‎Najmuddin Ayyub was a Kurd by race and held the post of
commander in the army of Imamuddin Zangi. Imamuddin Zangi was
very kind to Salahuddin, the son of Najmuddin Ayyub and he had
made some special arrangements for the education and training of
Salahuddin. Following the death of Sultan Imamuddin Zangi,
Nuruddin Zangi appointed Najmuddin Zangi as garrison commander
of the Damascus Fort and his son Salahuddin as his heiper. After the
death of Najmuddin Ayyub, Nuruddin Zangi appointed his brother
Sherkoh as the commander-in-chief and Salahuddin as the garrison
commander of the Damascus Fort. ١

‎Following the death of Azid Ubaidi, Salahuddin Ayyub became the
ruler of Egypt. When differences erupted regarding the accession after
the death of Sultan Nuruddin Zangi, Salahuddin Ayyubi came from
Egypt to Damascus and enthroned Malik Saleh, the son of Sultan

Brief Supplement Of The Islamic History Of Egypt And Syria 355

Nuruddin Zangi. From that day on Syrian rule came under the power
and influence of Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi. Yemen and Hijaz also
conceded to his rule the same year.

This was a most crucial period for the world of Islam. The united force
of Europe invaded Egypt but Salahuddin Ayyubi stood like a
mountain in their way. The Alamut atheists were on the other hand
playing havoc in the region by killing Muslim kings, ministers, nobles
and commanders. They had threatened Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi too
with death but, by the grace of Allah, he escaped.

At last, all the commanders unanimously conceded Salahuddin as the
ruler of Syria. And with this, he began to make all out efforts to take Bait
alMaqdis from the rule of the Christians. Following a heavy fight
Salahuddin Ayyubi was able to capture the Christian King of Bait al-
Maqdis on the baitlefield and liberate the territory in 583 A.H. However,
he set him free on the promise that he would never fight against the
Muslims in future. Salahuddin then marched ahead and occupied
Aakka and conquered Bait al-Magqdis in 588 A.H. From 490 A.H. to 588
AH. a period of 98 years, Bait al-Maqdis had remained under Christian
control. When the Christians had won it from the Muslims, they let flow
a river of Muslim blood. However, when Salahuddin Ayyubi took over
Bait al-Maqdis not a drop of Christian blood was spilled anywhere.

With the Muslim conquest of Bait al-Maqdis, the entire European
continent was overtaken by a tumult of the worst nature and every
Christian household raised a great clamor over the unexpected and
ignominious defeat. In the wake of this historic defeat Phillip, the
Emperor of France, Richard, the Lion-hearted Emperor of England,
Frederick, the Emperor of Germany along with a large number of
Small kings, dukes and nobles built a huge army and led it to conquer
entire Asian continent and to wipe out all traces of Islam. They
first targeted Syria. But Salahuddin Ayyubi with a comparatively
Small army fought against them several hundred battles within a span
of four years and he did not aliow them to touch the walls of Bait al-
20015. Defeated, disgraced and frustrated. the Christians returned
With their dreams smashed and souls shattered. Even at the height of
ese inimical relations, the kindhearted Salahuddin Ayyubi allowed
™ to visit Bait al-Maqdis as pilgrims.

356 __ The History of Islam

During the previously mentioned battles, Salahuddin Ayyubi showed
so much human feeling, generosity, kindness and dignity that, even,
today, European nations and the Christian world remember him with
respect and consider his name synonymous with bravery and nobility.
Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi passed away in 589 A.H. and was
reckoned among the Friends of Allah due only to his piety, devotion
and fear of Aliah Almighty.

Following the death of Salahuddin his son, Uthman came to the throne
with Malik al-Aziz as his title. He ruled for 6 years with a good
character and reputation. Following his death in 595 A.H., his son, Malik
Mansur came to the throne but was deposed after a year and was
succeeded by Malik Adil, brother of Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi. He was
virtuous and praiseworthy. He died in 615 A-H. He was succeeded by
his son, Malik Kamil. He too was a king of lofty ideals and character.
When he died in 635 A.H. his son, Malik Adil Abu Bakr came to the
throne. Two years later, Egyptian nobles put him in confinement and
seated his brother, Malik Saleh bin Malik on the throne of Egypt. He
ruled for a decade but was martyred during a fight against the
Christians. Following him Malik Mu’azzam Turan Shah Malik Saleh
came to the throne in 647 A.H. but was assassinated after reigning for
only a few months. After him Queen Shajratud’dur came to the throne
in 648 A.H. and was deposed after a few months and Malik Ashraf was
brought to the throne in 648 A.H. The slaves of the same dynasty in 652
A.H. deposed him and the Ayyubid dynasty came to an end.

During his reign, Sultan Salahuddin Ayyubi passed his days either in
Syria, the city of Damascus or on the battlefield. However, his
successors confined themselves to Egypt with the result that Syria
slipped out of their hands and they had to be content with Egypt under
their possession. The last rulers carved out a policy to purchase slaves
from Kharjiah and Armenia to build a massive army to combat and
punish any insurgent commander. Gradually, these slaves rose to such
strength and power that they laid the foundation of Mamluk Dynasty.

Mamluk Dynasty Of Egypt (Category I)

When the Ayyubid dynasty suffered a decline and all administrative
affairs came to be managed by the slaves, they chose one Malik Mu’iz

Brief Supplement Of The Islamic History Of Egypt And Syria 7

Azizuddin Aybak as their king. He married Shajratud’dur, the slave
girl of Malik Saleh Ayyubi who ruled for a short period. He was
assassinated in 655 A.H.

Following his death, they chose his son Mansur for the highest position.
However, he abdicated the throne after 2 years. Malik Muzaffar
replaced him as a king but only for. a short span of eleven months.
During his tenure, Hulagu Khan attacked Egypt but was defeated.
Malik al-Zahir Ruknuddin captured the throne by assassinating Malik
Muzaffar in 658 A. H. He ruled successfully for 17 years and was
succeeded by Malik Sayed Nasiruddin in 676 A.H. but he was
deposed after one year. Malik Adil Badruddin was then brought to
the throne but he too was deposed after four months. Thus ended the
first category of the Mamluk Dynasty of Egypt in 678 A.H. In total,
they ruled for 26 years. However, some of their attributes are worth
mentioning. Firstly, they introduced the voting system and elected
their kings by majority vote. Secondly, they repulsed all attacks of the
Mongols who had once devastated the entire civilized world.

Mamluk Dynasty Of Egypt (Category Il

It is also called the Qulauniyah Dynasty. After Malik Adil Badruddin,
Abul Ma‘ani Malik Mansur Qala‘un was elected the king of Egypt and
he was considered the first king of the second category of the

Mamluks. He ruled for 11 years.

Egyptian territory expanded during his tenure. Following him Malik
Ashraf Salahuddin Khalil came to the throne but abdicated it on his own
after a few days however, the people forced him back to the throne and
his reign spanned over 44 years and came to an end only after his death
in 737 AHL Malik Adil Katbagha Mansuri succeeded him but he did not
rule for even a month. After him, Mansur Hosamuddin ascended the
throne. He was assassinated two years after his ascension and Malik
Muzaffar Ruknuddin was elected for one year. Following him Malik
Mansur Abu Bakr was given the throne in 741 A.H. but he was sent into
exile. Malik Ashraf replaced him but he was also exiled after eight
Months, and Malik Nasir Ahmad received the throne. Following his
assassination in 745 AH., Abul Fida Malik Saleh Ismail came to the
throne. His reign lasted for not more than one year. Malik Kamil

358 The History of Islam
Sh’abani ascended the throne in 746 A.H. but was deposed only-after
few months. Malik Muzaffar Hajji was given the throne in 747 AH. but
was assassinated within a year. Nasir Hasan then acceded the throne in
748 A.H. He too was assassinated after reigning for 14 years. Malik
Saleh then came to the throne in 762 AH. and was deposed in 765 A.H.
and was replaced by Malik Mansur bin Haji and he too, was deposed
after a tenure of two years and the throne came to Malik Ashraf
Sh’abani_ who was assassinated after 11

Malik Mansur Ali in 778 AH. and died a
by Saleh Hajji in 783
of 8 or 9 years,
covered a peri
substantial diffe

fter 5 years. He was replaced
AH. and abdicated the throne Passing a duration
and with this ended Qalaukiah Dynasty. This dynasty
04 of 114 years. Category one and two showed no
Tence in respect of style of governance.

Mantuk Dynasty of Egypt (Category Lid)

It is also known as the Cherkesy (Circassian) Dynasty. Malik Tahir
Barquq replaced Malik Saleh Hajji who belonged to the Cherkesy
(Circassian) tribe, from northwest Caucus. Since kings from the same
tribe later ruled Egypt, Malik Tahir Barquq .came to be known as the
first king from the Ayyubid slaves. His reign covered a period of 9 years
between 792 A.H. to 801 A.H. and he was replaced by Malik Nasir who
ruled for 4 years. Even though Timur made Egypt a tributary for 5 years
during his tenure by and large, the Mamluk Dynasty remained safe.
Malik Nasir was instrumental in setting up Hanafi, Shafe’i, Maliki, and
Hambali prayer carpets.at the Ka’bah. At the outset, religious scholars
opposed this new arrangement but it subsided in due course for this
step created no disruption in the religion. He was followed by a number
of kings like Malik Mansur, Abu Nasser Sheikh, Malik Muzaffar
Ahmad, Malik al-Zahir Abul Fath and Malik Saleh Muhammad who
ascended the throne in 822 A.H. and abdicated on his own after four
months and was replaced by Malik Ashraf Abu Nasir. He was a devout
Muslim and loved to hear Quranic recitations. He ruled until 841 A.H.
and was replaced by Abul Mahasin Abdul Aziz, but was deposed only
after 3 months. Following him Malik Abu Sayeed, known as Malik Al-
Zahir came to the throne and died after reigning for 15 years. He was
Very good-natured and gracious. He was replaced by Malik Mansur
Uthman who was deposed in 857 A.H., after tuling for a few months.

Brief Supplement Of The Islamic History Of Egypt And Syria 359

Following him Malik Ashraf Abu Nasser ruled until 885 A.H. and then
Malik Muayyed came to the throne but was deposed within a few days.
Malik Zahir Abu Sayeed Khushgadam who reigned from 865 A.H. to
892 A.H. and died a natural death then replaced him. Malik Zahir Abu
Sayeed Malyas then took over as king but was sent into exile after a few
months and was replaced by Malik Zahir Abu Sayeed Tamrigha who
was put in prison within two months. Malik Ashraf Abu Nasir then
came to the throne and ruled till 902 A.H. and was replaced by Malik
Abu al-Sadat who was assassinated after ruling for two and half years.
Malik Ashraf Qalduh came to the throne after him but was lost after 11
days and was never found. Malik Zahir Abu Sayeed Qalduh remained
on the throne until 906 A.H. Malik Hanbalat replaced him but was
exiled within a year. Malik Adil ascended the throne in 907 A.H. but
was killed after four and half months. Malik Ashraf Abu Nasser Qalduh
then came to the throne and reigned over the country for 15 years.

Sultan Salim I Uthmani invaded Egypt in 922 A.H. and brought about
an end to the Cherkesy Dynasty by defeating Malik Ashraf Tuman,
and annexed Egypt to his kingdom and along with this ended the

nominal Abbasid Dynasty of Egypt.

This third category of Ayyubid slaves, which is known as Cherkesy
Dynasty, covered a period of 130 years. Subsequent to the Ayyubid
Dynasty, three categories of the Mamluks reigned over Egypt for a total
period of 270 years. In the beginning of these Mamluks, Hulagu Khan
had devastated the Abbasid Dynasty in Baghdad, but in a very short
time, as mentioned above, the Abbasid dynasty was revived by these
Mamluks and continued until their end in 922 A.H. Even though these
Abbasid caliphs were treated only like spiritual guides or figureheads
they after all, held a unique religious status and were very useful to the
Mamluks for no Muslim ruler would dare commit aggression against
them. Similarly, the Mamluks never posed a challenge to the Abbasid
Caliphate and they passed their days in peace and safety.

ow a list showing clearly which Abbasid
‏ط‎ king. It also should be kept in mind
dentials from the Abbasid Caliph and a
h the approval of the Egyptian king.
les wheré some caliphs enjoyed such a
yptian king would not dare

It appears proper to give bel
Caliph corresponded to whic
that a new king had to seek cre
New Caliph was installed wit
Nevertheless, there were examp:
strong position and power that an 8

360 . The History of Islam

oppose their installation. However, at times, relations between the
caliph and the king suffered setbacks and fluctuations. The caliph
enjoyed the support and sympathy of the Muslim masses while the
Egyptian king lived by his power. However, King Salim Uthmani did
away with such a conflicting situation and assimilated spiritual
leadership and kingship into one and he manifested that.

Abbasid Caliphs of Egypt

No. Name of the Caliph Year of Accession
1 Mustansir Billah bin Zahir Bi-Amrillahbin 659 A.H.
Nasir Li-Dinillah

2 Hakim Bi-Amrillah bin Mustarshid Billah 660 A.H.
3 Mustakfi Billah bin Hakim Bi-Amrillah 701 A.H.
4 Wathigq Billah 702 AH.
5 Hakim Bi-Anrrillah bin Mustakfi Billah 742 AH.
6 Mutazid Billah 753 A.H.
7 Mutawakkil Alallah 762 A.H.
8 Mustasim Billah bin Muhammad Ibrahim 778 AH.
9 Musta’in Billah 808 A.H.
10 Mu’tazid Billah 815 A.H.
11 Mustakfi Billah 845 AH.
12 Qasim Bi-Amriliah bin Mutawakkil 858 A.H.
13° Musta‘id Billah bin Mutawakkil 858 A.H.
14

Mutawakkil Ali bin Yaqub bin Mutawakkil 872 ‏1م‎
‎15 Mustamsik Billah 903 A.H.
saan Salim Uthmani conquered Egypt and Caliph Mustamsik handed
on oo him the Scepter and other relics, which were signs of the
M Pp te, and pledged his allegiance to him. Sultan Salim Uthmani took
‘ustamsik with him from Egypt to Constantinople where he died.

——Chapter 19 _
Ottoman Dynasty

We have now covered the early part of 10% century Hijri however, in
order to deal with the birth of the Ottoman Dynasty, we have to go
back as far as to the seventh century.

The plundering Turk tribes, known as Oguz and Ghazan Turks, had
injured and eroded the prestige of the Seljuk Dynasty by entering Iran
and Khorasan. Histories ranging from the Chinese province of
Hanchu to Morocco bear witness to the adventures of these Oguz
Turks, By capturing Sanjar Seljuk, they had sent people into terror.
With the rise of Genghis Khan, their power had diminished
considerably. Their remaining ability to strike awe in their enemies
suffered a complete . setback after the bloodshed and destruction
caused by the Genghezids. They had already divided themselves into
@ number of tribes and foreign invasions made them spread widely in
all directions. A certain tribe drifted to Egypt and joined the Egyptian
army, while several other of their tribes left Egypt and settled in
Armenia and Azerbaijan. Since no mighty king rose among them,
history is silent about much of their activity. By virtue of their being in
Iran and Khorasan as conquerors; they had imbibed the qualities of
362 The History of Islam

mind and spirit and learned Islamic manners. However, even amidst
power and conquest they had not given up the love of pastoral life.
Therefore, most of these tribes settled in the green postures and forests
of Khorasan, Iran and other such countries.

When the Mongols invaded Khorasan, the Oguz Turks of Khorasan
shifted to Armenia and settled there. Their chief was Sulaiman Khan.
He and his comrades were devout and true Muslims like the Seljuks.
The courage, determination and his behavior with his people attracted
many other Oguz Turks who were still unsettled and this added to his
strength. It was the era of Genghezid invasions and plunder and every
head of a family had to rely on his own strength and resources to
withstand the onslaughts. In such a delicate situation, only their unity
and solidarity could save them frcm utter destruction. Actually,
Sulaiman Khan, by acting wisely and cautiously, not only added to his
power and strength but also spared it for the future. The destruction
of the Khwarizm Shah Dynasty provided him with an opportunity to
make use of their men and materials for his own purpose.

Three years before his demise, Genghis Khan sent a huge army in 621
AH. to invade the Konya based Seljuks. Konya was then ruled over by
Alauddin Kaiqbad Seljuk. It has already been mentioned that the Seljuks
rulers of this Empire continuously fought with the Romans (Christians).
Now, with the passage of time, this Empire showed weaknesses and
decline. When Sulaiman Khan came to know that Alauddin Kaiqbad
was targeted by the Mongols, he felt very sad for the Sultan who was a
Believer while the Mongols were Unbelievers. Moreover, the Konya
kingdom was constantly engaged in holy war against the Christians
while the Mongols had devastated the world of Islam.

Sulaiman Khan ordered his tribesmen to march ahead to join
Alauddin and reinforce his army so that he could have an opportunity
to be honored with martyrdom. Even though the actual number of
Sulaiman’s troops is not known, he sent his son Artughril at the head
of 444 fighters as a vanguard. One of the strange things of history
Occurred on this occasion. These warriors in defense. of faith were
marching ahead from Armenia when, about the same time, a Mongol
force appeared from another side to take on Alauddin Kaiqbad’s
troops. Now, as the battle between the Mongol and Seljuk forces broke

Ottoman Dynasty 363

out and the Mongols were about to gain the upper hand Sulaiman
Khan‘s son Artughril appeared on the scene with Muslim soldiers. He
witnessed two forces fighting against each other and one party about
to be defeated when he joined the weak and dominated side without
identifying it and gave such a fierce fight that the Mongols were
uprooted and they took to their heals leaving behind nothing but dead
bodies. Alauddin Kaiqbad Seljuk who was facing certain defeat
expressed his utmost joy over this sudden and most unexpected
victory. He hugged Artughtil out of love and thankfulness. Artughril
on the other hand, expressed his happiness over extending timely help
to his Muslim brethren fighting in the way of Allah Almighty.
Artughril and Alauddin were still in an ecstasy of delight when
Sulaiman Khan also reached the battlefield. Alauddin’s joy knew no
bounds and he not only thanked but also honored the father and the
son with costly garments, He then bestowed on Artughril an estate
near Angorah, present day Ankara, and appointed Sulaiman Khan as
the Commander-in-chief of his army.

Alauddin’s prudence is commendable when he gave Artughril the
best piece of land under his possession. The Konya Empire was very
vast. But, gradually, the northern and western parts of Asia Minor
were occupied by the Romans and with their expansionist designs
they were going ahead capturing one area after another. The Mongols
had separated thé southeastern areas on the other hand, and their
thirst for more territory was going on unabated. Thus, the Konya
Empire was being ground between two milistones. With the result, it
was reduced to -a small-State and was counting its days to extinction.
In such a situation, it was rather a wise step on the part of Alauddin to
allot Artughril an estate bordering the Roman Empire and appointed
Sulaiman Khan as Commander-in-Chief to stop the advances of the
Mongols. Sulaiman Khan was campaigning against the Mongols and
while sailing along the Euphrates with his troops and crossing the
river fell into the river and succumbed to death. But Artughril kept
going ahead with his mission of wresting Christian lands and
expanding the borders of his own country. The King of Konya looked
upon his constant successes with appreciation and satisfaction. -

Alauddin Kaigbad died in 634 A.H. and was succeeded by his son,
Ghayathuddin Kaikhusro. In the wake of the constant Mongol

364 The History of {slam

invasions, Ghayathuddin Kaikhusro was reduced to the position of
giving tribute to the Mongols. However, Artughril was safe for he was
governing a territory that was out of danger. The Mongols also had no
time to turn to Asia Minor. Hulagu Khan, the grandson of Genghis
Khan put out the lamp of the Abbasid Caliphate of Baghdad in 656
AH. A son was bom to Artughril in 657 A.H. who was named,
Osman Gazi (or Osman I which is Turkish for the original Arabic
Uthmman). This is the same Osman Gazi after who the later Turkish
kings came to be known as Ottoman kings. Artughril died in 687 A.H.
when Osman was 30. The King of Konya issued Osman Gazi
credentials for ruling over the entire territory once ruled by his father.
Being highly impressed with his all-round abilities, Ghayathuddin
Kaikhusro appointed Osman Gazi as the Commander-in-Chief of his
army and gave him his daughter in marriage. Now Osman Gazi
settled in Konya and, ina very short time, he rose to become the Prime
Minister and held the status of delivering Juma (Friday) addresses
instead of Ghayathuddin Khusro.

Osman Khan

Ghayathuddin Khusro was killed during a Mongol disturbance. He
had no son but a daughter, who was married to Osman Gazi. Thus,
Osman Gazi was unanimously chosen as the king of Konya. Since then
the Empire founded by the descendants of Israel bin Seljuk in 470
A.H. ended in 699 A.H. giving place to the Ottoman Empire which
continued until the recent past. Israel bin Seljuk was the person whom
Sultan Mahmud Ghaznawi had confined in the Kalinjar Fort in India.

At the time of Osman Gazi’s accession, the Konya Empire was weak
and powerless and it was unable to withstand the two-pronged
onslaught of the Romans and the Mongols. But Osman Gazi injected
new life into the dying Empire and the secrets of Osman Gazi’s
success lay in his generous and polite attitude towards everyone.
Osman Gazi was a devout Muslim on one hand and was endowed
with bravery of the highest ‘order on the other. First, he wrested the
city of Eskisehir (Dorylaeum of ancient times) from the Romans and
set up his capital there. This choice proved auspicious. Right after his
accession to the throne, Osman Gazi had to deal with the enmities and

Ottoman Dynasty 365

intrigues of his rivals, which he ultimately put down and silenced his
detractors and opponents. Had Osman Gazi shown weakness at any
stage his rivals would have rose in Open revolt but his bravery,
courage, determination and utter fearlessness stood him in good stead
on every occasion. Thus, when the Christians built a strong army to
invade Konya at the initial stage of his coming to power, Osman Gazi
called his courtiers for consultations. On this occasion Osman Gazi‘s
uncle the brother of Artughril, an old man, expressing his opinion,
said, “We must avoid conflicts with the Christians and keep peace and
friendship with them because in case of an engagement with the
Mongols other Turkish commanders will invade our country in support
of the Christians and we may not be able to face the joint attacks of
our enemies.” Osman Gazi grew furious at these discouraging words
of his old uncle and he shot an arrow at him, which led to his death on
the spot. This horrible scene choked off the dissenting voices, if any.
Thus, Osman Gazi launched a massive attack on the Christians and
conquered and brought Eskisehir under -his control; and shifted his
capital from Konya to Eskisehir. Following this victory, Osman Gazi
marched ahead against the Christians winning one city after another
and forced them out from Asia Minor as well. Witnessing the surging
flood of Osman Gazi's victories with utmost anxiety the Caesar of
Constantinople in route to induce the Mongols to invade Osman
Gazi’s country from the eastern side. His plan was to turn the tide
towards the Mongols. The plan bore fruit. Instigated by Caesar, the -
Mongol invaders began to launch attacks on Osman Gazi's country.
But the victorious army of Osman was in high spirits and boisterous
form bubbling with zeal and determination. Osman Gazi dispatched a
part of his army under his son, Orkhan, a fighter matchless for his
gallantry, to combat the Mongols and he himself rose against the
Christians with added force and determination. Orkhan repulsed
every Mongol attack and forced them to give up their mission. After
the successful campaigns against the Mongols, Orkhan hurried to his
father and the joint command of father and son left no choice for the
Christians but to vacate city after city and the marching Muslim
fighters and the flood of Muslim victories reached the coast of the
Black Sea conquering Asia Minor rather easily. Orkhan, on the other
hand, pushed the Christians back and conquered Bursa, which was a

366 The History of Islam

magnificent city of Caesar of Rome situated near the western coast of
Asia Minor. At the time of the conquest of Bursa Osman Gazi was ona
sickbed in Eskisehir. When the good news on the conquest of Bursa
came to him, Osman Gazi at once decided to go to Bursa. He asked his
commanders to have him buried in Bursa even if he died on the way.
However, Osman Gazi arrived in Bursa and died a few days after
reaching there in 727 A.H.

Osman Gazi said addressing his son, “I don’t feel sad over my fast
approaching death for a worthy son like you is going to succeed me.
Make it a point not to give up devotion to Allah Almighty, piety,
mercy and justice. Your first and foremost duty should be to put into
practice the codes of Shari'ah (the Islamic system of law).” At the end,
he urged his son to make Bursa to serve as the center of his Empire.
The choice of Bursa to be the capital also pointed to his wisdom and
farsightedness. He knew fully well that a section in Konya was at
enmity with his dynasty and they could at any time rise against his
successor. He was also aware of the fact that the Mongols were against
the Muslims not because of their faith and they were, bit by bit,
coming into the fold of Islam. Thus in case of Konya being the capital
unnecessary conflicts and campaigns would continue. Moreover, the
Christian. countries were a better field for the Muslim fighters. In
addition, Bursa as a capital would serve as a deterrent to the Christians
having expansionist designs. And, above all, Ottoman kings would
find it easier to target Europe and conquer the Balkans. Osman was
thinking on the right lines and his descendants followed suit.

Osman Gazi was brave and he was an outstanding horseman and a
very handsome person. His power of judgment was unique and he
could easily arrive at a decision in the most intricate matters and his
opinions proved right. In beneficence and benevolence, he was
matchless. His intelligence and presence of mind had no parallel.

The Seljuk kings of Konya used the crescent on their flags. Osman
tetained the Crescent on his flags and standards and it became his
national symbol and it is an object of love for the Muslims even today.

Osman Gazi died at the age of 69 years and a few months reigning,
powerfully and magnificently for 27 years. His piety and abstinence
may be gauged from the fact that he left nothing save his armor,

Ottoman Dynasty 367
sword and girdle as personal property. This is the same sword, which
used to be fastened to the waist of every Ottoman king at the time of
his accession to the throne. Let it be clear that when Osman Gazi left
Konya he brought members of the old Seljuk dynasty to power as
rulers or governors and kept in tact their rights and practices that
were enjoyed by them in the past. In other words, Osman Gazi had set
up Konya asa principality under his rule that existed for a long time.
This act of Osman too lends support to the view that Osman Gazi was,
undoubtedly a noble, generous and farsighted by all standards.

Chapter 20
Ottoman Empire

A brief note on Roman Empire

Osman Gazi was succeeded by his son Orkhan, the second in the
Ottoman line. It seems expedient to describe what led to the emergence
of the Roman Empire so that the conditions leading to successful
campaigns and conquests of Orkhan can be comprehended.

Nearly six hundred years before the birth of Isa (Jesus), a virgin from
Italy named Silviya gave birth to twin sons. One of them was named
Romulas and the other was called Rimos. It is said that both were born
of the seed of Mars. The virgin gitl, Silviya was the priestess in the
temple of the goddess Westa where she was conceived by the god’
Mars. Shortly after their birth, the boys Romulas and Rimos were put

in a boat on the river and the waves pushed the two toa forest or to

the foot of a mountain. A female wolf came and suckled them and

began to take care of them. Accidentally a royal shepherd appeared,
lifted both the babies and produced them before the king. The Queen
brought them up under her care. After having grown up, they laid the
foundation of a city, which came to be known as Rome or Roma. Their

descendants founded such a terrible and magnificent Empire that it is

370 The History of Islam
counted among the greatest Empires that ever existed on the earth.
Although the Empire founded by Romulas and Rimos disappeared,
Rome is still the capital of Italy. At its highest point of power and
development it was divided into two, giving birth to Eastern Rome
and Western Rome. Eastern Rome had Constantinople as its capital
while Rome itself was the center of Western Rome: Western Rome
later came under constant attacks by savage people of northern Europe
and Russia and lost much of its power and strength and, at last, it was
also divided into two parts, Genoa and Venice. They had their separate
governments, and with the passage of time, these two were also divided
and _ subdivided into a number of independent states. However, Eastern
Rome suffered fewer foreign attacks and a time came when Rome also
came under the control of Constantinople. The Arabs and the Persians
knew nothing about Wester Rome. When the ruler of Constantinople
confessed Christianity and propagated Christianity the Christian world
held him in esteem and obeyed him. When almost all Europe came to
the fold of Christianity, Caesar of Rome gained special prestige in
Europe. When Christianity spread in Roman held territories, the Arabs
and the Persians began to call every Christian a Roman. Since the
Empire of Caesar of Constantinople was founded on the ruins of the
Greek Empire and Caesar of Rome was in command of the territories
once ruled by Alexander the Great of Greece, the Roman Empire also
came to be called the Greek Empire. Since Asia Minor and Syria too
were parts of the territory ruled by the Caesar of Constantinople, during
the early days of Islam, Asia Minor was considered as a part of the
Roman Empire. Even though Christian rule ended before long in some
of these territories, its rule in Asia Minor remained for a long period.
Thus, Asia Minor was popularly known and considered as Rome. When
a section of the Seljuks set up their government in Asia Minor it came to
be called the Seljuk State of Rome. When Osman Gazi I occupied most
of Asia Minor, he also came to be known as the Sultan of Rome and
Ottoman kings are referred to by this title even to this day.

When the Caesar of Constantinople accepted Christianity, this Christian
state and the Magian state of Persia remained constantly at war with
one another. These conflicts were still going on when the Islamic State
in Arabia appeared on the scene and replaced them in the region. The
Magian Empire broke into pieces and virtually ceased to exist shortly

Ottoman Empire 371

after the advent of Islam but the Christian Empire of Constantinople
survived the onslaughts of Islam for a long time.

During the times of the rightly guided Caliphs, the Christian rule of
the Caesar of Rome was routed in Syria, Palestine and Egypt. And the
Umayyads and Abbasids were constantly at war with the Caesar of
Rome. Asia Minor had been the cause of disagreements between the
Muslims and the Christians for seven hundred years. Sometimes the
Muslims pushed the Christians back as far the Danube pass (Iron
Gate), and the Christians sent the Muslims back to Iran and Kurdistan.
However, the reason behind the long stay of the Christian rule in Asia
Minor was the feuds and civil wars among the various Muslim States.

But the Ottoman Turks did the needful and because of this, they became
appreciated by the Muslims in general. The period we refer to here is
one when the European forces had flooded the vast fields of Syria and
Palestine repeatedly and every time they were driven back by the
Muslim fighters. But, even though they lost battles, they enriched
themselves with light and learning and something of the moral heights
of the Muslims and used all these to educate and enlighten their own
people. Thus, Europe embarked on a new way of life and showed signs
of progress and development. The argument advanced by the European
historians that the Roman Empire was then weak and negligent is quite
misleading and a sheer travesty of facts. The Christians were then
bubbling with rage against the Muslims and the Constantinople Court
was playing a pivotal role in uniting the Christians for a decisive battle
between the Cross and the Crescent. Constantinople was comparativei ,
stronger and more powerful and knew the art of warfare better than
most of the Christian powers. The Crusaders had brought ail the
warring powers together. Moreover, the Caesar of Constantinople used
io establish friendship with powers antagonistic to the Mustims. Thus,
Christian emissaries carried their mission of friendship up to China.
They would offer even their daughters in marriage to attract their rivals
to peace and friendship. Their heinous act of creating discord and
dissension in the Muslim ranks and thus weakening them in not anew
development of the present age but rather an old strategy. If the
Muslims gave up feuds, civil wars and infightings no power on earth ,
could stand in their way. Since Osman Gazi and his descendants were

372 The History of Islam

fully aware of this plain fact, they always spared themselves from
armed conflict with the other Muslim states. They kept their resources
preserved for combating the Christians.

Orkhan

Osman Gazi left behind two sons, Alauddin being the elder and
Orkhan, the younger. Alauddin, although matchless in learning,
insight, courage and determination, Osman Gazi was more impressed
with the military acumen and fighting spirit of Orkhan, and so he
appointed him as the successor to the throne. They were expected to
fight for the throne. But Alauddin, who deserved the throne, preferred
the will of his late father to his own rights and placed the crown on the
head of his younger brother with pleasure and pledged his allegiance
to him. He simply wanted a Piece of land in a village to pass the rest
of ‘his life in perfect peace. But his younger brother wanted something
else. He entreated his elder brother, with the active support of his
courtiers, to accept the role of Prime Minister, which he did after some
feluctance. Even though it was not highly respectable to become the
Prime Minister of his younger brother, he made this sacrifice for the
stability of their dynastic rule. He managed the affairs so adequately
that his name might top the list of the persons who held that post.

Within one year of his accession, he expanded the borders of his
country up to the Danube Pass and ended Christian occupation of
Asia Minor. He, with the wise counsel of his elder brother, issued and
enacted such orders and laws, which played a principal role in
organizing and regulating the administrative affairs of the country.
Until then, it was the common practice that military commanders
were allotted small pieces of land free of levy, for this they had to
provide the required number of soldiers when the country was at war.
Thus, each feudal lord had to serve as a commander on the battlefield.
A large number of Muslims lived in Asia Minor. However,
northwestern Asia Minor had a Christian majority.

Janissaries

With the fall of the northwestem Part of Asia Minor to the Ottoman
Turks, a large number of Christian Prisoners of war were brought to

man Empire
Otto ‏م‎ 373

their capital and many more Christians settled in the M
as Dhimmi (non-Muslim citizens of an Islamic State). lusli territory

Prime Minister Alauddin put into the mind of his
that the big feudal fiefdoms possessed large armies and often poset
danger to the central rule. The feudal lords could use the influx of
Christians against the central rulers. Thus it appeared wise that the
boys from the Christian prisoners and subjects be brought up
and. trained by the central power and an army be built out of them
after teaching them Islam. This army was to be considered as the royal
army and they were not expected to rise against the state. Moreover,
they could prove their mettle as devout Muslims and in such a case,
their relatives would not think of going against their own sons who
made up the royal army. When the plan was put into practice and
several thousand young Christian boys, when properly taught and
trained, rose to such a respected position, the Christians themselves
rushed for admission of their sons into these training centers. When
the first batch of the young Christian trainees was posted as the
bodyguards of the Sultan, he took them toa religions scholler for his
blessings. The sage put his hand on the shoulder of a young trainee
and invoked Allah’s blessings for the new recruits, which was taken as
a good omen. The teachings of Islam and exclusive military training
made them very pious and devout Muslims on one hand and soldiers
of the top rank on the other. These soldiers had nothing to do with
their relatives and they were solely the virtuous servants of Islam and
royal bodyguards. This wonderful army eliminated the danger of revolt
against. the central rule and the commanders and feudal lords could not
even think of such an action. Prime Minister Alauddin opened new
madrasas (schools) in different parts of the country and the Christians
were given the same rights that the Muslims enjoyed. They were given
full facilities to carry out their trade activities and allotted lands for their
churches. This graceful behavior of the rulers caused large number of
Christians to enter the fold of Islam. However, they were free to make
their own choice regarding religion and accepted Islam on their own
desores with full understanding of what they were doing,
This Janissary force was very modern. Alauddin browght abou vided
eforms in the army, gave it uniforms according

374 The History of Islam

them into various regiments and made them follow military rules very
strictly. One hundred, five hundred and one thousand soldiers were
put under separate commands. The army was also divided into
infantry and cavalry. A set of separate laws was enacted for the
volunteers. Reforms were also made in the revenue department and
separate civil and criminal courts in cities and towns were setup.
Alauddin paid attention to the police and municipal departments.
Tribes, which were fond of plunder and piracy, were given similar
tasks to perform. They were organized as a separate force to be sent to
enemy countries to terrorize them with their acts of plunder.

Prime Minister Alauddin paid special attention to construction works
and built mosques, madrasas, hospitals and inns. He also constructed
magnificent parks and palaces in big cities, bridges over the rivers, set
up police posts along the roads and constructed roads to facilitate trade
activities and military movements. He did everything he could do for
the progress and development of Asia Minor and for the peace, integrity
and solidarity of the country as a whole. For these reasons this territory
remains the abode of the Turks and they are still going so strong within
its bounds that no one could dare drive them out of this land,

The Caesar of Constantinople of the day had become disappointed
with the loss of Asia Minor and the fall of many other occupied
territories in Asia. In addition, he was apprehensive of the Turks
landing on European coasts by crossing the sea. However, Orkhan
preferred to consolidate the reforms and developmental works carried
out by his elder brother Alauddin in Asia Minor than to expand their
territory. He devoted twenty long and precarious years of his life to
major reforms in all-the departments of his administration. Had the
following generations conformed they would have been ruling in
Egypt, the Balkans, and Tripoli also.

Caesar’s grandson rose in revolt against him. This civil war among the
Christians proved somewhat advantageous to the Ottomans. The
insurgents sought help from Prince Umar Beg the Turkish Governor
of Iden. He crossed the sea with a fleet of 380 ships and an army of 28
thousand fighters and besieged the city of Demotika in Thrace,
Greece. Afterwards, he took a detachment of two thousand cavalry
soldiers and made progress into Serbia. Caesar held Umar Beg or

Ottoman Empire 375

Umar Pasha back from helping the insurgents by giving him a
substantial payment. Thereupon Umar Pasha returned to his province.
However, Caesar's grandson went out of control, deposed Caesar and
captured the throne. Following his death in 742 A.H. John Palaeologus
ascended the throne of Constantinople. But, the late Caesar's
grandson deposed Palaeologus and occupied the throne in 748 ‏كله‎
‎and ruled until 794 A.H. Two more Caesars replaced him until 857
AH. after which the Turks occupied Constantinople. Soon after
ascending the throne of Constantinople Caesar Cantacuzenus conceded
Sultan Orkhan to be the ruler of Asia Minor and made ali out efforts
to establish good relations with the Sultan. Thus, Caesar sent word to
Orkhan that he wanted to give his exquisitely beautiful daughter to him
in marriage. Caesar knew that Orkhan was then 60 and his daughter
was quite young. He was not unaware of the difference in religion.
Orkhan’ accepted the offer and married Theodora, the daughter of
Caesar. Thus, Caesar bought peace to strengthen his position militarily.
But, eight years after this event, something strange took place. Venice
and Genoa, the two strong naval powers clashed over coastal areas and
ports. Since Genoa and the Caesar of Constantinople had serious
tertitorial disputes both powers were hostile to each other therefore,
Caesar wished success for Venice. Orkhan Gazi, on the other hand,
hated Venice for its hostile activities on the southern coast of Asia Minor
and Venice looked down upon Orkhan's Empire. Thus, Orkhan was felt

compelled to lend his support to Genoa.

At last, Genoa and Venice the two entered into armed conflict near the
Bosphorus Straits. Orkhan’s son, Sulaiman Orkhan was the Governor

of the nearby coastal province.

One night Sulaiman Orkhan took only forty men and landed on the
European coast from a Genoese boat and conquered the fort at
Gallipoli (Turkish: Gelibolu, historical: Callipolis) on the coast, which
was a source of strength for Venice. Following this several thousand
Turks joined their victorious prince at the fort. Genoa felt happy and
encouraged at this new victory while the allies of Constantinople were
Sreatly disappointed after this development. He was about to write to
Orkhan to direct his son to vacate his occupation of the fort when
Caesar himself faced a revolt by his other son-in-law. When Caesar

376 The History of Islam

found his capital under threat, he sought immediate help from Orkhan,
Sultan Orkhan wrote to his son, Sulaiman to leave the fort in return for a
substantial amount of money. Sulaiman was on the verge of acting
upon the order of his father when a violent earthquake erupted and the
city wall of Gallipoli fell to the ground creating greater terror and panic
among the citizens. Assuming it a support from destiny the two
commanders Azdi Beg and Ghazi Fazil, accompanying Sulaiman
crossed the broken city-wall and captured Gallipoli. Immediately after
the seizure Sulaiman, had the walls repaired and deployed a strong
Turkish detachment there. Caesar lodged a complaint with Orkhan
against the occupation of Gallipoli Fort. Orkhan wrote back that his son
with sword did not conquer Gallipoli. The possession of the city took
place by an accident of the city wall falling because of the earthquake.
However, he would write to him to vacate the occupation. But, since
Caesar was constantly in need of military help from Sultan Orkhan and
was himself involved in family feuds, he did not put further pressure
for the return of Gallipoli and Sulaiman continued the occupation. The
occupation of Gallipoli was very necessary to Sulaiman because it kept
safe the western coast of Asia Minor from being usurped by Venice.
Two years after this event, Sulaiman suffered a fall from his horse and
died in 759 A.H. while hunting a falcon.

Sulaiman was a very promising, brave and wise young leader. Orkhan
felt terribly shocked at his tragic death. Had he lived he would have
succeeded his father Orkhan. It was, in fact, a severe blow for a father
like him who succumbed to his frustration in 761 A.H. at the age of 75
years, after reigning marvelously for 38 years.

Orkhan put his father’s will and policy into Practice with courage and
caution and extended his borders up to the European coasts. Orkhan
was wholly and solely interested in European campaigns. The reason
he buried his son at the Danube pass instead of Bursa was that he
didn't want the Turks to ever think of deserting the European coasts.

Murad I

In the wake of his elder son, Sulaiman’s death Orkhan declared his
younger son, Murad as the crown prince. Following the death ‏)هن‎

Ottoman Empire 377

Orkhan, Murad ascended the throne in 761 A.H. at the age of 40 years.
He had a strong desire to expand his territory in Europe but revolt in
the Turk Seljuk State of Karaman engaged his attention and he was
preoccupied with the affairs of Asia Minor. However, he descended
on the European shores, conquered Adrianople and reriamed it Edirne
and made it his capital and from 763 A.H. to the conquest of
Constantinople by Sultan Muhammad Il the capital remained at
Edirne. In the wake of the conquest of Adrianople the people of
Bulgaria and Serbia grew anxious. The Caesar of Constantinople sent
his message to the Archbishop of Rome to deliver sermons on the
Crusade and dispatch reinforcements from all over Europe. The
Christian kings of Serbia and Bulgaria also became alert. Thus, the
united Christian forces moved towards Andrianople in 765 A-H.
Murad 1 sent his commander, Lala Shahin at the head of 20 thousand
soldiers. The Muslim force took on several hundred thousand
Christian troops two stages ahead of Adrianople. This handful of
Muslim soldiers gave a smashing defeat to the huge Christian army.
They fled the battlefield leaving behind a large number of dead and
many captives. Lala Shahin moved forward and conquered large
tracts of enemy territory. -

When the Christians witnessed that Sultan Murad 1 had consolidated
his position in Adrianople, they made another attempt in 778 A.H. to
end the Muslim occupation of European land. Thus, the united forces
from Serbia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Bosnia, Poland, Constantinople and
the Pope of Rome marched ahead to wipe out Murad I and the
Ottoman Empire. The Muslim army was traditionally less than one-
fourth of the Christians’ joint command but the result was the same
and the huge Christian forces had to taste an ignominious defeat. The
king of Serbia bought peace with an annual payment in silver the
availability one thousand horsemen at the time of war for the service
of Murad I, while the ruler of Bulgaria saved himself by offering his
daughter in marriage and promising allegiance. Caesar of
Constantinople presented three beautiful daughters one to be married
to Murad I himself while the other two were to become wives of his
two sons. Caesar now cast out of his mind the idea of driving Sultan
Murad I out of Europe. Overtly he was now making all-out efforts to
Maintain good relations with the Sultan instead. While covertly, he

378 _ The History of Islam

was making secret efforts to get rid of the Sultan. With this purpose in
view he bore the disgrace of visiting the Pope in Rome and seek his
moral support and military help for the expulsion of the Muslim ruler.
When his mission fell flat, he grew afraid of Murad I and to atone for
this he sent his son Theoders to the Sultan to grace him by recruiting
him for the Janissaries. Sultan Murad grew happy with this gesture.

During these days, Sultan Murad I had to leave for Asia Minor to put
down certain revolts and uprisings and handed over the administration
of his occupied European territories to his son, Sawji in Adrianople. In
the absence of the Sultan, one of the sons of the Caesar of
Constantinople named Andronecus came to Adrianople and instigated
Sawji against his father Murad I after establishing intimate friendly
relations with him. He first expressed his dissatisfaction over the
attitude of his own father and then allured him into capturing power
in the absence of his father who was then far away in Asia Minor.
According to his plan, he first invited Sawji to move along with his
army to make a joint attack on Constantinople and capture it and
following the conquest of Constantinople, they would jointly capture
power in Adrianople. Thus, the Christian prince entrapped Sawji with
the lure of power. They jointly besieged Constantinople and declared
their sovereignty. When Murad _[ came to know of this development
he quickiy managed the affairs of Asia Minor and rushed back to
Adrianople. Both the princes hurriedly crossed a river and began
preparations to take on Murad I. Having reached Adrianople Murad I
wrote a strongly worded letter to Caesar Palaeologus to present
himself before him and explain how sucha silly and improper thing
could have happened. Why did he create such a situation by sending
his son to that of mine? Shocked and frightened he, claiming his
innocence, gave word that he would side with him in all actions taken
by him against the insurgent princes. On his part, he proposed that
both the princes be arrested and killed. With this reply Sultan Murad I
himself proceeded and encamped on his side of the river and crossed
it alone and called out at the insurgent camp: “Those who come to me
even now will be forgiven.” Recognizing the king from his voice,
almost all the soldiers came out of the camp and joined him. Thus,
both the princes fled the camp along with a few Turks and Christians.
But both of them were rounded up and produced before the Sultan.

Ottoman Empire 379

He first called his son before him and had him blinded and killed.
Caesar’s son was sent to his father in chains with the message that he
should punish him as he had himself punished his own son. Caesar
found himself ina terrible dilemma, as he could neither kill his son by
his own hand nor invite the wrath of Murad I. However, he preferred
to please the Sultan and blinded his son by dropping acid in his eyes
but left him alive. Murad 1 became happy with Caesar when he knew
that his order was carried out and did not object to his son being alive.
But in fact, Caesar’s son had not lost his eyesight completely and he
regained it after some time.

In 789 A.H. Karaman Turks revolted against Murad I in the western
part of Asia Minor. In a fight near Konya Murad I's son, Bayazid
made a quick charge at his enemy and routed them. Being happy at
the bravery and courage of his son he conferred upon him the title of
Yaldaram or Yil‘diram (lightning). Since the Turk Chieftain was also
the son-in-law of Murad 1, his daughter saved her husband by
entreating her father to pardon his fault.

Sultan Murad I then left on a visit to Asia Minor. The crusading spirit
and fiery speeches of the bishops all over Europe had plunged ail of
Europe into a fiery fury against the Muslims and in the wake of the
fall of Romiliya and some other territories, their blood boiled. Murad
was sitting in Asia Minor unaware of these new developments
throughout Europe that in Serbia, Bulgaria, Albania, Hungary, Glacia,
Poland, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Bosnia they had united to
annihilate the Ottoman dynasty. In 791 A.H., Murad I received the
shocking news while in Bursa, that the twenty thousand troops kept at
Romiliya had been exterminated by Christian forces. The entire
occupied territory in Europe along with the capital, Adrianople lay
under threat of European assault. With the receipt of this news,
Murad I reached Adrianople and took charge of the affairs. In 792
AH. Ali Pasha, the commander of Murad [ subdued the King of
Bulgaria and forced him to obey once again. The king of Serbia
gathered the forces of the different Christian countries at the borders
of Serbia and Bosnia and after setting up his camp there, he himself
threw a challenge to fight. Murad | was also ready for a decisive
battle. He assumed charge of his entire army and appeared on the

380 _ The History of Islam

battlefield of Kosovo. When the Christians found the Muslim troops
one-fourth of their number, they felt doubly encouraged. Since they
had occupied the field from before, they had regained their freghness
and energy unlike the Muslim army, which had arrived at the spot
after continuous fighting and enduring a hard journey and were
completely exhausted. Moreover, the Christians were well acquainted
with the environs and surroundings of the area for they had friends,
relatives and co-religionists there. With the arrival of the Muslim
army, both the parties went into long consultations in their respective
camps during the night. Some of the Christian commanders were of
the opinion that the Muslim troops should be sniped at and
exterminated before the daybreak. However, other commanders, filled
with the pride and conviction of their victory spoke against this,
pleading that a night attack would provide the Muslims an
opportunity to flee in the darkness of night, and they did not like to
spare a single soul. The Muslims, on the other hand, seemed awe-
struck with the size of the Christian army. During consultations in the
royal assembly, some Muslim commanders proposed rows of camels
of burden to be set against the enemy fighters to serve as living
fortifications. Moreover, during the fight these camels would strike
fear into enemy horses setting their battle lines in disorder. However,
Bayazid Yaldaram, the elder son of the Sultan differed for the reason
that such a deceptive device was tantamount to declaring their
weakness anu fear. He wanted to take on the enemy in the open field.
Thus, amidst conflicting views and suggestions, Sultan Murad I could
not arrive at a decision. Furthermore, he experienced with anxiety the
arrival of a strong dusty wind that had begun to blow against the
Muslim troops covering their eyes and faces with dirt. It was certainly
very injurious to the Muslim's fighting temper and spirit. Finding no
way out Sultan Murad I fell prostrate, invoking Allah's help and
succor in this hour of distress. His prayer continued until morning. He
was crying in distress with his head touching the ground, saying:
“This is the fight between Islam and infidelity; look not at our sins but
Protect the honor of Your Messenger (3%) and his Righteous Religion”.
These prayers attracted the Blessings of Allah and it began to rain
heavily by the evening settling the dirt and dust and making the

Ottoman Empire 381

weather pleasant. The rain and wind stopped after a while and the
battle lines were drawn. Murad | put the feudal forces to the right
under Prince Bayazid Yaldaram and those from the Asian territories
to the left under Prince Yaqub, while Murad I himself took over the
command of his bodyguards putting them in the center. He then sent
irregular horsemen and infantry as the vanguard. The center of the
army on the Christian side was under the command of Lazers, the
king of Serbia, the right wing was given to his nephew, the left to the
king of Bosnia. Both the armies clashed and kept fighting firmly until
noon. Sultan Murad I had an iron mace and was striking dead anyone
who faced him. Now the Christian troops showed signs of yielding
and were uprooted at last. The Muslim fighters expedited their
assaults and rounded up the king of Serbia, the Commander-in-Chief
of the Christian army. They fled the battlefield leaving behind
hundreds of thousands of Christians dead and almost all the
prominent commanders as captive. When the King of Serbia was
produced before Murad I, he ordered to keep him safe in prison. But a
Serbian commander’s cunning changed the jubilation of victory into
deep sorrow. While running with the defeated ones he, all of a
sudden, turned his horse towards the chasing Muslims and requested
them to catch him alive and bring him before their king for he hated
Christians and liked to join the Muslim camp after disclosing some
important secrets directly to the Sultan. Moreover, he had decided to
embrace Islam at that time. Thus, the Muslims caught him alive and
produced him to the Sultan along with others, narrating what led to
his arrest. The Sultan grew happy and called him near. He moved
ahead very respectfully and put his head on the feet of the Sultan. This
respectful gesture convinced the Sultan and his courtiers of his utmost
loyalty. Now, raising his head from the Sultan’s feet he took out a
dagger from under his garment and struck it into his chest. The Sultan
Sustained a deep injury and those in attendance tore the Serb to
pieces. When the wounded Sultan felt sure of his death, he ordered
the assassination of the captive King of Serbia, which was
implemented at once. After a while, the Sultan succumbed to his
injuries: Bayazid Yaldaram ‘succeeded his father. The Battle of Kosovo
Proved beyond doubt that even the allied forces of all Europe were

382 . The History of Islam

unable to drive the Muslims out of their lands. Along with this, the
battle put an end to the Christian invasions and crusades, for they had
grown anxious for their own safety. The thought of conquering Syria
had now left their minds. The Christians were now convinced that
their numerical superiority was no match for the spirit and
enthusiasm of the Muslim fighters. This defeat of the Christians is
reckoned among the mest horrible defeats they had ever tasted. This
splendid victory rooted the Muslim’s feet firmly and permanently
onto European soil. The Christians of Spain and France who were
once planning to put an end to the Muslim rule in Granada were now
in a state of constant terror and gave the Muslims ample concessions
and facilities of their own.

Sultan Murad I died at the age of 23 after ruling for 32 years. He was
buried in Bursa. Murad I was a wise, courageous, devout and dervish
like man.

Sultan Bayazid Khan Yaldaram

In 793 A.H., the second year of his succession, Sultan Bayazid
Yaldaram heard that efforts were on against the Muslim rule and that
Serbia and Bosnia were on the verge of revolt. Bayazid hurried to
Europe and annexed the territory from Bosnia to the Danube River
and extended his kingdom from the Euphrates to the Danube in
Walachia (a principality on the lower Danube River). Serbia and
Bosnia had become tributaries of Sultan Bayazid. In Persia, on the
other hand, the Mongol Genghezids had lost their unity and integrity
and broken into: a number of small states ruled over by various
members of the Genghezid House and were at odds with each other.
In view of Bayazid’s power and grandeur, the Caesar of Constantinople
wrote a letter to Bayazid that since he (Caesar) was then in possession
nothing more than Macedonia and some small Islands and these
should be left to him in lieu of his sincere support for him. Bayazid
Yaidaram granted his entreaty and left him free to rule his territories.
Now, after buying peace from Bayazid he devoted his time and
resources to hatching a plot against him. He sent his emissaries to
Iran, Khorasan, Persia, Syria, and Iraq. He also attempted to establish
friendly relations with the Muslim kings of Asia. The Muslim rulers of

Ottoman Empire 383

Armenia, Kurdistan and Azerbaijan were, on the other hand,
knocking at the door of western Asia Minor. Bayazid could easily
crush the Turkmen of Asia Minor but his sense of Muslim
brotherhood held him back. The Ottoman dynasty from the very
beginning had made it their directive principle to avoid conflict with
the Muslim rulers and devote all time and resources in waging holy
wars on the Christians and transform them into a civilized and
enlightened people under the influence of Islamic culture and
civilization. Thus, Bayazid also followed this tactic of his ancestors
and never showed any interest in conquering Muslim territories. But
in the wake of invasions by the Turkmen into Bayazid’s territories in
Asia Minor he was forced to proceed to Asia Minor in 795 A.H. and
brought peace to the troubled areas by defeating, capturing and
killing his enemies, The same year Bayazid obtained the title of Sultan
form Mustasim Billah, the Abbasid Caliph of Egypt. Thus, Bayazid
became the first “Sultan” ofthe Ottoman Empire as kings before him
were called “Amir.” 00

Sultan Bayazid was a brave man with all the traits of a soldier.

However, he absented himself from campaigns from 795 A.H. to 9

AH. and kept confined to his old capital, Adrianople and other parts
of Asia Minor. However, he came to know in 799 A.H. that the allied
forces of Europe were making serious preparations under the
command of king Sajmund of Hungary. France and England had also
joined the European camp against the Ottoman Empire. Even though
Caesar of Constantinople was totally behind their hostile activities, he
could not dare stand openly against Bayazid. The Ottoman ruler
dashed into Europe with lighting speed. He witnessed the European
nations mad with rage against the Ottoman rule for the Pope of Rome
had already issued his verdict that anyone joining the crusade would
be absolved from all sins. A short time before that France and England
were involved in war but the Pope and other influential Christians
brought peace between them and tumed the waves of war against the
Muslims as a whole. A separate strong army from Burgundy was also
Sent to Hungary under the Duke of Burgundy to reinforce the army
under the command of the king of Hungary. Besides a huge force
from France was mobilized under three cousins of the king of France
Namely, James, Philip and Henry. Forces from Germany, Pomerania

384 ___ The History of Islam

(northwestern part of Poland on the Baltic Sea), Austria, Italy and
Jerusalem concentrated in Hungry. The Christian king of Walachia (a
principality on the lower Danube River) who had already offered his
allegiance to Sultan Bayazid Yaldaram also joined the bandwagon
when the Christian forces passed through his territory. However, the
king of Serbia could only lend his secret support. Nevertheless, it
deserves notice that the present Christian forces were not only armed
to the teeth, it consisted of the bravest and most seasoned soldiers of
the Christian world. The commanders of this army were so confident
of their victory that they said most arrogantly and in one voice: “Even
if the sky falls today we shall lift it at the point of our swords”. The
Christian army marched to the Ottoman Empire through two routes
via Walachia and Serbia. Reaching within the bounds of Ottoman
Empire, Sajmund, the king of Hungary and Commander-in-Chief of
the allied forces ordered the invasion and the Christian troops began
to conquer one city after another and every conquered city was reduced
to ashes. Nobody was spared including young and old, women and
children. Bayazid was informed of these reverses after a number of
Ottoman cities had been totally destroyed. He hurried from Asia
Minor to Adrianople. It was likely that Sajmund should have reached
Andrianople by the time Sultan Bayazid would arrive and the latter
would therefore suffer setbacks. But loot and arson on the way delayed
his movements and provided Bayazid with many opportunities to
organize his army and resources and to move ahead to face the enemy.

The Christians were still unaware of the approaching Muslim troops.
When the spies communicated to Duke of Burgundy that the Muslim
army was not far away, he left his lunch with other French
commanders and requested Sajmund for an opportunity to be allowed
to be at the vanguard.

Sultan Bayazid Yaldaram kept his forty thousand strong force behind
an embankment so that the Christians could not measure the actual
strength of the Muslim fighters. Following this, he mobilized his
irregular detachment ahead. The French cavalry moved forward from
the opposite side, while Sajmund followed it at a slower pace. The
French cavaliers crushed the irregular Muslim troops in the vanguard
and ascended the embankment in a fit of zeal after gaining an initial
success. The Muslim detachments took advantage of the situation and

Ottoman Empire 385

moved behind the French invaders on the embankment. Thus, the
Christian troops in the vanguard were besieged and smashed by the
Turkish soldiers and very few of them escaped death to tell the story
of their complete rout. The Christian camp became terrified. Following
this Bayazid launched a massive attack with such immeasurable zeal
and fervor that it came to them as a great shock. Bayazid’s army
worked like an iron mace, which demolished the sand walls of the
Christians wherever it hit. Even though Bavaria, Austria and Hungry
fought with determination, the ferocious swords of the Muslim army
did not allow them to live any longer. The battle, which was fought on
a very large scale, came to its logical end in a very short time. Never
before had such a huge Christian army been routed so ignominiously
in spite of being so large in numbers and resources. Sajmund, the king
of Hungary fled for his life. A number of princes, dukes and
commanders were either killed or caught. The Duke of Burgundy was
among the captives. Not less than one hundred and fifty thousand
Christian soldiers lost their lives on the battlefield. Following the
victory the Sultan came to inspect the battlefield and found it covered
with dead bodies. Since he also found the bodies of Muslim soldiers as
well, he while expressing regret over their sacrifice, showed his
determination to avenge their blood. He then ordered the captives to
be brought before him. The prisoners were divided into several parts. |.
Ordinary soldiers were made slaves and distributed among the
Muslim troops while others were put to death. The Christian
commanders’ both their arms were tied behind their backs and sent to
some of the big cities to highlight the Muslim victory over the
Christians. A section comprising of princes and dukes and sovereign
tulers numbering twenty-five including the Duke of Burgundy was
brought to the Sultan. The Sultan took them and came to Bursa, his
Asian capital. He then called all of them and said, “You people
unnecessarily took the trouble of invading our territories, and Iam
myself determined to invade Hungary, Austria, France, Germany and
Italy. 1 have resolved to feed my horse at the altar of St. Peter. I shall,
therefore, meet you in your countries and [ shall be very happy if you
Come to the battlefield with greater preparations than you made for
our last battle. Had I feared you in the least | would have released you
on your promise that you will never rise against me. Instead I insist on
You to go to your respective countries and plunge into making hasty

386 The History of Islam

preparations against me.” Saying this Bayazid set all the princes and
commanders free.

Shortly after this, he hurried to Europe at the head of a strong army.
He tumed to Greece first, conquered Athens in 800 A.H. and
dispatched 30 thousand Greeks to be settled in Asta minor. He then
sent his commanders to Austria and Hungry along with troops and
they won most parts of those countries. Being aware of the intriguing
activities of the Caesar of Constantinople Bayazid decided to conquer
and put an end to that Christian rule, but Caesar saved the situation
once again on the promise of building a mosque in Constantinople for
the Muslims with a Muslim Qadi (judge) to look after their affairs and
provide all possible facilities for the Muslim traders besides paying a
huge amount annually in tribute. Bayazid accepted to these conditions
and left Constantinople.

However, Bayazid’s conquests of Greece and Athens sent terror into
the heart of Caesar and he sent an envoy to Timur (Tamerlane) with a
letter delineating: “My dynasty exists from the days of old and we
have been ruling Constantinople since the days of the Last Prophet
and the Rightly Guided Caliphs. We have signed peace treaties with
the Umayyads and the Abbasids and none among them ever desired
to conquer Constantinople. But at present, the Ottoman Empire has
annexed our territories and has its evil eye on Constantinople. In the
wake uf the existing situation, L find no way but to seek your help.
Bayazid is making victory after victory in Europe and his power is
expanding rapidly and, Tam sure, he will invade your territories once
he is free from his European campaigns and you will then find him a
formidable adversary. Besides, Bayazid had given Sultan Ahmad
Jalaie and Qara Yusuf Turkman a piace of respect in his kingdom
when they had revolted against you and they have kept instigating
Bayazid to invade your country. It is tantamount ‘to showing utter
disrespect on you when your opponent is so important and you are
unable to do anything in this connection. Now it is the clear demand
of the situation that you make no delay in launching an attack on Asia
Minor and save me from the disastrous activities of Bayazid. 1 am
ready to lend my help and support to you in your action within my
power and resources.” Even though the letter carried Caesar's selfish
feelings and Timur was not 30 gullible to be entrapped by these words

Ottoman Empire 387

the issue of giving shelter to rebels did not go out of his mind.
Caesar's letter came to Timur at a time when he was staying at
Haridawar on the bank of the river Ganges in India. Timur read the
letter and sent back the envoy in a hurry without showing any
reaction. Although he was planning to attack the eastern provinces of
India, the content of the letter agitated his mind in a way that he lost
interest in further advances and the consolidation of his conquests and
hurried to Samarkand. In Samarkand, he made all-out preparations
against the Ottoman Empire to establish exactly who was worthy of
being called the conqueror of the world. Bayazid was on his mission
to feed his horse at the famous church of St. Peter after conquering
Hungary and Austria when he came to know that Caesar was
working hard to join hands with Timur against him. Although he had
no fear of Timur nor was he sure that Timur would fight with him in
support of Caesar, he decided to teach a lesson to Caesar.

Timur, on the other hand, arrived at the western border of Asia Minor
and created large-scale loot, arson and carnage in Azerbaijan and
Armenia and brought a reign of terror all over the region. Now the
frontiers of Bayazid’s Empire were within his reach. In the wake of
Timor’s conquest of Azerbaijan Bayazid dispatched a detachment
under the command of his son Tughril. But Timur practiced caution
and instead of plunging into a direct fight based his strategy on slow
‘movements towards the cherished goal. First, he dispatched circulars
to all his occupied territories ordering his seasoned soldiers and
selected forces to join his camp without loss of time. Moreover, he had
a large number of men under the guise of beggars, mendicants, Sufis,
Sermonizers, traders and tourists to enter the frontiers of Ottoman
Empire. Furthermore, he sent expert and experienced spies into the
forces of Sultan Bayazid to contact the Mongol soldiers forming part
of the Ottoman army and cavalry to instill in their mind that their real
leader and ruler was none but Timur and, hence, to fight under the
banner of Bayazid Yaldaram, the Turkish ruler was nothing short of
treachery, dishonesty and dishonor. This secret invasion of Timur
Worked wonders, and a big section of the Ottoman soldiers lost
nterest in the victories of Bayazid. The spies also put into the minds of
the Mongol soldiers that while they were victims of Bayazid’s
Miserliness Timur was very génerous in matters of his soldiers’
Salaries and general welfare and spoils of war.

388 ___ The History of Islam

Being satisfied with these preliminaries Timur thought it proper to
first conquer Syria and Egypt so that Bayazid could get no help from
those two countries. He then wrote a letter to Bayazid to hand over
the rebel, Qara Yusuf Turkman, otherwise he would invade his
country. Following this he attacked Syria in 803-A.H. After the
conquest of Syria and Egypt, Timur marched to Baghdad and
conquered it also. He was in Baghdad when he received the reply to
his letter from Bayazid, who rejected his demand with utter contempt.

Timur anticipated such a reply and had set himself to make
preparations much before his writing the letter to Bayazid. However,
he left Baghdad in a hurry and reached Azerbaijan and devoted his
time and energy to organizing supply, communication and
intelligence departments anew. Bayazid, on the other hand, sent an
army headed by Qara Yusuf Turkman to vacate the Mongol
occupation of Syria and do away with Timor’s Governors, and he
himself marched to take on Timur.

Timur had invaded the frontier city of Sivas where Bayazid’s son,
Artughril was stationed as a garrison commander. Artughril and his
troops shut themselves in the fort and fought a defensive battle.
However, Timur besieged the fort and used his devices to break the
fort. He dug under the very foundations of the fort from the outside.
When pits were formed at different spots under the walls the wooden
beams that were set in those pits were set on fire with the result the
walls sank in. Thus, finding no way out the inmates of the fort
surrendered and were rounded up. They were four thousands in all.
As Timur had applied a new device to sink the fort into the ground, so
likewise he used a horrible and novel way of giving punishment.
Instead of sparing their lives he ordered that their arms be tied behind
their backs and fastened their heads to their knees like a bundle and
threw them all into the deep trenches dug for this purpose. He then
bridged the trenches with wooden planks‘and poured earth on it.
Thus, the captives were all buried alive.

When Bayazid Yaldaram heard of these inhuman atrocities meted out
to his son and his four thousand soldiers he boiled with anger and lost
his balance and this was exactly the reaction that Timur wanted to
produce in Bayazid. It was a situation where Timur was practicing

Ottoman Empire 389

calm and composure while Bayazid had not only lost his temper but
his mental balance also.

Bayazid had the information that Timur had with him 5 hundred
thousand selected soldiers. Bayazid was in great haste to avenge the
blood of his son and so he took with him as many soldiers as he could
and marched to Sivas where his son was buried alive and where his
enemy was lying with his troops. Being informed that Bayazid was on
way to Sivas with lightening speed, Timur played a trick and left Sivas
at a time when he was sure that Bayazid could not change his route
and shifted to Ankara and besieged it. When Bayazid arrived in Sivas,
the sight of his son’s burial ground turned him mad with anger and
when he came to know that Timur had shifted to Ankara, which lay in
the heart of Asia Minor, he could not put up with the loss of a moment
to have his revenge. Had he practiced caution he would have first sent
word to the Syrian and Egyptian commanders to make advance
towards Timur, and he himself could have made all out efforts to cut
all the supply lines of Timur. Moreover, he would have allowed
Timur to move towards the western cities even at the cost of their
destruction for those cities were thickly inhabited by Turks, the
staunch supporters of the Ottoman Empire and could then target
Timur on all sides. Thus, Timur could easily be surrounded and
caught. But Timur expected no such acute sense of wisdom from
Bayazid and he proved perfectly correct. Bayazid, in his fit of burning
anger, rushed to Ankara with such a rage and speed that, out of 4
hundred thousand troops he could only arrive with one hundred and
twenty thousand at the break neck speed he was traveling at and due
to their continuous movement they were completely exhausted. It was
a blunder that Bayazid committed and he had to pay dearly for it.

At the time when Bayazid reached near Ankara with his extremely
tired army, Timur was there with his troops physically fresh and
ready to combat his enemy. Besides, Timur had encamped at a place
strategically very important and advantageous and he had dug
trenches at various spots.

Bayazid came and, in order to show disrespect to Timor’s military
strength, led his troops to a high hilly spot to hunt wild animals. Thus,
the exhausted army, instead of taking sometime to rest and regain

390 The History of Islam
freshness they were overtaken by more exhaustion. In addition, the
soldiers had to go without water with the result that about five
thousand soldiers died of thirst’ and the rest became disillusioned at
his whimsical behavior. On his return, Bayazid found that his camp
had already been captured by the enemy who had also turned the
coarse of the stream that was to provide water for the Turkish
soldiers. Now the military acumen of Timur and his strategies had
already won the battle. Bayazid was left with no choice but to lead his
thirsty and extremely exhausted soldiers against an enemy much
superior in number, strength, strategy, spirit and freshness.

The Battle of Ankara

On Dhul Hijjah 19, 804 A.H. (July 20, 1402 A.C.) battle lines were
drawn between Bayazid and Timur and troops from both sides came
out to measure swords and the battle came to its logical end by sunset.
Bayazid had to combat against five to eight hundred thousand fresh
troops of Timur with his one hundred and twenty thousand exhausted
and disillusioned soldiers. Besides, as was expected, the Mongol
section deserted Bayazid during the fight and the Christian
commanders showed weakness and timidity and turned the whole
event into a disaster for the Ottomans. However, the principal reason
behind this smashing defeat was Bayazid’s shortsightedness and
indiscretion. His idiocies and wild zealotry could not bring him
anything else. Timur, on the other hand, showed patience, far-
sightedness, military acumen and strategy of the highest order at
every step. However, the backbreaking defeat of Bayazid caused
immense and immeasurable loss to the world of Islam and Europe,
which could easily have become a Muslim land but because of the
defeat of Bayazid slipped into Christian hands.

Amir Timur had his battle-line as follows:

Prince Mirza Shah Rukh was put as commanding officer of the right
wing which had forces commanded by Khalil Sultan-Sulaiman Shah,
Rustam Birlas Sonjak Bahadur, Musa, Tawi Bugha, Amir Yadgar etc.
Mirza Sultan Husain was heading a strong force to reinforce the
right wing.

Ottoman Empire 391

The left wing was commanded by Nuruddin Jalair, Barmazag Birlas,
Ali Fanjain, Mubash’shere, Sultan Sanjar Birlas, Umar ibn Taban etc.
and Prince Miran Shah was appointed as their commanding officer.
The detachment to reinforce the left wing was under the joint
command of Abu Bakr Amir Jahan Birlas and Pir Ali Salduz.

The right side of the main body comprised commanders like Tash
Timur, Aghlan Uzbek, Ahmad Jalal Yusuf, Baba Hajji Suji, Sikandar
Hindu Bogha, Khawaja Ali Airwi, Daulatemur, Muhammad Faujain
and Idris Qarchi etc. while Beg Wali, Elchikdai Hari Malik, Arghun
Malik Sufi Khalil, Esan Timur, Sanjar, Husain and Umar Beg, sons of
Nekroz, Jon Arbani, Beri Beg Faujain, and Zirak Birles were given
charge of reinforcements.

The left side of center was given to Tawak’kal Qara’gara, Ali
Mahmud, Shah Wali, Sunjak Tankari, Bezish Khawaja Muhammad
Khalil, Luqman, Sultan Birlas, Mirak Pir Muhammad, Shankram,
Sheikh Aslan Ilyas, Kapak Khani, Daulat Khawaja Birlas, Yufus Birlas,
and Ali Qabchag while its reinforcement was handed over to
Muhammad Sultan, Pir Muhammad, Iskander, Shah Malik, Ilyas
Khawaja, and Shamsuddin.

The above divisions of army apart, Timur took charge of the forty strong
squads to be kept reserved for reinforcing the side needing it. Besides,
he had employed a large number of mountain-like war elephants, which
were put ahead of the army rows, while Bayazid had none.

Sultan Bayazid handed over the left wing to Sulaiman Chalpi, the
tight wing to his Christian brother-in-law, the brother of his wife,
while he himself headed the main body and kept behind his three
Sons, Musa, Isa and Mustafa. ١

With the beat of the war drums, brave soldiers from both sides fell
Upon each other. The fight between the two was going on when Prince
Abu Bakr launched such a massive attack on the Turkish army that it
fell into complete disorder. Immediately after that, Sultan Husain
Made another attack on Sulaiman while Muhammad Sultan launched
the third assault. Noticing reverses in the left wing of the Turkish
oops, Muhammad rushed to reinforce Sulaiman Chalpi. The Turkish
army fought so firmly and gallantly that the Mongols, despite their

32 ____ The History of slam

superior number, had to retreat to a plateau. Bayazid, ina fit of anger,
lost his head and the fact that he was the Commander-in-Chief of his
army went out of his mind. Instead of keeping an eye on the entire
battlefield, he kept himself engaged throughout with the task of
driving back attacks of the main body of the Mongols.and he achieved
his purpose. Now, without looking towards the right and left wings of
his army and_ taking care of their needs, he ascended the Plateau and
occupied it by dislodging six major Mongol commanders.

Timur, on the other hand, had his eyes on every part of the battlefield
and was watching every move without getting directly involved in the
fight. Like a seasoned commander, he was pushing ahead and drawing
back his troops according to the need of the hour. When he noticed
Bayazid’s victorious advance, he directed his fresh squads to charge at
the right and left wings of his enemy with the result Bayazid was
separated from a greater part of his army. At this juncture, the Mongol
troops deserted Bayazid’s army and joined the Mongol camp and
caused great harm to the Turkish battle line. Now Timur had the
opportunity he was waiting for. He ordered his army to make an all-
out attack on the enemy with the result Bayazid’s right wing leader
was killed in action and his wife's brother, a Christian commander fled
the battlefield in a wretched condition. Bayazid himself was surrounded
on all sides. But, in sucha crucial moment, Bayazid and his devoted
soldiers showed their mettle with their swordsmanship in a manner
that they alone could do. Bayazid alone was more than a match for the
Mongols and pushed them back wherever he made his swift but
deadly charge. At times, he tore apart Mongol lines and reached the
spot from where Timur was directing his soldiers. Now the darkness
of night enveloped the surroundings and Bayazid, the Turkish lion
was captured alive falling from his tumbling horse, while his devoted
fighters had already laid down their lives and with his capture were
laid to rest all the hopes of the Muslim world to conquer Europe.

If nature is not transformed man has it in his nature to admire its
nobility. In spite of being a beast, the lion is held in high esteem by
everyone throughout the world. Man likes to be likened to a lion and
even though the ox and horse are so useful, nobody likes to be
compared with them. The fame of Rustam and the greatness and glory

Ottoman Empire 393

of Khalid bin Waleed and Salahuddin Ayyubi center around their acts
of valor. The event of Rustam’s assassination as mentioned in
Shahnama fills us with grief. When a valiant fighter meets with failure,
we feel offended and Sultan Bayazid Yardarm’s capture on the
battlefield of Ankara is a soul-shattering tragedy of human history.

Had Timur been defeated in the battlefield of Ankara it would have
been the loss solely of Timur and his dynasty not of Islam as a whole.
In such a case the territories under the occupation of Timur would
have been given to another Muslim king and not to forces antagonistic
to Islam but Bayazid’s defeat was a total loss for Islam, for the
Muslim’s advance towards Europe came to halt all of a sudden,
reviving a Europe that was breathing its last.

Had the result of the battle gone in favor of Bayazid it could be linked
to the battle fought in the battlefield of Asia Minor in 463 A.H. when
Sultan Alp Arsalan Seljuk gave a severe beating to two to three
hundred thousand Christian troops with his twelve thousand fighters
or the third battle of Panipat where eighty thousand Muslim soldiers
routed five or six hundred thousand Hindu troops. History bears
witness to the glaring fact that whenever a small army clashed with a
huge one the Muslim force was always much less in number but in the
battle between Bayazid and Timur, both sides had Muslim fighters to

combat one another.

Prior to this unfortunate clash one Muslim emperor named Bayazid
Yaldararm had gone up to France and was knocking at the door of
England while Timur, another mighty Muslim ruler had stormed the
eastern world up to China and Japan and the marching steps of the
Mongols had not been exhausted. There was none to stop Bayazid in

Thus, almost the entire world would have watched the flags of Islam
flying over it. But history had something very shocking in store for the
World of Islam. The battleground of Ankara drew both forces of Islam
to clash and it was the ground where the hopes of European conquest
Were laid to rest forever.

th his father while Princes

Bayazid's son, Musa was also captured wii ince
Timur put Bayazid in

Muhammad and Isa fled the battlefield for life.

304 The History of Islam

an iron cage and kept him so through out his journeys. To keep in
such a disgraceful confinement a mighty king like Bayazid and to put
his defeat and dishonor on display did not befit a brave fighter and
great king like Timur. His treatment was much below the standard of
a valiant soldier and noble soul. Brave and noble minded persons
show great respect to their worst enemies particularly when they are
at their mercy. When Alp Arsalan Sejuk arrested the Caesar of
Constantinople on the battleground of Maladhkurd, he released him
with due honors and restored the occupied country to him. When the
Raja of Punjab was arrested and produced before Alexander of
Greece, he was not only released with honor and given back his rule

but was allotted even more. Bayazid himself had arrested twenty-five
princes on the battlefield of Nicopolis but set them free asking them to
make more preparations for another round. ١

Unfortunately, the treatment meted out to a matchless fighter like
Bayazid is a scar on the face of Timur. Althou

igh Timur had kept
Bayazid, the Ottoman lion, in a manner a lion is kept ina cage it is not

an acceptable sort of poetic simile. The point is that the good sense of
Timur could not make a difference between man and animal.

The insult and indignity that Bayazid had to bear in the wake of his
setback in Ankara was so heavy that he did not remain alive for more
than eight months. The only act of grace on the part of Timur was that
he handed over the dead body of Bayazid to his son,

Musa and
released him to take it to be buried in Bursa.

Timor’s military activities remained ‘centered on plundering Muslim
territories and he never found in him a desire to wage war against the
non-Muslims and propagate Islam in their territories. However, Timur
also did not live long after the tragic death of Bayazid. He arrived in
Samarkand and marched ahead to conquer China, his only campaign

against a non-Muslim country, but Allah Almighty did not allow him
to accomplish it, and he died on the way.

Bayazid’s Sons at War

Following the defeat at Ankara there was,

, apparently, no hope of the
survival of the Ottoman Empire, for Timur

had distributed among the

Ottoman Entpire 395

Seljuks the small! states of Asia Minor ruled by them prior tothe
conquest of Bayazid Yaldaram. In some parts, Timur had carved out
new States.

When leaving for Asia Minor to fight with Timur, Bayazid had left his
son, Sulaiman in Adrianople as his deputy. The Turkish disaster in the
battle of Ankara encouraged the Christians to restore their lost
territory, with the result all the occupied parts save Adrianople and its
suburbs slipped out of the Ottoman Empire. The Caesar of
Constantinople too, who was restlessly awaiting the outcome of the
battle, found in himself a burning desire to expand his territory.
Although apparently at peace, the Christian powers were still under
the psychological fear arising out of their defeats and disasters in the
past and hence they could not muster courage enough to force the
Ottomans from Adrianople. Except for small pieces of European land
and Asia Minor, the Ottoman Empire had lost everything. And, to add
fuel to the fire, Bayazids’ sons rose against each other in internecine
fighting for the throne.

Bayazid Yaldaram had seven or eight sons and five or six had
survived the Battle of Ankara. Sulaiman was substituting for his father
in Adrianople; Musa was in prison along with his father; Isa who fled
Ankara to Bursa had become its ruler; Muhammad, the youngest and
the most worthy son of Bayazid was still ruling over a city in Asia
Minor; and Qasim who was totally devoid of courage and
determination lived with either Muhammad or Isa. Thus in the wake
of Bayazid’s captivity, Muhammad and Isa had their separate rules in
the remaining Ottoman territories, while Sulaiman was in possession
of the European territory under Ottoman rule.

Isa and Muhammad clashed with one another to establish their claim
over all the parts of Asia Minor under Ottoman administration. After
a fierce fight, Muhammad defeated Isa and the latter fled Asia Minor
and joined his brother, Sulaiman in Adrianople. He then pressed
Sulaiman to win his lost territory for him. Sulaiman captured Bursa
and Ankara. What a misfortune that Bayazid’s sons were at war with
one another at a time when he was suffering captivity at the hands of
Timur. Amid their burning desire to capture power, they must have
forgotten their father passing his days in disgrace.

396 The History of Islam

During the days Sulaiman was fighting with Muhammad in Asia
Minor Bayazid Yaldaram breathed his last in a state of utter distress
and Musa was carrying the dead body of his father home. Unfortunately,
a Seljuk squad of Qarmania arrested Musa on the way. On hearing
this, Muhammad wrote the Seljuk ruler to act gracefully to release his
brother, Musa so that he, along with Musa, could fight with Sulaiman.
The Seljuk ruler granted his submission without loss of time in order
to gain benefit from the infighting of the Ottoman camp. Musa joined
his brother, Muhammad immediately after the burial of his father.
Since Musa had accompanied his father, Bayazid during his days in
captivity, Ottoman nobles and soldiers held him in great veneration
and Muhammad felt more encouraged and powerful and the
battlefields of Asia Minor began to spit fire and blood. Muhammad
and Musa on one side and Sulaiman and Isa on the other, each was
thirsty of one another’s blood. At last, Isa lost his life but Sulaiman
fought firmly and did not allow his brothers to win the battle. Finding
no way out Musa asked his brother Muhammad to give him a
detachment to conquer the Ottoman occupied territories in Europe so
that Sulaiman should turn to his European possessions giving up his
campaigns in Asia Minor. Muhammad liked this suggestion and Musa
reached Adrianople with his troops. As expected, Sulaiman rushed to
the spot with the result a fierce battle broke out between Musa and
Sulaiman. Sulaiman being the elder son and claiming for himself all
the territories under Ottoman rule would not do any favors for his
military commanders to keep them happy and spirited. Since Musa
and Muhammad were making all out efforts to wrest power from
Sulaiman but considered their claim weaker owing to their being
younger, they showed more respect to the feelings of their
commanders and kept them emotionally attached to their cause, with
the result they preferred Musa to Sulaiman and brought about the
defeat of Sulaiman. Defeated and dejected, Sulaiman was going to the
Caesar of Constantinople when he was captured and assassinated on
the way in 813 A.H. Now only two brothers were left to rule and thus

- the European part of the Ottoman rule went to Musa and Muhammad
occupied the Asian Territory.

Musa then decided to punish the Caesar of Constantinople for his
support of Sulaiman but he first turned to Stephen, the ruler of Serbia

Ottoman Empire 307

for he had favored Sulaiman openly. He invaded Serbia and gave it a
smashing defeat with the result the Christians were overtaken by

reat terror. This victory won by Musa removed from the Christian
mind any thought about the weakness of the Ottomans. Following this
Musa besieged Constantinople.

Caesar was very shrewd and alert. During this period, Musa was
engaged in Serbia, he established very cordial relations with
Muhammad who was then ruling over some parts of Asia Minor and
annexing the small States carved out by Timur. Even though Musa
and Muhammad were in agreement to rule over European and Asian
territories respectively, Caesar's clever moves turned Muhammad
against Musa. In the wake of his country being under siege, Caesar
requested Muhammad to come to his help. Muhammad having the
least regard for brotherly relations reached there with his army to
raise the siege. Thus, the European and Asian Turks stood face to face
and both were ready to do combat when Mohammed was informed
that one of his commanders had revolted against him. Thus, he rushed
back to Asia Minor to put down the uprising. This revolt had taken
place at the instance of Musa who wanted him to go back without
extending his help to the Christian ruler. In his absence, Musa
narrowed down his siege and Caesar found himself in great trouble.
Muhammad put down the revolt and returned to Constantinople and
wrote to Stephen, the King of Serbia to take up arms against Musa and
assured him of his support. The king of Serbia rose against him and
Musa raised the siege of Constantinople and rushed to Serbia.
Muhammad chased him. Musa was killed in comb at with
Muhammad and serbian king. Muhammad sat on the throne of
Adrianople. He was now the only ruler of the entire Ottoman
conquered territories. Now all civil wars ended for there was none to
challenge him. 1 However, Muhammad made it a point to establish his
allegiance to his commanders, forces and subjects and, in order to do
away with the least possibility of insurgence against him, he blinded
his brother Qasim, who lived in Bursa and his nephew, the son of
Sulaiman. These events took place in 816 A.H. It is, without doubt,
one of the wonders of history how a dynasty, torn by eleven years of
civil wars and family strife not only survived but also rose so

powerfully.

398 The History of Islam

Sultan Muhammad |

Sultan Muhammad, son of Bayazid Yaldaram ascended the throne in
Adrianople in 816 A.H. He began to run the administration with
wisdom and sagacity. He had already established cordial relations
with the Caesar of Constantinople and the Christian King of Serbia.
Hence, both of them conveyed their facilitations on Muhammad’s
coronation and sent him precious gifts. Muhammad, also in token of
friendship and harmony, granted a number of concessions to the king
of Serbia and gave away to the Caesar of Constantinople some such
territories in the absence of which he felt perturbed. The democratic
State of Venice, a mighty naval power and at enmity with the Turks,
extended its hands of friendship in the wake of the Ottoman King’s
fame as a peace-loving ruler. Sultan Muhammad warmly welcomed
this move. States like Walachia, Albania, and Bosnia had declared
their sovereignty in the wake of the Ottoman setback in Ankara. But
now ail these Christian States were anxious for their safety and hence
each of them sent its felicitation to the new Ottoman ruler through
their emissaries. He greeted each of them warmly and told them while
saying goodbye, “All of you should tell your masters that I offer peace
to one and all and accept their peace offer as well. Allah Almighty
loves peace and hates disturbances”. With the expression of this
friendly gesture, peace returned to Europe. In truth, the Ottoman
Rule, which had very recently recovered froma long spell of illness,
needed rest and a controlled diet and the wisdom and patience of
Sultan Muhammad provided it in ample measure. Every step taken by
him was directed towards consolidation of power and integrity.

But uprisings in Asia Minor were going on unchecked. At last,
Muhammad marched to punish the insurgents. First of all, he put
down the revoit in Smyma (Izmir) and then silenced his enemies in
Fermania. He then established Peaceful relations with those states
formed after the demise of Timur and which bordered the eastern part
of the Ottoman territory. Thus, peace prevailed in the entire region of
Asia Minor. On the return journey the Sultan’s war fleet clashed with
that of Venice and the Ottoman fleet had to sustain damage but a fresh
agreement of peace was duly signed and normalcy returned.

Ottoman Empire 399

Sultan Muhammad believed in internal strength and consolidation of
power instead of expansion of territories. After winning peace, he
paid his attention to the public welfare. He set up madrasas (schools)
and extended honor to religious scholars. He brought peace and safety
to the routes and thoroughfares and set trading activities in motion.
Thus, his actions and activities brought him admiration both of friends
and foes.

But, despite all this, his rule was also overtaken by strife of the worst
nature. The man responsible for these disturbances was Qadi Badruddin.

It is said that a new-Muslim Jew turned apostate launched a
movement that the Sultan be deposed and democracy adopted. The
movement got the support of Qadi Badruddin. They jointly put an
uneducated man named, Mustafa as their religious leader and
launched their thoughts all over Asia and Europe. Thus, the movement
gathered momentum and caused anxiety to Muhammad. It gained
popularity among the Muslim masses particularly because they
disliked their ruler’s friendship and amity with the Christian powers.
However, they didn’t have the slightest idea that for the stability of
Ottoman dynasty, a policy of peaceful relations with the Christian
powers was the need of the hour, with the result, they were easily
carried away by the ideas of revolt from the elements antagonistic to
Ottoman rule. However, Muhammad stood against the poisonous
campaign and put an end to it in a short time and all the three '
protagonists of democracy had to pay the price with their lives.
Shortly after that, Muhammad had to face another trouble.

Mustafa, a son of Bayazid was killed in the battle of Ankara. But his
body remained traceless. Even the search party sent by Timur
retumed without success. Thus, the killing of Mustafa became
doubtful. Now, during the tenure of Sultan Muhammad in 824 AH. a
Man staked his claim in Asia Minor to the Ottoman throne asserting,
that he was Mustafa, the son of Bayazid Yaldaram. Since he happened
to resemble Mustafa, many Turks recognized his claim. The Ottoman
Governors of Smyrna and Walachia joined the bandwagon for they
Were not happy with Muhammad. Aided and abetted by them the
Said Mustafa came to Gallipoli and captured a territory near Thasli.
Muhammad rushed to the troubled spot and Mustafa fled to

400 The History of Islam

Constantinople after being thoroughly beaten. Muhammad wrote to the
king of Constantinople to send back Mustafa, the rebel. But Caesar
refused to do so but promised to keep him safe in custody provided he
keep sending him an amount to be spent on his maintenance. Since
Muhammad was worried about insurgence here and there and didn’t
want to add to his trouble by coming into conflict with Christian
powers, he accepted the demand and without showing any
dissatisfaction, he moved ahead with his plans to establish better
relations with Caesar and worked out a personal visit to Constantinople.
Caesar also greeted him warmly and honorably. They together renewed
the old agreement of peace and friendship. Following this, Muhammad
left for Gallipoli where he passed away in 825 A.H.

A Review of Muhammad’s Reign

Muhammad was 27 at the time of the Battle of Ankara. After the
battle, he became the sovereign ruler of Amisiah, a town in Asia
Minor and came into clashes with his brothers. In the wake of fighting
with his brothers for eleven long years, he overpowered all others and
ascended to the Ottoman throne. His 8-years tenure was beset with
strife and disruptions. His soft policy and wise steps saved a dying
Empire. Because of this some historians have called him the Noah of
the Ottoman Dynasty. ~

Sultan Muhammad I was the first Ottoman king who fixed an annual
grant for the maintenance of the House of Allah, the Ka’bah and for
the poor and the needy Makkans. This sacred service of his attracted
from the Abbasid Caliph, Mu’tazid Bilah the enviable title of the
custodian of the Sanctuaries of Makkah and Madinah. This title rose to
such a height with the passage of time that the Ottoman rulers came to
be called the Caliphs of the Muslims.

Sultan Muhammad died when he was 47. His son, Murad II, who was
then 18, was proving his worth as the commander of the Ottoman
Army in Asia Minor. The Ottoman ministers concealed the death of
the Sultan Muhammad for 40 days and during this period, they sent
couriers to Murad 11 to post him with the loss and bring him back te
the capital for his coronation as the king of Ottoman Dynasty.

Ottoman Empire 401

Following this, the body of the deceased was carried from Gallipoli to
Bursa and was laid to rest.

Murad II

Sultan Murad 11 was born in 806 A.H. and ascended the throne in
Adrianople. Shortly after ascension, the young Sultan was beset with
difficulties and dangers. On hearing about the death of Sultan
Muhammad, the Caesar of Constantinople called Mustafa from his
confinement and had him to write a bond declaring that in case he
became the ruler of the Ottoman territories he would hand over such
and such strongholds to him (Caesar) and would ever act as a well-
wisher of the Constantinople administration.

In the wake of the agreement, Caesar gave Mustafa a war fleet and
they landed on the eastern part of the Ottoman Empire to occupy that
area. Since his claim of being the son of Bayazid had not been decided
as yet a large number of Ottoman soldiers joined him and added to his
strength, with the result he went on winning city after city. The major
Part of the army sent to fight Mustafa joined his camp and the rest fled
back after a thorough beating. Following this reverse Sultan Murad
sent his commander, Bayazid Pasha at the head of an army to punish
the rebels. But Bayazid Pasha was killed on the battlefield and his
army was routed. This victory encouraged Mustafa beyond all limits.
He was also very sure of help from Caesar as well as the Christian
kings of the West against Murad and after-his conquest of Asia Minor,
he would be able to dislodge him from power. With this purpose in
View, he began to storm Asia Minor. Murad II himself led his army to
Asia Minor without delay and beat Mustafa. At this time, the Turkish
Soldiers had distanced themselves from the false claim of Mustafa and
lined Murad. In view of the lurking danger around him, he fled Asia

inor and occupied Thasil in Gallipoli. Murad came chasing him to
Callipoli_ and routed his military strength. Mustafa fled to Adrianople
to capture it but he was caught and hanged to death.

Shortly after Sultan Murad [I turned to Genoa and signed a peace
*greement with it because of its rivairy with Constantinople. Following,
this he started massive preparations against Constantinople. On
hearing this news, Caesar grew anxious. He had, until now, escaped

402 The History of Islam

all such troubles by various crafty devices. But, finding no other
means to save his country this time, he sent his emissary to Murad to
seek forgiveness for his fault of lending his help to Mustafa. However,
Sultan Murad returned the envoy with contempt.

Following this Murad reached Constantinople in 826 A.H. (June, 1422
A.C.) at the head of a 20 thousand-man army and laid his siege
around Constantinople. Even though the occupation of Constantinople
was not an easy job his expert use of explosive mines, catapults and
moving towers brought him very near to success. Caesar too was
clever to accept his defeat very easily. He had his own secret plans to
cause armed insurgence in Asia Minor. Thus, Murad had to raise his
siege of Constantinople and rush to Asia Minor when he was near to
victory, like his grandfather who had raised his siege of Constantinople
to hurry to Asia Minor to take on Timur.

Muhammad was survived by four sons two young and two of tender
age. The eldest among them, Murad II was 18 and the next one,
Mustafa was 15 at the time of Muhammad's death. After ascension,
Murad II sent his youngest brothers to Bursa for upbringing and
education and his brother Mustafa, younger than him by three years,
to Asia Minor, as a governor or commander.

When Murad II got rid of his so called uncle, Mustafa, the Caesar of
Constantinople started his efforts to bring the next Mustafa round to
his view and kept convincing him through his emissaries and spies
that he supported his right to the throne and he would lend all help in
case he staked his claim. He then began to persuade the Seljuk
commanders stationed in Konya and other cities as the feudal lords of
the Ottoman Empire and most of them were related to the ruling
family, to rise against Murad II and in favor of Mustafa, the brother of
Murad and his efforts brought fruits.

At last, Mustafa took up arms against the Ottoman Empire with the
active support of the Seljuk commanders. Thus, when Murad II was
about to conquer Constantinople, Mustafa very hastily occupied a
number of cities of Asia Minor and besieged Bursa. In view of the
prevailing situation, the Ottoman troops in Asia Minor joined the
camp of Mustafa. When Murad witnessed that Asia Minor was
gradually slipping out of his hands, he grew anxious and rushed to

‎Ottoman Empire 403‏ ا

‎the troubled spot to put a check on the advancement of his enemy.
with the arrival of Murad I], the major part of Mustafa’s army
ed sides and returned to Murad’s camp. Thus, Mustafa was
peaten and killed and peace staged a comeback in Asia Minor.
Following this victory, Murad was stationed in Asia Minor for about
a year to punish all the insurgent elements and bring about complete
ce and safety in the region. When Sultan Murad II came to Europe,
the Caesar of Constantinople bought peace from him at the cost of
paying 30 thousand Ducats annually.

‎Being free from these campaigns Murad 11 devoted himself whole
heartedly to the welfare of his subjects and the development of his
country and kept from any campaigns against Christian ox non-
Christian powers. However, he kept them following their agreements.

‎The King of Serbia, loyal and tributary to the Ottoman Empire, died in
831 A.H. and was succeeded by George Bernick. The new king was
net so sober and farsighted, hence, the Caesar of Constantinople had
an opportunity to hatch secret plots against the Ottoman rule with the
help of the Serbian and Hungarian administrations.

‎After the fall of Venice to Murad Il, Caesar felt aggrieved as it was on
friendly terms with him. Thus, he multiplied his hostile activities.
Murad 1, on the other hand, plunged himself into the task of
consolidating his position in Europe and in developmental works.
Albania and Bosnia too joined the intriguing activities of the
Christians like the Serbians and the Hungarians.

‎The Christians of Transylvania, a province towards the north of Serbia
and Romania, took up arms in 842 A.H. but the Sultan put down the
tebellion with such a heavy hand that 70 thousand Christians were
Killed on the battlefield and his name became a terror for them.

‎During those days a man named John Honey Deys or John Hani Das,
the illegitimate son of King Sajmund of Hungary came back to
Hungry after gaining rich experience in some of the battles fought in
Western Europe. His mother was Elizabeth Marsi, a beautiful but
loose woman. She secured for him the post of a Commander and he
Tose against the Turks. He succeeded in forcing out the Turks from
Transylvania. The Turkish General Mazid Beg, who was the Governor

46 ل اشتص سه يرس ‎ee‏

404 * The History of Islam

and the administrator was killed along with his son and 30 thousand
Turkish troops also died. Now, after a long exchange of letters the
Sultan agreed to a peace agreement, as a result of which he recognized
the freedom of Serbia and George Bernick as its king. He also handed
over Walachia to Hungary and repatriated Muhammad Chalpi in
return for sixty thousand Ducats. The Peace document was written
both in Turkish and Hungarian. Both the kings then put their seal on it

and vowed to obey it like a religious scripture. The agreement was
concluded for a period of ten years.

Now, in the wake of a ten-year peace treaty, and frustration caused by
the tragic death of his son Alauddin, Sultan Murad IT decided to
abdicate the throne. Thus, he called his second son, Muhammad I to
Adrianople and performed hi i
boy of tender age a council

ed to advised him on crucial matters.
Sultan Murad 11 then left for Asia Minor joined the assembly of the
saints and divines and adopted a life of seclusion.

Such an act brought
disgrace to the Christian community but he was lured away from his
Position with the offer of Bulgaria, Thus,

: the Christians agreed on
breaking the peace agreement within a month of its conclusion.

Members of the Ottoman court, at last, went to Asia Minor and posting
Sultan Murad ff with the breach of agreement by the Christians and the

Ottoman Empire 405

latest development, requested him to come out of seclusion and tead
his army to punish the defaulting Christians and save the Ottoman
Empire. Therefore, Murad II rushed to Adrianople and then left for
Wama where the Christian army was encamped. Hani Das’s
informers let him know that Sultan Murad II had given up his life of
seclusion and had arrived nearby at the head of forty thousand troops
to fight the Christians.

With this news, Hani Das and the king of Hungary held emergency
consultations and decided to face the Ottoman assault. Following this,
they drew their battle lines and placed the Walachian army on the left
and the Hungarian troops on the right side. In addition, a huge army
was put under the command of Cardinal Julian. The King of Hungary
was in charge of the main body along with his commanders and brave
tavaliers. The Polish army was behind all under the command ofa
bishop. Hani Das was the Commander-in-Chief of the entire army.

Sultan Murad I] also set his troops right and raised his standard witha
copy of the peace treaty atop. The battle was fought on the battleground
of Wana. Hani Das made such a powerful attack from the right side
that the Turkish troops were uprooted, the Walachian army too
pushed back the Ottoman force. Sultan Murad H was watching the
tepulses from behind and was almost sure of a setback. In the
meantime, the King of Hungary made a forceful charge at the
Ottoman troops and reached where Murad II was standing in a state
of anxiety and threw a challenge with utmost arrogance. The Sultan,
without loss of a moment, shot an arrow and his horse fell down

wounded. Khawaja Khairi, and old commander of the Janissaries,

Pounced on the King and cut his head off. He then placed the head on
The very sight of the head sent

the point of his spear and lifted it high.
terror into the hearts of the Christian troops. Howeyer, Hani Das
made a few desperate attempts to get back the head of the Hungarian
‏ع‎ but the Ottoman army encouraged by the new developments,
fepelled one and all and, at last, they were beaten and driven back.
Cardinal Julian, the worst enemy of the Muslims, the deputy of the
Pope and the Commander-in-Chief of the Christian crusaders, was
also killed. The Bishop and all other Christian commanders lost their
ives. Hani Das was the only commander who escaped death.

406 The History of Islam

In the wake of this marvelous victory, Serbia was annexed and Bosnia
too became an integral part of the Ottoman Empire. The heinous act of
the breach of trust on the part of the Christians boomeranged and a
large number of Christian embraced Islam. Sultan Murad [1 expanded
his territories deeply into Europe and consolidatedand regularized
the administration and went back again to a life of piety and seclusion
by handing over the throne to his son, Muhammad II.

Shortly after the ascension of Muhammad IL, for a second time, the
Janissaries launched a demand for a substantial increase in salaries
and_ stipends. When their undue demand was turned down, they took

up arms and took to plundering. Thus, the Ottoman Empire was once
again pushed into deep waters, -

In view of the precarious situation prevailing throughout, the notables
appeared before the Sultan once again and requested him to intervene.
Murad II had to come out from his seclusion for the second time. He
came to Adrianople in 849 A.H. On reaching the capital, he was
warmly greeted by his army and subjects. On coming to the throne,
Murad 15 sent his son, Muhammad I to Asia Minor to gain more
experience regarding statecraft and warfare. After assuming charge of
the administration this time he gave severe punishments to the
Opponents and the insurgents, with the result perfect peace returned
to the country. The Sultan thought it improper to quit the throne for
the third time nor did he want to give the Christians any Opportunity
to rise against the Ottoman rule. However, he never put anyone to
trouble without any rhyme and reason. Even though the Caesar of
Constantinople was the sworn enemy of the Ottomans and it was very
necessary to uproot him, Murad II made it a point to ignore his mischief.

In 852 A.H., Hani Das made a bid to launch a fr
the Ottomans and he succeed in collecting Chri
the same number as the
gave him a smashin;
territories.

esh campaign against
stian soldiers in about
‏ل‎ had done in the past, but Sultan Murad II
8 defeat and annexed a number of Christian

Following this, the Sultan had to spend much time in putting down

disturbances in Albania, but he had not put an end to them when he
was overtaken by death in 855 A.H.

Ottoman Empire 407

Although the Turks conquered Albania since a long time ago, it had
been left to the same ruling dynasty as a feudatory. In order to
establish close contacts with Sultan Murad II the king of Albania sent
his four young sons to the Sultan to be kept as hostage and to be
brought up in the Janissaries. However, accidentally, three of them fell
ill in the training center of Adrianople and passed away. The king of
Albania smelled a rat in their sudden demise. He, therefore, wrote to
the Sultan that he thought some of his enemies must have poisoned
his sons to death. Sultan Murad II too felt unhappy over the incident.
Now he made some special arrangement for the eldest son, Chastrait,
and kept him in his palace. He was educated and trained like a
Muslim prince. When he was eighteen, he was given command of a
military squad and he came to be known as Sikander Beg and Lord
Sikander. His father, John Chastrait died in Albania in 836 A.H. Sultan
Murad did not think it right to send George Chastrait to Albania to
succeed his father. The Ottoman Sultan loved him like his son and he
was, in truth, in a better position with the Sultan than he could be as a
ruler of Albania. Sultan Murad believed in his loyalty and he never
thought of any challenge on his part at any stage.

But, in the wake of a reverse incurred by the Turkish army at the
hands of Hani Das, Sikander Beg resolved to capture Albania by force.
Suddenly one day he stormed into the camp of the superintendent of
the office and made him write a letter addressed to the Junior
Commissioned Officer of Albania forcibly to hand over the
administration to Sikander Beg who was going as the viceroy of
Sultan Murad II. He also had the letter sealed and then assassinated
the superintendent and hurried straight to Albania. The Junior
Commissioned officer handed over the administration of Albania to
him immediately. Shortly after occupying the throne of Albania in this
Manner, he proclaimed that he had decided to retum to Christianity
and, in future, he would direct all his efforts to keep his country free
from Turkish control. With this declaration, the Christians’ jubilation
knew no bounds but, at the same time, a large-scale massacre of the
Turks became the order of the day, with the result, not a single Turk
was spared in the length and breadth of Albania.

Since Sikander Beg was brought up, trained and educated in the
Turkish environment he lived and behaved like a prince. He had

408 The History of Islam

grown very rich in courage and ambition and lost all respect for the
Turks. Thus, partly because of his courage and determination and
largely because of Albania being a hilly country with very difficult
tocky pathways, it was not easy for foreign troops to make entry across
its borders easily. Sultan Murad’s Pre-occupations with the affairs of
his country held him back from making a fuil-fledged attack on
Albania and a few small-scale campaigns failed to produce any result.

Since Sultan Murad II had brought Sikander Beg up like his son and
did not like his ruin or death. He entertained the hope of his return to
Tighteousness. When Sultan Muhammad 11 came to the throne after
the death of his father, he also made peace with Sikander Beg as he
looked upon him like a brother, Despite these concessions, Sikander

Beg rose against the Ottomans and Sultan Muhammad 11 was forced
to take acti

Sultan Muhammad IL, the Conqueror
of Constantinople

At the time of Sultan Murad II’
Asia Minor. He was then 21.

the king of Serbia who was then only 8-months old.
the coronation ceremony of Muhammad 1] was on,

the knowledge of Sultan Muhammad 11 took the chil
and Put him to death. Such

someone, without
ld to the bathroom
a heinous crime was, perhaps, comunitted in

Ottoman Empire 409

Since, during the lifetime of his father, he had ascended the throne
twice at short intervals, they expected him to function as a weak ruler
devoid of courage and determination. But he proved them wrong. He
was not then a boy of 15 or 16 but a young man of 21 or 22. And these
six years had not been passed in playing but in developing his skills as
a ruler, administrator, fighter and warrior. His company of religious
scholars and spiritual divines had enhanced his will power and
qualities of mind and spirit.

European historians accuse him of murdering his half brother but
these accusations were simply because of his being the Conqueror of
Constantinople. However, it is a matter of common knowledge that a
commander of the Janissaries killed the child. Moreover, they all agree
that Muhammad 11 killed the accused in retaliation. It is simple logic
that during the coronation ceremony Muhammad II must have
anticipated no trouble froin that small child of only eight months. Had
he been apprehensive of the child he could have implemented his
plan, if there was any in days to come using some clever device.
Furthermore, the commander of Janissaries had not accompanied
Muhammad II from Asia Minor to Adrianople, he was in Adrianople
much before the arrival of the Sultan. If the Sultan had such a plan, he
would have carried it out through any of the commanders
accompanying him from Asia Minor who were his confidants. It was
against all precautionary measures to give such an order at sucha
crucial moment. Besides, the accused did not divulge his secret even
at the point of death. Mohammad‘s relation with his stepmother, the
Princess of Serbia was so pleasant that she had joined the coronation
ceremony on her own. Furthermore, the future life of Muhammad II
had no similar instances of such a stupid and cowardly act, which did
Not fit the profile of such a pious and courageous soul.

it is an undeniable fact that the Janissaries had endeared itself enough
to the Ottomans and they so often committed undesirable acts on their
own like those of a spoiled child. Sultan Muhammad II's period was
Not free from such instances. The accused commander of the
Janissaries had done so in order to keep Sultan Muhammad II in his
control by obliging him in this way. The Caesar of Constantinople was
under the same delusion and it not only cost him Constantinople but
his life as well.

410 , The History of Islam

In 852 A.H. three years before the death of Caesar John Palaeclogus,
Caesar Constantine XII came to the throne of Constantinople. He too
was very clever and alert like his predecessor. Following the death of
Sultan Murad Il and the ascension of Sultan Muhammad II, he forged
the opponents and detractors of the Ottomans in Asia Minor into a
strong insurgent force and encouraged them to take up arms against
the new Ottoman ruler, with the result Sultan Muhammad II had to go
to Asia Minor to put the matter right and bring peace and order to the
Ottoman territory. But, in the meantime, Caesar Constantine sent
word to him that Orkhan, a prince of the Ottoman dynasty was in his
custody and he should increase the amount sent from the royal

treasury to be spent on the internee, otherwise he would be set free to
wrest the country from him.

Since Caesar was aware of the weak disposition of Sultan Muhammad
I, he attempted to extort money from him by threats. Had Sultan
Muhammad II been as weak as Caesar thought him to be he must
have yielded to the threat. But Sultan Muhammad II had courage and
will-power more than Alexander of Greece and Napoleon of France. He,
therefore, arrived at the conclusion that peace could not be maintained
unless the Christian kingdom of Constantinople was eliminated. He
thus sent away the Christian envoy without making any reply.

On his return from Asia Minor, Sultan Muhammad IL, entered into a
three-year peace treaty with Hani Das, the king of Hungary. With the
conclusion of this agreement, his northern borders became safe. The
next step taken was that he punished the commanders of the
Janissaries and cut them down to size. After a short interval, Caesar
Constantine sent his emissaries to Adrianople with the same demand
and threatened to set Orkhan free. Reacting sharply to this stupid
demand the Sultan ceased the maintenance allowance and. turned out
the emissaries. Following this Muhammad II set himself to preparing
to invade Constantinople. Now Caesar's eyes opened and he
acknowledged his mistake. The man thought to be a fox tured out to
be a lion. But Caesar Constantine too was a distinguished fighter and
he started making Preparations for the ensuing battle without loss of
time. The enlightenment and far-sightedness of Constantine is
commendable in that he brought about unity between the two major

Ottoman Empire 411°
factions of the Christians. In those days the entire Christian world
was divided in two parts one following the Pope of Rome the leader
of the Roman Church and the other one, which followed the Greek
Church and considered the Archbishop of Constantinople as its
religious guide and Caesar of Constantinople had the pride of
enjoying his patronage.

Caesar Constantine wrote to the Pope of Rome to bury the differences
and rise united against the Muslims. He assured the Roman Pope of
his acceptance of the Roman creeds and that the Church of
Constantinople was to be led by the Roman Church.

This proclamation of Caesar of Constantinople stirred the entire
Christian world and they rose united to crusade against the Muslims
as they had done to conquer Bait al-Maqdis and Syria. Christians in
large numbers rushed tojoin the military camp. Nicholas V, the Pope
himself launched a strong campaign for the crusade, which produced
deep, and favorable results. Huge armies from Spain and Castile
joined the Christian Crusaders in Constantinople. The Pope collected a
strong army, which was sent by warships under his deputy cardinal.
The Army and Navy from Venice and Genoa also set off towards
Constantinople. Constantine also began to fortify the city of
Constantinople as a defensive measure. The city had a population of
one hundred thousand. They were asked to contribute money and to
make use of all their resources in safeguarding themselves.

Sultan Muhammad 11 ordered Arban, a blacksmith who was a new
Muslim to make long-range heavy cannons. Arban was a citizen of
Hungary and had joined the services of Constantine before coming to
the fold of Islam. A number of such cannons were made and a few of
them could fire heavy shells. Although, a few years prior, Sultan
Murad 11 had already used cannons in battle they had not come to be
considered an effective weapon yet. As for demolishing the walls of

forts, those cannons made no major improvement over the catapults
and it was difficult to move them swiftly from one place to another.
Moreover, it could only fire seven to eight shells from morning to
evening and so these cannons were not expected to be of much use
during the siege of Constantinople.

412 , _ The History of Istam

First of all, Sultan Muhammad II paid heed to keep peace within his
territories. Being free from this duty, he dispatched 50 thousand
horsemen and twenty thousand infantry of brave and spirited soldiers
to lay the siege around Constantinople.

Both sides had begun their all-out open preparations Since 856 A.H.
(1452 C.E.). Caesar Constantine had hoarded within the bounds of
Constantinople large quantities of food grain. Furthermore, warships
from European countries were carrying not only troops and war
equipment but also supplies of food grain in large quantities. Besides,
architects, engineers and seasoned military commanders had arrived
in Constantinople to protect and fortify the city. They had tied
strong iron chain. on both sides of the sea and at the mouth of the
port so that no warship could enter therein. However, they could
loosen the chain to lower it to admit their own ships into the port. In
this way, they had stopped the entry of the enemy warships. The
walls of the city were very strong and fortified within a

circumference of 14 miles and were virtually invincible. However,

the walls were somewhat lower towards the port for they expected

no attack from that side. Deep trenches were being dug around the

City and outside of those walls were towers having cannons and

squads of archers to provide safeguards to the trenches and

fortifications. In short, all possible devices were put into service to

fortify the defensive position of Constantinople.

Sultan Bayazid Yaidaram had built a fort at the narrowest place on the
Asian coast of the Bosphorus Straits. When Sultan Muhammad II
decided on conquering Constantinople, he built a fort in front of the
first one. It was, in fact, the foremost Preparation for war against
Constantinople. The fort was ready in a very short time and cannons
were fitted atop as was done with the former one. By this strategy, the
door to Bosphorus Strait was sealed and separated from the Marmara
Sea, which stopped the entry of Caesar’s fleet into the Black sea. But
these arrangements did ao harm to Constantine since he was receiving
help from the European countries through the Danube Pass. Sultan
Muhammad II had three hundred small boats in all and none of them

was equal in size to even the smallest ship in the Constantinian fleet
consisting of fourteen ships.

Ottoman Empire 413

Conquest of Constantinople

On Rabia al-Awwal 26, 857 A.H. (April 6, 1453 C.E.) Sultan Muhammad
Il appeared on the scene in front of the walls of Constantinople, while
the Ottoman fleet was concentrated in the Marmara Sea and laid his
siege to the Golden Horn, the port of Constantinople. The Sultan set
up suitable squads at chosen spots. He then ordered his diggers to dig
mines and carry parapets near to the city walls and archers were
deployed to target anyone raising his head from the walls of the city.
Sultan Muhammad II demonstrated his wonderful skill in keeping the
siege not only in tact but narrowing its circle and reaching the walls of
the city rather speedily. Cannons and catapults were set up at strategic
spots and shells and stones were hurled at the walls.

The besieged were also not careless as regards their defense. John
Ghatyas, the Commander from Genoa and Duke Notarus, the Greek
commander put up the defenses with great skill and expertise and the
Cardinal, the deputy of Pope Nicholas V, also showed his mettle as a
brave. and seasoned commander and fighter. Caesar Constantine
assumed the overall charge of the allied forces. He remained in the
saddie from morning to evening and even during the night and he
seldom left it. He would inspect every part and wing of his army and
cavalry personally, he encouraged his troops to fight gallantly and
looked into the performance of various commanders. Shortly after the
Siege began, the citizens and Christian troops were filled with a new
Spirit and zeal. Bishops and clergies were moving about their side of
the battlefield sermonizing and singing praises of the crusade and for
laying down lives on the battlefield.

Sultan Muhammad II had pitched his camp in front of St. Romans,
the gate of the city and the besiegers were targeting this avenue
"creasingly.

At first, the besieged began to target the besiegers coming out of their
ramparts and the trenches. When this resulted in heavy loss of ‏ءانا‎ at
the hands of the Ottoman’ troops, Constantine issued orders that
Nobody should attempt to go out of the fortified city. However, the
besieged began to reply to the besiegers in the same coin. At last,

414 The History of Islam

cracks appeared in the city-walls, but the besieged carried out repairs
immediately. Sultan Muhammad II then took his troops near the
trenches and made pathways by bridging these trenches and reached
the city-walls. They could not gain control over the walls because the
Christians started throwing blazing kerosene oil at the Muslim troops,
with the result they had to retreat. Now the Sultan applied another
device to achieve his purpose. He erected wooden towers as high as
the city-walls with wheels to move them at will. A long ladder was
fastened with each tower and all ladders were put on the walls,
building bridges between the towers and the city-wall and Muslim
soldiers started attempting to scale the walls. But the beleaguered
made determined efforts to undo these attempts by hurling at them

blazing shells of pitch and setting the wooden structures on fire. This
new device also failed to produce any result.

On April 15, and the ninth day since the siege started, news came that
four ships from Genoa loaded with shells, gunpowder and food grain
reached the Golden Hom, the port of Constantinople tearing apart the
blockade of the Turkish fleet. With this sensational news, Sultan
Muhammad 11 rode to the seacoast and noticed that a fleet of five
warships was advancing through the Marmara Sea. He ordered his
navy commander to stop the approaching enemy warships. The
Ottoman warships launched a heavy attack on the enemy fleet and
broke the long row of the fleet so that they began to cluster together
one by one and were surrounded by the Turkish ships. However, they
failed to breach the high and heavy enemy ships and were not able to
overpower them for their own ships were low and much smaller.
After a short trial of strength, the giant enemy ships entered the
Golden Horn, following which the Christians pulled up the iron
chains stopping the chase of the Turkish ships.

Sultan Muhammad II witnessed the failure of his navy with his naked
eyes and grew very sad. He called his navy commander, beat him
thoroughly and ordered him to stay cautions and alert thereafter. In
fact, the navy commander was not at fault for he could not board the
giant enemy ships with his smaller ones. Nevertheless, the
punishment meted out by the Sultan worked wonders and after that
no enemy ship was able to pass by that route.

Ottoman Empire 415

Sultan Muhammad II then showed the utmost steadfastness in the
implementation of the siege but he had to sustain losses and reverses
repeatedly which added much to the courage and determination of
the Christians. There was no dearth of defensive material and food
grain. Moreover, they were sure that the Hungarian king Hani Das
would break the peace agreement and come to their aid and with his
arrival the siege would be raised. In view of these setbacks and
reverses, anybody else would have raised the siege putting off the task
to some later occasion. But the Sultan’s strong determination and
invincible courage stood him in good stead and every failure
enhanced his commitment and will.

When leaving for the campaign against Constantinople, Sultan
Muhammad II had brought with him a party of religious scholars,
Muslim divines and pious men. In the company of those slaves of
Allah, he had taken lessons in determination and grit. During the
lifetime of his father, he had spent six years continuously in Asia
Minor in the divine company of Muslim saints and religious scholars
and his qualities of mind and spirit had grown rich beyond all limits.
Even during the present siege, he was satisfied with the consultations
of these divines.

When the siege dragged on, he thought of a plan, which had never
before come to his mind. On one side of the city lay the sea, the
Golden Horn and was supposed to be safe from any siege. Up to now
all siege activities were limited to land. The entire use of force was
directed at St. Romans and all efforts were pointed to pull down the
city-wall from this side. Thus, the city-dwellers were also putting up
all their defensive measures on this front. Sultan Muhammad thought
that a fresh assault from the seaside would divide their defensive
power, with the result the city wall could be more easily broken. But
in the presence of the chain across the mouth of the Golden Hom,
there was no way the Turkish navy could enter the area. To the east of
the Golden Horn was a ten-mile wide strip of land across which lay
the Bosphorus straits ard the Turkish ships could move freely therein.
Sultan Muhammad Il spread wooden planks from the Bosphorus to
the Golden Horn on the moonlit night of 14 Jumad al-Awwal. He then
had eighty ships pushed across the strip of land. Thousands of troops

416 The History of Islam

ushing the ships ahead. The men within the city-wails could not
‏امن‎ what caused the shouts and noises and what was the
reason for the martial songs and drum beating. At last, the Ottoman
ships were brought into the Golden Horn before dawn. All of
Constantine's ships were kept towards the mouth of the port to block
the entry of Turkish ships. With the morning sun, the citizens of
Constantinople noticed to their utmost amazement the bridge of
Turkish ships right below the city-walls. The Ottoman army and navy
were then engaged in setting up cannons at suitable spots to shell the _
weak portions of the city-wall. A look at this scene sent terror into the
hearts of the Christian fighters and citizens. The Christian ships made
an attempt to move in and launch an attack on the Ottoman ships but
heavy cannons on both sides of the port stopped them and a few of
them sank as a result of the heavy shelling. It was the first occasion
that Ottoman artillery worked wonders. The sudden attack from the
seaside caught them unaware and they had to divide their resources.

The same day, May 24, Constantine sent his emissaries to the Sultan
with a peace offer requesting him to grant him mercy and leave him as
the ruler of Constantinople in return for as much tribute as he thought
proper. Sultan Muhammad II, who was then at the helm of affairs,
wrote him back that, in case of submission, he could be allotted the
southern part of Greece instead of Constantinople. Sultan Muhammad
11 was too far-sighted to know that the existence of a Christian
Constantinople in the middle of the Ottoman Empire would always
remain a source of danger. Moreover, he had in mind that
Constantinople could serve as. the most suitable capital for the
Ottomans. Moreover, the offer of a piece of land in southern Greece
was the height of generosity in view of the losses sustained and the
sacrifices made by the Ottomans during the long siege of
Constantinople. Caesar Constantine was destined to be the last ruler
of Constantinople, the old and magnificent kingdom of eastern Rome.
However, Constantine did not like to avail himself of this opportunity
and sought te oppose the Ottoman ruler more vehemently.

Thus, on Jumad al-Awwal 19, 857 A.H. (May 28, 1453 C.E.) Sultan
Muhammad II proclaimed throughout his army that an all around
attack would be launched the next day at dawn and the troops would

Ottoman Empire 417

be left free to plunder the entire Constantinople but without doing any
harm to government buildings and the old, the women and children
and the subjects seeking peace.

The news of a general attack the next morning filled the Muslim
troops with utmost joy and they passed the night in shouting slogans
out of zeal. Caesar Constantine, on the other hand, called a meeting of
his commanders, nobles and notables in his palace to inform them
about the ensuing Ottoman attack the next morning he induced them
to fight gallantly and to the last drop of their blood. Caesar then went
to St. Aya Sofia Church to pray for his victory. From there, he went
straight to his palace, which was overtaken, by despair and
harassment. After taking rest for a while he mounted his horse and
came to St. Romans, which, was, then under heavy attack.

Sultan Muhammad Il, on the other hand, following the predawn
prayer, requested the assembly of religious scholars and pious people
to pray to Allah Almighty for the victory of Islam.

The Sultan then took ten thousand selected horsemen under his
command and set off for the campaign ahead. His spiritual guide then
asked the people to erect a separate booth for him and entered it alone
to pray to Allah for an Ottoman victory. He put a gatekeeper to stop
the entry of anyone. The Ottoman forces launched a multi-faceted
attack and their cannons and catapults made cracks and holes in the
city-walls. However, all their attempts to enter the city met with
failure as the besieged troops and even the Christian women and
children put up stiff resistance. Heads were rolling on both sides but
Neither side was losing courage. By noon, the battle turned hot. At this
crucial moment, the Sultan sent one of his ministers‘or courtiers to his
Spiritual guide to pray and seek special Divine help. The situation was
quite discouraging for the Muslim troops and they seemed to 6
losing hope of victory. Sultan Muhammad also was growing
anxious that if, despite an all-out attack, the city remaine

unconquered it would be almost impossible to win it later fort ¢
“wading Muslim troops had devoted all the courage and power 2

their command to defeat the enemy. Atsuch an anxious moment, the
emissary of the Sultan arrived at the booth of the spiritual guide. me
doorkeeper made an attempt to stop him from intruding but the

418 ____ The History of Islam

emissary made his entry by force and he found the saint Prostrate
praying for a Muslim victory. On the entrance of the emissary the
saint raised his head and said, “The city of Constantinople has already
been conquered!” The emissary of the Sultan was greatly surprised,
He hurried back and found to his amazement the Ottoman flag flying
atop the ramparts of the city.

It so happened that at the very crucial moment when Sultan
Muhammad 11 had sent his emissary to his spiritual guide to request
him to make some special Prayer for victory, the emissary had just left
with the request when unexpectedly the city wall in front of the Sultan
caved in all of a sudden and with the debris of the wall the trench
filled up to pave the way leading to the city. About the same time, the
Ottoman navy captured a tower and hoisted the royal flag atop.
Noticing the flag flying and the frontal city-wall demolished the
Turkish troops under the direct command of the Sultan launched a
massive attack. Even though the Christians faced the Muslims firmly
they could not overcome them in the hand-to-hand fighting that
ensued. Besides this, the Muslim troops, ‏هده‎
‎charge at the Christian soldiers and there was
dead Christian bodies. Sultan Muhammad 1

and went straight to the church of St. Aya

therein without delay. He then offered P
comrades and thanked Allah Almighty Whi
magnificent victory. Following this he sent
Constantine. Near St. Romans where the city wall had fallen, the
Christians had given a good account of themselves and were killed in
large numbers. Constantine's body was also lyi

body had only two wounds. They cut off his head and brought it to
the Sultan. Thus was completed the conquest of Constantinople. The

Sultan then turned to palace of Caesar but found there nothing. but a
state of wilderness.

11 sides, made a heavy
nothing but a heap of
mounted on his horse
Sofia and called adhan
rayer along with. his
0 had given them such a
the people in search of

The conquest of Constantinople had taken place on Jurnad al-Awwal

20, 857 AH. (May 29, 1453 C.E.). Some People view the conquest to be
the result of the Prayer of the divine saint. It is, therefore, generally
said that Constantinople was conquered with a prayer. From that day,
Sultan Muhammad I came to be known as “Sultan, the Conqueror.”

Ottoman Empire 419

During this campaign, more than 40 thousand Christians fell dead and
about 60 thousand were taken as prisoners. Only a small number
thereof were able to escape by land and sea. They settled in Italy and
various other places. One of the grandsons of Caesar embraced Islam
shortly after that and settled in Constantinople. However, the dynasty
went out of existence.

Sultan, the Conqueror gave full protection to the Christian population
and their weaith and properties remained safe. Christian shrines and
churches except the church of Aya Sofia were left to their control.
Sultan Muhammad II called the Archbishop of Constantinople and
gave him good news of being left as the spiritual head of the Greek
Church and his religious power would not be interfered with. Sultan,
the Conqueror accepted the patronage of the Greek Church on his
own. Thus, the Archbishop and other priests and clergy had powers
that they had never enjoyed even under Christian rule. The Christian
population had full religious freedom. Various churches received from
him large pieces of property. He bought prisoners of war from his
own soldiers and set them free and had them to settle in a particular
locality of the city. When he saw that most of the houses had lost their
dwellers and much of the charm of the city had become an event of
the past he, in order to restore the lost glamour and splendor of
Constantinople, brought five thousand families from Asia Minor and
had them settled in Constantinople, with the result the city not only
tegained its past grandeur but more than what it had in the past.

History of the City of Constantinople

The conquest of Constantinople is considered as one of the marvelous
‘vents in world history. European historians have ended the Middle
Ages with the conquest of Constantinople. It is from here that the Age
of Enlightenment begins. On this occasion, it appears befitting to give
4 short history of Constantinople. The place where Constantinople city
15 now situated was first founded in the 8 century prior to Isa (Jesus)
(aay by a nomadic tribe who named it Byzantium. It witnessed quite a
"umber of events and incidents and became with the passage of time a
central city and the capital of a small State. The father of Alexander of
Greece attempted to occupy the city. In the darkness of night, he led

420 The History of Islam

his force to Byzantium. At the time when his troops had reached the
city-walls, a bright light appeared from the North and the citizens
noticed the invading army and rose to defend it. The invaders retreated
in view of the readiness of the citizens and the city was saved: The
local population thought it to be the work of the Goddess Diana and
built a temple there in her name and chose the moon.as their symbol.

A short time later, Alexander conquered the city and thus avenged the
failure of his father. Following the demise of Alexander, Byzantium
suffered many setbacks and reverses. When Caesar Constantine
conquered the city, he was pleased with its location and laid the
foundation of a new city by adding some adjoining areas to it and
decided to make it his capital. Although he named it the Modern or

New Rome, it gradually came to be called Constantinople after the
name of Constantine.

Constantine I populated Constantinople in 327 CE. Before this time
Constantine and his ancestors were idolaters but Constantine had
converted to Christianity. Three years after its being populated he
presented this city to Holy Maryam (Mary) and celebrated this offering
on a very large scale. Thus, since 330 C.E., Constantinople became
exclusively a Christian city and when the Roman Empire was divided
into two parts, Constantinople became the permanent capital of the
Eastern part. Caesar Justinian I, who ruled over it from 527 C.E. to 565
C.E., added to its glamour and beauty. This city suffered invasions at
different times but it remained safe from destruction. The Muslims
invaded it during the early period of Umayyad dynasty and Abu
Ayyub Ansari was martyred in that campaign and was buried
below the city wall. Although the Christians decided several times to
destroy the grave of Abu Ayyub Ansari, they could not do so for fear
of Muslims’ displeasure. Sultan Muhammad I, the conqueror built a
mosque adjoining the grave, which came to be known as Jami Ayyub.

During the Abbasid caliphate, preparations were made more than
once to conquer Constantinople but it could not be done due to one
reason or another. In 600 A.H., when the Crusades were on an army
from Venice conquered and annexed it to Latin rule which, followed
the Roman Pope as its religious guide. This rule spanned over 60
years. In 660 A.H. the Greeks, Eastern Romans, conquered it and laid

Ottoman Empire 421

the foundation of their Eastern Rule and they became free from the
dictates of the Roman Pope.

two centuries later, Sultan Muhammad I, the Conqueror put an end.
to the Christian rule and shifted his capital from Adrianople to
Constantinople. It had come to the Muslim fold after eleven hundred
years of Christian rule. After serving as the capital for four hundred
and seventy-five years it ceased to be so when at the end of the Ottoman
caliphate, Ankara became the capital of the Turkish democracy.
However, it is still considered as a magnificent Muslim city.

The Remaining Deeds of Sultan the Conqueror

Following the conquest of Constantinople Sultan Muhammad I
devoted his time and attention to developmental work and the welfare
of the people of Constantinople. However, the southern part of Greece
could not escape his attention and he decided on its annexation. It was
particularly because a Christian Greece could serve as the hotbed of
the hostile activities for Italy and other European states. Hence, he
conquered and annexed the small Greek States. The same Southern
Greece had a small State founded by the descendants of Caesar
Constantine after escaping from Constantinople but following the
conquest of their States, they all were converted to Islam.

Finding time from the conquest of the small States, Sultan Muhammad
11 turned to Venice but they bought peace by accepting the superiority
of the Ottoman rule. In 601 A-H. a man from the royal family of
Constantinople was expelled from the country during the disturbances
arising among the Crusaders. He had set up a separate small State at
Trabzon along the southern coast of the Black Sea, and it remained
unnoticed, with the result, it remained intact for two hundred and
fifty years. Whenever a Muslim ruler turned to it, it bowed its head in
obedience and saved itself but it would stop paying tribute whenever
it found the Muslim rulers engaged in feuds or civil wars. Following
the conquest of Constantinople, Sultan Muhammad 11 thought it
Necessary to do away with this Christian State in Asia Minor for it
Was, nevertheless, sympathetic to Caesar Constantine.

re Christian ruler of Trabzon was the father-in-law of Hasan Tawil,
 Turkman king of Iran. Hasan Tawil had occupied the whole of

422 . The History of Islam

tran and Armenia, He was considered a strong king. Hence, fran
could anytime pose a danger to the Ottoman rule in Asia Minor. The
Christian rule of Trabzon was, therefore, at liberty to create difficulties
for the Ottoman rule. Sultan Muhammad II was fully aware of the
intriguing activities of the Christian Caesar. Thus, he decided to
eliminate this potentiat danger. He attacked Trabzon in 860 A.H. and
annexed it. In spite of being a sovereign State, Trabzon was considered
to be a part of the Iranian state and this event angered the ruler of Iran
but he took no immediate action whatsoever.

Being free from the campaigns of Greece and Asia Minor, Sultan, the
Conqueror came back to Constantinople in 860 A.H. and he, very
Soon, resumed his campaigns against Serbia and Bosnia. Although
these two countries had become feudatories of the Ottoman
were showing signs of Opposition. Thus the Sultan, in order
end to the disturbing situation, conquered both Serbia and B
annexed both of them and sent his governors there.

tule, they
to put an
osnia and

Since the period of truce with Hungary had already ended and the
Hungarian ruler had started his

Preparations against the Ottoman rule
and had sought help from the Christian powers, Sultan Muhammad II
thought it proper to initiate his campaign against him. Thus in 861
A.H. (July 1456 C.E.) Ottoman forces marched to Hungary. In the
wake of the fall of Constantinople, the Christian Powers and all the

expertise at his command. And after much ki

ings and bloodshed the
at last, made progress into a

Part of the city. This was

Ottoman Empire 423

more strongly. This event took place on July 21. Although the Muslims
scaled the city-wails more than once and plundered the city the strong
defensive measures of the Christians did not allow them to conquer it.
At last, Sultan Muhammad II launched a decisive attack and
beheaded a number of Christian commanders and even wounded
Hani Das, the king of Hungary and was near to victory when a
Christian soldier struck him on his thigh and injured him so badly that
he was carried away on a stretcher. The present state of the Sultan was
discouraging for the Muslim troops to such an extent that their advance
not only stopped they began to retreat with the result the Christian
attack intensified. Even though the Christian commander, Hani Das
was wounded, his casualty was unknown to most of his troops.
Moreover, leadership of the Christian forces was shouldered by a
number of commanders in addition to Hani Das, while Sultan
Muhammad 11 was the only one commanding his troops. The retreat
of the Muslim troops was such a boost for the Christians that the
Ottomans could not find peace even at their camp and they had to
take their wounded ruler to Constantinople. In short, a Muslim victory
changed into defeat and Belgrade could not be conquered. The Muslim
teversal was celebrated all over Europe. But there was something else
in store. Twenty-one days later Hani Das succumbed to his injuries at
about the same time Sultan Muhammad I], the Conqueror took a
Convalescent bath, marking his recovery.

lt has already been mentioned that Sikander Beg was occupying
Albania and his upbringing in the Ottoman palace had attracted
Concessions from Murad II to the extent that he never challenged his
Position as the ruler of Albania. But, in the aftermath of the recent

‘Oman reverse in Belgrade Sikander Beg also, along with others, felt
®Ncouraged and began to show signs of insurgence. Although, at the
initial stage, Muhammad II ignored his rebellious activities, when his
srPosition took a serious turn, Sultan the Conqueror invaded Albania.
bene Sikander Beg was.a shrewd ruler and loved by his subjects
fo ides ruling a land with a difficult terrain, victory was not very easy

the Ottoman king.

8 . 1
‏ليت‎ after a long-drawn out battle, Sikander Beg sought peace in
H. and promised to remain loyal in future. Sultan Muhammad I

424 ._ The History of Islam

acceded his request and granted him peace by withdrawing from
Albania. But Sikander committed a breach of faith again and had,
therefore, to suffer another attack that was so massive that he could
not sustain it and escaped to Venice where he was warmly greeted.

Albania came to the fold of the Ottoman Empire. But Sultan, the
Conqueror was no Jonger a terror for the Christian world following
his setback in Belgrade. Thus, Venice, which had bought peace from
the Sultan in the immediate past, started raising its head once again.
The Ottoman ruler lost no time in crushing its revolt and conquered
long coastal areas and annexed a number of cities. The defeat was so
terrible that they sought a truce on ignominious terms surrendering

the city of Shkodra to Sultan, the Conqueror who spread his borders
up to the Adriatic Sea.

Sultan, the Conqueror appointed his commander, Ahmad Qaiduq as
his Prime Minister in 878 A.H. and engaged himself in conquering
Greek islands. During this period, Shah Hasan Awzun or Hasan Tawil
continued increasing his strength. He had captured and assassinated
Sultan Abu Sayeed Mirza Timuri in 873 AH. Now he had a plan to
challenge the power of Sultan Muhammad II in Asia Minor and avenge
his setback in Trabzon. He was behind a number of uprisings in Asia
Minor and each time the Turkish troops put them down. But Sultan
Muhammad II had no desire to fight with the Muslim state of Iran. He
had uppermost in his mind the desire of his forefather, Bayazid
Yaldaram to conquer the city of Rome. With this Purpose in mind, he
expanded his borders towards Italy. In the aftermath of his setback in
Belgrade, he occupied the entire territory up to the borders of the
Hungarian capital and consolidated his position up to this point. Setting
aside the conquest of Belgrade for a later period, he first conquered the
Greek islands and Venice. At that time, Asia Minor and Iran were not
on his mind. However, an Opportunity surfaced all of a sudden.

In 879 A.H, Sultan Muhamma

0 11, sent his Prime Minister towards the
Black Sea to Conquer Crime

, which was, for a long time, under the
rule of the Khans of the Genghezid race. However, in the recent past,
Genoa had annexed Yaffa (modern day Feodosiya), a Port on the
Black Sea on the southern coast of the Crimea. The Khan of Crimea
wrote to the Sultan for help to vacate the aggression and take him

Ottoman Empire 425
under his care. Sultan Muhammad II acceded to the request and sent
Ahmad Qaiduq at the head of a huge war fleet manned by 40
thousand troops and conquered Yaffa after a siege of four days and
held 40 thousand Genoese. Ahmad Qaiduq captured huge spoils of
war and warships too. The Khan of Crimea offered his allegiance to
the Sultan, which spanned over three hundred years. Yaffa was
supposed to be another Constantinople and its conquest was even
more necessary to keep Ottoman supremacy in the Eastern States and
the Black Sea. Annexation of the Crimea and Yaffa by the Ottoman
Empire made the Iranian ruler hot with anger. Hasan Tawil began to
oppose the Sultan openly. 0

In 880 A.H., Sultan the conqueror sent his son, Bayazid as Commander
to Asia Minor to look after the affairs there while he kept himself
involved in European campaigns. He had already conquered Albania
and Herzegovina and he started winning islands in the Mediterranean
Sea one by one. In 882 A.H. Umar Pasha, a commander of Sultan
Muhammad II reached the capital of Venice with his victorious army.
However, the parliament of Venice finding Turkish troops below the
city-walls, sought peace very humbly with the promise that, when
needed, they would provide a fleet of one hundred ships. Thus, Umar
Pasha concluded the treaty and returned from Venice.

A group of the Crusaders from Rhodes set up a sovereign state in 711
AH. These people had been in occupation of this island along with
the nearby islands and used to commit piracy on the ports of Syria
and Asia Minor. Even the rulers of Venice and Genoa never challenged
them. They actually appreciated their acts of robbery simply because
the Muslims were the sole victims of their assaults. When the Ottoman
Empire spread up to the borders of Rhodes the existence of such
criminal elements became a source of constant trouble to the Muslim
state. Sultan Muhammad 11 sent a naval expedition in 885 A.H. but it
met with failure. Following this, the Sultan sent another expedition
under a seasoned commander who surrounded the capital and
conquered the entire island. But the moment the Ottoman soldiers
were about to enter the city for plunder the commander ordered them
Not to touch anything. This order sent waves of disappointment and
discomfort and the soldiers held themselves back from completing the

426 The History of Islam

conquest. This state of affairs led to a dispute between the commander
and the troops and they had to return without conquering the island.

About the time the expedition was sent to Rhodes Sultan, the
Conqueror sent another expedition towards southern Ttaly under his
Prime Minister, Ahmad Qaiduq to start conquests in Italy. Thus,
Ahmad Qaiduq descended on the coast of Italy and besieged the city
of Otranto, which was called the gate to victory, the conquest of this
city meant the conquest of Italy and Rome. At last, Ahmad Qaiduq
conquered the city in 885 A.H. (August 11, 1480 C.E.) and killed or
captured twenty thousand of the besieged forces. Now the conquest of
Rome was not a difficult task. All of Italy was overtaken by such a
great terror that the Pope of Rome was ready to flee the city.

Being informed of the setbacks in the conquests of Otranto and Rhodes
Sultan, the Conqueror plunged into the task of collecting troops and
making preparations for another round. Apparently, there was no
impediment whatsoever in fulfilling Bayazid Yaldaram’s wish to feed
his horse in the Roman Church. Sultan, the Conqueror installed his
military Flag on the coast of the Bosphorus Strait signaling the
immediate arrival of the Sultan with a huge army under his command.

There were then three expeditions drawing his attention. One, he
wanted to punish Hasan Tawil, the King of Iran who had started
giving trouble to Prince Bayazid; second, to conqueror Rhodes and
third, to enter Rome victoriously. In spite of massive preparations,
Sultan Muhammad 11 kept his next target a secret. It was the practice
of the Sultan that he would never disclose his next target when he
would himself lead the expedition even to his commanders and Prime
Minister. A certain commander once asked about his next campaign,
Sultan Muhammad [I had said in reply that if he knew that a single
hair of his beard had come to know of his plan he would pull out the
hair at once and put it into fire. However, troops from all parts of his
Empire were concentrating in Constantinople. It was such a large-
scale preparation that 886 A.H. set in. It was Presumed that he would
first punish the king of fran and then conquer Rhodes before his
expedition to Italy where his Prime Minister was awaiting his arrival

rather desperately, and the Pope of Rome was ready to leave with the
Sultan’s entry into Italy.

Ottoman Empire 427

But Allah Almighty had decided otherwise. With the departure from
Constantinople Sultan Muhammad I] developed gout and it took such
a serious turn that the succumbed to it in Rabia al-Awwal, 886 A.H.
(May 3, 1481 C.E.). This ended the massive campaign that he planned.
The expedition returned with the dead body and buried it in
Constantinople. His end came at the age of 52 or 53 after ruling for
about 31 years. His death proved disastrous not only to the Ottoman
dynasty but for the entire world of Islam.

The year Sultan Muhammad 11, the Conqueror succeed his father in
Adrianople, Sultan Bahlol Lodhi had ascended the throne in India and
ruled for a few years afterwards. The same year, Safar 5, 886 A.H.
Khawaja Jahan Mahmud Gawan, the Prime Minister of Sultan
Muhammad Shah Bahmani was assassinated in Dakan (Southern part
of India). And exactly eleven years after the death of Sultan the
Conqueror, Rabia al-Awwa! 1897 A.H. the Muslim rule in Spain
ended. Had the Sultan lived for a few years and Italy was annexed by
the Ottoman Empire the Christians would have no opportunity to do
away with the Muslim rule in Granada.

‘A Review of Muhammad II’s Rule

Sultan Muhammad 115 rule was packed with campaigns and
adventures. During his tenure, he conquered twelve states and more
then two hundred cities and forts. The total number of Muslim
soldiers martyred during his reign came to 8 hundred thousand
although the number of his regular troops never exceeded one
hundred and twenty five thousand. The Janissaries who were the
Body Guards of the Sultan numbered around twelve thousand.

He promulgated such laws that did away with all the evils and
disorders of military and administrative spheres and made those that
benefited the Ottoman Empire most. A Sultan who spent his tenure in
campaigns and expeditions could not be a first-rate lawmaker. But
Muhammad 11 was first rate lawmaker. Moreover, his court had a team
of religious scholars along with a cluster of ministers and commanders.

He set up madrasas in every city, town and village under his rule and
their entire expenses were borne by the government. The syllabus for

428 The History of Islam

the Madrasas was also prepared by none other than the Sultan. Ail the
Madrasas held regular examinations and awarded degrees to the
successful examinees. These degrees were supposed to be the true
measurement of abilities and everybody received service positions
according to his academic qualifications. The courses of study
contained almost all the subjects necessary for the betterment of this
world and the next one. Sultan Muhammad himself was a great
scholar. He was well versed in Quranic and Hadith literature, history,
biography, mathematics and physics. He, therefore, chalked out the
best of courses. He could speak Arabic, Persian, Turkish, Latin, and
Greek fluently and eloquently. The laws promulgated in the length
and breadth of his country were based on stated principles: first of all
the Glorious Qur‘an should be followed in letter and spirit and then
the authentic Sunnah and Hadith followed by the four figahs and only
after all these three stages royal orders should be acted upon. In case,
any order issued by the king was against the injunction of the Qur‘an
and the Hadith the religious scholars were at liberty to prove it against
Shari’ at so that the Sultan would then withdraw it.

He had divided the territories under his rule into Provinces and
districts. It is quite amazing how such a warrior and conqueror could
find time to devote to academic activities. He was so conscious of his
prestige and position that he would never talk pleasantly and
informally even with his Prime Minister. He would sit in his court or
assembly only by necessity. He loved to pass his leisure in loneliness.
Nothing absurd and devoid of wisdom ever came from him. He was
devoted to religious scholars and valued them highly on one hand but
his hate for the “ignorant scholars” and so-called pseudo-religious
people was very strong. He was very particular in offering prayer and
observing fast and preferred his Prayers in congregation. His love for

the Qur‘an was the deepest. He showed kinciness and tolerance to the
Christians and men confessing other religious beliefs.

He was fully aware of the fact that so-called religious scholars
Practiced so much orthodoxy and adopted hard lines on trifles in a
manner that Islam became something “horrible.” Therefore, he was

very much in favor of taking advantage of permission when the
Islamic laws allowed it.

Ottoman Empire 429

sultan Muhammad II had his eyes on all the departments of his
administration. He was very steadfast in punishing the culprits and
rewarding the able and efficient ones. Although he loved solitude and
did everything to maintain his prestige he appeared very close to his
ordinary soldiers in the battlefield and helped them with everything at
his command, with the result his soldiers were ready to sacrifice their
lives for him. They held him like their affectionate father.

Sultan, the Conqueror was a man of medium height with a wheat
colored complexion. He most often looked sad, but appeared very
ferocious when in anger. He meted out cruel punishments to those
committing any kind of corruption in public life with the result there
was no trace of theft and robbery. within the boundaries of his
country. A complete absence of uprisings and revolts, misconduct and
corrupt practices is the glaring proof of his administrative acumen and
bold action.

Chapter 21

Civil Wars after Sultan
the Conqueror

The Story of Prince Jamshed

Sultan the Conqueror left two sons, Bayazid and Jamshed. Bayazid
was the Governor of Asia Minor while Jamshed was appointed as the
Governor of the Crimea. At the time of the Sultan's death, Bayazid
and Jamshed were 35 and 22 respectively. Bayazid was somewhat idle
and mild while Jamshed was remarkably active, steadfast and
enterprising. Neither of them were present in Constantinople at the
time of the Sultan’s death. Sultan, the Conqueror had appointed
Muhammad Shah as Prime Minister before sending the Prime Minister
Ahmad Qaiduq to the campaign against Italy as Commander. Prime
Minister Muhammad Shah had a desire to enthrone Jamshed after the
demise of the Sultan. He tried to keep the Sultan's death a secret and
sent word to Jamshed to hurry to Constantinople however, the news
was soon known. The Janissaries took up arms and put Prime Minister
Muhammad Shah to death and replaced him with Ishaq Pasha.
Bayazid was then informed of the death of the Sultan with the advice
to come rushing to Constantinople. In the meantime, the Janissaries

The History of Islam
432

took Constantinople by storm. They began to extort money fom traders
and wealthy persons and captured the administration of fomman er
Ahmad Qaiduq who had completed his preparations to mal
advancements after conquering and fortifying Otranto. Ahmad Qaiduq
grew uncomfortable ‘and frustrated with the sad news of the Sultan 5
demise. He immediately rushed to Constantinople after deputizing a
commander to look after the affairs in Otranto.

Bayazid, on the other hand, hurried to Constantinople at the head of
four thousand troops and ascended the throne. The Janissaries, after
demonstrating their power and strength, pressed the new ruler to
make a substantial increment in their salary and holdings otherwise,
he would be assassinated. Bayazid surrendered before the demand of
the hostile soldiers. By accepting this demand, he set the tradition of
conferring rewards to the soldiers on the eve of ascension and thus
used a big portion of the public wealth. Moreover, this weakness of
the new ruler provided ample proof of his being far froma strong

ruler and very different from his father who was aman

of courage
and determination.

However, his being the elder brother of Jamshed, a man like Ishaq
Pasha, as his Prime Minister and his ha’

ving the total support of the
Janissaries none could muster courage to challenge his position. A
short time later Ahmad Qaiduq reached Constantinople from Italy.

Since his rival, Prime Minister Muhammad Shah, was an Opponent of

Bayazid and supporter of Jamshed, Ahmad Qaiduq took the oath of
allegiance with Sultan Bayazid II.

Jamshed got the news of the death of his father a little la
time, Bayazid Il had ascended the throne in Constantin,
began to occupy cities in Asia Minor and wrote to hi
capturing Bursa that Sultan,

te and by that
ople. Jamshed

is brother after
the Conqueror had not appointed him

therefore he had no right to become the

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 433

sultan Bayazid II understand that fighting between two brothers was
not desirable and it was advisable that the territories of Asia Minor be
jven to Jamshed. However, Bayazid paid no heed to these words of
wisdom. He said that the most he could do for Jamshed was that he
ould give him permission to live in Bait al-Maqdis with his family
members and he would get an allowance from the income of state and
in short, no avenue for accord was explored.
Jamshed was aware of the fact that if he did not win the throne
Bayazid would not leave him alive. He was by the force of these
drcumstances compelled to fight for his safety. Sultan Bayazid took
advantage of his commander, Ahmad Qaiduq‘s experience and
decided to fight against his brother, Jamshed. The two forces fought in
886 A.H. (June 2, 1481 C.E.). At the moment that the battle became
heated, a few commanders broke away from Jamshed along with the
soldiers under their command and went over to the side of Bayazid,
which brought about the defeat of Jamshed.

On one side the two brothers were at war and, on the other side the
Pope of Rome who was about to leave Rome changed his mind owing
to the news of Sultan the Conqueror’s demise and sent word to the
Christian powers of Europe to take advantage of the present situation
and save Italy and drive the Turks out of Otranto. This desperate call
drew Christians from Spain, France and Austria and the Christian
forces laid a siege around Otranto. The Muslim troops of Otranto
could not get any help from Constantinople. However, the Turkish
force fought gallantly. Being disappointed at the absence of any help
ftom Constantinople they sent word to the Christians that, although,
in full command of the situation they no longer wanted to shed
human blood. If they wanted to take back the city in peace the Turkish
force could allow them to do so on condition that they were allowed
to leave with honor and safety and go back to Constantinopie. The
istian authorities accepted the peace offer without loss of time and
Sent them a signed peace treaty granting peace and safety to each
Turkish soldier. When, according to treaty, the Ottoman troops began

to leave the Christians committed a breach of trust and started killing
luslim soldiers. They surrounded the Ottomans on all sides and
killeg almost all of them. The lanes and streets of Otranto became r

with Mustim blood.

434 The History of Islam

This was a great shock and setback suffered by the Ottomans shortly
after the ascension of Bayazid II and their foothold in Italy was lost.
The door to the conquest of Italy that was opened by the Turks was
closed once again, and the cloud of despair hovering over the Roman
Church was removed at once. With this development, the expected
help for Spain was also held back. Ahmad Qaiduq was not even able
to avenge the blood of the Turkish soldiers killed by the Christians.

In the aftermath of his defeat, Jamshed found it inconvenient to stay in
Asia Minor and he had little faith in his own commanders therefore,
he preferred Egypt as his shelter. Egypt was at that time ruled over by
the Mamluks and Abu Sayeed Qaid Bey of the Cherkesy dynasty was
the ruler. Since the Abbasid caliph also had its seat in Egypt, the world
of Islam looked upon it with reverence.

Jamshed, after his setback, left for Egypt along with his mother and
wife. He was still within the confines of the Ottoman territories
when a Turkish commander raided the caravan and looted whatever
goods and chattels Jamshed had with him. He then crossed the
borders of the Ottoman Empire hurriedly. The Turkish commander
appeared before Bayazid in Constantinople to please the ruler by
presenting to him his plunder. But Bayazid had him killed for
plundering a defeated and afflicted caravan. When the Egyptian
ruler heard of Jamshed’s arrival, he welcomed him with honor, kept
him as his guest and showed him grace and sympathy. Jamshed
enjoined his stay with Abu Sayeed Bey for four months. He then left
to perform Hajj. He came back to Egypt after performing Hajj to the
House of Allah. In the meantime, exchanges of letters between
Bayazid and Abu Sayeed had begun but the Egyptian ruler would
not be persuaded to go against Jamshed instead he showed more
respect and sympathy.

On his retum from Makkah and Madinah, Jamshed plunged into
making preparations and the Egyptian ruler extended all military and
monetary help to him. Leaving his mother and wife behind in Egypt. |
Jamshed marched ahead to fight against Bayazid. Passing through
Palestine and Syria he arrived at the southwestern part of Asia Minor.
With this news, Bayazid moved ahead along with his seasoned

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 435

commander Ahmad Qaiduq. Jamshed.was defeated again after a
fierce fight. This battle broke out in 887 A.H. (1482 C.E.) The second
defeat was also led by his treacherous Turkish commander who first
called him from Egypt to fight against Bayazid but changed sides
when the battle took a serious turn, with the result that the rest of the
troops lost their spirit and suffered a disaster.

Jamshed felt so frustrated and ashamed that he did not want to go
back to Egypt and show his face to his mother, wife and the Egyptian
tuler. Thus, he decided to leave for the Christian territories in Europe
for rest and recuperation. Although he had opportunity in ample
measure in Egypt, he chose Rhodes for the purpose and addressed the
tuling group of Rhodes to allow him to stay for a short period. They
responded that they considered him as the ruler of the Ottoman
Empire and were ready to greet him to add to their own grace and
honor. They also assured him all help for carrying out his campaign.
With this encouraging but intriguing reply, he could not hold himself
back and hurried to Rhodes along with 30 men who were with him.
He found a large number of people on the coast to receive and greet
him. From there, he was escorted to the capital with pomp and show.
Dobson, the President of the Parliament gave him a standing ovation
and made him stay as an honored guest. But very soon, Jamshed came
to know that he was, in fact, held as acaptive. Dobson then made
Jamshed sign a bond declaring that, in case, he became the ruler of the
Ottoman Empire he would give all kinds of concessions to the officials
of Rhodes. Afterwards, he wrote to Bayazid that Jamshed was under
arrest. Now if he wanted to keep peace they should be favored with
freedom to make ingress and egress in all Ottoman ports and carry
out normal trading activities. Furthermore, they should be granted
€xemption from all kinds of duties besides an annual grant of forty-
five thousand Ottoman ducats to keep Jamshed confined otherwise
they would set him free to stake his claim to the Ottoman throne.
Bayazid accepted all the demands immediately and sent them more
than forty-five thousand ducats annually. Dobson, on the other hand,
Wrote to Jamshed’s afflicted and exiléd mother to send them one
hundred and fifty thousand annually as the price for not handing over
Jamshed to Bayazid and keeping him in peace and safety, otherwise

لس سس مضيس ايو عو سه جور

436 The History of islam

they would be compelled to settle the matter with Bayazid who was
offering much more than what they were demanding from her.
Jamshed’s mother managed somehow to meet the cruel demand of the
Christians and sent word that she would keep doing so annually
without interruption.

Thus, the ruling party of Rhodes made Jamshed a permanent source
of income. In view of the possibility of an invasion by Bayazid to
take possession of Jamshed and depriving them of their newly
acquired asset, they shifted Jamshed to a city in France, and
continued shifting him from one city to another. They also kept
Jamshed’s companions separate from him until he was alone. When
he was in a certain French ‘city, Philipina Helena, the daughter of the
administrator of the city fell in love with him, with the result he was
put in a house build especially for him. Jamshed became a ward of
the King of France as he had become a valuable property, which
everybody wanted to keep. The King of France, the Roman Pope and
other influential Christians of France wrote letters to Dobson to give
Jamshed to them. However, Dobson was unwilling to do so. He
neither agreed nor disagreed openly. Instead, he kept buying time
under one pretext or another. Prince Jamshed remained in France
until 895 A.H. During this period the ruling party of Rhodes
continued receiving money from Bayazid 11. Being apprehensive of
losing jamshed to the King of France, they wrote him to send
Jamshed back. In addition, they wrote to the mother of Jamshed in
Egypt to send them one hundred and fifty thousand ducats as a
traveling allowance for Jamshed so that he could be brought back
from France and then to be sent back to Egypt. That helpless lady
met their demand immediately.

Although unwilling, the French King, Charles VIII allowed
Jamshed’s departure to Italy on condition that the Pope deposit with
him as security the amount of ten thousand ducats which would be
forfeited in case Jamshed was taken out of Italy without the
permission of the French court. The Pope, on the other hand, wrote
to the rulers of Rhodes that the benefit they were getting out of
Jamshed if held back because of Jamshed’s departure to Italy the
Pope would cover their loss.

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 437

In short, Prince Jamshed entered the Roman city and was warmly
greeted and was made to stay in the royal palace of the Pope. The
French envoy accompanied the Prince. 1

When the French envoy and Jamshed went to meet the Pope the
bishops and the commanders asked Jamshed to bow before the Pope
ag the French envoy and others were doing. But the son of Sultan,
the Conqueror refused flatly to do so and moved forward rather
carelessly and with an air of a conqueror, seated himself beside the
Pope and began to converse with him ina royal fashion. During the
exchange, he expressed his desire to say something in private. The
Pope acceded to his request. During the private talk, Jamshed
complained to the Pope about the breach of trust and disrespectful
behavior of the Christian commanders. He also told his story of his
long suffering and separation from his mother and wife in such
pathetic words that his eyes were filled with tears. The Pope too
heard it with tearful eyes. However, he told Jamshed that his
departure to Egypt would prove fruitless and he would not be able
to restore his father’s throne. The Pope also told him to go to
Hungary as the Hungarian king had invited him. But, last of all, the
Pope told him rather emphatically to abandon Islam and convert to
Christianity and this was for him the easiest course to get back the
Ottoman throne for, in that case he would be entitled to the support
of the entire Christian world. The Pope had spoken this much when
Jamshed: stopped him and said: “I am not ready to desert Islam in
teturn for sovereignty over the entire world.” Having heard this the
Pope changed his way of speech and sent him out after giving him a
common gesture only. Thus, he began to pass his days in
confinement as he had been doing in France.

Having come to know of Jamshed’s arrival in Rome the king of Egypt
Sent his envoy to welcome him and the Egyptian ruler anticipated that
he Gamshed) would be sent to Egypt. Sultan Bayazid HI also sent his
emissary to Italy with presents and offerings to Pope to settle the
Matter for it was a well known fact that the Pope had the power to
Send Jamshed anywhere he willed, and he was not bound by the
desire of the people of Rhodes.

438 The History of Islam

tian king searched for Jamshed in Rome and
when | he got acceasete, him, he greeted and welcomed him ‏وز‎ a
manner he did with the king of Constantinople. The envoy related to
Jamshed the story about the amount of money Dobson had
demanded from his mother in the name of travel expenses, Heating
this Jamshed approached the Pope along with the envoy ang
reported this case of extortion. The Pope put an end to the dispute
by ordering the emissary of Dobson to pay Jamshed an amount
although it was very little.

The Egyptian envoy retumed empty-handed. Bayazid’s emissary then
contacted the Pope and struck a deal for the amount Bayazid would
Pay to Dobson. Being satisfied with the settlement, he too returned.
Following this, the Pope made suitable arrangements for Jamshed and
he began to pass his days as a captive.

Three years later, the Pope passed away and was replaced by another
one. The new Pope was even more mischievous than the Previous one.
Shortly after assuming the office, he sent his emissary to Bayazid with
the message that, in addition to the annual amount of forty thousand
ducats, if three hundred thousand ducats as a lump sum were sent he
would get him rid of Jamshed forever. George, the emissary of the
Pope expressed himself so wisely and nicely in the royal court of
Constantinople, that Bayazid suggested his name for the post of the
deputy of the Pope. The emissary was staying in Constantinople when
Charles VIII of France invaded Italy in 901 A.H. The reason behind
this attack was to take Jamshed out of the Possession of the new Pope.
In the aftermath of this assault, Pope Iskander fled Rome and took
shelter in the fort of St. Angelo and took Jamshed with him because
Jamshed was a valuable part of the toyal treasury. Eleven days after
this an assembly was convened to work out terms and conditions for
peace between the Pope and the King of France. The first condition
that Charles advanced was that Jamshed should be put in his custody.
At last, the Pope, Charles and Jamshed sat together in a separate room
where the Pope said addressing Jamshed, “Well Prince! With whom
do you want to live the king of France or myself?” Jamshed replied, “I
am no longer a Prince but a captive, so you can keep me anywhere.”
Finally, Charles, the king of France took Jamshed to Naples and put

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 439

him under the care of a commander with a team of military guards.
Now all hopes of the Pope to extort money in the name of Jamshed
were lost. Since the envoy of Sultan Bayazid had finalized a deal
with the people to do away with Jamshed in return for 3 hundred
thousand ducats, the Pope, having greed for money, wrote to
Bayazid that he would bring his life to an end even in Naples and
would be entitled to the amount as already settled. Following this,
the Pope chose a Greek barber to carry out his plan. The barber had
already converted to Islam and was named Mustafa. He, thereafter,
tumed apostate, came to Italy and had access to the Pope by means
of his profession. The Pope sent him to Naples with a small packet
to have Jamshed take it. It was the type of poison that would first
cause the victim to fall sick and then die after a protracted illness;
the poison also had no antidote.

Mustafa reached Naples -and after some time got access to Prince
Jamshed. Even the guards thought it unnecessary to prevent such an
important person from meeting Jamshed. One day; he found an
opportunity to have Jamshed take the poison, after which the Prince
caught an incurable disease. In the meantime, he was given a letter
from his mother but he was reduced to such a state of weakness that
he could not even go through it. In such a terrible plight Jamshed
invoked, “O Allah’. If these Unbelievers seek to inflict harm on
Muslims through me, it is better You give me death today and save
the Muslims from their mischief”. Mustafa had not only given him
poison but also shaved his head with a razor dipped in poison. The
day he invoked Allah for his death, his soul left his body. This
happened in 901 A.H. Jamshed succumbed to his long suffering in
prison, His dead body was sent to Sultan Bayazid as was demanded
by him and was buried in Bursa. Bayazid paid the fixed amount to the
Pope who kept Mustafa with him and later gave him a high post.

The detailed account of the sufferings of Jamshed and the treatment
meted out to him show beyond doubt the ignoble and treacherous
nature ‘of the Christians and their greed for wealth and power and their
breach of trust and promise. The highest and greatest among them went
down so low that they, on one hand, minted money at the expense of
Jamshed and stopped the Muslim invasion of their soil on the other.

440 The History of Islam

Sulean Bayazid li

Bayazid 11 came to the throne in 886 A.H. and ruled over the Ottoman
Empire until 918 A.H. He had a term of 32 years. Shortly after his
accession, he had _ to face his brother Jamshed twice and both time he
was victorious. However, his successes produced no fruit. He could
not invade Italy and Rhodes because Jamshed had been under their
control. His relation with the Mamluk Dynasty of Egypt became
strained. Since Jamshed had taken refuge in Egypt and his mother and
wife remained there until the end they started raiding the south-
western parts.of Asia Minor and occupied some border areas by
beating Bayazid’s forces in 890 A.H. Following a series of setbacks
Bayazid made peace with the Mamluks at the cost of the cities and
forts conquered by them.

Sultan Bayazid had a very bold and seasoned commander in the
person of Ahmad Qaidugq. Bayazid could utilize his experience and
talent for some great achievements. Ahmad Qaidugq was very popular
with his forces and exhorted Bayazid to correct his ways. He was bold
and outspoken and cared the least for toyal majesty and kingly awe.
However, Bayazid did not tolerate him for long.

In 895 A.H., he decided to contain the expanding power and influence
of the Janissaries and was about to issue. orders in this connection.
Disagreeing with this decision, Ahmad Qaiduq warned Bayazid while
in the court against such an injurious step and the prevailing tumult it
would cause and the utility of the Janissaries in curbing the current state
of chaos and confusion. He very emphatically said that a frustrated
army could not be of much use against the insurgents and the very
integrity of the country would be at stake, Although Bayazid kept silent
in the court, he grew displeased at Ahmad Qaidug’s interference.
Following this he decided to do away with Ahmad Qaidugq, who was
later arrested. Being informed of the state of affairs, the forces under
the command of Ahmad Qaiduq rose against Bayazid and besieged
the royal palace. They threatened to kill Bayazid in retaliation in case
their commander was killed. Thus, the Ottoman ruler changed his
mind and handed over Ahmad Qaiduq to his ‘devoted’ forces and

Civil Wars after Sultan-the Conqueror 441

apparently showed respect to him. However, sometime later, Bayazid
sent all the entire ‘devoted’ force to fight in some far off campaigns

and put Ahmad Qaidug to death. The assassination of the commander
proved harmful to the Ottoman Empire.

In 896 A.H., the Ottoman and Russian Empires got in touch with each
other. To start with, the Czar of Moscow sent his envoy to Sultan
Bayazid in Constantinople with presents but the envoy was given no
special treatment and he returned after a couple of days. The naval
power of the Ottoman Empire made much progress during his reign.
The Sultan was very particular about his naval power because of
Jamshed’s invasion with the support of Rhodes, Italy and France.
Thus, on one side, he made peace with the Christian powers but he

kept adding to his military strength and especially to his naval power
on the other. 1

At a time when Jamshed was being shuffled from one place to another
by the Christians, the Muslims of Spain, the King of Granada, sought
naval reinforcements from Sultan Bayazid. Even though he could have
extended significant help, he held himself back because of fear of the
Christian support for Jamshed against him. He, however, sent to Spain
a very: small and ordinary fleet consisting of only a few warships
under the command of Kamal, his naval commander. The fleet
teached the Spanish coast and inflicted only a minor loss to the
Christians and did not play a major role. But with the end of Jamshed,
he attempted to occupy the islands and coastal areas lying between
Greece and Italy and ruled over by Venice. In this way, he started a
clash with the naval force of Venice. At last, the Turkish fleet
decisively defeated the Venetian navy in 905 A.H. In 906 A.H. the
Ottoman war fleet had to face the allied naval forces of Venice, the
Roman Pope, Spain and France as a preemptive precaution against the
quickly developing naval forces of the Ottomans. They had unanimously
decided to do away with the Ottoman navy. However, the Ottoman
naval commander, Kamal did a wonderful job by defeating the

Christian war fleet. A.jarge number ‘of enemy warships were either

sunk or captured and the rest escaped the deadly Turkish assault.

Following this naval victory Kamal’s fame spread everywhere and the

Ottoman navy became the terror of the Mediterranean Sea. Only a few

442 , The History of islam

years before the Turkish naval victory, Muslim rule in Spain had
gone out of existence in 897 A.H. Although Poland and Hungary
also came to a clash with Bayazid II, their feeble attempts are not
worth mentioning. However, in the aftermath of these encounters,
the Polish made peace with the Sultan and the result was the
Turkish occupation of some cities of Poland. Since Bayazid Ii was
mentally inclined to peace Ottoman rule did not go beyond a certain
limit in regard to grandeur and territorial expansion. During Sultan
Muhammad II's period, the Christians had been so awe-struck that
they were satisfied with a peace treaty with him and did not dare
rise against him. We cannot, however, decry Sultan Bayazid I]
because during his rule, the Ottoman naval power made much
progress and a number of islands and coastal areas came under
Muslim control. However, he did not perform on a level worthy of
his ancestors. He is generally known as a man of peace and virtue
with a tinge of idleness and stupidity.

The year Sultan Bayazid II came to the throne Sheikh Abdur Rahman
Jami dedicated his book entitled Silsilatuz ‘Zahb to him. The Sheikh
had also passed away on Muharram 10,898 A.H. during Bayazid’s
tenure and was laid to rest in Herat. Columbus discovered America
the same year, although, Spanish Muslims discovered it long before,
notwithstanding Columbus is known for this accomplishment. During
Bayazid’s period the Portuguese king, Manuel sent Vasco de Gama
with three ships under his command to discover India. He reached the
port of Cannanore on the Malabar Coast and on Ramadan 20, 903
A.H. he lowered his anchor in Calcutta. During the same period, 906
A.H., Ismail Safwi, the founder of Safwi dynasty acceded to the throne
of Iran. Sikander Lodhi was the contemporary of Sultan Bayazid Il in
India, but he died in 915 A.H., three years before the demise of the
Ottoman king. On Shaban 29, 916 A.H. the Turkman king of the
Shebani Dynasty was killed facing Ismail Safwi, the king of Iran, and
one month later, Sultan Mahmud Beker the king of Gujarat died in
Ahmedabad. The thirty-two year reign of Bayazid II was not so
eventful, events occurring in other countries contemporary to his
period have been mentioned here for the sake of giving the reader a
historical perspective.

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 443

One more event of Sultan Bayazid II’s period is also worth
mentioning for it brings to focus the cold hearted and unmanly
character of the Christians of that time. As already mentioned,
Sultan Bayazid If had come into armed conflict with Hungary.
During one such encounter, Ghazi Mustafa, a commander of
Bayazid, and Ghazi’s full brother were caught by the Hungarian
troops. The Hungarian commander meted out such a ghastly
treatment to them that the brother of Ghazi Mustafa was put ona
spit and roasted over a fire like roasted meat while he was still alive.
The height of the cruelty was that Ghazi Mustafa was forced to turn
the spit to cook him. Following this gruesome punishment the king
broke all of Ghazi Mustafa’s teeth and freed him after torturing him
and taking a ransom for his release. A few years later, when the
same Hungarian commander was caught and produced before
Ghazi Mustafa, he was simply killed without any torture or ill
treatment. This single event proves beyond doubt the brute nature
of the Christians in contrast to the righteous and civilized behavior
of the Turks and their religious sensitivity and practice.

Towards the end of Sultan Bayazid II's reign, some internal troubles
and disorders appeared. The issue of his successor was one such
development. Bayazid If had eight sons. Five of them died young
while the three remaining sons were named Ahmad, Qarqud and
Salim. Among them Qarqud was the eldest and Salim was the
youngest. The Sultan was fondest of the middle one and wanted to
proclaim him as his successor. Ahmad, Qarqud and their sons were
Governors in Asia Minor while Trabzon was ruled over by Salim.
Salim was more valiant, adventurous and good-natured and because
of these qualities, his commanders and soldiers preferred him to the
others. After coming to power in Iran Ismail Safwi had spread the
Shiites all over Asia Minor to teach the Ottomans Shi‘a faith and make
them supporters and sympathizers of the Iranian king. These efforts
bore fruit and those ambitious among them rose to indulge in piracy
and plunder within the confines of Asia Minor. Qarqud and Ahmad,
ruling over the greater part of Asia Minor, sent their force to put down
the insurgence and a number of encounters took place. However,
owing to the negligence of the Ottoman Sultan and the idleness and

444 , The History of Islam

wrong actions of the princes, bands of insurgents gathered under the
leadership of a man named Shah Quli and they developed intoa
strong force. Shah Quli was a staunch supporter and well wisher of
the King of Iran, Ismail Safwi. He left no stone unturned in pushing
the Ottoman Empire into trouble. When the news of disturbances in
Asia Minor reached Constantinople, Sultan Bayazid was under
compulsion to send an army commanded by his Prime Minister to
face the situation. During a fierce fight at Srimashk, both Shah Quli
and the Ottoman Prime Minister were killed. The event took place in
917 A.H. These disturbances and disorders occurred in the territories
under Qarqud and Ahmad’s rule.

Trabzon, the territory ruled over by Salim was not given any chance to
rise against the Ottoman power, which was undeniable proof of
Salim’s steadfastness and farsightedness. He had built a huge army to
keep peace and order in his territory. When he found himself at the
helm of affairs, he led his force against Serkeshia and won victories.
Hearing this Bayazid 11 wrote to him from Constantinople not to
expand his territories by invading foreign lands. Salim wrote back
.fequesting his father to install him in a European province so that he
could wage jihad on the Christians, because sitting idle and keeping
silent was against his nature and he could not remain away from the
battlefield. These events occurred at a time when Bayazid II was about
to declare Ahmed his successor. When the ‘devoted’ forces and other
commanders had an opportunity with Bayazid II, they expressed their
resentment. Some of them spoke in favor of Qarqud for he was the
elder son, while others favored Salim for his bravery and
farsightedness. When Ahmad and Qarqud came to know of this
conflict, they grew anxious about losing the throne. Because of this, all
the three brothers started making efforts of their own to grab power
by increasing their military strength and indulging in opposing one
another. As per the wishes of the courtiers and Salim himself, he
(Salim) was nominated for a European province called Sarundra. In a
situation when efforts were on fo overtake one another, Salim also
strengthened his position by occupying Adrianople in Europe. With
the conquest of Adrianople, Bayazid himself rushed to punish Salim
and the fatter had to concede defeat easily for a large section of his

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 445

army deserted him and went over to Bayazid’s side. He fled the
battlefield, took a ship and reached the Crimea to join his father-in-
law and plunged into collecting fighters from among the Turks and
the Tartars.

Ahmad, in Asia Minor, completed his preparations to conquer
Constantinople and dethrone Bayazid. When Sultan Bayazid returned
to Constantinople after.driving away his son, Salim from Adrianople,
he heard of the ensuing attack of Ahmad. In view of this situation,
Sultan Bayazid became embarrassed and his courtiers started doubting
his abilities as a ruler. Now, following the advice of his courtiers or on
his own, Bayazid sent word to Salim to come to Constantinople along
with his army and join the royal forces to put a check on the
impending onslaught of Ahmad. This message filled Salim with joy
and he took with him three or four thousand soldiers and arrived in
Adrianople passing through difficult routes and passes and along the
coast of Black Sea and from there he went to Constantinople. Hearing
of Salim’s arrival in this manner Bayazid sent him orders to go back to
the province of Samundra, which he had been nominated for, as his
help: was no longer needed. But the courtiers and military commanders,
on the other hand, sent word not to return but to come straight to
Constantinople for he would never have such an opportunity again.
Thus, Salim reached Constantinople and was accorded a warm
welcome by the courtiers and military commanders. Salim then
reached the gate of the royal palace and sent his message to Bayazid
11 to grant him an audience in the court. Thus, Bayazid convened an
open court. The courtiers, religious scholars and jurists, advocates of
the people and commanders expressed themselves with one accord
that since the Sultan had grown old and weak it was desirable that
he should abdicate his throne in favor of his son, Salim. Bayazid
heard them patiently and declared Salim his successor without loss
of time and quit the throne. Salim moved ahead and kissed the
shoulder of the Sultan. Following this, the Sultan gave him some
wise counsel and then got in the palanquin and moved on. Salim too
walked along catching the foot of the palanquin. Bayazid I left
Constantinople to settle in the city of Demotika and pass the rest of

his life in peace and prayer. Salim escorted his departing father on

446 The History of Islam
foot up to the gate of the city. He then came back and ascended the
throne. Bayazid passed away on the way before reaching Demotika
city. He left behind three sons and nine grandsons among the
grandsons was also Sulaiman, the only son of Salim. Bayazid II
abdicated the throne on April 25, 1512 C.E. (910 AH.) and died on
April 29, 1512 C.E. Sultan Salim son of Bayazid II, ascended the throne
in Constantinople.

The Ottoman Sultan Salim

When Sultan Salim came to the throne of Constantinople with the
common consent and desire of the people and the military both of his
brothers ruling in Asia Minor, could not muster courage to challenge
his position. They apparently, showed their allegiance to Sultan Salim,
but secretly, they engaged themselves in preparing against the ceiitral
government. Salim was also not so gullible as to believe in the so-
called sincerity of his brothers. But he initiated no military campaign
against them. Now it came to such pass that Ahmad concentrated his
forces in Amasya and filled his treasury with a large amount of money
collected through heavy taxation. His son Alauddin, on the other
hand, declared his sovereignty at the insistence of his father. Having
heard of these insurgent activities Sultan Salim thought it necessary to
personally march to Asia Minor to put down the uprisings. Thus, he
himself led his army into Asia Minor. Moreover, he sent some
warships along the seacoast. He caught and killed both Alauddin and
his brother and occupied Bursa. He also found his nephews among
the opponents and killed them as well. Having heard this Ahmad
came out at the head of an army but fled the battlefield after being
beaten. Following his defeat, he sent his two sons to Ismail Safwi, the
king of Iran to live in safety, and he himself kept striving for success.
In view of the sad plight of Ahmad and his son his elder brother,
Qarqud ruling in the northeastern parts of Asia Minor became alert.
The next step of Sultan Salim was his sudden attack on the territory of
Qarqud with ten thousand cavalry soldiers. Qarqud was arrested after
a slight resistance and was put to death for his claim to the Ottoman
throne. However, the assassination of his brother left him sad for
sometime during which he refused to take meals.

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 447

The assassination of the Ottoman princes in this manner must have
naturally touched the emotions of the people and so Ahmad was able
to build a huge army and challenge Salim to fight with him. Salim’s
army suffered several initial reverses also. However, Salim was a man
of courage and determination and did not lose heart and concede
defeat. He continued his recruiting drive on one hand and
consolidated and regularized his military machine on the other. The
result was the defeat and arrest of Ahmad and finally his

assassination. This last battle with Ahmad resulting in his final setback
took place on April 24, 1513 (919 A.H.).

By habits, manners and_ his direct course of'action Sultan Salim was,
beyond doubt, more valiant than his father, and a man of courage and
determination like his grandfather. He was a constant source of terror
to the Christian countries. However, when they witnessed that the
Sultan was paying more attention to the Muslims and his internal
problems, they advanced cautiously towards implementing peace
agreements and keeping their western borders free from all conflicts.
Shortly after dealing with his brothers, Sultan Salim got involved with
fran and Asia Minor. Had he not shown his firmness and
determination against the Iranian ruler the Ottoman Empire would
have disintegrated. Ismail Safwi considered himself among the
descendants of Imam J’afar Sadiq and because of this, the Lranian
people were emotionally attached to him. Shia-Sunni conflicts had not
yet disappeared from Syria and Asia Minor. These countries had a
climate favorable to the growth of the Shia faith. Moreover, these
territories had a large Shia population. Ismail Safwi's maternal
grandmother was a Christian lady and the da ughter of the Christian
king of Trabzon and wife of Hasan Tawil. Hence, Ismail Safwi had a
desire to possess Trabzon, although it was a province of the Ottoman
tule for a long time. Since Ismail Safwi had rose to power through
Shia bigotry he knew very well how the Shia sect had played a
significant role in instigating the Mongols to ravage Baghdad. Thus,
the hate and enmity of an ambitious and mighty king like Ismail
Safwi towards the Ottoman rule was not a matter of surprise. From
the day he came to power he never failed to create trouble for
Bayazid !1 in Asia Minor and winning the favor and support of the

44 . The History of Islam

people there by propagating the Shia faith. Bayazid’s government
failed to put a check on those hostile activities. Moreover, his two
sons ruling at that time in Asia Minor took no serious notice of these
impending dangers. However, Salim, the ruler of Trabzon was fully
conscious of Ismail Safwi’s intriguing activities and he never
allowed his secret plans to bear fruit. Ismail Safwi had already
captured a few border areas during the reign of Bayazid II, and

when his Ottoman Governors failed to restore those territories
Bayazid paid no heed to the problem.

When Sultan Salim became involved
nephews, Ismail Safwi was watching
2 sense of satisfaction but, he lent his
through his agents in Asia Minor.
give Salim some initial defeats. Now
nefarious design of Ismail Safwi

Ahmad and nephew of Salim,
then put him.on the throne of ©
Murad was in those days un
noticed ‘that the cities, towns a

in dealing with his brothers and
the developments not only with
active support to the insurgents
That is why Ahmad was able to
Sultan Salim came to know of the
to set Murad, the son of prince
against him (Salim) in Asia Minor and
Onstantinople. He was able to do so for
der the-care of the Iranian king. He also
nd villages of Asia Minor were stormed
h were created by none other than Ismail

Safwi himself.

After doing away with his brothers, he first of all, set up a large-scale
secret service in Asia Minor and o;

rdered his agents to prepare a
comprehensive list of those who had

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 449

breadth of Asia Minor in a manner that the Ottoman soldiers
sustained not even a scratch. Such large-scale killing of the Shi‘a sect
was extremely horrible. The rest lost heart and renounced their new
faith. The undoing of the conspiracy of Ismail Safwi was, in fact, a
marvelous victory for Sultan Salim. Although Ismail Safwi fretted
much at this unfortunate happening, he kept silent. But shortly after
that, he came out with the open declaration that he was about to
launch an attack on the Ottomans to restore his ancestral throne by
arresting and deposing Salim, the Ottoman. Having heard this Sultan’
Salim called a meeting of his courtiers and military commanders and
informed them of his plan to invade Iran.

This declaration was made at a time when the episodes of Iranian
power had gripped the mind of everyone and Turkish troops had
already tasted defeat at their hands. Moreover, Shebani Khan, the king
of Turkistan had already been killed by Ismail Safwi. Thus, to the
audience of courtiers and military commanders any thought of
attacking Iran was an act fraught with danger. They all, therefore,
kept silent three times at the call of the Sultan. However, the
doorkeeper, named Abdullah broke the silence. He moved ahead,
knelt down before Sultan Salim and submitted that he and his’
companions were ready to fight under the royal banner and die for
victory. Sultan Salim grew very happy and promoted him to the post
of district collector. Other commanders also followed suit.

Ismail Safwi

Ismail’s lineage is as follows: Ismail bin Haider bin Junaid bin Ibrahim
bin Khawaja Ali bin Sadruddin bin Sheikh Safiuddin bin Jibril. Sheikh
Safiuddin was the first man in the family to achieve a prominent name
and was famous. He lived in Ardabil and served the people asa
spiritual guide. It is after his name that the family came to be known
as “Safwi.” Following the demise of Sheikh Safiuddin his son,
Sadruddin took up the patched garment of his father and replaced
him as a spiritual guide. Sultan Bayazid Yaldaram and Timur were his
contemporaries. Along with the defeat and arrest of Sultan Bayazid in
804 A.H. a large number of Turkish soldiers were also held by Timur.

450 The Histary of Islam

When, following this victory, Timur reached Ardabil he attended
the shrine of Sheikh Safiuddin. During the audience Timur said,
“Can I be of any service to you?” Sheikh Sadruddin said, “Release
all the prisoners held from the battle of Ankara.” Timur carried it
out immediately. After their release, all the Turkish prisoners
became the Sheikh’s disciples and began to live in attendance of the
Sheikh. With the passage of time, the number of these “released”
captives’ progeny increased.

After the demise of Timur, his empire broke into pieces and was
divided among his children. Soon after the death of Timur, the
Turkmen of Kara Koyunlu tribe set up their rule in the territory lying
between the Black Sea and Azerbaijan. Similarly, Kurdistan, the
northern part of Iraq, had gone to Ak Koyunlu, another tribe of the
Turkmen, which ruled over the territory as a feudatory with the
authority of Timur during the his lifetime. Qara Yusuf, the chief of the
Kara Koyunlu was at enmity with Timur and passed his days
wandering in Egypt during the reign of Timur. Having heard of the
death of Timur, he came back and occupied Azerbaijan rather easily.
Ardabil was the center of Azerbaijan while Diyar Bakr was the capital

of Kurdistan.

During the time of Sheikh Junaid, the great grandson of Sheikh
Sadru¢din, the number of the disciples increased so much that Shah,
son cf Qara Yusuf was embarrassed and asked Sheikh Junaid to leave
Ardabil. In response to the order, Sheikh Junaid, along with his
disciples, left for Diyar Bakr. Hasan Tawi of the Ak Koyunlu was then
the ruler of Diyar Bakr (Kurdistan). When he heard of the arrival of
Sheikh Junaid in this way, he grew very happy and accorded hima
warm welcome. 1

Soon after his arrival, Hasan Tawil married his sister to Sheikh Junaid.
Both Ak Koyunlu and Kara Koyunlu tribes of the Turkmen were old
rivals. Since Sheikh Junaid had now entered into relations with a royal
farnily and ‘come out of the life of seclusion, leadership had now
become part of his duties. He changed his disciples into soldiers
easily as they were none but the progeny of Turkish fighters. Bui ding

he launched an attack on Ardabil. Since

an army out of those soldiers, / 1
the valor of Ardabil had driven the Sheikh out of Ardabil, this

/

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 451

invasion was taken as a retaliatory action. Even his disciples and
supporters thought so. Since the Sheikh was an inexperienced
commander he suffered a setback and escaped from the battlefield
and invaded the ruler of Shirvan, a friend and ally of Jahan Shah, the
ruler of Ardabil. But the Sheikh suffered another defeat and fled for

his life in this state of confusion an assassin’s arrow hit him and he
succumbed to it.

Following the death of Sheikh Junaid his son Haider succeeded him as
the spiritual guide. Haider was a prince from the side of his mother
and a dervish from his father’s side. He had, therefore, in-him both the
temporal and the mystical and he drew more disciples than his father
had. After the death of Sheikh Junaid, Amir Hasan Tawil made
temporary peace with Jahan Shah and annexed Khorasan after killing
Abu Sayeed Timuri. Afterwards, Amir Hasan wrested Azerbaijan
from Jahan Shah and became the ruler of Iran. After that Hasan Tawil,
the King of Iran married his daughter to his maternal nephew Sheikh
Haider. Thus, Sheikh Haider became not only the son of the king of
Iran but also his son-in-law. Hasan Tawil had married the daughter of
the Christian king of Trabzon. His Christian wife gave birth to a girl
who was named Parsa or Shah Begum. This very girl was given to
Sheikh Haider in marriage and three sons named Ali, Ibrahim and
Ismail were bom to her. Sheikh Haider remained silent during the
‘lifetime of Hasan Tawil. But, following the death of Hasan Tawil and
the accession of his son Yaqub, Sheikh Haider built.an army out of his
disciples and invited others too to join his army to attack the ruler of
Shirvan, southeastern Caucasus (part of modem Azerbaijan), to
avenge the blood of his father. He held himself back from any such
action during, the lifetime of Hasan Tawil because he had made peace
with Jahan Shah following the assassination of Sheikh Junaid and had
also entered into a peace treaty with the king of Shirvan who had also
abetted Hasan Tawil in assassinating Abu Sayeed Mirza Timuri. Thus,
the peace treaty remained intact during the lifetime of Hasan Tawil,
and Sheikh Haider had to delay his action against the ruler of Shirvan.
Shirvan was under the rule of an Iranian dynasty for several hundred
years and they claimed to be the descendants of Bahram Chubin.
When Farkh Yasar of Shirvan heard of Sheikh Haider's expedition to

452 The History of Islam
avenge the blood of his father he also became
two forces came face to face in 893 A.H. ai
like his father and was buried in Ardabil.

ready to fight. These
ind Sheikh Haider was killed

After the demise of Sheikh Hai
the seat of his father asas
also flocked around him.

der his elder son, Ali was brought to
piritual guide. Disciples in Jarge numbers
When Amir Yaqub, who had succeeded
Hasan Tawil, anticipated Ali’s attack on Shirvan like his father and

grandfather he wanted the peace treaty conducted during the time of
Hasan Tawil to continue. T 1

- When Amir Yaqub died
and was succeeded by his son Ahmad Beg, Ali, along with his
escaped from captivity, he reached Ardabil and set himself
to the task of Procuring disciples. Ahmad Beg sent down an army to

punish Ali who came Out to face the attacking army but was defeated
and killed like his father and grandfather.

During the encounter Ali's younger brothers, Ibrahim and Ismail fled

from Ardabil to Gilan in disguise. Ibrahim Passed away shortly after
arriving in Gilan. Ismail atone,

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 453

Only four years before, a man who was passing a wretched life in
Gilan had now turned to be a mighty ruler. The progeny of the

Turkish soldiers never lacked in loyalty and took the descendant of
their benefactor, Sadruddin of Ardabil to the throne.

How amazing it is that those who led Ismail bin Haider Safwi to
power could not keep peace with the Ottoman Empire ruled over by
people of the same race. Since Ismail Safwi had won victories from the
very beginning, his reputation as a conqueror benefited him greatly
and he became a terror to his opponents. Had Ismail Safwi not spread
his net of conspiracy throughout the territories of Sultan Salim and
kept peace with him, the Ottomans could have tumed to Europe.
Because of this, Salim had to renew his peace agreements with the
Christian powers and they hada long respite of eight to ten years to
increase and strengthen their military power.

The Battle of Chaldiran

Having heard of the war preparations of Ismail Safwi, Sultan Salim
mobilized his armed forces in Yeni city in Rabia al-Awwal 920 A.H.
(April 20, 1514C.E) and entered into Asia Minor. After a week, on
April 27, Sultan Salim’s intelligence officers caught a spy of Shah
Ismail Safwi and produced him before Sultan Salim. But instead of
punishing him, he gave him a letter addressed to Ismail Safwi. In

addition, he sent an emissary to Iran. Sultan Salim wrote to him the
following after praising Allah Almighty.

“L, Salim bin Sultan Bayazid bin Sultan Muhammad bin
Sultan Murad, the ruler of the Ottoman Empire, the chief of the
brave and the destroyer of idofaters and the enemies of true
religion, tell Ismail, the ruler of Iran, that the Word of Allah
Almighty is above all changes. But it contains countless secrets
beyond the comprehension of man. Allah Almighty sent man to
the Earth as His Khalifa (vice rergent) for man alone embodies
both spiritual and physical forces at one time, and man is the
only animal who can understand the Attributes of Allah and
worships Him for His High Qualities. Man cannot acquire true
knowledge from any religion but Islam and none can gain
Success except by following the Last Prophet (#). © Amir

454 The History of Islam

Ismail, you can never attain success and prosperity for you have
defiled the pure and sacred principles of Islam by going against
the dictates of the Shari‘at and gave up the way to salvation.
You demolished the places of prayer and captured power in the
East by foul and unlawful means. You have atjained your
present position by tricks and fraud. You have opened the
doors to cruelties and mercilessness on the Muslims. You are
not only a liar, merciless and an apostate but also unjust, a
fabricator in religion and one showing disrespect to the Qur’an.
You have created differences and dissension in Islam by wrong
interpretations. Your have sowed the seeds of mischief and
disturbance throughout and raised the banner of faithlessness.
You have committed terrible excesses overpowered by your
baser self, and you have permitted one and all use of abusive
language against Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman. Since you have
committed infidelity in word and deed, our religious scholars
have issued a verdict of capital punishment on you. They have
also given a verdict that every Muslim should make it his duty
to do away with the evils and impurities lying within you and
your followers. Now, in order to implement the decisions of the
religious scholars which are totally based on the dictates of the
Qur’an and for strengthening Islam, the Religion of Allah and
saving people from your atrocities, I have decided to put on
armor by putting off royal garments and took up my flag for the
battlefield, the flag that has never seen defeat, and attack you
with a sword which goes mad when it is unsheathed along with
soldiers whose swords inflict deep injuries on the enemy. We
have already crossed the Straits and I am sure, by the Grace of
Allah, 1 will very soon put an end to your cruelties and
disruptive activities and take out of your mind the smell of
arrogance which has driven you towards evil acts. But, since I
follow the dictates of Shari‘at, I think it necessary to put the
Qur’an before you and invite you to follow the true religion.
The best course to shun the evil is to take stock of the record of
deeds, repent for the evils done and ward off all evil acts in the
future. Moreover, give back to the possession of our junior
commissioned officers those territories, which you have

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 455

unlawfully taken away. Do carry out these orders if you hold
your safety dear hnd do it immediately. But if you fail to give
up the wrong acts of your ancestors you will see your fields
covered with oun camps and watch us showing our wonderful
acts of bravery. The entire world will then see the verdict of
Allah Almighty, the greatest of all judges.”

As pointed out in the letter, Ismail had demolished all the tombs and
mosques belonging to the Sunni sect and put them to untold miseries.
The ancestors of Ismail were not Shi‘a by faith. They all belonged to
the Sunni sect and practiced Sunni faith. After the time of Sheikh
Junaid when the family was engaged in warfare, they began to induce
people to love of Ahl-e-bait (members of the Prophet's family) for they
were sure of their easy success in bringing recruits in this way. But,
gradually, they stuck to the Shia creed for political reasons. Ismail
Safwi indulged in excessive exaggeration and began to propagate the
Shiite faith all over the country. Since the Iranians were inclined to this
faith, he achieved remarkable success in his attempt. But those
Muslims who showed firmness in faith suffered terrible atrocities. He
propagated his beliefs across the borders of the Ottoman Empire.

Sultan Bayazid did not arrange to put a check on it but Sultan Salim
paid immediate attention to this scourge. 8

Along with the letter, Sultan Salim had sent his emissary to demand
the return of Prince Murad in case he (Ismail) was reconciled to the
Sultan’s way of thinking. Having gone through the letter he handed
over the emissary to Murad who, at the instance of Ismail Safwi, cut
the emissary into pieces. This step of Ismail was not only brutal but

against the royal norms. Ismail sent the following reply to Sultan
Salim:

“I couldn’t understand the reason behind your burning anger. I think
you have written the letter under the effect of opium. If you are set to

fight, 1 am also ready to face you and leave the result to Allah. You
will measure the merit only during the fight.”

Along with the letter Ismail Safwi sent a small box of opium as a gift
to Sultan Salim, meaning thereby that the Sultan's letter was from one
addicted to opium and the letter was written under the effect thereof.

456 . The History of Islam

Having seen the box of opium and having gone through the letter °
Salim fell in wrath and retaliated by killing Ismail’s emissary. He then
organized his forces and marched to Tabriz, the capital of Ismail
Safwi. When he took stock of his troops in Sivas, they were comprised
of eighty thousand cavalrymen and forty thousared infantry. He
divided his forty thousand infantrymen into many parts and deployed
a company at every stage from Sivas to Kayseri with the instruction
that each company should move one stage ahead as the troops under
the command of the Sultan moved a stage ahead of Kayseri. The
arrangement was made to facilitate the movement of supplies. But as
Sultan Salim stepped into Iranian territory he witnessed that, by the
order of Ismail Safwi, the Iranians had destroyed all populated areas
and cultivation and burnt down all the vegetation, trees and grass and
had set a large army to ravage its own territory leaving nothing for the
Ottoman troops. The Iranian population was ordered to vacate the
area with what they could carry and set what was left on fire
otherwise the army would turn them out and reduce their goods and
chattels to ashes. In such a situation Sultan Salim faced difficulties
although he had already made adequate arrangements for supplies
from Constantinople. and the European provinces to the port of
Trabzon by ship and from there on donkeys and camels up to the
military camps. Ismail Safwi kept moving back without putting up
any resistance and ravaging his own country. He had in mind that
Salim would not be able to lead sucha huge army so far and would
have to retreat exhausted and discouraged and Ismail Safwi was not
very wrong. At one stage of the long march the tired army refused to
go-ahead and the commanders advised the Sultan against further
movement, The Sultan disliked the suggestion and kept moving ahead
instead of going back. Now the Ottoman force entered Azerbaijan via
Diyar Bakr (Kurdistan). At this stage, tHe commanders jointly sent
Hamdan Pasha the childhood friend and classmate of the Sultan to go
and persuade him to return. He called on the Sultan and entreated
him not to displease his troops and go back. Having heard this Sultan
Salim turned mad with anger and cut off his head. No one could even
make a inurmur against the Sultan. However, at one stage of this long
and arduous journey the ‘devout’ forces, most courageous and valiant

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 457

of all, raised a unanimous voice against going ahead. In view of the
behavior of the entire army, the next morning Sultan Salim came on
horseback and stood among the ‘devout’ army and addressed the
soldiers as a whole:

“I have not come here to go back unsuccessful. Those who are valiant
and cannot bear the blame of timidity because of their inherent
nobility and fear not the wounds of arrows and swords will certainly
go with me. But those who prefer life to honor and want to go back
home deterring the troubles ahead are permitted on my part to leave the
company of our brave and mighty men. In case none of you accompany
me and leave me alone I shall not go back without fighting.”

Having said this Sultan Salim ordered the ‘impotent’ to leave and the
brave and those having a sense of shame to march ahead without
delay. The stirring words of the Sultan electrified the entire army and
it set out without a single soldier staying behind. It was the blessing
of his manly courage that at the next stage the Christian ruler of
Caucasia sent a huge amount of supplies to the Ottoman troops. This
generosity was given to win the heart and favor of the Sultan. Now
Tabriz, the capital of Ismail was not far away. Sultan Salim then
teached the valley of Chaldiran, and as he ascended a moun towards
the west of the valley, he witnessed the Iranian force in the field facing
him and he grew happy. In each letter addressed to Ismail Safwi until
then Ismail had put him to shame by evading a fight with the
Ottoman force. Had Ismail Safwi left his capital too, Sultan Salim
would have stopped his march and not gone beyond Tabriz. But
Ismail could not bear the Ottoman advances any more. Chaldiran lay
a little more than twenty miles away. from Tabriz and Ismail Safwi
had chosen this place to give battle to Salim. Ismail Safwi's army was
almost equal in size to that of Salim’s but with a difference. While the
Ottoman force was extremely exhausted, Ismail had a fresh army,
armed to the teeth. Ismail Safwi’s retreat was, in fact, a part of his war
strategy and he was very sure of defeating an army that was
overtaken by fatigue. In such a situation, it was reasonable for Sultan
Salim to delay the clash for a day or two and allow his troops to take a
rest and regain lost freshness and energy. But, since Sultan Salim was
impatient to fight with Ismail Safwi, he could not hold back when he

458 The History of Islam

came face to face with the enemy. As the spies of Ismail Safwi had.
informed him, the Ottoman force was to appear from the front he had
drawn his battle line accordingly and was determined not to give any
respite to the exhausted Ottoman army. He had also come to know of
the artillery with Sultan Salim besides the number of troops he had.
As a war strategy, he divided his eighty thousand cavalry into two
parts, each consisting of forty thousands and kept one part under his
direct command while another part he entrusted to his Commander,
Abu Ali. He then issued instructions that in case of an Ottoman attack,
the front line soldiers should face the assault and the two cavalry
corps should come around from the right and the left side to reach
behind and fall upon the enemy troops. When Sultan Salim noticed
the firmness of the Iranian force, he placed his troops drawn from
Asia Minor under his Commander Sanan Pasha and those from
Europe to Hussein Pasha and put Sanan Pasha on the right wing and
Hussein Pasha on the left. He took his ‘devout’ soldiers with him and
kept to the center. He then mobilized the feudatories and volunteers
as the vanguard; the artillery was set up at a suitable spot. Since Ismail
Safwi knew about the artillery of Sultan Salim, he had utilized the
services of eighty thousand cavalrymen to neutralize its effect. This
was, in fact, a commendable and wise strategy on the part of Ismail.
Thus, as both the armies came closer and the confrontation started
Ismail Safwi went around the Ottoman force and targeted its right
wing with his forty thousand cavalrymen and Abu Ali did the same
from the ieft side. As the battle broke out, calls of takbir (Allahu-Aktar)
rose from the Ottoman side while the Iranian troops cried “Shah,
Shah.” Thus, while the war cry of the Ottoman force meant, “Allah is
Great”, the Iranian army was chanting the name of its king and both
the forces could be identified by their distinctive chants. However,
Ismail Safwi, evading the artillery fire, launched a fierce attack on the
Husain Pasha‘s right wing from behind and took a heavy toll on the
European corps. Ismail’s Commander Abu Ali also attempted to give
the same performance on the left side but did not achieve much
success. A part of his cavalry came within the range of the Ottoman
artillery and they lost their existence along with their commander,
Abu Ali Sanan Pasha put Commander Ali’s troops to rout rather

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 459

easily. But Hussein Pasha was still struggling to beat the Iranians who
were proving their worth as formidable fighters. Sultan Salim was
watching the battlefield with the utmost caution. When he found
Sanan Pasha in a dominant position and needed no help, he hurried to
the rescue of Hussein Pasha with the selected squads under his direct
command and launched such a massive attack that the Iranians were
uprooted and Ismail Safwi himself fled the field.

Ismail Safwi was caught in his attempt to escape to safety but his
comrade Mirza Sultan posed as Ismail and as the Ottoman soldiers

turned their attention to Mirza Sultan, Ismail Safwi escaped. The

entire battlefield was cleared of Iranian troops. When Salim captured

the military camp, he found that the Iranian ruler had fled in such a
State of fright and confusion that he left behind not only his treasure
but also his beloved wife. Sultan Salim kept the women and children
in custody and killed all the Prisoners of war. The deserted look of the
battlefield showed that fourteen Ottoman commanders and an equal
number of their Iranian counterparts were lying dead. Sultan Salim
was much aggrieved at the loss: and buried them with honor.
Following this Sultan Salim Proceeded to Tabriz and entered the city
only thirteen days after the battle of Chaldiran on August 22, 1514
CE. (Rajab 20,920 A.H.). Ismail Safwi ha taken tefuge in Tabriz but
fled to Khorasan on hearing of Sultan Salim’s march into the city.
After a halt of eight days in Tabriz, the Sultan Proceeded to Karabakh.
During his stay in Tabriz, Mirza Badiuzzaman, a prince claiming to be ©
the descendant of Timur called on the Sultan and was greeted warmly
and honorably. Salim had in mind a march to Azerbaijan and to pass

the spring there before leading his campaigns against the eastern

5 forced by his army to return from the
banks of the river Satluj. Even though Sultan Salim left from
Karabakh, he did not 89 straight back to Constantinople. He halted at
the city of Amasya in Asia

Minor and after passing the spring there
invaded Armenia, Georgia and the Caucasus territories and annexed
them to the Ottoman rule. He had already occupied Azerbaijan. He
was now planning to conquer Kurdistan and Iraq, which until then
was under the rule of Ismail Safwi. In the meantime, news came from

4 The History of Islam

Constantinople that the Ottoman force there was about to revolt and
had shown disrespect to the Viceroy of the capital. This new
development compelled him to return to the trouble spot, but he
appointed seasoned commanders to complete his unfinished tasks
who, in a short time, conquered Kurdistan, Iraq and up to the coastal
areas of the Persian Gulf. Thus, half of Ismail Safwi's country became
the part of the Ottoman rule. All future attempts of the Iranian ruler to
restore his lost territories ended in defeat.

One of the gains of Sultan Salim in Tabriz was that he contracted
about one thousand builders, architects and artisans and sent them to
Constantinople offering them higher daily wages plus endowments.
The builders and architects of Tabriz were at that time famous all over
the world. Thus, he fulfilled the needs of Constantinople. On being

Parts of his country. As a result of these conquests, the Ottoman
Empire expanded deep into the eastern regions and @ number of
fertile provinces came under its control. Most importantly, the
Ottoman rule was no longer under threat from its eastern borders,
Ismail Safwi wrote to Sultan Salim to send back his wife who was still
in the custody of the Ottoman ruler. Since he considered Ismail an
apostate and faithless he refused to send his wife to him and married
her to one of his soldiers, Ja’far Chalpi. When Ismail Safwi came to
know that his wife was enjoying her married life with a Turkish

soldier, he was downcast by this terrible shock and he lived and died
in the same state. -

Conquest of Egypt and Syria

It has already been mentioned that Malik al-

Saleh of the Ayyubi
dynasty had organized a force in Egypt based on the Mamluks, which

y. Very soon, these slaves captured the
he same time, the Slave dynasty was in

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 461
power in India too. While in India, only two kings from the Slave
dynasty were actually slaves and the latter kings only belonged to that
dynasty, in Egypt however, only a slave could succeed to the throne
on the death of the slave ruler. Those slave kings were called
Mamluks. They ruled over Egypt until the time of Sultan Salim and
the Abbasid caliphs lived in Egypt only to provide a safeguard and to
provide credibility to those Egyptian kings. The Mamluk rule of Egypt
was also very respectable and mighty. The Mamluks extended two
marvelous services to Islam. One, they saved Islam from the Christian
assaults and did away with the crusades forever; two, they puta
check on the surge of Mongol invasions and beat the forces of
Genghis and Hulagu Khan. It is quite strange that the victorious
Mongols were thrashed by the slaves (Mamluks) of Egypt were beaten

again by the slave Kings of India. Thus, the Mongols who took the
most respectable and highest dynasties by storm were routed by the
Muslim slave kingdoms.

The Mamluk dynasty of Egypt, which ru
Hijaz from the end of the Ayyubi dynasty,
the Ottoman dynasty. However, when P:
Egypt after being defeated by his elder brother Sultan Bayazid I
relations with Cairo and Constantinople turned bitter to the extent of
causing a clash between the two and the Ottoman rule had suffered
setbacks at the hands of the Mamluks. They were arodously watching
the victorious marches of Sultan Salim and especially the defeat bf
Ismail Safwi. They were anticipating Salim’s campaigns against Egypt
to restore the cities and forts occupied by the Mamluks during the rule
of Bayazid 11. Ismail Safwi, after being defeated by Sultan Salim, sent
his emissary to the Mamluk ruler to establish friendly relations with
Egypt. Qalzu Ghazi, the ruler of Egypt held the Iranian emissary in
esteem and accepted the offer. The emissary also warned the Egyptian
ruler against the impending danger of Salim’s invasion. These new
developments drew his attention to the demand of the situation and he
himself came to the city of Aleppo (Arabic: Halb) and stationed himself
there. Immediately after this, he mobilized an adequate number of
troops along the Syrian borders. This was only done for precautionary
measures. Sultan Salim had, perhaps, no intention of attacking the
Mamluk rule for the Mamluks were devout Muslims and they hada

led in Egypt, Syria and the
had never been inimical to
rince Jamshed took refuge in

The History of Islam
462

ffered a setback
i ever, the unfortunate Mamluks su 8 set
Se of the come planning of the Iranian ruler, which positioned
Mamluk and Ottoman forces in apparently hostile postures.

On his return from Iran, Sultan Salim sat down in Constantinople te
organize and regularize the internal administration ier Constantinop 0
He no longer had any target other than the European bor lers an

Christian states. His ancestors had been campaigning against the
European powers from the beginning of their dynasty. In 922 A.H.
Sultan Salim received a message from Sanan Pasha, Governor of the
eastern part of Asia Minor, that he was unable to lead his expedition
into the Euphrates valley because of the presence of a Mamluk force
on the Syrian border for, according to him, they could possibly attack
the eastern parts of Asia Minor in his absence. Sultan Salim called an
emergency meeting of the commanders, scholars and ministers in
Constantinople and sought their advice on how to deal with the
Mamluks. After a long discussion his superintendent of the vernacular
office Muhammad Pasha made a fervid speech and said that the
Ottoman Empire must demonstrate its might, and the Mamluk rulers
do not deserve to serve the Sacred Sanctuaries of Makkah and
Madinah and keep the Hijaz under their control, Hence, the Sultan
must achieve this honor and this would be considered as a great

Mamluks was valid and

Sultan Salim was determined to fight the Mamluks, first he sent his
emissary to Qalzu Ghazi, the ruler of Egypt demanding from him
obedience and tribute and

his ona from the Ottoman ruler and released

emissary at once. But Sultan Salih Paid no heed to the request and
kept Moving ahead. Thus the Tival' forces came face-to-face at Marj
Wabiq, where lies the grave of Prophet Daud (#3) (the Prophet
David). On August 24, 1516 > ‏ب‎ (922 A.H.), two years after the battle

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 463

of Chaldiran. Although the Mamluks were not deficient in bravery
and courage, they were then overtaken by internal strife and rivalries
and could not withstand the onslaught of Salim’s huge force. The
Mamluk ruler, who was an old man, fought gallantly and died in
action. With this news, the Mamluks troops lost ground and Sultan
Salim seized Aleppo (Halb), 1

But this initial defeat failed to frustrate the Mamluks for they considered
the Ottomans unequal to them in valor. However, they returned to
Cairo to elect a new Sultan. The Mamluks had twenty-four commanders
who had the right to unanimously elect a new ruler and they all had to
be present in the capital on such an occasion. Syria was now open to
Sultan Salim in the absence of the major Mamluk commanders. Salim
seized the opportunity and took full advantage thereof and brought
Damascus and Bait al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) under his control. The
Marnluks did not put up.a strong resistance on their part.

The Mamluks elected Tuman Bey as their new ruler. Immediately
after accession, Tuman sent a big force to the borders of Egypt and
Syria to put a check on the advance of Sultan Salim and he set about
building a huge army. In the meantime, Sultan Salim, fortunately,
found a big treasure in Damascus, which belonged to the Egyptian
rulers. This treasure played a role in the future conquests of Sultan
Salim. With this huge amount he won the hearts of religious scholars,
orators, religious groups and judges and donated lavishly to building -
mosques, madrasas, bridges and the carrying out of welfare projects
besides, providing camels of burden and other necessary materials to
be used in attacking Egypt. The Egyptian force moved up to Gaza, the
bordering strip of Egypt. Sultan Salim led his troops passing through
populated and flourishing areas of Syria. While entering the deserts,
he loaded enough water.on camel back and gave away rewards to his
soldiers to enhance their courage and determination. He than handed
over the artillery to Pasha by appointing him as the Commander of a
huge army and sent him ahead as the vanguard. He himself took the
remaining troops and marched forward with great caution. This ten-
day long journey passed safely. Sanan Pasha fought with an Egyptian
column at Gaza under the Mamluk commander Ghazali- Even though
the Mamluk soldiers fought very valiantly, the Ottoman artillery

164 The History of Islam

routed them thoroughly. They lost the battle because their bravery
was no match for the artillery of the Ottomans. This victory added
much to the courage and determination of the Ottoman force and they
shook off the fear of the Mamluks.

Clash between the Mamluks and the Ottomans in
Egypt

On being thoroughly beaten in Gaza Ghazali came back to Cairo and
gave the shocking mews of their disaster caused by the Ottoman
artillery. But the irrepressible Tuman Bey instead of losing courage he
grew more determined. He mobilized his troops along the road
leading to Syria and waited for the arrival of the Ottoman force.
Sultan Tuman Bey was a noble man and a brave fighter. At times, the
forces of destiny go against able and noble souls and so it happened
with Tuman Bey. His election as the head of the country was opposed
by a section of the commanders but they could not raise their voice
openly at that time and kept smoldering with anger. Had Tuman Bey
found time he could have pacified his opponents but his military

engagement immediately after accession allowed him no opportunity
for this noble work.

Two among those opposing commanders were Ghazali and Khairi.
They started making secret plans to bring about the defeat of Tuman
Bey in his efforts to save Egypt. They entered into secret
correspondence with Sultan Salim and acquainted him with all the
war preparations and military strategies of the Egyptian ruler.

In order to render Sultan Salim’s artillery inoperative Tuman Bey
worked out a plan that the Egyptian cavalry should attack and capture
the artillery before it was set into action and then hand-to-hand fight
with swords and lances would be started. But those two traitors
informed Sultan Salim of this strategy with the result the new plan of
the Egyptian ruler was unfulfilled. Thus, Sultan Salim was fortunate
enough to get supporters from among the Mamluks themselves.

Both the forces drew their battle lines at Ridwaniah on January 22,
1517 CE. (922 A.H.). Since Salim was already alert, he gave Tuman
Bey no chance to implement his plans and the Mamluk force had to

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 465

fight in front of the artillery. As the battle broke out, the two
treacherous commanders joined the military camp of the Ottomans.
However, the Mamluk troops fought with exemplary valor. At one
stage, Tuman Bey took a squad of his cavalry armed to the teeth and
launched a fierce attack on the main Ottoman force. Two brave
Mamluk commanders who had vowed to either catch Sultan Salim
alive or kill him on the spot supported Sultan Tuman Bey.

This attack of a small band of Mamluks was like an earth tremor,
which shook the entire Ottoman army. Nothing could stop them from
making inroads into the enemy’s heart. Rending the enemy lines and
killing them in large number, they reached the spot from where Salim
was watching and directing his troops. But, taking Sanan Pasha as
Salim, Tuman Bey targeted him so accurately with his spear that he
fell down dead on the spot. Similarly, the Mamluk commanders, Alan
and Qarat, killed two Ottoman Commanders mistaking them for
Sultan Salim. None of them were able to tecognize Salim. However,
Tuman Bey and his Commanders killed Salim’s Commanders under

his nose and escaped unhurt. Since Salim was safe, the fighting
continued without a break. :

Sultan Salim was left bewildered at the bravery shown by the Mamluk
fighters. If it was not for his guns and artillery, he was sure he would
not have had an edge on the Mamluks just because his force was large.
However, Sultan Salim, without losing his composure made the best
use_of his artillery and kept killing enemy troops before their access to
the first row of his army. It is a unique example in the history that the
Mamluks died fighting just to show their valor. Twenty five thousand
Mamluk soldiers fell in the battle but did not surrender, with the
result only a few remained alive. And they tenaciously led Tuman Bey
to safety in Azubia. It is a fact that all the Mamluks that died perished
in _the artillery attacks while the Ottoman soldiers were killed by
sword or spear. The Mamluks had not a single gun to fire at their
enemy because they considered the use of guns while fighting below
their standard of valor. Since Tuman Bey was.led to Azubia, Cairo
was lying undefended and so seven days after the clash Sultan Salim
Occupied the Egyptian capital. In the meantime, the scattered Mamluk

Soldiers gathered around Tuman Bey in Azubia and a small force
came into being.

466 The History of Islam

On hearing, that Sultan Salim had occupied Cairo Tuman Bey. took his
troops and launched an attack on the Egyptian capital. Salim was then
in his military camp outside the city. Tuman Bey made a sudden
advance into Cairo and began to kill the occupying Turkish troops in a
manner that none of them were able to save their lives. Taman Bey
restored the city and fortified every lane and by-lane every house in
the city. When Sultan Salim attempted to enter the city, he
experienced many impediments and hurdles everywhere and at the
same time, it would have been a shameful sign of weakness for Sultan
Salim leave Cairo unconquered. Even three days after continuous
clashes, the Turkish army could not make any headway. Finding no
way out he called the Mamluk commander Khairi, who had joined his
camp during the battle of Ridwaniah, and asked him to suggest the
way to success. Khairi told him to announce that those among the
Mamluks laying down arms would be given peace and safety. With
this declaration, fighting came to a halt and a number of Mamluk
soldiers appeared before the Ottoman Sultan on their own while
others were forced by the citizens to join the Turkish camp. Thus,
eight hundred Mamluks very easily became captives of Sultan Salim.
They all were killed on the advice of Khairi followed by an all-out
massacre in the city.
Losing, all hope of resistance Tuman Bey left Cairo and went to the
desert tribes. The Ottoman force acted brutally and massacred fifty
thousand Mamluks. During this action Qarat Bey, the right hand of
Tuman Bey, went underground in Cairo. Shortly after finishing his
task, Sultan Salim ordered his soldiers to go in search of Taman Bey
and Qarat Bey. On being informed that Tuman Bey had escaped the
territory while Qarat Bey had gone into hiding in Caira,-he announced
that, since the Mamluks had already lost their power, it would be an
act of wisdom on his apart to join him on the promise of safety of his
life. Qarat Bey, being sure of his arrest in the immediate future
accepted the offer and came to Sultan Salim.

Salim looked upon Qarat Bey and remarked: “On the day of the battle
of Ridwaniah you appeared very brave on your horse but, at present,
your are keeping silent. Qarat Bey told him that I am as brave as ever
but the Ottomans are coward enough to make use of guns to establish

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 467

their bravery. During the rule of Sultan Qalzu Ghazi a European came
with a gun and told him that it would be wise to distribute guns
among the Mamluk soldiers. But the Sultan and his courtiers said in
one voice that even the holding of a gun was an act of utter disgrace
for them. The European then remarked before the open court that you
would one day lose the rule of Egypt to the guns and you have won
victory only at gunpoint. I believe that guns cannot become the basis
of victory or defeat; swords and arrows can play a more effective role
in warfare. We have been affected only because Allah Almighty has
decided so. But your rule will also come to an end one day. Dynasties
also have their limited age on this earth like men. Never think that
you have achieved victory because you are more valiant”. Thereupon
Sultan Salim said, “Why have you been produced before me asa
captive if you are so brave?” Qarat Bey replied, “By Allah, I don’t
consider myself as a captive. I have come here of my own and by
trusting you. 1 am, therefore, quite free.” The exchange of words
between Salim and Qarat Bey had reached this point when Qarat Bey
noticed Khairi Bey who was then among the supporters of the
Ottoman ruler. He tumed to Khairi Bey and condemned him in the
Strongest possible words. He then said addressing Sultan Salim, “He
(Khairi) deserves to have his head cut off and thus punishing him for
his guilt otherwise he will carry you to Hell also”. On hearing this
Sultan Salim fell in wrath and said, “I had decided to entrust some
important military position to you. But you have violated the dignity
of the royal court and behaved impertinently. You are perhaps,
unaware that anyone who behaves rudely in the royal court deserves
disgrace and punishment.” Qarat Bey replied fearlessly “May Allah

not bring me the day that 1am employed by you and become one of
your supporters,”

Hearing this Sultan Salim grew furious and called his executioners. At
this Qarat Bey said, “What's the use of cutting off my head when
thousands of brave men are after your head, and Turan Bey is also
alive and working hard to take revenge on you"? However, when the
executioners came and got ready to behead him he turned to Khairi Bey
and said, “Come and carry my head and put it in the lap of your wife.”
These words were coming out of his lips when his head was cut off.

468 The History of Islam

Tuman Bey had already started collecting Arab tribes to fight along
side of him. When he succeeded in organizing a reasonable force he
began to make attacks on the Ottoman troops. Salim kept sending
corps after corps to face the Mamluks’ attacks but they all were tom
apart. Tuman Bey’s force consisted of two parts because some
scattered Mamluk fighters had joined him and he had organized some
Arab tribes into a force. Both the Arabs and the Mamluks had
developed hate against their rulers and hence they jointly rallied to

Tuman Bey but the growing rivalry between the two parts of his force
was causing concern to him.

Sultan Salim, after suffering a series of setbacks, sent word to Tuman
Bey that on condition of his obedience and submission, he would
recognize him as the king of Egypt, stop occupying their land and
leave all the Egyptian territories for him. Since Sultan Salim had killed
their Commander Qarat Bey and committed carnage in Egypt they
tore the emissary into pieces. When Sultan Salim came to know of it,
he killed three thousand Mamluk captives in retaliation, and sent a
strong army along with artillery to take on Tuman Bey. The two forces
clashed near the pyramids of Egypt. During the battle, the Arab and
Mamluk soldiers fought with one another and started ‘killing each
other. The Ottoman artillery was, on the other hand, killing them both.
Thus, the force under Tuman Bey was wiped out quickly. Frustrated
and dejected, Tuman Bey escaped to an Arab chieftain who owed

much to him but that ungrateful person caught him and sent him to
Sultan Salim.

When the Ottoman ruler came to know that Tuman Bey was caught,
he said in a fit of joy: “Egypt is conquered.” When Tuman Bey drew
near, Salim welcomed him like a king and held him in high esteem
and kept him as an honorable guest. Sultan Salim’s treatment of
Tuman Bey filled Khairi.and Ghazali with anxiety for these two
traitors were sworn enemies of the Egyptian ruler. Sultan Salim now
had the opportunity to implement his scheme of installing Tuman Bey
as the king of Egypt by way of obligation and leave for
Constantinople, They, however, spread their net very cautiously and
began to give Sultan Salim information from various sources that
tremendous efforts were being made to free Tuman Bey and put him

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 469

on the Egyptian throne and after being free, Tuman Bey would pose a
grave danger to the Ottoman Empire. Sultan Salim, who was suffering
from these troubles since he arrived in Egypt ordered Tuman Bey
killed without Iss of time. Thus came the end of Tuman Bey, the last
Mamluk king on April 17, 1517 C.E. (922 A.H.).

Following the assassination of Tuman Bey the Ottoman ruler was
under no threat from the former Egyptian rulers. However, he knew
very well that keeping Egypt under Ottoman possession was not an
easy task. The Mamluks were ruling in Egypt for several hundred
years and were the inhabitants of Egypt. They had increased their
population by purchasing slaves from the Caucasus. Gradually, they
tose as a very strong and formidable ruling class in Egypt but the
Arabs too were in such a large number that Egypt was considered an
Arab country. Moreover, the Arab population of Egypt commanded

much respect and influence religiously as well as politically because of
their close relations with Syria and the Hijaz. The Copts and the Jews,

the indigenous population of Egypt also wielded influence because of
their services rendered as officials in the Accounts and Agricultural

Departments. The people inhabiting the west-southern frontier

provinces and territories had the capabilities of invading Egypt and

cccupying it at anytime. In the case that Sultan Salim appointed

somebody as the Governor of Egypt, he wanted to be careful that he

was not likely to rise in revolt with the support of Syria, the Hijaz and .
the people of the western territories. Also, if such a person were to be

put in power that lacked courage and determination, he would not be

able to put down any future revolt. Had Sultan Salim gone back

immediately after the conquest of Egypt, the conquered country

would have risen in revolt creating trouble for the Sultan. Salim,

therefore, made a long stay in Egypt and studied the situation

minutely, He had a plan to march to Tripoli and bring the entire of

North Africa up to Morocco under his control but his troops refused to

‎ahead, with the result he had to go back to Constantinople.‏ 0م

‎After the conquest of Egypt it was very easy for Sultan Salim to
annihilate the Mamluks from the country but he, very wisely, kept
their number and strength intact and appointed Mamluk Commander
Khairi as the Governor of Egypt with the permission that they could

470 The History of Islam

hold their 24-member council or parliament as usual. They-had the
power and ability to elect a new ruler after the death or deposition of
the one in power. Although the number of the members of parliament
was to remain unchanged, the consent of the Ottoman king was
declared as necessary. Along with this, the post ofthe Chief Justice
was limited to the Arab commanders and _ this was certainly a wise
decision. Collection of money and other financial responsibilities were
entrusted to the Copts and the Jews. After setting up a three-tier
system in administration Sultan Salim deployed five thousand cavalry
and five hundred infantrymen from his own force under his
renowned Commander, Khairuddin with the instructions that he
should keep Cairo city and the central forts under his direct control
and must not, in any case go out of the fixed limits. Thus, all the
possible dangers were eliminated.

Following the conquest of Egypt Sultan Salim offered his Friday
prayers in the Grand Mosque of Egypt. A very costly carpet was
spread for the Sultan. When he came to the mosque, he disliked this
preferential treatment and asked for the carpet to be removed and
performed his prayers like the commanders. During the prayer, he
was so overwhelmed with tender feelings that he began to weep
bitterly. Following the conquest of Egypt Sultan Salim sent a team of
first-rate architects and artisans to Constantinople as he had done in
Tabriz. One can gauge from this his strong desire to enhance the
beauty and grandeur of his capital. It is strange that despite his long
stay in Egypt he took no interest in the Egyptian pyramids and never
visited them. However, his interest in the mosques and madrasas of
Egypt was very high. He added to the grace and dignity of the
religious scholars and increased their daily allowance. Sultan Salim
had decided while in Egypt that the conquest of Arabia was even
more necessary. The sacred cities of Makkah and Madinah were under
the control of Arab chiefs and no military action was needed to
occupy these cities, What was necessary was the conquest of the
hearts of the citizens. With this in mind, he lavished favors on the
Arab chiefs and Sultan Salim was undisputedly recognized as the king
of the Hijaz following the end of the Mamluk rule. The Arab chiefs
could have opposed Sultan Salim as the ruler but, because of his
favors and kindnesses, they themselves sent greetings to the Ottoman

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 471
ruler and gave him the title of the Servant of the Sanctuaries of
Makkah and Madinah. The Abbasid Caliphs lived in Egypt with so
much stately splendor and brotherhood as did the Roman Pope or
Akbar Shah II and Bahadur Shah in Delhi. Even though they had
neither any sovereignty nor a country nor any force but the rulers of
islamic countries would try to get from them some title to add to their
power and position and they were treated as religious leaders.

Sultan Salim felt the power and influence of the Abbasid Caliphs.
Thus, he made the last Caliph agree to abdicate the Caliphate and
hand over the standard, the sword and the shield to the Ottoman ruler
and recognize him (Salim) as the Caliph of the Muslims. He then
pledged his allegiance to Sultan Salim. Now a real Caliph took over
the charge of the Caliphate instead of a nominal one. The Caliph is the
highest authority for the Muslims and Sultan Salim was, undoubtedly,
the mightiest Muslim king of those days. In 923 A.H. Sultan Salim set
out from Egypt along with one thousand camels loaded with gold and
silver. He also took the last Abbasid Caliph with him. He had covered
a distance of a few miles from Cairo when he told his Prime Minister,
Yunus, who was marching and talking along with him on his own
horse, that very soon they would step into Syrian territory. The Prime
Minister said in reply that they were going back after spoiling half of
their troops and handing over the charge of Egypt to the very people
they had taken it from. Yunus also said to him that he could not
understand what benefit they had gained by invading Egypt. Hearing
this Sultan Salim ordered the cavalryman accompanying him to cut off
his (Yunus’s) head and the order was implemented at once. Sultan
Salim was very hard on his ministers and courtiers but was equaily
soft on religious scholars. Yunus was, in fact, against the conquest of
Egypt right from the beginning and he- had opposed the original
decision to invade and he had only repeated his position. However,
this much can be said without any fear of contradiction that the
conquest of Egypt had enhanced the glory of the Ottoman Dynasty.
Sultan Salim took about two years in conqueriig Egypt and making his
return journey. During this period, he had brought Syria, Arabia and
Egypt to the fold of the Ottoman rule and the greatest benefit of all, was
that he had invaded Egypt only as Sultan Salim but he was the Caliph
of the Muslims and the leader of the Muslim world on his return.

472 The History of Istam
Sultan Salim stayed in Damascus for several years. Some accounts
support the view that from Damascus he went to perform Hajj while
others contradict it. However, Sultan Salim established relations with
the Arab chiefs and took the oath of allegiance from them. From
Damascus, he came to Aleppo (Halb) and made a long stay there. In
order to make the administration work efficiently he divided Syria
into small parts under separate governors, thus, putting an end to the
threat of revolts. From there, he reached Constantinople in 924 A.H.

On his return to Constantinople, Sultan Salim received the tribute of
Cyprus from Venice, which it paid to the Mamluks of Egypt in the

past. The Venetians not only paid the tribute but promised to keep on
paying in the future also.

The Christian ruler of Spain sent his envoy to Sultan Salim requesting
him to give protection to the Christians going to Syria and Palestine as
pilgrims. Immediately granting the petition the Ottoman ruler gave
word that Christian pilgrims would suffer no harm within the
confines of his rule. The peace treaty with the king of Hungry was also
coming to its end. Thus, the Hungarian ruler also requested for an
extension and Sultan Salim granted it immediately. The Ottoman
Sultan’s conquests in Asia and Africa did not go unnoticed as far as
the Europeans were concerned. Sultan Salim extended his territories
considerably and was conferred with the title of the Caliph of the
Muslims. European powers were shuddering at the very thought of an
Ottoman invasion. Thus following the return of Sultan Salim from
Egypt the European powers began to send peace proposals along with
their offers of allegiance. Although Sultan Salim was temperamentally
very harsh, he was very far-sighted too and had his eye on the
consequences of every step taken. He was not so gullible as to be
carried away by flattering remarks. He was also well aware of
mischief and activities of intrigue. He had established a large and
mighty empire by conquering Egypt, Syria, the Hijaz, Iraq and
western Iran. Thus, his empire had extended over the three continents
of Asia, Africa and Europe. His next target was the conquest of
Europe as a whole and he was not at all negligent in this regard. He
knew very well that his ancestors had been making all-out efforts to
conquer the continent. Historians are unanimous that Sultan Salim

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 473

was a devoutly religious person and was full of a religious sense of
honor. However, it seers strange that Sultan Salim had always been
engaged in fighting with the Muslim states and he conquered Muslim
countries throughout his reign. It was because his experience and
observation had taught him that the religious sense among the
Muslims had considerably weakened and evils of all kinds had made
progress against their Islamic character. The open.clash between
Timur and Bayazid was the clear evidence of this malaise. Sultan
Muhammad II had brought peace to some extent by putting an end to
the Christian rule in Constantinople but periodic revolts in Asia Minor
remained a source of constant worry for the Ottoman kings. Ismail
Safwi’s mischief and secret planning had occupied Sultan Salim’s
attention right from the day of his accession. Hence, he managed to
ward off threats from the eastern side by punishing the Shiite’s of Iran
and annexing its provinces. The large-scale massacre of the Shi'a sect -
in Asia Minor had minimized the possibilities of any plot against his
territories. Since the Islamic rulers of Egypt had made use of force
against the Ottomans in connection with Prince Jamshed, the Egyptian
threat was not considered at all small. Sultan Salim thought it proper to
bring Egypt under control before dealing with the Christian countries
otherwise the Christians could instigate the Egyptians against the
Ottomans. Now the European conquest was his next obvious step but
Sultan Salim was prudent enough to avoid any hasty measures against
the Europeans following his return from Egypt. He gave preference to
the task of putting internal affairs of his country on right lines and
finding time for strengthening his military machine. In the meantime the
Christian kings, one after another, began their efforts to make peace
with him and he readily accepted their peace proposals but without
stopping his war preparations. Shortly after his retum from Egypt, he
started building ships “and set up several shipyards. One hundred and
fifty warships, each weighing about seven hundred tons, were ready in
record time. One hundred small ships were built in addition. There was
a total ban on taking the ships out to sea for sailing. Once he saw a
warship sailing along the coast of Constantinople and grew so furious
that he was about to order the killing of the Admiral. However, some
commanders and ministers saved the Admiral by convincing the king
that the ship was‘on a test run shortly after being built.

The History of Islam
474 ry of

Besides shipyards, Sultan Salim set up a number of arms factories for
manufacturing guns, artillery and gunpowder. Along with this, a
large-scale recruiting drive was on. Moreover, a strong force armed
with modern weapons was ready to come into action on very short
notice. Sultan Salim’s ministers were, in view of these large-scale
preparations of the land force and navy, awaiting a big event but they
were still unaware of what was going to happen. Although he
consulted his minister and advisors on various issues, he kept crucial
matters a secret. He never took any step in haste but once he resolved
to do something, he would not budge from his decision. He was a
man of courage and determination and anybody asking him to change
his opinion would lose his life. Thus after a long campaign against the
Muslim rulers and conquering a number of Muslim countries he was
certainly making military preparations against the European powers.
“Since he wanted to leave nothing to chance, he was reorganizing his
forces leaving no loophole anywhere.

Sultan Salim was desperately engaged in his military preparations
when he passed away on Shawwal 6,926 A.H. (September 22, 1520
CE) and left~the task of conquering Europe to his son Sultan
Sulaiman Azam.

Sultan Salim marched from Constantinople on Shawwal 1,926 A.H. to
Adrianople. He was encamped on the way to Adrianople when he
developed a boil on his thigh. His Physicians advised him against
tiding but he would not pay heed until the boil took a serious tum
and he succumbed to it.

A Review of the Reign of Sultan Salim

Civil Wars after Sultan the Conqueror 475

sentences for them. When Qadi Jamali of Constantinople heard of it he
called on the Sultan and asked him to withdraw his order for they
were not liable for capital punishment. Sultan Salim told the Qadi that
he should not meddle in administrative affairs. The Qadi said to him:
“You keep your eye on the welfare of your country, but I want your
welfare in the next world. Whatever the expediency behind your
order is, it will bring you destruction in the life Hereafter. Allah
Almighty bestows his favor and reward on one who shows pity and
chastises the cruel. Thus, the wise counseling of the Qadi caused Salim
to change his mind and he ordered all of them set free.

Similarly, Sultan Salim once ordered that the export of silk to Iran be
stopped. As a follow-up action, he ordered the arrest all such traders
in Constantinople and those carrying sitk to Iran. They were four
hundred in all and their properties were to be confiscated and their
heads were to be cut off by.the order of the Sultan. At the time, Sultan
Salim was about to leave for Adrianople and Qadi Jamali was
accompanying him. He interceded with the Sultan for “those
condemned to death. The Sultan replied, “It is rather justified to kill
one-third for the welfare of two-thirds of the citizens and what could
be more of a major corruption than going against the orders of the
king”. The Qadi replied, “They can not be held responsible for the
court order had not reached them.” Had the Prime Minister talked to
the Sultan so boldly he would have lost his life. But even at the height
of anger, he could ask the Qadi not to meddle in the state affairs. Qadi
Jalali grew furious and left without seeking permission and without
showing due regard to the Sultan. Sultan Salim kept staring at him
silently in a state of amazement. A few minutes later, he bowed his
head, thought for sometime and ordered the release of the condemned
traders along with the confiscated goods. Following this Sultan Salim
sent a message to Qadi Jalali appointing him the Chief Qadi of the
entire Ottoman Empire. Although Qadi Jalali declined the offer,

Sultan Salim kept showing favor to him.

Sultan Salim’s reign was noted by the world for its religious

significance. During his period, the Ottomans replaced the Islamic

Caliphate of the Abbasids, and Caliphs with power and authority
‏ع‎ nominal ones. Martin Luther began

were now at the helm instead © 5
reforms in Christianity at the same time, which wasa result of the

476 , The History of Islam
١ i , Kabir Das started his: own
coming of the Muslims into Europe. Kabir ch had died at

religious order in India during the same period.
Magher near Gorakhpur in 924 A.H. He was contemporary of Sultan

Sikander Lodhi. During the Reign of Sultan Salim, in 922 A.H the
pocket watch was invented.

Sultan Salim had in mind that following his conquest of the Christian
countries he would bring all the Christians to the fold of Isiam and
wipe out all foreign elements from his territories. Thus, he expressed
his opinion to convert churches into mosques. Having heard this some
Christians appeared before the Sultan and submitted that his
forefathers had given them full religious freedom and promised
protection to their churches and non-interference with their religious
affairs. Religious scholars of Sultan Salim’s courts supported the
statement of the Christians and Qadi Jamali also interceded for them.
Thus, the Sultan held back from such an action. Christian historians
appear to be very unhappy with Sultan Salim and held his religious
interests to be his demerit but this is sheer prejudice on their part.
Their dislike of him is a glaring proof of his divine nature and virtues
and the countries conquered by Sultan Salim remained under Turkish
control. Sultan Salim did not rule for long and died at the age of 52
had he lived a little longer he would have conquered Europe as'a
whole. He was also the first Caliph in the Ottoman Dynasty.

THE END

www.sunniconnect.com

