The Biography of

'Uthmsn ibn 'Affin&
Dhun-Noorayn
Kalamullah.Com

By: Dr. Ali Muhammad as-Sallabi
Translated by: Nasir Khattab
Edited by: Hoda Khattab

DARUSSALAM
GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS

I/ Contents 11
Chapter 1
'Uthrnk Ihn 'AEb4 Dhun-Noorayn Behveen Makkah And Madinah
1. His name, lineage, kunynh, nicknames, physical Attributes and family, and
his stahls during the jeiliyyah
2. His name, lineage, kunyah and nicknames
3. His Family
4. His status during the jailiyyah
5. His coming to Islam
6. His marriage to Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of AJl&
7. His persecution and migration to Abyssinia
8. ' U W n e and the Holy Q d k
9. His staying close to the Prophet g in Madinah
10. U
and jihnd with the Messn~gmof Allgh
'11. His social life in Madinah
12. His economic conaibution to the establishment of the hetate
13. AhMeeth of the Messenger % about 'Uthmsn ibn ' m n
alongside others
14. What was narrated about his *es
15. Ahiideeth from the Messenger of All* @ about the m o i l (Fikah) during
which ' U W n would be killed
'at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar
16. U
17. At the time of Abu Bakr a
18. At the 6me of 'Umar 4

Chapter 2
'Uthmk's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling and the
main features of his character
1. ' U i h d d s appointment as caliph
2. 'Urnat's deep insight when appointing his succffsor
3. 'U~nar's advice to the caliph who would come after him
4. How 'Abd al-Rahmk ibn 'Awf conducted the shoora process
5. False reports inserted by the Raidis into the story of the hehoora

81
81
81
88
94
99

Contents
6. 'Uthmsn ibn 'Mgn 4s was more qualified to become the caliph
7. Consensus concerning the caliphate of 'Uth&
8. Ruling on preierring 'Ali over 'Uthmgn (&)
9. ' U t M s method of ruling
10. 'UthmXn's letters to his agents, governors and commanders, and to the
people at large
11. The highest authority in the state
12. The uwnah's right to call the caliph to account
13. Shoora
14. Justice and equality
15. Freedom
16. hspection (Hisbah)
17. His main characteristics
18. Knowledge and teaching skills
19. Forbearance
20. Easygoing nature
21. Gentleness
22. Forgiveness
a.Humility
24. Modesty and chastity
25. Gennosity
26. Courage
27. Resolve
28. Patience
29. Justice
30. Worship
31. Fear of AU&, weeping and taking stock of h i d
32. Asceticism
33. Gratitude
34. Checking on people
35. Defining the specialitis of workers
36. Benefitting from qualified people

Chapter 3
Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthmin 4 6 . . . .
1. Financial institutions
2. Financial policy announced by 'Uthmh when he became caliph
3. ' U t h d d s guidelines explaining the basic ~rinciplesof z d d h to the people
4. The khums (onefifth) of the war booty

Contents
5. Public income from the jizynh at the h e of 'UthrGn
6 . Public income from the kharij and 'ushoor at the time of 'Uthmin
7. The policy of 'Uthmh ibn 'Affin in allocating land
8. 'Uth&s
policy in allocating land for grazing
9. Types of public expenditure at the time of 'Uthmgn
10. Continuation of the stipend system at the time af ' U M ibn ' M i n
11. Effect of inueased abundance of wealth on soda1 and economic life
12. ' U h n h and his relatives, and stipends from the bayf al-miil
13. Judicial institutions and somefiqhi ijtihids
14. Qisiis, hudood punishments and t a ' m punishments
15. Acts of worship and bansactions between people

Chapter 4
Conquests at the time of 'Uthmin ibn 'A£% & . . . . . . .
1. Introduction
2. 'Uthmin's conquests in the East
3. Conquests of the people of Kufah: Azerbaijan, 24 AH
4. Participation of the people of K&h in sabotaging Byzantine movements
5. The campaign of Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas to Tabxistan in 30 AH
6. The flight of the Persian king Yazdagird to Kborasan
7. The death of Yazdagird the Persian king in 31 A H
8. The Christians expressed their sol~owon the death of Yazdagird
9. The conquests of 'Abd-Allgh ibn 'Aamir, 31 AH
10. The campaign of al-Bib and Balanjar in 32 AH
11. The first dispute between the people of Kufih and the pwple of Syria, 32 A H
12. Ihe conquests of Ibn 'Aamir, 32 AH
13. Fighting between the army of al-Ahnaf and the people of Takhiristan,
d-Jawzajj,, a l - T i q h and d-Fariyib
14. Al-Ahnds treaty with the people of Balkh, 32 AH
15. '1 shall give my thanks to AlEh by entering ihrtm from the point from
which I set out for 'umrah'
16. The defeat of Q i r h in Kho~asan
17. One of the leaders of the conquests in the east at the time of ' U r n
d-Ahnaf ibn Qays
18. Conquests in Syria
19. The conquests of Habeeb ibn Maslamah al-Fhi
20. The first one to allow the Muslims to campaign by sea was ' U t M n ibn 'Affj,
21. The campaign to Cyprus
22. Surrender and request for a peace h t y
23. 'Abd-All* ibn Qays, commander of the Muslim navy in Syria

Contents
24. The Cypriots break the treaty
25. How insignificant are the people to All& if they disobey Him
26. 'Ubidah ibn al-t
dividing the spoils of Cyprus
27. Conquests on the Egyptian front
28. Suppression of the rebels in Alexandria
29. The conquest of Nubia
30. The conquest of North Africa
31. The heroism of 'Abd-All& ihn az-Zubayr in the conquest of North Africa
32. The battle of DhSt al-Saw&?
33. Where did the battle take place?
34. Events of the battle
35. The outcome of D K t al- saw^
36. The most important lessons learned from the conquffitsof ' U t M
37. The greatest achievement of ' U M was uniing the urn& with a single Mus-haf
38. Stages in the writing down of the Holy Q u i j n
39. Consulting the Sakaak with regard to the compilation of 'Uthmh
40. The difference between the compilation of Abu Bak and the compilation
of ' U t h h (&)
41. Did the 'Uthmini manuscripts contain all seven recitations?
4% The number of Mus-hqF that 'Uthmin sent to the regions
43 The attitude of 'Ahd-All* ibn Madood towards the Mus-hf of 'Uthmjn
44. The Sahaak's understanding of the v-s
which forbid dissent

279
280
282
283
283
287
287
292
294
296
298
300
302
319
319
328
329
331
333
334
336

Chapter 5
Governors at the time of 'Uthmin
1. Regions of the Islamic state at the time of 'Uthmk a and his policy
with regard to govmors
2. Makkah al-Mukarramah
3. al-Madinah al-Munayywarah
4. al-Bahrain and al-Yamhmh
5. Yemen and Hadramawt
6 . The province of Syria
7. Armenia
8. The province of Egypt
9. The province of Basra
10. The province of Kufah
11. 'UthmWs policies with his governors and their rights and duties
12. 'UthmWs policies with his governors
13. How 'Uthmh kept watch on his governors and checked on them frequently

343
343
343
344
345
346
347
348
350
351
355
363
363
365

Contents
14. The rights of governors
15. Duties of governors
16. Who were the governors of 'Uthmh +?
17. Mu'zwiyah ibn Abi S u f y h ibn Harb d-Umawi
18. 'Abd-AU2h ibn 'Aamir ibn Kwayz
19. His economic developments in Basra
20. al-Wdeed ibn 'Uqbah
21. Sa'eed ibn al'Aas
22. 'Abd-AUjh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh
23. M v r w h ibn d-Hakam and his father
24. Did 'Utbmin show favouritism to any of his relatives at the
expense of the Muslims?
25. Tne hue nature of the relationship between Abu Dharr d-Cbif&
and 'Uthmiin ihn 'Affsn (&)
26. Summary of the story
27. Roving false the report that h Saba' influenced Abu Dharr 9
28. The death of Abu D h m s, and ' U t M s adding his family to his own

Chapter 6
Reasons for the fitnah that led to the murder of 'Uthmin
1. Tne importance of studying the turmoil that led up to the
murder of ' U t h d n and its consequences, and the Prophet's wisdom...
in telling 'Utbmsn of what would happen
2. The wisdom of the Prophet
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the klling of 'Uthmb 4S
Rosperity and its effect on society
The nature of social change at the time of ' U W n 9
' U t h d s coming after 'Umar (4%)
Departure of the senior Sahabah from Madinah
J a l i tribalism

9. The cessation of conquest
10. Mistaken concept of piety
11. Ambitions of ambitious people
12. The conspiracy of the haters
13. Plans to stir up trouble against 'Utbmin 4
14. Using means to stir up the people
15. Influence of the Saba'is (followem of 'Abd-AU2h ibn Saba') on the fihah

Chapter 7
The Murder of 'Uthmh ihn ' A E n (4)
1 The spread of fitnah (turmoil)

Contents
2. The followers of whims and desires were upset with the r e f o m
3. The Jew 'Abd-Alliih ibn Saba' was the head of the p g
4. Mischief-makers causing trouble in the mqilis of Sa'eed ibn al'Aas
5. The exiles from Kufah with Mu'2wiyah
6. Mu'Swiyah's letter to ' U W n about the troublemakers in Kufah
7. E. Rehlm of the troublemaken to K h h followed by their expulsion to al-Jazeerah
8. 'Uhneh's policy in dealing with the humoil @&ah)
9. Some of the Sahiibnh thought that 'Uthmin should send
committees to investigate the matter
10. He wrote a letter to all the provinces that was a general announcement
to all Muslims
11. 'UthnSsis advice to the governors of the provinces
12. Establishing proof against the rebels
13. Responding to some d their requests
14. 'UthnGn's guidelines for dealing with turmoil
15. The rebels' occupation of Madinah
16. Arrival of the rebels from the repons
17. The beginning of the siege, und 'UthnSsis opinion on praying behind
the leaders of the troublemakezs
18. Negotiatiom between 'Utand the besiegers
19. The Sahabah's offer to defend 'Uthmh and his ~ j w t i o nthereof
20. Tne attihtde of the Mothea of the Believers and some of the female Sahib&
21. Who led the people in Hajj that year? Did 'Uask
the governors for help?
22. Tne martyrdom of ' U W n (a)
23. The date of his murder, his age when he was martyred,
his funeral and burial
24. Attihtde of the Sahtbah towards the murder of 'Uthmh (4)
25. Praise of Ah1 d-Bayt for 'Uthmh -ii and their innocence of shedding
his blood
26. The attitude of 'Ammaar ibn Yaasir (4)
27. ' A m f s innocence of the murder of U
'28. C o m e n b of the Sahib& about thefihah
29. l h e effect of 'UthmMs murder in creating further humoil and division
30. Wronging and tram,-ssing
against others are causes of doom in this
world and in the H-after
31. The Muslims' sorrow at the murder af 'Uthman
Conclusio

491
492
494
496
503
504
515
515
517
518
523
527

528
531
531
538
539
547
554
559
571
579
585
587
597
602
604
607
608
609
611

-

-

-

-

His name, lineage, kunyah, nicknames,
physical attribuies and family, and his
status during.theJcihiliyyah
A

.

-

His same, lineage, kunya& and nicwames
1 - He was 'Uthm2n ibn ' M hibn Abi'l-'Aas ibn Umayyah ibn
'Abd Shams ibn 'Abd M a n s ibn Qusayy ibn ~il2b.I" His
lineage coincides with that of the Messenger of All& g in
'Abd Man8f. His mother was Arwa bint Kurayz ibn
Rabee'ah ibn Habeeb ibn 'Abd Shams ibn 'Abd Ma113f ibn
~ u s a ~ ~Her
. [ ~mother
l
was Urnm Hakeem al-Bayda' bint
'Abd al-Muttalib, who was the full sister of 'Abd-All2h, the
'I

At-TahnryJt by Ibn Sa'd, 3/53; Al-lsibah.4/377, no. 5463.

'*I At-Tamheed wal-Bayrinfi
Maqtal al-Shaheed 'Uthmin, by Muhammad Yahya al-

Andalusi, p. 19

'Uthmh Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

12

father of the Prophet Ssand it was said that they were twins
(this was narrated by al-Zubayr ibn Bald&). So he was the
son of the cousin (daughter of paternal aunt) of the Prophet
@, and the Prophet was the cousin (son of maternal uncle)
of his mother. The mother of 'Uthmh became Muslim and
died during the caliphate of her son 'Uthmsn, and he was
among those who carried her to her grave.[11 'Uthmh's
father died during the J&iliyyah.

2 - His kunyuh during the Jihiliyyah was Abu 'Am. When
Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of AUih @ bore
him a son, he named him 'Abd-All& and took his kunyah
from him, so the Muslims called him by the kunyah of Abu
'~bd-All&."
3 - 'Uthmh & was known by the nickname of Dhun-Noorayn
(the one with the two lights). Badr al-Deen al-'Ayni said in
his commentary on Saheeh al-Bukhciri that it was said to alMuhallab ibn Abi ~ u f r a h [:~ Why
'
was 'Uthmgn called
Dhu'n-Noorayn? He said: Because we did not know
anyone who married two daughters of a Prophet except
him.[41 'Abd-Allih ibn 'Umar ibn A b h al-Ju'fi said: My
maternal uncle Husayn al-Ju'fi said to me: 0 my son, do you
know why 'Uthmh was called Dhu'n-Noorayn? I said: I do
not know. He said: No one else was ever married to two
daughters of a Prophet, from the time All& created Adam
mtiI the Hour will begin, except 'Uthmgn. Hence he was
al-Mzilcifahal-RMidak wa'l-Dawlak al-Umawiyyah, by Dr. Yahya al-Yahya, p.
388
[I'

al-Tamheed wa'l-Bayin j Maqtal al-Skaheed 'Uthmman,
p. 19
was al-Muhallab ibn Abi Sufrah al-Azdi al-'Aqali, o m of the great
commanders. al-Muhallab invaded India durine
" the cali~hateof Mu'gwivah.
,
and he was a covernor for Ibn al-Zubayr. He fought the Khaw%rii during the

'31 He

Wajiyit al-A'yin, 51350; Siyar ~ ' k m
A%-~ubala',4/38?1
["

'Umdut alLQ2ri Sharh Saheek al-BuWlu'ri, 16/201

'Uthmim Ibn ' A f f h Dhun-Noorayn Between MaWcah...

13

called ~ h u ' n - ~ o o r a ~ nAnd
. [ ~ 'it was said that he was called
Dhu'n-Noorayn because he used to recite a great deal of
Qur'Sn in his prayer every night, and the Q d S n is light and
praying qiyim al-lay1 is light.[']

4 - His birth. He was born in Makkah six years after the Year of
the Elephant, according to the correct view.[31 And it was
said that he was born in al-TiYif. He was about five years
younger than the Messenger of All3h @.I4]
5 - His physical attributes: he was neither short nor tall, soft
skinned, with a huge thick beard, big-boned, broadshouldered, with thick hair on his head, and he used to
dye his beard with saffron. Az-Zuhri said: 'Uthm3n was a
man of average height, with handsome hair and face and a
[ ~ ' a hooked nose, big
bald spot; he was b ~ w - l e ~ ~ e,dwith
calves, and long arms that were covered with hair. He had
the most handsome mouth of all people, his hair came down
below his ears, and he had a handsome face. It is most likely
that he was white-skinned, and it was said that he was dark
skinned.[61

His Family
'Uthmh & married eight wives in all, all of them after Islam.
They were: Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of All& @,y
who bore him 'Abd-All& ibn 'Uthmsn. Then he married Umm
Kulthoom the daughter of the Messenger of AllSh
after
Ruqayyah died. He also married FSkhitah bint Ghazwh, who
was the sister of the governor 'Utbah ibn GhazwSn, and she bore
'Uthmh 'Abd-All& the younger; Umm 'Am bint Jundub alSunan al-Bayhaqi, 7/73. Dr. 'Aatif Lam2dah said: a hasan report.
'Uthmiin ibn 'Affiin Dhufl-Noorayn, by 'AbbBs alLrAqq2d, p. 79
[31 al-Isribah, 4/377, no. 5465
[41 'UthmLin ibn 'Affiin, by SBdiq 'Aqoon, p. 45
[51 Tiireekh at-Tabari, 5/440
[61 S@t al-Safiah, 1/295; Suheeh al-Tawtheeqji Seerat wa Hayit Dhi'l-Noorayn, p. 15
['I
['I

I

Azdiyyah, who bore 'Uthmiin 'Amr, Khgid, Abin, 'Umar and
Maryam. And he married Fstimah bint al-Waleed ibn 'Abd
Shams ibn al-Mugheerah al-Makhzoomiyyah, who bore him alWaleed, Sa'eed and Umm Sa'd. And he married Umm al-Baneen
bint 'Uyaynah ibn Husn al-Fiz&yyah, who bore him 'Abd-All?&.
And he married Ramlah bint Shaybah ibn Rabee'ah alUmawiyyah, who bore him 'Aa'ishah, Umm Abiin and Umm
'Amr. Ramlah became Muslim and swore allegiance to the
Messenger of All& &. And he married Nzilah bint al-Fargfisah
al-Kalbiyyah, who was a Christian then she became Muslim
before he consummated the marriage with her and she became a
good ~uslirn.I~l
He had nine sons from five wives. They were: 'Abd-All&,
whose mother was Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of
Allih &.He was born two years before the Hijrah and his mother
took him with her when she migrated with her husband 'Uthm2n
to Madinah. During his first days in Madinah a rooster pecked
him on the face, near his eye, and the (infection) spread until it
covered his whole face. He died in 4 AH when he was six years
His other sons were:
'Abd-AU2h the younger, whose mother was Fmutah bint
Ghazwiin; 'Amr, whose mother was Umm 'Amr bint Jundub; he
narrated hadeeth from his father and from Us2mah ibn Zayd, and
'Ali ibn al-Husayn, Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyab and Abu'l-ZMd
narrated from him, but he narrated only a few hadeeth. He
married Ramlah bint Mu'swiyah ibn Abi Sufysn, and died in 80
AH.
Khglid, whose mother was Umm 'Amr bint Jundub.
Absn, whose mother was Umm ' A m bint Jundub. He was a
'I1

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/441; al-Tamheed wa'l-Bayin ji Maqtal al-Shaheed 'Uthmin, p.
19; al-Ameen Dku'l-Noorayn, by Mahmoud Shskir, p. 364

"I

al-Ameen Dku'l-Noorayn, by Mahmoud Shgkir, p. 365; al-Tamheed wa'l-Bay&
jiMaqtal al-Slwkeed 'Uthmin, p. 19

'UthmSn Ibn 'AffSn Dhun-Noorayn Between Makkah...

15

leading scholar of fiqh, and was known by the kunyah of Abu
Sa'eed. He was govemor of Madkah for seven years during the
caliphate of 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwh. He narrated a few
ahideeth, including the hadeeth that he narrated from ' U t h m k

'%ever says at the beginning of each day and night :'In the
name of Allih with Whose name nothing can cause harm on
earth or in heaven, and He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing,'
nothing will harm him that day or that night."
When A b k became paralyzed on one side, he said: By AUsh,
I forgot this du'ii' so the decree of Allsh befell me.'''
He was regarded as one of the fuqaha' of Madmah of his
time. He died in 105 AH.["
'Umar, whose mother was Umm 'Am bint Jundub.
Al-Waleed, whose mother was Fstimah bint al-Waleed ibn
'Abd Shams ibn al-Mugheerah al-Makhzoomiyyah.
Sa'eed, whose mother was Fstimah bint al-Waleed alMakhzoomiyyah. He became governor of Khorasan in 56 AH at
the time of Mu'swiyah ibn Abi Sufyh.
'Abd al-Malik, whose mother was Umm al-Baneen bint
'Uyaynah ibn Husn. He died in childhood.
And it was said that NS'ilah bint al- FariXisah bore 'Uthman a
son who was named '~nbasah.[~'
He had seven daughters from five wives, including: Maryam,
whose mother was Umrn 'Amr bint Jundub; Umm Sa'eed, whose
['I Su~za~z
al-Tirmidhi, KitCbaI-Darm?t,no. 3388. A saheeh hadeeth.
IZ1
Siyar A'Em an-Nubala' (4/253); Tare&

al-Qadi'i, p. 308.
p. 369

13] Al-Ameen Dhu'l-Noorayn by Mahmoud S*,

1

I

16

'Uthmh Ibn ' A f f h

+ Dhun-Nooravn

mother was FStimah bint al-Waleed ibn 'Abd Shams alMakhzoomiyyah; 'Aa'ishah, whose mother was Ramlah bint
Shaybah ibn Rabee'ah; Maryam b i t 'UthmSi~,whose mother was
N2ilah bint al- Farsfisah; and Umm al-Baneen, whose mother
was a concubine (umm walad) .['I
The full sister of ' U M n was Aaminah bint 'Affsn, who
worked as a hairdresser during the JShiliyyah, then she married
al-Hakam ibn Kayssn, the freed slave of HishSm ibn alMugheerah al-Makhzoomi. An expedition led by 'Abd-All&
ibn Jahsh captured al-Hakam ibn Kaysh, and in Madhah he
embraced Islam and became a good Muslim. He stayed with the
Messenger of All& @ until he was killed as a martyr in the battle
of Bi'r Ma'oonah, at the beginning of the fourth year after the
Hijrah. Aaminah bint 'Affh stayed in Makkah and remained a
mushrik until the Conquest, then she became Muslim along with
her mother and the rest of her sisters, and she swore allegiance to
the Messenger of All* @ along with Hind bint 'Uqbah, the wife
of Abu Sufyh, pledging not to associate anything with Alliih,
steal or commit zina.L2]
'Uthmin had three brothers through his mother. They were:
al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'eet, whose father was
killed on the day of Badr when he was a prisoner, and he was a
Mir. Al-Waleed went out with his brother 'Amiirah after alHudaybiyah to bring back their sister Umm Kulthoom, who had
become Muslim and migrated, but the Messenger of Allsh &
refused to give her back. He became Muslim on the day of the
Conquest of Makkah.
'Amiirah ibn 'Uqbah, who was late in coming to Islam.
KhSlid ibn 'Uqbah.
'UthmMs sisters through his mother were:
Umm Kulthoom bint 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'eet, who became
[I1

al-Tamheed wa'l-Bayinfi Maqtal al-Shaheed 'Ufhmrin,p. 20.

Al-Ameen Dhu'l-Noorayn by Mahmoud SGkir, p. 346

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affsn Dhun-Nooravn Between Makkah...

17

Muslim in Makkah and migrated and swore allegiance to the
Messenger of AllSh &. She was the first woman to migrate after
the Messenger of All& @$ came back to Macmah after the treaty
of al-Hudaybiyah.
Other sisters through his mother were: Umm Hakeem bint
'Uqbah and Hind bint 'Uqbah.

His st&~sduring
During the Jihiliyyah, 'Uthmiin & was among the best of his
people. He was of high status, very wealthy, extremely modest,
and eloquent in speech. His people loved him dearly and
respected him. He never prostrated to any idol during the
Jailiyyah and he never committed any immoral action. He did not
drink alcohol before Islam and he used to say: It (alcohol) destroys
reason and reason is the most sublime thing that All& has given
to man, and man should elevate himself by means of reason, not
try to destroy it. Similarly, during the Jailiyyah he was not
attracted to songs or entertainment. 'Uthmiin also used to refrain
from looking at any 'awrah.[ll May Alliih have mercy on
'Uthmiin &, for he made it easy for us to get to know him,
when he said: "I had no interest in songs, I never committed any
immoral deed, and my right hand never touched my private part
since I swore allegiance to the Messenger of AllZh &. I did not
drink alcohol during the Jihiliyyah or in Islam, and I did not
commit zina during the Jih~liyyahor in slam."[^^ He was well
versed in the knowledge that was available to the Arabs during
the Jihzliyyah, including lineages, proverbs, and the history of
important events. He travelled to Syria and Abyssinia, and mixed
with non-Arab peoples, learnin things about their lives and
customs that no one else knew.13 He took care of the business
that he had inherited from his father, and his wealth grew. He was
regarded as one of the men of Banu Umayyah who were held in
[I1 Mawsoo'at al-Tareekh al-Islami, by Ahmad Shalaby, 1/618

Hilyat al-Awliya', 1/60, 61. This report is saheeh.
[31 'Aqbariyyat 'Uthmiin by al-'Aqqid, p. 72
'*I

18

' U r n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

high esteem by all of Quraysh. In the Jihili society of Makkah in
which 'Uthmiin lived, men were respected for their wealth and for
the number of children and brothers they had, then for the tribe
and people to which they belonged. 'Uthmiin was regarded as
being of high status among his people, and he was loved dearly.
Among the evidence which points to the people's love for
'Uth&n because of this combination of good qualities is the
report which says that at that time, an Arab woman would sing to
her child a song which speaks of the people's respect and love for
him:
"By the most Merciful, I love you as much as Quraysh love
'Uth&,," [I]

His coming to Isiam
' U t h h was h t y - f o u r years old when Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq
called him to Islam, and he did not hesitate at all, rather he
responded immediately to the call of Abu Bakr. Thus he was one
of the earliest Muslims, of whom Ibn Ishiiq said: The first person
to become Muslim after Abu Bakr, 'Ali and Zayd ibn HSrithah
was ' ~ t h t n 2 i n .Thus
~ ~ ~ he was the fourth man to embrace Islam.
His coming to Islam so early was, perhaps, the result of what
happened to him when he was returmg from Syria. He told the
Messenger of Alliih @ about that when he entered upon him
along with Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-All* and he presented Islam to
them and recited Qur'h to them, and told them of the duties of
Islam and promsed them that they would be honoured by All&.
They believed him, and ' U M n said: 0 Messenger of All&, I
have come recently from Syria, and when we were between
Ma'h and al-Zarqa', I was about to sleep when I heard a voice
calling: 0 sleepers, get up, for Ahmad has emerged in Makkah.
Then we came here and heard about you.[31
['I Mawsoo'at al-Tai-eekh al-lsiami, 1/618
[I'

alSeerah al-Nabawiyyah by fin Hisum, 1/287-289
at-Tabaqit by Ibn Sa'd, 3/55

'Uthmiln Ibn 'Affh Dhun-Noorayn Between Makkah...

19

Undoubtedly this incident had a positive effect on 'Uthmsn
and he could not forget it when he could see all the facts before
him with his own eves. How could anvone who heard of the
emergence of a Prophet before reaching the city in which he lived,
and found upon
his arrival that what he had heard was h e , then
.
hesitate to respond to the call? No matter how arrogant a man
may be, he cannot fail to submit to the truth; if he tries to ignore it
his conscience will continue to trouble him until he either believes
in it or dies, thus saving himself from the stirrings of his
conscience. 'Uthmgn's quick response was not based on
foolishness or rashness, rather it was based on certainty and
firm belief that left no room for doubt.['' He thought about this
new call calmly, as was his way in all things, and he found that it
was a call to virtue, a call to shun immorality, a call to Tawheed
and a warning against shirk, a call to worship AllCh and a
warning against heedlessness, a call to good morals and a
warning against bad morals. Then he looked at his people and
saw them worshipping idols, eating dead meat, mistreating their
neighbours and regarding as permissible forbidden things such as
the shedding of blood, etc.12' But the Prophet Muhammad ibn
'Abd-ullgh &j was sincere and trustworthy; he knew nothing but
good about him and he had heard nothing bad about him. He was
never known to tell a lie or commit any act of treachery. He was
calling for the worship of AllSh alone with no parler or associate,
and for the upholding of family ties, kind treatment of
neighbours, prayer and fasting, and not worshipping anyhng
other than ~ l l ~ h .So
' ~ he
] became Muslim at the hands of Abu
Bakr asSiddeeq, and he persisted in his faith, calling others to
Islam in a friendly and patient manner; he was content, forgiving,
kind, charitable, compassionate and generous, helping the weak
and oppressed until Islam became strong.[41
"I Jawlah Tureekhiyyahfi 'Asr nl-Khulufu' al-Eshideen, p. 302

See: Manuiyrit al-'Ahd al-Mukki, by 'Aadil 'Abd al-Ghafoor,2/805
131 Fitnah Maqtal 'Uthmrin,by Dr. Muhammad 'Abd-AUSh a l c h a b h , 1/37
" 'Uthmiin ibn 'Affrin,by Sidiq 'Ajoon, p. 53

1''

20

' U W n lbn 'Aff2n 8 Dhun-Nooravn

His marriage to ~ u ~ a ~ the
~ a daughter
h ,
of the
Messenger of AII2h
The Muslims rejoiced greatly when 'Uthmin became Muslim,
and the bonds of love and brotherhood between him and them
were strengthened when Alliih honoured him with marriage to
the daughter of the Messenger of AllCh @, Ruqayyah. The
Messenger of All& g had given her in marriage to 'Utbah ibn
Abi Lahab, and he had given her sister Umm Kulthoom in
marriage to 'Utaybah ibn Abi Lahab, but when SGrat al-Masad
was revealed -

"Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab (an uncle of the Prophet)
and perish he! His wealth and his children will not benefit him!
He will be burnt in a Fire of blazingjames! And his wife, too,
who carries wood (thorns of Sa'dcin which she used to put on the
way of the Prophet &g or use to slander him). In her neck is a
hvisted rope of Masad (palmjiber)'' (Al-Masad 111:l-5)
Abu Lahab and their mother Umm Jameel hint Harb ibn
Umayyah - the "carrier of w o o d - told them to leave the
daughters of Muhammad, so they separated from them before
they had consummated the marriage with them, as an honour to
them from Allih and as a humiliation to the sons of Abu
~ahab.['l No sooner did 'Uthmh hear the news of the divorce of
Ruqayyah but he was filled with joy and he hastened to propose
marriage to her through the Messenger of All&
The
Messenger of Allih @$ gave her in marriage to him, and the
Mother of the Believers Khadeejah bint Khuwaylid prepared her

a.

[I1

Dhuh-Noorayn 'UthmLin ibn 'AffLin, by Muhammad Rasheed Rida, p. 12

'Uthmiin lbn 'Affan Dhun-Noorayn Between Makkah...

and presented her to him. 'Uthm2n was one of the most
handsome men of Quraysh and she competed with him in
beauty and gracefulness. It was said to her when she was
presented to him:
The best looking couple anyone has ever seen, is Ruqayyah
and her husband ' ~ t h m h . ~ ' ]
It was narrated horn 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'UthmSn alQurashi that the Messenger of AllSh @ entered upon his daughter
when she was washing the head of 'Uthmh and he said:

"0 my daughter, take good care of Abu 'Abdullrih, for he is the
closest of my companions to me in attitude."[']

Umm Jameel bint Harb and her husband Abu Lahab thought
that by divorcing Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthoom that they would
deal a harsh blow to the family of Muhammad
or at least
weaken them, but All& chose good for Ruqayyah and Umm
Kulthoom, which caused a great deal of frustration and anger for
Umm Jameel and Abu Lahab, and they did not achieve anything.
Thus AUSh sufficed the household of the Prophet @ against their
evil.
And the Command of Allgh is a decree determined.

His persecution and migration to Abyssinia
AllWs decree that all are to be tested is applied constantly to
individuals, communities, peoples and nations. This applied to
the Sahgbah too, and they underwent trials and tribulations that
would shake the foundations of lofty mountains. They spent their
wealth and shed their blood for the sake of All&, and this
suffering became as severe as All& willed that it should. The
'I1 Ansib al-AshriJ p. 89

"I

Narrated by at-TabarSni and the men of its i s ~ are
d thiqSt (trustworthy),as
stated by al-Haythami. Af-Majma' no. 14500 (9/81)

'UthmSn Ibn 'AffCin & Dhun-Noorayn

prominent Muslims were not spared these trials. 'UthmSn was
persecuted and tortured for the sake of All& at the hands of his
paternal uncle al-Hakam ibn Abi'l-'Aas ibn Umayyah who caught
him and tied him up, and said: "Will you turn away hom the
religion of your forefathers for a new religion? By AllSh, I will not
let you go until you give up this religion." 'UthmSn & said: "By
Allgh, I will never give it up or leave it." When al-Hakam saw his
steadfastness in adhering to his religion, he let him go.[11
The persecution intensified and affected all the Muslims, to
such an extent that Yssir and his wife Sumayyah were killed. The
Prophet jg$was deeply grieved, and wondered where could the
Muslims go? Then the Messenger of AllSh @ thought of
Abyssinia and said to the Muslims: "Why don't you go to
Abyssinia, for in (that land) there is a righteous king in whose
land no one is wronged."r21
The migration Qujrah) began, and the Prophet @ was
saddened to see groups of believers sneaking out of ~ a k k a h [ ~ I
and travelling by sea. Some left riding, and others left on foot, and
they continued marching until they reached the coast of the Red
Sea. Then they appointed 'Uthmh ibn Maz'oon as their leader
and by the grace of AllSh they found two ships on which they
embarked in return for half a dinar for each person. Quraysh
found out about that and they set off in hot pursuit, but when they
reached the coast, the two ships had already set sail.[41
Among those who migrated during the first and second
migration to Abyssinia was 'UthmSn ibn 'AffSn, and on both
occasions he was accompanied by his wife Ruqayyah, the
daughter of the Messenger of AllSh @. They arrived in
Abyssinia in Rajab in the fifth year after the Prophet's mission
began, and they found safety, security and freedom of worship.

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn Dhun-Nooraw Between Makkah...

23

The Qur'k speaks of the migration of the early Muslims to
Abyssinia, as All& says:

"And as for those who emigratedfor the Cause of All&, after
they had been wronged, We will certainly give them goodly
residence in this world, but indeed the reward of the Hereafter
will be greater; if they but knew!" (Al-Nahl 16:41)
d-Qurtubi (may All& have mercy on him) quoted Qatgdah
(may AUSh have mercy on him) as saying: What is referred to here
is the companions of Muhammad SMwho were oppressed by the
mushrikeen in Makkah and expelled, until a group of them
migrated to Abyssinia, then Allah granted them a place to which
to migrate (i.e., Madinah) and granted them supporters from
among the believers.[''
And All& says:

"Say (0 Muhammad gj : "0 My slaves who belleve (in the
Oneness ofAll& - Islamic Monotheism),fear your Lord (All&)
and keep your duty to Him. Good is (the reward)for those who
do good in this world, and Allthis earth is spacious (so i f you
cannot worship Allth at a place, then go to another)! Only those
who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without
reckoning" (Al-Zumar 39:lO)
Ibn'Abbgs & said: This refers to Ja'far ibn Abi Tglib and those
who went with him to ~ b ~ s s i n i a . ' ~ '
'Uthmsn
benefited from this migration, as he gained
['I
[I'

al-Jtmi'li Ahktm nl-Qur'in by al-Qurtubi, 10/107
op. cit., 15/240

24

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

experience and learned lessons that would stand him in good
stead later in his blessed Life. Among the most important of these
lessons were the following:
1-The steadfastness of the believers in adhering to their faith
after the infliction of all kinds of persecution and torture by the
misguided evildoers is a sign of their sincere faith and high
spiritual standing, as their peace of mind, contentment, and hope
for the pleasure of AU2h was far greater than the torture,
deprivation and pain that affected their bodies, because what
matters most for the sincere believers and dsiyahs is their
spiritual aspirations, not their physical needs. So they hastened to
fulfil the needs of their souls and paid less attention to their
bodies' needs for rest, fulfilment and pleasure. Thus the call to
All* prevailed and the masses were freed from darkness and
ignorance.[']
2- ' U M n & learned from the Prophet
compassion
towards the ummah. His compassion was demonstrated when he
became caliph and before that, when he lived in Madinah at the
time of the Prophet gUAbu Bakr and 'Umar (may AllSh be
pleased with them). He saw with his own eyes the compassion of
the Prophet towards his companions and his deep concern to
guarantee their safety and security. Hence he suggested to them
that they go to that just king in whose land no one was oppressed.
had jsaid; they were safe and free
And it turned out to be as he @
to practise their religion, and they stayed there on the best
The Prophet is the one who suggested Abyssinia; he
is the one who chose a safe place for his community and his
message, so that it was protected from being wiped out. This is
how the Prophet @ trained Muslim leaders in every era to plan
wisely and with farsightedness in order to protect the call of Islam
and the callers (dsiyahs), and to look for a safe land to be a
provisional capital for the call and a centre from which it could
operate lest the main centre be exposed to danger, attacked or
['I as-Seprah an-Nabawiyyah by Dr. Mustafa al-SibVi, p. 57

al-Hijrah Ti-Qur'in il-Kareem, p. 312

'UthmSn Ibn 'Man Dhun-Nooravn Between Makkah...

25

destroyed. The dsiyahs are a true asset and all efforts should be
focused on protecting them, without any negligence or risks that
could jeopardize their lives or their safety. One Muslim is
equivalent to an earthful of people who are outside of the
religion of Alltih and do not believe in ~awheed.[l'
3- 'Uthmin 4 learned from the Prophet's advice to migrate to
Abyssinia that risks should be undertaken by those who are close
to the leader, his family and relatives; the notion that the leader's
relatives should be kept away from danger and that those who are
not related to the leader or are not of high status should be sent to
confront danger is far removed from the way of the Prophet g.121
Hence when 'Uthmh became caliph, his relatives were in the
forefront of the army. 'Abd-AUSh ibn Abi Sarh led the conquests
in Africa, and 'Abd-All21 ibn 'Aamir led the conquests in the east.
He commanded Mu'swiyah to travel by sea, accompanied by his
wife, and to be at the head of the army. This will be discussed in
further detail below when we speak of the conquests.
4- 'Uthmtin 4 was the first one of this ummah to migrate to
Abyssinia with his family.[31The Messenger of All21 @ said:

"May All& be with them. 'Uthmlin is thejirst one to migrate
with his family for the sake of All& after LOO^."[^^
When there was a rumour that the people of Makkah had
become Muslim, news of that reached the emigrants in Abyssinia,
so they came back, but when they drew close to Makkah, they
heard that what was being said about the people of Makkah
becoming Muslim was false. But they entered the city under the
protection of some of the people of Makkah. Among those who
returned was 'Uthmtin ibn 'Affk and his wife Ruqayyah (may
at-Tarbiyah al-Qiyidiyyah by Muneer al-Ghadbsn, 1/333
op. cit.; al-Seerah al-Nabawiyyuh, 1/348
[31 a s S m 2 i q al-Mursalak, 1/314
[41 al-Ma'rifih wa'l-Tareekh, 3/268; i t s i s ~ i sdda'eef

"I

26

'UthmSn b n ' A f f h & Dhun-Noorayn

Allsh be pleased with them both).['] He settled there until Allih
granted permission to migrate to MaCmah. From the day he
became Muslim, 'Uthmh stayed close to the Prophet @ wherever
he was, and he did not leave him except when he migrated with
his permission, or went on a mission for which he appointed him,
which no one else could do. In staying close to the Prophet @$ he
was like all of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs. 'Uthmh had a strong
connection to the message of Islam from the first year, and he did
not miss any event in the life of the Prophet @, public or private,
nor did he miss any event in the reigns of the first two caliphs; or
in other words, he did not miss anything that had to do with the
laying of foundations for the Islamic state.["

[I1 ~ . - S E E ~ &
an-Nabawiyynh by Ibn Hishh, 1/402

" op. cit., p. 78

The method by means of which 'Utbmh ibn 'Affh and all
the noble SahSbah were educated was the Holy Qur'h which
was revealed from the Lord of the Worlds. It was the only source
of guidance to be accepted. The Prophet @ was keen to ensure
that the Muslims acquired their concepts from one source only.
The Holy Qur'gn alone was to be the methodology and focal point
on which the Muslim individuaI, family and society were to be
raised. The verses which 'Uthmsn heard directly from the
Messenger of Allgh @ played a role in the formation of his
Islamic personality. They purified his heart and soul and
influenced him, and he became a new man, with new values,
emotions, aims, behaviour and aspirations.[']
'Uthmh L& was deeply attached to the Holy Qur'gn. Abu
'Abd al-Rahmh al-Sulami narrated how he learned it from the
Messenger of All31 g,and his words indicate how greatly he
loved to live with the Book of All*. It was narrated that 'Abu
'.Abd al-Rahmh al-Sulami said: Those who taught us the Q d h such as ' U t M ibn 'Affsn, 'Abd-All31 ibn Mas'ood and others told us that when they learned ten verses from the Prophet #f
they would not go beyond them until they had learned the
1'1 An-Seeruh an-Nabawiyyuh by al-Sallsbi, 1/145

'Uthmh Ibn 'AffSn L& Dhun-Nooravn

28

knowledge contained in them and how to apply it in deed. They
said: So we learned the Qur'Sn and knowledge and its application
together. Hence they would spend a whiie to memorize a
soorah.['] AUSh says:

"(This is) a Book (the Qur'tn) which We have sent down to you,
full of blessings, that they may ponder ater its Verses, and that
men of understanding may remember" (Slid 38:29)
'Uthmh u,;$. narrated that the Prophet @ said:

"The best of you are those who learn the Qur'lin and teach

i f ,,I21

'Utrecited the entire Qur'h back to the Messenger of
All& & before he died. Among the most famous of 'UthmSn's
students in learning Qur'Sn were Abu 'Abd d - R a M n al-Sulami,
al-Mugheerah ibn Abi ShihSb, Abu'l-Aswad and Zurr ibn
~ubaysh.[~]
History has recorded for us some of the things that 'UthmSn
& said about the Holy Qur'h. He said:
"If our hearts were pure, we would never have our fill of the
words of All&, may He be glorified and
"I would not like a day to come when I do not look in the
Covenant of All& (i.e., the ~ u s - h a f ) . " ~ ~ ]
"Three worldly things have been made dear to me: feeding
the hungry, clothing the naked and reading ~ u r ' h . " ~ ~ ]

"' al-Fatiwu, 13/177
I['

al-Bukhsri, Fadd'il al-Qur'tn, no. 5027

[31 Tareekh al-Islam, 'Ahd al-Khulafa' al-Rdshideen by al-Dhahabi, p. 467
[41 al-Fattwa, 11/122; al-Bid@& wah-Nihciyah, 7/225

al-Bidciyah warn-Nihiyah, 7/225; Farrid al-Kaltm, p. 275
[61 Irshrid al-'Ibcid li Isti'did li Y m m il-Ma'iid, p. 88

i

'Uthmfin and the Holy Qur'2n

29

"There are four things which are outwardly virtues, but in
reality are obligations: mixing with righteous people is a virtue,
and following their example is a duty; reading Qur'h is a virtue
and acting upon it is a duty; visiting the graves is a virtue and
preparing for death is a duty; and visiting the sick person is a
virtue and asking him to make a will is a duty."[']
"Ten things are the greatest waste of time: a scholar whom no
one asks about; knowledge that is not acted upon; sound advice
that is not accepted; a weapon that is not used; a Masjid that is not
prayed in; a Mus-haf that is not read from; wealth from which
nothing is spent (in charity); a horse that is not ridden; knowledge
of asceticism in the heart of one who is seeking worldly gain; and
a long life in which no preparation is made for the journey (into
the erea after)."[^'
'Uthmik & was hafiz of Qur'h, and he read Qur'h all the
time. He was asked about that and he said: "It is blessed and was
brought by a blessed one."[31 When 'Uthmh died, his Mus-haf
was worn out because he had read from it so much.[41
The wife of 'Uthmh said on the day when he was besieged:
"Either kill him or leave him alone, for by Alliih, he would recite
the whole Qur'Sn in one rak'ah when praying qiyiim al-layl.'r[51
The words of AU& -

"Is one who is obedient to Allih, prostrating himselfor standing
(in prayer) during the hours of the night, fearing the Hereafter
and hnping for the Mercy of his Lord (like one who disbelieves)?
[I1 op. cit., p. 90; Fart'id

al-KalBm, p. 2 7 8
Irshid al-'lb8d, p. 91; Fari'id al-filcim, p. 2 7 8
[31 al-Bayiin wa'l-Tabyiin ji Maqtal al-Shaheed 'Uthrnin, 3/177; Fart'id al-Kaliim, p.
273

I['

30

' U W n Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

Say: "Are those who know equal to those who know not?"It is
only men of understanding who will remember (i .e. get a lesson
from Allih's Signs and Verses)" (Az-Zumar 39:9) - were
fulfilled in him.
'UthnGin immersed himself in the principles of Islam and
studied at the hands of the Messenger of All& &. Through the
Qur'iin, ' U M n came to know Who is the God Who must be
worshipped. The Prophet @ instilled in his heart the meanings of
these sublime verses, for he was keen to teach his companions the
correct concept of their Lord and His rights over them, knowing
that this concept would generate certainty and faith when their
souls were purified and their nature (fitrah) became somd.
'UthmMs view of Allih, the universe, life, Paradise, Hell, the
divine will and decree, the true nature of man and man's struggle
with the ShayGn were all based on the Holy Qur'ih and the
guidance of the Prophet &.
Allih is above having any shortcomings; His are the
attributes of infinite perfection. He is One, with no partner or
associate, and He has no wife or child. He, may He be glorified,
has defined this concept of 'uboodiyyah (complete servitude to
Allih) and Tawheed in the Holy ly~ur'ih.[~]
' U W n ' s view of the universe was based on the verses in
which Allih says:

"I Manha] ar-Rasoolfi Gharas ar-Rooh nl-Jth&i~yyah, p. 10-16

1

'Uthmh and the Holv Our'h

31

"Say (0Muhammad g):Do you verily disbelieve in Him W h o
created the earth in fwo Days? And you set up rivals (in
worship) with Him? That is the Lord of the 'Aalameen
(mankind, jinn and all that exists). He placed therein (i .e.
the earth)firm mountainsfrom above it, and He blessed it, and
measured therein its sustenance (for its dwellers) infour Days
equal (i.e. all these four 'days' were equal i n the length oftime)
for all those who ask (about its creation). . Then He rose over
(Istawa) tozuards the heaven when it was smoke, and said to it
and to the earth: 'Come both of you willingly or unwillingly .'
They both said: W e come willingly .' Then He completed and
finishedjrom their creation (as) seven heavens in two Days and
He made in each heaven its affair.And W e adorned the nearest
flmest) heaven with lamps (stars) to be an adornment as well as
to
(from the devils by using them as missiles against the
devils) . Such is the Decree of Him, the All-Mighty, the AllKnower" (Fussilat 41:9-12)
As for this life, no matter how long it lasts, it will inevitably
come to an end, and no matter how great its conveniences and
luxuries, they are in fact insignificant. All2h says:

"Verily, the likeness of (this) worldly life is as the water (rain)
which W e send downjrom the sky; so by it arises the intermingled
produce of the earth of which men and caftle eat: until when the
earth is clad in its adornments and is beautified, and its people think
that they have all the powers of disposal over it, Our Command
reaches it by night or by day and W e make it like a clean-mown
harvest, as $it had notflourished yesterday! Thus do W e explain
the A y i t in detailfor the people who reflect" (Yoonus 10:24)

'Uthmiin Ibn 'Affh
& Dhun-Noorayn

32

' U t W s view of Paradise was derived from the verses
which describe it, and this concept became a deterrent which
prevented him from going astray from the laws of All*. Anyone
'will see how clear the idea of
who studies the life of U
meeting All& was in his mind, and how greatly he feared the
wrath and punishment of All&. We will see this in the pages of
this book, in sha Allsh.
His concept of the Divine will and decree was derived from
the Book of All& and the teachings of the Messenger of All& g.
This concept was firmly entrenched in his heart, and he
understood its different categories as mentioned in the Book of
All&. He was certain that the knowledge of AUih encompasses
all things:

;*
$3
c; dh $9
sk
* +J
+
,

,jL fi
&
+
<<

jx 4

,-

4

9;

5

,

/

a &,

,
'y +.>
L3-

&
4 gj xf 9; qi 12'

yf;

+
L;

'j
,

I

,,' r e,a
a&+ L
i I>*

$3 @
$
;

,j
,

,

4%

5

"Neither you (0 Muhammad) do any deed nor recite any
portion of the Qur'lin, nor you (0mankind) do any deed (good
or evil), but W e are Witness thereof, when you are doing it. And
nothing is hiddenporn your Lord (so much as) the weight ofan
atom (or small ant) on the earth or in the heaven. Not what is
less than that or what is greater than that but is (written) in a
Clear Record" (Yoonus 10:61)
And he was certain that AUZh has decreed everything that is
to be:

"Verily, Wegive lqe to the dead, and W e record that which they

U
' -n

and the Holy Qur'an

33

send before (them), and their truces['] and all things W e have
recorded with numbers (as a record) in a Clear Book" (Ya-Seen
3612)
The will of ALlih is ever executed and His power is absolute:

"Have they not travelled in the land, and seen what was the end
of those before them - though they were superior to them in
power? All& is not such that anything in the heavens or in the
earth escapes Him. Verily, He is All-Knowing, AllOmnipotent" (Fitir 35:44)
And Allih is the Creator of all things:

"Such is All&, your Lord! La^ Iltiha illa Huwa (none has the
right to be worshipped but He), the Creator of all things. So
worship Him (Alone), and He is the Wakeel (Trustee, Disposer
of affnirs or Guardian) mer all things" (Al-An'im 6102)
This correct understanding and deep conviction of the reality
of the Divine will and decree bore many h i t s which were
apparent inhis life, as we shall in this book. From the Holy Qur'2n
he understood the reality of his own self and of all men. He knew
that man's essence went back to two origins: his ancient origin
when he was first created from clay, when he was formed and the
['I Traces: Their footsteps and walking on the earth with their legs to the

mosques for the five compulsory congregational prayers, Jihiid (holy fighting
in A W s Cause) and all other good and evil they did, and that which they
leave behind.

34

'Uthmin Ibn 'M2n & Dhun-Noorayn

soul was breathed into him, and his recent origin when he was
created from a drop of sperm. AUSh says:

'Who made meything He has created good and He began the
creation of man from clay. Then He made his offspring from
semen of despised water (male and female sexual discharge).
Then He fashioned him in due proportion, and breathed into him
the soul (created by All& for fhat person); and He gave you
hearing (ears), sight (eyes) and hearts. Little is the thanks you
give!" (As-Sajdah 327-9)
He understood that All& had created man with His own
hand, and honoured him with a beautiful form and an upright
posture. He had blessed him with wisdom, logic and
discernment, and subjugated to him aIl that is in the heavens
and on earth. AllSh favoured man over much of His creation, and
honoured him by sending the Messengers to him. The most
wondrous manifestation of this divine honour towards man was
that He made man qualified to receive His love and good
pleasure, which could be attained by following the Prophet &$
who called man to Islam so that they might live a good life in this
world and attain eternal bliss in the Hereafter. All& says:

'Whoever works righteousness - whether male or female while he (or she) is a true believer (of Islamic Monotheism)
verily, to him W e will give a good l$e (in this world with
respect, contentment and lawful provision), and W e shall pay
them certainly a reward in proportion to the best of what they
used to do (i.e. Paradise in the Hereafter)" (An-Nahl 16:97)

'Uthmgn and the Holy Qur'an

35

From the Qur'sn, 'Uthmsn understood the hue nature of the
sli-uggle between man and the Shaytsn. He knew that this enemy
comes to man from before and behind, from his right
- and from his
left, and whispers to him, tempting him to commit sin, and
stirring up his desires. He used to seek the help of All& against
his enemy Iblees and he prevailed over him throughout his life.
He learned from the story of Adam with the Shaytsn, as
mentioned in the Qur'h, that Adam was the origin of mankind,
and that the essence of Islam is absolute obedience to AUCh and
that man is vulnerable to falling into sin. From the story of
Adam's sin he learned the necessity of putting one's tmst in All&,
the importance of repentance and praying for forgiveness in the
life of the believer, the necessity of keeping away from envy and
arrogance, and the importance of speaking in the best manner to
one's companions, because All& says:

"And say to M y slaves (i.e. the true belimers of Islamic
Monotheism) that they should (only) say those words that are
the best. (Because) Shaytrin (Satan) verily, sows a state 4
conflict and disagreements among them. Surely, Shaytin
(Satan) is to man a plain enemy" [Al-Isra' 17:53]
The Lord, may He be glorified and exalted, honoured
' U M ibn 'Affsn with Islam, and he lived by it and strove to
spread its message. He learned its major and minor issues from
the Book of All& and the teachings of the Prophet g, and he
became one of the leaders of Islam who guided the people and
whose words and deeds were taken as an example in this life. We
should not forget that 'Uthm2n ibn 'Affh was one of the scribes
who wrote down the Revelation for the Messenger of Allsh ,h.

His staying close to the
Prophet & in Madinah

The strongest factor that shaped 'Uthrnin's character,
brought out his talents and potentials and purified h s soul was
his keeping company with the Messenger of Allih & and
studying at his hands. 'Uthmh & stayed close to the Messenger
g i n Makkah after he became Muslim, and he stayed close to him
in MadA& after he migrated there. ' U M devoted himself to
studying various branches of knowledge at the hands of the
teacher and guide of mankind who had been taught by his Lord in
the best manner. He was eager to learn the Holy Qur'h and the
Sunnah from the leader of all of mankind.
'Uthmh tells us how he stayed close to the Messenger of
Alliih g, as he said: Alliih, may He be glorified and exalted, sent
Muhammad with the truth and revealed the Book to him, and I
was one of those who responded to Allih and His Messenger and
believed. I made the two early migrations and I became the sonin-law of the Messenger of AllSh & and I received guidance
directly from him.['] 'Uthmiin & was trained according to the
Qur'hic method and the one who taught him was the Messenger
"I

Fad8'1I as-SnhaAbah by Abu 'Abd-AlEh Ahmad ~ b Hanbal,
n
1/597 Its lsniid is
saheeh.

38

' U r n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

of Alliih @. The starting point in ' U t h m s s education came when
he met the Messenger of Alliih #$$ and underwent a sudden and
marvellous transformation as soon as he met the Prophet @,
coming forth from darkness into Light, acquiring faith and
shunning kufr. He was able to bear hardships for the sake of his
new religion and its pure beliefs. The personality of the
Messenger of AUCh @ was the main attraction to Islam, for he
possessed the ability to attract and influence others. Alliih had
prepared him and moulded him and made him the most perfect
human being in the history of the world. Greatness is always
loved and admired by people; admirers gather around it and
remain attached to it, because of that love and admiration. But in
the case of the Messenger of Alliih gdadded to that greatness was
the fact that he was the Messenger of AUSh, the one who received
revelation from AUiih and conveyed it to mankind. This added a
further dimensionto the impact on the believers' feelings towards
him. He was not loved only for himself as great men are loved,
but also for that divine connection. For when a believer was in the
presence of the Messenger of AllCh @, he was also in the presence
of Divine revelation. So the Messenger of All& @ was both a
great human being and a great Messenger; these two qualities
ultimately combined and became one, with no distinction
between them. Thus the believer's love for the Messenger of
All31 @ was love for the Messenger as a human being and for the
human being as a Messenger. Love for AllCh was connected to
love for His Messenger, and the two joined together in the
believer's heart, becoming the focal point of all his emotions and
the basis for his behaviour and attitudes.
This love that motivated the first generation of the Sahiibah is
the focus and starting point of Islamic personal development.
Through the blessing of keeping company with the Messenger of
Alliih @ and learning at his hands, 'Uthmiin & and the Sahibah
attained a high level of faith. 'Uthmh & studied at the hands of
the Messenger of All& @$ and learned from him the Qur'iin and
Sunnah, the rules of renitation (tiliiwah) and how souls are
purified. Alliih says:

His staying close to the Prophet in Madinah

39

Say (0Muhammad @J : "0 people of the Scripture (Jewsand
Christians)! Come to a word that is just between us and you,
that we worship none but All& (Alone), and that we associate
no partners with Him, and that none of us shll take others as
lords besides All&." Then, if they turn away, say: "Bear
witness that we are Muslims." (Aal 'Imrin 354)
He was keen to immerse himself in the teachings of the
Prophet @ and to stay close to him during times of war and of
peace. In the coming pages we will see, in sha Allah, his attitude
concerning the fields of jihad, politics, social life and economics
with the Messenger of All& @ in the Madeenan period.

'Uthrngn and jihad with the %essenger of kl5h &
After the Messenger of AllSh & had settled in Madinah he
started establishing the foundations of the Islamic state he began
to create bonds of brotherhood between the Muhijireen and Ansir.
'Uthmh's "brother" was Aws ibn ~h$bit.['' Then the Prophet gg
established his mosque and drew up a treaty with the Jews, and
he started to send out military expeditions and paid attention to
laying down the economic and educational foundations of the
new society. 'Uthmh & was one of the pillars of the Islamic state,
and he did not withhold any advice, opinion or wealth. He was
also present at every major event except the battle of ~adr.['l

'Uthmsn and the battle of Badr
When the Muslims went out to fight the battle of Badr,
'Uthmh's wife, Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of
"I Al-Ameen Dhu'n-Nooruyn by Mahmoud Shikir, p. 40
I''

Manhj at-Tarbiyah al-Islumiyyah by Ahmad Qutub, p. 34,35

40

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affgn ;2; Dhun-Noorayn

AllSh g,
was sick with the measles and was confined to her bed at
the time when the Messenger of Alliih called on the M u s h to
intercept the caravan of Quraysh. 'Uthmh 4 hastened to go out
but he received orders to stay
with the Messenger of AllSh
with Ruqayyah and nurse her; he obeyed willingly and stayed
with his wife Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of All21
g.When her sickness grew worse and death approached, as
Ruqayyah breathed her last she was longing to see her father who
had gone out to Badr and her sister Zaynab who was still in
Makkah. 'Uthmh L& looked at her through his tears, his heart
breaking with sorrow.111 She departed this life bearing witness
that there is no god but AUSh and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of All&, but she did not get to see her father the
Messenger of AllSh g,because he was in Badr with his noble
companions, striving to make the word of All21 supreme, and he
did not attend her burial. Ruqayyah was prepared for burial and
her body was brought, with her grieving husband walking
behind it. When the funeral reached al-Baqee', Ruqayyah was
buried there and the attendants wept and levelled the soil over the
grave of Ruqayyah, the daughter of the Messenger of AllSh @. As
they were returning, Yazeed ibn H s t h a h came, riding the camel
of the Messenger of All21 B, bringing good news that the
Messenger of Alliih @ was safe and sound, and the mushrikeen
had been killed and their heroes captured. The Muslims of
Madinah received this news with rejoicing, celebrating the victory
that AllSh had granted to His believing slaves, but amidst the
rejoicing 'Uthmiin could not conceal his sorrow at the loss of
Ruqayyah &. After the Messenger @ returned, he learned of the
death of Ruqayyah 4, and he went out to al-Baqee' and stood
over the grave of his daughter and prayed for forgiveness for
her.121
'Uthmiin ibn ' A f f h did not stay behind from Badr because of
any shortcoming or because he wanted to avoid the battle, as is
['I

Nisa' Ah1 al-Bayt by Ahmad Khaleel Jumu'ah, p. 491-504
Dirna' 'ala Qarnees 'Ufhrntn ibn 'Afin, p. 20

His staying close to the Prophet in Madinah
claimed by those followers of whims and desires who attack him
because of his absence from Badr. He did not intend to go against
because the virtue attained by those who were
the Messenger gY
present at Badr was due to their obeying the Messenger @ and
following him. 'Uthmh went out with the others who went out
but he @ sent him back to take
with the Messenger of Allsh g,
care of his daughter. Thus he was doing the most important duty
of obeying the Messenger of AUSh g who asked him to stay
behind. The Prophet @ gave him a share of the booty and reward,
so he had a share in the booty and attained the virtue and reward
of obeying and submitting to AUih and His ~ e s s e n ~ e r . [ "
It was narrated that 'Uthmiin ibn 'Abd-AllSh ibn Mawhab
said: A man came from Egypt to perfom pilgrimage to the
Ka'bah, and he said: 0 Ibn 'Umar, I am going to ask you about
something, so tell me, for I adjure you by All& and the sanctity of
this House: do you know that 'Uthmh was absent from Badr and
did not witness it? He said: Yes, but his absence from Badr was
because he was married to the daughter of the Messenger of All&
it&$ and she fell sick, and the Messenger of All& it&$ said to him:

"You will have the reward and the share of booty of a man who
was present at ~ a d r"['.
It was narrated from Abu Wgil that 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh &
said: "On the day of Badr, I stayed behind to look after the
daughter of the Messenger of All& B, and the Messenger of Allsh
gave me a share (of the booty)." ZVidah said in his hadeeth:
Whoever was given a share of the booty by the Messenger of AllSh
was regarded as having been there.[31 So 'Uthmgn was
regarded as one of the people of Badr, by consensus.[41
Kittb a1-Imtmah wa'l-Radd bla al-Rtjdah by al-hbahsni, p. 302
al-BuhWu?ri,
no. 3698 at-Tirmidhi 3706
[31 al-Imhah wa'l-Radd hla al-Efidah by al-Asbahcki, p. 304
'UthmAnibn 'Afin, by Stidiq 'Aqoon, p. 47
[I1
['I

42

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

'Uthmsn and the battle of Uhud
At the battle of Uhud, AUiih % granted victory to the Muslims
at the beginning of the battle, and the Muslims began to wield
their swords against the mushrikeen, whose defeat appeared
imminent. The standard-bearers of the mushrikeen were killed,
one by one, and no one could get near to retrieve the banner. The
mushrikeen began to flee and the women who had been singing
and banging the drums began to scream; they threw down their
drums and fled towards the mountain, baring their calves. But
suddenly the balance tipped, because of the archers whom the
Prophet had commanded to stay in their position on the side of
the mountain and not to move no matter what the outcome of the
battle was. All but a few of them deserted their posts and came
down to the field of battle seeking booty, when they saw the
Muslims gathering it. =lid ibn al-Waleed, who was the leader
of the cavalry of Quraysh, took this opporhmity when he saw that
the mountain was bare of archers except a few. He, along with
'Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl, launched a cavalry attack and killed the
remaining archers, including their leader 'Abd-All& ibn Jubayr
&, who had remained at his post with a small group. Whilst the
Muslims were distracted and collecting the booty, Kh%d and
those who were with him attacked them from all sides and started
killing them. The Muslims panicked and some of them, including
'Uthmh ibn 'Affgn, fled to a place near Madinah, and they did
not return until the fighting stopped. Another group became
confused when they heard that the Prophet @ had been killed,
and a third group stood firm with the Prophet @. Concerning the
group that fled, All& revealed coi~cemingthem Qur'h that will
be recited until the Day of Resurrection. AUSh said:

"Those ofyou who turned back on the day the two hosts met (i.e.
the battle of Uhud), it wns S h y t i n (Satan) who caused them to
backslide (run awayfiom the battlefield) because of some (sins)

1

His staying close to the Prophet in Madfnah

43

they had earned. But Alllih, indeed, has forgiven them. Surely,
Alllih is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing" (Aal 'Imrin 3~155)
But those who cannot see anything but that which is dictated
to them by their whims and desires never quote the names of
those who retreated except 'UthmSn &. They accuse him and not
the other SaMbah who also retreated. Should he have stayed on
his own? If he had done that he would have exposed himself to
danger.['] After All& forgave those who retreated, the ruling is
very clear and there is no confusion or ambiguity. There is no
room for blaming 'Uthmh ibn'Affh & after that. It is enough to
know that Alliih has forgiven him, as is stated in the text of the
Qur'h. His striving in jihad throughout his life is witness to his
bravery.

The campaign of Ghatafsn (Dhu Imr)
The Messenger of Alliih @ mobilized the Muslims and set out
with four hundred men and a number of horses, leaving 'Uthmin
ibn 'Affin & in charge in MadAbah.They captured a (mushrik)
man in Dhu'l-Qussah whose name was Jabbk, from Banu
Tha'labah. He was taken to the Messenger of Allih @$ and he
told him some information about his people, and said: "They will
never meet you in battle; when they heard that you were coming,
they fled to the mountaintops. I will go with you." The Messenger
of AllSh gg called him to Islam and he became M u s h , and the
Messenger of Alliih @ made him the brother of Bila. The
Messenger of Allih @ did not meet anyone in battle, then he came
back to Madhah with no fighting having taken place. He was
absent for eleven days.[']

The campaign of Dhat al-RiqV
The Messenger of AllSh g heard that a group from Ghatafh,
from (the tribes of) Tha'labah and Anm*, wanted to attack
Madkah, so he set out with four hundred of his companions until
['I alarneen Dhu'n-Nooayan by Mahmoud Sh&ir, p. 49
"I

al-Rawd al-Anf, 3/137; al-Tabaqit by Ibn Sa'd, 2/34, 35

44

' U W n Ibn ' A f f h 9Dhun-Noorayn

he reached Sir&. Before he left, the Messenger of A1131 g
appointed 'Uthmin ibn 'Affh in charge of MadAmh. he
Muslims encountered a huge group from Ghatafsn and the
people drew close but no fighting occurred between them. The
people were afraid of one another, until the Messenger of AUih @
led the people in offering the fear prayer, then he departed with
the people. He was away from MadAmhfor fifteen days.[']

Bay'at al-RadwSn
When the Messenger of AUih @ halted at d-Hudaybiyah, he
deemed it essential to send a representative to Quraysh, to tell
them of his peaceful intentions and that he had no desire to fight,
and he wanted to respect the holy places; he wanted to perform
'Umrah and then return to MaCmah. The man chosen to be the
representative of the Messenger of AUiih @$ to Quraysh was
Kharish ibn Umayyah al-KhuzVi, whom he mounted on a camel
called al-Tha'lab. When he entered Makkah, Quraysh killed the
camel and they wanted to kill Kharish too, but the Ahsbeesh
stopped them. Khartish ibn Umayyah came back to the Messenger
of Allih @ and told him what Quraysh had done. The Messenger
of AUsh &wanted to send another envoy to tell Quraysh of the
message of the Messenger of All* @g and at first he chose 'Umar
ibn d-Khattib &.[21 But 'Umar apologized to the Messenger of
Allih @ and said that he preferred not to go, and he suggested to
r
@ that he send 'UthnGn instead of him.[3]
the ~ e s s e n ~ofe All&
He clearly explained the reason for that, which is that it is
essential for anyone who mixes with the enemy to have
protection. As no such protection was available to 'Umar, he
suggested to the Prophet g that he send 'Utlunin &, because he
had a tribe who could protect him from the harm of the
mushrikeen until he had conveyed the message of the
He said to the Messenger of All21 g:
Messenger of Alliih g.[41
['I al-Amex Dhufi-Noorayn by Muhammad SEkir, p. 52, 53
"I
14'

Ghazwat al-Hudaybiyah by Abu Firis, p. 83
al-Maghcizi by Muhammad 'Umar al-Wiqidi, 2/600
al-Maghizi by Muhammad ' U r n al-Wiqidi, 2/600

His staving close to the Provhet in Madhah

45

"I fear for myself with regard to Quraysh, for they know how
hostile I am towards them, and there is no one there from Banu
'Udayy who could protect me. But if you want, 0 Messenger of
Allsh, I will go and meet them."['l
The Messenger of All&
did not say anything, and 'Umar
said: "But I shall tell you, 0Messenger of All&, of a man who is
held in high esteem in Makkah and who has more relatives and is
better protected: 'Uthmiin ibn 'AffSn." The Messenger of All& &
called ' U t h d n Q and said: "Go to Quraysh and tell them that we
have not come to fight, rather we have only come as visitors to
this House, respecting its sanctity. We have our sacrificial animals
with us; we will slaughter them and depart." 'Uthmh set out and
came to Baldah (a place near Makkah) where he found Quraysh.
They said: "Where are you going?" He said: "The Messenger of
Alliih @ has sent me to you, to call you to Alliih and to Islam, and
to enter the religion of Alliih, for Allsh will make His religion
prevail and will grant victory to His Prophet. Your other option is
to leave him alone and let other people fight him, then if they
prevail over Muhammad, that is what you want, but if
Muhammad prevails then you will have the choice of entering
what the people have entered or of fighting him when your power
is still intact. The war has destroyed you and taken the best of
your leaders." 'Uthmh kept talking and telling them things they
did not want to hear, and they said: "We have heard what you
say, but it will never happen. He will never enter upon us by
force. Go back to your companion and tell him that he is not
allowed to come to us." Abiin ibn Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas stood up and
welcomed him and offered him protection and said: "I think you
will get what you want." Then he dismounted from the horse that
he was riding, and he made 'UthmSn sit in the saddle and he rode
behind him, and 'Uthmsn entered Makkah and went to each
leader in turn:Abu Sufyh ibn Harb, Safwsn ibn Umayyah and
others whom he had met at Baldah, and others whom he met in
Makkah. They all kept telling him, "Muhammad will never enter
['I ai-Magluizi by Muhammad 'Umar al-WSqidi, 2/600

1

' U W n Ibn ' A f f h4 Dhun-Noorayn

46

upon us."c11 The mushrikoon suggested to 'Uthmih & that he
perform tawsf around the Ka'bah but he refused.[" 'Uthmh
conveyed the message of the Messenger of All21 @$ to the weak
and oppressed of Makkah and gave them the glad tidings that
relief was close at hand.[31 And he took a verbal message back
from them to the Messenger of AUsh g$in which they said:
"Convey our salsm to the Messenger of All& &$,for the One Who
enabled him to camp at al-Hudaybiyah is able to cause him to
enter the centre of ~ a k k a h . [ ~ ]
There were nunours among the Muslims that 'Uthmsn had
been killed, then the Messenger of All& @$ called his companions
to swear allegiance to him, pledging to fight the mushrikeen. The
SaMbah responded, swearing loyalty unto deathK5',except for alJadd ibn Qays, who was a hypocrite.[61 According to another
report, the pledge was to remain steadfastcq,and according to
yet another report it was a pledge not to flee.181 There is no
contradiction here, because a pledge to remain loyal unto death
means a pledge to remain steadfast and not fleeCg1The first one to
make this pledge was Abu SinSn 'Abd-AU2I ibn Wahb al~sadi.["l Then the rest of the people came forth and made the
same pledge as he had.[''] Salamah ibn al-Akwa' swore
allegiance three times: with the first group of people, in the
middle and with the last
The Prophet @ said of his
Zid al-Ma'id, 31290; nlSeerah an-Nabaziyyah by ibn Hishsm, 3/344
I['
Zid al-Marrid, 3/290
[31 Zid al-Ma'id, 3/290
[$ Ghamat al-Hudaybiyah by Abu F-,
p. 85
"I al-Bukhdi-i, hadeeth no. 4169
[61 alSeerah an-Nabuwiyyahj Daw' al-hlasidir al-Asliyyah, p. 486
17' al-Bukhliri, no. 4169
['I Muslim, no. 1856
aI-Seerah an-Nabawiyyah j Dam' an-Maslidir aI-Asliyyah, p. 486
["I

ibid.
ibid.

[I2]

Zid al-Mdi~f,3/291

[lo'

His staying close to the Prophet in Madinah

47

right hand, "This is the hand of 'Uthmin", and he put it in his
other hand.['] The number of Sahibah from whom the Messenger
of Allfih @ accepted the oath of allegiance beneath the tree was
one thousand and four hundred.['] The Qur'hspeaks of the
people who gave the oath of allegiance (Bay'at al-Radwh), and
their virtue is mentioned in many Whit verses and ahfideeth,
such as the following:
1 - AU8h says:

"Verily, those who give Bay'ah (pledge) to you (0 Muhammad
@j they are giving Bay'ah (pledge)to Allih . The Hand ofAllih
is over their hands. Then whosoever breaks his pledge, breaks it
only to his own harm; and whosoever fulfils what he has
covenanted with Allih, He will bestow on him a great reward
(Al-Fath 48:10]
2 - All& says:

"No blame or sin is there upon the blind, nor is there blame or
sin upon the lame, nor is there blame or sin upon the sick (that
they go not forfighting). And whosoever obeys Allrih and His
Messenger (Muhammad @J, He will admit him to Gardots
"I Saheeh al-Seerah an-Nabaruiyyah, p. 404
[21 Muslim (1485)

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affsn & Dhm-Nooravn

48

beneath which rivers flow (Paradise); and whosoever turns
back, He will punish him with a painful torment. Indeed, All&
was pleased with the believers when they gave the Bay'nh
(pledge) to you (0 Muhammad @J under the tree, He knew
what was in their hearts, and He sent down As-Sakeenah
(calmness and tranquillity) upon them, and He rewarded them
with a near uictoy" (Al-Fath 48:17, 18)
3 - JSbir ibn 'Abdull2h 4 said:
The Messenger of AllSh @ said to us on the day of alHudaybiyah:

"You are the best people on earth."
There were one thousand and four hundred of us and if I
could see I would show you where the tree stood.111I s hadeeth
clearly speaks of the virtue of those who were present at the tree.
At that time there were a number of Muslims in Makkah,
Mad^mh and other places, but some of the Shi'ah take this
hadeeth as evidence that 'Ali was better than 'Uthm2n because
'Ali was among those to whom these words were addressed, and
he was among those who swore allegiance beneath the tree,
whereas 'Uthm2n was absent that day. But this argument is
baseless, because the Prophet & swore allegiance on 'Uthm2n's
behalf, so 'UthmSn is equal to them in virtue in this particular
case, and the hadeeth is not intended to differentiate between
them.[']
With regard to al-Hudaybiyah, al-Muhibb al-Tabari
mentioned a number of qualities that were exclusive to
'UthmSn. For example, he was the only one for whom the hand
of the Prophet g represented his hand, when the SaMbah swore
['I Al-Bukh~rino 4154, Muslim, 1856

"' Fafh al-Bin, 7/443

His staying close to the Prophet in Madinah

49

allegiance and ' U M n was absent. He was the only one who
conveyed the message of the Messenger of Allsh to the Muslim
prisoners in Makkah, and the Prophet @ approved of 'Uthmsn's
refusal to perform t a w 3 when he sent him with that message.[''
It was narrated from Iy2s ibn Salamah from his father that the
Prophet swore allegiance on behalf of 'Uthmh, with one hand
in the other, and the people said: Congratulations to Abu 'AbdAll*; he can perform tawsf around the Ka'bah safely. The
Prophet @: "No matter how long he stays in Makkah, he will not
perform tawif until I do."121
'Uthmh was falsely accused of not having sworn allegiance
to the Messenger of AUsh @ in Bay'at al-Radwh, when he was
absent. This is one of the accusations that were made against
'Uthmh when the turmoil (fitnah) arose which was aimed at
deskroying the foundations of his caliphate.[31 We will discuss
this in further detail below, in sha All*. It was narrated that Anas
said: When the Messenger of All21 g enjoined Bay'at al-Radwh,
'Uthmh ibn 'Affh had been sent by the Messenger of Allih @ to
the people of Makkah. The people swore allegiance to him, then
he said: " 'Uthmh is doing an errand for All2h and His
Messenger," and he shuck the ground with one of his hands. The
hand of the Messenger of All* @ that represented 'Uthmh was
better than their hands that represented themselves.14]

Intercession of 'Uthmiin ibn 'Affiin for 'Abd-Allah ibn
Abi'l-Sarh at the conquest of Makkah
When the conquest of Makkah came, 'Abd-All* ibn Sa'd ibn
Abi'l-Sarh hid with 'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn, who brought him to
stand before the Prophet g. He said: "0 Messenger of Allsh,
accept the allegiance of 'Abd-All&." He raised his head and
looked at him three times, refusing each time, but he accepted his
al-Riyiidh an-Nadrahji M a n i ~ i bal-'Asharah, p. 460,491
op. cit., p. 491; there is some weakness in its isr6d.
Siyar as-Salaf al-Siliheen, 1/181; its isnrid is da'eef, but the hadeetk is saheek.
Sunan at-Timzidki, no. 3702
"I asSaarim al-Maslool 'alaa Shaatami Rasool, P.109
[I1

[I'

50

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

allegiance after the third time. Then he turned to his companions
and said: "Was there not among you a wise man who would get
up and deal with this man and kill him, when he saw me
withholding my hand and refusing to accept his allegiance?"
They said: We did not know, 0 Messenger of Allih, what you
were thinking of; why didn't you gesture to us with your eyes? He
said: "It is not befitting for a Prophet to deceive with his eyes."[ll
According to another report: when the conquest of Makkah
came, the Messenger of All& gj granted safety to the people
except four, of whom he said: "Kill them even if you find them
clinging to the curtains of the Ka'bah: 'Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl, 'AbdAll* ibn Khatal, Maqees ibn Habbibah and 'Abd-All* ibn Sa'd
ibn ~bi'l-sarh.[~]'Abd-Allih ibn Khatal was caught when he was
clinging to the curtains of the Ka'bah; Sa'd ibn H&th and
'Ammsr raced to kiU him, and Sa'd beat 'Ammir, as he was the
younger of the two men, and he killed him. 'Ikrimah travelled by
sea and a storm came. The crew of the boat said: "Be sincere
towards the Almighty, for your.gods cannot avail you anything
here." 'Ikrimah said: "By Alliih, if nothing can help me on the sea
except sincerity towards the Almighty, then nothing else will help
me on land. 0 All&, I promise that if You save me from this
predicament, I will go to Muhammad and put my hand in his; I
am certain that I will find him forgiving and generous." So he
came and became Muslim. 'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh hid
with 'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h and when the Messenger of Allih @
called the people to swear allegiance, 'Uthmiin brought him and
made him stand before the Prophet @# and the rest is as we have
mentioned above.r31
It was narrated that 'Abd-All& ibn 'Abbis said: 'Abd-All&
ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh was a scribe for the Messenger of Allih gd
then the Shayth caused him to slip and he went and joined the
kuffir. The Messenger of All& @ ordered that he be killed on the
Adwa' al-Bayinfi Tareekh al-Qur'in by Sgbir Abu Sula-n,
[21 b i d
['I

op.cit., p. 80

p. 79

His staying close to the Prophet in Madfhah

51

day of the Conquest, but 'Uthmsn asked to be allowed to give him
protection and the Messenger of All21 @ gave him permission.[11
Ibn IsMq mentioned the reason why the Messenger of All21 @$
ordered that Sa'd be killed and why 'Uthmsn interceded for him.
He said: The Messenger of AU2h
ordered that he be killed
because he had become Muslim, and he used to write down the
Wahy (Revelation) for the Messenger of All2I @$, then he
apostatized and became a mushrik, and went back to Quraysh.
He fled to 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh, who was his brother through
breastfeeding, and he hid him until he brought him to the
Messenger of AU2h @ after things had calmed down among the
people of Makkah, and asked for a pardon for him. Ibn Hishim
said: Then he became Muslim alter that, and 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb
appointed him for some tasks, as did 'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn after
him.E21

a

The campaign of Tabook
In 9 AH, Heraclius turned his attention towards Arabia,
seeking to attack it and absorb it into his empire. He ordered his
troops to prepare and await his instructions to advance.. News of
that reached the Messenger
and he told his companions to
prepare for jihad. It was a blazing hot summer and the country
was suffering drought and hardship. Even though the Muslims
could, by their faith, withstand the brutal heat and set out for
jihad across the burning sands of the desert, where would they get
the equipment that they needed for jihad? The Messenger $g
urged them to donate, and each person gave what he could
afford. The women brought their jewellery to the Messenger of
Allsh @* and he used it to help prepare the army, but these
donations could not help much with the huge requirements of the
army. The Messenger of Alliih g looked at the huge ranks of men
who were preparing for battle and he said: "Who will equip them
and All2h will forgive him?" No sooner had 'Uthmsn heard this
['I ibid.
['I

asSeerah an-Nabawiyyah by fin H i s h h , 4/57,58

I
3

'Uthmsn ibn 'Affsn A Dhun-Noorayn

52

call of the Messenger of All& @ but he hastened to seek the
forgiveness and pleasure of AUSh and thus this pressing need
supplied the
was met by the generosity of 'uthmSn.[ll He
army's every need, down to the last rope and bridle.
Ibn ShihSb az-Zuhri said: 'Uthmh supplied the army of
Tabook with nine hundred and forty camels, and sixty horses to
bring the number to one thousand. 'Uthmgn brought ten
thousand dinars to equip the army and placed the money
before the Messenger of All& & and the Messenger g began
turning it over with his hand, saying:

+

"No deed can harm 'Uthmcin after today" k u i ~ e . [ ~ ]
'Uthmh 4 was the one who spent the most on this
campaign.[31 'Abd al-RahmSn ibn HabbSb spoke of the
spending of 'Uthmgn when he said: I was present with the
Prophet &when he was urging the people to spend on the army
of Tabook. 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh & stood up and said: "0
Messenger of All&, I pledge to give two hundred camels with
their saddles and equipment for the sake of All%h." Then the
Prophet @ urged the people to spend on the army and 'Uthm2n
ibn 'Affh stood up and said: "0 Messenger of Allih, I pledge to
give three hundred camels with their saddles and equipment for
the sake of AUSh." I saw the Messenger of All* @ coming down
from the minbar, saying:

"Nothing could h a m 'Uthmcin, no matter what he does after
['I Fath al-Bin', 7/67; mulafa' al-Rasool, p. 250; alLIAshurahal-Mubashsharoona bi'l-

Jannah by Muhammad Sglih 'Awad, p. 53
[21 Sunan at-Tinnidhi, no. 3701; Saheeh al-Tmtheeq, p. 26
'31 asSeerah an-Nabawiyyahfi Daw'

al-Mnsidir al-Asliyyah, p. 615

His staying close to the Prophet in Madhah

53

this; nothing could h a m 'Uthmtn, no matter what he does after
this ."lls
It was narrated that 'Abd al-Kahmh ibn Samurah L& said:
'Uthmin ibn 'Affin & came to the Prophet @ with one thousand
was equipping the
dinars in his garment, when the Prophet
army of Tabook, and the Prophet @ started turning the coins over
with his hand and saying,

"Nothing could harm 'Uthmtn, no matter what he does after
this,"[21
And he repeated it several t&ies.
It seems that he was the only sponsor for this new
community. The Messenger marched at the head of the army
until they reached a place called Tabook, halfway between
Madhah and Damascus. There they heard the good news that
Heraclius, who had been preparing to march from Damascus, had
lost his resolve and had left Damascus, giving up on his desperate
plans after hearing that the Prophet g and his companions had
set out to meet him. The army returned with all the equipment
that 'Uthmin had supplied to them, but did he take anything
back? Not at all, and it was unlikely that he would do such a
thing. He remained quick to respond to every gesture of the
Prophet g when he asked anew for the people to spend for the
sake of Allih.[31

His social kfe in Madinah
His mamiage to Umm Kulthoom in 3 AH
'Umm Kulthoom & is known by her kunyah and her name is
['I Sunan at-Timidhi, no. 3700

Sunan at-Timidhi, no.3701
p. 138; al-'Asharuh al-Mubashsharoma bi'l-Jannah, p. 31

[31 Khulafa' al-Rasool,

54

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

not known, except that al-Hskim narrated from Mus'ab azZubayri that her name was Umayyah and that she was older than
Fstimah &.['I
Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyab said: 'UthrnMs wife Ruqayyah, the
daughter of the Messenger of All.% gYdied, and the husband of
Hafsah bint 'Umar also died. 'Umar came to 'Uthmh and said:
Do you want to marry Hafsah? But 'Uthmh had heard the
Messenger of All* & speaking of her, so he did not answer him.
'Umar mentioned that to the Prophet & and he said: "How about
a better idea? I will marry Hafsah, and 'Uthmh can marry
someone better than her: Umm ~ulthoom."'~]
According to a report by al-Bukhsri, 'Umar said: The
husband of Hafsah bint 'Umar, Khunays ibn Hudhsfah alSuhami, died. He was one of the companions of the Prophet @
and he died in Ma*.
'Umar said: I went to ' U W n ibn ' M s n
and suggested that he many Hafsah bint 'Umar. I said: If you
wish, I will give Hafsah in marriage to you. He said: I will think
about it. A few days passed, then he met me and said: I do not
think that I want to get married right now. 'Umar said: Then I met
Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq and I said: If you wish, I will give Hafsah
bint 'Umar in marriage to you. Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq remained
silent and did not give me any answer, and I was more upset
about +at than I was with 'Uthmsn. A few days passed, then the
Messenger of A1131 @ proposed marriage to her and I gave her in
marriage to him.Abu Bakr met me and said: Perhaps you were
upset with me when you offered Hafsah in marriage to me and I
did not give you any answer? 'Umar said: Yes. He said: Nothing
kept me from answering you when you made that offer except
that I knew that the Messenger of All* @ had spoken of her, and
I did not want to disclose the secret of the Messenger of AUSh @.
If the Messenger of AUsh @ had decided not to marry her I would
have accepted her.[31
['I
I['

ad-Duhah an-Nabawiyyah al-Shareefah, by F h o q Ha-d&
p. 45, 46
Mustadrak al-Hiikirn, 4/49; a l - A t by
~ ~Abu Yoosuf, no. 1957
al-Bukhrin', Kitib al-Nikih, no. 5122

His staying close to the Prophet in M a d h a h

55

The Mother of the Believers 'Aa'ishah & also spoke of the
marriage of Umm Kulthoom to 'Uthmh 4. She said: When the
Prophet & arranged the marriage of his daughter Umm
Kulthoom, he said to Umm Ayman: "Prepare my daughter
Umm Kulthoom for marriage and present her to 'Ut-n,
and
beat the daff in front of her." She did that and the Prophet &
visited his daughter three days later. He entered upon her and
said: " 0 my daughter, how did you find yow husband?" She
said: The best of husbands.["
It was narrated from Abu Hurayrah & that the Prophet g
stood at the door of the mosque and said:

"0 'Uthmin, Jibreel hns told me thatAll& wants you to marry
Umm Kulthoomfor a dowry similar to that of Ruqayyah and to
treat her with similar kindness ." I['

That was in Rabee' al-Awwal of 3 AH, and he consummated
the marriage with her in Jumzda al-Aakhirah.

The death of 'Abd-AUSh ibn 'UthmSn &
In Jumsda al-Oola of 4 AH, 'Abd-All&, the son of 'Uthmgn 6
from Ruqayyah the daughter of the Messenger of Allih &, died
when he was six years old. The Messenger of Allih g offered the
funeral prayer for him and his father ' U h i n went down in his
grave to receive his body and lay him to rest.13' This was a great
trial for 'Uthmh, and how many are the trials in the lives of those
who call people to All&.

['I asSeerak an-Nabawzyyah b y Abu Shahbah, 2/231; Dima' 'ala Qamees 'Utkmcin,

p. 22
Sunan ibn M?uh, no. 110. Its i s G d includes 'UthmSn ibn Khilid, who is da'eef
(weak).
[31 AI-Mmil by Ibn al-Atheer, 2/130; Dlma' 'ala Qames ' U t k m h , p. 22
[I'

56

'Uthmin b n 'Affin & Dhun-Nooraw

The death of Umm Kulthoom %
Umm Kulthoom stayed with 'Uthmin (may All.% be pleased
with them both) until her death in Sha'bh of 9AH as the result of
illness. The Messenger of All2h #$ offered the funeral prayer for
her and sat by her grave. It was narrated from Anas ibn M2lik that
he saw the Prophet @$sitting by the grave of Umm Kulthoom. He
said: I saw his eyes flowing with tears and he said:

"Is there any man among you who did not do anything last
night?" Abu Talhah said: Me. He said: "Go down in her
grave. "[I'
It was narrated that Layla bint Q2nif al-Thaqafiyyah said: I
was among those who washed Umm Kulthoom the daughter of
the Messenger of Allih g when she died. The first thing that the
gave to us was the waist-wrapper, then the
Messenger of All2h @j
chemise, then the head cover, then the large wrapper, then after
that she was wrapped in another cloth. The Messenger of Allih
was at the door with her shroud, handing the pieces to us one by
one.[']
It was narrated by Ibn Sa'd that 'Ali ibn Abi Tgib, al-Fad1 ibn
'Abbis and Us2mah ibn Zayd went down in her grave with Abu
Talhah (to lay her to rest), and that the ones who washed her were
Asma' bint 'Umavs and Safiyyah bint 'Abd al-Muttalib.13'
'Uthmh & \\,as deeply grieved by the loss of Umm
Kulthoom, and tile Messenger of Allih @ saw 'Uthmh
walking broken-hearted with signs of grief at his loss on his
face. He came to him and said: "If we had a third one, we would
al-Bukhiiri, Kitiib al-Jani'iz, no. 1342
[21 Sunan Abi Dmuood, no. 3157
[31 at-Tabaqiit by Ibn Sa'd, 8/39; ad-Duhah an-Nabawiyyah, p. 48
['I

I

His staying close to the Prophet in Madinah

57

give her in marriage to you, 0 '~thmiin."[l] This is indicative of
the love of the Messenger of All* @ for 'Uthmk and of
'Uthhn's loyalty and respect towards his Prophet. It is also a
rejection of the superstitious attitude that people usually adopt in
such circumstances, for the decree of AllSh is ever executed and
nothing can ward off His deaee.Iz1

conkibution to the establishm

f

'Uthmin & was one of the richest of those on whom Alliih
had bestowed wealth. He engaged in trade and was very wealthy,
but he used this wealth in obedience to All&, seeking His
pleasure and that which is with Him. Thus, he was always first to
do good and spend, and he did not fear poverty. Among the
many examples of his spending are the following:

The well of Bi'r Roomah
When the Prophet @ came to MadA& he found that there
was very little fresh water there and there was no source of fresh
water in MadAmhexcept the well of Bi'r Roomah. The Messenger
of All& @ said:

' W h o will buy Bi'r Room& and share i f with the Muslims in

return for reward in ~aradise?"[~]
And he said:

by al-Haythami, 9/83; its isniid is hasan because of
corroborating reports.
Al-Khulafd al-Rishideen: Armiil wa A&"th, by Dr. Arneen alQadfi, p. 73
13] Suheeh an-Nasci, no. 3638 by al-AlbSni, 22/76 and at-Timidhi (3703)
['I Majma' az-Zawrid

58

'Uthmih Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn
' W h o will dig the well of Bi'r Roomah and Paradise will be
his? ,411

Before the arrival of the Prophet &, no one could drink from
Bi'r Roomah except in return for payment. When the Muhsjiroon
came to Madinah, they did not like the water. A man from Banu
GhifSr had a well called Roomah and he used to sell water from it
by the bucketful. The Prophet
said: "Will you sell it in return
for a spring in Paradise?" He said: 0 Messenger of All%, my
family and I do not have anything else. News of that reached
'Uthmh and he bought it for tlurty-five thousand dirhams, then
he came to the Prophet & and said: Will you promise me in return
for it the same as you promised him? He said: "Yes." He said:
Then I give it to the ~ u s l i m s . [ ~ ~
And it was said that Roomah was a spring that belonged to a
Jew who used to sell its water to the Muslims, then 'Uthrnk ibn
'AffSn bought it from the Jew for twenty thousand dirhams and
donated it for the rich and poor and wayfarers.[31

Expansion of the Prophet's Mosque
After the Messenger of AllSh &$jbuilt his mosque in Madmah,
the Muslims would gather there to offer the five daily prayers and
to Listen to the speeches of the Prophet @jin which he would issue
commands and prohibitions, and they learned about their religion
in the mosque. They would set out from the mosque for their
campaigns and return to it when they came back. Hence the
mosque became too small for the people, and the Prophet g$
asked some of the SahSbah to buy the land next to the mosque so
that the mosque could be expanded and made big enough to
accommodate all the people. He said:

'I1

Narrated by al-Bukhkhari,
no. 2778 in a mu'allaq report. It is saheeh because there
are corroborating reports

"I

Tuhfat al-Ahwadhi bi Sharh Sunan at-Timidhi, 10/196

["

l a t h al-Biri, 5/408; al-Hikmah fi'l-Dawauhila All&, p. 231

His staying close to the Prophet in Madinah

59

' W h o will buy the land of So and so and add it to the mosque in
return for something good for him in ~aradise?""'
'Uthm2n ibn 'Aff2n & bought it with his own money for
twenty-five thousand dirhams, or for twenty thousand, then it
was added to the mosque, 12] which then became large enough to
accommodate the ~ u s l i m s . ' ~ '

Tabook and the generosity of 'Uthmsn
When the Messenger of All2h @ wanted to set out on the
campaign to Tabook, he urged the wealthy Sah2bah to spend on
equipping the army that the Messenger of AlEh @ was
mobilizing to fight the Byzantines. The companions of the
Messenger of AU2h @ spent whatever they could afford, and
'Uthmh 4 spent a huge amount that no one else could match.[41
This has been described above in the discussion on his role in the
campaign to Tabook.

['I Saheeh Sunan at-Tirmidki 3703 by al-Albtni, 3/209, Sumn an-NasEi, no. 2921

Saheeh Sunan an-Nasri, (3638) and at-Tirmidhi (3703)
[I' A'lim al-Muslimeen by Kh&d al-Baytsr, 3/41
al-Hihhf Yl-Da'wak ila All&, p. 231

-

.

Ahddeeth of the 6 s s e G e r ~5about
'Uthmiin ibn ' A & h

What
others

about his

'Open the gate for him and give him the glad tidings of
Paradise in return for a calamity that will befall him'
It was narrated that Abu Moosa & said: I was with the
Prophet @ in one of the gardens of Madkah when a man came
and asked for the gate to be opened. The Prophet @$ said: "Open
the gate for him and give him the glad tidings of Paradise." I
opened the gate and saw it was Abu Bakr, and I gave him the glad
tidings of what the Messenger of All81 @ had said, and he
praised All&. Then another man asked for the gate to the opened,
and the Prophet @ said: "Open the gate for him and give him the
glad tidings of Paradise." I opened the gate and saw it was 'Umar,
and I gave him the glad tidings of what the Messenger of AUSh @$
had said, and he praised Allih. Then another man asked for the
gate to be opened, and (the Prophet @) said: "Open the gate for
him and give him the glad tidings of Paradise in return for a
calamity that will befall him." It was 'UthmSn, and I told him
what the Messenger of AlEh @, had said, and he praised AllSh,

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

62

then he said: All21 is the One Whose help I seek.[']
This hadeeth speaks of the virtue of the three men mentioned,
namely Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthmsn, and states that they are
among the people of Paradise. It also speaks of the virtue of Abu
Moosa, and shows that it is permissible to praise a man to his face
if there is no wony about self admiration and the like. And it
contains an obvious miracle, in that the Prophet &$ foretold the
calamity that would befall 'Uthmsn, and that all three would
persevere in faith and guidance.i21

'Be still, 0 Uhud, for there is no one on you but a Prophet, a
siddeeq and two martyrs'
It was narrated that Anas & said: The Prophet &$ climbed
Uhud, accompanied by Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthmsn, and (the
mountain) shook. He said:

2 % ; ~ ' ; ' ~ @ $-, ,

,>

I

,
,

A>. 6

&I

-

e &I))a
'21

"Be still, 0 mud," and I think he struck it with his foot - "jor
there is no one on you but a Prophet, a siddeeq and two

martyrs. "[31
'Be calm for there is no one on you but a Prophet, a Siddeeq
or a martyr'
It was narrated from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of
AllSh @$ was on Hira', along with Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthmh,
'Ali, Talhah and az-Zubayr, and the rock shook. The Messenger of
All& @ said:

['I al-Bukhliri, no. 3695

Sharh al-Nawazui 'Ala Saheeh Muslim, 15/170,171
'31 al-Bukhiri, no. 3697

I

Ahlideeth of the Messenger about ' U W n ibn 'M2n

63

"Be calm, for there is no one on you but a Prophet or a Siddeeq
or a martyr. "[I'
The modesty of 'UthmBn &
It was narrated from Yahya ibn Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas that Sa'eed
ibn al-'Aas told him that 'Aa'ishah the wife of the Prophet and
' U M n & told him that Abu Bakr asked for permission to enter
upon the Messenger of All21 & when he was lying down on his
bed, wrapping himself in the cover of 'Aa'ishah. He gave
permission to Abu Bakr (to enter) when he was like that, and
he fulfilled his need then he went away. Then 'Umar asked for
permission to enter and he gave him permission (to enter) when
he was like that, and he fulfilled his need then he went away.
'Uthmh said: Then I asked permission to enter and he sat up and
said to 'Aa'ishah:

"Cover yourselfproperly."
I fulfilled my need then I went away. 'Aa'ishah said: 0
Messenger of Allzh, why did I not see you stirring for Abu Bakr
and 'Umar as you did for 'Uthmh? The Messenger of AllSh @
said: "

'Uthmin is a shy man, and I was afraid that i f I gave him
permission to enter when I was in that state, he would not tell
me of his need."[I'
The shyness of the angels before 'UthmBn
It was narrated from Abu Salamah ibn 'Abd al-Rahmh that
['I Muslim, no. 2417
" Muslim, no. 2402

64

'Uthmh fin 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

'Aa'ishah said: The Messenger of All& g was lying down in my
house with his thigh or shin uncovered. Abu Bakr asked for
permission to enter and he let him in whilst he was in that state,
and he spoke to him. Then 'Umar asked for permission to enter
and he let him in whilst he was in that state, and he spoke to him.
Then 'Uthmsn asked for permission to enter and the Messenger of
All31 sat up and straightened his garment - Muhammad (one
of the narrators) said: I do not say that this all happened on one
day - and he came in and he spoke to him.When he left, 'Aa'ishah
said: Abu Bakr came in and you did not stir for him, and 'Umar
came in and you did not stir for him, then 'UthmSn came in and
you sat up and straightened your garment. He said:

"Should I notfeel shy before a man before whom the angelsfeel
shy ? r l [ l ~
Al-ManGwi said: The main characteristic of 'Uthmsn is
modesty, and modesty results from great respect for the One Who
is looking at him as well as awareness of some faults that he can
see in himself. It is as if he was overwhelmed by the glory of All21
and saw in himself some faults and shortcomings. These are of the
lofty qualities of those who are close to All&. Thus 'Uthmh was
raised in status, so the chosen one of AllWs creation (i.e., the
Prophet @) felt a sense of modesty and shyness before him, just as
the one who loves Allsh loves His close friends, and the one who
fears Allsh will be feared by

"The most sincere (of this ummah) in modesty is 'Uthm2nf'
It was narrated that Anas ibn MSlik said: The Messenger of
All& @ said:

[I1 Muslim, no. 2401
I'[ Fayd ai-Qadeer by a l - M d w i , 4/302

Aklideetk of the Messenger about ' U W n ibn 'Affh

65

"The most compassionate of my ummah is Abu Bakr, the
strictest m adherence to religion is 'Umar, the most sincere in
modesty is 'Uthmrin, the most knowledgeable about halril and
harrim is Mu'ridh ibn Jabal, the most knowledgeable about the
Book of Allrih is Ubayy, the most knowledgeable about
inhentance is Zayd ibn %"bit. Every nation has a keeper of
secrets, and the keeper of secrets of this ummah is Abu 'Ubaydah
ibn al-~arrrih."['I

Ahadeeth from the Messenger of Allah -,:! about the
turmoil (Fitlrah) during which 'Uthmkn would he
killed
Whoever is saved from three things is indeed saved'
It was narrated from 'Abd-Alliih ibn Hawiilah that the
Messenger of AUih @j said:

$5 4g3\;L2$',-$I>
,

,
,
&,&
+$k
!!&

,-,

2))

Sk& ,.,
*

/,

'Whoever is savedfvom three things is indeed saved :my death,
the Dajjlil and the murder of a caliph who is persevering in
adhering to the truth andfulfilling his duty."[21

It is well known that the caliph who was killed when he was
persevering in adhering to the truth and fulfilling his duty was
['I Musnad al-Imam Ahmad, Bliqi KitibMusnad al-Mukthireen, Btb Musnad Anas ibn

Mtlik, 12493
Al-Mnsmd, 4/106, edited by Ahmad Shikir

66

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affk
& Dhun-Nooravn
-

'UthmSn. Circumstantial evidence suggests that the caliph who is
referred to in this hadeeth is 'Uthmh ibn 'AffSn &. This hadeeth and All31 knows best - points to the importance of avoiding
partaking in this turmoil in word or in deed. "In deed" means
taking part by inciting and stirring up turmoil or killing, etc, and
"in word" means talking about it, repeating fabrications about it
and saying things that are not true. Thus the hadeeth applies to the
ummah in general, not just those who were alive at the time of the
jitnah that claimed the life of ' ~ t h m S n . [ ~ ]

'The one who is covering his head will be killed on that day'
It was narrated that Ibn 'Umar said: The Messenger of AllSh
mentioned turmoil and a man passed by and he said:

"The one who is covering his head will be killed unlawfully on
that day ."
He said: I looked and saw that it was 'UthmSn ibn 'AffSn.121

'On that day this man will be following right guidance'
It was narrated that Ka'b ibn 'Ujrah said:

The Messenger of Allrih &$ mentioned some turmoil and gave
the impression that it would soon come to pass. A man passed by
with his head covered and the Messenger of All& g said : "On
that day this man will be following right guidance." I rushed
and grabbed 'Uthmin by the (upper) a m , then I turned to face
[I1

F i b h Maqfal 'UfhmBn,by Dr. Muhammad 'Abd-AMh al-Ghabgn, 1/44

I['

Fadt'il al-Sahtbah, 1/551. Its isnid is hasan and Ahmad (2/115).

Ahlideeth of the Messenger about 'Uthmh ibn 'Affgn

67

the Messenger of All& @ and said :This man? He said :"This
man ."['I

'There will be turmoil like the horns of cows, but this man
and those who are with him will be following the truth'
It was narrated that Murrah al-Bahzi said: I was with the
Messenger of Alliih g and Bahz - one of the narrators of the
hadeeth - said: The Messenger of Alliih g said:

"There will be turmoil like the horns of cows, but this man and
those who are with him will befollowing the truth."

I went and grabbed him by his cloak, and saw that it was
'UthmSn ibn '~ffiin.~']
'On that day, this man and those who are with him will be
following truth and right guidance'
It was narrated that Abu'l-Ash'ath said: Many people stood
up to give speeches in (Baitul-Maqdis) during the governorship of
Mu'iiwiyah & and the last one to speak was Murrah ibn Ka'b, who
said: Were it not for a hadeeth that I heard from the Messenger of
All* gfl
I would not have stood up (to speak). I heard the
Messenger of Allih @ mention a turmoil that was close at hand,
then a man whose head was covered passed by and he said:

"On that day, this man and those who are with him will be
following truth and right guidance ."
I said: This man, 0 Messenger of Alliih? And I turned him to
face him. He said: "This man." That was 'Uthmiin &.[31
['I Saheeh Sunan Ibn Mijah, 1/24 (111)
12] ai-Musnad, 5/33; there are other isn2ds that strengthen it.
"I Musnad Ahmad, Musnad al-Smrniyeen, Bib Hadeeth Ka'b ibn Murrah al-Sularni

aw Munah ibn Ka'b, hadeeth no. 17602 (4/236)

!

68

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Noorayn

'You should be with the trustworthy one a n d his
companions'
It was narrated from Abu Habeebah that he entered the house
when 'Uthmsn was being besieged, and he heard Abu Hurayrah
asking permission to speak to ' U r n . Permission was given to
him, and he stood up and praised Allsh, then he said: I heard the
Messenger of All& &$say:

"You will face turmoil and differeuces after I am gone - or
differencesand turmoil ." One of the people said to him : Who
could help us, 0 Messenger ofAllth? He said: "You should be
with the trustworthy one and his companions"
And he pointed to 'Uthmh as he said it.[']

'If the hypocrites want you to shed it (the caliphate), do not
shed iV
It was narrated from 'Abd-All* ibn 'Aamir, from al-Nu'mih
ibn Basheer, that 'Aa'ishah said: The Messenger of All* & sent
ibn 'Aff2n and the Messenger of Allsh
went to
for 'Uthim and spoke with him. When we saw the Messenger of Allsh
we turned to one another, and the last thing he said to him was
when he struck him on the shoulder and said:

['I Fadi'il al-Sahib&, 1/500. Its isncid is suheeh and Al-Musnad 2/345.

Aluideeth of the Messenger about 'Uthmsn ibn 'Affin

69
--

-

"0 'Uthmcin, All31 will give you a garment to wear (i.e., the
caliphate), so ifthe hypocrites want you to shed it, do not shed it
until you meet me. 0 'Uthmcin, Allcih will give you a garment
to wear, so if the hypocrites want you to shed it, do not shed it
until you meet me,"

Three times. I (al-Nu'dn) said to her: 0 Mother of the
Believers, why didn't you narrate this before? She said: I forgot it
and by All& I did not remember it. He said: I narrated it to
Mu'gwiyah ibn Abi Sufyh and he did not approve of what I told
him until he wrote to the Mother of the Believers asking her to
write to him about it, and she wrote to him about it.[']

T h e Messenger of Allah &$ gave me some advice and I am
going to persevere with it'
It was narrated from Abu Sahlah that 'Aa'ishah said: The
said:
Messenger of AUSh

"Call one of my companions for me."
I said: Abu Bakr? He said: "No." I said: 'Uthmh? He said:
"Yes." When he came he said (to me): "Move away," then he
started to converse with him, and 'Uthmh's colour changed.
When he was besieged in his house, we said: 0 Ameer alMu'mineen, will you not fight? He said: No. The Messenger of
All& g gave me some advice and I am going to persevere with
it.r21
This hadeeth shows the deep love that the Messenger of AllSh
g had for 'Uthmgn A& and how great was his concern for the
welfare of the ummah after he was gone. He told him things that
had to do with this turmoil that would end with his death, and he
urged him to keep it secret, so that all that we know about it is
[I1 Musnad Ahmad, Btqi Musmd al-Anst?, 24045 56/87)

I['

Fadpi1 al-Smbah, 1/206. Its isnzd is sakeh Al-Musnad (6/52).

70

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

what 'Uthmk stated during the turmoil, when it was said to him:
Will you not fight? And he said: No. The Messenger of Allih g
gave me some advice and I am going to persevere with it.[']
From these words of his it is clear that the Prophet % taught
him the correct attitude when turmoil breaks out, which will stop
the turmoil spreading further. In some reports there is additional
statement which reveals some of the contents of this secret
conversation, and states that the Prophet @j said to him: "If they
ask you to shed the shirt with which Allih has clothed you (i.e.,
the caliphate), do not do it."[21 The content of the advice
mentioned by ' U h S n & had to do with the turmoil and
encouragement to be patient and not give up the caliphate, and
the hadeeth indicated that he would be caliph one day.
It seems that there was advice and guidance about this
turmoil which was known only to 'UthmSn &, as the Prophet @
was keen to keep it secret, as is clear from his telling 'Aa'ishah %
to move away when he wanted to converse privately with
'Uthmk g;;. He also spoke with him in a low voice, despite the
fact that there was no one else there, until his colour changed,
which is indicative of the seriousness of the conversation. The fact
that 'Aa'ishah made a connection between this private
conversation and the turmoil clearly indicates that this
conversation was about the turmoil during which 'Uthmin was
killed, and contained advice from the Prophet @ to 'Uthmh to
adopt the right stance and not give up the caliphate. The Prophet
g did not only give warning of the turmoil; he spoke of that in
many ahgdeeth as we have seen above, but in this private
conversation there were other things beyond just saying that
turmoil would happen, and he urged him to keep it secret for a
reason, and AUih knows best what it was.
This hadeeth clearly explains the reason why 'Uthmk
refused to fight during the siege, and why he refused to give up
"I Ibid.

1''

Fadi'il as-Sahibah, 1/613. Its isnrid is saheeh. See also at-Tabaqat, 3/66,67

Ahlideetk of the Messenger about 'Uthmsn ibn 'Affsn

71

the caliphate when the people suggested that to him. Researchers
and historians have wondered what the reason for this attitude
was, and they were confused as to why 'Uthmik & took this
stance.['' The murder of 'Uthmik was one of many events that
were foretold by the Messenger of AU& @ during his lifetime,
and this is the matter of the unseen. Knowledge of the unseen is
one of the attributes of Alliih and none of His creation has the
power to know the unseen. This was knowledge that Allih
granted to the Prophet &$ and ordered him to convey it to the
people.r21 All* says:

"Say (0 Muhammad @J : 'I possess no power over benefit or
hurt to myseself except as Allih wills. I f I had the knowledge of the
Ghayb (Unseen), I should have securedfor myselfan abundance
of wealth, and no evil should have touched me. I am but a
Warner, and a bringer ofglad tidings unto people who believe"'
(Al-A'rq 7:188)

['I Fitnah Maqtal 'Uthmln, by Muhammad 'Abd-AUCh alLGhabh, 1/48
[I'

ibid.

'Uthmgn at the time of
Abu Bakr and 'Umar

At the time of Abu
He was one of those consulted with regard to important
matters of state
'Uthmih u, was one of the Sahibah and one of ah1 al-shoora,
those whose opinions were sought concerning the most serious
issues during the caliphate of Abu Bakr. He was second in
closeness to Abu Bakr; 'Umar ibn al-Khattib & was known for
firmness and resolve and ' U t h m h ibn 'Affin was known for
kindness and deliberation. 'Umar was the adviser for the caliph
Abu Bakr and 'Uthmih was his keeper of secrets and senior
scribe.I1] His opinion was held in high esteem by Abu Bakr. After
Abu Bakr had finished dealing with the Riddah (apostasy)
movement, he wanted to attack the Byzantines and send the army
of jihad to the ends of the earth, so he consulted the people. Some
wise men said what they thought, then Abu Bakr wanted more
from them, so he said: What do you think? 'Uthmih said: I think
that you are sincere and kind towards the followers of this
['I 'Ufhrnlin ibn 'Afftn, by S d i q 'Aqoon, p. 58

74

'Uth&

Ibn 'Affsn + Dhun-Noorayn

religion. If you think that something is in their best interests, then
go ahead with it, for you are above reproach.['' Talhah, azZubayr, Sa'd, Abu 'Ubaydah, Sa'eed ibn Zayd and those of the
Muhgjireen and Ansk (may AU2h be pleased with them all) who
were present in that meeting said: 'UthmSn has spoken the h t h ;
whatever you think is best, go ahead with it.[']
When Abu Bakr wanted to send a governor to Bahrain, he
consulted his companions, and 'Uthmzn said: Send a man whom
the Messenger of Allih & sent to them and he came back to him
with the news that they had become Muslim. They know him and
he knows them and the country (meaning al'Ala' ibn al-Hadrami
&). So Abu Bakr sent al-'Ala' to ahr rain.^^]
When Abu Bakr became very sick, he consulted the people to
ask them who they wanted to take his place after he was gone,
and they suggested 'Umar. 'Uthmin said of 'Umar: By Allih,
what I know of him is that he is better inwardly than he is
outwardly, and there is no one like him.[*' Abu Bakr said: May
Allih have mercy on you. By Allih, if you had not suggested
'Umar, I would have been disappointed.r51

2. Economic crisis at the time of Abu Bakr
It was narrated that Ibn 'Abbgs said: There was a drought at
the time of Abu Bakr. The people came to Abu Bakr and said: It
has not rained and the earth is not bringing forth its produce and
the people are suffering great hardship. Abu Bakr said: Go and be
patient, for evening will not come before Allih the Most Generous
grants you relief. It was not long before the workers of 'UthmSn
came from Syria, bringing him one hundred camels laden with
1'1 Tareekh Dimashq by Ibn'Asskir, 2/63-65; Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq by as-Sallsbi, p.

264
"I Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq by asSallibi, p. 364
['I Kailz al-'Ummtl, 5/620, no. 14093; al-Quyood al-Wiridah ' a h Sultah al-Dmlah,

by 'Abd-AlEh al-JSayl$ni,; Tareekh at-Tabari, 4/122
by Ibn al-Atheer, 2/79; Al-Khulafa' AI-Rtshidoon by Mahmoud SMkir,
p. 101
[I' al-Emil by Ibn al-Atheer, 2/79

'41 al-KLimil

' U W n at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar

75

wheat - or foodstuff. The people gathered at 'Uthmiin's door and
knocked on the door. 'Uthmh came out to the crowd of people
and said: What do you want? They said: It has not rained and the
earth is not bringing forth its produce and the people are suffering
great hardship, and we have heard that you have food; sell it to us
so that we may give it to the poor Muslims. 'Uthmh said: By all
means, come in and buy. The merchants went in and saw the food
in the house of 'Uthmin. He said: 0 merchants, how much profit
will you give me for that which I bought from Syria? They said:
Twelve in return for ten. 'Uthmk said: I have had a better offer.
They said: Fifteen for ten. 'Uthmh said: I have had a better offer.
The merchants said: 0 Abu 'Amr, there are no merchants in
Madinah other than us. Who has given you a better offer?He said:
Alliih, may He be blessed and exalted, has given me a better offer,
ten for every dirham. Can you offer me more? They said: No, by
Alliih. He said: I call upon Alliih to bear witness that I am giving
this food as charity for the poor ~uslims.[llIbn 'Abbiis said: Last
night I saw the Messenger of Allsh in my dream. He was riding
a black and white mule, wearing a suit of light; on his feet were
shoes of light, in his hand was a staff of light, and he was
hastening. I said: 0 Messenger of Allsh, I am longing to see you
and hear you speak. Where are you hastening to? He said: "0 Ibn
'Abbiis, 'Uthmk has given charity, and All& has accepted it
from him and given him a bride in Paradise, and I have been
invited to the wedding."[21
Will the money worshippers and those who hoard the
people's food out of greed listen to these great words of 'Uthmsn,
and will these words reach their hearts, so that they will be kind
and compassionate towards the poor and needy, widows and
orphans who are in distress and crushed by life's calamities and
whose plight is ignored by the rich? How great is the Muslims'
need at this stage in their life to follow the example of 'Uthmiin
['I

al-Riqquh wa'l-Buka' by Ibn Q u d h a h , p. 190; al-Khulafa'al-Rtshideen by Hasan
Ayyoob, p. 191; Shaheed al-D& by Ahmad al-Khuroof, p. 21

I['

al-Riqqah wa'l-Buka', p. 190

'UthmZn Ibn 'ALlSn &sDhun-Noorayn

76

and spend on the poor and needy so as to bring about compassion
and kindness between them.[']

4:s 5.jj 5; +$$
"Nay! Verily, man does transgress (in disbeliefand evil deed) ."
(Al-Alaq 96:6)
This is an example of the kindness and generosity of ' U t h m b
&, who was one of the most compassionate of people towards

others. He read the words of AU&
>;-:
,:, ,c
,,", <,%,

4<

,.,'
+&, -+I

%I &.i

,=,

a+3

<,

g\
,, ,

L$,+

"Enjoin you Al-Bin (piety and righteousness and each and
every act of obedience to All&) on the people and you forget (to
practise it) yourselves, while you recite the Scripture! Have you
then no sense?" (Al-Baqarah 2441
and that made him one of the farthest removed of people
from hypocrisy and the hypocrites. And he read the words of
All&:

s,;5 3:
; $G
, 3

FZ3~3 j,., 3%
,>>

J'j

+${

51;;&"L-, &JG
,

*A,,

+g
,
, <2=g$<
,
yyl 43 +$Ub
a b &Jb
'4, 43f
;~:fl
,
/ y 5L
Jy 3\25 ;&J,
,,
,
3 J*gi. li~
+&>
d ?
'+; *&,;

...

,/-',

-,,,

'

'0''

;g+fjg

'

,,",,<
,,

.f,

9L!9

-

, ,
,

*

~ >.U e3
I ~b

Y C , ,

"It is not AI-Bin (piety, righteousness, and each and e u e y act
of obedience to Allih) that you turn your faces towards east and
(or) west (in prayers) ;but Al-Birr is (the quality of) the one who
believes in Allih, the Last Day, the Angels, the Book, the
Prophets and gives his wealth, in spite of love for it, to the
[I1 'Uth&

ibn 'AffZn by S2diq 'Aqoon,p. 52

' U t M n at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar

77

kinsfolk, to the orphans, and to Al-Mastkeen (the poor), and to
the wayfarer, and to those who ask, and to set slaves free,
performs As-Salih (Tqimat-as-Salih),and gives the Zakrih, and
whoful$l their covenant when they make it, and who are patient
in extreme poverty and ailment (disease) and at the time of
jighting (during the battles)" (Al-Baqarah 2177),
and he understood from that

"Such are the people of the truth and they are Al-Muttaqoon (the
pious" (Al-Baqarah2177).

At the time of '&nar a
'UthmSn was held in high esteem by 'Umar, and when the
people wanted to ask 'Umar about something, they would
approach him through 'Uthmin and 'Abd a l - R a M n ibn 'Awf.
'Uthmin was known as al-Radeef, and radeef in Arabic refers to
one who rides behind or stands beside another man and could
play his role; they would use this word to refer to a man who they
thought would be a leader one day. If these two men could not
ach&e something, they would b;ing in al-'Abbb as the third
one.[']
On one occasion it happened that 'Umar set out with the
people and they camped in a place called Sir& ' U r n came
and asked him: What is going on? What do you intend to do?
'Umar called out: As-Salitu jimi'ah, then he told the people that he
had decided to invade Iraq.[21
When 'Umar became caliph, he consulted the prominent
Sahibah about his salary from the bayt al-mil of the Muslims, and
'UthmSn said to him: Eat and feed others.[31
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 4/83; al-Murtada by al-Nadawi, p. 131
I'

'Uth&n ibn 'Affin, al-Khaleefah as-Shakir as-Sibir, p. 63

["

ibid.

78

'Uthmsn Ibn ' A f f k 21 Dhun-Noorayn

When Abu 'Ubaydah sent for 'Umar to come to Bayt alMaqdis to conquer it, 'Umar consulted the people and 'Uthmsn
suggested that he should not go to them as a token of humiliation
towards them. He said to 'Umar: If you stay here and do not go to
them, they will think that you are not worried about them and are
prepared to fight them, and they will soon feel humiliated and
pay the jizyah.[ll But 'Ali suggested that he go there, and 'Umar
preferred Ali's suggestion, because it was easier for the Muslims
who had been besieging the enemy without success.[21
During the caliphate of 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb 4, the status of
'Uthmsn was that of an adviser, and you could say that his
position was like that of 'Umar to Abu Bakr during Abu Bakr's
caliphate. Allsh gave Abu Bakr an adviser who was as sincere
towards him as he would be towards the closest of his own
family, namely 'Umar; and He gave 'Umar an adviser who was as
sincere towards him as he would be towards the closest of his
own family, namely 'Uthmsn. Abu Bakr was the most
compassionate of people towards others and 'Umar was the
shictest of them when it came to the truth, so All* combined the
compassion of Abu Bakr with the strictness of 'Umar, which
resulted in a caliphate of truth, justice and strong resolve.
'UthmSn + was more like Abu Bakr in his compassion, and
'Umar remained strict as was his wont, so when he became caliph
after Abu Bakr, he found in his adviser 'UthmSn a replacement, as
it were, for the compassion and kindness of Abu Bakr. All of that
resulted in the best examples for ruling and directing the affairs of
the ummah in a wise and fair manner. The people knew of
'Uthmsn's status during the caliphate of 'Umar, and he was the
one who suggested to 'Umar the idea of keeping records (the
d i w h ) and writing a calendar, as is mentioned in some reports.

The Diwcin (keeping records)
When the conquests spread further and wealth increased,
['I 'Uthmdn ibn 'Affinby Muhammad HusaynHaykal, p. 47,48, quoting from asSiyisah al-Mriliyyah li ' U f h m h ibn 'Affiin, p. 24
I[' 'Uthmin tbn ' A f f f nal-Khaleefah ash-Shiikir, p. 63

'UthmSn at the t i e of Abu Bakr and 'Umar

79

'Uthmb gathered some of the companions of the Messenger of
AUiih & and consulted them about this wealth. ' U W n said: I
think it is a lot of wealth and sufficient for everyone, but if records
are not kept in order to know who has taken from it and who has
not, I fear that the wealth may run out. 'Umar agreed with
'Uthmb and they set up the system of record-keeping (the

diwcin).[']

The calendar
In some reports it says that the one who suggested to 'Umar
that he should make the Hijri year start with Muharram was
'Uthmh. When they agreed, after consultation, to make the
Islamic calendar start with the Hijrah of the Prophet @# because
that was the dividing point between truth and falsehood,
opinions were divided as to which month should be regarded
as the beginning of the year. 'Uthmiin said: Date the beginning of
the year from Muharram, because it is a sacred month and the
first of the months in counting, and it is when the people come
back from Hajj. 'Umar and those who were present with him
approved of 'Uthdn's opinion, and thus the matter was settled
and the beginning point of the Islamic calendar was decided.[21

The kharg lands
' U t h d n was one of those who supported the view of 'Umar
ibn al-Khattib, that the conquered lands should not be divided
among the conquerors and they should be left as a source of
income (via Wlarij) for the Muslims and their descendants after
them.I3I

His Hajj with the Mothers of the Believers
When 'Umar ibn al-Khattiib became caliph in 13 AH, that
year he appointed 'Abd al-Rahmiin ibn 'Awf in charge of the Hajj,
and he led the people on Hajj, and he did Hajj with 'Umar during
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/203
I['

' U t h d n ibn 'A$n by SSdiq 'Aqoon, p. 60
asSiytsah al-MLiliyyah li 'Uthmin, p. 25

80

'Uthdn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

'Umar's last Hajj in 23 AH. In that year 'Umar gave permission to
the wives of the Prophet & to perform Hajj. They rode in
hawdahs and he sent 'Uthmh ibn 'Mh and 'Abd al-Rahmh
ibn 'Awf to accompany them. As they travelled, ' U M n rode
ahead of them and would not let anyone come near them, and
they stopped at every place 'Umar stopped, and 'Uthm2n and
'Abd al-Rahmsn would make them stop inside the mountain
passes, and the two men would stop at the entrances to the passes,
so that no one could pass by

['I

Tabaqit Ibn Sa'd, 3/134; AnsCb al-AshrafbfbyalBaEdhuri, 11465,466; Majallat alBuhooth al-lslamiyyah, issue no. 10, p. 263

-

'Uthm2nts avvointment as calivh

'Umar's deep insight when appointing his
successor
'Umar's concern remained focused on the unity and future of
the ummah even during the last moments of his life, despite the
painful wounds from which he was suffering. Undoubtedly this
was a critical moment in history, in which his deep faith, sincerity
and selflessness were manifested.['] During those critical
moments, 'Umar managed to invent a new and unprecedented
way of choosing the new caliph. This is tangible and clear
evidence of his understanding and skill in running the affairs of
the ummah. The Prophet @jhad passed away before him without
clearly appointing a successor, and when Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq
['I al-KhaIecfah al-Farooq 'Umar i
h al-Khattib by d-'Aani, p. 161

82

'Uthmih Ibn 'M2n 4 Dhun-Nooravn

passed away, he appointed 'Umar after consulting the senior
SaEbah. When'Umar was asked to appoint a successor as he was
on his death bed, he thought for a while, then he decided on a
different method that suited the situation. When the Messenger of
A l l a g died, the people were all agreed upon the superiority
and seniority of Abu Bakr, so the possibility of conflict was
remote, especially since the Prophet @,had shown the ummah, in
word and deed, that Abu Bakr was the most qualified to take
control after he died. When Abu Bakr appointed 'Umar as his
successor, he knew that the Sahibah were all convinced that
'Umar was the strongest and most capable of bearing that
responsibility after he was gone. So he appointed him as caliph
after consulting the senior SahSbah, and no one disagreed with
him, so there was consensus and they all swore allegiance to
,umar.[l'
The method of selecting the new caliph was based on limiting
shoora to a specific number of people. 'Umar chose six of the
companions of the Messenger of Allih &$all of whom were fit to
become caliph, even though they varied in their qualifications for
the post. 'Umar also defined the way in which the selection was to
be made, and how long it should take. He ordered some troops to
keep watch over the proceedings and stipulated punishments for
anyone who went against the jamgah. He sought to prevent
disorder by ruling that no one was to enter upon them or listen to
what was going on in the assembly of decision makers.[21
There follows a more detailed discussion of these events:

The number of those appointed for the shoora, and their
names
The number of men appointed was six. They were: 'Ali ibn
Abi Tilib, 'Uthmin ibn 'Affh, 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'Awf, Sa'd
ibn Abi Waqqis, az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwim and Talhah ibn
'Ubayd-Allih (may Allgh be pleased with them all). Sa'eed ibn
Awwuliyyit al-Farooq, p. 124; Fath al-B&i, 13/208

"' Awwuliyy8t al-Farooq, p. 124

'Uthmsn's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

83

Zayd ibn Nufayl was excluded even though he was one of the ten
who had been promised Paradise; perhaps that was because he
was from the tribe of Banu 'Adiyy (which was 'Umar's own
tribe).[ll 'Umar was very careful to exclude his relatives from
positions of authority, even though there were among them those
who were qualified for that. So he kept his relative Sa'eed ibn
Zayd off the list of nominees for the caliphate.r21

The way in which the caliph was to be selected
He commanded them to assemble in the house of one of them
and consult with one another. 'Abd-All* ibn 'Umar was to be
present among them as an advisor only, with no say in the matter.
Prayers were to be led by Suhayb al-Roomi during this
consultation period, and he said to him: You are the prayer
leader for these three days. He did not appoint any of the six to
lead the prayers lest that be interpreted as 'Umar's nominating
him to be caliph.131 And al-Miqdgd ibn al-Aswad and Abu
Talhah al-Ans2ri were commanded to watch over the

How long the selection process took
'Umar 6 stipulated a period of three days, which was
sufficient time. If they took longer than that, it would mean that
deep conflict would spread, so he said to them: "Do not let the
fourth day come without you having a leader over you."[51

The number of votes that were sufficient to elect the caliph
.
Ibn Sa'd narrated, with an isnlid whose men are thiqit
(trustworthy), that 'Umar said to Suhayb: "Lead the people in
prayer for three days, and leave this group of men in a house.
When they have agreed upon a man, then whoever disagrees
"I al-BidEyah wa'n-Nihiyah, 7/142

al-Khulafa' al-Rishideen by al-Khilidi, p. 98
1' al-Khilifih wa'l-Khulafa' al-Rishidoon b y al-Bahnasswi, p. 213
Ashhar Mashiheer al-Islam $'I-Harb wa'lSiyisah, p. 648
at-Tabuqit by Ibn Sa'd, 3/364

I'

84

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affgn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

with them, strike his neck (i.e., execute him)."[ll 'Umar 4 issued
orders that anyone who tried to go against this group and cause
division among the Muslims was to be executed, acting upon the
command of the Prophet @j:

''Whoever comes to you when you are united behind one man,
seeking to cause division among you, then execute him."121
What is mentioned in the history books, that 'Umar &
commanded them to gather and consult one another, and stated
that if five of them agreed on a man and one objected, his head
was to be skruck with the sword, and if four of h e m agreed on a
man and two of them objected, their heads were to be
,is
a report that has no sound chain of transmission. It is one of the
weird reports concocted by Abu Makhnaf, the Rsfidi Shi'i, and it
is contrary to the suheeh texts and what is known of the conduct of
the Sahsbah. Abu Makhnaf narrated that 'Umar said to Suhayb:
"Stand over them - i.e., the people of shoora - and if five agree on a
man and one objects, strike his head with the sword. If four of
them agree on a man and two object, then strike their heads."[41
But this is a false report. How could 'Umar have said such a thing,
when he knew that they were among the elite of the companions
of the Messenger of Allih g,and he was the one who had chosen
them for this task because he knew of their virtue and high
It was narrated from Ibn Sa'd that 'Umar said to the Ansk
"Let them stay in a house for three days. If they come to an
at-Tabaqtt, 3/342
Muslim, 110.1852, 3/1480
13' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/226
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/226
[* Mnmiy2t A h M ~ u k h a f f iTareekh at-Tabari, by Dr Yahya al-Yahya, p. 175
['I
[I'

' U t W s appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

85

agreement (all well and good), otherwise enter upon them and
strike their necks (i.e., cut off their heads)."['] These narrations
have unconnected chains and also include Sammgk ibn Harb,
who is a weak narrator.[']

Ruling in the case of a difference of opinion
'Umar advised them that 'Abd-AlEh ibn 'Umar should be
present with them in the gathering, but he was not to have any
say in the matter. But he told them: "If three men approve of one
man and three approve of another man, then refer to 'Abd-All31
ibn 'Umar, and whichever of the two groups he favours, let them
choose a man from among themselves. If they do not approve of
the ruling of 'Abd-All21 ibn 'Umar, then go with the group
among whom is 'Abd al-Rahm2n ibn 'Awf." He described 'Abd
d - R a M n ibn 'Awf as being wise and mature, saying, "What a
wise man 'Abd d - R M n ibn 'Awf is, and how mature. He is
guided and protected by All$h, so listen to him."[31

A group of Muslim soldiers were to watch over the election
and prevent disorder
'Umar said to Abu Talhah al-Anssri: "0Abu Talhah, All*,
may He be exalted and glorified, has supported Islam through
you. Choose fifty men of the Anstir to urge this group until they
choose a man from among their number."[41 And he said to alMiqdgd ibn al-Aswad: "When you have placed me in my grave,
bring this group of men together in a house until they elect one of
their number."[51

Permissibility of appointing someone as caliph even if there
is someone else who is better than him
O l e of the things that we learn from the story of the shoora is
at-Tabaqit, 3/342
Marwiyit Abu Mukhnaffi Tareekh at-Tabari, p. 176
[31 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5 / Z 4
op. cit., 2/225
op. cit., 5/225

"I
"I

' U W n Ibn 'AffSn & Dhun-Nooravn

86

that it is permissible to appoint someone as caliph even if there is
someone else who is better than him, because 'Umar appointed
six men for the shoora even though he knew that some of them
were better than others. This can also be seen in the fact that when
'Umar appointed governors, he did not take into account their
level of religious commitment only, but he also looked at their
ability in dealing with people whilst avoiding anything that goes
against sharee'ah. So he appointed Mu'Swiyah, al-Mugheerah ibn
Shu'bah and 'Amr ibn al-'Aas even though there were others who
were superior to them in terms of religious commitment and
knowledge, such as Abu'l-Darda' in Syria and Ibn Mas'ood in
~ufah.['l

'Umar's compromise between appointing a successor and
not appointing one
'Umar compromised between appointing a successor, as Abu
Bakr had done, by selecting candidates, and not appointing one as
the Messenger @ had done. He selected six people and asked
them to consult one another about the matter.[']

Consultation was not only among these six
'Umar knew that consultation would not take place only
among these six men, rather public opinion in Madkah on who
should be appointed as caliph would also be taken into
consideration. He set a limit of three days so that their choice of
the one who would be appointed as his successor would be based
on the agreement of the majority of those present at that time in
Madinah, where most of the Sahgbah were living. All those living
elsewhere would follow them in whatever they agreed upon.
Until 23 AH, Madinah was still the gathering place of the
SahSbah, and the senior SahSbah were stiU there as 'Umar kept
them by his side and did not allow them to migrate to the
conquered lands.[31
I'[ al-Madinah an-Nabamiyyah - Fajr ul-Islam wa'l-'Asr al-Rishidi (2/97)

ibid.
'31 ibid.

'Uthm&n's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

87

The shoora council was the highest political body
'Umar gave the shoora council alone the responsibility of
selecting the new caliph from among their number and it is
important to note that not one of the shoora council objected to
this decision that was taken by 'Umar, and none of the other
Sahgbah objected either. This is what is indicated by the texts that
we have before us, and we do not know of any other suggestion
that was made or any objection that was raised by anyone at that
time to 'Umar's command either during the last moments of his
life or after his death. All the people agreed with this arrangement
and thought that it was in the best interests of all the Muslims. We
can say that 'Umar formed the highest political body and
entrusted it with the mission of selecting the head of state or
caliph, and this was a new organisatioml system introduced by
the genius of 'Umar which did not contradict the basic principles
established by Islam, especially those that have to do with the
principle of shoora, because what matters is the general swearing
of allegiance (bay'ah) which takes place in the jiimi' mosque. There
may be a question that arises here: who gave 'Umar the right to do
this? What is the basis for 'Umar making this arrangement? It is
sufficient to note that a number of Muslims approved of thk
arrangement and no voice was heard objecting to it, so we can be
certain that there was consensus (ijmi') - which is one of the
sources of sharee'ah - that it was a valid arrangement.[']
We should not forget that 'Umar was a wise caliph, and we
may be certain that this principle - that the shoora council is the
highest political body - was approved by the Islamic regime at the
time of the RightlyGuided Caliphs. Moreover, the council that
was appointed by 'Umar enjoyed many advantages that were not
shared by any other Muslim group, advantages that were
bestowed by All& and confirmed by the Messenger &y and no
other Muslim could reach the status of piety and trustworthiness

88

' U W n Ibn 'Affzn & Dhun-Nooravn

that these ten had rea~hed.~"
Thus 'Umar's life came to an end, and neither the calamity
that had befallen him nor the pangs of death could keep him from
conducting the affairs of the Muslims and establishing an
unprecedented system of shoora. Undoubtedly the basic
principle of shoora is established in the Holy Qur'h and the
Sunnah, both words and deeds, and the Messenger of All&
and Abu Bakr both implemented this principle. So 'Umar was not
introducing a new or innovated principle, rather what 'Umar did
was to set out a method of selecting a new caliph and limit the
number of people from whom the choice was to be made. This
was not done by the Messenger or by Abu Bakr &; the first one
to do that was 'Umar, and what a good thing he did. It was the
best of the options available to the Sahiibah at that time.[']

'Umar's advice to the caliph w h o would come after
him
'Umar & offered important advice to the caliph who was to
come after him and lead the ummah. He said: "I advise you to fear
All2h alone, with no partner or associate. I advise you to treat the
first muhiijireen well and acknowledge their seniority. I advise
you to treat the Andr well, and show approval of those among
them who do well, and forgive those among them who make
mistakes. I advise you to treat the people of the outlying regions
well, for they are a shield against the enemy and conduits of fay'
(booty); do not take anything from them except that which is
surplus to their needs. I advise you to treat the people of the desert
well, for they are the original Arabs and the protectors of Islam.
Take from the surplus of their wealth and give it to their poor. I
advise you to treat ah1 al-dhtmmah (Jews and Christians living in
Muslim lands under goverment protection) well, to defend them
against their enemies and not burden them with more than they
can bear if they fulfil their duties towards the believers or pay the
['I op. cit., 1/229
"1 A m a l i y y i f ul-Farooq by Dr. Ghaib 'Abd d-K2fi al-Qurashi, p. 127

'UWn's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

89

jizyah with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued. I
advise you to fear All& and fear His wrath, lest you do anything
wrong.
I advise you to fear Alltih with regard to the people, but do
not fear the people with regard to All&. I advise you to treat the
people justly, and to devote yourself to looking after them and
protecting them against their enemies. Do not show any favour to
the rich over the poor. That will be better for your spiritual well
being and will help to reduce your burden of sin, and it will be
better for your Hereafter, until you meet the One Who knows
what is in your heart. I instruct you to be strict with regard to the
commands of All&, His sacred limits and disobedience with all
people, both relatives and others. Do not show any mercy to
anyone until you have settled the score with him according to his
offence. Treat all people as equal, and do not worry about who is
at fault or fear the blame of the blamers. Beware of showing
favouritism among the believers with regard to the fay' that All$h
has put you in charge of, lest that lead to injustice. Keep away
from that. You are in a position between this world and the
Hereafter. If you conduct your affairs justly in this world and
refrain from indulgence, that will earn you faith and divine
pleasure. But if you let whims and desires overwhelm you, you
will incur the displeasure of Allsh.
I advise you not to let yourself or anyone else do wrong to ah1
al-dhimmah. I am offering you sincere advice; seek thereby the
Countenance of A l l a and the Hereafter. I have chosen advice for
you that I would offer to myself or my son. If you do as I have
advised you and follow my instructions, you would have gained
a great deal. If you do not accept it or pay attention to it, and do
not handle your affairs in the way that pleases Allgh, that will be a
shortcoming on your part and you will have failed to be sincere,
because whims and desires are the same and the cause of sin is
lblees, who calls man to everything that will lead to his doom. He
misguided the generations who came before you and led them to
Hell, what a terrible abode. What a bad deal it is for a man to take

90

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

the enemy of All& as his friend, who calls him to disobey Allih.
Adhere to the truth, strive hard to reach it and admonish yourself.
I urge you by Allih to show mercy to the Muslims, honour their
elderly, show compassion to their young ones and respect the
knowledgeable ones among them. Do not harm them or humiliate
them, and do not keep the fay' for yourself lest you anger them.
Do not deprive them of their stipends when they become due,
thus making them poor. Do not keep them away on campaigns
for so long that they end up having no children. Do not allow
wealth to circulate only among the rich. Do not close your door to
the people lest that allow the strong to oppress the weak. 1% is
my advice to you, as All& is my witness, and I greet you with
peace."pl
This advice is indicative of 'Umar's farsightedness with
regard to matters of ruling and administration, which clearly
reflects an integrated methodology and system of ruling and
admini~tration.[~'
This advice covers a number of very important
issues and deserves to be viewed as a precious document because
it includes basic principles of ruling which incorporate the
religious, political, military, economic and social aspects of rule,
which includes the following:

Advice to fear AllSh
(a) Strong advice to fear All* in secret and in public, in word
and deed, because the one who fears Allah will be protected
by Him. "I advise you to fear Allah alone, with no partner or
associate." "I advise you to fear All* and fear His wrath."

@) Imposing the hudood punishments on relatives and strangers
alike. "Do not wony about who is at fault or fear the blame
of the blamers" because hudood punishments are set out by
at-Tabaqdt by b n Sa'd, 3/339; al-Baydn marl-Tabyeen by al-J&iz, 2/46, Jumhurat
Khutab al-'Arab, 1/263-265; al-Kim11fi'l-Tareekh, 2/210; al-maleefa!? al-Farooq
'Umar ibn al-Khattfib by al-'Aalu, p. 171, 172
"I al-ldcirah al-lslamiyyahfi 'Asr 'Umar ibn al-Khattrib, p. 381

' U W n ' s appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

91

sharee'ah and are part of the religion and sharee'ah that
leaves people with no excuse, so their words and deeds will
be measured according to it, and neglecting it will corrupt
religion and society.
(c) Firm adherence to Islam -

"So stand (ask Allrih to make) you (Muhammad) firm and
straight (on the religion of Islamic Monotheism) as you are
commanded" [Hood 11 :112].
This is something that is essential in both religious and
worldly terms, and is something that is required of the ruler
in both word and deed, and also of the people. "Admonish
yourself." "Seek thereby the Countenance of Alltih and the
Hereafter."

Advice regarding political matters
(a) Adhering to justice, because that is the basis of rule, and
establishing justice among the people gives the ruler
authority and respect, and brings political and social
stability. It enhances the position of the ruler in the eyes of
the people. "I advise you to treat the people justly." "Treat
aU people as equal."
(b) Taking care of the first Muslims from among the Muhiijireen
and Anstir, because of their seniority in Islam, and because
the Islamic religion and the political system that is based on
it were established as the result of their striving, and they are
its bearers and guardians. "I advise you to treat the first
Muhijireen well and acknowledge their seniority. I advise
you to treat the Ansrir well, and show approval of those
among them who do well, and forgive those among them
who make mistakes."

Advice regarding military matters

'Uthmin Ibn ' A f f k 4 Dhun-Noorayn

(a) Paying attention to the army and preparing it properly,
because of the great responsibility that is placed on its
shoulders, in order to guarantee the safety and security of the
state. Paying attention to the needs of the fighters.
(b) Not keeping the fighters away from their families on the
borders for too long, so as to avoid the boredom, anxiety and
loss of morale to which that may lead. It is essential to give
them leave at specified times and let them go back to their
families, where they could renew their energy and so that
they will not cease to produce offspring. "Do not keep them
away on campaigns for so long that they end up having no
children." "I advise you to treat the people of the outlying
regions well, for they are a shield against the enemy."
(c) Giving each soldier the fay' and stipend to which he is
entitled, in order to guarantee a fixed income for him and his
family, which will motivate him to fight in jihad and prevent
him from worrying about his financial affairs. "Do not keep
the fay' for yourself lest you anger them." "Do not deprive
them of their stipends when they become due, thus making
them poor."
Advice regarding economic and financial matters
(a) Taking care to distribute wealth among the people in a just
and fair manner, avoiding anything that could lead to the
accumulation of wealth among one class, to the exclusion of
others. "Do not allow wealth to circulate only among the
rich."

(b) Not burdening ahl al-dhimmah with more than they can bear
if they fulfil their financial obligations to the state. "[Do] not
burden them with more than they can bear if they fulfil their
duties towards the believers."
(c) Protecting the people's financial rights and not neglecting
them; avoiding the imposition of more than they can bear.
"Do not take anything from them except that which is

'U-n's

appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

93

surplus to their needs." "Take from the surplus of their
wealth and give it to their poor."[11

5. Advice regarding social matters
(a) Taking care of the people, checking on them, meeting their
needs and giving them their rights. "Do not deprive them of
their stipends when they become due."
(b) Avoiding selfishness, favouritism and following whims and
desires, because these things pose the danger of the leader
being led astray and leading to corruption in society and the
disruption of human relations. "Beware of showing
favouritism among the believers with regard to the fay'
that All& has put you in charge of." "Do not show any
favour to the rich over the poor."
(c) Respecting the people and being humble towards them,

young and old, because this will lift human relations to a
higher level and lead them to unite behind the leader and
love him more. "I urge you by AUSh to show mercy to the
Muslims, honour their elderly, show compassion to their
young ones and respect the knowledgeable ones among
them."
(d) Being accessible to the people, by listening to their
complaints, judging among them and settling scores,
otherwise relations will be adversely affected and there
will be instability in society. "Do not close your door to the
people lest that allow the strong to oppress the weak."
(e) Following the truth and striving to establish it in society in
all situations and circumstances, because this is a social
necessity that must be achieved. "Adhere to the truth, strive
hard to reach it." "Treat all people as equal, and do not
wony about who is at fault."

94

'Uthmin Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Noorayn

(4 Avoiding wrongdoing in all shapes and forms, especially
with ah1 al-dhimmah, because justice is to be established
among all those who come under the state's rule, Muslims
and otherwise, so that all may benefit from the justice of
Islam. "I advise you not to let yourself or anyone else do
wrong to ah1 al-dhirnmah."
(g) Taking care of the people of the desert and looking after
them. "I advise you to treat the people of the desert well, for
they are the original Arabs and the protectors of slam."[^]
(h) Further advice offered by 'Umar to the one who came after
him was: Do not leave anyone who was appointed during
my reign for more than one year, but leave al-Ash'ari for four
years.[']

How ' ~ b dal-Rahmin ibn 'Awf conducted the
shoora process
Assembling the group for consultation
Barely had the people finished burying 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb
& when the members of the consultation group and the highest

council of the state hastened to gather in the house of 'Aa'ishah
the Mother of the Believers %, or it was said that they gathered in
the house of Fstimah bint Qays al-Fihriyyah, the sister of alDahhi?tk ibn Qays, to decide the most important issue facing the
Muslims after the death of 'Umar. The people spoke and
expressed their opinions, and they were guided by All& to
agree on some terms that were approved by the notables and by
all the ~ u s l i m s . ~ ~ ~

'Abd al-Rahmiin called for some of them to give up their
candidacy for the caliphate
['I

al-Khaleefahal-Farooq 'Umar zbn al-Khattiib by al'Aani, p. 173-175

[21 'Asr al-Kkzllifh al-Riish~dah,
p. 102
[31 'U&m& zbn 'Affiinby Sidiq 'Arjoon, p. 62,63

'Uthmitn's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

95

When the members of the shoora council had assembled,
'Abd al-Rahmiin ibn 'Awf said to them: Delegate the matter to
three among you. Al-Zubayr said: I delegate my say to '~li.[l]
Talhah said: I delegate my say to 'UthmSn. Sa'd said: I delegate
my say to 'Abd a l - R a w ibn 'Awf. So now there were three
candidates: 'Ali ibn Abi Tiilib, 'Uthmiin ibn ' A f f h and 'Abd alR a M n ibn 'Awf. 'Abd al-RahmSn ibn 'Awf said: Which of you
will declare that he should not be appointed, so we will give him
the responsibility of choosing the caliph, and All& will watch
over him, so that he may think to himself who is the best
candidate? The two men remained silent. Then 'Abd al-RahmSn
ibn 'Awf said: Will you leave it up to me, and All& is watching,
so that I will only choose the better of you? They said:

Delegating Ibn ' A d to conduct the process of shoora
'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'Awf began to contact people and
consult them as soon as the meeting with the six candidates
ended, on the Sunday morning, and that went on for three whole
days, until dawn on Wednesday, the 4th of Muharram, which was
the end of the period stipulated for them by 'Umar. 'Abd alRahmh started with 'Ali ibn Abi Taib, and said to him: If I do
not choose you, then tell me who you would nominate for caliph.
'Ali said: 'UthmSn ibn 'Affiin. 'Abd al-Rahmiin went to ' U t M n
and said to him: If I do not choose you, who would you nominate
for caliph? 'Uthmh said: 'Ali ibn Abi TSlib. After that, Ibn 'Awf
went to the other Sahgbah and consulted them, and he consulted
each of the senior SaMbah whom he met in MaCmah, as well as
the commanders of the army, and visitors to MadAmh. His
consultation also included women in seclusion, who expressed
their views, as well as children and slaves in Madinah. The
outcome of his consultation was that the majonty of Muslims
suggested 'Uthmh ibn 'Affiin, and some of them suggested 'Ali
ibn Abi Tiilib. At midnight on Wednesday, 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn
['I al-Bukh&i, Kitrib FadZil Ashrib an-Nabi, no. 3700

ibid.

'Awf went to the house of his sister's son, al-Miswar ibn
Makhramah, where he knocked at the door and found alMiswar sleeping.['] He banged on the door until he woke him up,
then he said: I see you sleeping but by AllSh I have not slept
much. Go and call az-Zubayr and Sa'd. So I [al-Miswar] called
them for him, and he consulted them, then he called me and said:
Call 'Ali for me. So I called him and he conversed with him until
halfway through the night, then'Ali got up and left. Then he said:
Call 'Uthmsn for me. So I called him and he conversed with him
until the muezzin's call to Fajr prayer intempted them.[']

Agreement to swear allegiance to 'Uthmiin
After Fajr prayer on the day of swearing allegiance (the last
day of Dhu'l-Hijjah 23 AH/ 6 November 644 CE), which was led
by Suhayb al-Roomi, 'Abd al-Rahmsn ibn 'Awf came, wearing
the head cover that the Messenger of Allgh & had put on his
head. The men of the shoora committee had gathered by the
minbar, and he sent for those of the MnhSjireen, AnsSr and army
commanders who were present, among whom were Mu'swiyah
the governor of Syria, 'Umayr ibn Sa'd the governor of Homs, and
'Amr ibn al-'Aas the governor of Egypt. They had gone for Hajj
with 'Umar and had come with him to ~ a d k a h . ~ ~ ]
In the report narrated by al-Bukhiiri it says: When the people
had prayed Fajr and that group had assembled by the minbar, he
sent for everyone who was present of the Muhsjireen and Anscr,
and he sent for the commanders of the army, who had attended
Hajj that year with 'Umar. When they had gathered, 'Abd alRahmsn recited the Shahgdah, then he said: 0 'Ali, I have spoken
to the people and asked for their opinions, and I do not believe
that they thin< anyone is as good as ' U h s n , but do not give
anyone a reason to criticize you (by expressing disagreement with
the majority). He (i.e., 'Abd al-Rahmh) said (to 'Uthmh): I swear
I'[ al-Khulafa' al-Riishidom by a l - m i d i , p. 106,107
al-Bukhiiri, Kitiib al-Ahkiim, no. 7207
[3' Shaheed al-Diir 'Ufhmiin ibn 'Affdn, by Ahmad al-Khuroof, p. 37

'UthmSn's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

97

allegiance to you in accordance with the way of All& and His
Messenger and the two caliphs who came after him. So 'Abd alRahmh swore allegiance to him and the people swore allegiance
to him, the MdGjireen and the AnsSr and the commanders of the
army and the ~uslims.[l'According to the report of the author of
al-Tamheed wul-Buy&, 'Ali ibn Abi Tslib was the first one to swear
allegiance after 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn ' ~ w f . [ ~ '

The wisdom of 'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Awf in conducting the
shoora process
'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'Awf conducted the shoora process in a
manner that is indicative of his wisdom and noble character, and
his preference for the general interests of the Muslims over any
personal interest. He willingly gave up his chance for the highest
position that any man could hope to attain in this world in order
to keep the Muslims united, and he conducted the shoora process
in a systematic way to choose the one who would become caliph
and direct the Muslims' affairs. He succeeded by means of
deliberation, patience, resolution and good management in
achieving his great mission The steps that he took were as
follows:
(a) He explained his plan in the first meeting of the shoora
council, drawn up within the time frame stipulated by
'Umar. Thus he was able to make all the members of the
council express their views and he managed to find out the
views and aims of each of them, and he executed his plan
with clarity.
(b) He gave up his own right to candidacy so as to ward off any
doubts about him and to create trust
(c) He found out what each of his partners in the shoora council
was hoping to achieve. He kept discussing it with them until
he obtained a partial result in which ' U t h d n was favored
'I1

al-Bukhriri, Kitib a/-AMm, no. 7207
at-Tamheed war/-Buy&,p. 26

98

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn
with the support of Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and az-Zubayr ibn
al-'Awwam. Thus it seemed to him that 'Uthman had the
majority of support from those present.

(d) Then he sought to find out what each of the two leading
figures, 'Uthman and 'Ali, thought of the other in relation to
the other people nominated by 'Umar. He found out that
each of them did not think that any of them was better than
his counterpart, if he did not become caliph himself.
(e) He started to find out the opinion of those outside the shoora
council, among the notables of the ummah and the people of
wisdom, then the common folk and the weakest members of
society. Then he realized that most of the people did not
regard anyone as equal to 'Uthmin, so he swore allegiance to
him and the people followed suit.[']
T h u s by m e a n s of h i s s m a r t n e s s , h o n e s t y ,
straightforwardness and selflessness, 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn
'Awf was able to give up his own ambition for caliphate and
showed no interest in the highest position in the state. He
passed this test and led the shoora council skilfully, which
deserves the greatest appreciation.[21
Al-Dhahabi said: One of the greatest deeds of 'Abd alRahm8n ibn 'Awf was when he took himself out of the race
at the time of the shoora; he chose for the ummah what the
decision-makers suggested and did a marvellous job in
uniting the ummah behind 'Uthmh. If he had been unfair,
he could have tried to seize the position himself or given it to
his cousin and the closest of the council members to him,
Sa'd ibn Abi ~ a q q i s . ' ~ ~
Thus another form of shoora took place at the time of the
Rightly-Guided Caliphs, which was appointing the caliph by
'Uthmlin ibn 'Affrir~by SBdiq 'Aqoon, p. 70,71
Majallat al-Buhooth al-lslamiyyah, issue no. 10, p. 225
[I' Siyar A'lrim an-Nubala', by Shams al-Deen al-Dhahabi, 1/86
'I1

'UthmMs appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

99

means of a shoora council who were to select one of their
number, after assessing public opinion, then the umrnah in
general was to swear allegiance to him.[']

There are false reports and lies that the Rsidi Shi'ah have
inserted into the history of Islam, including the story of the shoora
and 'Uthmin's appointment as caliph. These reports were then
taken up by the Orientalists who tried to spread them further, and
many modern historians and thinkers have been influenced by
them without examining the reports or checking their chains of
transmission and texts, and thus they became widespread among
the Muslims.
The Rfidi Shi'i historians paid attention to the story of the
shoora and the appointment of 'Uthm2n ibn 'Affiin as caliph, and
they inserted lies and false reports into it. Some of them wrote
whole books on the topic. Abu Makhnaf wrote a book called Kitib
al-Shoora, and Ibn 'Uqdah and Ibn Biibawayh also wrote similar
books.[21 Ibn Sa'd narrated nine reports via al-Wiiqidi about the
shoora, the oath of allegiance to 'Uthmh and the story of how he
was appointed caliph.r3] He narrated another report via 'UbaydAll* ibn Moosa which includes the murder of 'Umar, his limiting
the shoora to six men, and his advice to both 'Ali and 'Uthmiin if
either of them should be appointed caliph, and his advice to
Suhayb regarding this matter.[41
Al-Baliidhuri narrated a report about the shoora and the oath
] from Hishiim
of allegiance to 'Uthmh from Abu ~ a k h n a f [,~and
al-Kalbi, some of which was quoted from Abu Makhnaf and some
of which was narrated only by himr6], and from a l - ~ $ q i d i,[ ~
Dirciscitfi 'Ahd al-hlubuwwah wa'l-Khilcifah al-Rcishidah, p. 278
al-Dharee'ah ila Tasrineef al-Shi'ah, 14/246
r31 al-Tabaqcit al-hbra b y Ibn Sa'd, 3/63 and 3/67
"I op. cit., 3/340
'51 Ans2b al-Ashrifby al-Balidhuri, 5/18,19
[I1

'Uthmdn Ibn 'Affdn L& Dhun-Noorayn

100

and from 'Ubayd-AUsh ibn ~ o o s a . "Al-Tabari
~
based his version
of this story on a number of reports, such as that of Abu
~akhnaf.~']Ibn Abi'l-Hadeed narrated some of the events of the
and he
shoora story via Ahmad ibn 'Abd al-'Azeez al-~awhari~~]
mentioned that he was quoting from the book al-Skoora by al~ s ~ i d i . The
[ * ~Shi'ah reports include a number of interpolations
for which there is no sound evidence. These are:

Accusation against the Sahiibah of favouritism in issues
concerning the Muslims
The Shi'ah reports accuse the Sahibah of favouritism in issues
concerning the Muslims and suggest that 'Ali was not happy
about 'Abd al-Rahmk choosing the caliph. It was narrated by
Abu Makhnaf and Hishsm al-Kalbi from his father and Ahmad
al-Jawhari that 'Umar gave the deciding choice in the event of an
equal split to 'Abd a l - R a M n ibn'Awf, and 'Alirealized that the
caliphate had slipped from his grasp because 'Abd al-Rahmk
would choose 'Uthmk because they were related by marriage.IS1
But Ibn Taymiyah refuted that there was any close relationship by
blood between 'Uthmsn and 'Abd al-Rahmk. He said; 'Abd alR a M n was not a brother or cousin of 'Uthmsn, and he was not
from the same clan at all. Rather one was from Banu Zuhrah and
the other was from Banu Umayyah, and Banu Zuhrah was closer
to Banu Hgshim than Banu Umayyah. Banu Zuhrah were
maternal uncles of the Prophet g,including 'Abd al-Rahmk
ibn 'Awf and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqss, of whom the Prophet &$said:

['I ibid.
["

ibid.

1

13] op. cit., 6/5

Athr al-Tashayyu' 'ala al-Riwtytt al-Tareekhiyyah by Dr.'Abd al'Azeez Noor, p.
321. This is the main source for this section.
'n Sharh Nahj al-BaEghah, 9/49,50-58
[" op. at., 9/15
[71 Athr al-Tashayyu' 'ala al-Riwliytt al-Tareekhiyyah, p. 322

' U t M s appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

101

"This is my maternal uncle; who dares to compare his maternal
uncle to mine?"I1'
The Prophet & did not establish brotherhood between one
MuhLjir and another, or between one Ansgri and another, rather
he established brotherhood between the MuMjireen and the
An&. He established brotherhood between 'Abd al-RahmSn ibn
. This hadeeth is well
'Awf and Sa'd ibn al-Rabee' al-~ns&iI~~
known and established in the books of Saheeh and elsewhere, and
all the scholars know that.13] The Shi'ah based their reports of
'Abd al-RahmXs favouring 'Uthmh on the fact that they were
related by marriage, but they forgot that the ties of blood are
stronger than ties through marriage, and they also forgot the
nature of the relationship between the believers in the first
generation of Islam, and that it was based on neither ties of blood
nor ties through marriage. The way in which 'Abd al-Rahmgn and
'Uthmgn were related through marriage was that 'Abd alR a h m h was married to Umm Kalthoom bint 'Uqbah ibn Abi
Mu'eet, the sister of al-waleed.14'

The Umawi party and the Hsshimi party
The report of Abu Makhnaf suggests that there was a dispute
between Banu Hgshim and Banu Umayyah during the swearing
of allegiance, but this is not true. It is not mentioned in any report,
sound or weak.15] Some historians were influenced by the reports
of the Rgfidi Shi'ah and based their inconect analvsis on these
reports, so they portrayed the discussion among the companions
of the Messenger $& about the appointment of the new caliph as a
divided into two goups, the
tribal dispute,saying that the
Umawi party and the Hbhimi party. This is an imaginary idea
['I Snheeh Sunan at-Tirmidhi, 3/220, no. 3752

al-Bukhljri, Kitrib mnliqib a[-Ansrir, no. 3780
Minhrij al-Snnuah an-Nabmuiyynh by Ibn Taymiyah, 6/271,272
'41 ul-Tabaqtt al-Kubra, 3/127
[I' al-Kkulafa' al-Riskideen by Ameen al-Qada, p. 78, 79
[21

102

' U W Ibn ' A f f h& Dhun-Nooravn

and incorrect conclusion for which there is no evidence at aU,
because that is not the kind of atmosphere in which the
were living when a
companions of the Messenger of AUiih
Muhiijir would stand with an A n s s against his own father GT
brother or cousin or tribe. It ignores the fact that these
companions are the ones who sacrificed all worldly gains in
order to protect their religion. It is not based on sound knowledge
of these nobles who had been given the glad tidings of Paradise.
There are many events in their lives which prove that these people
were far above looking at things from such a narrow perspective
when dealing with their affairs. It was not the matter of family or
tribal representation; they were appointed to the shoora council
because of their status in Islam.
Words that were falsely a&ibuted to 'Ali 4
Ibn Katheer said: What is said by many historians such as Ibn
Jareer and others who narrated from unknown men about 'Ali
saying to 'Abd al-liahmiin: You deceived me; you only appointed
him because he is related to you through marriage and so that he
would seek your advice every day, and that he did not swear
allegiance to 'Uthmiin until 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'Awf said,

"Verily, those who give Bay'ah (pledge) to you (@) they are
giving Bay'ah (pledge) to All&. The Hand of All& is over their
hands. Then whosoever breaks his pledge, breaks it only to his
own harm; and whosoeverfulfils what he has covenanted with
Allth, He will bestow on him a great reward" (Al-Fath 48:lO) is
false.

Accusation against 'Amr ibn al-'Aas and al-Mugheerah ibn
Shu'bah

'Uthm;m's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

103

Abu Makhnaf stated in his report about the shoora that 'Amr
ibn al-'Aas and al-Mugheerah ibn Shu'bah sat at the door and
Sa'd told them off. This would be strange if it was done by lowclass people, let alone the noble Sah2bah. How could Sa'd have
said to them: You want to say that you were present and were
among the people of shoora, when people already knew the
people of shoora by name and that was well established among
them? In fact the report of Abu Makhnaf contradicts itself, as is
clear to anyone who studies it and examines it against the sound
sources. It is too obviously strange to mention. Dr Yahyaal-Yahya
has produced examples to disprove this report and show that it is
not worthy of attention.['] These are some of the ideas that he
mentioned in order to warn against these poisonous notions that
are widespread in our classical history books, which have
influenced our thinkers, writers and historians.

No believer would doubt that 'Uthmh 4was more qualified
to become caliph and that his claim to the caliphate was more
valid. No one can criticize that except one who has deviation in
his heart and who bears a grudge against the companions of the
because of the hatred that he has in his
Messenger of All&
heart towards them. This only applies to the RiZidi Shi'ah who
have made it their main aim in life to slander and express hatred
towards the Sahgbah (may All& be pleased with them). The
criticism that they direct against the first three caliphs is not worth
paying attention to because it is obviously unfounded and
fabricated. In a number of definitive saheeh texts and well known
reports there are signs that 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh .& was qualified to
become caliph. These reports include the following:[21
1-All& says:

['I
[I'

M n m i y i t Abi MnkhnaA p. 179
'Aqeedat Ah1 al-Sunnahfi'l-Sahibah, 2/656

104

'Uthmh fin 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

"Allth has promised those among you who believe and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the land, as He granted it
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority
to practise their religion which He has chosen for them (i.e.
Islam). And He will surely, give them in exchange a safe
security after theirfear (provided) they (believers) worship Me
and do not associate anything (in worship) with Me. But
whoever disbelieved after this, they are the Frisiqoon (rebellious,
disobedient to Alllih)" (An-Noor 24:55)
The relevant point in this verse with regard to 'UthmSn being
qualified for the caliphate is that he was one of those to whom
Allih granted succession in the land and granted authority.
During his caliphate he did well and ruled the people with justice,
establishing regular prayer, paying zakiih, enjoining what is good
and forbidding what is evil. So this verse indicates that he was
qualified to become caliph.[']
2- Aual says:

"Say (0 Muhammad @J to the Bedouins who lagged behind:
'You shall be called to fight against a people given to great
warfare, then you shall fight them, or they shall surrender.

'Uthmsn's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

105

Then ifyou obey, Alliih will give you a fair rmard; but ifyou
turn away as you did turn away before, He will punish you with
a painful torment"' (Al-Fath48:16)
The relevant point in thisverse with regard to 'Uthmh being
qualified for the caliphate is that those who called these Bedouin
would call them after the Prophet & was gone, and that was Abu
Bakr, 'Umar and 'UthmSn (may All31 be pleased with them all).
Abu Bakr called them to fight the Byzantines, Persians and Turks.
So it was obligatory to obey these three according to the text of the
Qur'h, and if it was obligatory to obey them then their caliphate
was valid.[']
3- It was narrated that that Abu Moosa 4 said:

((&

2 g& I;k, ."'ke-:/

The Prophet @$ entered a garden and told me to watch the gate of
the garden. A man came and asked permission to enter, and he
said : "Let him in and give him glad tidings of Paradise ." And
that was Abu Bakr. Then another man came and asked
permission to enter, and he said: "Let him in and give him
glad tidings of Paradise." And that was 'Umar. Then another
man came and asked permission to enter, and he said :"Let him
in and give him glad tidings of Paradise for a calamity that will
befall him." And that was 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin.[21
This hadeeth points to the order of the first three caliphs, and
['I

al-Faslfi'-Milal wa'l-Ahwa'wa'l-Nihal, 4/109,110
al-Bukhiiri, no. 3695

'Uthmh Ibn 'M2n & Dhun-Noorayn

foretells a calamity that would befall 'Uthmk. This calamity
befell him when he was besieged in his house, until he was N e d
unlawfully. So this 'adeeth is one of the signs of Prophethood and
indicated that 'Uthmh would be a martyr (may All% be pleased
with him).[''
4- Abu Dawood
narrated with his isniid from Jgbir ibn
'Abd-AllSh that the Messenger of AllSh @jsaid:

(.+)

"Last night a righteous man was shown (in a dream) that Abu
Bakr was tied to the Messenger of All& B, and 'Umar was tied
to Abu Bakr, and 'Uthmin was tied to 'Umar."
JSbir said: When we left the Messenger of All21 @$, we said:
As for the righteous man, that was the Messenger of AlGh s.,and
as for their being tied to one another, they will be in charge of this
matter with which AllSh has sent His Prophet %.['I
5- Abu 'Abd-AUSh al-HSkim narrated with his isnSd that Abu
Hurayrah & said: I heard the Messenger of All& g say:

.a: J G '->

?%. ,

I
,

4

D

:

b

, .
b
-1;

,

,

9

,

,

$

:J 6

P

P
$\))

%

'$1

JG;~

"There will be turmoil and conflict - or conflict and tumoil ."
W e said: 0 Messenger of All&, what do you command us to
do? He said: "Be with the trustworthy one and his
companions,"
And he pointed to ' ~ t h m k . [This
~ ~ hadeeth is an evident
miracle of the Prophet
and points to the truth of his
['I 'Aqeeaizt Ah1 alSunnnh wa'l-Jama^'uhfirl-Sahaahab&,
2/657
[I' Sunun Abi Dmood, (4636) 2/513
'31 al-Mustadrak, 3/99; he said: this hadeeth has a saheeh isn2d although they (al-

BukhSri and Muslim) did not narrate it; and al-Dhahabi agreed with him.

'Uthman's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

107

Prophethood, as it foretells the turmoil (fitnah) that would occur
during the caliphate of 'Uthmk and it happened as it was
foretold. The hadeeth also indicates that 'Uthmin was a
legitimate caliph, as the Prophet @ commanded the people to
rally around 'UthmSn: when there arose turmoil and conflict with
the caliph and leader, he commanded them to unite around him
and stay with him, because he would be following the truth,
whereas those who rebelled against him would be following
falsehood, deviancy, whims and desires. The Messenger &$
testified that he ('Uthmh) would be adhering to the truth and
would not depart from it. [I1
6- Abu 'Eesa al-Tirmidhi narrated with his isniid going back
to 'Aa'ishah & that the Prophet @ said:

"0 'Uthmin, All& may give you agament to wear, and ifthey
want you to tnke it off, do not take it offor them."[']

In this hadeeth the caliphate is Likened to a garment, and the
fact that he mentions that some people will want him to take it off
is like a nomination, as if he is saying: AUCh will make you caliph,
so if the people want to depose you, do not depose yourself for
their sake, because you will be following truth whilst they will be
following falsehood.[31
7- al-Tirmidhi narrated with his isGd that Abu Sahlah said:
'Uthmk said to me on the day when he was besieged: The
Messenger of All2h & gave me some advice and I am going to
adhere to it.141 The advice given was not to give up the caliphate,
r'l 'Aqeedat Ahl ul-Sur~nd~
wa'l-JarnZahfirl-Sd~a^balr,
2/660

FadCil al-SahLibah, 1/613; its i s d d is saheeh A t - T i ~ d h (3705)
i
'31 Al-Deen al-Hziilis by Muhammad Siddeeq Hasan al-Qanoohi, alBukh%i,

446

3/

' U t h m h fin ' A f f h & Dhun-Noorayn

108

as he said:

"Tfthey want you to take it off, do not take it offfir them ."[ll
The words I am going to adhere to it mean I am going to
follow that advice.
8- Abu 'Abd-Alliih al-Hiikim narrated with his isniid going
back to Abu Sahlah, the freed slave of 'Aa'ishah %, that the
Messenger of AUiih @j said: "Call for me - or I wish there was here
with me - one of my companions." She said: I said: Abu Bakr? He
said: "No." 1said: 'Umar? He said: "No." 1said: Your cousin 'Ali?
He said: "No." I said: Then 'Uthmsn? He said: "Yes." So 'Uthmk
came and he said (to 'Aa'ishah): "Get up (and leave us)." The
Prophet gg started whispering to 'Uthmsn and his colour
changed. He (the narrator) said: Then when the day of the siege
came, we said: Will you not fight? He said: The Messenger of
All& @j gave me some advice and I will adhere to it.[''
This hadeeth and the one before it both point to the legitimacy
of 'UthmSs caliphate. Whoever rejects his caliphate and does
not believe that he is one of the people of Paradise and martvrs,
and speaks disrespectfully of hi; is beyond the pale of faith &d
~slam.[~J
9- Another indication of the legitimacy of his caliphate is the
report narrated by al-Bukhiiri with his isnid from 'Ibn 'Umar &
who said: At the time of the Prophet @ we did not regard anyone
as equal to Abu Bakr, then 'Umar, then 'Uthmiin, then after that
we left the companions of the Prophet @ and did not differentiate
['I F a a i l asSahabah, 1/605 - its isncid is snheeh; at-Timidhi, 5/295
[I1 Tuhfat al-Ahwadhi, by Muhammad 'Abd a l - R M n al-Mub%a!doori, 10/209

at-Timidhi, (3705)
[31 Fadi'il al-Sahlfbnh,1/605 -its isnlid is saheeh; nl-Mustadrak, 3/99-the hadeeth
has a snheeh isncid although they (al-Bukhiri and Muslim) did not narrate it,
and al-Dhahabi agreed with him.
Al-Deen d-Khcilis, 33/46

Ii

' U W n ' s appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

109

between them.['] This indicates that Allih had instilled in their
hearts the order of caliphs which He had ordained for after His
Prophet gg had died.12]
Ibn Taymiyah said: This hadeeth tells us what the S a b a h
believed at the time of the Prophet @+ that Abu Bakr was the best,
then 'Umar, then 'Uthmh. It was narrated that the Prophet
heard about that and did not deny it. So this superiority is proven
by the text, and even if that were not the case, it would still be
proven by the attitude of the M d j i r e e n and An& at the time of
without any disapproval on his part,
the Messenger of AUih gfl
and by their attitude when 'Umar died, as they all swore
allegiance to 'UthmSn ibn'Affin without any materialistic motive
and without fear, and no one disagreed with his being appointed
caliph."'
All the texts that we have quoted here offer strong evidence
that the caliphate of 'Uthmin 4 was legitimate and there is no
doubt concerning that and no conflict among those who adhere to
the Qur'2n and Sunnah, to whom nothing brings greater joy than
adhering to them, namely Ah1 al-Sunnah wa'l-@mi'&. Every
Muslim is required to believe that the caliphate of 'Uthm2n was
legitimate and he must accept fully th; texts which indicate
that.I41

Consensus concerning the caliphate of 'iiihmlin
The companions of the Messenger of AU& @ and those who
came after them and followed their way, Ah1 al-Sunnah wa'lJamVah, are agreed that 'UthmSn ibn 'Affin & was the most
qualified of people to become caliph after 'Umar ibn al-Khattib
&, and no one objected or disagreed with that. Rather they all
I'[ AI-BukMn, Kitrfb Fadfil Ashrfb al-Nabi, no. 3698
'Aqeedah Ah1 al-Sunnah, 2/664
I ' [ Mnhrij as-Sunnah an-Nabmiyynh by Ibn Taymiyah, 3/165
[41

'Aqeedat AM al-Sunnah marl-Jami'ahfi'lSakdbahal-Kirrim by Dr. Ngsir ibn 'Ali
'Aayid Hasan al-Shaykh, 2 / 6 4

'Uthrnin Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

110

submitted to that because he was the best of Allsh's creation after
the two Shaykhs Abu Bakr and 'Umar (mayAll& be pleased with
them both), and a number of scholars of hadeeth and others
narrated that there was consensus on the legitimacy of 'UthmWs
caliphate after 'Umar. These reports include the following[1' :
1-The report of Ibn Abi Shaybah with his isGd going back to
H s t h ibn Mudarrib who said: I performed Hajj during the
caliphate of 'Umar and they did not doubt that the caliphate
would pass to 'Uthmh after him.[']
2- Abu Na'eem al-Asbahsni narrated with his isnSd going
back to Hudhayfah that he said: I was standing with 'Umar, my
knee touching his knee, and he said: Who do you think the people
will ap oint7 I said: The people have already decided on Ibn
'Affiin.
3- Al-H3iz al-Dhahabi narrated that Shareek ibn 'Abd-All&
al-QSdi said: The Prophet @$ died and the Muslims appointed
Abu Bakr as his successor; if they had known that there was
anyone better than him among them, then they would have
deceived (the ummah, by doing that). Then Abu Bakr appointed
'Umar as his successor and was a man of truth and justice. When
he was dying, he delegated the matter (of succession) to a council
of six men, who agreed on 'Uthmh. If they had known that there
was anyone better than him among them, then they would have
deceived us.[41
All these reports clearly indicate that it was well established
among the companions of the Prophet @ that 'Uthmsn was more
quahfied to succeed to the caliphate when 'Umar ibn al-Khattib 4
was still alive, because they already knew and had learned from
the texts which spoke of his position in the order (of caliphs) that
-

& .

"I op. cit., 2/665
"I

al-Musannaf, 14/665

[31 Kitib al-Imimah wa'l-Radd 'ala al-Rifidah, p. 306

Miziin al-l'tidilfi Naqd ar-Rijiil, by Muhammad ibn'Uthmin al-Dhahabi, 2/273

'Uthmsn's appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

111

he would become caliph after 'Umar 4, and because they knew
that he was the best of all the people after Abu Bakr and 'Umar
(may Allsh be pleased with them both).[''
4- Ibn Sa'd narrated with his isnsd going back to al-Nazziil
ibn Subrah & who said: 'Abd-All31 ibn Mas'ood said, when
'Uthmh was appointed as caliph: We have appointed as caliph
the best of those who are left, and we did not fail to select the
best.'"
5- al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Za'fariini said: I heard alShifa'i say: The people were unanimously agreed on the caliphate
of Abu Bakr, and Abu Bakr appointed 'Umar as his successor,
then he delegated a council of six men to appoint one of their
number, and they appointed 'Uthmiin (may Allsh be pleased with
them all).13' Abu Hiimid Muhammad al-Maqdisi narrated some
words which he attributed to Imam al-SEfa'i: You should know
that the rightful ruler after 'Umar & was 'Uthmh 4. That is
because the members of the shoora council delegated the task of
choosing the caliph to 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'Awf and he chose
'Uthmh &, and the Sahiibah & were unanimously agreed on
that. The people approved of what 'Abd al-Rahmh did, and
'Uthmin led the people in the path of truth and ruled with justice
until he was martyred.14'
6- Ibn Taymiyah narrated that Imam Ahmad said: They did
not all agree to swear allegiance to anyone as they all agreed to
swear allegiance to '~thmiin.[~'
7- Abu'l-Hasan al-Ash'ari said: The caliphate of 'Uthmin &
after 'Umar & is proven because he was chosen by the members
of the shoora council who were appointed by 'Umar. They chose
'Aqeedat Ah1 al-Sunnah wa'l-Jama^'ahji'-Sah8bah
al-Kiriim, by Dr. N2sir ibn 'Ali
'Aayid, 2/666
[21 at-Tabaqdt al-Kubra, 3/63
[I' Mnntqib ash-Shiifa'i by al-Bayhaqi, 1/434,435
[" al-Radd 'ala al-Efidah, p. 319, 320
[51 Manhcij asSunnah, 3/166; asSunnah by al-Khallsl, p. 320
['I

I

!

112

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

him and approved of his leadership, and they were unanimously
agreed about his virtue and justice.[ll
8- ' U M n al-Sabooru said, explaining the belief of the salaf
and of the scholars of hadeeth concerning the order of the caliphs,
after mentioning that they said that the caliphate of Abu Bakr
came first, then 'Umar: Then came the caliphate of ' U M by
the consensus of the shoora council and all the Companions of the
Prophet gYand with their approval, thus he became the caliph
who was in charge.[']
9- Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyah (.&) said: All the Muslims
swore allegiance to 'Uthmiin and no one held back. When the
prominent people and people of authority and power swore
allegiance to him, he became the ruler. If 'Abd alLRahm2n had
sworn allegiance to him but 'Ali and other prominent and
powerful SahSbah had not done so, he would not have become
the ruler. But 'Umar appointed six men to the shoora council 'Uthmh, 'Ali, Talhah, az-Zubayr, Sa'd and 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn
'Awf, then Talhah, az-Zubayr and Sa'd withdrew from the race
willingly, leaving 'UthmSn, 'Ali and 'Abd al-Rah&n, who did
not withdraw but he was delegated to select one of the other two.
For three days during which 'Abd al-Rahmin swore that he did
not sleep much, he consulted the first Muslims and those who had
followed them in buth. He consulted the commanders of the
troops who had gone for Hajj with 'Umar that year. The Mushms
suggested to him that 'Uthmh should be appointed caliph, and
he said that they all favoured 'Uthmh, so they swore allegiance
to him, not because of something that he gave them or because
they were afraid of him. Hence more than one of the salaf and
imams, such as Ayoob al-Sakhtiyini, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, alDSraqutm and others said: Whoever prefers 'Ali over 'Uthmh
has thought badly of the M a j i r e e n and AnsSr. This is another
sign of 'UthmSn's superiority, because they appointed him as
['I al-lniibah 'an Usool al-Diyiimh, p. 68
'21

'Aqeedat alSalaf wa Ashtb al-Hadeefh dirnna al-Ristluh al-Minbariyyah, 1/139

' U W n ' s appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

113

their leader willingly and on the basis of ~hoora.~']
10- al-Hsfiz Ibn Katheer (+&) narrated that there was
consensus among the Sahibah about the appointment of
'Uthmih & as caliph and he reported that the members of the
shoora council delegated the matter to 'Abd al-Rahmin, for him
to work out for the Muslims who was the best of them to be
appointed to this position. He asked those whom he could ask of
the shoora council members, and others, and they did not suggest
anyone but 'Uthmih ibn'Affk. He said to 'Ali: If I do not appoint
you, who do you suggest? He said: 'Uthmsn. And he said to
'Uthmh If I do not appoint you, who do you suggest? He said:
'Ali ibn Abi Tslib. It seems that this was before the matter was
limited to three people and 'Abd al-Rahmsn withdrew from the
race in order to choose the best candidate.
Then 'Abd al-Rahmsn ibn 'Awf began to consult the people
about these two and he collected the opinions of both the ordinary
Muslims and their leaders, consulting them in groups and
individually, secretly and openly, even consulting the women in
seclusion from behind their curtains and asking the children in
their schools. He even asked the travellers and Bedouin who came
to MaCmah during those three days. He did not get much sleep,
rather he spent his time in prayer and supplication, seeking
guidance and asking wise people. He did not find anyone
suggesting that anyone was better than 'Uthmk ibn 'Affsn. On
the fourth day after the death of 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb, he came to
the house of his nephew al-Miswar ibn Makhramah and told him
to call 'Ali and 'Uthmih for him. So he called them and they came
to 'Abd al-Rahmsu. He told them that he had asked the people
and he did not find anyone who suggested that anyone was better
than either of them, then he took a solemn promise from each of
them that if he was appointed he would be just, and if he was not
appointed, that he would hear and obey. Then he went out to the
mosque, wearing the head cover that the Messenger of All& &

114

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

had put on him, and with a sword by his side. He sent for the
most prominent people among the MuhSjireen and Anssr, and
the call went out to the people at large: As-Salifu jimi'ah (prayer is
about to begin). The mosque filled with people and was so
crowded that ' U M n could not find a place to sit except at the
back, and he was a very shy man. 'Abd al-Rahmsn ibn 'Awf
ascended the minbar of the Messenger of AllSh g j j where he stood
for a long time and said a lengthy du'2 that the people could not
hear. Then he spoke and said: 0 people, I have asked you secretly
and openly about your leader, and I did not find suggesting that
anyone was better than either of these two men, 'Ali and
'Uthmh. Come here, 0 'Ali. He came and stood beneath the
minbar, then 'Abd al-RahmSn took him by the hand and said:
Will you swear allegiance to me in accordance with the Book of
AllSh and the Sunnah of His Prophet and the deeds of Abu Bakr
and 'Umar? He said: By AllSh, no, but on the basis of my efforts
and ability (i.e., I will do my best). He let go of his hand and said:
Come here, 0 'Uthmh. He took him by the hand and said: Will
you swear allegiance to me in accordance with the Book of All&
and the Sunnah of His Prophet and the deeds of Abu Bakr and
'Umar? He said: By AllSh, yes. He looked up at the ceiling of the
mosque, still holding 'UthmtXs hand, and said: 0 All&, listen
and bear witness; 0 All&, listen and bear witness; 0 AUSh listen
and bear witness. 0 AllSh, that which was on my shoulders I
place on the shoulders of 'Uthmh. The people crowded around,
swearing their allegiance to 'Uthmh, until they surrounded him
beneath the minbar. 'Abd al-Rahmsn sat down where the
Messenger of Allsh &$ used to sit and 'Uthmh sat beneath him
on the second step, and the people came to him and swore
allegiance to him,and 'Ali ibn Abi T a b swore allegiance to him
first - or it was said that he was the second to do so.'''
These reports, all of which mention the consensus of all these
leaders, offer definitive proof that the oath of allegiance to
'Uthmh as caliph was done with the consensus of all the SahSbah

' U W n ' s appointment as caliph, his approach to ruling...

115

and no one disagreed or objected to that.[']

Ruling on preferring 'Miover 'Uthmgn (A]
The view of Ah1 al-Sunnah is that the one who prefers 'Ali over
Abu Bakr and 'Umar is a misguided innovator, and the one who
prefers 'Ali over 'Uthmh is mistaken, but they did not regard
him as misguided or an innovator[21,although one of the scholars
spoke harshly about the one who prefers 'Ali over 'Uthmh, as he
said: The one who prefers 'Ali over 'Uthmh is claiming that the
companions of the Messenger @ betrayed the trust when they
chose 'Uthmh over 'AL~.[~]
Ibn Taymiyah said: Ah1 al-Sunnah are agreed that 'Uthmh is
of a higher status, although this issue - the issue of 'Uthmh and
'Ali - is not a basic issue such that the one who differs concerning
it is regarded as misguided, according to the majority of Ah1 alSunnah. The issue concerning which the one who differs is
regarded as is misguided is the issue of caliphate. That is because
they believe that the caliph after the Messenger of Allgh @ was
Abu Bakr, then 'Umar, then 'Uthmzn, then 'Ali, and whoever
criticized the caliphate of any of these leaders is more misguided
than his people's donkey.[41
He mentioned the comments of the scholars about the issue of
preferring 'Ali over 'Uthmh, concerning which there are two
reports:
The first is that this is not acceptable. The one who prefers 'Ali
over 'Uthmsn has transgressed beyond the Sunnah and
introduced an innovation, because he disagreed with the
consensus of the Sahzbah. Hence it was said that the one who
prefers 'Ali over 'Uthmh has thought badly of the Muhtjireen
and Anszr. This was narrated from more than one scholar,
'AqeedahAh1 al-Sunnah wa'l-TamCahj'l-Sahcibah il-Karcim, by Dr. NSsir ibn 'Ali
'Aayid, 2/671
12] Majmoo' al-Fafiiwa, 3/101, 102
[31 Hiqbah min nl-Tareekh by 'Uthmk al-Khamees, p. 66
[41 Mqimoo'ah al-Fatha, 3/101,102
['I

116

' U t l u n h Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

including Ayyoob as-Sakhtiyhi, Ahmad ibn Hanbal and alDkaqutni.
The second view is that the one who prefers 'Ali is not to be
regarded as an innovator, because ' U t M and 'ALi are so close
in status.[ll

['I op. cit., 4/367

When the oath of allegiance was sworn to 'Uthmh as caliph,
he stood before the people and declared his approach to ruling,
explaining that he would follow the guidelines of the Qur'sn and
S m a h and follow in the footsteps of the two Shaykhs (i.e., Abu
Bakr and 'Umar). He also stated in his speech that he was going to
run the people's affairs with forbearance and wisdom, but he
would accept no compromise with regard to hadd punishments
that must be carried out. Then he warned them against feeling
content with worldly things and being tempted by worldly trivia,
lest that lead them to compete with one another and stir up
grudges and resentment among them, which would in turn lead
to division and disunity in the ummah. 'Uthmh 6was looking
with insight to the future and at the tunnoil that might emerge in
the ummah as the result of whims and desires and of striving and
competing in the accumulation of worldly wealth.[']
He said:
I have been given a responsibility and I have accepted it.
Verily I am a follower (of the Sunnah) and not an innovator. I
promise you that in addition to following the Book of All* and
the Sunnah of His Prophet g,I will do three other things:
I'[ Tahqeeq Mmuriqifal-Sahtbah fi'I-FiM, 1/392

118

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affgn 4Dhun-Noorayn

following the example of those who came before me with regard
to what you have agreed upon and decided, and what is decided
by good people openly, and not interfering with you except when
a hadd punishment is required. This world is tempting and it
makes itself attractive to people, so that many people are inclined
towards it. Do not be content with this world and do not put your
trust in it, for it is not trustworthy. Understand that these worldly
temptations will not go away unless you ignore them.[']
With regard to what some people say, that when 'Uthmiln
gave his first speech he was tongue-tied and did not know what to
say until he said: 0 people, the first day is difficult but if I live I
shall deliver a proper speech, this is something that was
and others who
mentioned by the author of al-'Aqd al-~areed~~]
narrated interesting stories, but its i s d d is not authentic.[31

"Uthm2n1s letters to his agents, gov
commanders, and $9 the people at larg
'Uthm2n retained the agents appointed by 'Umar, and he did
not dismiss any of them for a full year, on the advice of 'Umar &.
The one who studies the letters that he sent to the governors,
zaksh-collectors and commanders will see the policy according to
which he would deal with the ummah's affairs.[41

The first letter written by 'UthmSn to all his governors
"All& has commanded rulers to be shepherds; He did not
command them to be money-collectors.The attitude of the earliest
leaders of this ummah was that of shepherds, not moneycollectors. Soon you will find your leaders becoming moneyTareekh at-Tabari, 5/443
c2] What is meant is Ibn'Abd Rabbihi al-Andalusi, the author of al-'Aqd al-Fareed,
which is a book that narrates tales and stories, but pays no attention to the
soundness of the reports and their chains of narrators,.
[31 Khiliijzh 'Uthrnan inbn 'AfiAn, by Dr. as-Sulami, p. 34, 35; this report was
narrated via al-Wsqidi and it is matrook.
Tahqeeq Mawiyif as-Sahribah by Dr. Muhammad Ahmazoon, 1/393
["

' U W s method of rulimg

119

collectors, not shepherds. Once that happens, there will be no
more modesty, trustworthiness or honesty. The best way of
running the people's affairs is to examine the Muslims' situation,
find out what their dues are and give them to them, and take from
them what is due from them. Then go to ahl nl-dhimmah and give
them what is due to them and take from them what is due from
them. Then confront the enemy and seek to defeat them by means
of sincerity."[ll
What we see in this letter is that ' U t h m k confirmed the
duties of his governors in the regions towards the people under
their jurisdiction. He made it clear that their mission was not to
collect wealth; rather it was to take care of the interests of the
people. For that reason he explained the way to run the affairs of
the ummah, by taking what was due from people, and giving
them what was due to them, thus the affairs of the ummah would
be sound. If they were to turn into money-collectors with no aim
but the collection of wealth, then modesty would be lost, as would
trustworthiness and honesty.['] In his letter to the governors,
'Uthmb focused on the values of political, social and economic
justice, by giving people their dues and taking what they owed,
and he established the importance of taking care of the people's
affairs and not focusing on the collection and accumulation of
wealth.I3]
He also pointed out what would happen if the governors
turned from shepherds into money-collectors: that would lead to
a loss of good morals and attitudes such as modesty,
trustworthiness and loyalty. That is because there is a sublime
connection between the ruler and his people, which is supported
by the agreement of all on one goal, which is seeking the pleasure
of Allsh &. The governor is shiving for this goal by means of
obedience, loyalty, honesty and trust that he offers to his ruler,
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/244
Takqeeq MawQifas-Saluibak, 1/393
"I al-Dawlak al-lslrmiyyahji Xsr al-mulafa' ar-Rdshidem, by Dr. Hamdi Shaheen,
p. 246.

['I

' U M n Ibn 'Affih & Dhun-Nooravn

120

and the modesty to which 'UthmSn refers remains as a common
factor among all, preventing them from committing abhorrent
deeds or hurting feelings or causing them any hardship. Then
'Uthmh advised his governors to be just to the people under
their control, by taking what is due from them and giving them
their rights. And he referred to an important point, which is that
fulfilling covenants is one of the greatest means of victory over the
enemy. History shows that this sublime attitude caused the
Muslim to prevail in the fields of administration and war.[''

His letter to the commanders of the troops
The first letter that he wrote to the commanders of the hoops
in the regions was:
"You are the guardians of the Muslims and their shield.
'Umar gave you a particular mission which is not hidden from us,
rather it is known to everyone. I do not want to hear that any one
of you has changed the deal, lest AU2h replace you with someone
else. So watch what you do and I shall try my best to fulfil the
mission that AllSh has enjoined on me."121
In this letter, 'Uthmin drew attention to the fact that things
do not change with the appointment of a new caliph, because the
caliphs and their governors are all following the same path, which
is the mission of applying Islam in real life. His words, " 'Umar
gave you a particular mission which is not hidden from us, rather
it is known to everyone" indicate that the rule of those caliphs
was based on shoora, which meant that all major issues would be
known in detail to the decision-makers. When one ruler departed
and another one came, he would follow the same path, because
the goals were clear to everyone. His words, "I do not want to
hear that any one of you has changed the deal, lest AUSh replace
you with someone else" show his clear insight into the laws of
AllSh in this world, for AllSh's promise to support and protect His

"' At-Tareekh
al-Islami Mmut@f
369

iqa

'Bar, by Dr. 'Abd al-'t\zeer al-Humaydi, 121

1

' U W n ' s method of ruling

121

close friends is dependent on their adhering to His laws and
submitting to His command. If they change from that, All* will
change their situation and will replace them with others whom
He will support and cause to prevail.[11 Concerning that All21
says:

"For him (each person), there are angels in succession, before
and behind him. 7 k y guard him by the Command of Alllih.
Verily, Alllih will not change the (good) condition of a people as
long as they do not change their state (of goodness) themselves
(by committing sins and by being ungratefil and disobedient to
Alllih). But when All& wills a people's punishment, there can
be no turning back of it, and they will ,find besides Him no
protector" (Ar-Ra'd 1311)
'Uthmh told them that he was aware of the duties that he
so that both ruler and subjects would have a shared
had to ~LLM
sense of duty, and that each of them would feel that he was
striving for the sake of his ummah as well as for himself.[21

His letter to the zakah collectors
The first letter that he wrote to the zak&collectors was:
"All2h created on the basis of truth and He accepts nothing
but that which is based on truth, so take what is due (zaksh)and
give people their dues (rights)on the basis of Allsh's teachings. I
urge you to adhere to honesty, pay a great deal of attention to it
and do not be the first to neglect honesty. Fulfil covenants, and do
not wrong orphans or non-Muslims who have a treaty with the
[I1 At-Tare&

I['

al-lslami, 12/370

'Uthmin ibn 'Affk, by Ydiq 'Aqoon, p. 199

II

' U M n Ibn 'MSn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

122

Muslims, for AllSh will be the opponent of the one who wrongs
them."[']
This letter is addressed exclusively to those who are in charge
of collecting money and wealth from individuals, to be spent on
the public interests of the ummah. 'UthmSn explained to them
that AllSh accepts nothing but that which is based on truth, and
truth is based on sincerity and fulfilment. Then he pointed out
two types of people who are the weakest in the ummah: orphans
and dhimmis (non-Muslimswho have a treaty with the Muslims),
and he urged them to avoid wronging them, for they are under
the protection of ~llSh.['] Then he reminded them that if they
wronged them, they would be subject to the punishment of All&,
because He is the opponent of the one who wrongs these weak
persons. This points to one aspect of the greatness of Islam, as it
promotes supporting those who have been wronged, even if they
are non-Muslims living under Muslim protection.[31

His letter to the masses
"You have achieved what you have achieved by following
(Qur'k and Sunnah), so do not let worldly affairs distract you
from what matters. This ummah will start to follow innovations
after three things happen to you: when all kinds of luxury are
attained, when the children of your female slaves reach puberty,
and when the Bedouin and non-Arabs start reading the Qur'h,
for the Messenger of Allsh & said:

'Kufr results from not understanding Arabic; when they are
faced with something that they do not understand, they will
make it complicated and introduce innovations."'I4]
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/244
" 'Uthrn8n iibn 'Afftn, by Sgdiq 'Ar~oon,p. 198
at-Tareekh al-Islami, 20/371
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/245
['I

'UthmSn's method of ruling

123

In this letter we see that 'Uthmh & was keen for the common
folk of the ummah to follow that which is clear and not to make
things complicated or introduce innovations. He warned them
that the situation would change if three things happened together:
the attainment of all kinds of luxury, which would make people
careless and make them enjoy ease and lose the incentive to strive
hard, and would make them lazy and idle, so that they would lose
their energy and resolve; when the children of their female slaves
reached puberty - and during their history the ummah came to
realize the effect that these people had on their Muslim society in
political, social and religious terms; and when the Bedouin and
non-Arabs read the Qur'in. What 'Uthmk meant by that was the
harshness and hard-heartedness which is in the nature of the
Bedouin, so the guidance of the Qur'in would not penetrate deep
into their hearts. And as for the non-Arabs, they had their legacy
of deeply-rooted traditions and beliefs, and ancient customs that
created a barrier between them and their being affected and
guided by the Qur'in. The influence of the Bedouin was
i
who were a hard-hearted type of
manifested in the K h ~ j sect,
people; they read the Qur'h more than anyone else, yet they
were the furthest removed from its guidance. Then came the
influence of the non-Arabs, with the innovations that they
introduced and their complicated views and opinions, which
had a very bad effect on Muslim beliefs and from which stemmed
the misguided sects who played such a dangerous role in Islamic
history.[1'

The highest authority in the st
'Uthmsn declared that the highest authority in the state was
the Book of All31 and the Sunnah of His Messenger & and the
example of the two Shaykhs (Abu Bakr and 'Umar). He said: "... I
am a follower, not an innovator. After the Book of Allih and the
Sunnah of His Prophet g,I promise you three things: I will follow
"I

'Uthmtn ibn 'Affin, by Sgdiq'Aqoon, p. 199

I

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Noorayn

124

those who came before me in matters on which you were
unanimously agreed..."[']
1. The primary source is the Book of Allah. All* says:

"Surely, W e have sent down to you (0 Muhammad @J the
Book (this Qur'in) in truth that you might judge bekueen men
by that which All& has shown you (i .e. has taught you through
Divine Revelation), so be not a pleader for the treacherous" (AnNisa' 4105)
The Book of All* includes all shar'i rulings that have to do
with various aspects of life, as well as basic principles and
definitive rules to set straight all aspects of life. The Q d a n
tells the Muslims alI the principles they need in order to
establish their state.

2. The secondary source is the Sunnah, from which the Islamic
constitution derives its principles and f?om which can be
learned the practical way of implementing the rulings of the
~ur'2n.[*]

3. Following the example of the two Shaykhs. The Messenger of
All?& g said:

"Follow the example of those who come after me :Abu Bakr and
'Umar."[31
The state led by 'Uthmtin submitted to sharee'ah, and
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/443

12J Fiqh at-Tamkeen ji'l-Qurrin ii-Kareem by as-Sallsbi, p. 432
[31 Saheeh Sunan at-Tirmidhi, (3662) 3/200

'Uthmgn's method of ruling

125

sharee'ah superseded all human laws. This clearly shows us
that the Islamic state is a state based on sharee'ah, and all
aspects of the state submit to the rulings of this law. The ruler
is restricted by these rulings and cannot operate outside of
them.['] In the state ruled by 'UthmAn and in the society of
the Sahabah, sharee'ah came above all, and rulers and
subjects alike submitted to it. Obedience to the caliph was
within the framework of obedience to All*. The Messenger
of AUah g said:

"There is no obedience in the case of sin; obedience is only with
regard to that which is right and
The fact that sharee'ah dominated all affairs of state is one of
the characteristics of the Rightly-Guided caliphate. The
government of the RightlyGuided Caliphs was distinguished
from other governments by a number of characteristics, including
the following:
e The government of the caliph had responsibility over all
aspects of life, i.e., it was based on integration between
religious and worldly affairs.
e The government of the caliph was committed to
implementing the rulings of sharee'ah.
e The caliphate was based on the unity of the Muslim world.[31

The ummah's right to cafl &e caliph to acco~nt
Something concerning which there is no doubt is that the
authority of the caliph is not absolute, rather it is restricted by two
things:

1- He cannot go against any clear text of the Qur'h or Sunnah,
['I Nizam al-Hukmyl-Islam,
p. 227
['I

al-Bukhrin', no. 7257
by al-Sanhoori, p. 80

[31 Fiqh al-l(hiliijzh

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn ,& Dhun-Noorayn

and any
;ion he takes should be in harmony with the
spirit and a, s of sharee'ah.
2- He should not go against that upon which the Muslim
ummah is agreed or go against the will of the ummah.
The basis for that is that the caliph is the representative of the
ummah and his authority is derived from that, so it is up to the
ummah to determine the limits of this authority. The ummah
could, at any time, increase this authority or limit it and put
restrictions on it whenever there is an interest to be served by
doing so or to guarantee adherence to the commands of AllSh and
serve the interests of the ummah.[ll That may be achieved
affirmed
through the shoora council of the ummah. 'Uthmih
the ummah's right to bring the caliph to account when he said: If
you find in the book of All21 that you should put my legs in irons
then put my legs in irons.[z1When some group criticized some of
his mistakes - as they claimed - in the way he ran the affairs of
government and appomted people to positions of authority, and
groups assembled to bring him to account for his actions, he
submitted to their demand (to question him)and he did not deny
them this right, and he showed that he was quite prepared to put
right whatever mistakes he could have made.[31

Shoora
One of the basic principles of the Islamic state is the idea that
the leaders and rulers of the state should consult with the
Muslims and submit to their demands and opinions, and allow
the system of shoora to work. AllSh says:

al-Dawlah wa'l-Siycidah, by Dr. Fathi 'Abd al-Kareem, p. 268
Musnud al-Imam Ahmad, al-hhwsoo'ah al-Hadeethiyyah, no. 524
[31 al-Dmulah wa'l-Slyridah, p. 379
['I

I['

' U t W s method of ruling

127

"And by the Mercy of All&, you dealt with them gently. And
had you been severe and harsh-hearted, they would have broken
away frum about you; so pass over (their faults), and ask
(Allih's) forgiveness for them; and consult them in the affairs.
Then when you have taken a decision, put your trust in Allih,
certainly, Alllih loves those who put their trust (in Him)" (Aal
'Imrin 3~159)

"And those who answer the Call of their Lord [i.e. to believe that
He is the only One Lord (All&), and to worship none but Him
Alone], and perform As-Salih flqimat-as-Salih), and who
(conduct)their affairs by mutual consultation, and who spend of
what W e have bestowed on them" (Ash-Shoora 4238)
' U t M & established a shoora council for his state,
composed of the senior companions of the Messenger of AUSh
@ and the MdGjiroon and ~ n s k . [ l 'Uthmsn
]
made a request of
the governors and commanders, saying:
"Continue as you were when you were working for 'Umar,
and do not change. Whatever decision you want to take, refer it to
us and we will gather the ummah for consultation then we will
give you an answer."[']
His commanders committed themselves to that, so when they
wanted to launch a campaign or make any advances in the
conquests, they would ask him for permission and consult him,
and he in turn would assemble the SaKbah and consult them as
to how to make preparations, take decisions and make proper
plans, then he would give them permission to go ahead.l3] 'AbdAll31 ibn Abi Sarh wrote to the caliph 'Uthmk & asking him for
al-Ida^rnh al-'Askariyyah fi'l-Dawlah al-Islamiyyuh, 1/277
op. cit., 1/277, quoting from Tareekh at-Tabari
[I' Futooh Misr, p. 83
['I

I['

128

'Uthmk Ibn 'Affh
g Dhun-Noorayn

permission to penetrate deeper into Africa, because the islands
belonging to the Byzantines were close to the Muslims. The caliph
'Uthmiin gave him permission for that after consulting others,
and he urged the people to join him.['] When Mu'swiyah ibn Abi
Sufygn wanted to conquer the islands of Cyprus and Rhodes, he
did the same thing, consulting the leaders of the central
command, and he asked him for permission. The answer did
not come until after he held a meeting of the shoora council and
discussed the issue, then he gave him permission.[Z1
The commanders of the caliph 'Uthmsn 4 used to consult
with one anotherI3] with regard to directing battles, just as
'Uthmsn consulted the senior Sahsbah with regard to the
compilation of the Qur'h, 'Ubayd-All& ibn 'Umar's killing of
al-Hormuzh, the procedures to put an end to turmoil (fitnah),
court judgements and other issues and events which we will
discuss below in sha All&.

One of the aims of Islamic rule is to lay the foundations of the
Islamic system which will establish a Muslim society. Among the
most important of these foundations are justice and equality.
'Uthmh wrote to the people in the regions, saying: "Enjoin what
is good and forbid what is evil. No believer should subject himself
to humiliation, for I will be with the weak against the strong so
long as he has been wronged, in sha ~ l l s h . " ' ~ ]
His policy was based on justice in its most sublime form. He
canied out the hadd punishment on the governor of Kufah, alWaleed ibn 'Uqbah (who was his brother through his mother)
when witnesses testified that he had drunk alcohol, and he
dismissed him from his post because of that. This will be
discussed in detail later on in sha Allsh. And he agreed to appoint
op. cit., p. 183
al-ldirah al-'Askari~ah,1/278
13] ibid.
I4]Tareekh at-Tabari, 4/414
['I

'Uthmh's method of d i n g

129

of Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari in his stead, because the people of Kufah
did not agree to his appointment of Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas as the
successor to al-Waleed. It was also narrated that he got angry
with a servant of his one day and tweaked his ear until he hurt
him. Then he could not sleep that night until after he had called
his servant to his room and told him to take revenge by tweaking
his ear. The servant refused to obey at first, but 'Uthmh insisted,
so he obeyed.[ll

Reedo
The principle of freedom is one of the basic principles on
which rule was based at the time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs.
According to this principle, all civil liberties are to be guaranteed
to all people, within the framework of Islamic sharee'ah and in
such a way that they do not contradict it. The Islamic call for
freedom for all people is a comprehensive call, the like of which is
very rare in history. At the time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs
civil liberties such as we know them today were guaranteed and
protected[21, such as religious freedom, freedom of movement,
the right to safety, the sanctity of one's home, freedom of
ownership and freedom of opinion.

inspection (His
'UthmSn ii, himself paid attention to the issue of inspection
(hisbah) as well as delegating it to others. It is narrated that
'Uthmh took on the task of inspection in many fields, such as the
following:

Denouncing the wearing of clothes dyed with safflower
As part of his inspection, 'UthmSn & denounced Muhammad
ibn Ja'far ibn Abi Taib ii, for wearing a garment dyed with
safflower. It was narrated that Abu Hurayrah & said: 'Uthmh 4
['I Nizam d-Hukm
Samad, p. 149
[I'

fi 'Ahd al-KhuIafa' ar-Xlishideen, by Hamad Muhammad al-

op.cit., p. 157, 158

1

130

'Uthmin Ibn ' A f f k

Dhun-Noorayn

went to Makkah for Hajj. The wife of Muhammad ibn Ja'far ibn
Abi Taib entered upon him (Muhammad ibn Ja'far) and spent the
night with him, then the next morning he came with traces of
perfume on him, wearing a wrapper that was dyed with safflower
and had a reddish colour. He caught up with the people in
~ a l a l [ ' ]before they moved on. When 'Uthmh &. saw him, he
rebuked him and told him off and said: "Are you wearing a
garment dyed with safflower when the Messenger of Allih @
forbade that?"[']

Denunciation of women who go for 'umrah or Hajj during
the 'iddah period
Another example of 'UtMn's inspection is when he sent
back women who had gone out for 'umrah or Hajj when they
were still observing 'iddah. Imam 'Abd al-Razziq narrated that
Mujihid said: 'Umar and 'Uthmh (may All& be pleased with
them both) used to send back women who were going for Hajj
and 'umrah from al-Juhfah and ~ h u ' l - ~ u l a ~ f a h . [ ~ ~

His command to slaughter pigeons
He also forbade people to become preoccupied with keeping
pigeons[41 when life became easy for them, and he commanded
them to slaughter them. Imam al-Bukhiri narrated that al-Hasan
said: I heard 'Uthmh & enjoining in his khutbah the killing of
dogs and the slaughtering of pigeons.[5i

His objection to playing with dice
'Uthmh 4 used to forbid playing with dice, and he
commanded whoever had them in his house to bum them or
break them. Imam alBayhaqi narrated from Zubayd ibn al-Salt
that he heard 'Uthmin ibn 'Affh 4 say when he was on the
~ a l a la: place between Makkah and Madinah
at-Musnad, no. 517. Ahmad Sh& said: Its isn8d is saheeh. See: Ta'leeqit atShaykh 'ala'l-Musnad, 1/384
I'[ al-Musannaf, no. 12071
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/415
[51 al-Adab at-Mufrad, Bib Dhabh al-Hamim, no. 1307
I'[

I

'Uthmsn's method of ruling

131

minbar: 0 people, beware of gambling - meaning dice -for I have
been told that some of you have them in your houses. Whoever
has them in his house, let him bum them or break them. And
'Uthmsn said on another occasion when he was on the minbar: 0
people, I spoke to you about these dice, and I have not seen you
taking them out. I was thinking of ordering that firewood be
brought, then I would send men to the houses of those who have
them in their houses, to bum them down with them inside.[''

His expulsion from Madinah of those whom he saw doing
evil or unsheathing their weapons
'Uthmsn would denounce those whom he saw committing
evil or canying weapons, and he would expel them from
Madimah. It was narrated that Saim ibn 'Abdull* & said: 'If
'Uthrnh saw any of them committing evil or unsheathing a
weapon, wielding a stick or anything more than that, openly, he
would banish them.[']

Beating anyone who showed disrespect towards the
paternal uncle of the Prophet
During his caliphate he beat a man who, during a dispute,
expressed disrespect towards al-'Abbgs ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib, the
paternal uncle of the Messenger @. He was asked about the
reason why he beat him and he said: "Of course; didn't the
Messenger of All& $gshow a great deal of respect towards his
uncle? Do you want me to allow people to show disrespect
towards him? The one who does that or approves of it is going
against the Messenger of AllSh @.''[31

His prohibition of alcohol because it is the mother of all
evils
It was narrated by al-Nassi and al-Bayhaqi in their Sunans
[I1 alSuuan al-Kubra, Kitib al-Shahidit, 10/215

Tureekh at-Tabari, 5/416, Most of this section is taken from al-Hisbahfi'l-'Asr alNabawi wa'l-'Ahd at-Xiishidi, by Dr. Fad1 IlShi.
13' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/417

' U M n Ibn ' A f f h& Dhun-Noorayn

132

that ' U t M n ibn'Aff2n said: Avoid alcohol, for it is the mother of
all evils. There was a man in the past who was a devoted
worshipper, but a woman fell in love with him and wanted to
tempt him.She sent her slave girl to him, to tell him that she was
calling him to give testimony. She went with the slave girl, who
started to close every door behind him as he entered, until he
came to a beautiful woman, with whom was a boy and a vessel of
wine. She said: By All*, I did not call you here to give testimony,
but I called you to have intercourse with me, or to drink a cup of
this wine, or to kill this boy. He said: Pour me a cup of this wine.
She poured a cup for him and he said: Give me more. Then he did
not stop until he had had intercourse with her and killed the boy.
So avoid alcohol, for by AU* faith and addiction to alcohol
cannot co-exist but one of them will soon expel the other.[ll

(.+)

Khutbahs and sayings of 'UthmSn
His khutbah about preparing for the Day of Resurrection.
Al-Hasan al-Basri
said: 'Uthmh ibn 'Aff2n delivered a
speech. He praised and glorified All& then he said: 0 people,
fear All21 for fear of All2h is a great treasure. The smartest of
people is the one who checks himself and strives for that which
comes after death, and gains from the light of All2h light to
illuminate his grave. Everyone should wony lest All* resurrect
him blind when he had sight before. A few concise words are
sufficient for the wise man, but the deaf person will be called from
a distant place. You should realize that the one with whom All&
is will not fear anything, but the one against whom All2h is, what
hope can he have?["
It was narrated from 'Uthmh 4 that the Messenger of All2h
@ said:

['I S u m n an-Nasi'i, Kitiib al-Ashribah; Mawsoorah Fiqh 'Uthman, p. 52
12] Saheeh al-Tawtheeqfi Seerah wa Hayiit Dhi'r-Nomayn, p. 107

'Uthm3n's method of ruling

133

"The hornless animal will settle its score with the homed one on
the Day of Resurrection ."['I

His reminder about adopting a good attitude
'Uthmh
said: By Alliih we were with the Messenger of
AUSh &$ on journeys and at home. He used to visit our sick ones,
attend our funerals, go out on campaigns with us and share with
us during lean times and in times of plenty. There are people who
want to remind me of his Sunnah when probably none of them
even saw him.[']

c. Sayings that became well known among the people
0

a

0

0

0

e

'Uthmh said:
If our hearts were truly pure, we would never have our fill of
the words of your ~ 0 r d . I ~ ~
No one conceals something in his heart, but All* causes it to
be seen on his face or in a slip of the tongue.[41
Things may be achieved by means of authority that cannot be
achieved by means of the ~ u r ' h . [ ~ ]
' U W I .& did not attach much importance to this world, of
which he said: Concern with this world is darkness in the
heart, but concern with the Hereafter is light in the heart.[61
It is sufficient for you that the one who envies you is
distressed at the time of your joy.lq
During the days of turmoil he .& said: I ask All* for
forgiveness if I have done wrong, and I have already forgiven
if I have been wronged by others.[']

['I al-Mawsoorahal-Hadeethiyyah, Musnad Ahmad, no. 520 (1/72)
['I Saheeh al-Tawtheeqj? Seerah wa Hayrit Dhi'r-Noorayn, p. 107
13' @mi' al-'Uloom wa'l-Hikam, p. 363
[41 Fmii'id al-filrirn li'l-Khulafa' al-Kiram, p. 269
['I al-Krimilfi'l-Lugha wa'l-Adab, 1/157
[61 al-isti'lid li Yawm al-Mi'lid, p. 9

Majma' al-Amthil by al-Mayd-,
21453
Tare& Khaleefah ibn Khayyrif, p. 171

'Uthmsn fin 'AffZn .?a Dhun-Nooravn

134
e

e

e

Everything has something to undermine it, and every
blessing has something to diminish it. The thing that
undermines this religion and diminishes this blessing is
those who criticize a great deal and those who stab in the
back; they show you what you want to see and they conceal
that which you dislike. They are wicked like ostriches.[ll
When 'Abd-AU2h ibn az-Zubayr came with news of the
conquest of North k c a , 'Uthmth i b i ~'Affh 4 told him to
stand up and give a speech. When he had finished speaking,
'Uthmsn said: Marry women for what their fathers and
brothers are, for I have not seen any of the sons of Abu Bakr
who are more like him than this one.['] The mother of 'AbdAll& ibn az-Zubayr was Asma' bint Abi Bakr, and he meant
that Ibn az-Zubayr was like his grandfather in courage,
bravery and eloquence.131
No one does a good deed but All2h will make it show on
h,[41

e

The believer has five types of fear. The first is that AU* may
take his faith away from him; the second is that the recording
angels may write down something that may expose him on
the Day of Resurrection; the third is that the shaytgn may
cause his deeds to become invalid; the fourth is that the Angel
of Death may come to him without warning; and the fifth is
that this world may tempt him and distract him from the

erea after.'^'
e

I have found the sweetness of worship in four things. Thc first
is in performing the obligatory acts of worship enjoined by
All2h; the second is in avoiding the things forbidden by
AUSh; the third is enjoining that which is good, seeking the

I'[ Majma' al-Amthil by al-Maydini, 20/453
12] al-Baydn wart-Tabyeen, 2/95
13] Farrid al-Kaltm, p. 271
[4 az-Zuhd by Imam Ahmad, p. 185

Farrid al-KaEm li'l-Khulafa' al-Kirtm, p. 278

' U W n ' s method of ruling

135

reward of All&; and the fourth is forbidding that which is
evil, fearing the wrath of ~ l l ~ h . [ l '

'Uthmsn and poets and poetry
The sources tell us only a little about 'Uthmh's relationship
with poetry and poets, even though the duration of his caliphate
was relatively long. The little we know tells us that he adhered to
the general guidelines of Islamic belief as laid down by the
Messenger @$which were followed before him by Abu Bakr alSiddeeq and 'Umar ibn al-Khattiib (&). Undoubtedly each of
them had his own interest in literature. Abu Bakr was famous for
his knowledge of lineages, his broad general knowledge, his good
company and his recital of poetry. 'Umar was famous for
encouraging people to learn poetry. No issue was referred to
him but he could quote a pertinent line of poetry, and he was also
a poet himself. As for ' U t M n ibn 'Affsn 4,it is not narrated that
he had any deep interest in poetry or any strong relationship with
the poets. We know that the poets used to swarm around the
doors of the rulers, hoping to earn their pleasure and &ts. But in
the days of 'Uthmh we see that the poets left the major cities and
Madmh, and preferred to go back to the desert.121The books of
literature and history quote some of the verses that are attributed
to ' U W n or that he used to recite.
Because the third Rightly-Guided Caliph did not pay a great
deal of attention to poetry and the poets were not close to him, his
murder by thugs opened the door to the flourishing of 'Abbasid
poetry that would effectively become a form of media in the
coming Islamic eras. When he was murdered, many of the poets
among the Sdztbah wrote moving eulogies. This wiU be discussed
in the succeeding chapters, in sha Allih.

['I ibid.

I21 Adar Sadr al-Islam, by W;ldih al-Samad, p. 99

i

I

I

His main characteristics

-

'Uthmsn is regarded as a born leader, one who was devoted
to Allih. In describing his character, we will mention some points
in brief and discuss others in detail. Among the most important of
his characteristics were his deep faith in Alliih and his belief in the
Last Day, his knowledge of Islam, his trust in Allsh, exemplary
conduct, sincerity, efficiency, courage, chivalry, asceticism, love of
sacrifice, humility, willingness to accept advice, forbearance,
patience, high ambition, resolve, strong will, justice, problemsolving ability, ability to teach and prepare leaders, and other
characteristics. Because of the leadership qualities that All2h had
created in him, he was able to protect the state and suppress
rebellions that arose in the conquered lands, and by the grace and
support of AlEh he was able to help the ummah achieve its goals.
Among the most important of these attributes on which we will
try to shed light in this section are the following:

Knowledge a i d teaching skills
'Uthmk & is regarded as one of the senior scholars among
the Sahsbah with regard to the Holy Qur'sn and Sunnah of the
Prophet &. We will discuss his efforts in the field of fiqh in the
sections on the judiciary, financial institutions and jihad, in sha
AUsh ' U t h m h d was eager to follow the guidance of the Prophet

138

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affgn &
Dhun-Nooravn
i
- --.~
,--

@< Abu Bakr and 'Umar (may Allgh be pleased with them both).

It was narrated from'urwah ibn az-Zubayr that 'Ubayd-AUSh ibn
'Adiyy ibn al-KhayySr told him that al-Miswar ibn Makhramah
and 'Abd al-Rahm2n ibn al-Aswad 'Abd Yaghooth said to him:
What kept you from speaking to your maternal uncle, the Ameer
al-Mu'mineen 'Uthmh, about al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah, when the
people were talking a great deal about what he did? 'Ubayd-All*
said: I intercepted the caliph 'Uthmh when he went out to pray
and I said to him:I want to give you some advice. He said: 0 man,
I seek refuge with All* from you. So I went away, then when he
had finished praying I sat with al-Miswar and Ibn 'Abd Yaghooth
and told them what I had said to the caliph and what he had said
to me. They said: You have done what you had to. Whilst I was
sitting with them, the messenger of the caliph 'Uthmgn came to
me and they said to me: AllSh is testing you. I went to 'Uthmgn
and he said: What is the advice that you wanted to tell me before?
I recited the Shahgdah then I said to him: All&, may He be
glorified and exalted, sent Muhammad with the truth and
revealed the Book to him, and you were one of those who
responded to AllSh and His Messenger @< and you saw his
guidance. The people are talking too much about al-Waleed, so
you have to carry out the hadd punishment on him.He said to me:
0 son of my sister, did you meet the Messenger of AUSh g?I said:
No, but the knowledge and certain faith that have reached me are
what could reach a virgin in her seclusion. He recited the
Shahsdah then he said: All& sent Muhammad with the truth,
and I was one of those who responded to All& and His
I believe in that with which He sent Muhammad
Messenger g:
@< then I migrated twice as you said, and I became the son-in-law
of the Messenger of AUSh @. I swore allegiance to the Messenger
of All* g and by Allgh 1 was not disobedient or insincere
towards hi& until he passed away. Then Abu Bakr was appointed
as his successor, and we swore allegiance to him, and by All* I
was not disobedient or insincere towards him until he passed
away. Then 'Umar was appointed as his successor, and by AllSh I
was not disobedient or insincere towards him until he passed

i

His main characteristics

139

away. Now All2h has appointed me as his successor, so should I
not have authority over you as they had over me? I said: Yes. He
said: So what is this talk that I am hearing about among you? As
for what you say about al-Waleed, we will investigate it, in sha
Allah, and do what is right. He gave al-Waleed forty lashes, and
he ordered 'Ali to flog him,so he was the one who flogged him.[']
'Uthmh 8 stayed close to the Prophet @ and benefited from
his knowledge and guidance, which made him one of the senior
scholars of the SahSbah ( &). He was able to show his people
the right way and lead them properly, teaching them their duties
and giving them his advice and opinions which were based on his
knowledge and experience so that they could advance in the
fields of da'wah, leadership, education, jihad and preparing to
meet AU2h 3%.
Some of 'Uthmh's exhortations were included in the speech
he gave when he was appointed caliph, in which he said, after
praising All21 and sending blessings upon the Prophet &: YOU
are in a transient realm which you will soon leave, but you have
some of your life left, so hasten before death comes to do the best
you can, for death may come to you at any time, morning or
evening. This world is very deceiving, so let not this present life
deceive you, and let not the chief deceiver (Satan) deceive you
about All2h (cf. FStir 35~5).Learn from those who have passed
away, then strive hard and do not be heedless. Where are those
who lived in this world before us, those who tilled the soil and
populated the land and enjoyed life for a long time? Did they not
depart this life? So do what is good in this world.['] All31 says:

['I
I['

Fada^lil ul-SuhLibah, 1/597, no, 791. Its isnid is saheeh.
Al-Bidiyah wah-Nihiyah, 7/153

'Uthm5n Ibn ' A f f k

140

.* Dhun-Noorayn

"And put fomard to them the example of the life of this world :it
is like the water (rain) which We send downfrom the sky, and
the vegetation of the earth mingles with it, nnd becomes fresh
and green. But (Infer)it becomes dry and broken pieces, which
the winds scatter. And Allih is Able to do everything. Wenlth
and children are the adornment of the life of this world. But the
good righteous deeds thnt last, are better with your Lord for
rmards and better in respect of hope" (Al-Knhf 18:45,46)
The focal point in this khutbah delivered by the third caliph
'Uthmh was urging people to turn to All21 and to turn their
backs on this world. This was an appropriate topic for a speech at
that time, when Islam was established throughout the world,
lands had been conquered, worldly luxuries had become
abundant and competition in acquiring worldly things had
begun, especially among people other than the colnpanions of
the Messen er of Allsh &. So these were the right words at the
right time.['
'Uthmh 4 narrated ahzdeeth from the Messenger of Allih
g$from which the ummah benefited. Abu 'Abd al-Rahmh alSulami tells us of a hadeeth that he heard from 'Uthmh and acted
upon it. It was narrated from Sa'd ibn 'Ubaydah, from Abu 'Abd
al-Rahmzn al-Sulami, hom 'Uthmh &, that the Prophet & said:

5

"The best of you is the one who learns the Qur'in and teaches
it,"[21
He said: Abu 'Abd al-Rahmsn taught the Qur'in durlng the
caliphate of 'Uthmgn and until the time of al-Hajjzj. He said: That
is what made me sit down and teach. According to a report
narrated from Shu'bah, Abu 'Abd a l - R a M n said: That is what
made me sit down and teach, and he used to teach ~ u r ' i n . [ ~ 1
'I'

I'

al-Kafci'ah al-Idiriyyahfi'l-Siyisahal-Shafiyyah by dQSdiri, p. 93
al-Bukhkhari,
no. 5027
al-Khailrifah ar-Rtshidah, by Dr. Yahya d-Yahya, p. 420, 421

His main characteristics

141

'Uthmh narrated ahsdeeth of the Messenger of A E h @ to the
Muslims, each at the proper time and place. These ahsdeeth
include the following:

The importance of wudoo'
'Uthmh did wudoo' in al-Balst then he said: I shall narrate to
you a hadeeth that I heard from the Messenger of AIEh @* which
were it not for a verse in the Book of AUSh I would not narrate it to
you. I heard the Prophet @ say:

'Whoever does wudoo' and does it well, then goes in and prays,
he will be forgiven his sins between one prayer and the next,
until he prays it. "[I'

His imitation of the Messenger of AU2h

in doing wurloo'

It was narrated from HamrSn ibn A b h that 'Uthmsn ibn
'Affh called for water and he did wudoo', rinsing his mouth and
nose, then washing his face three times, then his forearms three
times each, then wiping his head and the tops of his feet. Then he
smiled and said to his companions: Are you not going to ask me
why I am smiling? They said: Why are you smiling, 0 Arneer alMu'mineen? He said: I saw the Messenger of AUSh g$calling for
water near this spot, then he did wudoo' as I have done, then he
smiled and said:

"Are you not going to ask me why I am smiling?"
They said: Why are you smiling, 0 Messenger of AllSh? He
said:
"I

al-Mawsoorahal-Hadeethiyyah, Musnad Ahmad, no. 400 (1/75). Its isnrjd is saheeh.

' U M Ibn 'Affgn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

142

"If a person calls for water for wudoo', and washes his face,
All& will erase every sin caused by hisface. When he washes his
forearms, the same applies. When he wipes his head, the same
applies, and when he cleans his feet, the same q p l i e s . "['I
The expiation of wudoo'
It was narrated that 'Uthmih said: The Messenger of All21 $g
said:

'Whoeuer completes wudoo' as enjoined by Allih (may He be
g l o q e d and exalted), the prescribed prayers will be an expiation
for whatever comes in behveen them. "['l

Wudoo', praying two rak'ahs, and forgiveness of sins
'Uthmsn called for water when he was sitting on a chair. He
poured some water on his right hand and washed it, then he put
his right hand in the vessel and washed his hands three times,
then he washed his face three times and rinsed his mouth and
nose. He washed his forearms up to the elbows three times, then
he wiped his head, then he washed his feet up to the ankles three
times, then he said: I heard the Messenger of A l l a g say:

['I al-Mawsoo'ah al-Hadeethiyyah, Musnud Ahmad, no. 415 (1/58,59). It is saheeh li

ghayrihi.
"I

Al-Mawsoorah al-Hadeethiyyah, Musnad ul-Imam Ahmad, no. 406; (1/57) its is&
is saheeh.

i

I

His main characteristics

143

"Whoever does wudoo' as I have done it, then prays two rak'ahs
in which he does not a l l m his mind to wander, Allrih will
forgive him his previous sins ."[ll
A word of sincerity and a word of piety
'Uthmh said: I heard the Messenger of All&

say:

"I knoul a word which no person says sincerely,from the heart,
but he will be forbidden to the Fire ."
'Umar ibn al-Khattsb said to him: I will tell you what it is. It is
the word of sincerity to which Allsh 3% will cause Muhammad &$
and his companions to adhere, and it is the word of piety which
the Prophet of AUsh g urged his uncle Abu Taib to say when he
was dying: the testimony that there is no god but ~ll21.[~'

Knowledge of AU2h will admit a person to Paradise
It was narrated from 'Uthmh ibn 'Affk that the Prophet @
said:

"Whoever dies knowing that there is no god but All31 will enter
paradise ."[31

The good righteous deeds and the things that endure
It was narrated that Hzrith, the freed slave of 'Uthmh, said:
Op. cit., no. 418. its isniid is saheeh (1159).
IZ1 Musnad Ahmud, no. 447 (1/63). Its isnrid is qmiy.
13' Musnad Akmad, no. 464 (1/65). Its isnrid is saheeh
'I1

144

' U W n Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Nooravn

'Uthmiin sat down one day and we sat with him, then the
muezzin came to him and he called for water in a vessel which I
think could hold a mudd. He did wudoo' then he said: I saw the
Messenger of All* & doing wudoo' like this, then he said:

'Whoever does wudoo'as I have done it, then prays Zuhr prayer
will be forgiven for what came between it and Fajr, then prays
'Asr, will be forgiven for what came between it and Zuhr
prayer, then prays Maghrib, will be forgiven for what came
between it and 'Asr prayer, then prays 'Isha', will be forgiven
for what came between it and Maghrib prayer. Then ifhe spends
the night engaging in intimacy, then he gets up and does
wudoo' and prays Fajr, he will be forgiven for what came
between it and 'Isha' prayer. These are the good righteous deeds
that take away bad deeds ."
They said: These are the good righteous deeds; what are the
things that endure, 0 'Uthmiin? He said: They are (the phrases) Lli
illiha ill-Alllih (there is no god but All31), Subhlin Alllih (Glory be to
AUiih), ul-hamdu Lillah (praise be to Allsh), Alllihu akbar (An* is
Most Great) and Lli hawla wa la^ quwwata illa Billlih (There is no
power and no strength except with ~ l l ~ h ) . " ~

Seriousness of telling lies about the Messenger of Allsh @
"I Musnad Ahmad, no. 513 (1/71).Its isr&d is hasan

His main characteristics

145

It was narrated that ' U t M n & said: The Messenger of Allsh
@jsaid:

[[>a,
> -. f@. - 'K. d5
,

) , ;

,

"The one who tells a lie about me deliberately, let him take his
place in Hell ."['I
This is some of the ahlideeth that were narrated by 'Uthmh
from the Messenger of Allsh g.This is indicative of 'Uthmsn's
knowledge and keenness to learn more of the Prophet's teachings
and to understand Islam.

Forbearance is one of the pillars of wisdom. Allsh has
ascribed the attribute of forbearance to Himself in several places
in the Qur'sn, such as the verse in which He says:

"Those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts met (i .e.
the battle of Uhud), it was Shaytin (Satan)who caused them to
backslide (vun away from the battlefield) because of some (sins)
they had earned. But Allth, indeed, has forgiven them. Surely,
Alllih is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbean'ng" (Aal 'Imrlin 3:155)
The Prophet @ reached the pinnacle of forbearance and
ed
'UthmSn ibn 'Affh
tolerance, and t h e - ~ i ~ h t l ~ - G u i dCaliph
followed the exemplary words and deeds of the Messenger of
AUsh @. There are many cases which point to his forbearance and
self control. One of the clearest examples of his forbearance is the
story of his being besieged by the rebels, when he commanded the
Muhsjireen and Anssr who were with him to go to their own
homes and leave him, even though they were able to protect him.
'I Musnad Ahmad, no. 507 (1/70). Its isnid is saheeh.

'Uthmgn Ibn ' A f f h& Dhun-Nooravn

146

His forbearancewas based on his longing to meet his Lord and his
desire to protect Muslim blood from being shed, even if that led to
his own death.[']

Easygoing nature
It was narrated from 'Ata' ibn Farrookh, the freed slave of
Quraysh, that ' U M n g bought some land from a man, then the
man changed his mind and did not complete the deal. 'Uthmsn
met him and said: Why are you not taking the money? He said:
You did not give me the right price and everyone whom 1 met
criticized me. He said: Is that why you don't want to go ahead
with it? He said: Yes. He said: Choose between the land and the
money. Then he said: The Messenger of AUih @ said:

"Alllih admitted to Paradise a man who was easygoing in
buying and selling, both when paying of his debts and when
asking people to pay him what they owed him ."[''
This is a sublime example of being easygoing in buying and
selling which indicates that 'UthmSn 4 was of a noble nature and
was not deeply attached to this world; he scorned worldly gain in
the interests of good manners, the most important of which was
selflessness, for being selfish could have made him give his own
interests precedence even if that harmed others.[31

Gentleness
Allsh reminded His Messenger @ that He had bestowed
upon him the quality of gentleness as a sign of His mercy towards
him and towards His slaves. AU6h says:
['I Al-Kafi'ah al-ldin'yyahji'-Siyn^sak alSkar'iyyah by Dr. 'Abd-AIEh al-Qsdiri, p.

65

Musnad Akmad, no. 410 (1/58). It is hasan li ghayrihi.
'31 At-Tareekh al-Islami, 17, 18/126

I

His main characteristics

147

"And by the Mercy of Allth, you dealt with them gently. And
had you been severe and harsh-hearted, they would have broken
away from about you" (Aal 'Imrtn 3:159)
The verse indicates that the attribute of gentleness is a mercy
from AU2h which He bestows upon whomsoever He will of His
slaves, and the Messenger & was blessed with this quality as a
mercy from All& towards Him and towards His slaves to whom
He had sent him. It may be understood from this verse that the
one who has the quality of gentleness is loved by people and the
gather around him and accept his commands and prohibitions.[1
Gentleness is one of the good characteristics that ' U M n .& had.
He was gentle towards his people and compassionate towards his
urnmah, lest anyone be stricken with calamity without his
knowledge, which would make him unable to help him. He
used to check on people, helping the weak and taking what was
due from the strong.

i"

Forgive
It was narrated from 'Imrin ibn 'Abd-Alla ibn Talhah that
'Uthrnin ibn 'Affin 4 went out to pray Fajr and he entered
through the door through which he usually entered, and another
man pushed and shoved at the door. He said: See who it is. They
looked and found that it was a man who had a dagger or sword
with him. 'Uthmin & said to him: What is this? He said: I wanted
to kill you. He said: Subhh All*, woe to you! Why do you want
to kill me? He said: Your governor wronged me in Yemen. He
said: Why didn't you complain to me about your mistreatment?
Then if I did not help you or settle the score for you, you could
decide to kill me. He said to those who were around him:What do

' U W n Ibn 'AffSn g Dhun-Noorayn

148

you think? They said: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, he is an enemy
over whom Allgh has given you power. He said: He is a person
who thought of a sin but AllSh protected me from him. Bring me
someone who will guarantee that you will not enter Madinah
again so long as I am the ruler of the Muslims. So he brought a
man of his own people who gave that guarantee, and he let him
131
go.
This is a great example of tolerance on the part of the caliph
'UthmSn ibn 'Affgn, as he forgave a man who wanted to kill him.
Forgiveness when one is able to take revenge is one of the
qualities of perfection in a man, and it indicates that he has risen
above his ego, has rid himself of selfishness and has few ties with
this world, being strongly tied to the Hereafter instead. In
addition to it being a righteous deed, this characteristic also raises
a person in status in the Hereafter, and is a wise approach in this
world, because if this man who had wanted to attack him was
killed or punished, that may have caused turmoil, stirring up
hatred in the hearts of his fellow-tribesmen, and they may have
decided to take revenge whenever the opportunity arose. But
forgiving him would lead to his fellow-tribesmen rebuking him
for what he had tried to do, thus the turmoil was nipped in the
bud. The one who is forbearing is able to win people's hearts.[']

Humility
Allgh says:

"And the (faith&l) slaves of the Most Gracious (Allth) are those
who walk on the earth in humility and sedateness, and when the
[I1 at-Tareekh al-Islami, 17,18/22,

ah, p. 1027,1028

quoting from Tareekh al-Madinah al-Munawwar-

His main characteristics

149

foolish address them (with bud words) they reply buck with mild
words of gentleness" (Al-Furqrin 25:63)
The Lord has made humility one of the main characteristicsof
His believing slaves. The Rightly-Guided Caliph 'Uthmiin also
had this characteristic, which stemmed from his sincerity towards
All* %. It was narrated that 'Abd-All* d-Roomi said: 'Uthm2n
ibn 'Aff2n used to get his wudoo' water for himself when he got
up to pray at night. It was said to him Why don't you tell your
servant to do it for you? He said: No; the night is for them to
rest.['] This is an example of the mercy that was characteristic of
the caliph 'Uthmin. Even though he was older and of a high social
status, he would help himself at night and not wake up the
servants, even though All& has placed the servants at the service
of their masters. The Muslim to whom Allgh has given servants
should remember that the servant is a human being like him: he
has limited energy and he has feelings, so he should respect his
feelings and lei him rest ~LLU when he sleeps, so that his work will
A sign of his humifity and respect
not be too dlfhcult for
for the uncle of the Prophet @ was that if he passed by him when
riding, he would dismount until al-'Abbis disappeared, out of
respect for him.13]

him6

Modesty and chastity
Modesty was one of the most famous characteristics of
'Uthmh 4,and one of the best, with which All* adorned him. Ii
was a source of goodness and blessing, kindness and compassion.
'Uthmh & was one of the most modest of men.I4I Al-Hasan alBasri (.&) mentioned 'Uthmh and his intense modesty, saying:
He would be in a house with the door closed, and he would not
take off his garment in order to pour water on himself, and
FadEil al-Sahtbah, no. 742. Its isnSd is sakeh.
At-Tareekh al-Islami, 17, 18/62
13' At-Tabyeenfl Ansib d-Qurashiyyeen, 152
14' 'Uthmtn ibn A@n by Ssdiq 'Arjoon, p. 48,49
[I1

150

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affgn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

modesty would prevent him from standing up straight.[']
Another example of his modesty was narrated by BaGnah,
who was his wife's slave woman. She said: When 'Uthmb
bathed, I would bring him his garment and he would say: Do not
look at me, for that is not permissible for you.[21
And there are ahgdeeth of the Prophet @$ which speak of his
modesty. We will quote them below as is appropriate.
With regard to his chastity and avoidance of bad behaviour,
there is an abundance of reports that point to that. He did not
commit immoral deeds either during the Jthiliyyah or in Islam.
'Uthmin said: I was never involved in singing or telling lies, and I
never touched my penis with my right hand since I swore
allegiance to the Messenger of All& &. I never drank alcohol
during the Jrihiliyyah or in Islam, and I never committed zina
during the Jthiliyynh or in slam.[^]

' U W n was one of the most generous of this ummah. There
are many reports which speak of this, and form a bright page in
the history of Islam. We have already seen what he did for the
campaign to Tabook, and how he bought the well of Bi'r Roomah
and gave it in charity to the Muslims, and how he expanded the
Prophet's Mosque at the time of the Prophet %, and how he gave
a caravan of food in charity at the time of Abu Bakr &. From the
time he became Muslim, he freed one slave every week for the
sake of Allsh. In all, he freed approximately 2,400 slaves.[41It was
narrated that Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-All2h - who was one of the most
generous of people - owed him fifty thousand, and Talhah said to
him one day: Your money is ready; come and take it. 'Uthmin
said to him: Keep it as a reward for your chivalry.[51' U W s
1'1 Saheeh af-Tawtheeq$ Seerah wa Hayrit Dhih-Noorayn, p. 43

12] Tabaqtt Ibn Sa'd, 3/59.
[I' Saheeh al-Tmtheeq, p. 44
I[' asSawi'iq al-Muhriqah by Ibn Hajar al-Haytami, 1/237

aMid8yah wah-Nihtyd, 7/227

His main characteristics

151

generosity was a basic feature of his personality. He used his
wealth in the service of AUXs religion and he was not stingy in
helping to establish the Islamic state, in jihad for the sake of Allah
and in serving the society, seeking thereby the pleasure of All&

3%.

Courage
'Uthmgn is regarded as one of the most courageous of men,
and the evidence for that is as follows:

1- He went out to engage in jihad for the sake of Allah, and was
present on all the campaigns with the Messenger of AUah @.
Although some may criticize him for not being present at
Badr, we have already explained that this was in response to
the command of the Messenger of Allah gg and the
Messenger of All& @ counted him among those who had
been present and gave him a share of the booty, and he will
attain the reward for that too, in sha All&. After coming to
know what the Messenger of Allah @ said about it, there is
nothing more that can be said.
2- The Messenger of Allah @ sent him as an envoy to Quraysh
at the time of al-Hudaybiyah.
As we have seen above, 'UthmAn obeyed the request of the
Messenger g and went to Quraysh knowing the risk that he
was taking, but his courage and heroism compelled him to
obey.
The one who agrees to go as an envoy under such
circumstances is courageous indeed, and he is a rare type
of hero. It is true that this was a command from the
Messenger of Allah @, but at the same time it is a
courageous act that could not be undertaken by any
coward or ordinary man.'']

' U M n Ibn 'Affgn 4%Dhun-Noorayn

152

3- His self-sacrifice. When 'Uthm3n was besieged in his house,
the outlaws asked him to abdicate from the caliphate and
gave him no other choice: abdicate or be killed, and dismiss
some of his governors and hand some of them over. He
persisted in his attitude of self-sacrifice so as to prevent the
caliphate from falling into the hands of this gang who would
remove whomever they wanted and appoint whomever they
wanted or wrest the caliphate from the one who had been
appointed by the ummah, lest that set a precedent.['] He
insisted on that even though he could see death in the
swords of the besiegers. The one who takes such a stance
must be brave, and he is in the right. No coward or lover of
this world would ever take such a stance. For such cowards
life is better than any status or position, and better than the
whole world.[21 But 'Uthmgn's unwavering insistence,
determined resolve and great courage stemmed from his
strong faith in AIlfih and belief in the Last Day, which were
deeply rooted in his heart and made him scorn everything in
this life, even life itself.[31
4- Jihad with his wealth. Jihad with oneself is mentioned
alongside jihad with one's wealth, and may take precedence
over it. Allah says:

"Not equal are those ofthe believers who sit (at home), except
those who are disabled (by injury or are blind or lame), and those
who strive hard andfght in the Cause ofAllih with their wealth
'I

op. cit., p. 197
op. cit., p. 197

'31 jawlah Tareekhiyyah

p. 304

fi 'Asr al-Khulafa' ar-Rrishideen by Muhammad al-Wakeel,

His main characteristics

153

and their lives. Allih has preferred in grades those who strive
hard andfight with their wealth and their lives above those who
sit (at home). Unto each, All& has promised good (Paradise),
but Alllih has preferred those who strive hard andfght, above
those who sit (at home) by a huge reward (An-Nisa' 495)
There are many verses which mention wealth alongside
oneself (in the context of jihad). The one who spends his wealth
generously for the sake of All31 is also a muji&id and is
courageous. 'UthmSn 4 spent a great deal for the sake of All&, so
said:
much so that the Messenger of All&

"Nothing will ham 'Uthmlin, no matter what he does, afer
today,"[I'
twice.
'UthmSn was brave and did not fear death; he was
courageous in confronting and challenging falsehood and he
was forbearing and did not let the folly of the foolish cause him to
say ignorant things.[''

Res
Resolve was a fundamental part of the character of 'Uthmh.
When Abu Bakr & presented Islam to him, he said to him: Woe to
you, 0 'UthmSn, for you are a man of resolve and you should be
able to distinguish truth from falsehood. What are these idols that
our people worship?[31
In 26AH, 'UthmSn expanded al-Masjid al-Hariim. He bought
(property) from some of the people, but others refused to sell. He
still demolished the houses, and he put the price for them in the
bayt al-miil, and they started to shout at 'UthmSn, so he ordered
that they be detained. He said: Do you know what made you dare
Sunan at-Tinnidhi, no. 3701
Jmlah Tmeekhiyyahj 'Asr al-KhulajY ar-Rcishideen, p. 304
[31 'Uthmtn ibn 'Afffin,by SSdiq Aqoon, p. 47
['I
[I'

154

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

to shout at me? Nothing made you dare to shout at me but my
forbearance. 'Umar did that to you before, and you did not shout
at him. Then 'Abd-AllSh ibn Khslid ibn Usayd spoke to him
concerning them, and he let them go.[11
Another indication of his resolve came when he protected the
system of caliphate from being undermined. He did not respond
to the rebels' demand to step down as caliph, and through his
steadfastness the system continued, because if he had given in to
their demands to step down, the position of caliph would have
become like a toy in the hands of those who were tempted by the
shaytiin and were trying to spread corruption on earth; chaos
would have prevailed and the system of government would have
been undermined, and the thugs and troublemakers would have
gained power over the rulers and governors. 'Uthmin's view was
farsighted; if he had given in to them, he would have set a
precedent and every time the people objected to their ruler, they
would depose him, which would cause a great deal of trouble to
the ummah, and distract them from fighting their enemy by
embroiling them in a civil war, which would lead to chaos and
collapse. But he could not find anything but his own self to
sacrifice for the sake of the ummah and protect it from collapse.
By means of this sacrifice he supported the social system and
protected the authority that ruled it, lest the troublemakers harm
it. There can be no doubt that this action of 'Uthmiin's was the
greatest that any man to whom the reins of the ummah were
given could do, as he resorted to the lesser of the two evils by
means of this sacrifice, to psotect the system and authority of the
caliphate.[21We will discuss this further in the appropriate place,
in sha Allsh.

Patience
'UthmSn bore the characteristic of patience, as is indicated by
his steadfastness at the time of fitnah. His attitude in facing the

"I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/250
Tuhqeeq Mawtqifas-Sahribah min al-Fihah, 1/474

His main characteristics

155

events that befell him and the Muslims was the highest example
of self-sacrifice that any person could offer for the sake of
preserving the community and the honour of the ummah, and
preventing Muslim blood from being shed. He could have
protected himself if all he cared about was saving his own life
without caring about the ummah. If he had been selfish he would
have urged the Sahibah and the sons of the Muhijireen and
AnsSr who came to his defence to go and fight the outlaws who
had rebelled against his rule. But he wanted to keep the ummah
united, so he offered himself as a sacrifice. 'Uthmh & announced
that he would face the overwhelming fitnah with patience[11,in
obedience to the words of All&

"Those (i .e . believers) unto whom the people (hypocrites) said,
'Verily, the people (pagans) have gathered against you (a great
army), therefore, fear them.' But it (only) increased them in
Faith, and they said : 'All& (Alone) is Suficient for us, and He
is the Best Disposer of affairs for us)"' (Aal 'Imrin 3:173)
'Uthmh had strong faith in AUSh and was noble-hearted,
with deep insight and patience, so he sacrificed himself to save the
ummah. That is one of the greatest of his virtues in the eyes of the
~uslims.[~
Ibn
] Taymiyah (.&) said: It is well-known via tawstur
that 'UthmSn was a person who refrained the most from
bloodshed, and he was the most patient of people with those
who would tarnish his honour and who planned to shed his blood
and kill him. They besieged him with the aim of killing him, and
he knew that they wanted to kill him; the Muslims came to
support him and advised him to fight, but he kept urging the
people to refrain from fighting. He told those who would listen to
[I1 Siyar ashShuhadarby alSakhistiy$ni, p. 57,58
[21

Tahqeeq Maw8q$al-Sah8bnh min al-Fitnuh, 1/472

' U r n Ibn ' A f f k i$a Dhun-Noorayn

him not to fight. It was said to him: Go to Makkah, but he said: I
will not be one who causes the sanctuary to be violated. It was
said to him: Go to Syria, but he said: I will not leave the land to
which I migrated. It was said to him: Then fight them. He said: I
will not be the first of the successors of Muhammad to confront
his ummah by the sword. The patience that 'Uthmh showed
until he was killed was one of the greatest of his virtues in the eyes
of the ~uslims.['l

'Uthmh had the quality of justice. It was narrated from
'Ubayd-AUSh ibn 'Adiyy ibn d-Khiyib that he entered upon
'Uthmh 4 when he was being besieged and said to him: You are
the leader of the people, and there has befallen you what you see,
which is that a man who led us in prayer is the leader of this
turmoil - meaning 'Abd a l - R a h d ibn 'Udays al-Balwa - but I
shall refuse to pray behind him. 'Uthmh said to him: Prayer is
the best thing that the people can do. If the people do something
good then join them in that, and if they do something bad then
avoid their bad deeds.["
Ibn Shabbah narrated with his isn2d that 'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h
entered upon a slave of his who was feeding his she-camel, and he
saw something in the feed that he disliked, so he took hold of the
slave's ear and tweaked it. Then he regretted it and said to his
slave: Settle the score. The slave refused, but he did not leave him
alone until he had taken hold of his ear and begun to tweak it.
'Uthmh said to him: Pull hard, until he thought that (the slave)
had pulled as hard as he had done. Then 'Uthmin & said: How
easy it is to settle a score before it is settled in the erea after.^^]

Worship
'UtlmSn &was one of those who strove hard in worship. It is
Manluij as-Sunnah, 3/202, 203
al-Bukh&i, no. 695
'31 Akhb8~al-Madinah by Ibn Shabbah, 3/236
"I

'21

His main characteristics

157

narrated via more than one isAd that he would recite the entire
Qur'h in one rak'ah at the Black Stone during the days of Hajj,
and this was something that he did regularly.[" Hence it was
narrated that Ibn 'Umar said concerning the verse

"Is one who is obedient to All&, prostrating himselfor standing
(in prayer) during the hours of the night, fearing the Hereaper
and hoping for the Mercy of his Lord (like one who
disbelieves)?" (Az-Zumar 399)
Such was 'Uthmfin ibn '~ffin.~']And Ibn 'Abbss said
concerning the verse

"Is such a man equal to one (believer in the Islamic Monotheism)
s
and is himself on the Straight Path?"
who c o m ~ n d justice,
(An-Nahl16:76):
Such a man was ' ~ t h m 2 n . ~He
~ 'would start reading Qur'Sn
the night before Friday and complete it the night before
~ h u r s d a ~ . He
[ ~ ]used to fast all the time, and spend the ni ht
in prayer, apart from a short sleep at the beginning of the night.k1

Fear o f All&, weeping and taking stock of himsell
In one of his khutbahs he said: 0 people, fear AUih for fear of
All21 is a treasure. The smartest of the people is the one who
al-Tabaqzt al-Kubra, 3/76; TareeWl al-Islam, 'Ahd al-Khulafa: by al-Dhahabi, p.
476
[21 Tnfseer Ibn Katheer, 4/47.
[31 Tafseer lbn Katheer, 2/579
'41 'Uluw al-Himmah, 3/93
rq Sqat as-Safwah by Imam Ibn al-Jawzi, 1/302
['I

158

'UthmSn Ibn 'Affin a% Dhun-Nooravn

checks on himself and strives for that which comes after death,
strives to acquire some of the light of Allsh for his grave, and fears
lest AUZh raise him blind when he had sight (in this world)."]
And it was narrated that he said: If I were between Paradise and
Hell, not knowing to which of them I would be commanded to be
taken, I would wish to be tumed to ashes before I knew in which
of them I would end up.
He would tremble and tears would roll down his cheeks
whenever he thought of the Hereafter, and when he imagined
himself when his grave was opened and his body was taken out
to stand before All* and be brought to account.[21 It was
narrated that H h i , the freed slave of 'Uthmh, said: When
'Uthmiin stood by a grave he would weep until his beard became
wet. It was said to him: You remember Paradise and Hell and
weep because of them? He said: The Messenger of All& & said:

"The grave is thejirst stage of the Hereafter; i f a person safe at
that stage, what comes after it will be easier than it, but ifhe is
not safe at that stage, what comes after it will be harder than it ."
He said: And the Messenger of All*

& said:

"By Allih, I have never seen any scene but the grave is more
terrifying than it ."
He said: When the Prophet & had finished burying the
deceased, he would stand over him and say:
"I

Snheeh at-Tawtheeqfi Seerah wa Haytt Dhu'n-Noorayn by Majdi Fathi al-Sayyid,
p. 107
Niztm al-Hukm fi ;Ihd ai-Kkulafa' ar-Rtshideen by Hamad Muhammad alSamad, p. 205

His main characteristics

159

"Pray for forgiveness for your brother and ask that he may be
made steadfast,for even now is he being questioned."[1]
This is true understanding of what it means to meet All&,
which is what 'Uthmh 4 understood and is what he lived by.
How great is our need for this understanding by means of which
souls are revived and potentials unleashed.

'Uthmiin 4 is well known for being a wealthy man, but
despite that there are reports which indicate that he was also one
of the ascetics who shun worldly comforts. It was narrated from
Humayd ibn Nu'aym that 'Umar and 'Uthm2n (4)were invited
to a meal, and when they set out, 'Uthmh said to 'Umar: We have
come to a meal where I wish we did not come. He said: Why? He
said: I a m afraid it was prepared in order to show off.['] This is
how 'Uthmh & understood the definition of generosity that is
approved of in Islam; generosity does not mean trying to show off
or compete by offering many kinds of food in large quantities,
rather it means spending money without being extravagant or
showing off, whilst giving thanks to the Bestower of blessings
(All& &) and being humble towards other people. This
understanding is indicative of 'Uthmsn's asceticism and
disinterest in worldly status.[31 Another example of 'Uthmgn's
asceticism and humility is the report narrated by Imam Ahmad
from Maymoon ibn Mihrh, who said: al-Hamadhi told me that
he saw 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin riding a mule with his slave NZil
behind him, when he was the caliph.[41He also narrated that al-

['I Fadii'il asSahibah, no. 773. Its isncid is hasan, Abu Dawmd (3221).
[I'

Az-Zuhd by Imam Ahmad, p. 126
at-Tareekh al-Islami, 48/17, 18

I['

az-Zuhd, p. 127

160

'Uthmh Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

Hamadhi said: I saw ' U t e sleeping in the mosque, wrapped
in a blanket with no one around him, when he was the caliph.[ll
And he narrated from Sharahbeel ibn Muslim that 'Uthmsn ibn
'Affh & used to offer the people fine food, then he would go into
his own house and eat vinegar and olive oil.[']
These are a few examples of the asceticism of the caliph
'Uthmh. When the z&id is an ordinary man, then his zuhd is not
something that attracts attention or evokes admiration, but when
he is a rich man, then his zukd is something astonishing for those
who think about it, and it is a lesson for those with the eyes to see,
because abundant wealth tempts a person to be focused on
physical pleasure and living a life of extravagance, so for a rich
person to be a z a i d , he must tidy understand what it means to
prepare to meet Allsh, to such a point that this idea dominates his
thinking and the Hereafter loom large in his mind whilst this
world pales into insigruficance. This is how 'Uthmh & was; he
was one of the wealthiest men in Islam, but the strength of his
faith overcame his w h i m and desires, so he was one of the
greatest of ascetics, and he gave an example to all rich people of
how it is possible to combine wealth and asceticism in this
world.[31

Gratitude
'Uthmh was deeply grateful to All2h % and expressed that
gratitude in his words, thoughts and actions. One day he was
called to catch some people who were engaged in some
suspicious activity, so he went to catch them red-handed, but
they dispersed before he reached them. He freed a slave in
gratitude to AllSh that no Muslim had been shamed at his
hands.[*]
I'[ ibid.
12] ut-Tureekh ul-lsiumi, 48/17, 18
I ' [ op.cit., 49/17,18

'Uiuw al-Himmah, 5/481

His main characteristics

161

Checking on people
'Uthmh was a kind and caring man, and he would ask after
the Muslims, find out about their problems, check on those who
were absent, welcome those who returned from trips and ask
after those who were sick. Imam Ahmad narrated that Moosa ibn
Talhah said: I saw 'UthmSn ibn ' A f f h when he was on the
minbar, finding out about the eople, asking about their affairs
and the current prices of goods61 Ibn Sardnarrated in al-Tabaqit
that he said: 1 saw 'Uthmh ibn 'AffSn going out one Friday
wearing two yellow garments. He sat on the minbar and the
muezzin gave the call to prayer whilst he was speaking to the
people and asking them about their travels, who had come back
and who was sick.['] He & was concerned about the affairs of his
people, helping those who were in need and allocating a stipend
from the bayt al-mil to those who were in need.[31 And it was
narrated that 'Urwah ibn az-Zubayr said: I lived at the time of
'Uthmh and there was no Muslim soul who did not have a right
to the wealth of All&, i.e., the bayf a~-mil.[~]

Defining the specia~i'ities
of workers
What is meant by defining the specialities of workers is
dividing the work among his workers in such a way that each
employee knows what type of work he is commissioned to do and
thus is able to do it without falling short, and he does not get
involved in work that has been delegated to someone else.
Dividing tasks in accordance with the laws of the universe is the
practice of the Messenger of AlEh & and the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs who came after him. At the time of 'Uthmiin &, jobs and
tasks were allocated among the Muslims in such a way that each
person was given work in his own field as will be discussed
"I FadZiI al-Sddbah, no. 812; its isnid f
s saheeh

al-Tabaqa^t,3/59
Tahqeeq Mmtqifas-Sahiibah, 1/396
'41 al-Musannaf/i'-Hadeeth by Ibn Shaybah, 3/1023
'31

'Uthmh Ibn 'AffZn

162

Dhun-Nooravn

below, in sha Allih. In the fields of the judiciary, financial affairs,
the army and governorship of the regions, 'Uthmin's leadership
qualities can be seen in the way he selected people who were
qualified in those various fields. Work was divided and
guidelines were set out, which were among the most important
elements of success in the state of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs.[']

Benefitting from qualified people
Respecting people for their qualifications and directing the

ummah to respect them, honour them and appoint them to the
right position and not undermine them, and to benefit from their
energies and specialties - all of this made the early generation of
this ummah attain a position of pride, glory and power on this
earth.['] This quality was manifested in the character of 'Uthmin
& when he put to good use the qualifications of Zayd ibn Thsbit
and the committee which helped him to collect the Qur'hin one
recitation.
These are some of the notable qualities of the character of
'UthmSn &, which serve as an example for the Muslim leaders
and common folk, and for anyone who wants to follow the
guidance of the Prophet @ and the Rightly-Guided Caliphs in this
life.
Learning about the attributes of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs
and trying to follow their example is a step in the right direction
for devoted leaders who are able to lead the ummah steadily
towards its goals. One of the means of supporting this religion is
finding leaders who are devoted to All& and whose hearts are
filled with faith which is reflected in their actions and deeds, and
with taqwa that is manifested in all situations. This pious, wise
leadership is the one that seeks to rule in accordance with the laws
of AU6h and to unleash and direct the potentials of the ummah; it
is the one that follows Islam and adheres to it inwardly and
outwardly, beliefs and laws, in both religious and worldly
'I1 al-KajZ'ah al-ldiriyyah, p. 117

op. cit., p. 157

I

His main characteristics

163

matters. It is the one that is thinking day and night of its 'aqeedah
and ummah, and striving hard by all means to solve the problems
that it is facing, striving sincerely to remove all obstacles that
prevent it from attaining success and power.

~inancialand Judiciary
Institutions at the time of
Uthmsn 4%

-

-

Financial institutions

-

When 'Uthmsn became caliph, he did not change the
financial strategy that had been adopted by 'Umar, even though
he allowed the Muslims to acquire and accumulate wealth, build
palaces and own large amounts of land. The Muslims were no
longer subject to the shictness of 'Umar which had scared them
and made them afraid, and which had prevented them from
doing a lot of what they had desired. So the time of 'Uthmh was
a time of ease for the ~ u s l i m s . ~ ~ '

Financial policy announced by 'Uthmin when he
became caliph
'Uthmh & sent a letter to the governors and another to the
h v i j collectors, and he addressed another letter to the masses. I

'Uthmin Ibn 'Min 4 Dhun-Nooravn

166

have quoted the texts of these letters when I spoke of his method
of ruling. In the light of these texts we may say that the public
finance policy announced by the first three Rightly-Guided
Caliphs was based on the following principles:
Applying the general financial policy of Islam

/,

Creating a balance between collection of dues and the
welfare of the people

4 Taking from the Muslims what they owed to the bayt almi2 of the Muslims

4 Giving the Muslims what they are entitled to from the
bayt a/-mlil of the Muslims

4 Taking what the ah1 a/-dkimmahowe to the bayt al-mi2
of the Muslims in a proper manner, and giving them
what they are entitled to, and not wronging them

4 Selecting kkartj collectors for their honesty and
sincerity

4 Avoiding financial corruption, which would lead to
prosperity for the entire ummah

'Uthman's intention in applying his financial policy
There can be no doubt that the third caliph - 'Uthmh ibn
' A f f h & - was determined to apply the financial policies of Islam.
Allegiance was given to him on the basis that he would apply the
laws of A l l a and the Sunnah of His Messenger g3and adopt the
policies of his two predecessors. Abu Bakr & had applied that
which was revealed in the Qur'in and established as Sunnah by
the Messenger of All* &$with regard to financial policies and
other rulings. 'Umar developed the financial institutions, laying
down foundations, establishing guidelines and principles,
increasing the sources of income and setting out guidelines on
expenditure. 'Uthmin followed in their footsteps, and also
engaged in i / h k i d with regard to some matters that are subject

Financial and Judiciaq Institutions at the time of 'Uthmiin &

167

to ijtihid. He implemented the ruling of Alliih on earth with
regard to financial and other matters. He supervised the way
zakjh was collected for the bayt al-mil and how it was distributed
to those who were entitled to it; how the ah1 al-kitib paid the jizyah
to the bayt al-mil of the Islamic state, thus coming under its
protection, and how s e t y was provided to them and how they
made use of other public services; how the mujihideen acquired
booty and sent one-fifth of it (the khums) to the bayt al-mil, which
distributed it to orphans, the poor, wayfarers and others in
accordance with the words of All&

"And know that whatever of war-booty that you may gain,
verily, oneTfifth [lhth) of it is assigned to Allih, and to the
Messenger, and to the near relatives [of the Messenger
(Muhammad @)I, (and also) the orphans, Al-Madkeen (the
poor) and the wayfarer, ifyou have believed in Allih and in that
which W e sent down to Our slave (Muhammad @) oil the Day
of Criterion (between right and wrong), the Day when the two
forces met (the battle of Badr); and All& is Able to do all
things" (Al-Anfil841);and other known sources of income
for the state.
The financial policy at the time of 'Uthmh and the other
Rightly-Guided Caliphs was distinguished by the fact that it was
connected to Islam, the implementation of Islamic teachings and
protection of sources of income. Public expenditure was aimed at
supporting the message of Islam and the good of the Muslims.
This was a policy of wise spending, because the teachings of Islam
forbid extravagance and fight against it, for Alliih does not love
the extravagant.Islam also forbids the foolish from having control
of the public wealth. The public income should all be good and
from haliil sources and some of this income is to be spent on those

168

' U W n Ibn 'Aff2n 6 Dhun-Noorayn

who need it most among the people.

Creating a balance between collection of dues and the
welfare of the people
In his letter, 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh & pointed out to the
governors that collecting wealth for the bayt al-mil was almost
taking precedence over the primary duty of the governors, which
was ensuring the welfare of the people, and that was because the
collection of wealth was one of the duties of the people that was
undertaken by the head of the Islamic state, so it was not right for
it to be done at the expense of other duties.[ll From the guidance
of the Prophet & and the time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, the
fuqaha' derived rulings on what is meant by the duty of ensuring
the welfare of the people, i.e., the duties of the caliph towards the
people, which are as follows:
al-Miiwardi said: His duties towards the public include ten
things:
1- Preserving the religion on the basis of its fundamental
principles and the consensus of the early generations
(salaff of this ummah
2- Judging between disputants and ending disputes so that
justice will prevail, no transgressor will get away with
wronging others and no one who has been wronged will
remain unrequited.
3- Guarding the welfare of the ummah and protecting
women, so that the people will be able to go about their
daily lives and travel about in safety.

4- Canying out hadd punishments to protect the sacred
limits of Allah from being violated and to protect
people's rights from being destroyed or taken away.

Financial and Judiciary htitutions at the time of 'Uthmsn 4

169

5- Strengthening the border posts with sufficient arms and
strength to ward off attack, so that the enemy will not be
able to seize any opportunity to transgress the border or
shed the blood of any Muslim or mu'aid (non-Muslim
living under Muslim rule).
6- Jihad against those who oppose Islam, after calling them
to Islam until they either become Muslim or enter into a
treaty with the Muslims (dhimmah),so that the promise
of All2h will be fulfilled to make Islam prevail over all
other religions.
7- Collecting fay' and zakih in the manner enjoined in the

texts or in accordance with ijtihlid without going to
extremes.

8- Working out stipends and what people are entitled to
from bayt al-mil, without extravagance or stinginess, and
paying them on time, neither too early nor too late.
9- Appointing honest and sincere people to various posts
and tasks including financial matters, so that this work
will be controlled and run by people who are qualified
and sincere.
10- Direct supervision of affairs, checking on things at
various levels, so that he will be directly involved in
running the affairs of the ummah and protecting the
ummah. He should not rely on delegation because of
being preoccupied with physical pleasures or
In brief, the duties of the caliph are based on two conditions of
the oath of allegiance (bay'ah), namely protecting the faith and
'I'

al-Ahkiim as-SultLiniyyah wa'l-WilLiya^tad-Deeniyyah by Abu'l-Hasan al-Mswardi, p. 16,17

' U W n Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

170

running the worldly affairs (of the ummah)[ll ,which formed the
whose successor he is. Al-Mgwardi
mission of the Messenger
and al-Farra' were contemporaries of one another who came up
with a precise list of the duties of the ruler. But that was their own
ijtikcid based on the needs of the ummah at that time, and the
rights of the ummah should not be limited to what was listed by
one or two scholars, or more, no matter how vast their knowledge
and no matter how comprehensive their analysis. This would
apply even if the scholar was our own contemporary, so how
about if their opinions and ijtihgd came centuries before our
time?[" Hence the duties of the ruler should be defined on the
basis of these two conditions so that his position vis a vis the
ummah will be valid. They are: protecting the faith and running
worldly affairs. Committees of scholars should be formed to
define that for the people of their own time.131
These are some of the duties of the caliph with regard to
taking care of the people, as defined by thefuqaka', but they are
subject to further development in such a way as to suit
developments at different times, provided that it does not go
against any Qur'inic text or religious ruling.[41

a,

Taking what is due from the Muslims
The khariij collectors are deputies of the state who collect the
dues of the bayt al-ma. If they take what the Muslims are obliged
to give, then they have fulfilled their duties, but if they go to
extremes in collecting the dues of the bayt al-mil, then they have
wronged their sponsors and caused them a great deal of harm,
and forced them to do more than they are able. The Messenger &$
warned against going to extremes in collecting the dues of the bayt
al-mil, and he forbade collecting the best of people's wealth in
[I1 Muqaddimat lbn Khuldwn,

p. 191

1('

al-Khilifnh bayna at-Tanzeer wart-Tatbeeqby Muhammad d-MirdSwi, p. 66

'31

op. cit., p. 67

'41 as-Siyiisah al-Miliyyah li 'Uthmiin, p. 62

Financial and Tudiciarv Institutions at the time of ' U t h m h &

171

zakiih, and he enjoined a moderate approach in collecting the
zak2h on crops.[']

Giving the Muslims what they are entitled to from the bayt
al-m2l
The stipends for the Muslims from the bayt al-mil were given
either directly, as in the case of distribution of zaksh to those who
were entitled to it, or the giving of extra wealth to the Muslims in
accordance with the stipend system, or they were given
indirectly, in the form of public services offered by the state to
the people and paid for from the bayt al-mil. In both cases,
stipends were to be given on a just and fair basis. In the case of
stipends that are given directly, it is not permissible to go against
the general gudelines so as to favour some and deprive others, or
decrease the share of some without any justification. It is not
permissible to delay giving the stipend after the appointed time
because of complex procedures or barriers which prevent those
who have been wronged from reaching those who are in
authority to discuss the wrongs that have been done, such as
delays in payment, being given too little or receiving nothing at
all. With regard to indirect payment in the form of public services
offered by the state to the people, it is not permissible for the
benefit to go to one individual only; rather it should benefit the
whole ~ m m a h . [ ~ ]

Not wronging ah1 al-dhimmah; taking what is due from them
for the bayt al-mcil in a proper manner, and giving them
their rights in a proper manner
It is not permissible to wrong the people of the Book when
taking jizyah from them, because the people of the Book are
dhimmis who are living in the Islamic state and are under its care
and protection so long as they pay the jizyah, and the Messenger
of All* @ enjoined treating them with kindness. He appointed
['I
[I'

op. cit., p. 64
asSiy2ssah nl-M81iyyah li 'Uthmin, p. 66

172

' U r n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

'Abd-Alliih ibn Arqam in charge of collecting the jizyah of ah1 aldhimmah, then when he turned to leave he called him and said:
"The one who wrongs a mu'ihid, or imposes a greater burden on
him than he can bear, or detractsfrom his rights, or takes anything
from him without his consent, I will be his opponent on the Day of
~esurrection."[~~
Based on that, 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb & left
instructions when he died: I urge the caliph who comes after me
to treat ah1 al-dhzmmah well and to fulfil the covenant with them, to
protect them from their enemies and not to burden them with
more than they can bear.[']
If the jizyah collectors harm the dhimmis or burden them with
more than they can bear, or punish them, or take the jizyah from
an elderly man who has nothing and is unable to work, or they
take it from a dhimmi who has become Muslim, this is a kind of
iniustice to which the third caliuh drew attention in his letter to
the kharij collectors, basing that on the teachings of the Messenger
@.[3]
In addition to the jizyah, those of ah1 al-dhimmah who were
cultivating the kharij lands -which were lands that had come into
the possession of the Muslim state as the result of conquests were to pay the kharij that was due on those lands to the bayt almil of the Muslims. The kharij collectors should pay attention to
working out the amount that is due on the land that is cultivated
by ahl al-dhimmah, which is to be done by taking into account all
the factors that play a role in defining the amount that they have
to pay, because neglecting all or some of these factors may lead to
mistreatment of the ah1 al-dhimmah who are cultivating it. These
factors are four:
The quality of the land: if it is good the crop will be good
and if it is bad the yield will be less.
m
Cultivation of different types of grains and crops, some of
1'1 al-Muntakhab min as-Sunnah, p. 261
C2]
['I

al-Siyrisah al-Mtliyyah li 'UthmJn, p. 67
op. cit., p. 67

I

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthmh &

173

which may be expensive and some may be cheap, so the
kharij should reflect that.
0
Irrigation: because the rate paid on crops that are
irrigated by artificial means should not be as high as
the rate paid on crops that may be irrigated by rivers and
rainfall.
m
Khurij should not mean taking everything that is there;
enough should be left for the people of the land so that
they can survive times of hardship and famine.[']
However, if the Islamic state has drawn up a covenant or
made a peace deal with the people of the Book, then the Islamic
state and the kharij collectors have to adhere to the conditions
stipulated in that covenant or deal, including conditions that
stipulate how much they should pay of jizyah or kharij, because
when the Muslims draw up a covenant or enter into a deal, they
are bound to fulfil its terms.[21

Not wronging orphans
Orphans have rights to public wealth, according to the texts
of the Qur'in. Orphans are among those who are entitled to a
share of z a E h wealth if they are poor. Allih says:

"As-Sadaqit (here it means Zakih) are only for the FuqarZ
(poor), and Al-Masikeen (the poor) and those employed to
collect (the funds); and to attract the hearts of those who have
been inclined (towards Islam); and tofree the captives; and for
those i n debt; and for Allih's Cause (i.e. for Mujaidoon thosefighting i n a holy battle), andfor the wayfarer (a traveller
['I as-Siyisah al-MAliyyahli 'Uthmlin, p. 67

ibid.

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Aff2n Dhun-Nooravn

174

who is cut offfiom everything); a duty imposed by All&. And
Allih is All-Knower, All-Wise" (At-Tawbah 960)
Orphans are also entitled to a share of the one-fifth of the warbooty (the khums), in accordance with the words of Alliih:

"And know that whatever of war-booty that you may gain,
verily, one$fth ((1/5th)of it is assigned to Allih, and to the
Messenger, and to the near relatives [of the Messenger
(and also) the orphans, Al-Masikeen (the
(Muhammad gj],
poor) and the wayfarer, ifyou have believed in All% and in that
which We sent down to Our slave (Muhammad @j on the Day
of Criterion (between right and wrong), the Day when the two
forces met (the battle of Badr); and Allih is Able to do all
things" (Al-Anfil 8:41)
And orphans are also entitled to a stipend from the bayt almil, which may be allocated to all children, including orphans. If
an orphan is independent of means, he is obliged to pay zakiih on
his wealth if he has wealth, and the zakiih collectors are obliged to
take zakiih in a fair and just manner, lest their wrongdoing cause
unjust loss to the orphan's wealth or part of it.'']

The kharcij collectors should be honest and trustworthy
Alliih says:

"Verily, Allih commands that you should render back the trusts
to those, to whom they are due; and that when you judge
[I1 op. cit., p. 68

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthmsn &

175

between men, you judge with justice. Verily, how excellent is
the teaching which He (Allih) gives you! Truly, Allih is Ever
All-Hearer, All-Seer" (An-Nisa' 458)

"Those who are faithfully true to their Amanit (all the duties
which Allih has ordained, honesty, moral responsibility and
trusts) and to their covenants" (Al-Mu'minoon 23%)
The Rightly-Guided Caliph 'Uthmgn & required the khargj
collectors to be trustworthy and to have the qualities that are
essential in all those who work with the public wealth. If they did
not have this quality then they would transgress against the rights
of the bayt al-mil and they would be unfair to the zak&-payers,
and the connection between the bayt al-mil and the zam-payers
would be broken. The Holy Qur'iin and the ahiideeth of the
Prophet #g point to the importance of honesty and encourage
adherence to it. The caliph 'Uthmiin also required the z a m collectors to be trustworthy. Trustworthiness was mentioned in
general terms in the letter of the caliph, which included sincerity
towards the bayt al-mil by taking care to collect all its dues from
the people, sincerity towards the zak2h-payers by not wronging
them and going to extremes in dictating the financial dues
required from them, and sincerity towards ah1 al-dhimmah by
treating them kindly and implementing the conditions of the
peace deal with them such as jizyah and h r i j , without imposing
more.[']

Effect of accumulation of wealth on the ummah
'Uthm2n ibn 'Affgn ;$4. did not want to leave the masses
without warning them or making them aware of what might
happen to them, so he warned them lest this world attract them to
its pleasures and delights. He was worried lest the ummah go
"I Op. cit., p. 68

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

176

down the path of innovation after three factors became available
to them: accumulation of wealth and a life of ease; when the
children of female prisoners reached puberty; and when the nonArabs began to read ~ut'$n.Il] 'Uthmh realized that a life of
ease would lead some people to deviate from the right path,
because the life of ease that results from accumulation of wealth
could conupt them because of what they spent on luxuries and
immoralities.[21All* says:

"And when We decide to destroy a town (population),We (first)
send a definite order (to obey All& and be righteous) to those
among them [or We (first) increase in number those of its
population] who lead a lqe of luxury. Then, they transgress
therein, and thus the word (of torment) is justified against it
(them). Then We destroy it with complete destruction" (Al-Isra'
17:16)

Comparison between the policies of 'Umar and 'UthmSn
The financial policy announced by ' U M n was almost the
same as the public financial policy implemented by 'Umar when
he became caliph. He announced - and put into practice - that the
public wealth could only be dealt under by three conditions: that
it be taken in a just manner and given in a just manner, and that it
be prevented from being spent on unjust causes.13' So the
financial policies of 'Umar and 'Uthmh spran from the same
source, which was the basic principles of Islam.k1

[I1 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/245

11'

asSiyiisnh a l - ~ " l li 'Uthmtn,
~
p. 70
asSiyiisah al-Miiliyyah li 'Umar ibn al-l(hattib, by Qutub Ibr2heem Muhammad,
p. 23 ff

1''

asSiyisah al-M81iyyah li 'Uthmin, p. 76

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthman 4%

177

"UthnnSn's guidelines explaining the basic
principles of zakiih to the people
'UthnGn & said: This is the month of your zak2h, so whoever
owes a debt, let him pay it off so that you may pay z&h on your
wealth. Whoever does not have anything will not be asked for
anything unless he brings it voluntarily. Whoever has already
paid zaMh does not have to pay anything more until this time
next year. Ibrsheem ibn Sa'd said: I think he meant the month of
~ a m a d s n . ~Abu
"
'Ubayd said: In some reports it says that the
month meant by 'Uthmk was Muharram.['] By saying this,
'UthmSn 4 confirmed the following principles:
(i) That zaBh is to be paid annually because the condition
for paying zak& -except in the case of crops - is that one
year has passed. That is clear from the words of
'Uthman, that the one who has already paid the zak2h
on his wealth does not have to pay zak& again until the
same month in the following year, so he will not pay
zak* more than once in a year.
(ii) If we accept the view of Abu 'Ubayd, that the month
meant by 'Uthman ibn 'AffSn was the month of
Muharram, then the statement may be taken as
refening to the Islamic financial year, which is based
on the Hijri calendar. After one full Hijri year has passed
for the wealth that they possess, the Muslims must pay
what is due of zak* at the beginning of the following
Hijri year, which is the month of Muharram, if the
conditions are met.
(iii) 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh & called on people to calculate the
amount of zak3h due, then he asked them to pay off any
[I1 al-Amwiil by Abu 'Ubayd, p. 534

op. cit., p. 535

I

178

' U W n Ibn 'AH& & Dhun-Noorayn

debts they owed so that they could pay z a u h on the rest
of their wealth.['] Perhaps 'Uthman wanted to
encourage people to pay off their debts to be fair to the
creditors and so as to make it easier to calculate the
wealth that was subject to z a m , and so as to be certain
that the debts were genuine.121
(iv) 'Uthmh + said: The one who does not have anything
will not be asked to give anything unless he brings it
voluntarily. Thus 'Uthmgn opened the door to voluntary
giving. Some Muslims may think that they do not have to
give zaMh but they still want to give some of their wealth
voluntarily to the bayt al-ma, so that would be accepted
from them and added to the zaktih income, and the state
~ ~words of
would spend it in the same way as ~ a k t i h . [The
'Uthman & - The one who does not have anything will not
be asked to give anything unless he brings it voluntarily probably meant that the bayt al-mil would not collect the
zak* on gold and silver unless the owner brought it to the
bayt alLm21. As for the zak2h that the people were forced to
give and for which they would be fought if they withheld
it, that is zak* on livestock, crops and palm trees. Thus
'Uthmgn would have left those who owned gold and
silver to pay z&h on wealth that is an invisible kind of
wealth, namely gold, silver and trade goods, and he
would not accept it from them unless they brought it
voluntarily.[41Concerning that, Abu 'Ubayd said: Do you
not see that the Messenger of AllSh @ used to send the
zaksh collectors to collect zak* from the owners of
livestock by force or by consent, and the rulers after him
did likewise. It was for withholding the zaksh on
as-Siyisuh al-hlriliyyuh li 'Uthmrin (R), p. 76
op. Cit.
[31 asSiy8sah a/-Mliyjah li 'Uthmin, p. 77
al-Amwm b y Abu 'Ubayd, p. 537
''1
"1

I

Financial and Iudiciarv Institutions at the time of 'UthmSn &

179

livestock that Abu Bakr fought them. There is no report to
suggest that the Prophet @$ or those who came after him
forced the people to pay zakiih on invisible kinds of
wealth, unless they brought it without being forced.
Rather it was a trust that they paid, because it was in their
possession and they were entrusted with it. But with
regard to livestock, that is a nding to which they were
subject, and rulings among people were to include visible
wealth, but between them and Allsh, they were re uired
to pay zak& on both visible and invisible wealth.

%

His opinion on zak2h on a debt owed to a creditor
It was narrated from alS2ib ibn Yazeed that 'Uthmh L& used
to say: Zakgh should be paid on a debt which, if you wanted, you
could get it back from the borrower, and he is able to pay it off,
but you do not ask for it out of shyness or as a favour; then zak%
is due on it."'
And it was narrated that 'Uthmh said: Pay zakiih on it - i.e., a
debt - if it is with someone who is able to pay it off.13]
From these two statements of ' U M n it is clear that zaksh is
due on the debt owed to the creditor if the debtor is able to pay it
back and the creditor is able to get the money back from the
debtor, but he feels too shy to remind the debtor of it, or if the
creditor leaves it with the debtor as favour; favour here means
keeping quiet and not asking for the debt, in return for some
favour that he may receive from the debtor.14]
Borrowing money from the zakih fund and spending it on

the public interest
'Uthmh & took money from the zak% funds and spent it on
the war effort and on other kinds of public expenditure. He spent
ibid.
al-Muntakhab min as-Sunnnh, 6/301
as-Siycisah al-.Wliyyah li 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin, p. 79
I[' asSiycisah al-Mliyyah li ' U t h d n , p. 80
'I1

180

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

it on jihad with the proviso that he would pay it back whenever he
could afford it. The ruler has the authority to borrow from one
fund for another, and that does not go against Islamic teachings or
the tradition of any previous caliph, so long as he is determined to
pay back what he took from the zak2h funds.111
Some opinions suggest that one of the things on which zak2h
may be spent, namelyfi sabeel-ill& (for the sake of All&), means
that zakih funds may be given to those who are fighting in jihad
for the sake of All&, because their devotion to jihad means that
they are not able to work and earn a living. This is not intended to
encourage idleness, for these people have given precedence to the
interests of Islam over their own interests, and they have given up
working for their own sake in order to work for a broader cause,
which is striving so that the word of All* may be supreme and to
spread His religion throughout the earth. Some scholars think
that it is permissible to spend zak& funds in the public interest
according to whatever is needed!"

Spending zakih funds on food for the poor and wayfarers
'Uthmh set a new precedent by putting food in the mosque
during Ramadsn and saying: It is for the devoted worshipper
who is staying in the mosque, and for the wayfarer, and the
The caliph 'Uthmh 4 honoured the Muslims with the
zakih funds, and by doing so he followed the example of the
Messenger @$ who was the most generous of people and was at
his most generous during Ramadin. This precedent that was set
by 'Uthmh encouraged the people to observe i'tW in the
mosques, because their food was readily available, so this kept
alive the Prophet's Sunnah of i ' t i ~ f . [ ~ ]

Establishing inns with zakgh funds
'UthmSn heard about Abu Sammil al-Asadi and a number of
['I as-Siycisah al-M8liyyahli 'Uthmfn, p. 80

op. cit., p. 81
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/345
I4] asSiyisah al-MiIiyyah li 'Uthmrin ibn 'Affiin, p. 82, 83
"I

'31

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthmh 4

181

people of Kufah: when food supplies arrived, a caller of theirs
would call out: Whoever has no place to stay in Kufah should
come and stay as a guest with Abu Sammiil. ' U t M n designated
some houses as inns where strangers who had no place to stay
could come and stay. One of these houses was the house of 'AbdAUgh ibn Mas'ood in Hudhayl; guests would come and stay in his
house in Hudhayl when the area around the mosque got too
crowded.[''

A stipend from the bayt aLmd for every slave
Another idea introduced by 'Uthmiin & was that he gave to
every slave in Kufah something from the leftovers of wealth on
three days every month, so that they would have extra money to
help them out without reducing the stipends that they got from
their masters.[21In most cases the source of this wealth which
'Uthmh distributed to every slave was zauh, on the grounds
that they were entitled to a share of it, because they were one of
the eight categories mentioned in the verse of zakiih, in which it
says:

"And to free the captives" (At-Tawbak 9:60).[~]

The Rhums (one-fi*): of the war booty
The jihad began at the time of the Messenger
and
continued throughout the reigns of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and
the reign of the caliph 'Uthmh ibn 'Affiin. As a result of that,
Islam spread and the territory of the Islamic state expanded.
There were many conquests at the time of 'Uthmiin, which
brought a great deal of booty, including the khums, to the bayt almil. That also brought to the bayt ul-mil the jizyah from those
among the people of the Book who preferred to continue
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/273

IZ1
op. cit., 51275
'31 as-Siyisah al-Miiliyyah li 'Utirmrin, p. 84

182

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affh + Dhun-Noorayn

following their own religions and did not want to fight. So there is
a connection between the bayt al-mil and the Islamic conquests. At
the time of ' U t h m h the bayf al-mil financed the conquests, either
by means of the salaries paid to the troops, or by purchasing the
weapons and equipment needed in addition to money that was
donated and troops who volunteered. When victory was
achieved, the jizyak was imposed on those of the people of the
Book who did not become Muslim, and the kkarij was imposed on
the land that was taken by force. If the people of the land became
Muslim, they paid the zak&hof their wealth reached the nisrib and
fulfilled the conditions of zaksh, as it was one of the pillars of
Islam, without which a Muslim's Islam cannot be complete. All of
these factors played a part in increasing the income of the Islamic
state. All,% permitted war booty to the M u s h s , four-fifths of
which were distributed among the conquerors and the other fifth
of which was paid to the bayt al-mil of the ~ u s l i m s . [ ~ ~
There follow some of the issues that arose as the result of
implementing the public financial policy at the time of 'Uthmsn
ibn 'Affzn with regard to the kkums (one-fifth) of the war booty
acquired by means of the conquests:

Children were not given a share of the war booty at the time
of Wthmin ibn 'Affin.
It was narrated that Tameem ibn al-Mahri said: I was present
when Alexandria was conquered for the second time, but I was
not given a share until my people and Quraysh almost came to
blows. Some of the people said: Send for Basrah al-Ghifsri and
'Uqbah ibn 'Aamir al-Juhani - who were companions of the
Messenger of All21 g - and ask them about this. So they sent for
them and asked them, and they said: See whether his facial hair
has started to grow; if so, give him a share. So some of the people
looked at me and they found that my facial hair had started to
grow, so they gave me a share.[21
[I1 op. cit., p. 86, 87
['I

Fufooh Misr wa Akhbimha, p. 121

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Utlunb 4

183

What this means is that no share is given to children or
women, but they are to be given something in return for their help
in the Muslim campaigns. This is what was applied at the time of
the Messenger of All& @.ll'
The belongings of the slain went to the one who killed him
at the time of 'Uthman as at the time of the Messenger of
Allah @
The belongings of the slain refer to what the slain man was
wearing at the time of war, along with his weapons and horse.
The Messenger of All& @ ruled that the belongings of the slain
were to go to the killer. It was narrated from Abu Qatiidah that
said on the day of Hunayn:
the Messenger of Allsh

"Whoever kills a person (in battle) and has proof, his belongings
go to him.,'[I'
What may be understood from this hadeeth is that the killer is
not entitled to the belongings of the slain unless he can establish
proof that he is the one who killed him. If two people dispute and
both claim that they kiUed someone, then the belongings of the
slain go to the one who can establish proof.[31
After Alexandria broke the treaty, the Byzantines returned,
led by Manuel al-Hassa. They landed their ships in Alexandria
and 'Amr left them to march towards him, so that they would be
faced by the local people. Thus Alliih humiliated them by means
of one another. They set out from Alexandria, accompanied by the
people of other cities who had broken the treaty, and when they
passed through a town they would drink the people's wine and
eat their food, and confiscate whatever they could lay their hands
on, and 'Amr did not oppose them until they reached Nafyoos,
['I asSiytsah al-MtIiyyah li 'Uthmtn, p. 93
[I'

al-BuMri, Kitlib al-Magkazi, no. 4321
asSiytsah al-mIiyyah Ii 'Ufhmtn,p. 93

184

'Uthmtin Ibn 'Affsn .& Dhun-Noorayn

where (the Muslims) confronted them on land and sea, and
fought them with arrows. Then they came out of the sea and
joined those who were on land, and they continued to fight with
arrows (from a distance). The patriarch of those who had come
from the land of the Byzantines came out on a horse, carrying a
weapon made of gold, and called for someone to come out and
engage in single combat. A man from (the tribe of) Zubayd who
was called Hawmal Abu Madhjah went out to confront him,and
they fought for a long time, chasing one another with spears. Then
the patriarch threw down his spear and took up his sword, and
Hawmal also threw down his spear and took up his sword, and
'Amr started shouting:Abu Madhjah. He replied: At your service.
The people were standing in ranks on the banks of the Nile, ready
for combat. The two men fought for a while with their swords,
then the patriarch charged at him, but he threw him to the floor.
Then Hawmal took up a dagger that was at his side or strapped to
his a m , and shuck his enemy's upper chest, weakening him,then
he killed him and took his belongings. Then Hawmal died a few
days later (may All& have mercy on him). After that the Muslims
pursued them until they pushed them back Alexandria, then
All31 granted them victory and Manuel al-Hassa was killed.[''

The value of the booty and the share of the bayt al-ma1 in
one of the conquests of 'Uthmh
In the hadeeth of 'Abd al-Malik ibn Maslamah from someone
else it says: We went on a campaign with 'Abd-All21 ibn Sa'd in
North Africa, and he divided the booty among us after setting
aside the khums (one-fifth). The share of a horseman was three
thousand dinars, two thousand for the horse and one thousand
for the rider; and the share of a foot soldier was one thousand
dinars. He allocated a share to a man who had died, and gave his
family one thousand dinars after he died.['] From the hadeeth of
'Uthmin ibn Saih and others it says: the army of 'Abd-Allih ibn
['I Futooh Misr wa Akhbimha, p. 119,120
"I

op. cit.. p. 125

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'UthmAn &

185

Sa'd was composed of twenty thousand men, and it is known that
the khums was paid to the bayt al-m21, based on the verse in
which AU2h says:

"And know that whatever of war-booty that you may gain,
verily, one-fifth (1/5th) of it is assigned to Allih, and to the
Messenger, and to the near relatives [of the Messenger
(Muhammad gj],(and also) the orphans, Al-Musrikeen (the
poor) and the wayfarer, $you have belzmed zn Allih and in that
whzch W e sent down to Our slave (Muhammad @j on the Day
of Cntenon (hehueen right and wrong), the Day when the hvo
forces met (the battle of Badr); and Allih zs Able to do all
things" (Al-Anfil 8:41)
At the time of Abu Bakr, after the death of the Messenger @,
the share of the Messenger @ and the "near relatives" was
diverted to expenditure on weapons and horses, and 'Umar ibn
al-Khatt2b ib did the same after him, as did 'Uthmtk 4. The
remaining four-fifths of the booty were distributed among the
conquerors, with three shares for each horseman and his horse,
and one share for each foot soldier. From the two hadeeth quoted
above it is possible to work out the value of the khums that was
given to the bayt al-mil and of the entire booty. If we assume that
the horsemen composed one-tenth of the army, which was twenty
thousand strong, and that the rest were foot soldiers, then the
calculations are as follows:
2,000 horsemen x 3,000 dinars = 6,000,000 dinars
18,000 foot soldiers x 1,000 dinars = 18,000,000 dinars.
So the total share of the fighters was 24 million dinars, which
represents four-fifths of the value of the booty. So the share of the

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

186

bayt al-mil would be one-fifth of the booty, or 6 million dinars. So
the total value of the booty taken by the Muslims was 30 million
dinars.[']

Public spending from the one-fifth of the booty
The one-fifth of the booty was spent, in accordance with the
text of the verse, on the Messenger gdhis near relatives, orphans,
the poor and wayfarers who were all entitled to it. After the death
his share and that of the "near relatives" went
of the Prophet
to the bayt al-mil to be spent on horses and weapons. The caliph
'Uthmtin 4 exhausted the share of the Messenger of All21 @ and
the "near relatives" that went to the bayt al-mil to be spent on
horses and weapons, because of the many conquests that were
achieved during his caliphate and what they required of weapons
and horses.I2]
@j

Success of the financial policy in financing the Islamic
conquests at the time of 'Uthmsn
Among the challenges faced by ' U M n &was the rebellion
of some of the conquered lands, but ' U t M n was able to force the
lands that broke treaties to adhere to the treaties with the Islamic
state and submit to its rule.
In the light of the new conquests, we may say that the
financial policy that was adopted at the time of ' U M n ibn
'Affh
gave the results that it was designed to produce, whether
that was by means of financing these conquests or by means of
these victories which brought great amounts of booty, of which
the bayt al-mil got its share, but it also had other sources of income
such as the zak2h of those who became Muslim and the jizyah of
those people of the Book who refused to become Muslim, and the
!&arij on their lands.13]

['I

as-Siyffiahal-Mfliyyah li 'Uthmanibn 'Afffn, p. 95

'21

op. cit., p. 97
op. cit., p. 99

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'UthmAn &

187

Public i~lconie from the jizyah at the time of
'Uthman
Final shape of details of thejizyah at the time of 'Uthmsn A&
The rulings and principles of jizyah, and the system of how to
apply it and acquire it, were finalized at the time of 'Umar ibn alKhattsb. Hence the role of the bayt al-mil at the time of 'Uthmh
was to receive whatever was collected of jzzyah after agreeing on
its value. The state was to approve whatever previous deals were
already in effect or to initiate new deals, and the state was to
guarantee for all those who paid the jizydz all rights that resulted
from this payment.[11

Examples of jiryah income received by the bayt al-mcil
(a) During his governorship of Kulah at the time of
'Uthmh, al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah invaded Azerbaijan,
where he made a peace deal with its people in return for
800,000 dirhams. They stopped paying it when 'Umar
died, so he attacked them with the army and subjugated
them, and got the payment again.[21

@) When 'Uthmh sent 'Abd-All2h ibn Sa'd to North Africa,
the one with whom he made the treaty was the patriarch
of North Africa, Jarjeer, in return for 2,520, 000 dinars.
And 'Abd-All& made a treaty with them in return for
three hundred qintars of gold (perhaps that is equivalent
to the first amount).[31
(c) The treaty of Cyprus was given in return for seven
thousand dinars to be paid to the ~ u s l i m s . [ ~ ~
['I asSiyffiah al-Miiliyyah li 'Uthman ibn 'A@,
['I

Tareekh af-Tabari, 2/246

[31 op. cit.,

5/255

[41 op. at., 5/261

p. 103

' U W n Ibn ' M i n 4 Dhun-Noorayn

188

(d) Sa'eed ibn S2lih made a peace deal with the people of
Jarj*. Sometimes they would bring him one hundred
thousand and say: This is our deal. And sometimes they
would bring two hundred thousand and sometimes
three hundred thousand.[']
(e) 'Abd-All3h ibn 'Aamir conquered Nishapur and went
out to Sarkhas. The people of Marw sent word to him
asking him for a peace treaty, so he sent Ibn HCtim to
them, and he made a peace treaty with the chieftain of
Marw in return for two miuion; another report says that
he made a peace treaty with him in return for sixty
thousand dirhams.[']
(f) Al-Ahnaf ibn Qays marched to Balkh and besieged it,
and its people made a peace treaty with him in retun for
four hundred thousand, and he agreed to that. He told
his cousin Usayd ibn al-Mutashammis to take from them
what they had agreed to.[31

'Uthm2n ibn 'Aff2n implements the deal that the Prophet g
had made with the people of Najr2n
The Prophet & had agreed to the terms stipulated between
him and the people of Najrin, and had that written in a document
for them which explained the terms and conditions, including
their paying the jzzyah and the amount thereof. Then after the
Messenger g died, they came to Abu Bakr & who wrote a
document for them that included the same conditions. After
'Umar & was appointed caliph, they came to him. 'Umar expelled
them from Najrin al-Yemen and settled them in NajrSn al-'IrCq,
because he feared (their plots) against the Muslims, and he wrote
a peace deal with them.14] When 'Umar died and 'Uthmh ibn
"I op. cit., 5/318
I[' op. cit., 5/307
13] nl-Kharrij by Abu Yoosuf, p. 74

" ibid.

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthmtin 4

189

'Affh & succeeded him, they came to him in Madinah and he
wrote the following letter for them to al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah, who
was the governor:
In the name of All*, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
From the slave of Mlih 'Uthmh, the Arneer al-Mu'mineen, to alWaleed ibn 'Uqbah. May the peace of All* be upon you. I praise
Allih, besides Whom there is no other god. To proceed: The
bishops, priests and prominent figures among the people of
Najrh who are in Iraq came to me, complained to me and
showed me the conditions that 'Umar agreed to with them. I
know what they have suffered because of some Muslims, so I
have reduced their burden of lizyah by thirty suits, and I have
done that for the sake of ALlih, may He be glorified and exalted,
and I have guaranteed to them all the land that 'Umar granted to
them in return for their land in Yemen. S o treat them kindly for
they are under our protection, and I know some of them
personally. Look at the document that 'Umar wrote for them
and fulfil all its conditions. And when you have read the
document, give it back to them. ~a'l-salim.['] That was on the
fifteenth of Sha'bin 27 AH.[^'
Several things become clear from this, as follows:
' -n
& fulfilled the covenant of the Messenger
(a) That U
@$ and the covenant of his two companions (may Allah
be pleased with them both) who came after him, and that
was based on general Islamic principles which state that
whoever makes a contract, deal or promise must fulfil it.

@) 'Uthmh reduced the jizyah for them and gave them all
the land they were entitled to, and he asked his governor
al-Waleed ibn'uqbah to fulfil the terms mentioned in the
document between them and 'Umar, and to treat them
['I as-Siy&ah al-Mtliyyah li 'Uthmtn, p. 105
"I

ibid.

190

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affgn @ Dhun-Noorayn

kindly, because they were people who were under
protection.111

The people of the Book are under the protection of the
Muslims so long as they pay the jizyah
After the victory of 'Am ibn al-'Aas in Alexandria, when he
had acquired a great deal of booty that had been taken from the
villages during the war, the people of the villages who had not
broken the treaty came to him and said: We adhered to our treaty,
but these thieves (i.e., the Byzantines) came and took our property
and livestock, and our property is with you now. So 'Amr
returned to them whatever of their property they recognized and
could prove was theirs. Some of them said to 'Am ibn alL'Aas:
The way you have treated us is not permissible. You should have
fought to protect us because we were under your protection and
we did not break the treaty; as for those who broke it, may AllSh
cast them away.['] Look at how the system of jzzyah gave them
rights that they adhered to, which was protection in return for
what they paid, even though they did not take part with the
Muslims in defending the land, rather they paid it in return for
some rights that they were granted from the Islamic state, one of
which was the right to protection and welfare. 'Amr ibn al-'Aas
honoured these rights and returned their property to them.13'

Contribution of ah1 al-dhimmah to public expenditure at the
time of 'Uthmsn
It maybe noted with regard to jizyah during the second
conquest of Alexandria during the caliphate of 'Uthmsn ibn
'Affh, that the ruler of Akhna -whose name was Talma -came to
'Am ibn al-'Aas and said: TelI us what each of us has to pay of
jizynh, so that we may do our best. 'Am said, pointing to the
comer of a church: You are just a storage facility for us; if our
op. cit., p. 106
op. at., p. 106
C31 as-Siy&ah al-A4iliyyah li 'Uthman,p. 106
['I
['I

\

Financial and ludiciarv Institutions at the time of 'Uthman &

191

burden increases, your burden will increase, and if (our burden) is
reduced, bour burden) will be reduced. The ruler of Akhna
became angry, so he went out to the Byzantines and brought them
(to fight), but AllSh defeated them and Akhna was taken prisoner
and was brought to ' A m . The people said to him: KiU him. He
said: No. It was said: When he was brought to 'Amr, he put a
crown on his head and clothed him in a purple cloak, and he said
to him:How could you find people%kethose? So he agreed to pay
the jizyah. And it was said to Talma: Why don't you go to the king
of the Byzantines? He said: If I go to him he would kill me and
say: You killed my companions.[11
When we analyze the statement of 'Amr ibn al-'Aas, You are
just a storage facility for us; if our burden increases, your burden
will increase, and if (our burden) is reduced, (your burden) will be
reduced, we come to the following conclusions about the
principles of the financial policy with regard to non-Muslims at
the time of 'Uthmsn:
(a) The ah1 al-dhimmah contributed to the bayt al-mil of the
Muslims by means of what they paid of jizyah, so they
were a storehouse or source of income for the bayt al-mil,
from which the bayt al-mil acquired its share of their
wealth in the form of jizyah.
(b) This share of the wealth of ah1 al-dhimmah was
determined by the burdens carried by the state: if these
burdens increased then the jizyah would increase, and if
they decreased, then the jizyah would decrease.

(c) This fluctuation in the rate of the jizyah - increasing and
decreasing - depending on the burdens of the state, is
based on the principle that all citizens should carry a
share of the burden so that everyone contributes as much
as he can, in such a way that achieves justice in the
distribution of burdens, in the light of the
"I Futooh Misr zcla AkhbLiruha, p. 102

'Uthmgn Ibn 'AffSn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

a

recommendations made by the Messenger
with
regard to treating ah1 al-dhimmah well in general.[11

h b l i c income from the khadj and 'ushosr at the
tlme of 'Uthmgn
The Islamic conquests expanded at the time of ' U t h d n ibn
'Affiin &, which resulted in the agricultural lands of the
conquered regions coming under the control of the Islamic
state. 'Umar regarded these lands as fay' for the Muslims and left
them in the hands of the people of the Book who preferred to
adhere to their own religions, so that they could cultivate them
and pay kkartj on the land to the bayt al-mil of the Muslims. The
Wzarij from these lands increased the income of the bayt al-mil at
the time of 'Uthmh & because of the expansion of the Islamic
conquests dur~nghis reign.i21

'Ushoor (one-tenth paid an trade goods)
The 'ushoor system was established at the time of 'Umar &s on
the bases that he laid out. At the time of 'Uthmiin &s it seems that
in general the income of the bayt al-mil from the one-tenth paid on
trade goods increased as a result of the expansion of the Islamic
state, because of the conquests that were achieved during his
reign and as a result of the increase in the wealth of some
individuals in general, especially in the first years of the reign of
'UthmSn ibn 'Affsn, which were distinguished by stability and an
increase in purchasing power which increased the demand for
goods. The increase in the demand for goods called for an increase
in import activities, which became subject to the 'ushoor on trade
goods once the conditions for the imposing of this duty were met.
Among the factors that led to this increase in payments of 'ushoor
at the time of 'Uthmiin ibn 'AffSn was the increase in prices,
['I as-Siyiisah al-Miliyyak li 'UtkmLin, p. 107
[I'

op. cit., p. 113

Financial and Tudiciarv Institutions at the time of ' U M &

193

because an increase in prices in turn leads to an increase in the
total of 'ushoor payments, because it is a tax that is based on the
value of the goods, not a payment that is taken for certain types of
goods.111

The

of 'Uthrngn ibn 'MfSn in allocating land:

Abu Bakr & continued the policy of the Prophet & m
allocating land to the people so that they could cultivate and
develop it. He allocated to az-Zubayr ibn a1L'Aww.h some
] he allocated to
unused land between al-Jarf and ~ a r G h [,~and
Majti'ah ibn Marsrah al-Hanafi land in a village in al-Yadmah
called al-~hudrama.[~]
He wanted to allocate some land to alZabarqin ibn Badr, but then he changed his mind when 'Umar &
objected. He also wanted to allocate to 'Uyaynah ibn Husn alF a z and
~ al-Aqra' ibn Hsbis al-Tameemi some barren land that
they wanted to cultivate, but then he changed his mind based on
the opinion of 'Umar which was that there was no need to soften
their hearts towards Islam. He said: The Messenger of AUgh @
used to soften your hearts but Islam was weak at that time, but
now All& has made Islam strong, so now go and work hard for
yourselves.
It is clear that 'Umar did not object to the principle of
allocating land to make use of it, rather it had to do with specific
people whose hearts he did not think needed to be softened
towards Islam. 'Umar allocated land on a large scale with the aim
of cultivating it, following the Prophet's policy. He announced: 0
people, whoever revives dead land, it is his.[41 There are da'eef
(weak) reports which describe 'Umar taking away allocated land
if it was not developed.151One da'eef report states that there was a
three year limit from the date of allocation.It is proven that 'Umar

"' op. cit., p. 123
at-Tabaqcit at-Kubra by IbnSa'd, 3/104
I3I 'Asr al-fllilrifoh al-Rishidah by al-'Umari, p. 220
141 op. Cit., p. 221
"I op. cit., p. 221

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affin &
Dhun-Noorayn
i

194

& allocated some dead land to K h a w S n ibn Jubayr and he

allocated all the land of al-'Aqeeq to az-Zubayr ibn alLrAwwSm,
and the land of Yanboo' to 'Ali ibn Ab'i Tslib, then a great deal of
water started running thi-ough it so 'Ali & allocated it as a waqf
for the
became caliph, he expanded the allocation
When U
'of land, especially in the conquered regions, because many
owners of conquered land left their lands and fled, so the land
came under the direct control of the state, to be invested, and
'Uthmh & allocated it lest it be neglected.[21 But Imam Ahmad
thinks that he allocated land in alSaw2d too, and there can be no
doubt that a great deal of the abandoned lands were in al-SawSd.
Whatever the case, the allocation of land increased the income
from nine million (9,000,000) dirhams per year during the
caliphate of 'Umar & to fifty million (50,000,000) dirhams
during the caliphate of ' U t M n A,which proves the success of
his policy in managing abandoned land. The sources also mention
a list of the names of those to whom 'Uthmh & allocated land,
most of whom were not from Quraysh, but most of the reports
about ' U M n ' s allocation of land are da'eef (weak), but in
general they prove that he expanded the allocation of land. It is
useful to list the names of those to whom land was allocated. They
were:

/,

'Abd-All21 ibn Mas'ood al-Hudhali (land between the
two rivers of Bee1 and al-Sawsd)

/, ' A m & ibn YSsir (Isteeniya)
Khabbsb ibn al-Aratt al-Tameerni (Sa'nabi - a village in
al-Sawsd)

,,/ 'Adiyy ibn Hstim al-TVi (al-Rawha' - one of the
villages of Baghdad on the 'Abs river)

"I

op. cit., p. 222

" op. cit., p. 223

I

I

Financial and Tudiciaw Institutions at the time of ' U t M n &

195

Sa'd ibn Abi WaqqSs al-Zuhri al-Qurashi (the village of
Hormuz in Barri Fsris

J Al-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwsm
/, Udmah ibn Zayd al-Kalbi
J Sa'eed ibn Zayd al-'Adawi al-Qurashi
J Jareer ibn 'Abd-Allsh alBajali (land on the banks of the
Euphrates)

J Ibn Habb&
Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-Allgh al-Tameemi al-Qurashi (alNashastbah - land in Kufah)

J W2il ibn Hajar al-Hadrami (land near the village of
Zur2ah in Kufah)

J Kh5lid ibn 'Arfatah al-Qadzi (land beside H a m m h
A'yan in Kufah)
Al-Ash'ath ibn Qays al-Kindi (Tayzanbgdh - a place
between Kufah and al-Qzdisiyyah)

4 Abu Mureed al-Hanafi (land in al-Ahwk on the Teeri
river)

/, Na' ibn al-Hsrith ibn Kildah al-Thaqafi (a piece of
land in Shatt 'Uthmsn in Basra)

/, Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari (a piece of land in Hammsm
'Amrah)

4 'Ufhnxk ibn Abi'l-'Aas al-Thaqafi (Shatt 'Uthmgn in
Basra)
It seems that the previous owners' abandonment of this land
turned it into disused land, and 'Uthmh 4 allocated it so that it
might be cultivated and developed. It seems that Mu'swiyah ibn
Abi S u f y h allocated some pieces of land on the coast of Syria so

196

'Uthmgn Ibn ' A f f h 4 Dhun-Noorayn

that they might be developed and prepared as border posts to
ward off Byzantine attacks. He also allocated pieces of land in
Antakiyah (Antioch) on 'UthmMs orders, and another piece of
' ] for his allocating Fadak to M a w & ibn
land in ~ a l e e ~ a l a . ~As
al-Hakam, nothing is known of that from any sound source, but it
was said that the one who allocated Fadak to MarwSn was
Mu'iiwiyah ibn Abi ~ u f ~ h . [ ' 'Uthmik's
l
policy in allocating
land contributed to the increase of income for the bnyt a1-mil of the
Muslims, because of the zak& paid by all the recipients on their
wealth, when it met the conditions of zakSh. 'Uthmik's policy of
allocating land succeeded, based on the increase in the state's
revenue from its own property in Iraq, which reached 50 million
dirhams after it was nine million dirhams at the time of mar.[^'

'Uthmfin's policy in aIioeahg land for grazing
This refers to land that was allocated for the care of camels
and horses that were owned by the state. He continued to protect
Wadi al-Naqee' as it had been protected during the caliphates of
Abu Bakr and 'Umar (may All* be pleased with them both), as
the Prophet & had set it aside for horses.[4' It was eighty
kilometres long, starting from forty kilometres south of
adi in ah.'^' The areas set aside for grazing increased during
the caliphate of 'Umar because of the increase in numbers of
camels and horses owned by the state and kept in readiness for
jihad. That included the grazing area of al-Rabdhah that was set
aside for the zak& camels, over which he appointed his freed
slave Hanniy and advised him to allow those who owned a few
camels to let them graze there, in exclusion to those who were
rich. He allocated land for grazing in Diyh Bani Tha'labah
despite their protests, which he answered by saying: The land is
'As7 al-KhiUh al-Rashidah, p. 224
225
13' as-SiyCiSah al-Miliyyah li 'Uthmtn, p. 118
[41 Saheeh Sunan Abi Dawood, by al-AlbSni, 2/595
'51 'As7 al-Khilqah al-Rashidah, p. 225, 226
['I

'21 op. cit., p

Financial and Judiciaw Institutions at the time of ' U M n 4

197

the land of AUsh, and it should be allocated for the camels which
belong to Allih (i.e., z a E h camels).[ll 'Uthmh followed the way
of those who came before him with regard to allocation of grazing
land because the state expanded and the conquests increased
during his reign. The idea of allocating grazing land had been
limited to the animals given as zak&h, but ' U M n 4 expanded it
and increased the amount of allocated land as the number of
Muslims (and therefore the number of animals given as zak2h)
increased.[']
Because Abu Bakr and 'Umar had allocated land for grazing
without anyone objecting to that, 'Uthmsn took the matter further
because there were so many camels and other livestock that had
been given as z a m , and there were too many arguments among
the herdsmen who cared for the zaksh animals, so no one objected
to his actions.[31 Rather what Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthmh did
with regard to allocating grazing land became well-known
among the SahSbah, and no one objected to it, so it is regarded
as consensus.[41 And Ibn Qudimah narrated that there was
consensus on this matter.[']

Types of public expenditure at the time oi 'Uthmsn
The salary of the caliph
'Uthmsn did not take anything from the bayt al-mil of the
Muslims. He was the wealthiest of Quraysh and the most
involved in trade, and he used to spend on his family and those
around him from his own wealth.

Salary of governors from the bayt al-mil
At the time of 'Uthmh &, the Islamic state was divided into
['I at-Tabaqiit, 3/326. The report is saheeh.
[21 Niziim al-Khilvah fi'l-Fib al-Islami, by Dr. Mustafa Hilmi,p. 78

13] op. cit., p. 78

14' Niziim al-Ariidifi Sadr at-Dmlah al-Islamiyyah, p. 169
['I al-Mughni by Ibn Qudsmah, 5/581

' U t M n Ibn ' A f f h 8 Dhun-Nooravn

198

provinces, each of which was ruled by a governor appointed by
the caliph, who took his salary from the bayt al-mil and ran the
affairs of the province in accordance with the rulings of Islamic
sharee'ah. The fact that the caliph did not appoint a representative
to be in charge of the provincial bayt al-mil indicates that it was
part of the governor's role to supervise the collection of the
province's income, which was the jizyah, kharij and one-tenth on
trade goods ('ushoor) and spend from that income on provincial
affairs. Anything that was left over was to be sent to the bayt al-mil
of the Muslims in Madinah. As for the zaksh which was received
from the wealthy in the province, it was spent on the poor in the
same region.[']
Expenditure from bayt al-mril on salaries
The bayt al-mil paid salaries to the troops in addition to
whatever share of the booty they got. The hoops of each province
got their salaries from the provincial bayt nl-mil. For example,
with regard to the hoops of Egypt, 'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn wrote the
following letter to 'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd, the governor of Egypt,
telling him to pay the salaries of the troops stationed in
Alexandria: You know how concerned the Ameer al-Mu'mineen
is about Alexandria, because the Byzantines broke the terms of
the peace treaty twice. So keep troops stationed in Alexandria and
pay them their salaries, and rotate them every six months.r21

Public expenditure on the Hajj from the bayt al-mril
At the time of 'Uthmiin, public expenditure on the Hajj came
from the bayt al-mil. The covering of the Ka'bah was made from
QubSti cloth, which was a fabric made of linen kom ~ g y ~ t . ' ~ ~
Financing the rebuilding of the Prophefs Mosque from the

bayt al-ma1
The people spoke to 'Uthmh when he was first appointed
as-Siytsah al-Miliyyah li 'Uthmtn, p. 130
I[' op. cit., p. 140
op. cit., 140,141
['I

I

Financial and Tudiciarv Institutions at the time of 'Uthmh &

199

caliph, asking him to expand the Prophet's Mosque, because it
had become too crowded at lumu'ah prayer, due to the spread of
conquests and the great increase in the number of inhabitants in
Madinah. 'Uthmh consulted the wise people and they agreed to
demolish the mosque then rebuild and expand it. 'Uthmh led the
people in praying Zuhr, then he ascended the minbar and praised
and glorified AllSh, then he said: 0 people, I have decided to
demolish the Mosque of the Messenger of A l l a & then expand it.
I bear witness that I heard the Messenger of All*
say:

'Whoever builds a mosque, All& will build for him a house in
paradise. "[11
I have a precedent for that in the ruler who came before me, as
'Umar ibn al-Khattiib expanded it. I have consulted the wise
people among the companions of the Messenger of AllSh g,and
they agreed to demolishing it then rebuilding and expanding it.
The people approved of that and prayed for him, then the next
day he called the workers and was present there himself.[21
Financing the expansion of al-Masjid al-Har2m from the

bayt al-mail
At the time of the Messenger &, the Ka'bah had nothing
around it but a narrow courtyard in which the people used to
pray. The mosque remained like that until the caliphate of Abu
Bakr. At the time of 'Umar the mosque was expanded, when he
bought the houses around the mosque and demolished them, and
incorporated the area into the sacred House of Alliih, and built a
low wall around it, and installed lamps to illuminate it at night.
That was because the mosque was too crowded with pilgrims
who came to perform the obligatory duty of Hajj after the
conquests of Islam expanded and people entered the religion of
"I
"I

al-Musnad, no. 434, (1/61) its isniid is snheeh.
AI-Bidiyah wa'n-Nihiiynh, 7/60; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/267

200

' U W n Ibn 'AffSn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

All& in crowds. When the mosque became too small a second
time during 'Uthmsn's reign, he followed the example of 'Umar
and added to the Ka'bah some land that he bought, and
surrounded it with a wall that was no taller than a man, as
'Umar had done before.['] The governors also built mosques in
their provinces and spent on them from the provincial bayt al-mil,
as happened in the building of Masjid al-Rahmah in Alexandria,
and a mosque in Istakhr during the conquests in the east.[']

Spending on the establishment of the f i s t navy
The bayt al-mil played a role in the establishment of the first
navy in Islam, at the time of 'Uthmk. The role of the navy in the
Islamic conquests will be discussed below, in sha Allah, when we
discuss the conquests.[31

Spending on moving the port from al-Shu'aybah to Jeddah
In 26 AH, the people of Makkah spoke to 'Uthmh about
moving the port from Shu'aybah, which was the old port of
Makkah during the Jzhiliyyah, to where it is now in Jeddah,
because it was closer. 'Uthmh went out to Jeddah to see its
location, and he ordered that the port be moved there. Then he
went into the sea and washed himself with seawater, and said: It
is blessed. And he said to those who were with him: Go into the
sea and wash yourselves with seawater, but keep your izks
(waist-wrappers) on. Then he set out from Jeddah via 'Asfin to
MadAmh,and the people abandoned the port of al- Shu'aybah at
that time, and Jeddah has remained the port of Makkah until
now.c4'

Digging wells with funds from the bayt al-mcil of the
Muslims
Among the works that were financed by the bayt al-mil of the
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/250; Dhuh-Noorayn, by Muhammad Rasheed, p. 25

asSiycisah al-Mtliyyah li 'Uthmcin ibn 'Affin, p. 147, 148
op. cit., p. 148
[41 Dhuh-Noorayn 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin,by Muhammad Rasheed, p. 26

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'UthmSn 4%

201

Muslims at the time of 'Uthmin was the digging of a well in
MadAmhwhich was called Bi'r Arees, which was two miles from
MaCmh. This occurred in 30 AH. It so happened that 'Uthm&I
sat in the edge of this well with the ring of the Messenger of A l l a
& on his finger, and the ring slipped from his finger and fell into
the well. They looked for it in the well and took out the water, but
they could not find it. He offered a huge reward to the one who
found it, and he was very distressed by this incident. When he
gave up hope of finding it, he had another ring made of silver that
looked like it, and had the words "Muhammad Rasool A l l W
engraved on it, and he wore it on his finger until he was killed.
When he was killed the ring disappeared from his hand and no
one knew who took it.[']

Spending on muezzins from the bayt al-m&l
'Uthmh .& was the first one to give the muezzins money
from the bayt al-mil. Imam al-Sh2fari said: The muezzins were
given salaries by the imam of guidance 'Uthmh ibn 'Aff&I.['l
'Uthmh 4 paid them for giving the

Financing the sublime aims of Islam
It is clear from the study of public expenditure discussed
above that the bayt al-mil played a role in financing the sublime
aims of the Islamic state. In addition to expenditure on state
administration and the interests of the people, money was spent
on spreading Islam so that the word of Allih would become
supreme. The bayt al-mil financed the establishment of the first
navy of the Islamic state; houses of All& were built by financing
the construction and renovation of mosques; and salaries were
paid to muezzins, governors, judges, troops and government
agents and workers. Money was also spent on Hajj to the sacred
House of Allih, and the covering of the Ka'bah which was the
qiblah of Islam and the Muslims. The bayt al-mil of the Muslims
"I al-Bidiyah wah-Nihiyah, 7/161; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/284

Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmtn ibn 'Affin, p. 14
[31 ibid.

202

'Uthmzn Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Nooravn

also funded the digging of wells to provide drinking water for all
citizens of the Islamic state. From the income of the state, such as
zak& and the kh~rms(one-fifth) of the war booty, the weak
sectors of society in the Islamic state were sponsored, namely the
poor and needy, orphans, strangers and wayfarers, and slaves
were set free.[''

Confiinuation of the
'Ulhnain ibn 'Affgn
The stipend system continued at the time of 'Uthmh as it had
been at the time of 'Umar ibn al-Khattgb (may All* be pleased
with them both). Those who had come to Islam first were the one
who were given more. He wrote to his governor in Kufah
informing him of that, and said: Give precedence to those who
came to Islam first and those to whom All* granted victory in
that land. Make those who followed them to these lands followers
to them, unless they become slower in following the truth and
supporting it, and the others take on this mission of fighting and
defending, recognize the status of each of them, and give them all
their share on the basis of tmth. Knowing people is a means to
achieve justice.[Z1When the Islamic conquests spread during his
reign, the income of the state increased, which led the caliph
'Uthmh 4 to set up storehouses.[3] This in turn was reflected by
the amounts that he gave out. The troops' salaries were increased
by 100 dirhams for each soldier. This was the first increase in the
people's stipends and the caliphs who came after him followed
him in increasing the troops' salaries.[41
al-Hasan said: I saw the caller of ' U M calling out: 0
people, come and take what you need of clothing, so they took
suits of clothing. (And he said:) Come and take what you need of
['I assiyrisah a[-MiiliyyahEi 'Uthmin ibn 'Ajflin, p. 150
[21 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/280
[31 al-Idtrah al-'Askariyyahfl-Dawlah al-lslamiyyoh (2/6836); an-Nujoom al-Zlihirah

14'

(1/87)
Tareekh at-Tabari (5/145)

I

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthman

A&

203

ghee and honey. Al-Hasan said: A lot of provision, a lot of
blessings, and harmony among people; no believer on earth fears
another believer, rather he loves him, supports him and befriends
him.['] The caliph 'Uthmh & also paid attention to the border
outposts and the troops stationed there; he ordered his
commanders to give them their stipends and provisions and to
increase it for the troops stationed on the borders.[''

ealth oh s

Effect of increase
and economic life

At the time of 'Uthmin, the khartj increased and wealth came
to him from all directions, so he built storehouses for it. That in
turn affected the economy and the society. It was narrated from
Abu IsKq that his grandfather passed by 'Uthmsn and he said to
him: How many children do you have, 0 Shaykh? He said: I have
such and such. He said: We allocate to you fifteen (hundred) meaning one thousand five hundred - and we allocate to your
dependents one thousand.[31 And it was narrated that
Muhammad ibn Hila al-Madeeni said: May father told me that
my grandmother used to enter upon 'Uthmh. She did not come
one day and he said to her family:Why do I not see So and so? His
wife said: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, last night she gave birth to a
boy. She said: And he sent me fifty dirhams and some clothing.
Then he said: This is the stipend for your son and this clothin
also for him. After one year, we will increase it to one hundred.14p
'Uthmh also spent on the eople of al-'Awili in Madimah,
providing food and clothingr5 When the commander Qutn ibn
'Amr al-Hilai gave four thousand dirhams to the army that was
with him, who numbered four thousand men, as an
encouragement, the governor of Basra, 'Abd-Allsh ibn 'Aamir,

P

Majma' al-Zmt'id, 9/93, 94; Fasi al-Khitibbfi Mawriqfal-Ashiib, p. 52
Futooh Misr, p. 192; Fath al-Buldin li'l-Baiadhuri, 1/152-157
I'[ al-ldarah al-'Askariyyah, 2/769
L41op. cit., 2/769
Is] at-Tabaqit, 3/298
['I

I'[

' U W n Ibn 'Affgn & DhunXooravn

204

thought it was too much; he wrote to the caliph 'Uthmiin & telling
him about that, but the caliph allowed it and said: An thing that
helps with (jihad) for the sake of All& is permissible.
'Uthmiin introduced the idea that the stipend of a Muslim
soldier could be given to his female heirs, his daughters and
wives. Al-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwim said to the caliph 'Uthmik,
after the death of 'Abd-All21 ibn Mas'ood &: Give me the stipend
of 'Abd-AllSh, for the children of 'Abd-All& are more entitled to
it than the bayt al-mil. So he gave him fifteen thousand.['l
Activities in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing and trade
also increased at the time of the RightlyGuided Caliph 'Uthmh
ibn 'AffSn. Because of the bounty that AllSh bestowed upon the
Muslims as the result of the conquests, the people of Madmah in
particular and the Muslims in general began to live a life of ease
and plenty, and this wealth was accompanied by many cultural
developments that had been unknown in Arabia prior to the great
conquests. The Muslims saw what other nations had and adopted
things from them, and this process became widespread during the
caliphate of 'Uthmh. Some of the SahSbah built large houses and
the foreigners who had been taken captive during the conquests
played a role in the development of social and economic life.[3'

K1

"Uthmgn
bayt al-m

r

an

'Uthmiin was accused by the rebels and thugs of being
extravagant with the bayt al-mdl and giving most of it to his own
relatives. This accusation was supported by a propaganda
campaign against him that was led by the Saba'is (followers of
'Abd-AllSh ibn Saba') and the Rfidi Shi'ah, which found its way
into the history books and was heated by some intellectuals and
historians as if it were true, although it is false and was never
al-Awi'il by al-'Askari, 2/26, 27
al-ldiruh alLrAskariyyah, 2/770
[31 al-Hadiruh al-'Arabiyyah al-Islarniyyah, by Dr. Wadd2h .halamad, p. 114

['I

'21

Financial and Judiciw Institutions at the time of 'UthmSn 4

205

proven, because it is inconsistent. What was proven of his being
generous towards his relatives is to be regarded as commendable
and not as shortcomings.
1- 'Uthmh was extremely wealthy and upheld the ties of
kinshipc1' by giving his relatives a great deal. Those
evildoers picked on that and said that he was giving to his
relatives from the bayt al-mil, but 'Uthmiin
defending
himself by saying: I love my relatives and I give to them, but
my love for them did not make-me support them when they
were in the wrong, rather I treat them the same as everyone
else. But as for my giving to them, I only give to them from
my own wealth, for I do not regard the wealth of the
Muslims as permissible for me or for any of the people. I
used to give a lot to the people from my own wealth at the
time of the Messenger of Allih @, Abu Bakr and 'Uthmh.
At that time I was young and more careful about what I
spent, but when I became the eldest of my family and
approached the age of dying, and I gave my wealth to my
family, then the evildoers said what they said.[" 'Uthmh
had divided his wealth and his land among Banu Umayyah,
and he regarded his children as the same as those who had
been given some of his wealth. So he started with the sons of
Abu'l-'Aas and gave each man among them ten thousand, so
they took one hundred thousand (in all). He gave a similar
amount to the sons of 'Uthmin, and he distributed (wealth)
to the sons of al-'Aas and the sons of al'Ays and the sons of
arb.[^] These reports and others which were well-known
about him,and the suheeh ahlideeth which speak of his great
virtue, all indicate that whatever was said about his
extravagance with the buyt al-mil and his spending most of
it on himself and his relatives and palaces were just stories
that had no basis whatsoever, and were all fabrications
['I Fasl al-l<hitiibfi Mawiq'qifal-Ashdb, p. 82
'21 Tare&
[31 ibid.

at-Tabari (5/365

206

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Noorayn

against him, as 'Uthmsn was innocent of what was
attributed to him. Taqiy al-Deen ibn Taymiyah said: Some
of the fuqaha' suggested that the phrase 'near relatives' [in
al-M218:41, referring to distribution of war booty] refers to
the relatives of the caliph, as al-Hasan and Abu Thawr
suggested, and that the Prophet @ used to give to his
relatives because of his position as leader of the Muslims. So
the 'near relatives' at the time of the Prophet @ were his
relatives, and after he died they were the relatives of the one
who became leader after him, and that is because supporting
the ruler is obligatory, and his relatives will support him and
defend him in a way that no one else will do. And he said: In
general, most of those who were appointed as rulers after
'Umar appointed some of their relatives to positions of
authority or gave generously to some of them in terms of
money.['] And it was said that 'Uthmh disposed of wealth
in three ways: (i) the one who was in charge of collecting it
deserves payment even if he was independent of means; (ii)
the 'near relatives' were the relatives of the ruler; and (iii)the
relatives of 'Uthmh formed a large tribe that was not like
the tribes of Abu Bakr or 'Umar, so he needed to give to them
and appoint them to positions of authority more than Abu
Bakr and 'Umar needed to appoint and give to their
relatives. This is what was narrated from 'Uthmh ibn
'Affh when he was defending himself.121
2- It is narrated in Tareekh al-Tabari that when 'Uthmsn
commanded 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh to march
from Egypt to Tunis to conquer it, he said to him: If Allsh
grants you the conquest of North Africa, then you will have
one-fifth of the one-fifth (?&urns) of the booty that Allsh
bestows upon the Muslims, as a bonus. So he set out with his
army until they crossed the land of Egypt and penetrated

1' op. cit., 3/237, al-Dawlah al-Umawiyyah by Hamdi Shaheen, p. 163

Financial and Judiciary Institutions at the time of 'Uthrngn &

207

deep into the land of North Africa and conquered its plains
and mountains, and 'Abd-Alla divided the booty among
the hoops, and he took one-fifth of the Wzums, and sent the
remaining four-fifths to 'Uthmk with Ibn Watheemah alNadri. Some people who were with him complained to
'Uthmgn about what 'Abd-All& had taken, but 'Uthmgn
said to them: I told him to do that, but if you are not pleased
then I will tell him to give it back. They said: We are not
pleased. So 'UthnGn ordered 'Abd-AEh to give it back, and
he did so.['' And it is proven in the Sunnah that something
extra may be given to people who demonshate particular
power and strength in jihad.[']

3- It was too difficult to bring to Madfiah the remaining fourfifths and animals that had been taken as booty in North
Africa, so M a r w h bought all of that for one hundred
thousand dirhams. He paid cash for most of it and some of
the price was left, and he was the first to go to 'Uthm2n with
the news of the conquest. The Muslims had been very
anxious and worried lest the Muslims meet with disaster in
North Africa, so ' U M n let him off the remainder of the
payment as a reward for his bringing the good news. The
ruler has the right to give whatever he sees fit to the bringer
of good news in return for his efforts and the importance of
his good news. This is what is proven with regard to
'Uthm2n giving something to Marwh. What they said about
him giving him the khums from North Africa is a lie.I3]
' U t h d & loved his relatives very much, but that did not
make him commit any harsm or wrong action, or engage in
misconduct with regard to money or anything else. Rather,
false accusations that were fabricated by evil propaganda
and the JGfidi Shi'ah against 'Uthmk & have been inserted
into the history books.
"I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/253
12'

[I'

Fad al-Wzifib fi Mawiqifal-Asldb, p. 84
ibid.

208

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

The way in which 'Uthmiin behaved with his relatives
represents a noble aspect of Islam, because AUSh says:

"That is (the Paradise) whereof All& giw glad tidings to His
slaves who believe (in the Oneness of Allih - Islamic
Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds. Say (0
Muhammad @J : 'No reward do I ask of you for this except to
be kind to mefor my kinship with you .' And whoever earns a
good righteous deed, W e shall give him an increase of good in
respect thereof. Verily, All& is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to
appreciate (the deeds of those who are obedient to Him)" (AshShoora 4223)

"And give to the kinsman his due and to the Miskeen (poor)and
to the wayfarer. But spend not wastefully (your wealth) in the
manner of a spendtht+@"(Al-Isra' 17:26)
It also shows that he was following a practical aspect of the
because he had seen the Messenger of
example of the Prophet g,
All& @ and he knew the way in which the Prophet @$ treated
people and relatives, which the people who criticized him did not
know. He had deeper knowledge than most of the people and he
had seen how much the Prophet @ loved his relatives and how
kind he was towards them. He gave his paternal uncle al'Abb2s
what he did not give to anyone else when some wealth from
Bahrain was brought to him.''' And he appointed 'Ali, who was
his cousin and son-in-law, to a position of authority. 'Uthmsn and

Financial and Tudiciarv Institutions at the time of 'Uthmsn 4

209

all the believers had the greatest example in the Messenger of
All& 2%. ['I
Ibn Katheer ,& said: 'Uthmin was of noble character, very
modest and generous. He gave preference to his family and
relatives over himself for the sake of AllSh, to soften their hearts
by giving them temporary worldly benefits, so as to encourage
them to give preference to that which will abide forever over that
which is temporary, as the Prophet & used to give to some people
and not others in order to instil guidance and faith in their hearts.
Some people criticized him for this quality as some of the
Khaw%rij criticized the Messen er of Allih & when he gave
precedence to some over others!~ It was narrated that Jsbir ibn
'Abd-Allih c& said: Whilst the Messenger of AllSh g was sharing
] said to him: Be fair. He said:
out the booty at a l - ~ i ' r h a h ,~a~man

"I would be doomed $1 were n ~ t f a i r . " [ ~ ~
'Uthm2n argued for his kindness to his family and relatives
when addressing the shoora council by saying: I will tell you
about me and about that which is under my care. My two
companions who came before me (i.e., Abu Bakr and 'Umar) were
too strict with themselves with regard to spending money. The
Messenger of AUCh @ used to give to his relatives and I have
relatives who have many children and little income, so I give
some of that which is under my authority. But if you think this is
wrong, then I will stop it. 15]
Ibn Taymiyah (4s) refuted those who accused 'Uthmin of
favouring his relatives by giving them a great deal from the bayf
al-mil by saying: There are reports which say that he used to give
[I1 al-Bidriyah wah-Nihiiyd, 7/201
'2'

ibid.

L31 al-Ji'rkah: am oasis between al-Tii'if and Makkah; it is closer to Makkah.
[41 A l - B u k M ~ ,(3138) Kifiib Fard al-mums

at-Tabaqiit al-Kubra, 3/64

'Uthmgn Ibn 'AffCn & Dhun-Nooravn

210
-

-

--

his family a great deal of wealth from the bayf al-mil, to such an
extent that he gave four hundred thousand dinars to four men of
Quraysh who were his sow-in-law, and he gave Marwsn a
million dinars. The answer to that is: How can you prove that
these reports are true? Yes, he used to give to his relatives but he
also used to g v e to people who were not his relatives. He treated
all the Muslims well. Saying that he gave these huge amounts
requires sound proof. Moreover it should be noted that this is a
blatant lie, because neither 'Uthmh nor any other RightlyGuided Caliph gave anyone anytlung near this amount.'ll

Judicial institutions and some

Jiqhi gtihdds

The time of 'Uthmh is regarded as a continuation of the era
of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs which is important because of its
direct connection and closeness to the era of the Prophet @. The
time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs in general, and particularly
with regard to the judiciary at that time, was a continuation of the
judiciary and of everything that had been established at the time
of the Prophet g9which was applied completely, in letter and in
spirit. The importance of the era of the RightlyGuided Caliphs
was manifested in two basic issues:
e
Adherence to the texts of the Prophet's era, following them
and persisting in adhering to them.
a Formation of new judiciary bodies to help reinforce the pillars
of the vast Islamic state and to deal with various new
circ~mstances.[~l
By the help of AlEh and with his own genius, 'Umar was able
to develop the judicial institutions in the Islamic state, so they
acquired guidelines and regulations, from which the Caliph
'Uthmin & benefited when appointing judges and determining
'I1

Tareekh al-Qudu'fi'l-Islam by auuhayli, p. 83, 84

212

'Uthmsn Ibn 'AffGn & Dhun-Nooravn

their salaries, judicial specialties, the qualities required of a judge,
the sources of judicial rulings, and how judges are to deal with
evidence. There were also legal precedents from the time of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar which judges made use of at the time of ' U W n
&.

When 'Uthmh was appointed caliph, 'Ali ibn Abi Tslib,
Zayd ibn Thiibit and al-S2ib ibn Yazeed (may Alliih be pleased
with them) were in charge of the judiciary in MadAmh.Some
researchers say that 'Uthmin did not allow them any
independence in passing judgement in any case as the situation
had been at the time of 'Umar &; rather he would examine the
cases himself and consult these men and others about the ruling.
If their opinion coincided with his, he would pass judgement,
otherwise he would examine the matter further. This means that
'Uthmh relieved these three judges of their duties, but he kept
them on as consultants in every dispute that was referred to him,
but he consulted others too. Some researchers suggest that there is
no clear text to show that they were relieved of their duties, and
the most that has been narrated indicates that 'Uthmiin approved
of the judges appointed by 'Umar in Madinah, but he reduced
their burden by looking at many serious cases himself, in
consultation with them. The reason why there is a difference of
opinion about what 'Uthmin did is that there are conflicting
reports concerning this issue.
a It was narrated by al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan and by Wakee' in
Akkbtr al-Qudtt that 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn Sa'eed said: My
grandfather told me: I saw 'Uthmiin ibn 'Affsn in the mosque,
when the two disputants came to him. He said to one of them:
Go and call 'Ali. And he said to the other: Go and call Talhah
ibn 'Ubayd-Allsh, az-Zubayr and 'Abd al-Rahmiin. So they
came and sat down, and he said to (the two disputants):
Speak; then he turned to (the three men) and said: Tell me
what you think. If they said what coincided with his opinion
he would go ahead and pass judgement, and if not, he would
examine it further and they would leave after saying salsm.

Judicial institutions and some fighi iitihtds

213

And it is not known that 'Uthmh appointed any other judge
in Madinah until he was killed.
s It says in Tareekk at-Tabari, when mentioning the deeds of
' U W n : At the time of 'Uthmsn, Zayd ibn Thsbit was in
charge of the judiciary, which indicates that 'Uthmih kept
Zayd in charge of the judiciary and that he had permission to
pass judgement in disputes. So long as it is possible to
reconcile between the reports, it is better to accept them both,
rather than accepting only one without any reason. They may
be reconciled by noting that 'Uthmsn retained the judges in
Madinah to pass judgements in some cases, but he kept some
other, more difficult, cases for himself and made it his job to
deal with them, in consultation with his companions,
includmg his judges.lll
'Uthmh sometimes appointed judges for different regions,
such as when he appointed Ka'b ibn Soor as the chief judge of
Basra, and sometimes he left the judiciary to the governor, such as
when he asked his governor in Basra to judge between the people
in addition to his tasks as governor. That was after he had
dismissed Ka'b ibn Soor. Similar1 Ya'la ibn Umayyah was both
governor and judge of San'd.lzT It may be noted that some
governors chose judges for themselves, and the judges were
answerable to them, which indicates that governors had greater
authority than judges during his caliphate.131 The reports
narrated from 'Uthmsn, his letters to his governors,
commanders of troops on the borders and to the Muslims in
general, suggest that it is most likely that he put governors in
charge of the judiciary, to take care of the matter themselves, or to
appoint those who were able to deal with it.'41 Although we find
a great of correspondence between 'Umar and the judges of the
'I'

an-Nuzum al-Islami, 1/378; Waqii'i' Nadwat Abi Zabi, 1405 AH.

" 'Asr al-l(hilqah al-Rishidah, p. 143
'31 an-Nuzum al-Islamiyyah, 1/378
'41 ibid.

'Uthmsn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun'Nooravn

214

various regions, we find that such correspondence between
'Uthmiin and the judges was very rare.[']
0
Ibn 'Umar excused himself from the post of judge
'Uthmin said to Ibn 'Umar: Judge between people. He said: I
will not judge between two people or lead two men in prayer. Did
you not hear the Prophet @ say:
,ljC;d
*

iG

;

&L iGw - L

, ,
.

"Whoever seeks refuge with All& has indeed sought (an
excellent) refuge ."
'UthnGn said: Yes (heard
I
that). He said: Then I seek refuge
with AUih from being appointed b you. So he let him off, and
said: Do not tell anyone about that.$1
a
Courthouses
Some history books state that one of the legacies of 'Uthmin
was the setting up of courthouses, as is clear from a report
narrated by Ibn 'Asskir from Abu Silih, the freed slave of al'Abbgs, who said: al-'Abbss sent me to 'Uthmsn to invite him,
and I found him in the courthouse... If this is saheeh, then
'Uthmh was the first one to set up courthouses in Islam. The two
caliphs before him used to hear cases in the mosque, as was well
known.[31
0
The most famous judges during the caliphate of 'Uthmin

1- Zayd ibn Th3bit (Madinah)
2- Abu'l-Darda' (Damascus)
3- Ka'b ibn Soor (Basra)
4- Abu Moosa al'Ash'ari (Basra - in addition to being
['I
I''

al-Mliyah 'ala al-Buldin, 2/92
Musnad al-Imam Ahmad, no. 475 (1/66). I t is hasan li ghayrihi
Ashhar Mashiiheer al-Islam, 4/740

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihids

215

governor thereof)

5- Shurayh (Kufah)

6- Ya'la ibn Umayyah(Yemen)

8- 'Uthmh ibn Qays ibn Abi'l-'Aas ( ~ ~ ~ ~ t ) . [ l l
The Rightly-Guided Caliph also left behind fiqhi rulings in
the fields of qisis, offences, hudood punishments, ta'zeer
punishments, acts of worship and transactions between people,
which had a clear effect on the schools of fiqh. There follow some
of the rulings issued by 'UthmSn:

Qis&s, h u d o o
punishments

ishrnents an

eer

The first case that 'Uthmh dealt with was a case of murder:
The first case in which 'Uthmh passed judgement was the
case of 'Ubayd-AllSh ibn 'Umar, when he went to the daughter of
Abu Lu'lu'ah, the killer of 'Umar, and killed her. He also struck a
Christian man called Jufaynahwith the sword and killed him, and
he struck al-Hormuzh, the ruler of Tastar, and killed him. It was
said that these two had conspired with Abu Lu'lu'ah to kill
'Umar. And AllSh knows best.[21 'Umar had ordered that he
('Ubayd-Allih) be imprisoned so that he might be judged by the
caliph who came after him. When ' U M was appointed caliph
and met with the people, the first case he examined was that of
'Ubayd-AllSh. 'Ali said: It is not fair to let him off, and he said that
he should be executed. Some of the Muhijiveen said: How can you
kill him today when his father was slain yesterday? 'And Ibn al'Aas said: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, Allih has spared you from

216

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

involvement in this incident; it is something that did not happen
during your reign, so leave it alone. So 'Uthrnh paid the diyah for
those who had been slain from his own wealth, because he was in
charge of them, but they had no heir other than the bayt al-mil,
and the ruler should do what he sees fit. And he let 'Ubayd-Allsh
go.'1]
There is a report from al-Tabari which says that alQamSdhbh ibn al-Hormuzh forgave 'Ubayd-AllSh. It was
narrated that Abu Mansoor said: I heard alQam2dhbSn speaking
about the killing of his father. He said: The Persians in Madkah
used to spend time together. Fayrooz passed by my father and he
had a two-headed dagger with him.He took it from him and said:
What will you do with this in this land? He said: I feel safe with it.
A man saw him, and when 'Umar was killed he said: I saw this
(dagger) with al-Hormuzh, and he was giving it to Fayrooz. So
'Ubayd-All& went and killed him. When ' U W n became
caliph, he called me and gave me the option to retaliate, then he
said: 0 my son, this is your father's killer; you have more right to
deal with him than us, so go and kill him. I took him out and
everyone came out to see what I would do with him, but they
were asking me to let him off. I said: Is it up to me whether I kill
him? They said: Yes. I said: Can you protect him? They said: No. I
let him go for the sake of AllZh and for their sake, and they carried
me on their shoulders, and by AllSh, they carried me home on
their shoulders.[21
There is no contradiction between this report and the other
report which says that the caliph 'Uthmh let 'Ubayd-AllSh ibn
'Umar off and paid the diyah himself to the heirs of al-Hormuz6n,
because all the Sahgbah agreed that the son of al-Hormuzgn had
the right to retaliate, but he responded to their hope that he would
let him off, as mentioned above. Moreover, the caliph's pardon
was based on his authority to investigate the crime and pass
judgement concerning it; this is the role of the caliph, not of the
"I ibid
"I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/243. Its isntd is not saheeh.

ludicial institutions and some fiahi iitihids

217

victim's son. 'Ubayd-All& had transgressed against the rights of
the caliph, hence the report that speaks of forgiveness refers to a
pardon for transgressing these rights. This transgression on the
part of 'Ubayd-All& also stemmed from the fact that his action
caused the state to lose an important opportunity to find out
about the "cells" connected to the crime, and the criminals and
others who were involved in this conspiracy. The caliph was also
in a position to issue a pardon because those who were killed had
no heirs, namely Jufaynah and the daughter of the Magian killer.
There is no dispute in the reports and historical sources that the
dagger with which 'Umar was killed had been in the hands of alHormuzh and Jufaynah before this incident. That was witnessed
by two of the SaMbah, namely 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn 'Awf and
'Abd al-Rahmh ibn Abi Bakr. The report of 'Abd al-Rahmin ibn
Abi Bakr says that the killer Abu Lu'lu'ah was with these two
partners, and the three of them were whispering together. When
he startled them, the dagger fell from their hands. After 'Umar
was killed, they found that it was the same dagger that the two
witnesses had described.Ill Therefore al-HormuzSn and Jufaynah
deserved to be N e d . As for the daughter of Abu Lu'lu'ah, who
had killed himself to conceal his two co-conspirators, she was
N e d wrongfully and no one should have been executed in
retaliation. 'Ubayd-Allih thought that she was one of the partners
in the killing, since she had been hiding the weapon for her
father.[']

The execution of the thieves
Some of the young men of Kufah during the governorship of
al-'Waleed ibn 'Uqbah broke into the house of Ibn al-Haysamh
al-Khuz$'i and out numbered him. He warned them, then he
drew his sword. When he saw how many they were, he started
yelling for help and they said to him: Be quiet; it will only take one
blow and you will be relieved of this fear tonight. Abu Shurayh al-

218

'UthmSn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Noorayn

KhuzS'i was watching from above, and he shouted at them and
they struck him and killed him. The people surrounded them and
caught them, and among them were Zuhayr ibn Jundub al-Azdi,
Muwarra' ibn Abi Muwarra' al-Asadi, Shubayl ibn Ubayy alAzdi and others. Abu Shurayh and his son bore witness that they
had entered upon (the victim), and they (the thieves) had ganged
up together against the victim and some of them had killed him.
He wrote to 'Uthmh about this and 'Uthmh wrote back, saying
that they should be executed. So he executed them by the gate of
the fort in al-Rahbah.

A man who killed a merchant for his money
That occurred during the caliphate of 'Uthmsn, and the
punishment was execution in retaliation (qislis).[ll

The punishment of a practitioner of witchcraft
It so happened during the caliphate of 'Uthmh & that a slave
woman of Hafsah's bewitched her, then the slave woman
admitted that, so Hafsah ordered 'Abd al-Rahmcn ibn Zayd to
kill her. 'Uthmgn denounced her for that, and Ibn 'Umar said:
Why are you upset with the Mother of the Believers when a
woman bewitched her and admitted it? 'Uthmsn remained silent.
'Uthmh did not criticize Hafsah for the killing, rather he
criticized her for transgressing against the rights of the ruler to
carry out hndd punishments, because the issue of hadd
punishments is something that is in the ruler's hands. This is
what is referred to in the words of Ibn 'Umar: Why are you upset
with the Mother of the Believers when a woman bewitched her
and admitted it? - i.e., the ruling is clear and the woman
undoubtedly deserved to die.[']

The offence committed by a blind man
The blind man with his guide is like a tool; he moves on his
instructions and is unaware of what is going on around him; he
Asr al-h7rilffak al-kAshidnk,p. 153
[I' Mawsoo'at Fiqk 'UtkmLin ibn 'Afffn, p. 169,170
['I

ludicial institutions and some fighi iitihlids

219

moves and he may fall or be harmed by his movements. So he
may harm others by his movements when he cannot see them.
Hence if he causes any harm to his guide or his companion
without meaning to, he is not liable for it. 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh
said: Any man who sits with a blind man and the blind man
harms him in some way, he is not liable for it.[']

Injuries caused in a fight between two people
There may be an argument between some people, each of
whom harms the other. If any such thing happens, then qisis must
take place, because this offence was deliberate, as it seems that
each of them wanted to harm the other. 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin said:
If two people fi ht, then any injuries caused between them are
subject to qisis.12

B

Harm caused to animals
If harm is caused to an animal, then its value must be paid. It
was narrated that 'Uqbah ibn 'Aamir said: During the caliphate of
'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh, a man killed a hunting dog, the like of which
was unknown among other dogs. Its value was estimated at eight
hundred dirhams, so 'Uthmin made him pay that amount. And
in another case he penalized a man twenty camels for the price of
a dog that he had killed.13]

Harm caused to an aggressor
If a person transgresses against the property of another man,
or he threatens his life or honour and he kills him during that
incident of aggression, then he is not liable. Ibn Hazm narrated in
al-Muhalla that a man saw another man with his wife and killed
him; they referred the matter to 'Uthmin and he ruled that no
blood money was to be paid.141

['I op. cit., p. 99
"I

op. cit., p. 100

[31 Mawsoorat

Fiqh 'Uthmtn, p. 102

[41 op. cit., p. 103

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affin ;gB Dhun-Noorayn

220

Asking the apostate to repent
The hadd punishment is not to be carried out on the apostate
until he has been asked to repent three times. But if he persists in
his apostasy, he is to be executed. 'Abd-All& ibn Mas'ood caught
some men in Kufah who had apostatized from Islam and were
reviving the issue of Musaylimah the liar. He wrote to the caliph
'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h about them, and 'Uthmin wrote back saying
that they should be presented with the true religion and the
testimony that there is no god but All& and that Muhammad is
the Messenger of All*. Whoever accepted that and disavowed
himself of Musaylimah was not to be executed, but whoever
persisted in adhering to the religion of Musaylimah was to be
executed. Some of them accepted it and were let go; others
adhered to the religion of Musaylimah and were executed.'''

"I have killed; will my repentance be accepted?"
A man said to ' U t h m k 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, I have
killed, will my repentance be accepted? 'Uthmh recited to him
from the beginning of Soorat Gh*

" H i . Meem. [These letters are one of the miracles of the Qur'in,
and none but Allih (Alone) knows their meanings.] The
revelation of the Book (this Qur'in) is ?om All&, the AllMighty, the All-Knower. The Forgiver of sin, the Acceptor of
repentance, the Severe in punishment" (Ghrifir 40:l-3)
Then he said to him:Do good deeds and do not despair.['] It
is worth mentioning that when repenting from sins that affect
other people, it is essential to restore their rights to them unless
they give them up.[31
['I op. cit., p. 150
12] Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmin iibn 'Afftn, p, 93
13] ibid.

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihiids

221

The hadd punishment for drinking alcohol
It is well known that the Messenger of All* @ would punish
a free man for drinking alcohol by giving him forty lashes, and the
people would hit him with their shoes and the edges of their
garments in order to humiliate him. Abu Bakr did likewise, as did
'Umar at the beginning of his reign, but he soon increased the
punishment to eighty lashes, in consultation with the Sahibah,
when he saw that the people were not taking the punishment
seriously and were not deterred by it. With regard to 'Uthmh ibn
'Affin, it is proven that he gave a free man forty lashes and it is
proven that he gave him eighty lashes. This is not due to his
whims and desires, rather he distinguished between one drinker
and another. He did not punish the one who had made a mistake
and dnrnk alcohol once as he punished the one who was addicted
to it. For the person who had dm& for the first time and made a
mistake, the punishment was forty lashes, and for the one who
drank repeatedly and was addicted to it, the punishment was
eighty lashes. It is as if the first forty lashes was the minimum, and
the other forty was an additional punishment.

Canying out the hadd punishment on his uterine brother alWaleed ibu 'Uqbah
It was narrated that Husayn ibn al-Mundhir said: I was
present with 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh when al-Waleed was brought
and two men - one of whom was Hamrin - testified that he had
d
d wine, and another testified that he had seen him vomiting.
'UthmZn said: He would not have vomited unless he drank it. He
said: 0 'Ali, get up and flog him.'Ali said: Get up, 0 Hasan, and
flog him. Al-Hasan said: Let the one who is in authority cany out
the punishment.111 It is as i f he was upset with him.He said: 0
'Abd-AUSh ibn Ja'far, get up and flog him. So he flogged him and
'Ali counted until he reached forty, then he said: Stop. He said:
The Prophet @j gave forty lashes, and Abu Bakr gave forty, and
'Umar gave eighty; both are Sunnah but this is dearer to me.L2'
''I Sharh al-Nmuzui 'ala Saheeh Muslim, Kittb al-Hudood, 11/216
I''

Wil8yat al-Shurtahfll-lslam, by Dr. Nimr al-HumaydM, p. 105

222

'Uthmgn Ibn 'AffSn A Dhun-Nooravn

From this hadeeth it may be understood that the predecessors
of 'Uthmin (&) implemented this hadd punishment, and that the
one who is commanded to carry out the hadd punishment may
delegate it to someone else. It may also be understood that
'Uthmh was strict in adhering to the truth and that he did not
worry about the blame of others when it came to implementing
the laws of Allsh. Al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'eet was his
brother on his mother's side.Ill

Theft by a minor
The hadd punishment for stealing is only to be carried out if
the thief is an adult of sound mind who did it by choice, knowing
that it is harim. A boy who had stolen was brought to 'Uthmh,
and he said: Look at his private parts. So they looked, but the
pubic hair had not yet appeared, so he did not amputate his

Imprisonment as a Ta'zeer punishment
Dsbi ibn al-Hirith al-Burjami borrowed a dog called Qarhk
from some of the Anssr at the time of al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah, to go
hunting gazelles, then he refused to give it back. The Ansiris
disputed with him and sought the help of his people against him,
and they outnumbered him. They took the dog from him and
returned it to the Ans*, then he attacked them and composed
poetry in which he slandered them and said that this dog was
their mother. They complained about him to 'Uthmin, who sent
for him and punished him by imprisoning him as he used to do
with other Muslims; he found life in prison very hard and he
remained in prison until he died there.13]

Slandering people's honour indirectly
'Uthmgn used to carry out the hadd punishment for
slandering people's honour even if that was done indirectly.
One man said to another, 0 son of ... - hinting that his mother was
"I
12'

op. cit., p 104
Saheeh alLTawtheeq, p. 77;Mawsoorat Fiqh 'UthhmLin, p. 171
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/420

Judicial institutions and some fqhi ijtihids

223

an adulteress. He complained about that to 'Uthmh ibn 'Affin,
and the man said: I only meant such and such. But 'Uthmsn
ordered that he be flogged as the hadd punishment for slander and
he did not pay any attention to what he said he meant.'']

The punishment for zina
If it is proven that a man or woman has committed zina, and
he or she is free and married, the punishment is stoning to death.
A married woman committed zina at the time of 'Uthmh ibn
'Affsn, and he had her stoned but he did not attend the stoning.[21

Exile as a ta'zeer punishment
'UthmSn heard that Ibn d-Habkah al-Nahdi was engaging in
a kind of witchcraft, so he sent word to al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah
telling him to question him about that and, if he admitted it, to
punish him severely. So he summoned him and questioned him,
and he said: It is just something kind and wonderful. So he
ordered that he be punished and he told the people about him and
he read 'Uthmin's letter to them, in which 'Uthmh told them to
focus on serious matters and keep away from time-wasters. So
people turned against him and they were surprised that 'Uthmh
knew about him. The man got angry, and he and some others
acted in a defiant manner, so (d-Waleed) wrote to 'Uthmsn
concerning him, and when he exiled these people to Syria, he
exiled Ka'b ibn Dhi'l-Habkah and Milik ibn 'Abd-AllSh to
Deenyawand.

Keeping the people away from the funeral of ab'Abb8s
It was narrated that 'Abd al-Rahmk ibn Yazeed said: When
the bier of alL'Abb2s ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib was brought to the
place where biers were brought, the people crowded around and
took him to al-Baqee'. I remember when we offered the funeral
prayer for him in al-Baqee', and I never saw so many people come
out for anyone. No one could get near his bier, and Banu Hsshim
"I Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Ufhmlin ibn 'Afftn, p. 247
[I'

Op. cit., p. 164

224

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affh

A@

Dhun-Noorayn

were pushing people away from him. When they reached the
grave, the people were crowding around. I saw 'Uthmh leaving,
and he sent the police to push people away from Banu Hishim,
until Banu Hishim were able to come forward, and they were the
ones who lowered him into the grave.[11
This indicates that there were numerous policemen at that
time, and ' U M n is regarded by some historians[Z1as the first
caliph to establish a police force. He gave this mission in Madinah
to the great Sahibi al-Muhijir ibn Qunfudh ibn 'Umayr al~urashi.[~I
This indicates that he cared about this issue and that it
was well known at his time. In Kufah, 'Abd al-Rahmh al-Asadi
was in charge of the police of Sa'eed ibn alL'Aas ('Uthmin's
governor in Kufah), and Naseer ibn 'Abd al-Ralunb was in
charge of the police of Mu'iwiyah ibn Abi Sufyh ('Uthmin's
governor in syria).141
In fact we do not know of any caliph after Abu Bakr and
'Umar (A)who did not carry out hadd punishments on both
relatives and non-relatives, noble and ignoble, rich and poor,
without caring who the person was, as 'Uthmh did, and it is
sufficient honour for him that he is counted as one of the RightlyGuided

Acts af w0rsh4~and kansactions b e h e e n people
'Uthm2n offered the prayers in full at Mina and 'Arafst
In Hajj of 29 A H 'Uthmh led the people in prayer in Mina
and prayed four rak'ahs. Someone went to 'Abd al-RahmSn ibn
'Awf and said: Do you know what your brother did? He led the
people in four rak'ahs. So 'Abd ar-Rahmh led his companions in
praying two rak'ahs, then he went and entered upon 'Uthmsn,
at-Tabaqat, 4/32
Tureekh Khuleefak ibn Khayyit, p. 179
Wiliyut al-Shurfahj?"Islam, p. 105
[41 op. cit., p. 106
[*I Tahqeeq Muw2qqal-ShAbahfi'l-Fitnah, 11409
['I

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihids

225

and said to him: Didn't you pray two rak'ahs in this place with the
Messenger of A l l a B? He said: Yes. He said: Didn't you pray
two rak'ahs with Abu Bakr? He said: Yes. He said: Didn't you
vrav two rak'ahs with 'Umar? He said: Yes. He said: Did vou not
pray two rak'ahs at the beginning of your caliphate?He said: Yes.
'Uthmh said: Listen to me, 0 Abu Muhammad['l ,I was told that
some of the people of Yemen and some rough people who came
for Hajj said last year: the prayer for the resident is two rak'ahs,
because your leader 'Uthmh prays two rak'ahs, and I had taken
a wife in Makkah. So I decided to pray four rak'ahs because I was
womed about the people and because I had taken a wife here,
and I have property in al-Tlif. Perhaps I will go there after I finish
and stay there. 'Abd d-Rahm2n ibn 'Awf said: None of that is an
excuse for you. As for your saying that you have taken a wife,
your wife is in MaCmah and you could travel with her if you
wanted to and bring her here if you wanted to, because she stays
wherever you stay. As for your saying that you have property in
al-TVif, there is three days have1 between you and al-TVif, and
you are not one of the people of al-Ti'if. As for your saying that
the people of Yemen who did Hajj and others will go back saying
that the ruler ' U M n prays two rak'ahs and he is a resident, the
Messenger of AU2h received the Revelation and Muslims were
few at that time, and the same was hue at the time of Abu Bakr
and 'Uthmsn. Now Islam has become well established, and
'Umar led them in praying two rak'nhs until he died. 'Uthman
said: This is my opinion. 'Abd al-RaWn went out and met Ton
Mas'ood. He said: 0 Abu Muhammad, have you come to some
agreement? He said: No. He said: What should I do? He said: Do
what you know. Ibn Mas'ood said: Differing is evil. I heard that
he prayed with four rak'ahs so I led my companions in praying
four. 'Abd ar-Rahmh ibn 'Awf said: I heard that he prayed with
four rak'ahs but I led my companions in praying two. But now I
shall do as you suggest (i.e., praying four rak'ahs with him).[']
['I Abu M x h m m d is the kunyah of 'Abd ar-Rahmh ibn 'Awf.
[21 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/268

i

226

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

'Uthmh did what he did, offering the prayer in full in Mina
and 'Arafit, out of compassion towards the weak Muslims, lest
they become confused about religious matters. He gave a
reasonable explanation for his action when 'Abd al-Rahmh ibn
'Awf asked him about it and what prompted him to do that.
When 'Uthmh told him of his view, 'Abd ar-Rahmh accepted it
and offered the prayer in full with his companions, as did 'AbdAUSh ibn Mas'ood and the majority of the Sahsbah. They
followed him and did not differ from him, because he was a
wise ruler who was to be followed so long as he did not transgress
the limits of sharee'ah. If there had been any question that
'Uthmin was going against a shar'i text, then the majority of the
SahSbah could never have followed him.[']
So 'UthmSn was worried that the people may become
confused about the prayer, especially the rough Bedouins from
the desert, and those who lived far away in remote regions who
did not have scholars to guide and teach them. 'Uthmin wanted,
by means of his action, to put anend to this confusion that was felt
by many of the weaker Muslims. He went to great lengths to
avoid any suspicion about himself, so he said that he had taken a
wife in Makkah, and that he had property in al-Ti'if, and he
would perhaps go and stay there after the Hajj season ended. So at
that time he was a resident whose prayers should be offered in
full. This is indicative of his precise understanding and
wisdom.[21
Some of the Sahsbah were of the view that the prayer should
be offered in full when travelling, such as 'Aa'ishah, 'Uthm&,
S a h h and fourteen other companions of the Messenger of AUih
$?3.[31
'UthmSn did not regard it as obligatory to shorten prayers
when travelling, rather he regarded it as permissible, which is the
view of the fuqaha' of MaCmh, Milik, al-ShWi and others.
Moreover, it is a matter that is subject to ijtihrid, which is why the
ibn 'Afln,by S2diq 'Aqoon, p. 192
op. cit., p. 194
[31 KiGb al-Imrfmah wa'l-Rudd 'ala al-RE$idah by al-Asbahhi, p. 312
[I1 'Uthmhiz
'21

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihlids

227

scholars differed concerning it. His view does not amount to kufr
orfisq.[l'
As for the view of Ibn Mas'ood, that differing is evilrz1(and in
one report he said: I hate differences[31, this is a lesson and a
reminder for us that it is better to find a way out of differences in
matters that are subject to ijtihlid. It is better for a Muslim to by to
avoid controversial matters and not argue about minor issues
concerning which there are differences of opinion.'41 Our
circumstances do not allow us to waste precious time in
arguing and disputing. Rather we should devote our time to
dealing with the serious challenges that face us.[51 The action of
Ibn Mas'ood and Ibn 'Awf in praying behind 'Uthm2n also
highlights the Sahibah's keenness for unity, which is one of the
great attributes of that generation which attained victory.

Adding a second adhrin on Friday
The Messenger of All21 @ said:

"You should adhere to my Sunnah and the way of the Rightly.
Guided Caliphs who come after me."[61
The addition of the second adhin is the part of the way of the
Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and undoubtedly 'Uthmh was one of
the Rightly-Guided Caliphs. He saw a purpose in adding a second
adluin, which was to alert the people that the time of Jurnu'ah
prayer was approaching, after the city of Madkah had expanded
in size. Al-H%z was of the view that it was an announcement that
the time has begun. He said in Fath al-Bliri: It seems that 'Uthmiin

"' al-Riyiidh al-Nadrah, p. 566
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/268
al-QawEid al-Fiqhiyynh li'l-Nadwi, p. 336
141 Fiqh al-Awwaliyyat by Muhammad d-Wakeeli, p. 169
[51 al-Fikr al-lslami b a p a al-Mathiliyyah wa'l-Tatbeeq by Gmil al-Shareef, p. 29
[61 Sunan Abi Dawood, Kitib al-Sun&,
no. 4607; Sunan at-Timidhi, Kitdb al-'Ilm,
p. 2676
[I'

['I

228

' U t M n Ibn ' A f f h 6 Dhun-Nooravn

introduced it so that the people would know that the time had
begun, by analogy with other prayers, so he made Jumu'ah like
other prayers, and he kept the distinct feature of Jumu'ah which is
giving the a d h h when the khateeb ascends the minbar. But as for
that which people have introduced before the time of Jumu'ah of
reciting du'i's, dhikr and blessings on the Prophet @ over
loudspeakers, which happens in some countries but not others,
following the way of the righteous salaf is preferable.[11
As for those who say that it was introduced just before the
time for Jumu'ah begins, they said: That is because the purpose
was to announce Jumu'ah and make the people rush to prayer, so
it was the same purpose as the first adhin of Fajr, and if it came
after the time began, it would not achieve that purpose unless
Jumu'ah was delayed somewhat, which is contrary to the Sunnah.
Thus, with the a d h k before the time begins, there is no need for
the recitation of dhikr etc. which al-Hafiz referred to when he said
"following the way of the righteous salaf is preferable."[21

Doing ghusl every day since he became Muslim
'Uthmh ibn 'Affh did ghusl every day since he became
~ u s 1 i m . IOne
~ ~ day he led the people in praying Fajr when he
was junub, without realizing. In the morning he saw traces of
semen on his garment. He said: I am getting old, by All&; I was
junub and did not realize it. Then he repeated the prayer141,but
those who had prayed behind him did not repeat itK5]

Sujood al-Tilaiuah (prostration when reading Qur'in)
'Uthmin ibn ' M i n L& was of the view that sujood al-tiliwah
was obligatory when reciting Qur'h and when sitting and
[I1

Fath al-Btri, 4/345

['I as-Sunnah war1-Bid'ah,by 'Abd-All2h Ba'lawi al-Hadrarni, p. 132,133

FadPil alSahibah, no. 756. Its i s ~ isd hasan
[41 Mnwsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmrln ibn 'Affin, p. 190
['I op. cit., p. 192
['I

I

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihrids

229

listening to Qur'h. As for one who hears it without meaning to,
he does not have to prostrate. 'Umar passed by a storyteller who
recited a verse in which a prostration was required so that
'Uthmiin would prostrate with him. 'Uthmiin said: The
prostration is only required of the one is listening to it, then he
went on his way and did not prostrate.[11 His words "the one
who is listening to it" mean the one who intended to listen to it.
And he said: The prostration is only required of the one who sits
(to listen to it).['] And it was narrated from 'Uthmh that the
menstruaiing woman who hears a verse of prostration should
make a gesture and not ignore it, but she should not prostrate as
in

PrayingJumu'ah in the coastal regions
Al-Layth ibn Sa'd said: Every city or town in which there is a
congregation fiarni'ah) is enjoined to pray Jumu'ah. The people of
a region and its coast would come together to pray Jumu'ah at the
time of 'Umar and 'Uthmiin on their command, and there were
some of the Sahlibah among them.141

'Uthmsn rested during the khutbah
It was narrated from Qatiidah that the Prophet @, Abu Bakr,
'Umar and ' U M n used to deliver the khutbah on Friday until it
became hard for 'Uthmsn to stand, so he used to deliver the
khutbah standing and then sit. When Mu'iiwiyah was the caliph,
he would deliver the first khutbah sitting and the second khutbah

Reciting Qunoot before bowing
Anas said: The first one who put Qunoot before bowing - i.e.,
['I

a/-Khila^fah a/-Rtshidah marl-Dawlnh al-Ummuiyyah, by Dr. Yahya al-Yahya, p.

['I

Mawsoorat Fiqh 'Uthmrin ibn 'Affrin, p. 168

444
[31 ibid.

I['

Fath al-BLiTi, 2 / 4 1

[51 al-Khilrifuh al-ahidah, by Yahya N a h y a , p. 444

' U r n Ibn 'Affiin & Dhun-Noorayn

as a regular practice - was 'Uthmh, so that the people could catch
up with the ra!s'ah.[ll

The most knowledgeable of people on the rulings of Hajj
Muhammad ibn Sireen said: They used to think that the most
knowledgeable of people with regard to the rituals of Hajj were
'Uthmh ibn 'Affh, then 'Abd-All* ibn 'Umar (&).121

Prohibition on entering ihram before reaching the miqrit
When 'Abd-Allsh ibn 'Aamir conquered Khorasan, he said:
This is a victoly from Allsh and I must give thanks to Him; I shall
show my gratitude to All* by leaving this place - Khorasan - in
ikrclm. So he entered ihrclm from Nishapur and left al-Ahnaf ibn
Qays in charge of Khorasan. When he had completed his 'umrah,
he came to 'Uthmh, and that was in the year in which he was
killed. 'Uthmh said to him: You spoiled your 'umrah when you
entered ikrirn from ~ i s h a ~ u r . ~ ~ ]

Woman in 'iddah travelling for Hajj and 'Umrah
It is well known that a woman who is observing 'iddak should
not stay overnight anywhere but in her own house, and she
should not travel until after her 'iddak has ended, because
travelling will mean that she will stay overnight outside her
house. Travel is inevitable in the case of Hajj, hence 'Uthmk was
of the view that a woman in 'iddak is not obliged to do Hajj so long
as she is in 'iddah, and he would send back from al-Juhfah or
Dhu'l-Hulayfah any woman in 'iddah who was going for Hajj or
'~mrak.[~]

Ban on Hajj Tamattu'
' U t h d n banned Hajj Tamattu' and Qircln so that people
would do that which is better, not so as to abolish them. It was
op. cit., p. 444; Fath al-BLiri, 2/569
Mnwsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmtn ibn 'Afftn. p. 112
E31 Sunan nl-Bayhaqi, 5/31; Mmusoo'at Fiqh 'Ufhmin ibn 'A@n, p. 17

['I
I['

[41

Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmlill ibn 'Affin, p. 112

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihlids

231

well known to 'Uthmin and others that the one who enters ikrtm
has the choice between i f i d , Qirtn and Tamattu', but he thought
that Ifyrid was better than the two other options. It was narrated
that Marwin ibn al-Hakam said: I saw 'Uthmin and 'Ali (&)
when ' U t M n banned Tamattu' and Qirtn. When 'Alisaw that,
he entered ikrtm for both and said: Labbayka bi 'umratin wa kajjatin
(Here I am (0All%), for 'Umrah and Hajj]. And he said: I would
not give up the Sunnah of the Prophet @ for the opinion of
anyone.['' . 'Uthmh did not object to 'Ali doing that, because 'Ali
was &aid that others might interpret the ban as an abolition and
prohibition. Rather he said: I would never give up the Sunnah of
the Prophet & for the opinion of anyone, to make it clear that it is
permissible and that it is Sunnah for all time. Each of them was a
mujtahid who will be rewarded!']
From this story we learn, among other things, that scholars of
authority may debate for the purpose of spreading knowledge
and advising the Muslims; people in authority were open-minded
and listened to the scholar's views on various issues in which
there is room for ijtiktd; and the mujtahid cannot force another
mujtahid to follow him, because 'Uthmh kept quiet about 'Ali's
action. It also shows that one should have knowledge before
speaking or acting.13]

Eating game meat
It is not permissible for the pilgrim in ikrtm to eat game meat
that he has caught himself, or that was caught for him by someone
outside the sanctuary.141It was narrated from 'Abd a l - R a M
ibn Hiitib that he did 'Umrah with 'Uthm2n ibn 'Affgn and a
group of people. When he was in al-Rawha' he brought them the
meat of a bird and 'Uthmiin said to them, Eat, but he did not want
to eat any of it himself. 'Amr ibn al-'Aas said: Should we eat of
'I1

al-BukEri, Kifb'b &Hajj, no. 1563
Shaheed al-Diy 'Uthmb'n ibn 'Affb'n,p. 86

13] ibid.
14] Muwsoo'ut Fiqh 'Uthmfin ibn 'Affin, p. 20

232

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affzn & Dhun-Nooravn

something that you are not eating? 'Uthmsn said: With regard to
this meat, I am not like you, because it was caught for me and
killed for my sake.['] And this happened to 'UthnGn on another
occasion, as 'Abd-All* ibn 'Aamir ibn Rabee'ah said: I saw
'Uthm2n ibn'Aff2n in al-'U jwhen he was in ihrcim on a summer's
day and had covered his head with a piece of red cloth. Some
game meat was brought to him and he said to his companions:
Eat. They said: Why don't you eat too? He said: I amnot like you;
it was caught for my sake.IZ1

Dislike of marriage between close relatives
Al-Khallsl narrated via Ishsq ibn 'Abd-Allsh ibn Abi Talhah,
from his father, that Abu Bakr, 'Umar and ' U t M n disliked
marriage between close relatives for fear of creating hatred.13]

Breastfeeding
'Abd al-Razz2q narrated from Ibn Jurayjthat Ibn Shihsb said:
'Uthmh separated people who had got married on the basis of a
statementfrom a black woman who had breastfed bothof them.[41
It was narrated that al-Rubayyi' bint Mu'awwidh said: There
was an argument between me and my paternal cousin - who was
her husband - and I said to him: You can have everything (in
retum for separation),and he said: I agree. I said: By Allzh, he has
taken everything, even my mattress. I went to 'Uthm2n when he
was besieged and he said: Your condition gave him the authority
to take everything, even your headband.[51 According to another
report: I separated from my husband by Wlula' in return for
everything except my headband, and 'Uthmh allowed that.[61
ibid.
Sunan d-Bayhaqi, 5/191; Mazusoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmiill ibn 'Aftn, p. 20
al-Khiltfah al-Rashidah, by Dr. Yahya al-Yahya, p. 449
[41 al-Fath, 5/18
al-Tabaqtt, 8/448
[61 al-Khiltfah al-Rlishidah, by Yahya al-Yahya, p. 449
['I

j

Judicial institutions and some fqhi ijfihtds

233

A woman whose husband dies must observe the mourning
period
Part of (the widow's) mourning is not wearing adornments
and not stayingovernight anywhere except the house in which her
husband died, except in cases of necessity. It is permissible for her
to go out during the day for necessary purposes, but she should
not stay overnight except in her own house.['' It was narrated
the sister of Abu Sa'eed alfrom Furay'ah bint M%k ibn S*,
Khudri, that she came to the Messenger of AUZh $gand told him
that her husband had gone out in pursuit of some slaves of his, and
they killed him in Taraf al-Qudoom. She asked the Messenger of
All* gig: Let me go back to my family, because my husband did
not leave me in a house that he owned and did not leave any
provisions. The Messenger of AUSh @ said: Yes. She said: I turned
to leave, then when I was in the next room, the Messenger of AllZh
called me back or ordered that I be called back, and he said:
What did you say? I repeated the story that I had told him about
my husband, and he said: Stay in your house until the term
prescribed is fulfilled (i.e., until your 'idduh is over). She said: So I
observed 'iddah there for four months and ten days. She said:
When 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh was caliph he sent for me and asked me
about that, and I told him, and he ruled according to that.[']
Hence 'Uthmh was very strict concerning the issue of a woman in
'iddah going out of her house. It so happened that a woman whose
husband had died visited her family during her 'idduh, and her
labour pains began. They asked 'Uthmh about that and he said:
Take her back to her home, when she was in labour.[31
Do not marry her unless you are serious about it
A man came to 'Uthmsn during his caliphate when he was
riding and said to him: I need to ask you something, 0 Ameer alMu'mineen. 'Uthmh said: I am in a huny right now, but if you
' I Mwsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthm-n ibn 'Afln, p. 244
I''

op. cit., p. 224; al-Muwaffa',2/591

op. cit., p. 224

234

'Uthrnsn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

wish you may ride behind me so that you can tell me what you
want. So he rode behind him and said: I have a neighbour who
divorced his wife in a moment of anger, and he is very upset. I
want to seek reward by marrying her and consummating the
marriage with her, then divorcing her so that she can go back to
her first husband. ' U M n said to him: Do not marry her unless
you are serious about it.[''

Divorce issued by a drunkard
'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh .& was of the view that nothing said by a
drunkard counts, so his contract, annulment, approval and
divorce do not count as such, because he is not aware of what
he is saying, and there is no commitment when there is no
control.[21 'Uthmh said: There is no divorce on the part of one
who is drunk or insane.131

Father's gift to his son
If a father gives his son a gft, he must bring witnesses to this
gft.If he brings witnesses, it is as if he has already given it, but it
is valid to keep it in the possession of the father. It was narrated
that ' U W n ibn 'Mh4 said: Whoever gives a gft to his minor
son and brings witnesses to that, it is binding even if it remains
under the father's
But if he does not bring witnesses
and does not hand it over to the son, then it is a gft that is not
binding. 'Uthmin said: What is the matter with people, one of
whom gives a gft to his son, then if the son dies he says: It is my
property and is in my possession. But if he (the father) dies, he
says: I gave it to him? Nothing is proven to have been given as a
&t except that which is in the son's possession of his father's

"'op. cit., p. 81
Mnwsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmiin ibn 'A@, p. 53; al-Fatiwa, 14/72
al-Fatiwa, 33/61; Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmcin ibn 'Afln, p., p. 53
[41 Sunan aldaykaqi, 61170; Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthm&n ilm 'Afiiin, p., p. 288
al-Fatha, 31/154
['

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihids

235

Not letting a fool dispose of his wealth
'Uthmh ibn 'Mh & was of the view that a fool (one who is
feeble-minded) should not be allowed to dispose of his own
wealth. It so happened that 'Abd-AllSh ibn Ja'far bought some
land for sixty thousand dinars, news of which reached 'Ali ibn
Abi Tilib. He decided that the land was not worth this much
money, and that 'Abd-All& ibn Ja'far had been cheated badly,
and that he had engaged in a foolish transaction. He said that he
was going to go to the caliph 'UthmSn ibn 'Affh & and ask him
to put a ban on 'Abd-AllSh ibn Ja'far from disposing of his wealth,
because of his foolishness and bad handling of his wealth. 'AbdAllih ibn Ja'far ran to az-Zubayr - who was a smart businessman and said to him: I bought something for such an amount, and 'Ali
wants to go to 'Uthmh and ask him to impose a ban on me. AzZubayr said to him: I will be your partner in this venture. 'Ali
went to 'Uthmh ibn 'AffSn and told him: My brother's son
bought some barren land for sixty thousand that I wouldn't even
buy with my shoes; impose a ban on him. Az-Zubayr said to
' U t h m h I am his partner in this venture. 'Uthmin ibn 'Affh said
to 'Ali ibn Abi Tilib: How can I impose a ban on a man whose
business partner is az-~ubayr?[" i.e., we cannot rule that Ja'far
was foolish when his partner is az-Zubayr, because az-Zubayr
could not be a partner in a foolish transacti~n.[~'

Imposing a ban on one who is bankrupt
'Uthmh ibn 'Affin was of the view that a ban should
imposed on one who is bankrupt, and that if a ban was imposed
on one who is bankrupt, his creditors would share out his property
according to what was owed to them. But if one of the creditors
found his own goods that he had sold to him, it was permissible
[ ~he
]
for him to annul his transaction and take back his O O ~ S .So
had more right to those goods than anyone else.[4

?

['I Sunan ul-Bayhaqi, 6/661; Mawsoofat Fiqh 'Uthrntn ibn 'A@, p., p. 119
12] Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmin ibn 'Afln, p., p. 119
["
[41

Snnan al-Baykqi, 6/46
A&wsoo1at Fiqh 'Uthrnrin ibn 'Arm,p., p. 119

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affsn -% Dhun-Nooravn

236

Prohibition on hoarding
'Uthmh ibn 'Affin & forbade hoarding and did not allow
it.''] It seems that 'Uthmzn ibn 'Affh, like his predecessor 'Umar
ibn al-Khattib, did not differentiate between hoarding of food
and other things, because his prohibition on hoarding was
general, especially since the reports that were narrated from the
Messenger of Allih @$ concerning the prohibition included some
that were general in meaning and included the hoarding of
anything, no matter what it is, and some that define the things
that are not to be hoarded. But according to the majority of
scholars, what is general in meaning is to be accepted as it is.l2l

Lost camels
Mglik narrated that he heard Ibn Shihgb say: At the hene of
'Umar ibn al-Khattib, lost camels would be let go and no one
would touch them. But at the time of 'Uthmh ibn 'Affin, he
ordered that it should be announced (as lost property) and then
they should be sold, then if the owner came along, he was to be
given the price of the camel.[31 'Umar's action was in accordance
with the hadeeth narrated in al-Saheehnyn from Zayd ibn Khilid
al-Juhani & who said: A Bedouin came to the Prophet & and
asked him about what he found (of lost property). He said:

"Memorize thefeatures ofits bag and strup, and announce itfor
a year. Then qits owner comes (give it to him), otherwise it is
"I Muwatta'Milik, 2 / 6 1
Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmin ibn 'Affan, p. 15
"I Muwatta' Miilik, p. 648, 649, Dar al-AfSq al-Jadeedah edition
"I

Judicial institutions and some fqhi ijtihlids

237

yours." He said: What about a lost sheep, 0 Messenger of
Allth? He said: "It is either for you or your brother or for the
wolf." He said: What about a lost camel? He said: 'What have
you to do with it? It has its water supply and its feet, and it can
come to the water and eatfrom the trees, until its masterfinds
it,,411
Professor al-Hajawi was of the view that this ijtihtd on
'Uthmsn's part was based on al-maslahah al-mursalah (the public
interest), as he saw the people taking these lost camels. So he
appointed a herdsman to collect them, then they were to be sold
in the public interest.['] Professor 'Abd al-Saliim al-SulaymSni, on
the other hand, responded to this by saying: It is difficult to accept
the view of Professor al-Hajawi, because matters of public interest
are issues concerning which there is no clear text of sharee'ah
whereas the Prophet
issued a ruling on lost camels in the
hadeeth quoted above, so in this case the public interest is what
was stated by the Prophet @ himself. So it is not valid to say that
what 'Uthmh did, selling these lost camels, comes under the
heading of al-maslahah al-mursalah. The principle of al-maslahah
al-mursalah does not apply when there is a text.
It seems to us that 'Uthmsn's ijtihsd with regard to this issue
served a public interest but it was not a case of maslahah mursalah,
and that this was an issue that is subject to ijtihsd concerning
which the ruling may change according to time and circumstance.
The ijtih2d of 'Uthmh was based on the interests of the owners of
the lost camels, because the reason for the ruling, as it appears to
be, is to protect these camels, either physically or with regard to
their price. In either case there is an interest to be served.
Undoubtedly 'Uthmh's aim in this case was to serve the public
interest, because he thought that leaving these camels as they
were - as was the case at the time of the Prophet g until the time
of 'Umar - would expose them to loss, after the people's attitude
['I al-Bukhari, Kit& al-Laqatah, no. 2427, 2428,2429

Al-Fikr alStmi, 1/245

238

' U t h m h Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Nooravn

changed and they started to take the lost camels. He thought that
his action would stop them doing that, and this is undoubtedly a
sound ijtihfid and sound ruling.[''

Allowing a woman who was divorced during her husband's
final illness to inherit
'Abd al-Rahm2n ibn 'Awf divorced his wife when he was
sick, but 'Uthmh allowed her to inherit from him after her 'iddah
ended. It was narrated that Shurayh wrote to 'Umar ibn alKhattfib about a man who divorced his wife three times when he
was sick, and 'Umar replied: Let her inherit from him so long as
she was still in 'iddah when he died, but if her 'iddah had ended,
then she cannot inherit. After they agreed that a divorce issued by
a sick man in his final illness does not alter the fact that she is still
his wife and may inherit from him, 'Umar set a limit for that,
which was the 'iddah, whereas 'Uthmh did not set a limit and
said: She inherits from the one who divorced her whether he died
during the 'iddah or afterwards. There is no text to refer to with
regard to this issue, and the reason for the ruling was to do the
opposite of what the husband intended, because by divorcing her
in his final illness, he wanted to deprive his wife of her
inheritance.["

Allowing a divorced woman to inherit so long as the 'iddah
had not yet ended
'Uthm2n ibn 'Afffin said: If one of the spouses dies before the
third menstrual cycle of the divorced woman, then the one who is
still alive inherits from the one who diesL3]There is no reason
why they should not inherit from one another if that is still within
the 'iddah period, such as if the woman had one or two menstrual
periods, then she stopped menstruating. Habbfin ibn Munqidh
divorced his wife when he was healthy, and she was
[I1 al-IjtihMfi'l-Fiqh al-lslami, p. 143, 144

al-Islami by al-Hadari, p. 118; Nash'at al-Fiqh al-IjtihZi by
Muhammad al-Syis, p. 27; al-Tjtihridfi'l-Fiqh al-Islami, p. 142
"I Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthmrin ibn 'Affln, p. 28
'21 Tareekh al-Tashree'

Judicial institutions and some fiqhi ijtihlids

239

breastfeeding his daughter, and she remained for seventeen
months without menstruating, because breastfeeding stopped her
menses. H a b b h fell sick seven or eight months after he had
divorced her, and it was said to him: Your wife will inherit from
you. He said: Take me to ' U t M n . So they took him to him, and
he told him about his wife. 'Ali ibn Abi Taib and Zayd ibn '&?bit
were present, and U
'said to them: What do you think?
They said: We think that she should inherit from him if he dies,
and he should inherit from her if she dies, because she is not one
of the

' W o m e n past childbearing who do not expect wedlock" (cf. AnNoor 24:60),
and she is not a virgin who has no menses yet, so the 'idduh is
still to be counted by her menstrual cycles whether they are short
or long. H a b b h went back to his wife and took his daughter
away, and when the breastfeeding stopped, she BR IS wife) got her
menses, then she got her menses again, then Habbin died before
she got her third menses, so she observed the 'idddi of the widow,
and inherited from her husband H a b b h ibn ~ u n ~ i d h . [ "
Inheritance of a foundling
A kifir woman was taken prisoner, and in her arms was a
child whom she claimed was her son. This is what is called a
foundling and her claim is not to be believed and they cannot
inherit from one another unless proof is established that he is her
son. 'Uthmk consulted the companions of the Messenger of
All* @ about that, and each of them gave his opinion. Then
'Uthmh said: In that case we do not think that we should allow
the wealth of All* to be inherited except with proof. And he said:
The foundling cannot inherit except with proof.[21
"I

Sunan al-Bayhaqi (7/419); h s o o ' a t Fiqh 'Uthmin ibn'APn, p. 29

I'

Mawsoo'at Fiqh 'Uthaman ibn 'Afin, p. 28

240

'UthnGn Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

These are some of the examples of the ijtihlid of 'Uthmh
which had an impact on the judiciary in the areas of qisis, hudood
punishments, offences, and disciplinary punishments (ta'zeer).
' U t h d n also played a role in the development of the schools of
which was indicative of the
Islamic fiqh through his
vastness of his knowledge and the depth of his understanding of
the noble aims of sharee'ah. He was a Rightly-Guided Caliph, and
his actions are to be taken as guidance for the ummah in its efforts
to support the religion of All& %.

tik kid

~~~~~~

at the time of '~thrn24
ibn *Mf2n4;
i
I

-

-

Introduction

News of the murder of 'Umar ibn al-Khattkib & encouraged
the enemies of Islam, especially in Persia and Byzaniium, to hope
that they would be able to take back their lands and regain their
power, so Yazdagird the king of Persia began making his plans in
the capital where he was ensconced, which was Farghanah the
capital of Samarqand. As for the Byzantine leaders, they had left
Syria and moved to Constantinople, the capital of Byzantium. At
the time of 'UthmSn they started to look for means that would
enable them to take back their land. The remainder of the
Byzantine army in Egypt was besieged in Alexandria at the time
of 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb. 'Amr ibn al'Aas asked him for
permission to conquer it, and it was surrounded by a great deal
of fortifications with catapults atop their walls. Heraclius resolved
to lead the fighting himself, and ruled that no one should stay
behind and not fight, because Alexandria was their last
stronghold.[ll At the time of 'Uthmkin, the Byzantines

242

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affk & Dhun-Nooravn

assembled in Alexandria and started to look for means to take
back their lands, to such an extent that they decided to break the
treaty and seek help from the Byzantine navy.['] So they supplied
them with three hundred ships canying men and weapons.
'Uthmiin faced all that with a strategy that was based on
decisiveness and resolve, and included the following steps:

1- Subjugating the rebels, both Persian and Byzantine, and
restoring Islamic rule in those lands.
2- Ongoing jihad and conquests in areas beyond those
lands, to cut off their supply lines.
3- Establishing bases and outposts so that the Muslims
could guard the lands of Islam.
4- Establishing a navy because the Muslim army needed its

At the time of 'Uthmin, the army camps and barracks were
the capitals of the major regions. So the camps of Iraq were Kufah
and Basra; the camp of Syria was in Damascus after all of Syria
came under the control of Mu'iwiyah ibn Abi Sufy8n; the camp of
Egypt was centred in al-Fust8t. All of these camps were
established to protect the Islamic state and to ensure the
continued progress of the conquests and the spread of slam.[^]

['I

JawlahTareekhiyyah fi 'Asr al-Khulafa' al-Sshideen, p. 324

[21 Al-Khiltfah wa'l-Khulafa' al-Rtshidoon, p. 222

'Uthmrin ibn 'Affin by SSdiq 'Arjoon, p. 199,200

I

'UthmSn's conquests in the East

Conquests of the people of Kufah: herbaijan, 24
AH
The outposts of the people of Kufah were al-Rayy and
Azerbaijan, where ten thousand fighters were stationed, six
thousand in Azerbaijan and four thousand in al-Rayy. The
standing army of Kufah was forty thousand strong; every year ten
thousand of them would go out to fight, so each man would go to
war once every four years. When 'Uthmh appointed al-Waleed
ibn 'Uqbah as governor of Kufah, the people of Azerbaijan broke
the treaty and refused to continue adhering to the conditions they
had agreed to with Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamh at the time of 'Umar,
and they rebelled against their governor 'Uqbah ibn Farqad.
'Uthmh ordered al-Waleed to attack them, so he sent against
them his commander SalmZn ibn Rabee'ah al-Bali as an advance
force at the head of a number of troops, then al-Waleed set out
after him with some of the people. The people of Azerbaijan
hastened to come to him,seeking a peace treaty on the same terms
as they had agreed to with Hudhayfah, and al-Waleed agreed and
accepted their submission. Then he sent dispatches to the
surrounding areas and launched attacks. He sent 'Abd-AHZh
ibn Shabeel al-Ahmasi with four thousand troops to the people of

244

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn 4 Dhm-Noorayn

Mawqsn and al-Babar al-Taylassn, where he seized some of their
wealth as booty and captured some prisoners, but they managed
to get away from him and he could not catch them. Then he sent
S d m h a l - B ~ lwith
i
twelve thousand hoops to Armenia, which
he subjugated and returned from it with his hands full of booty.
After that, al-Waleed departed and returned to ~ufah.'"
But the people of Azerbaijan rebelled more than once. AlAsh'ath ibn Qays, the governor of Azerbaijan, wrote to al-Waleed
ibn 'Uqbah and he sent reinforcements from Kufah; al-Ash'ath
pursued the rebels and inflicted a decisive defeat on them, so they
asked for a peace treaty and he agreed to the same t e r n as in
their first treaty. But al-Ash'ath was afraid that they would rebel
again, so he stationed a guard of Arab troops and gave them a
stipend that was registered in the diwgn, and he told them to call
the people to Islam. When Sa'eed ibn d-'Aas became their
governor, the people of Azerbaijan once again rebelled against
their new governor, so he sent Jareer ibn 'Abd-All& al-Bajali to
him and he defeated them and killed their leader. Then things
settled down after most of the people became Muslim and learned
the Holy Qur'sn
As for al-Rayy, the command of the caliph 'Uthmh went out
to Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari when he was the governor of Kufah,
telling him to send the army there because it had rebelled. So he
sent Qurayzah ibn Ka'b a l - A n s ~there to conquer it again."'

Participation
Byzanttne m
When al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah finished his mission in
Azerbaijan and returned to Mosul, there came to him the
command of the caliph 'Uthmsn, which read as follows:
Mu'iiwiyah ibn Abi Sufyin has written to me, telling me that
the Byzantines have brought a huge army against the Muslims. I
['I

Tareekh af-Taban, 5/246
al-l(hilif& wwa'l-Kkulafa' al-Rlishidoon, p. 224

'Uthmh's conquests in the East

245

think that their brothers from Kufah should go and support them.
When this letter of mine reaches you, send a man of those whom
you think are chivalrous, brave and pious, with eight thousand or
nine thousand or ten thousand troops from the place where you
get this letter. ~a'l-sali?m.[ll
Al-Waleed stood before the people and praised and glorified
Allih, then he said: 0 people, Allih has granted victory to the
Muslims in this direction (the east) and has enabled them to
recapture land whose inhabitants rebelled and to conquer new
land, and He brought them back safe and sound, with booty and
reward. Praise be to All*, the Lord of the Worlds. Now the Arneer
al-Mu'mmeen has written to me, commanding me to send between
eight and ten thousand of you to support your brothers in Syria,
for the Byzantines have assembled (an army) against them. 1n-that
there will be a great reward and immense virtue. So join up, may
Alliih have mercy on you, with Salm2n ibn Rabee'ah al-Bthili.
So the people joined up, and before three days had passed,
eight thousand men from Kufah set out, and marched until they
and the people of Syria entered the land of the Byzantines. The
Syrian army was led by Habeeb ibn Maslamah ibn Khslid al-Fihri,
and the army of Kufah was led by Salmk ibn Rabee'ah al-Bshili.
They raided the Byzantine lands, taking whatever prisoners and
booty they wanted, and they conquered many skrongholds
there.IZ1 Of the jihad and campaign of al-Waleed one narrator
said: I saw al-Sha'bi sitting with Muhammad ibn 'Amr ibn alWaleed ibn'Uqbah, and Muhammad mentioned the campaign of
Maslamah ibn 'Abd al-Malik. Al-Sha'bi said: What if you had
seen al-Waleed and his campaign when he was governor? When
he went out on campaign he would reach such and such a place
and would not fall short, and no one rebelled against him until he
was dismissed from his post.r31

['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/247

"I ibid.
'-'I 'Uthmtn iibn 'Aff8n by Sgdiq 'Aqoon, p. 201

246

The
in 3

'Uthrnin Ibn ' M i n & Dhun-Nooravn

tan

Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas set out on campaign from Kufah in 30 AH,
heading for Khorasan, accompanied by Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamin
and some of the companiom of the Messenger of AlEh @
; with
him were al-Hasan and al-Husayn, 'Abd-All& ibn 'Abbis, 'AbdAll& ibn 'Umar, 'Abd-All& ibn 'Am ibn al-'Aas and 'Abd-All&
ibn az-Zubayr. 'Abd-All& ibn 'Aamir set out from Basra heading
for Khorasan, and he went ahead of Sa'eed and camped in
Abarshahr. News of his camping in Abarshahr reached Sa'eed, so
Sa'eed camped in Qumees, with whose people there was a peace
treaty that had been drawn up by Hudhayfah after Nahawand.
He went to Jaj h and they made a deal with him in return for two
hundred thousand. Then he went to Tameesah, which was part of
Tabaristan JarjSn; it was a coastal city on the border of JarjSn. He
fought its people until he offered the fear prayer, then he said to
Hudhayfah: How did the Messenger of AlISh @ pray? He told
him, so Sa'eed offered the fear prayer whilst they were fighting.
On that day Sa'eed struck a mushrik man on the shoulder and his
sword came out beneath his armpit. He besieged them and they
asked for safety, which he granted to them, pledging that he
would not kill any of their men, so they opened the fortress to him
on those terms.

The flight of the Persian king Y a ~ d a g i r d to
Khorasan
Ibn 'Aamir came to Basra then he went to Persia and
conquered it. Yazdagird fled from Wajooz - which is Ardasheer
Khurah - in 30 AH, and Ibn 'Aamir sent Majsshi' ibn Mas'ood alSulami after him, and he pursued him as far as Kannin. Then
MajSshi' camped in al-Sirjh with his army, and Yazdagird fled to
Khorasan.[ll
'I1

Tareekh at-Tabari, 51288

' U M s conquests in the East

247

?he death of Yazdagkd &.he Persian king in 31 in@
There is a difference of opinion as to how the killing of
Yazdagird came about. Ibn Ishsq said: Yazdagird fled from
K a d n with a few people to Maw, where he asked some of its
people for money but they refused, as they feared for themselves,
and they sent word to the Turks seeking their help against him.
They came and killed his companions, and he fled until he
reached the house of a man who was a maker of millstones, on the
He gave him sanctuary for one
banks of the MargMb river!']
night, then when he fell asleep he killed him.['] According to a
report narrated by al-Tabari, Yazdagird left Karmin before the
Arabs reached it and took the road towards al-Tabaseen and
Qahmiitan, until he approached Marw with approximately four
thousand men, to mobilize people from Khorasan and attack and
fight the Arabs. He was met by two commanders in Marw who
envied and hated one another; one of whom was called BarSz and
the other Sanjh. They gave him their allegiance and he stayed in
M a w , but he favoured Bar& and Sanjh was jealous of that.
BarSz started plotting against Sanjh and incited Yazdagird
against him,until Yazdagird decided to kill him (Sanjsn).He told
one of his wives what he had decided to do, but she had been
unfaithful to him with BarSz, and she sent a woman to BarSz to
tell him that Yazdagird had decided to kill SanjSn. He in turn
disclosed what Yazdagird had decided to do, and thus the secret
became known. Sanjh found out and took precautions by
gathering supporters, ending up with a similar number to the
companions of BarSz and the troops who were with Yazdagird.
He marched towards the fortress where Yazdagird was staying,
and news of that reached Bark, who fled from Sanjh because he
had amassed such a large group. Sajnsn's group filled Yazdagird
with fear and he fled from his palace in disguise, fleeing blindly
on foot in fear for his life. He went about two parasangs, then he
['I The Marghib is the river of M a w
[*I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/295

248

' U W n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

reached the miller's house, which he entered and sat down,
utterly exhausted. The miller saw him in his fine clothes and gave
him a mattress to sit on, and brought him food. He stayed with
him for one day and one night, then the miller asked him to give
him something and he offered him a belt encrusted with gems
that he was wearing, but the miller refused to accept it and said:
All I want, instead of this belt, is four dirhams with which to buy
food and drink. He told him that he had no silver with him. The
miller kept an eye on him until he fell asleep, then he took an axe
and struck him on the head with it, and killed him.He chopped
off his head and took the clothes and belt that he was wearing,
then he threw his body in the river that drove the millstone. He
opened his belly and filled it with branches from the trees that
grew by the river, so that the body would sink in the place where
he threw it, and would not float downstream lest the matter
become known and the killer sought along with the things that he
had taken. Then he fled.[''
In another report it says that the Turks came looking for him
(Yazdagird) and they found that he had been killed and his
possessions taken, so they killed that man and the members of his
household, and they took the goods that had been with Chosroes.
They also recovered the body of Chosroes and put it in a box,
which they carried to ~ s t a k h r . ~ ~ '
Al-Tabari mentioned two lengthy reports, one of which is
longer than the other, which indicate the different turmoils and
troubles that he went through until he met his end.I3' According
to some reports, Yazdagird said to those who wanted to hill him:
Woe to you! We find in our book that those who dare to kill kings,
God will punish them with fire in this world, in addition to what
is to come in the Hereafter, so do not kill me; rather take me to the
grandee or take me to the Arabs, for they let kings like me live.I4l
['I Khiltfat 'Ufhmanby as-Sdami, p. 57
1' Tareekh af-Tabari, 5/297
c31 al-lktifa' by al-KalZi, 4/417

op. cit., 4/418; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/302

I

'UthmAn's conauests in the East

249

The reign of Yazdagird lasted for twenty years, of which four
were trouble-free, but the rest of the time was spent fleeing from
city to city for fear of Islam and the Muslims. He was the last of
the kings of Persia in this world.['] Glory be to the Almighty, the
true Sovereign, the Ever-Living, Eternal One Who will never die;
there is no god but He. All things will perish save His
Countenance, His is the power and to Him you will return.[']
The Messenger of AU2h @ said of the kings of Persia and
Byzantium:

Mi, &X&,

'iX

*:Mi, s:

&,

"When Caesar dies there will be no Caesar after him, and when
Chosroes dies, there will be no Chosroes after him. By the One
in Whose hand is my soul, you will certainly spend their wealth
for the sake of ~ l l & . " [ ~ ]

The Chisleians expressed their s
of Yazdagird
News of Yazdagird's killing reached a man from al-Ahwk
who was the patriarch of Marw, whose name was Eeliya'. He
gathered the Christians around him and said to them: The king of
Persia has been killed, the son of Shahriyiir the son of Kisra.
Shahriyiir was the son of the believing woman Shireen whose
rights and many acts of kindness to her fellow-Christians you
acknowledged. This king was connected to the Christians and
moreover the Christians gained a lot of glory and honour during
the reign of his grandfather Chosroes and before that, during the
reign of some other kings before them. He built monasteries for
them and supported them. So we should feel sorrow for the
['I Khilifat 'Uthrni by Dr. as-Sulami, p. 57
"I
[I'

aI-lktifn' by al-KalVi, 4/419
Muslim, al-Fitan, no. 2918, 2919, Al-Bukhari (6629)

!

slaying of this king because of the kindness that he and his
predecessors and his grandmother Shireen showed to the
Christians. I think that I will build a sepulchre for him and
convey his body in a digrufied manner to be buried in that
sepulchre. The Christians said: We are at your command, 0
patriarch, and we support your opinion. So the patriarch ordered
that a sepulchre be built in the middle of the partiarch's garden in
Maw, and he himself went with the Christians of Manv to take
the body of Yazdagird out of the river, then they shrouded it and
placed it in a coffin, then the Christians of Marw who were with
him carried it on their shoulders and brought it to the sepulchre
that had been built, wherein he was placed and the door of the
sepulchre was sealed.[''

The conquests of "Abd-All2h ibn "Aamir, 31 AH
In the same year, 31 AH, 'Abd-AlEh ibn 'Aamir marched to
Khorasan where he conquered Abarshahr, Toos, Biyurd, and
Nisa, until he reached Sarkhas, where he entered into a treaty
with the people of Marw. According to one report, al-Sakan ibn
Qatsdah al-'Urayni said: Ibn 'Aamir conquered Persia and come
back to Basra, and he appointed Shareek ibn al-A'war al-Hsrithi
as governor of Istakhr. Shareek built the mosque of Istakhr. A
man from Banu Tameem - we used to say that it was al-Ahnaf but
it was also said that it was Aws ibn Jibir al-Jushami - entered
upon Ibn 'Aamir and said to him: Your enemy is fleeing from you
and he is afraid of you. The land that lies ahead of you is vast, so
march and All31 will support you and cause His religion to
prevail. So Ibn 'Aamir made preparations and ordered the people
to prepare to m c h , and he appointed Ziysd in charge of Basra in
his absence. He marched to Karmh, then he headed towards
Khorasan. Some say that he took the road to Asbahsn, then he
headed towards Khorasan. He appointed Majsshi' ibn Mas'ood
al-Sulami in charge of Karmh, then Ibn 'Aamir headed towards
Mafszat Wsbar, which is eighty parasangs, then he went towards
'I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/304

'Uthmh's conauests in the East

251

al-Tabaseen, heading towards Abarshahr, which is the city of
Nishapur. At the head of his army was al-Ahnaf ibn Qays. He
headed first to Fahastan, then he set out for Abarshahr, where he
was met by the Habstilah, who are the people of Herat. Al-Ahnaf
fought them and defeated them, then Ibn 'Aamir came to
~isha~ur.['l
According to another report, Ibn 'Aamir attacked Abarshahr
and defeated half of it by force, and the other half was under the
control of Kan&i, who also controlled half of Nasawatoos. Ibn
'Aamir was not able to reach Marw, so he made a treaty with
K h i , who gave him his son Abu'l-Salt ibn KaGri and his
nephew Saleem as hostages. He told 'Abd-Allsh ibn m z i m to go
to Herat and HStim ibn al-Nu'msn to go to Marw, and he took the
son and nephew of K d r i to al-Nu'mk ibn al-Afqam, then set
them free.['] Ibn 'Aamir conquered the regions around
Abarshahr, such as Toos, Biyurd, Nasa and HamrSn, until he
reached Sarkhas, then Ibn 'Aamir told al-Aswad ibn Kulthoom al'Adawi - the enemy of al-RabSb - to go to Babhaq, which was part
of Abarshahr, sixteen parasangs away. He conquered it, but alAswad ibn Kulthoom was killed; he was a pious man and was
one of the companions of 'Aamir ibn 'Abd-All* al-'Anbari. After
he was expelled from Basra, 'Aamir used to say: I would not miss
anything in Iraq except going thirsty at the time of extreme heat
(when fasting) and hearing the adhin reverberate and brothers
such as al-Aswad ibn ~ulthoom.'~]Ibn 'Aamir managed to
conquer Nishapur, then he went out to Sarkhas and sent word to
the people of Marw seeking a peace deal. Ibn 'Aamir sent to them
HStim ibn al-Nu'mk al-Bshili, who made a treaty with Barsz, the
ruler of Marw in return for two million and two hundred
thousand.[41
['I

op. cit., 5/305

I" op. cit., 5/306
[31 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/307

I" op. cit., 5/307

252

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

The campaign of al-Bgb and halanjar in 32 AN
' U W n ibn 'Affh wrote to Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas saying: Send
Salmsn to conquer al-B2b. And he wrote to 'Abd al-Rahmiin ibn
Rabee'ah, who was in charge of al-BSb, saying: Most of the people
are living a life of luxury and putting on weight, so take it easy
and do not expose the Muslims to danger, for I am afraid that they
may be exposed to hardship. But that did not deter 'Abd arRahmiin from reaching his goal. He insisted on attacking Balanjar.
He set out on campaign in the ninth year of 'Uthmsn's caliphate,
and when he reached Balanjar they besieged it and set up
catapults and other war machines. If anyone came close, they
harassed him or killed him, so many people were killed.I1l Then
one day the Turks made an agreement with the people of Balanjar
and they came out and the Turks joined them, then fighting broke
out. 'Abd al-Rahmiin ibn Rabee'ah was killed, and the Muslims
fled and scattered. Those who followed S a l k ibn Rabee'ah
escaped and left al-BSb safely, but those who followed the route of
al-Khazar which leads to the Khazar country conquered Jaylsn
and JarjSn; among them were Salmsn al-F2risi and Abu
~ura~rah.[']

The killing of Yazeed ibn Mu4wiyah
The people of Kufah kept attacking Balanjar for many years
during 'Uthmiin's reign, and no woman among them was
widowed and no child was orphaned, until the ninth year of
'Uthm2n's reign when two days before the major battle, Yazeed
ibn Mu'swiyah saw in a dream that a gazelle was brought to him
in his tent, and he had never seen any gazelle more beautiful than
it, and the gazelle got under his cloak. Then he was brought to a
grave over which four people were standing, and he had never
seen anything as smooth and lovely as this grave, and he was
buried in it. When the people met the Turks in battle, a stone was
['I
I['

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/308
op. cit.. 5/309

'Uthmsn's conquests in the East

253

thrown at Yazeed and smashed his head, and it was as if he was
adorned with his blood, not smeared with it. That was the gazelle
that he had seen (in his dream).111Yazeed was very handsome
and good looking (may All& have mercy on him). When news of
that reached 'Uthmgn he said: To All* we belong and unto Him
is our return. Tragedy has befallen the people of Kufah. 0 AUSh,
forgive them.121

'How beautiful would the redness of blood be on your
whiteness'
'Amr ibn 'Utbah used to say to a white cloak that he wore:
How beautiful would the redness of blood be on your whiteness.
He was injured whilst engaging the enemy and he saw his cloak
as he .had always wished, then he died.13]

'How beautiful is the glistening of blood on garments'
Al-Qarsha' used to say: How beautiful is the glistening of
blood on garments. On the day of the great battle, al-Qarsha'
fought until he was stabbed many times with spears, and it was as
if his cloak was a white background decorated with red. The
people remained steadfast until he was injured, but they were
defeated after he died.[41

'They die as you die'
During that battle, the Turks hid in the forest. They feared the
Muslims and believed that weapons did not affect them. It so
happened that a Turk hid in a grove of trees and shot an arrow at
a Muslim and killed him. He called out to his people: They die as
you die, why are you afraid? So the Turks were encouraged to
fight the Muslims and they came out of their hiding-places and
attacked them, causing large numbers of casualties. The fighting
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/310
I['

op. cit., 5/311
op. cit., 5/310

'41 ibid.

grew fierce but 'Abd al-RahmCn stood his ground until he was
martyred.'l1
'Patience, 0 people of Salman'
According to another report, when 'Abd al-Rahmgn was
martyred, his brother SalmCn ibn Rabee'ah al-BChili took the
banner and fought carrying it. A caller cried out, Patience, 0
people of Salmk. SalmZn said: Why is that? Do you see panic?
SalmZn and Abu Hurayrah al-Dawsi went towards Jeelkl" and
,withdrawing from a losing
crossed it, heading towards Ja~jiin'~]
battleI4] after buryin his brother 'Abd al-Rahmh on the
outskirts of ~a1anjar.I' By means of this withdrawal, Salmgn
saved the rest of his brother's army.[61
Mahmoud Sheet KhattCb thought this report more likely to be
correct, and he said: Withdrawing is more akin to resuming
fighting as the pressure on them had intensified and they had
incurred many losses. This would enable them to join another
group of Muslims and attack the enemy again. Salmh ibn
Rabee'ah had come with reinforcements to 'Abd al-Rahmh on
'Uthmtin's orders, and it would make no sense for him to stay
there when his reinforcements at al-BZb and it is not possible that
his brother 'Abd al-Rahmk would ignore him when he was
fighting a vicious battle in which he needed every single soldier.
How could 'Abd al-Rahmk ignore an entire army at the head of
which was his own brother, and not benefit from it in battle?
The ancient historians used the word hazeemah (lit. defeat) to
mean withdrawal, because most of them were civilians who did
not distinguish between the two terms. Hazeemah (defeat) meant
leaving the battlefield in a disorganized fashion with no

?

Qridaf al-Fath al-lslamifi Armenia, by Muhammad Khatt2b, p.151
[I' Jeelin: land beyond Tabaristan
[" JajhA famous big city between Tabaristan and Khorasan.
[I' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/309; Qidat d-Fath d-Islami fi Armenia, p. 151
[" Mu'jam al-Buldin, 2/278
Qidat d-Fath al-lslamifi Armenia, p. 151
I"

'Uthmh's conauests in the East

25.5

leadership, so it was a disaster; whereas withdrawal meant
leaving the battlefield according to a strategic plan under a single
leadership. Withdrawal was one of the aspects of fighting, the aim
of which was to regroup and attack the enemy anew after making
necessary preparations with regard to numbers and equipment.
We hope that modern historians wiU not make the same mistake
by failing to distinguish between a defeat and a withdrawal,
because the difference between the two is very important.[''

The first dispute between the people of Kufah and
the people of Syria, 32 AH
When 'Abd al-Rahrnh ibn Rabee'ah was killed, Sa'eed ibn al'Aas appointed Salmin ibn Rabee'ah in charge of that division,
and 'Uthmh sent people from Syria as reinforcements, in charge
of whom was Habeeb ibn Maslamah. Habeeb and SalmSn
disputed as to who would be overall commander. The people of
Syria said: We were about to strike SalmSn. The people said: In
that case we will beat and imprison Habeeb, and if you insist, we
will have a fight and there will be many slain on your side and
ours.
The Muslims managed to contain the fitnah with the help of
All&, then the presence of people such as Hudhayfah ibn alYamzn, who was in charge of the people of Kufah during the
campaign. He had gone on campaign three times in that region,
and 'Uthm2n was killed during his third campaign.[21

During this year, Ibn 'Aamir conquered Marw Roodh, alT a i q h , al-F&iy%b,al-Jawzajznand Takharistan. Ibn 'Aamir sent
al-Ahnaf ibn Qays to Marw Roodh where he lay siege to its
people, then they came out and fought them, but the Muslims
defeated them and they were forced to hide in their fortress. They
['I op. cit., p. 152, 152
I['

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/31]

256

'UthmSn Ibn 'Affk .& Dhun-Nooravn

looked out at him and said: 0 Arabs, you are not as we thought
you were. If we had known that you are as we see, things would
be different between us and you. Give us one day to think about
it, and go back to your camp. So al-Ahnaf went back, and the next
day he found that they had prepared to fight him.One of the nonArab men came out with a letter from the city and he said: I am
just a messenger, so grant me safety, and they gave him safety. He
was a messenger from the satrap of Marw, his nephew and
interpreter, and the satrap had sent a letter to al-Ahnaf. He read
the letter and said: It is addressed to the commander of the army.
We praise All& in Whose hand are all nations; He changes
whomever He wills of kings, and raises whomever He wills after
being low, and lowers whomever He wills after being high. He is
calling me to make peace with you because my grandfather
became a M u s h and because of what he has seen from your
leader of honour. So welcome, and be of good cheer. I invite you
to make peace between you and us on the basis that we will pay
you a kharrij of sixty thousand dirhams, and you will let me keep
control of that which the king of kings Chosroes allocated to my
father's grandfather when he killed the snake that ate people and
prevented them from travelling between lands and towns, and
you will not take khurcij from any member of my family and you
will leave them in positions of authority. If you accept this from
me, I will come out and meet you. I have sent my nephew MShik
to discuss matters with you.
Al-Ahnaf wrote back to him, saying:
In the name of All&, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
From Sakhr ibn Qays the commander of the army, to Badhsn the
satrap of Marw Roodh and the non-Arabs and Persians who are
with him. Peace be upon those who follow true guidance and
believe and fear Allsh. Your nephew MShik has come to me and
has acted with sincerity and conveyed your message. I have
discussed it with the Muslims who are with me, and we are all in
agreement with regard to your case. We agree to the terms that
you asked for and presented to us, on the condition that you pay

' U t W s conquests in the East

257

(kharij) for your agricultural activities and your peasants and the
land that you said the tyrant Chosroes himself gave to your
fathefls grandfather because he killed the snake that was causing
mischief in the land and preventing people from travelling. The
earth belongs to AUsh and He gives it as an inheritance to
whomsoever He wills among His slaves. You will also have to
support the Muslims and fight their enemies along with whoever
is with you of the non-Arabs, whenever the Muslims want you to
do that. In return for that, you will have the support of the
Muslims against those who would fight you I will be your
protector. You will have a written document which you can keep
after I am gone. No kharij will be demanded from you or any of
your household or relatives. If you become Muslim and follow the
Messenger, then you will have a stipend from the Muslims and
status and income, and you will be their brother, and in return
you will have my protection and the protection of my father and
the Muslims and their fathers. What is in this letter was witnessed
by Juz' ibn Mu'gwiyah or Mu'swiyah ibn Juz' al-Sa'di, Hamzah
ibn al-Harm%, Humayd ibn al-Khijrk al-Mszniysn and 'Iysd ibn
Warqa' al-Usaydi. It was written by Kaysih the freed slave of
Banu Tha'labah on a Sunday in Muhanam and sealed by the
commander of the army al-Ahnaf ibn Qays, and engraved on the
seal of al-Ahnaf was (the phrase) "We worship A I I ~ ~ . " [ ~ '

1-Ahnaf and the
al-Tgliqgn and
Ibn 'Aamir made a peace treaty with the people of Marw, and
he sent al-Ahnaf with four thousand men to Tawristan, and he
proceeded until he stopped at the place where the palace of alAhnaf is in M a w Roodh. The people of Takhsstan, and the
people of al-Jawzajh, al-Tzliqsn and al-Fariysb, gathered to fight
him, so there were three armies, thirty thousand men in all. News
of their numbers reached al-Ahnaf, and he consulted the people,

258

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affin B Dhun-Noorayn

but their opinions differed. Some of them said let us go back to
Marw; some said let us go back to Abarshahr; some said let us
stay and await reinforcements; and some said, let us meet them in
battle and fight them. When evening came, al-Ahnaf went out
walking in the camp, listening to what the people were saying. He
passed by some people m a tent, where a man had lit a cooking
fire or was making dough, and they were talking and discussing
the enemy. Some of them said: It is up to the ameer, if he wants to
march towards them in the morning so that he can engage with
the people where they are; that will be more effective in casting
fear into their hearts and starting the fight with them. The one
who was cooking or making dough said: If he does that, then he
will be making a mistake and so will you. Do you want him to go
and meet the enemy in a plain in their own land and face this huge
multitude with his small number? If they launch a single attack
they will finish us off. But it is up to him, if he wants to camp
between the Marghgb (river) and the mountain, let him put the
river on his right and the mountain on his left, then the enemy will
not be able to send a greater number than he has with him. AlAhnaf went back convinced of what they were saying, and he set
up his camp. The people of Marw sent word to him offering to
fight alongside him, but he said: I do not like to seek help from the
mushnkeen. Stick to the deal that we made. If we win, the deal
will remain in effect, but if they win and fight you, then fight them
on your own behalf. At the time of 'Asr prayer, the mushnkoon
attacked, but the Muslims fought back and the two parties
remained steadfast until evening came.
According to another report, they fought until most of the
night had passed, and the Muslims defeated them and drove
them back until they reached Raskan, which is twelve parasangs
from the palace of al-Ahnaf. The satrap of Manv Roodh had kept
back a load to pay the Muslims in accordance with the peace deal,
waiting to see what the outcome of the fighting would be. When
al-Ahnaf won, he sent two men to the satrap and told them not to
speak to him until they got the payment, and they did that. He
realized that they would not have come to demand the payment if

'Uthmh's conauests in the East

259

they had not won, so he paid what he owed.[']
Al-Ahnaf sent al-Aqra' ibn Hgbis with a detachment of
cavalry to al-Jawzajsn to mop up some of the remnants of the
army that al-Ahnaf had defeated, and he fought them. The
Muslims launched an attack and some of their horsemen were
killed, then Allsh granted the Muslims victory over them and
they defeated them and killed them.

Ai-Ahnaf's treaty with the people of B a f h , 32 AH
Al-Ahnaf travelled from M a w Roodh to Ball& and besieged
it, then he made a peace treaty with them in return for four
hundred thousand. He appointed his cousin, Usayd ibn alMutashammis to take from them what they had agreed to pay,
then he went to Kharizm where he stayed until the onset of
winter. He said to his companions: What do you want (to do)?
They said: 'Umar ibn Ma'di Yakrib said:
If there is something that you cannot do, then leave it and do
something that you can do.
So al-Ahnaf gave orders to move on, and headed towards
Balkh. His cousin had taken that which they had agreed to pay,
and it so happened that the time when he was concluding the deal
coincided with their festival of Mahrajh, so they brought him
gifts of gold and silver vessels, dinars and dirhams, goods and
clothing. The cousin of al-Ahnaf said: Is this part of the deal that
you made? They said: No, but this is something that we do on this
day for those in authority over us, to placate them. He said: And
what is this day? They said: al-Mahrajsn. He said: I do not know
what that is, and I do not want to retum it when I may be entitled
to it; but I will take it and set it aside until I decide how to dispose
of it. So he took it and set it aside, and when al-Ahnaf came, he
told him about it, and he asked them about it, and they told him
the same as they had told his cousin. He said: I shall take it to the
commander. So he took it to Ibn'Aamir and told him about it, and
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/31?

260

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affgn g Dhun-Noorayn

he said: Take it, 0 Abu Bahr, it is yours. He said: I have no need of
it. Ibn 'Aamir said: Take it, 0 ~ i s d r . [ ' ]

'I shall give my thanks to Allgh by entering ihrrim
h o m the point from which I set out for kmr&'
When al-Ahnaf went back to Ibn 'Aamir, the people said to
Ibn'Aamir: No one has ever achieved victories in Persia, K a r m h ,
Sijistan and all of Khorasan as you have. He said: No doubt I shall
give my thanks to All21 by entering ihrim from the point from
which I set out for 'umrah. So he entered ihrim for 'Umrah from
Nishapur, but when he came to 'Uthmiin he criticized him for
entering thrim from Khorasan, and said: I wish that you had done
it from the miqit from which people enter ~hrirn.~~'

n e defeat of Qkin in Khorasan
When Ibn 'Aamir returned from his campaign, he appointed
Qays ibn al-Haytham as governor of Khorasan. Then Qsrin came
with an army of forty thousand Turks and was met by 'Abd-Allih
ibn Khizim al-Sulami with four thousand men. He put six
hundred men at the front of the anny and told each one of them to
put fire on the top of his spear and march towards them in the
middle of night and attack them. So the vanguard engaged with
them and started fighting, then 'Abd-All31 ibn Khkim came with
the rest of the Muslims and surrounded them. The mushrikoon
turned and fled, and were pursued by the Muslims who killed
whomever they wished, and Qkin was among the slain. The
Muslims captured a great deal of booty and wealth. Then 'AbdAllih ibn Khhim sent news of the victory to Ibn 'Aamir, who was
pleased with him and confirmed his position as governor of
Khorasan. That was because he had played a trick on the previous
governor, Qays ibn al-Haytham al-Sulami, when he made him
leave Khorasan then he took on the mission of fighting Qsrin.
When he defeated him and took booty from his camp, Ibn 'Aamir
'I1

I'

Tareekh at:~ubari, 5/319
al-Bidtyah rua'n-NiEyah, 7/167; Tureekh at-Tabari, 5/319

'UthmAn's conauests in the East

261

was pleased with him and confiied his position as governor of
~horasan."~
Thus the caliph 'Uthmiin tackled the rebel movements that
appeared in the east, and continued the conquests. These
rebellions did not weaken the Muslims or weaken the resolve of
the caliph who was able to deal with them. He confronted them in
a swift and decisive manner, sending wave after wave of
reinforcements and appointing the right man for each task, as is
clear from a study of the events narrated in Tareekh at-Tabari, Ibn
Katheer and al-Kalci, which leaves no doubt that 'Uthmgn made
the right choice in selecting the leaders who were able to attain
these victories and contain these turmoils, even though the
mission of jihad was very difficult and needed someone who
could direct it properly, because there were so many fronts and so
much turmoil, with huge distances between the various regions.
In dealing with these problems that confronted ' U h S n after
he became caliph, he faced them with resolve, sound thinking,
swiftness, caution and deliberation, which is indicative of his
strength of character and sound insight. Thanks to these
characteristics - after the help of AUgh - he was able to reinforce
the authority of the state after it had been shaken and weakened
by the killing of 'Umar &. The fruits borne by these brilliant
characteristics were as follows:
1- Subjugation of the rebels and restoration of Muslim
power over them

2- Advancement of Islamic conquests beyond the rebel
areas, to prevent their enemies from fleeing there and
stirring up trouble from those regions.
3- Establishment of strong Muslim outposts to protect the
lands that had submitted to Muslim rule.

Could all these great conquests, wise policies and proper

262

'Uthmin Ibn 'M%n
& Dhun-Nooravn

control of the regions have been achieved if 'UthmSn had been
weak and unable to take decisions?''] - as is claimed by those
who are deceived by the reports of the Riifidis, Shi'ah and
Orientalists, and those who follow in their sick footsteps.

One of the leaders of the conquests in the
the time of 'Uthmsn: al-khnaf ibn Qays
The conquests at the time of 'Uthmh & were great indeed. I
think it is appropriate to shed some light on some of the leaders of
conauest at the time of 'Uthmin. From the discussion of the eastern
conquests above, it is important to paint a bright picture of one of
the leaders of these conquests, and I chose al-Ahnaf ibn Qays.

His lineage and family
He was Abu Bahr, al-Ahnaf ibn Qays ibn Mu'gwiyah ibn
Husayn ibn Hafs ibn 'UbSdah al-~arneemi.~~]
His given name
His
] mother was Habbah
was al-Dahha, or it was said, ~ a k h r . [ ~
bint 'Amr ibn Qurt a l - ~ ~ h i l i ~ ~Her
a h .brother
[ ~ ~ was al-Akhtal
ibn Qurt, one of those who were known for bravery. Al-Ahnaf
said, boasting about this maternal uncle of his: Who has an uncle
like mine?'51
His life
He was one of the senior Tgbi'een, a leader among his
people161 and a leader of the people of ~ a s r a . ~He
' was trusted
by people of all classes and inclinations, and he was wise, smart
religiously committed, clever and eloquent.[91
and
Tahqeeq Mawiqifal-SahAbah, 1/408,409
Jamharat Anstb al-'Arab, p. 217;Tabaqit lbn Sa'd, 7 / 9 5
L3] Qidat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, by Mahmoud Khatt&b,p. 285
ibid.
Is] Jamharat Ansiib alL'Arab, p. 212
[61 Qridat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 285
[71 al-lsibah, 1/103; Asad al-Ghibah, 1/55
[*I Qidat Fath al-Smd wa Afghanistan, p. 304
[91 Qiidat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 304
['I
['I

'Uthmh's conquests in the East

263

He was the leader of his people, endued with intelligence,
wisdom, knowledge and forbearance, and he set an example by
his forbearance.
KhSlid ibn S a f w h said of him: al-Ahnaf fled from honour,
but honour pursued him.['] There follows a list of some of his
qualities that affected the people around him.

His forbearance
al-Ahnaf was forbearing and his forbearance was exemplary.
He was asked about forbearance and what it was, and he replied:
It is humility with patience. When people admired his
forbearance he would say: I feel the same as you do, but I am
patient; 1 only learned forbearance from Qays ibn 'Aasin~al~ a n ~ a r i . ~A' ]nephew of his killed one of his sons, and was
brought to him bound up. He said: You are scaring the lad. Then
he turned to the lad and said: What a bad thing you have done;
you have weakened your numbers and reduced your support;
you have made your enemies rejoice and hurt your people. Let
him go and take the diyah to the mother of the slain one, for she is
a stranger (not of our people). Then the killer left and Qays never
took off his shawl (worn as a sign of mourning) and his expression
never changed.[31A man said to al-Ahnaf, Teach me forbearance,
0 Abu Bahr. He said: It is humility, 0 son of my brother; can you
put up with it? And he said: I am not forbearing but I am trying to
be.[41Another example of his forbearance is when a man reviled
him but he said nothing. The man reviled him again but again he
said nothing. The man said: 0 God, nothing is keeping him from
And he
responding except that he thinks I am in~igruficant.[~]
used to say: The one who cannot bear to hear a word will hear
many words, and there may be anger that is suppressed for fear of
['I

Tahdheeb Ibn 'As&ir, 7/13

12' al-Isti'tb, 311294
[31 W a w t al-A'yJn, 2/188

[41 Qcidat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 306
[51 Qidat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 306

264

'Uthmsn ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

worse con~equences.'~~
But his forbearance was that of one who
is strong and able, not that of one who is weak and incapable. He
fought fiercely in some battle situations, and a man said to him: 0
Abu Bahr, where is forbearance? He said: I left it at home.[21

His wisdom
al-Ahnaf was wise and smart. He said on one occasion:
Whoever has four qualities will become the leader of his people
without any competition: if he has religious commitment that
restrains him, good lineage to protect him, wisdom to guide him
and modesty to guard him.[31
And he said: Wisdom is the best comuanion, "
~ood
manners
are the best inheritance, and Allsh's help is the best thing you can
have.14] And he said: I never say anything bad about anyone after
he leaves my presence. If mention of a man was made in his
presence, he would say: Let him consume his due provision and
death will come to him at the appointed time.15] His nephew
complained of a toothache and he said: I lost my eye thirty years
ago and I did not mention it to anyone.16] And he said: No one
who was of a higher status than me disputed with me but I
acknowledged his position, and no one who was of a lower status
than me disputed with me but I refused to sink to his level, and no
one who was of equal status with me disputed with me but I did
him a favour and let him win.Iq
-

His knowledge
He was a trustworthy scholar who narrated a few hadeeth.
He narrated from 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb, 'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh, 'AL

I'[

Qidat Fath ai-Sind ma Afghanistan, p. 306

12] op. cit., p. 306

['I op. cit., p. 306

Tahdheeb Ibn 'Asikir, 7/19
op. cit., 7/21
[" op. cit., 7/16
17] Qirdut Fath al-Sind zua Afghanistan, p. 307

I

'Uthmiin's conauests in the East

265

ibn Abi Tglib and Abu Dharr al-~hif~ri.[ll
Al-Hasan al-Basri,
'Urwah ibn az-Zubayr and others narrated from him.[21 He was
one of the prominent fuqaha' at the time of Mu'swiyah.

His wisdom
He was wise and spoke with wisdom. He was asked about
chivalry and said: It is piety and forbearance.
He was asked about chivalry and said: It is adhering to the
limits set by religion, patience in the face of calamity, honouring
one's parents, forbearance at the time of anger and forgiveness
when one is able to take revenge.[31
And he said: Good manners are expressed in good words,
and there is no goodness in speaking without action, or in looking
good without being good inside, or in wealth without generosity,
or in a friend unless he is sincere, or in knowledge (of religion)
without piety, or in charity without the proper intention.[41
And he said: Keep your favours intact by never mentioning
them.IS1And he said: Laughmg too much takes away dignity and
joking too much takes awa chivalry; whoever adheres to a thing
will become known for it.[ And he said: Keep women and food
away from our gathering, for I would hate for a man to be in
service to his private parts and his stomach; chivalry is when a
man refrains from eating food that he desires.[71
And he said (when praised by the masses):Leadership is with
the masses - meaning, The one whose name is not mentioned on
the lips of the masses and recognized as a leader will not benefit if
only the elite recognize his leadership.[81

X

Tabaqit Ibn Sa'd, 7/93
Q&t Futh d-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 308
['I Qtdat Futh al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 308
[41 Takdheeb ibn 'As&;klr,7/19,20
['I al-Biddyah wah-Nihiyah, 7/331
Wafiytt al-A'ytn, by Ibn KhalkSn, 2/187
['I Wufiytt al-A'yin, 2/188
[I' Qtdat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 309
['I
['I

266

U
'-

Ibn 'Afftin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

His eloquence
He was eloquent and well spoken.['] On one occasion he
said, after praising and glorifying AllSh: 0
delivered a speech a i ~ d
people of al-Azd and Rabee'ah, you are our brothers in faith, and
you are related to us by marriage and by ties of blood, and you are
our neighbours in the land, and we are all facing a common
enemy. By Allsh, the people of al-Azd in Basra are dearer to us
than Tameem in Kufah, and the people of al-Azd in Kufah are
dearer to us than Tameem in Syria. If you feel any jealousy in your
heart, then you will find that our patience and wealth are enough
for us and you.[21He was sharp-witted and skilled in argument.
Al-Ahnaf came to some people who were discussing blood
money (diyah) and he said: You pass judgement. They said: We
want two diyahs. He said: You will get what you want. When
they fell silent he said: I will give you what you have asked for,
but I want to tell you something: All*, may He be glorified and
exalted, has decreed one diyah, and the Prophet @ decreed one
diyah. Today you are seeking compensation, but I fear that one
day you may be asked for blood money, and the people will only
accept from you that for which you yourselves set a precedent.
They said: Then we will accept one diyah.13] Al-Ahnal heard a
man say: I do not care if I am praised or criticized. He said to him:
You will have peace of mind that noble people will never have.F4'

His selflessness
Al-Ahnaf loved for others what he loved for himself, rather he
preferred others over himself when it came to kindness and
favours, and he would be pleased when he did good for other
people. When al-Ahnaf came to 'Umar in Madinah, the caliph
offered him a gft, and he said: 0 Arneer al-Mu'rnineen, by AllSh,
we did not cross the wilderness and come all this way for gifts. AU
[I1 Qtdat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 309

I'[ Qidat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistnn, p. 309
13' WajiyJt al-A'yin, 2/188
Wafiy8t al-A'yin, 2/188

'Uthman's conquests in the East

267

I want is to fulfil the needs of those who are with me. And this
increased him in status in 'Umar's eyes.[']

His h-ustworthiness
al-Ahnaf was very trustworthy. We have seen that when he
appointed his nephew as governor of the people of Balkh, and
when his nephew took possession of what had been agreed to in
the treaty, they also brought him vessels of gold and silver, dinars
and dirhams, goods and clothing. His nephew said to them: Is this
part of the deal that you made? They said: No, but this is
something that we do on this day for those in authority over us, to
placate them. He said: And what is this day? They said: alMahrajk. He said: I do not know what that is, and I do not want
to return it when I may be entitled to it; I will take it and set it
aside until I decide how to dispose of it. So he took it and set it
aside, and when al-Ahnaf came, he told him about it, and he
asked them about it, and they told him the same as they had told
his cousin. He said: I shall take it to the commander. So he took it
to Ibn 'Aamir and told him about it, and he said: Take it, 0 Abu
Bahr, it is yours. He said: I have no need of it.[21Al-Ahnaf was not
comfortable even with a gift; he was content with his share of the

His deliberation
Al-Ahnaf was very deliberate, and he would not do anything
until he had thought it over a thousand times. It was said to him:
0 Abu Bahr, you have a great deal of deliberation. He said: I
know myself to be hasty in three things: in my prayer when the
time comes, until I have prayed; when there is a funeral, which I
attend until the body is buried in the grave; and if someone
compatible proposes marriage to my daughter, until I give her to
him in
Tahdheeb Ibn 'Asrikir,7/12
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/319
"I Qidaf Fafh al-Sind wa Afghanistan, by Mahmoud Khattsb, p. 313
l4] TabaqBt fin Sa'd, 7 / 9 6
[I1

"I

268

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

His piety
Al-Ahnaf was a pious believer who was strong in faith. He
hastened to embracd Islam as soon as the call reached him, and his
He gave protection to the
people became Muslim on his ad~ice.~"
early d2'iyahs121 and was steadfast in his belief when most of his
people and most of the Arabs apostatized after the death of the
Prophet @. He strove hard and with sincerity to defend Islam,
and he achieved great things in that regard. Al-Hasan al-Basri
said of him: I have never seen a prominent man of status among
his people who was better than him.[31
Al-Ahnaf said: 'Umar ibn al-Khattgb kept me with him in
MadAmhfor one year, and he came to me every day and night
and he never saw anything of me but that which he liked.14' After
al-Ahnaf passed Umais test - and how difficult and thorough it
was - he sent letters with him to the governor of Basra saying: alAhnaf is the chief of ~asra.['] He wrote to Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari
telling him to consult al-Ahnaf and listen to him.[61 'Umar said to
him, after he had kept him with him for a year: 0 Ahnaf, I have
tested you and I have seen nothing but good; I think that you are
outwardly good, and I hope that you are the same inwardly as
you appear to be outwardly.i71
Al-Ahnaf was a righteous man who prayed a great deal at
night. He would light a lamp and weep until morning. He would
put his finger in the lamp and say to himself: If you cannot bear
the lamp, then how could you bear the greater ire?['] It was said
to him: You fast a great deal and that makes the stomach weak.
[I1

Shadhrcit al-Dhahabfi Akhbcir min Dhahab, by Abu'l-Fala 'Abd al-Hayy, 1/78

'" Q&t Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 314

Qcidat Fafh al-Sind ma Afghanistan. p. 314
Qtdat Fath d-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 314
I ' [ Tahdheeb lbn 'Aslkir, 7/12
16] Tabaqcit Ibn Sa'd, 7/94
I[' al-Bizyak warn-Nihtyah, 7/331
"I Tabaqlt Ibn Sa'd, 7/94; Qldat Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 315

I'[

'Uthm&nrsconquests in the East

269

He said: I am preparing it for a long journey.[ll Al-Ahnaf was
appointed as governor of Khorasan and when he went to Persia,
he became junub on a cold night; he did not wake any of his slaves
or troops, rather he went out looking for water, and he walked
over thorny plants and shrubs until his feet flowed with blood.
Then he found some icy snow and broke some of it off and did
gh~sl.['~Rarely did he find himself alone but he would call for
the Mus-haf, for reading the Mus-haf frequently was a
characteristic of the early generation.[31 In his durC he would
say: 0 All&, if You forgive me, then it is because of your
generosity, and if You punish me, it is because of my sin.I4] And
he would say: 0 Alltih, rant me certain faith to help me bear the
calamities of this w o r l d 1 A funeral passed by him and he said:
May All2h have mercy on the one who strives to prepare for a day
Like this.16] And he used to say: I a m surprised that the one who
has traveled through the urine passages twicer7] can feel
These are some of the features of the character of al-Ahnaf, by
virtue of which he gained the people's trust, love and respect.
These characteristics make the one who acquires them a strong
and influential character, such as is rarely found among people in
any time or place, or in any era.[91
Al-Ahnaf was one of the leaders of conquest at the time of
'Uthm2n &, and he distinguished himself in his leadership of the
army in the east by his ability to prepare sound and successful
"I Tabaqit lbn Sa'd, 7/94

Tabaqit lbn Sa'd, 7/95
Q8dnt Fath alSind ma Afghanistan, p. 315; the biography of al-Ahnaf has been
taken largely from this valuable book, as well as from other sources.
[41 Tahdheeb Ibn 'Astfir, 7/16
ibid.
al-Bidiyah warn-Nihiyah, 7/331
I[' i.e., has come from the loins of his father and the womb of his mother.
[Translator]
[I' Qidnt Fath al-Sind wa Afghanistan, p. 316
I ' [ op. cit., p.320
'21

270

' U W Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

strategies and make sound decisions quickly; his personal
courage also had a sbong effect in laying out those plans and
taking decisions when putting those plans into effect. He would
do his utmost to prepare battle plans and listen to the advice of
people of wisdom; in fact he would go around secretly at night,
Listening to what his men were talking about, and if he found a
good idea he would hasten to implement it; he did not mind
accepting wisdom from anywhere he found it. This field
commander at the time of 'Uthmh fought with his sword and
reason alike. He had such a great deal of courage that he would
expose himself to danger rather than expose his men, and he
would prefer for them to remain safe. He was also very smart, and
by means of his smartness he saved his troops a great deal of
effort and hardship.[']
Al-Ahnaf was a man who was like a nation in himself. He was
the leader of the people of the east who was called by a name
other than his own, a s 'Umar ibn al-Khatt2b 4 used to say of
hirn. 121
I have spoken at length about al-Ahnaf because he was one of
the leaders of the conquests at the time of 'Uthmh, and he was
one of those who contributed to the major events of the reign of
the third Rightly-Guided Caliph, and one of those governors and
commanders who have been targeted by lies.

['I

op. cit., p. 322

"I

op.cit., p. 322

Conquests in Syria

The Conquests of Habeeb ibn Masiarnah ai-&hri
We have seen how the Byzantines gathered huge numbers to
fight the Muslims in Syria at the beginning of ' U t W s
caliphate. ' U t M wrote to al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah in Kufah,
telling him to send reinforcements to his brethren in Syria, so he
sent eight thousand men, led by SalmSn ibn Rabee'ah al-BW.
The Muslims prevailed over their enemy after penetrating the
land of Byzantium and taking prisoners and acquiring booty. The
Byzantines had formed an alliance to fight the Muslims who had
invaded Armenia from Syria. The commander of the Muslims
was Habeeb ibn Maslamah who was crafty in war. He decided to
attack the enemy leader al-Mooriygn, by catching him unawares
at night. His wife Umm 'Abd-All2h bint Yazeed al-Kalbiyyah
heard him mention that, and she said: Where will we meet? He
said: In the courtyard of al-Mooriysn or in Paradise. Then he
attacked them at night and defeated them, and when he came to
the courtyard of al-Mooriyin, he found that his wife had got there
before him.['] Habeeb continued his jihad and ongoing victories
in the lands of h'menia and Azerbaijan, which he conquered
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/248

272

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affk 4 Dhun-Nooravn

either by means of treaties or by force.["
Habeeb ibn Maslamah al-Fihri was one of the prominent
commanders who fought in Byzantine Armenia. He wiped out
many of the enemy's annies completely and conquered many
strongholds and cities.[21 He also invaded the Byzantine lands
beyond the borders of Mesopotamia and conquered strongholds
there, such as Shamshgt, Malatiyyah, and others. In 25 AH,
Mu'swiyah attacked the Byzantines and reached 'Amooriyyah,
where he found the strongholds between Antzkiyah (Antioch)
and Tarsus empty, so he installed a large number of people from
Syria and Iraq there. His commander Qays ibn al-Hurr al-'Absi
continued the campaign the following summer, and when he
finished, he destroyed some strongholds near Antioch so that the
Byzantines could not make use of them.[31

The first one to aiiow the Musiims to campaip by
sea was 'Uthmgn ibn "Alfgn
When Mu'iwiyah ibn Abi Sufysn was the governor of Syria,
he urged 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb to campaign by sea, and told him
how close the Byzantines were to Homs. He said: In one of the
villages of Homs, the people can hear the barking of their dogs
and the crowing of their roosters. 'Umar was almost convinced,
and he wrote to 'Amr ibn al-'Aas saying: Describe to me the sea
and those who sail on it, for I am thinking about it. ' A m wrote to
him, saying: It is like a huge creature being ridden by a small
creature; if it stays still it will scare you and if it moves it will make
you lose your mind; there is no certainty about it and great doubts
about it. They (sailors) are like worms on a stick; if it tilts they win
drown and if it is saved you will be astonished. When 'Umar ibn
al-Khattsb read the letter of ' A m ibn al-'Aas, he wrote to
['I

al-Dawlnh al-Tslamiyydi fi 'Asr al-mulafa' al-Rtshidem by Hamdi Shahem, p.
252

al-Islam f f - S h i m Ji ' U h w d al-Khulafa' al-Rishideen b y Muhammad
Ahmad Bashmeel, p. 577
[I' al-Dawlah al-lslamiyyd1 fi 'Asr al-Khulafa' al-Rrishideen, p. 253
[21 Humob

Conquests in Syria

273

Mu'swiyah saying: No, by the One Who sent Muhammad with
the truth, I will never let a Muslim campaign by sea. By AllZh, a
Muslim is dearer to me than all that the Byzantines have. Stop
suggesting that to me.['' But the idea kept nagging at Mu'hiyah;
he saw the Byzantines and their land, and kept hoping to conquer
it. When 'UthmSn became the caliph, he brought the matter up
again and urged 'Uthmh to consider it. 'Uthmh replied by
saying: I am aware of how 'Umar (may Allsh have mercy on him)
responded when you asked him for permission to campaign by
sea. Then Mu'swiyah wrote to him again, trying to convince him
that it was no major thing to travel by sea to Cyprus. He wrote
back to him saying: If you take your wife with you, then you have
our permission to go, otherwise no.['] The caliph 'Uthmsn 4
stipulated further conditions by saying: Do not select people and
do not draw lots; give them the choice, and whoever chooses to go
willingly, let him go with you and help him.[31 When Mu'swiyah
read the letter of 'Uthmh he started mobilizing people to travel
by sea to Cyprus. He wrote to the people on the coast ordering
them to repair their ships and bring them close to the coast in
Palestine at 'Akka (Acre), which he had refurbished so that the
Muslims could travel from there to ~ ~ ~ r u s . [ ~ ]

The c a m p i p to Cypms
Mu'swiyah prepared the ships needed to transport the
campaigning army, and he took the port of 'Akka as the point
of departure for the ships, of which there were many. He took his
wife Fskhitah bint Qarzah with him, and 'Ubsdah ibn al-Sirnit
also took his wife, Umm H a r h bint Milhin, with him on that
campaign.15'
"I Tareekk at-Tabari, 5/258

al-lda^~ah
al-'Asknriyyahfi'l-Dawlahal-lslamiyyah, by Dr. S u l a y d n ibn SZlih, 2/
538
[31 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/260
[I' al-ld2rah al-'Askariyyahfl-Dawlah a/-Is!nmiyyak, 2/538
[I' a/-Bidiiydl wa'n-NihaAyah,7/159

['I

274

'Uthm& Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

This Umm Hariim is the lady mentioned in the famous story.
It was narrated from Anas ibn Maik 4 that the Messenger of
All* @ used to enter upon Umm Har2m bint Milhiin and she
would give him food. Umm Harsm was married to 'Ubsdah ibn
al-Shit. One day the Messenger of A l l a @ entered upon her,
and she provided him with food and started grooming his head.
slept, then he woke up smiling.
Then the Messenger of Alliih (g)
Umm Harsm asked, "What is making you smile, 0 Messenger of
Allsh?" He said,

"Smne people of my ummah were shown to me (in my dream)
campaigningfor the sake ofAllrih, sailing in the middle of the sea
like kings rn thrones. "
Umm Hariim added, "I said, '0 Messenger of All*! Pray to
All* to make me one of them."' So the Messenger of AlSiih (@)
prayed to AUiih for her and then laid his head down (and slept).
Then he woke up smiling (again). (Umm Hariim added): I said,
"What is making you smile, O Messenger of Allsh?" He said,

"Some people of my ummah were shown to me (in my dream)
campaigningfor the sake of All&, "
He said the same as he had said before. I said, "0Messenger
of AUsh! Fray to AUiih to make me one of them." He said, "You
will be among the first ones." Then Umm Hariim sailed across the
sea during the time of Mu'iiwiyah ibn Abi S u f y h , and she fell
down from her riding animal after coming ashore, and died.[']
Although Mu'swiyah did not force the people to go out on
"I al-BuWliri, no. 2877 and Muslim, no.1912

Conquests in Syria

275

this campaign, a huge army of Muslims set out with him,[']
which indicates that this world and everything in it were
i n s i w c a n t to the Muslims, and they did not care about it even
though its doors were open to them and they were all enjoying its
luxuries.
The Muslims had come to learn that that which is with AUiih
is better and more lasting, and that Alliih had chosen them to
support His religion, establish justice, spread virtue and strive to
make the religion of Allsh prevail over all else. They believed that
this was their true mission, and that jihad for the sake of AUiih
was the way to attain AllSh's pleasure. If they fell short in their
mission and failed to fulfil their duties, All& would withhold His
support from them in this world and deprive them of His pleasure
in the Hereafter, and that would be true loss. Because of that, they
rushed to go with Mu'iiwiyah and raced to embark on the ships.
Perhaps they were aware of the hadeeth of Umm H a r h and it
motivated them to go out and fight for the sake of All*, in
confirmation of the hadeeth of the Messenger of All* g.
That
was at the end of winter in 28 AH (649 CE)."'
The Muslims travelled from Syria, embarking from the port
of 'Akka and heading for Cyprus. The Muslims landed on the
coast and Umm HarSm went to ride her mount, but the animal
spooked and Umm Hariim fell to the ground and broke her neck
and diedJ3' The Muslims left Umm H a r h after burying her on
the island, as a symbol of the extent of the sacrifices made by the
Muslims for the sake of spreading their religion, and her grave
became known there as the grave of a righteous woman.r41
Mu'iiwiyah held a meeting with his companions, among
whom was Abu Ayyoob Khiilid ibn Zayd al-Ans5ri, Abu'lDarda', Abu Dharr al-Ghifiiri, 'Ubiidah ibn al-Siimit, Wiithilah ibn

"' Jawlah
TareeWIiyyah fi 'Asr al-Khulafa' al-Xiishidem, by Dr. Muhammad alSayyid al-wakeel, p.
356

[I'

ibid.
at-Bidtyah warn-Nihiiyah, 7/159
Jawtah Tareekhiyyahfi 'Asr al-Khulafa' al-Xiishidem, p. 357

276

' U W n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

d-Asqa', 'Abd-All* ibn Bishr al-Mgzini, Shaddgd ibn Aws ibn
Thiibit, d-Miqdgd ibn al-Aswad, Ka'b al-Hibr ibn Mgti' and
Jubayr ibn Nufayr al-~adrami.[ll They discussed among
themselves, then sent word to the people of Cyprus telling them
that they were not invading to take over their island['], rather
they wanted to call them to the religion of All*, then secure the
borders of the Islamic state in Syria, because the Byzantines were
using Cyprus as a rest station during their campaigns and taking
provisions from it when their supplies ran low, thus it posed a
threat to Syria, which was at its mercy. If the Muslims could not
be certain that this island was at peace with them and subjugated
to their will, then it would remain a thorn in their sides and an
arrow aimed at their border. But the inhabitants of the island did
not submit to the invaders and did not open their land to them,
rather they barricaded themselves in their capital and did not
come out to confront the Muslims. The islanders were waiting for
the Byzantines to come and save them.[31

Sumender and request for a peace treaty
The Muslims came to the capital of Cyprus (Qustantina) and
besieged it, but it was only a few hours before the people asked
for a peace treaty, and the Muslims granted them that. They
offered conditions to the Muslims and the Muslims stipulated
conditions. The condition stipulated by the people of Cyprus was
that the Muslims should not stipulate any condition that would
cause trouble for them with the Byzantines, because they could
not handle them and were not able to fight them.
The Muslims' conditions were:
1- The Muslims would not defend the island if it was
attacked by outsiders

2- The islanders would tell the Muslims about the
['I ibid.
[21 ibid.
[31 ibid.

Conauests in Svria

277

movements of their Byzantine enemies

3- The islanders would give the Muslims seven thousand
and two hundred dinars every year
4- They would not help the Byzantines if they tried to
attack the Muslim lands, or tell them about their
secrets.'ll

Then the Muslims returned to Syria. This campaign proved
the ability of the Muslims to engage in naval campaigns with
competence and gave them the opportunity to gain experience in
fighting this kind of battle against an enemy who was always
watching for an opportunity to attack them in Syria or
~lexandria.[~]

'Abd-Alli2h ibn Qays, commander of fhe muslin^
n;rvy in Syria
Mu'gwiyah ibn Abi S u f y h appointed 'Abd-Allgh ibn Qays
al-JSsi, the ally of Banu Fazirah, in charge of the navy; he led fifty
campaigns by sea, some in winter and some in summer, and no
one drowned or had any problems. He used to pray to All& to
keep him and his hoops safe, and not allow any of them to be
harmed, and He granted that to him. If he wanted to take a risk by
himself, he went on his own boat as a scout. He went to one of the
ports in Byzantine territory, where there were beggars asking
from everyone in that place. He gave charity to them, then one of
the beggar women went back to her village and told the men: Are
you looking for 'Abd-All2h ibn Qays? They said: Where is he? She
said: In the port. They said: 0 enemy of Allih, how do you know
about 'Abd-All& ibn Qays? She told them off and said: You are
too incompetent to know about 'Abd-Allih ibn Qays. They
rushed to him and attacked him, and he fought back, but he was
the only one who was killed. The sailor who was with him
"I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/261

Jnwluh Tareekhiyyahfi 'Asr al-r<hulafa'al-Rishideen, p. 358,359

!

'UthmSn Ibn 'Affsn 4Dhun-Noorayn

278

escaped and came to his companions and they came and
gathered. His successor as commander was Sufyh ibn 'Awf alAzdi, who went out and fought them. He was very distressed and
started swearing at his companions, and the slave woman of
'Abd-All* said, eulogizing him: 0 'Abd-ALlSh; that is not what
he used to say when he fought. SufyCn said: What did he used to
say? She said: Hard times (for a while), then that will leave us. So
he stopped saying what he used to say and repeated: Hard times
(for a while), then that will leave us. The Muslims suffered
casualties for the first time on that day, and that was at the end of
the time of 'Abd-All31 ibn Qays al-~Csi.[l]And it was said to that
woman who told the Byzantines about 'Abd-AUSh ibn Qays:
How did you know him? She said: He looked like a merchant, but
when I asked him (for alms) he gave like a king, so I knew that he
was 'Abd-All2I ibn ~ a ~ s . [ ~ '
When All31 wanted to bestow martyrdom upon this great
leader, the opporhmity became available when he was in a
position that would not damage the reputation of the Muslim
navy, as he was by himself, watching the enemy. When this smart
and crafty woman saw this man who looked like an ordinary
merchant but gave like a king, she saw signs of leadership in him
despite his ordinary appearance, so she realized that he was the
leader of the Muslims who had given the fighters such a hard time
in that land. Thus his good manners and generosity, even to nonMuslims, led to his being found out

"So that All& might accomplish a matter already ordained (in

His Knowledge)" (cf. An-Anftl 8:44),
And he was attacked and attained martyrdom.
Thus he set the highest example for other leaders, so that great
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 51260
ibid

Conquests in Syria

279

things might be achieved at their hands, and they in turn would
be examples for those who came after them. This inspired leader
nndertook the espionage mission himself and did not delegate it
to one of his troops. By going alone on this mission, it may seem
that he took too great a risk and exposed himself to death at the
hands of the enemy, but he took the risk nevertheless and took on
this mission. Moreover we find that he displayed true Islamic
attributes, even with the women and the weak ones among the
enemy. He showed mercy and compassion towards them, and
gave them money, which is the dearest of what people possess.
Even before that, we see that he was kind and patient, and did not
rebuke anyone or act in an arrogant manner, even when danger
surrounded him; he was filled with optimism that the hardship
would soon end. He never resorted to rebuking or blaming his
companions and he never panicked in a way that spoil a mission
or lead to chaos. His successor, S u f y h al-Azdi, may have made
the mistakes he did, panicking and blaming his hoops, because he
was new to the position of commander, but it is to his credit that
when the slave woman of 'Abd-AU5h pointed out the wise
methods that his former commander used to follow, he hastened
to follow his example. He had no sense of pride that would make
him ignore the word of truth, even if it was uttered by an
unknown slave woman. This is a fine example of selflessness and
freedom from following whims and desires; this is the great
attitude that was common among the first generation, by means of
which the conquests were achieved and the governors and
commanders succeeded in running the affairs of the ummah. How
great were the people of that generation; how prominent and
farsighted, how great the pressure they put on the tyrants and
how gentle their approach was to the oppressed and poor.[11

The Cypriots break the beaty
In 32 AH, the people of Cyprus came under intense pressure
from the Byzantines, who forced them to send ships to the

280

' U r n Ibn ' A f f h& Dhun-Nooravn

Byzantine army with which to attack the Muslim lands. Thus the
Cypriots broke the conditions of the treaty. When Mu'Swiyah
learned of the Cypriots' betrayal, he decided to invade the island
and bring it under Muslim control. So the Muslims attacked the
island, killing, taking prisoners and seizing booty. The army of
Mu'Swiyah attacked it from one side and 'Abd-Alla ibn Sa'd
attacked it from the other, and they killed many people and
captured many prisoners, and seized a great deal of booty.'ll
Under pressure from the Muslim forces, the ruler of Cyprus had
no choice but to yield to the conquerors and seek a (new) treaty
with them, and Mu'Swiyah agreed to the same conditions as in the
first treaty.[" But this time Mu'Swiyah did not want to leave them
without a guard stationed on the island to protect it from enemy
raids and establish security so that they would not rebel against
the Muslims. So he sent twelve thousand troops and brought a
group from B:labek, and he built a city there, complete with a
mosque, and paid a stipend to the troops. Things continued in this
vein, with the island at peace and the Muslims safe from sudden
attacks by the Byzantines. The Muslims noticed that the Cypriots
had no military forces and they were being oppressed by those
who attacked them, and they realized that the Byzantines were
controlling them and subjugating them to their own interests. So
they felt it was their duty to protect them from Byzantine
oppression and prevent the Byzantines from taking control of
them. Ism2'eel ibn 'AyySsh said: The people of Cyprus are being
humiliated and oppressed by the Byzantines who control their
affairs and their women; it is our duty to protect them.[31

How insignificant are the people to AlISh if they
disobey Him
During this campaign, when Abu'l-Darda' saw the enemy
prisoners, he wept and said: How insighcant are the people to
Jawaluh Tareekhiyyah, p. 359,360
[21 al-Baliidhuri, p. 158
['I Jawlah Tareekhiyyiih, p. 361
['I

Conquests in Syria

281

1
!

AUSh if they disobey Him. Look at these people: they were
powerful and prevailed over their enemies, but when they
ignored the commands of All% - may He be glorified and exalted
- and disobeyed Him, they ended up as you see.''' According to
another report, Jubayr ibn Nufayr said to him: Why are you
weeping when All21 has caused Islam and its people to prevail?
He said: Woe to you, this was a powerful nation that
prevailed, but when they neglected the commands of All%, they
ended up as you see. AUSh has punished them by making them
prisoners. And when a people end up prisoners, AUSh has no
need of them. He said: How insighcant are the people to AUSh if
they disobey ~ i m . ~ ' l
These words uttered by Abu'l-Darda' provide an example of
his insight and deep understanding of the decree of AllSh. This
great S a b i felt sorry for those whom All% had caused to be
blind, so they did not follow the call of truth and they ended up in
this sorry state, when they fell from power and were humiliated
and subjugated because they insisted on following falsehood and
were too arrogant to submit to the call of truth. If only they had
understood and thought things through, by entering Islam they
would have held onto their power, authority and lands under the
protection of the Islamic state. This deep thought on the part of
Abu'l-Darda' was a manifestation of the mercy and compassion
that he felt in his heart, which appeared in the form of tears in the
eyes of this great man as he expressed his sorrow for the fate of
this nation that had continued to follow misguidance and thus
met a bad end when it lost its power and was humiliated. As
much as the Muslims rejoice when people enter Islam, they grieve
when they see the Efirs living in misguidance because they know
the eternal punishment that awaits them in the hereafter. So how
about if we add to that their being taken prisoner, exiled or
exposed to death in this world?[31

282

' U M n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

"Ubsdah ibn a$-Ssmit dividing the spoils of Cyprus
'Ubsdah ibn al-Shit said to Mu'swiyah (&): 1 saw the
during the campaign of Hunayn, when the
Messenger of All*
people spoke to him about the booty. He took the hair of a camel
and said:

"I have nothing of that which Allih has bestowed upon you of
fhis booty except the khums, and the khums is paid back to
you. "
So fear All&, 0 Mu'swiyah, and divide the booty properly;
do not give anyone more than his fair share. Mu'swiyah said to
him:I give you the task of dividing the booty, for there is no one in
Syria who is better or more knowledgeable than you. So divide it
among those who are entitled to it and fear All& with regard to it.
So 'Ubsdah divided it among those who were entitled to it, and
Abu'l-Darda' and Abu Umiimah helped him.[']

['I ar-Riyldh al-nadrahfi Manfiqib al-'Asharnh by Abu Ja'farAhmad, who is better

known as al-Muhibb at-Tabari,p. 561 (And see Al-Bayhaqei 7/17)

Conquests
-.
on the Egyptian
front

Suppression of-the reb
The Byzantines were very upset with the loss of Alexandria,
and they kept looking for opportunities to take it back. They
started inciting the Byzantines who were in Alexandria to rebel
against the Muslim authorities because they believed that they
could never feel at ease in their own land after the loss of
Alexandria.['' The Byzantines' incitement of the people of
Alexandria coincided with the desires of its inhabitants, so they
responded to the call and wrote to Constantine, the son of
Heraclius, telling him of the small numbers of the Muslims and
describing to him how the Byzantines living in Alexandria felt
humiliated.[21 ' U M n had dismissed 'Amr ibn al-'Aas from his
post as governor of Egypt, and replaced him with 'Abd-AllCh ibn
Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh. During this period, Manuel al-Khassi, the
commander of the Byzantine forces, arrived in Alexandria with
the aim of recapturing it and taking it from the Muslims. He was
accompanied by a huge force carried on three hundred ships that
were loaded with all the equipment and weapons they would
need.I3]
~~

a l - K h i l by Tbn al-Atheer
" Jawluh Tareekhiyyah,p. 335
ibid.
'I1

284

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affk & Dhun-Nooravn

The people of Egypt knew that the Byzantine forces had
landed in Alexandria, so they wrote to 'Uthmh, asking him to
reinstate ' A m ibn al-'Aas so that he could confront the invading
forces, because he had experience in fighting them, and he was
feared by them. The caliph responded to the Egyptians' request,
Manuel and his
and he kept Ibn al-'Aas as governor of
anny ransacked Alexandria and left it in ruins, and went on to
spread evil and corruption in the surrounding towns. ' A m ibn al'Aas let them get carried away so that the Egyptians would see the
huge difference between the Muslim rulers and the Byzantine
rulers, and the hearts of the Egyptians would be filled with hatred
and anger towards the Byzantines and would feel no love or
compassion towards them at all. Manuel and his army left
Alexandria, heading towards lower Egypt, and they were not
confronted by 'Amr and did not meet with resistance from
anyone. Some of 'Amr's companions got worried but 'Amr had a
different point of view and thought that he should let them come
to him. No doubt they were going to ransack the property of the
E ~ p t i a n and
s commit atrocities, which would fill the Egyptians'
hearts with anger and hatred against them. At that point, if the
Muslims decided to confront them, the Egyptians would help to
get rid of them. 'Amr described this policy of his by saying: "Let
them come to me, for they will attack those whom they pass by, so
some will be humiliated at the hands of others.['' 'Amr's insight
proved We, for the Byzantines got carried away in their
evildoing, ransacking and looting, and the Egyptians were
greatly vexed by their deeds, and they started looking for
someone to rid them of the evil of these vicious invaders.13]
Manuel reached Naqyoos, and 'Amr readied his troops to
confront him, then they marched towards this vicious enemy. The
two armies met at the fort of Naqyoos on the banks of the Nile.
Both armies fought bravely, demonstrating fortitude in the face of
I"

ibid.

" Jawlah Tareekhiyyah, p. 336; 'Uthmcin ibn 'Affix,by Haykal, p. 67
op. cit., p. 336

Conquests on the Egyptian front

285

the enemy, which made the battle even more intense. This
motivated the commander ' A m to penetrate deep into the enemy
ranks, urging his horse forward among their horses and wielding
his sword among their swords and cutting the necks of men. His
horse was struck by an arrow and killed, so 'Am leapt down and
joined the ranks of the foot soldiers. The Muslims saw him and
began to fight fiercely like lions, not fearing the clashing of
swords.'" Before this Muslim attack the resolve of the Byzantines
failed and they lost their strength. They began fleeing before the
heroes whose aim was either of the two good things (martyrdom
or victory). The Byzantines fled to Alexandria hoping to find
protection in its fortresses and behind its high walk from the
shadow of death that was pursuing them.121
After they saw the defeat of the Byzantines, the Egyptians
came out to repair for the Muslims the roads and bridges that the
fleeing enemy had destroyed, and they expressed their joy at the
Muslims' defeat of the enemy who had violated their honour and
transgressed against their property, offering the Muslims the
supplies and weapons that they were lacking.[31
When ' A m reached Alexandria, he besieged the Byzantines
and set up catapults with which he kept striking the walls of
Alexandria until they were weakened. He kept on shiking until
the people grew weak and the walls cracked, then the city opened
its gates and the Muslims entered Alexandria wielding swords
against the Byzantines, killing the fighters and taking the women
and children captive. Those who managed to escape death fled to
the ships to flee back whence they had come and Manuel was
among the slain. But the Muslims did not stop killing and
capturing people until' Amr issued orders to that effect when they
reached the middle of the city, and there was no longer any
resistance.[41 When the Muslims halted their fighting, 'Amr
op. cit., p. 338
al-Ballidhuri, p. 69
[31 Jawlah Tareekhiyyah, p. 338
'41 Jmlah Tareekhiyyah, p. 338

['I

286

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

ordered that a mosque be built in the place where the fighting
stopped, and it was called Masjid al-Rahmah (the mosque of
mercy).I1]
Peace returned to the capital, and tranquility returned to the
hearts of the Egyptians living there. Those who had fled from the
terrifying Byzantine invaders returned, including the Coptic
Patriarch Benjamin, who had fled with those who fled. He started
urging 'Amr not to mistreat the Copts because they had not
broken their treaty or neglected their duties; he also urged him not
to make any deal with the B zantines, and to bury him, if he died,
in the church of Yuhannas.$1
The Egyptians came from all directions to thank 'Amr for
ridding them of Byzantine oppression and asking him to return
their wealth and livestock, and they confirmed their allegiance
and obedience to him. They said: The Byzantines took our
livestock and wealth and we did not break our deal with you; we
were still loyal. 'Amr asked them to bring evidence to support
their claims, and whoever was able to identlfy his property had it
returned to him. 131 He also knocked down the walls of
Alexandria. That happened in 25 AH, and Alexandria became
safe on all sides even though its walls had been knocked down.
Lands to the east and the south were under Muslim control, and
the lands to the west were secured by 'Amr when he conquered
Barqah, Zuwaylah and Tarablus al-Gharb, and made a treaty with
the people of these lands in return for jizyah that they paid
willingly. The area to the north was under Byzantine control, but
they had learned a lesson at the hands of the Muslims and were
not thinking of coming back; even if they thought of coming back,
there was no way they could enter the city because they had no
supporters or helpers there, and the Muslims were watching the
sea carefully.14]
I'[ ibid
op. cit., p. 340
13] ibid.

Conquests on the Egyptian front

287

The conquest of Nubi
' A m ibn al'Aas had started to conquer Nubia with the
permission of the caliph'umar, but he found that the people there
fought in a way for which the Muslims had no training. The
Nubians would shoot arrows into the eyes of their enemy, and
one hundred and fifty eyes were lost in the first battle. Hence the
army accepted a peace deal, but 'Amribn al-'Aas refused it,
hoping for better conditions.[11 When Ibn Sa'd became governor
of Egypt, he attacked Nubia in 31 AH, and the people of Nubia
fought back fiercely and many of the Muslims suffered eye
injuries.[']
The people of Nubia asked 'Abd-All* ibn Sa'd for a peace
deal, and he granted them a treaty that lasted for six centuries.13]
The treaty allowed them to remain independent and gave the
Muslims security on their southern border. It also opened up
Nubia for trade. The Muslims be an to mix with the Nubians and
many of them embraced Islam.147

The conquest of North Africa
Among the aims of the campaign of 'Amr ibn al-'Aas & in
Barqah, Tripoli and the rest of Libya were to conquer the land and
remove the yoke of Roman tyranny, so that the people there
would have freedom of choice. This blessed campaign brought
light into those dark regions where idol worship was common,
and where people offered sacrifices to false gods and human
beings instead of All&; thus they were brought out from worship
of people to the worship of the Lord of people. Concerning the
campaign of 'Abd-All* ibn Sa'd in North Africat5' , Dr S a i
Mustafa said: In 26 AH/&I-6 CE, ' A m ibn al-'Aas 4 was
al-mhideen, p. 229
Qtdat al-Fafh li Bilid al-Maghrib, 1/61-63
[3' al-KhiEiifah wa'l-Khulafa' al-Rashideen, p. 229
[41 Qlidat al-Fath li Bilrid al-Maghrib, 1/61-63
[51 al-Sharaf wa'l-Tasimi bi Harakat al-Fath al-lslami, by al-Sallgbi, p. 189
[I1 al-Khilijiah wa'l-Khulafa'
I['

288

'Uthm6n Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

dismissed from his post as governor of Egypt, and 'Abd-Allih ibn
Sa'd &was appointed instead. 'Abd-Allih ibn Sa'd sent cavalries
as they used to do at the time of 'Amr, and they attacked the
borders of North Africa and they acquired booty.['' The cavalries
were heading towards North Africa (Tunis) in preparation to
conquer it and so as to find out about it. These cavalries were like
scouting parties that were regarded as the vanguard and eyes of
the army. When 'Abd-All31 ibn Sa'd had gathered sufficient
information about North Africa with regard to the routes in and
out of the region, and the numbers and strength of its armies, and
its strategic geographical locations, then he wrote to the RightlyGuided Caliph 'Uthmin ibn 'AffSn, telling him this important
information about North Africa and asking him for permission to
conquer it, based on this information. He got what he wanted. Dr.
S&lih Mustafa said: When 'Abd-All31 ibn Sa'd asked the caliph
' U t M n ibn 'Aff2n for permission to attack North Africa, he
gathered the Sahsbah together and consulted them concerning
that. They suggested that it should be conquered, except for
Abu'l-A'war Sa'eed ibn Zayd, who disagreed and held to the
view of 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb, that no Muslim should conquer
North Africa. When the SaGbah agreed on that, 'Uthmin called
for jihad and Madinah - the capital of the Islamic caliphate prepared to gather and equip volunteers and send them to Egypt
to invade North Africa under the leadership of 'Abd-Allih ibn
Sa'd. There was a great deal of interest in this campaign, and it is
clear that among those who went out to fight were some of the
senior Sahibah, the best of the youth of the Prophet's family, and
the sons of the first Muhijireen and the Ansir. Al-Hasan and alHusayn, Ibn 'AbbSs, Ibn Ja'far and others went out on this
campaign.
From the tribe of Mahrah alone, six hundred men went out on
the campaign of 'Abd-Allih ibn Sa'd. Ghanath sent seven
hundred men, and Meed'in also sent seven hundred. When the
['I Libya min al-Fath al-Xrabi h t t a Intiqil aall(hilij~h
al-Fitimiyyah ila Misr, by SBlih
Mustafa Mif% al-Muzayni, p. 49

Conquests on the Egyptian front

289

preparations were complete, 'Uthmiin addressed them and
encouraged them to go for jihad. He said to them: I have
appointed al-H2rith ibn al-Hakam to lead you until you join
'Abd-Alliih ibn Sa'd, then he will be in command, I leave you in
the care of All*. It was said that 'Uthmiin & helped this
campaign by supplying one thousand camels to carry the poor
among the people. When the army reached Egypt, it joined the
army of 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd, and the united army of twenty
thousand men proceeded from al-Fustiit under the command of
'Abd-Allgh, crossing the Egyptian-Libyan border. When they
reached Barqah they were joined by 'Uqbah ibn Niifi' al-Fihri and
the Muslims who were with him. The Muslim army did not
encounter any difficulties during their march across Barqah,
because the region was adhering to the deal they had made with
the Muslims at the time of 'Amr ibn al-'Aas; no kharil-collector
even entered the region, rather they sent their kharij to Egypt at
the appointed time. The fact that Barqah adhered to the treaty
made at the time of 'Amr ibn al'Aas is confirmed by the fact that
he was heard to say: When I was in this posihon, none of the
Copts of Egypt adhered to their covenants with me, except the
people of Antablus (i.e., Barqah); there is a covenant that should
be adhered to with them. 'Abd-Alliih ibn 'Amr ibn al-'Aas also
used to say: Were it not for my property in Hij&, I would have
settled in Bar ah, for I do not know of any city more safe and
secure than it.
So this blessed campaign set out for North Africa, after the
forces of 'Uqbah ibn NSi' joined them. 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd, the
commander of the campaign, continued to send scouts and spies
in all directions to seek out routes and secure them, and keep a
watch on enemy movements, so as to protect the army against
any ambush that might catch them unawares. As a result of that
scouting, they spotted a number of warships belonging to the
RomanEmpire that were at anchor off the coast of Libya, near the
city of Tripoli. Before long, the Muslims took the cargo of these

711

"I

Libya mix al-Fath al-'Arabi hatta lntiqil al-Khilifah al-Fitimiyyah ila Misr, p. 39

290

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affh 4 Dhun-Noorayn

ships as booty, and they took more than a hundred of their crews
as prisoners. This was regarded as the first booty of any value that
the Muslims seized on their way to conquer North Africa.[']
'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd continued the march towards North
Africa, sending out his scouts in all directions, until his army
reached the city of Subaytalah safely. There the two groups met,
the Muslim army led by 'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd and the army of
Jajeer, the ruler of North Africa, whose army numbered around
one hundred and twenty thousand. There was ongoing
communication between the two commanders, and an exchange
of messengers, in which the message of Islam was presented to
Jarjeer and he was invited to enter Islam and submit to the
command of All&, or pay the jizyah and accept Islamic rule. But
all offers were refused and he and his troops persisted in their
arrogance. Before long, battle broke out between the two groups
and the fighting grew intense, until reinforcements anived under
the leadership of 'Abd-AUih ibn az-Zubayr, at whose hands this
arrogant tyrant met his end.[']
When the Byzantines who were on the coast saw what had
happened to Jajeer and the people of Subaytalah, they got upset
and gathered and consulted one another about fighting 'AbdAll& ibn Sa'd, but they were afraid of him. They wrote letters to
him, offering to pay him something so that he would take his
army and leave, and they would not attack him. According to
some reports they send him three hundred qintars of gold, and
according to others the sum was one hundred qintars, as jizyah
each year so that the Muslims would leave them alone and depart
from their land. He accepted that from them and took the money.
One of the conditions of the treaty was that the Muslims would
keep whatever they had acquired before the treaty took effect, but
whatever they got after the treaty took effect would be retuned to
the people. 'Abd-AlEh ibn az-Zubayr said to 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd:
It is going to be a long drawn-out affair with these people. They
[I'

I''

al-Skaraf wa'l-Tasammi bi Ha~akatal-Fath al-Islami, p. 191
op. cit., p. 193; al-BidLiyah wah-NikEyA, 7/158

Conquests on the Egyptian front

291

could receive endless reinforcements and the country is theirs,
whereas we are cut off from the Muslims and their lands. I think
that tomorrow we should leave a good group of Muslim heroes
ready in their tents and go and fight the Byzantines, and continue
to fight until they grow tired, then when they go back to their
tents and the Muslims go back, those Muslims who stayed in the
tents and did not fight will still have the energy to go and take
them by surprise, and perhaps All& will grant us victory over
them. So he summoned some of the most prominent of the
Sahsbah and consulted them, and they agreed to &it. So the next
day 'Abd-All& &id what they had agreed to. All the Muslim
heroes stayed in their tents with their horses at the ready, and the
others went and fought the Byzantines until noon, fighting
fiercely. When the adhtin for Zuhr came, the Byzantines wanted
to leave as was their wont, but Ibn az-Zubayr did not let them,
and he persisted in fighting them until they were exhausted. Then
he left and the Muslims left them, and both groups lay down their
weapons because they were exhausted. At that point 'Abd-All&
ibn az-Zubayr took the Muslim heroes who had been resting and
headed towards the Byzantines, who did not notice them until
they were in their midst, attacking them as one with cries of
Allihu Akbar. The Byzantines were not able to put on their
weapons and armour before the Muslims overpowered them, and
Jarjeer was killed by Ibn az-Zubayr. The Byzantines were
defeated and many of them were killed, and the daughter of
Jaqeer was taken captive. 'Abd-AU2h ibn Sa'd went to the city and
lay siege to it until it fell, and he saw in it wealth that did not exist
in any other city. The share of each horseman was three thousand
dinars and the share of each foot soldier was one thousand.
When 'Abd-Alltih conquered the city of Subaytalah, he sent
his anny to penetrate deeper into the country, and they reached
Qafsah where they took prisoners and acquired booty. He sent
hoops to the fortress of al-Ajamm where the people of the region
had barricaded themselves, and he lay siege to it and conquered it
by making a deal with the people of North Africa, as we have seen
above. 'Abd-All* ibn az-Zubayr took the daughter of the king as

292

'Utlun2n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

his share of the booty, and Ibn Sa'd sent him to 'Uthmin with the
good news of the conquest of North ~ f r i c a . ~ ' ~

The heroism of "

the

conquest of Nort
'Abd-All31 ibn az-Zubayr & displayed a brave and heroic
attitude which al-Hifiz Ibn Katheer mentioned when he said:
When the Muslims - who were twenty-thousand strong - set out
for North Africa, led by 'Abd-AllSh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh, with
'Abd-All31 ibn 'Umar and 'Abd-AU2h ibn az-Zubayr in his army,
the Berber king Jajeer confronted them with one hundred and
twenty thousand men, or it was said, two hundred thousand.
When the two groups approached one another, he ordered his
troops to surround the Muslims, and the Muslims found
themselves in a very bad situation, and had never seen
anything more frightening than that.
'Abd-All& ibn az-Zubayr said: I looked at the king Jarjeer
behind the ranks, and he was riding a horse, with two slave girls
shading him with peacock fathers. I went to 'Abd-Allih ibn Sa'd
ibn Abi'l-Sarh and asked him to send with me someone to guard
my back whilst I headed towards the king. He sent with me a
group of brave men and ordered them to guard my back, and I
went and penetrated the ranks. They thought that I was bringing
a message to the king, but when I got near to him he realized that I
was up to no good, so he fled on his horse, but I caught up with
him and struck him with my spear and finished him off with my
sword, then I took his head and put it on my spear and said
fakbeer. When the Berbers saw that, they scattered and fled like
birds, and were pursued by the Muslims who killed some and
captured others, and took a huge amount of booty. That was in a
land called Subaytalah, two days from al-Qayrawh.
Ibn Katheer said: This was the first incident by means of
which 'Abd-All& ibn az-Zubayr became famous, may All2h be
['I al-mmil by Ibn al-Atheer, 3/45,46

Conquests on the Egyptian front
pleased with him and his father and all the ~aha^bah.[l~
What Ibn az-Zubayr did represents a kind of ambition to
achieve high goals with a great deal of risk, without a gradual
lead-up. At that time he was twenty-seven years old, and before
that nothing is mentioned of him taking risky ventures with high
aims. How could he undertake this huge risk which most
ordinary people would think certain to end in death? What
could have gone through the mind of this adventurer is one of
two things:
1- That his attack would succeed and he would finish off
the Berber king so that his hoops would scatter, as was
the habit of the kuffsr, and that would mean a decisive
victory for the Muslims which would help them avoid
the vicious battle that they feared

2- Or Allsh would accept him as a martyr, and that would
be the fulfilment of his highest hopes and attainment of
the highest status that the righteous could hope for, to
attain which they were competing. It would also have
the effect of instilling fear in the hearts of the kufftir to a
great extent, as they would expect all the Muslims to be
that type of courageous people. It was sufficient bravery
for this adventurer to throw himself into the midst of a
fierce battle, for no one would take such a leap except the
greatest of people who see that Paradise lies beyond that
leap, for which they are longing. Ibn az-Zubayr made
this leap, thinking nothing of this world and its burdens,
hoping to attain the reward that All& has prepared for
the mujihideen who strive their utmost, whether they
prevail over their enemies or attain martyrdom.121
In this report it states that after their king was slain, the
Berbers fled from the Muslim army like birds, and the Muslims
['I

al-Bidtyah wah-Nihriyah, 7/158

[21 at-Tareekh d-Islami, 12/390

294

'Utlunsn Ibn 'Affin 4 DhWooravn

pursued them, killing some and taking others prisoners, without
meeting much resistance. This report indicates that AllSh is with
His believing friends and if they are sincere He will save them
from hardship and spare them difficulties. The Muslims were
faced with a major dilemma when they were surrounded by their
enemies who outnumbered them by six to one, or more. The
Muslims had to fight on all sides, which was something very
difficult for such a small army that was surrounded by a huge
number of enemies, as the narrator said The Muslims were in the
worst and most frightening position they had ever seen, but All21
sent them this great hero who took this risk, and through him
Allsh saved this Muslim army from the hardship it was going
through.[']
We should not forget the role of the other heroes who were
with 'Abd-All21 ibn az-Zubayr, guarding his back; they took part
in the risky venture with him and even though history did not
record their names, their courageous deed remains forever in our
memories in this world and it fills the ummah with pride when it
boasts of its heroes, and in the Hereafter they will et the reward
that AUih has promised to the sincere mujihideen.61
The Muslims gave everything they had for the conquest of
North Africa, and many of them were martyred. Among those
who died during the campaign to North Africa at the time of
'Uthmh was Abu Dhu'ayb al-Hudhali, who was a famous poet.

The bagie of Dh2t al-Saw2ri
The Byzantines were dealt a decisive blow in North Africa,
and their coastlines were exposed to danger after the Islamic navy
gained control of the Mediterranean coastline from Rhodes to
Barqah. Constantine the son of Heraclius assembled the navy that
he had previously built and set out with a thousand ships to
avenge his continuous losses at sea. 'Uthmh 4 granted
permission to confront the enemy, so Mu'swiyah sent the ships
['I op. cit., 12/392
[I' ibid.

Conquests on the Egyptian front

295

of Syria under the leadership of Bisr ibn Artsh, and he met up
with 'Abd-AUgh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh, who was bringing the
ships of Egypt. AU of the ships came under his control, and the
total number of ships was only two hundred. This Muslim army
included the most courageous Muslim mujrihldeen who had taken
part in previous battles in which they had prevailed over the
Byzantines. So in their minds the enemy was already broken and
they had no fear of them, even though they had so few ships in
comparison with the number of enemy ships. The Muslims set out
by sea, and in their hearts they had only one objective, which was
to support the religion of All* and break the resolve of the
Byzantines. There were several reasons for this historical battle,
including the following:
1- The strong blows that the Muslims had dealt to the
Byzantines in North Africa.
2- The loss of control suffered by the Byzantines on their
eastern and southern coastlines due to the Muslim
navy's rise to dominance.

3- The Byzantines' fear that the Muslim navy would grow
strong and think of attacking Constantinople itself.

4- Constantine the son of Heraclius wanted to regain the
status of his kingdom after its successive losses on land
and on the coasts of Syria, Egypt and Barqah.
5- The Byzantines wanted to engage in a battle the outcome
of which they thought was guaranteed, so that they
could retain control of the Mediterranean and keep hold
of its islands, from which they could attack the Arab
coastlines.
6- The Byzantines wanted to attempt to regain control of
Alexandria, because of its importance to them. It has
been proven historically that its inhabitants wrote letters

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

296

I

j

i

to Constantine the son of Heraclius, the king of
Byzantium.

i

These are some of the reasons for the battle of DMt alsaw%.[1]

I

m e r e did the ba&le take place?
This is a question for which the historians do not have a single
answer. The Arab sources do not spec~fythe precise location of
tlhe battle, except for one source - as far as we know.
a
In Fath Misr wa ~!&briruha[~]
, the author mentions the
speech given by 'Abd-AU2h ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh, in
which he said: I have heard that Heraclius is coming to
you with a thousand ships; but he did not say where the
battle took place.
a
In his discussion of the year 31 AH, at-~abari~~]
made a
connection between Dhgt alSaw2ri and what the
Muslims had done to the Byzantines in North Africa,
and he said: The Byzantines came out with huge numbers
(of ships) such as had never been seen before.
a
Al-I-Gmil fi'l-~aree!&[~]
does not state where the battle
took place either, but it does mention the reason as being
due to what the Muslims had achieved in North Africa in
particular.
a In al-Bidriyah wa'l-~zhri~ah[~~
it says: When 'Abd-Allah
ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh defeated the Franks and Berbers
in North Africa, the Byzantines got angry and rallied
behind Constantine the son of Heraclius, and they set out
towards the Muslims in huge numbers, the like of which
had never been seen since Islam began. They set out in
['I Dhit alSnwriri by Shawqi Abu Khaleel, p. 60,61
[21 op. cit., p. 61
['I
['I
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/290
al-Kiimil fi'l-Tureekh, 3/58
al-Bidtyuh wah-Nihiyah, 7/163

I

I!
i

1

!

1
1
I

i
i

i

Conquests on the Egyptian front

297

five hundred ships and headed towards 'Abd-Alltih ibn
Sa'd bn Abi'l-Sarh and the Muslims in the Maghreb.
0
Tare& al-Umam a l - ~ s l a m i ~ ~ amakes
h [ ~ ~ no mention of
where the battle took place either.[21
Dr. Shawqi Abu Khaleel thinks it most likely that the battle
took place off the coast of Alexandria, for the following reasons:
0
The book al-Nujoom al-Zihirahfi Mulook Misr wa'l-Qiihirak
clearly states that the battle of Dhtit al-Sawtiri took place
on the sea, near Ale~andria.~~]
0
The Tareekh of Ibn K h ~ l d o o n [says:
~ ~ Then Ibn Abi'lSarh
sent out detachments and they subjugated many lands,
and they obeyed him and he went back to Egypt. When
Ibn Abi'l-Sarh had achieved what he achieved in North
Africa and gone back to Egypt, Constantine the son of
Heraclius set out to attack Alexandria with six hundred
ships.
0
Although the Arab sources did not describe the precise
location of the battle, they made a connection between
this battle and the Byzantine losses in North Africa.
The Byzantine navy had a long history and had been in
control of the Mediterranean before Dhtit al-Saw&, so it
was more audacious in attacking the Muslim coastlines.
Hence Dr Shawqi Abu Khaleel thinks it most likely that
the Byzantine navy came to the coast of Alexandria in
order to regain it, because of its importance to the
Byzantines and because its people had written to their
previous ruler. By regaining Alexandria they would be
able to destroy the new navy that the Arabs had started to
build in Alexandria and nip it in the bud, thus regaining
control over the waters and islands of the Mediterranean.
al-Shaykh al-Khudri, 2/29
!" Dhiit al-Sawin, p. 62
al-Nujoom al-Ztkirah, 1/80
Tareekh roll Khuldoon, 2/468
['I

' U W n Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

298
e

The non-Arab sources knew Dhit al-SawSri as the battle
of Phoenix or Phoenicus (modem Finike), which was an
outpost to the west of Alexandria, near the city of Marsi
Matrooh. This is a precise definition of its location.[''

Events of the batl-Ie
MSlik ibn Aws ibn al-HadatM said: I was with them at DhSt
alSawSri. We met in battle on the sea, and we looked at their
ships and had never seen anything like them. The wind was
against us - i.e., it was in the favour of the Byzantine ships - so we
dropped anchor for a while and they dropped anchor near us.
Then the wind dropped, and we said to the Byzantines: Let us
make peace between us and you. They said: We will give you
that, and in retum we want peace.121The Muslims also said to the
Byzantines: If you wish, we will go to the coast and fight there
until victory is decreed for one of us, or if you wish, we will fight
on the sea. Maik ibn Aws said: They all shouted as one: No, on
the sea. Thus it seemed to us that they were putting their trust in
their naval experience and hoping for victory because of their
skills and experience at sea, as they were used to it and its climate,
so they hoped for a victory at sea, es ecially since they knew that
the Muslims were new in this field.
The two sides spent that night at sea, and the situation was
very critical. The Muslim commander said to his companions:
Advise me. They said: Wait for this night so that we can think
about the matter and test our enemy. So the Muslims spent the
night praying and calling upon AllSh - may He be glorified and
exalted - remembering Him and praying tahajjud. Their voices
sounded like the buzzing of bees, accompanied by the sound of
the waves slapping the ships. As for the Byzantines, they spent
the night ringing the bells on their ships. In the morning,
Constantine wanted to rush to fight, but when 'Abd-All& ibn

&

"I

'"

DMt alSaw8ri by Shawqi Khaleel, p. 62
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/292
D h i t al-Sawin, p. 66

Conquests on the Egyptian front

299

Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh had finished leading the Muslims in praying
Fajr, he consulted his advisors and they agreed upon a bdiant
plan. They decided to make the battle on land even though it was
at sea. How did the Muslims achieve that? 'Abd-All* ordered his
troops to get close to the enemy ships, so they drew so close that
their ships were touching the enemy ships. Then some brave men
leapt into the water and tied the Muslim ships to the Byzantine
ships with thick ropes. So there were 1200 ships on the sea, every
ten or twenty of which were joined together, as if it were a piece of
land on which the battle would take place. Then 'Abd-Allgh ibn
Sa'd drew up the Muslim ranks on the edges of the ships,
exhorting them and telling them to recite Qur'iin, especially
Soorat al-Anfa, because it speaks of unity, steadfastness and
patience.[']
The Byzantines started the fighting, and in their view victory
was guaranteed when they said that they wanted to fight on the
sea. They attacked the Muslim ships with hopes of victory and
aiming to deliver a decisive blow and break the back of the
Muslim navy. The Byzantines broke the ranks of the Muslims that
were parallel to their ships, and the fighting became chaotic. It
was hard on both sides, and blood flowed freely and coloured the
surface of the sea, which turned red. Bodies toppled into the
water, and the waves pushed the ships towards the shore. Many
of the Muslims were killed, and so many of the Byzantines were
slain that the Byzantine historian Theophanes said: This battle
.~~'
described
was a second Yarmook for the ~ ~ z a n t i n e sAl-Tabari
it in the following terns: There was more blood than water in this
battle.[31 The Byzantines tried to scuttle the ship of the Muslim
commander 'Abd-Allah ibn Abi'l-Sarh, so that the Muslim troops
would be left without a leader. A Byzantine ship approached his
ship and threw ropes to Abd-Allgh's ship in order to tow it away
and isolate it, but 'Ilqimah ibn Yazeed al-Ghutayfi saved the ship
['I
I['

op. at., p. 67
Dhit alSawki, p. 67
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/293

and the commander by throwing himself on to the ropes and
cutting them with his sword.[']
The Muslims stood finn despite everything, and they were
patient as they usually were in their battles, and Alliih decreed
victory for them because of their patience. So what was left of the
Byzantine navy was defeated and the ruler Constantine himself
almost fell into the hands of the Muslims - as Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
stated - but he managed to flee when he saw his forces collapsing
and saw the bodies of his men floating in the water and the waves
throwing them up onto the shore. He saw his navy that he had
hoped would fare well and succeed in restoring his honour,
sinking ship by ship. So he fled, wounded in body and broken of
heart, overwhelmed with failure and frustration, and he reached
,where the wind took him. His people asked
the island of
him what had happened and he told them, and they said:
Christianity and its men are destroyed! If the Muslims want to
invade, they will not find anyone to repel them.i31. So they killed
him, but they let the others who were in the ships with him

The oqtcome of Dh2t ai-'saw2ri
1- DhSt al-Saw2r-i was the fist decisive sea battle fought by
the Muslims, in which the new navy demonstrated
patience, faith, perseverance and sound thinking as the
Muslims worked out a plan to make the battle difficult
for their enemies, so that they would not be able to
penetrate the Muslim ranks easily. The Muslims also
used long iron hooks to bring down the masts and sails
of the enemy ships, which led to disaster for the
Byzantines.
2- DMt al-Saw& led to a turning-point in Byzantine policy
['I

Dhit al-Sawu'ri, p. 68

Tareekh Ibn fiuldoon, 21468
op. cit., 2/468
[41 Dh2t alSawriri, p. 68

I['

[31

Conquests on the Egyptian front

301

towards the Muslims. They realized that their plans to
regain their power or take back Syria and Egypt had
failed, as the Muslims set out across this sea that had
been a Roman lake, and the name "Roman Sea" ended
forever. The Muslims conquered Cyprus, Crete, Corsica,
Sardinia and the Balearic Islands, and they reached as far
as Genoa and Marseilles.

3- Constantine was killed and was succeeded by
Constantine IV, who was very young. This made
circumstances suitable for the Muslims to undertake a
land and sea campaign heading for the Byzantine capital
Constantinople.

4- Spiritual preparation before battle - which is known as
morale boosting nowadays - is of great value in
achieving victory, as it focuses the heart sincerely on
Allah. Thus the believers spent the night in tahajjud and
dhikr, seeking help from All* by His might and power,
after making all the necessary preparations. Thus they
met the enemy in high spirits, not fearing death, for
Allih is greater than all things. We are describing these
battles and historical events in the manner of a
prescription that is to be followed and implemented so
that we may benefit from it in our own lives, for the life
of the Sahibah is no less than an example to be
f~llowed.~"
5- The Mediterranean became an Islamic lake, and the
Muslim navy became master of the Mediterranean. This
navy was not established in order to impose its authority
or dominance, rather its goal was to call people to A U f i
and weaken the mushrikeen, and spread a culture that
was based on the Book of Allih and the Sunnah of His
Messenger @.

302

' U t h h Ibn 'Affih 4 Dhun-Nooram

6- The Muslims devoted themselves to studying the naval
arts and ship-making, and methods of equipping ships
with weapons and fighting on board ship, as well as the
science of astronomy for the purpose of navigating by
sea and working out the location of ships on naval maps
later on. They invented the astrolabe (an astronomical
compass) and developed it to such an extent that
westerners such as Christopher Columbus and
Amerigo Vespucci were able to make use of it in their
explorations.

7- This battle was one of the manifestations of the
superiority of strong, sound belief over military
experience and superior equipment and numbers. The
Byzantines had been seafarers since ancient times, with
lengthy experience of naval warfare, whereas the
Muslims were new to sea travel and naval battles. But
All& caused the Muslims to prevail over them despite
the advantages mentioned, because He had given these
believers the mission of spreading His religion and
making His word supreme on earth. It is worth pointing
out the strength of the commander 'Abd-Allah ibn Sa'd,
and his steadfastness and ability to direct the fighting.
This was all a kind of courage that the Muslims
demonstrated, as they were willing to sacrifice
themselves in order to make their religion prevail and
advance the interests of their state.'']

The Ijnost important iessons learned froin the
conquests of 'Uthmgn
Fulfilment of Allah's promise to the believers
Ibn Katheer said, speaking about 'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh &:
Allgh caused many regions to be conquered at his hands, and the

Conquests on the Egyptian front

303

Islamic state expanded and the message of Islam travelled east
and west. People were shown the confirmation of the words o f
All6h:

"All& has promised those among you who believe and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the land, as He granted it
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority
to practise their religion which He has chosen for them (i.e.
Islam). And He will surely, give them in exchange a safe
security after theirfear (provided) they (believers) worship Me
and do not associate anything (in worship) with Me. But
whoever disbelieved after this, they are the Fasiqoon (rebellious,
disobedient to Alllih)" (An-Noor 24551

"It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhnmmad @J with
guidance and the religzon oftruth (Islam), to make it superior
over all religions even though the Mushrikoon (polytheists,
pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allih) hate
(it)" (At-Tawbah 9 3 3 )
And the words o f the Prophet g:

' U W n Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

304

"When (the kingdom of) Caesar is destroyed, there will be no
Caesar after him, and when (the kingdom of) Chosroes has been
destroyed, there will be no Chosroes after him. By the One in
Whose hand is my soul, yon will distribute their wealth for the
sake of Allih ."['I
All this came to pass at the time of 'Uthmsn &.['I

Developments in the arts of war and politics
Wars used to break out between people for the sake of land
that they wanted to control or because of aggression committed
against a country or a tribe, but at the time of the Prophet
and
the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, wars began to be fought on the basis
of principles. The Muslims wanted their beliefs to prevail on
earth, but they found that they were up against deviant and
cormpt beliefs such as the beliefs of the mushrikeen and Magiam.
But that was not the only reason for the development of the arts of
war, rather we find a new kind of development, which was that
the Muslim mujaahideen would offer options to their enemies:
Islam or jizyah or fighting. From those conquests there emerged a
brilliant policy with which all peoples were happy, except those
who harboured a hatred of justice and equality among those who
wanted to spread tribulation and rebellion; in some cases the
Muslims had no choice but to be strict with these people and
punish them severely.[31

The beginning of compulsory conscription at the time of
'Umar and its continuation at the time of 'Uthm2n
The Battle of al-Qaadisiyyah was one of the reasons why
'Umar took the decision to introduce compulsory conscription.
He issued an order to his governors in all regions to summon
every chivalrous horseman who had experience or owned a horse
or weapon. If he came willingly, all well and good, otherwise he
['I Muslim, Kitaab al-Fitan, 2918,2919, Al-Bukhari (6629)
"I

al-Bidauyak wu'n-Nihyah, 7/216

L31 'Asr al-Khulafa'al-Raaahideen, by Dr. 'Abd al-Hameed Bakheet, p. 216

Conquests on the Emptian front

305

was to be brought by force. He told them to hasten to do that
when he said: Do not leave anyone but send him to me, and do
that right away.['] 'Umar was thinking of conscription for the
purpose of jihad. When he introduced the diwaan (record-keeping)
and arranged annual stipends for the Muslims, his idea came to
fruition and the introduction of the diwaan resulted in the
introduction of official conscription, and stipends and salaries
were allocated to the troops from the bayt al-maal of the Muslims.
When ' U t M gave Mu'Swiyah permission to wage a campaign
by sea, he told him to give the people the choice, so that no one
would go on that type of campaign except willingly. But in the
case of conscription for campaigns on land to complete the
program of conquests, it remained compulsory during his reign
for the regular soldiers who were receiving salaries.[21

'UthmBn's concern about the borders of the Islamic state
The expansion of the Islamic state during the reign of
'Uthmh & led to a continued policy of fortdying and
strengthening the borders so as to protect the Islamic state from
enemy attack, whether by stationing troops on the borders or
setting up defensive outposts. The first letter that 'Uthm2n ibn
'Affh wrote as caliph to tell the troops on the borders to protect
the borders of the Islamic state was:
You are the guardians of the Muslims. 'Umar gave you
stipends that we are aware of and which were decided in our
presence. I do not want to hear of anyone among you changing
his attitude lest All& change you and replace you with others. So
see how you will be, for I will always take care of that with which
AllSh has honoured me of responsibilities and duties.13]
In order to make the administration run more smoothly, the
caliph 'UthmSn & put greater Syria, al-Jazeerah and the outposts
under the authority of Mu'Swiyah ibn Abi Sufyan, so that they
['I Ihnam al-Wafd, p. 70

al-Nuzum aI-lslamiyyah, by Suhbi al-Saalih, p. 489
[I' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/244

1''

306

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin + Dhm-Noorayn

!
i

were under one administration. He told him to send a campaign
against Shamshaat, with the option of delegating it to someone of
whom he approved among the senior commanders who were
experienced and courageous and wanted to fight in jlhad against
the ~~zantines.["
He also wrote to Mu'swiyah ibn Abi Sufygn,
telling him to settle some people at the outpost of Antakyah
(Antioch) and allocate some land to them, and he dtd that.r21
' U M n L& took an interest in the border posts and sent people to
find out about the situation there.13' When Mu'gwiyah ibn Abi
Sufyh invaded 'Amooriyyah, he found the fortresses there,
between the outposts of Antioch and Tarsus, empty of Byzantine
fighters, so he stationed some of the troops of greater Syria, alJazeerah and Qinnasreen there, and ordered them to stay there to
guard his back whilst he withdrew from his campaign. Then one
or two years later he sent Yazeed ibn al-Hurr al-'Absi there on a
summer campaign[41, and he ordered him to do the same thing.
When the commanders entered the Byzantine lands on summer
and winter campaigns they would do the same thing, as they left
behind many troops when they departed from the land of the
enemy.[51 Mu'swiyah ibn Abi Sufysn did very well in his
administration and fortification of the Syrian coast.[61
'Uthmk also wrote to 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'lSarh,
telling him to guard the post of Alexandria by keeping troops
stationed there, and to pay them their salaries, and to rotate the
troops so that they would not be harmed by being away from
their wives for too long. He said to him: You know how
concerned the Ameer al-Mu'mineen 'Umar ibn al-Khattgb was
about Alexandria, and how the Byzantines broke the peace treaty
twice, so keep troops stationed in Alexandria and pay them their
al-Idaarak al-'Askariyyakfi'l-Dawlahal-lslarniyyah, 2/466
Futook aI-Buldan, by d-BaEdhuri, 1/175
13' 11-Kharuaj w a Sinaa'at al-Kitaabah, by Ibn Qudaamah, p. 413
al-lduarah al-'Askariwahfi'l-Dazulahal-Islamiyyah, 2/467
"I ibid.
L61 ibid.

Conauests on the Emvtian front

307

salaries, and rotate them every six months.['] It was the habit of
the commanders of the caliph 'Uthmiin ibn 'Affk &, when the
conquests progressed and they gained control of enemy
fortresses, to refurbish them as previous commanders had done,
then station Muslim hoops there, as well creating new fortresses
for defence. Among the fortresses that were refurbished by
Mu'iiwiyah ibn Abi Sufyh were: the fortress of the Euphrates
which is called ~ u m a ~ s a a t [~~ 'a, l t i ~ ~ aShamshaat
h ~ ~ ] , and
~ a m a k h [ ~and
l ~ a a l e e ~ l a. [These
~ I were fortresses that were
taken over by the Muslim when they conquered Armenia during
the reign of 'Uthmk &, and they refurbished them and stationed
troops in them.[61
In Qaaleeqla the commander Habeeb ibn Maslamah al-Fihri
stationed two thousand men and allocated land to thern.Ia The
caliph 'Uthmh ordered the commander Habeeb ibn Maslamah to
set up border posts in eater Syria and al-Jazeerah, and to run
them and guard them.@ When al-Bara' ibn 'Aazib & conquered
the border region of Qizween, he installed five hundred Muslim
troops there, appointed a commander over them and allocated to
them land that did not belong to anyone, and they cultivated it,
irrigated it and dug wells.[91When Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas conquered
~ u m a ~ s a h [he
~ ~stationed
],
two thousand troops there and
appointed a commander over them.[''] And there were many

g.

[I1 Futooh Misr, p. 192

Sumysaat: a city on the banks of the Euphrates on the edge of Byzantine
territory to the west of the Euphrates.
Maltiyah: one of the famous cities of the Byzantines adjacent to Syria, which
belongs to the Muslims
[41 Kamakh: a Byzantine city one day's distance from Azerbaijan. Mu'jam alBuldaan, 4/497
LnQaaleeqla: in greater Armenia near Khalaat and Manaazjarad
[61 Tareekh al-Tahseenaat by Muhammad 'Abd al-Huadi, p , 4 3 4
171 Futooh al-Buldaan, 1/234
op. cit., 1/241
'91 al-Zdaarah al-'Askari'yyah, 2/469
[Io1 Tumaysah: an area in the plains of Tabaristan
["I al-Idaarah al-'Askariyyah, 2/469

I['

' U t h m h ibn ' A f f k & Dhun-Nooravn

308

more fortifications that were established on the borders during
the reign of the caliph 'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn &, and filled with
troops to guard the borders of the Islamic state.[']
In his administration, the caliph 'Uthmh 4 paid attention to
the matter of summer and winter campaigns, facilitating them
every year. He appointed senior commanders and governors in
charge of them, such as Mu'swiyah ibn Abi Sufysn L& who built a
bridge in Manbaj so that the hoops of summer campaigns could
cross over it where there had been no bridge before. And the
caliph 'Uthmsn & gave his governor Mu'swiyah permission to
launch a campaign against the Byzantines and appoint whoever
he wanted as commanders of the summer campaigns. So
Mu'swiyah appointed Sufyh ibn 'Awf who continued to lead
the summer campaigns during the reign of 'Uthmh. The summer
and winter campaigns were not limited to the land, rather they
also took place on the sea at the time of 'Uthmsn &.[21

Division of booty among the people of Syria and Iraq
Habeeb ibn Maslamah managed to defeat the Byzantines in
Armenia before the reinforcements of al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah
arrived from Kufah, and the people of Syria captured a great deal
of booty. After the reinforcements from Kufah arrived, they
differed concerning the matter of booty. Habeeb wrote to
Mu'swiyah about that, and Mu'swiyah wrote to the caliph
'Uthmh &. telling him about that. 'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h & ruled
that the people of Syria should give a share of that booty to the
people of Iraq. When the letter of the caliph 'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h
reached Habeeb ibn Maslamah, he read it to the Syrian troops and
they said: We hear and obey the ameer al-mu'minem. Then they
gave a share to the Iraqi troops.[31

Eagerness to be united when confronting the enemy
At the time of 'Uthmh 4, 'Abd-All& ibn 'Aamir appointed
"I op. cit., 2/470
[21 al-Tdaarah al-'Askariyyah, 2/470
[I'

al-Futooh by b n A'tham, 1/341,342

Conquests on the Egyptian front

309

Qays ibn al-Haytham al6ulami in charge of Khorasan in his
absence. When he (Qays) went out on campaign, (the enemy
leader) Qaarin assembled a large horde from al-Tabaseen,
Baadaghees, Herat and Qustahan, and he came with forty
thousand troops. Qays ibn al-Haytham consulted 'Abd-Allih
ibn Khaazim, asking him: What do you think? He said: I think
that you should leave the land, for I am its governor and I have a
letter of appointment from Ibn 'Aamir; if there is war in Khorasan
I am to be its governor. Then he produced a letter that he had
forged. Qays did not want any trouble so he gave up authority to
him.['] By doing this, Qays ibn al-Haytham sought unity rather
than division, lest the troops become confused or disheartened,
which would lead to defeat. But the Muslims attained victory
over their enemies, praise be to ~ l l t ? h . [ ~ ~

Stipulating what the troops needed in peace treaties
At the time of 'Uthmh 4 the Islamic conquests expanded,
which led the commanders to stipulate in some of the peace
treaties that some livestock, food and drink should be provided to
meet the needs of the army for supplies and food, to help them in
their conquests, so that they would not have the burden of
carrying food supplies with them from their headquarters and
they would not have to ask for them. Thus they would be more
focused and more able to fight the enemy.13]

Gathering intelligence about the enemy
The Islamic conquests continued during the time of 'Uthmsn
ibn ' A f f h &. He paid a great deal of attention to news and
actively sought it out himself.[41 His commanders followed the
example of previous commanders by sending out spies and
seeking news of the enemy.I5I One of the conditions stipulated in
I'[

al-ILt?aruh al-'Askariyyuh, 1/189, quoting from Tareekh at-Tabari

'21 ibid.

Tareekh al-Ya'qoobi, 2/166, 167
at-Tnbuqaat, 3/59
[51 nl-ldaaruh al-'Askariyyah, 1/403
14]

310

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

the peace treaties was that the other side should be sincere in
adhering to the treaty and alert the Muslims of any enemy
movements towards them, and help them by means of spying and
informing the Muslims of enemy movements.[11

'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn Rabee'ah al-Baahili, one of the
leaders of conquest at the time of 'Uthmsn
'Abd al-Rahmaan was a commander with high standards
who was motivated by ideology. His strong adherence to his
beliefs put him in a position of trust both with his commanders
and the men under his control, in addition to his courage and
knowledge of Islam. Thus he remained the commander and
governor of the Baab al-Abwaab region from the death of
Suraaqah ibn ' A m until he was martyred, and he was never
dismissed from his post despite the changes of caliphs and the
changes of governors in Kufah, which was the centre to which
'Abd al-Rahmaan's reported. 'Abd al-Rahmaan believed in the
noble chivalry of warfare, so he did not betray, deceive or strike
from behind.['] His good conduct in the Baab al-Abwaab region
and the area south and west of the Khazar Sea led to security and
stability in those regions, which were in the forefront of the
spread of Islam and conquests to the north. Thus Islam became
established in those remote areas in the face of different turmoils
and ideologies fourteen hundred years ago, and it remains so
until today.[3J
An example of his sublime attitude that is recorded in the
pages of history is when he led the people out until they passed alBaab, then the king Shahriyaar said to him: What do you intend to
do? He said: I am heading for Balanjar and the Turks. He said: We
would be happy if they stayed away from us, beyond al-Baab.
'Abd ar-Rahmaan said: But we wiU not be happy with them until
we come to them in their own land. By All&, there are people
"I ibid.

[I'
"I

Qaadat al-Fafh al-Islamifi Armenia, p. 155
op. cit., p. 156

Conquests on the Egyptian front

311

with us who, if our leader gives us permission, would penetrate
as far as al-~adm.['] The king said: How is that? 'Abd arRahmaan replied: They are people who accompanied the
Messenger of AU%hg, and embraced this matter with sincerity.
They were modest and noble during the Jaahiliyynh and their
modesty and nobility increased. They will continue to be
victorious and prevail over their enemies until they change.[']
'Abd al-Rahmaan invaded Balanjar at the time of 'Umar ibn alKhattcb, and the Turks said: They would not have dared to attack
us unless they had angels with them protecting them from death.
So the Turks fled from him and he rehuned victorious, canying
booty after his cavalry had reached two hundred parasangs
beyond Balanjar. They all came back and none of them was
killed.[31It is clear that the Muslims were in high spirits because
of their successive victories and adherence to their religion,
whereas the morale of the enemies they had fought was very low,
because the Muslims had defeated the nations whom they fought.
Hence the Turks fled before the Muslims and fortified themselves
and no real fighting took place during this campaign and no
]
ar-Rahmaan ibn
martyrs fell among the ~ u s l i m s . [ ~'Abd
Rabee'ah al-Baahili was very pious and of excellent character,
and his dealings with the defeated peoples had an effect in
establishing stability and security, and spreading Islam. He was
very loyal and very trustworthy. The king of al-Baab had sent an
envoy to the king of China with gifts - that was before the
Muslims conquered his land - and his envoy returned after the
Muslim conquest of that land, bearing gfts from the king of China
among which was a valuable red ruby. When the envoy returned,
the king of al-Baab was sitting with 'Abd al-Rahmaan. The king
took that mby from his envoy and handed it to 'Abd ar-Rahrnaan,
but 'Abd al-Rahmaan immediately returned it to him after
['I al-Radm: it was said that this was the Great Wall of China

al-l<aamil by Ibn al-Atheer, 3/29, 30; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/146
Tareekh at-Taban, 54/146
[41 Qaadat al-Fafh al-lslamifi Armenia, p. 150
[I'

312

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affin A@ Dhun-Nooravn

looking at it. The king was moved by this and said: This ruby is
better than this city (meaning Baab al-Abwaab);by Allih, you are
dearer to me as rulers than the family of Chosroes. If I had been
under their rule then they heard about this ruby, they would have
taken it by force. By Allih, no one could withstand you so long as
you are honest and your great king is honest too.[']
The king of the city of al-Baab and its environs was entitled to
be astonished and amazed by the trustworthiness and honesty of
the Muslim commander. This king had lived all his life in a
vicious circle of betrayal and in a toxic atmosphere of treachery.
When he saw the trustworthiness and absolute sincerity of the
Muslims, he could not help but forget about his lost kingdom and
the kings who had preceded him, and he expressed his feelings
with words of admiration for this trustworthiness and honesty
that came from the bottom of his heart.["
'Abd ar-Rahmaan knew that he had no personal right to take
possession of this priceless ruby, and that the bayt al-mu1 of the
Muslims also had no right to it. This ruby was the same as dust in
his view. 'Abd ar-Rahmaan was noble, generous, chivalrous and
pious, with a good knowledge of Islam. He owned no worldly
goods despite the fact that he spent most of his Life as a warrior
and a governor. He was martyred in 32 AH in the region of
~ a l a n j a r . ~'Abd
~ ' ar-Rahmaan ibn Rabee'ah al-Bfili is regarded
as one of the leaders of conquest at the time of 'Uthmh &; he was
a companion of the Prophet
although he embraced Islam
relatively late.

Salmaan ibn Rabee'ah al-Baahili, one of the leaders of
conquest at the time of 'UthmBn
This Sahaabi was the first judge appointed in Kufah. 'Umar
ibn al-Khattib 4sent him to Kufah as judge before Shurayh.
When Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqaas was appointed as governor of Kufah
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/148
Qaadat al-Fath al-Islami$ Armenia, p. 154
13] ibid.
"I

"I

Conquests on the Egyphan front

313

the second time, at the time of ' U t M n ibn 'Affh, he also
appointed Salmaan as a judge. He was present at al-Qaadisiyyah
where he was also a judge, and he was a judge in al-Madaa'in.
Not everyone was fit to be a judge, especially at the time of 'Umar
ibn al-Khattgb &, and not everyone was fit to be a judge of the
people of Kufah, which at that time was crowded with prominent
Arabs and senior Sahgbah on the one hand, and a mix of various
nations, peoples and tribes on the other. This is indicative of
Salmaan's abundant knowledge of Islam, and his righteousness,
sense of justice, religious commitment, maturity, sound thinking
and strong character, which earned him the confidence of all
people. He was also in charge of dividing the booty after the
conquest of al-Madaa'in and also during the campaign of al-Baab,
which is indicative of his absolute fairness. He was a righteous
man who performed Hajj every year. Some of the senior Taabi'een
narrated (hadeeth) from him and he was a rare example of sound
character, noble, generous, chivalrous, sincere and honest, a lover
of good who loved for others what he loved for himself. He did
not leave behind any money or property when he was martyred,
after having lived his life as a mulakid, judge and governor.
He was superior to his peers in leadership qualities. When
'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh 6 sent a letter to al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah - his
governor in Kufah - telling him to send reinforcements from
Kufah to the people of Syria under the leadership of "a man of
those whom you think are chivalrous, brave and committed to
Islam", he did not hesitate for a moment to choose Salmaan for
this dangerous mission. He chose him from among a large
number of leaders of conquests who were with him or were in
Kufah, because Salmaan was indeed a brilliant example of
chivalry, strength and courage, in addition to his piety. He was
brave and courageous, and quick to do chivalrous acts, and he
was an expert in the arts of war because of his lengthy experience
and he also had a great deal of experience in leading men. He was
a skilled archer and he was also a expert horseman, and was in
charge of looking after the horses for 'Umar ibn al-Khattgb 4. In
every Muslim region, large numbers of horses were kept in

314

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

readiness for jihad; in Kufah alone there were four thousand
horses. When the enemy attacked the Muslim borders, the
Muslim mujaahideen would ride the horses and msh to fight
them['' ,and Salmaan was in charge of the horses in ~ufah.[']
He was a brave horseman. Salmaan said: I killed a hundred
fully-equipped soldiers with this sword of mine, all of whom
worshipped something other than All&, and I did not kill a single
one of them after taking him captive. He would even not kill his
kaaflr enemy who worshipped something other than AU2h on the
battlefield before he warned him and then engaged in combat
with him,then he would kilI him when the opportunity arose in
combat. So this killing was not like stabbing in the back or killing
someone who was not able to defend himself (after capture).[31
He was an example of the sincere mujaahid who seeks reward
with Allsh, who strives in jihad so that the word of AllSh may be
supreme, and who does not care in what way he is killed for the
sake of Allsh. Finally he fell, drenched in his own blood, but his
sword never fell from his hand. He is a fine example for every
soldier, every commander, in his noble past and his great
deedsC4]He was martyred in 32 or 33 AH[^] ; may All2h be
pleased with him, thefaqeeh and scholar of hadeeth, the just judge,
the honest man, the effective administrator, the courageous
horseman, the hero and martyr, the conquering commander
Salmaan ibn Rabee'ah al-~aahili.[~]

Habeeb ibn Maslamah al-Fihri, one of the leaders of
conquest at the time of 'Uthmin
Even though Habeeb was young, he moved from one
battlefield to another, sometimes leading the conquest,
Qaadaat al-Fath al-lslamifi Armenia, p. 169
Asad al-Ghaabahfi Ma'rifat al-Sahaabah, 2/327
13] al-Istee'aab fi Mu'rifat al-Ashaab, 2/633
14] Qaadaat al-Fath ul-lslami fi Armenia, p. 170
['I op. cit., p. 171
[61 op. cit., p. 172

['I

Conquests on the Egyptian front

315

sometimes bringing reinforcements. Victory was on his side in
every battle in which he fought. He came to the Prophet &$when
he was in MadAmh,wanting to fight, and at that time he was very
young. He was present at Tabook under the leadership of the
Prophet @. With this campaign his jihad began which lasted for
nearly twenty years of his short life.['' When 'Umar ibn alKhattgb saw that he was strong in body and in character, he put
him to the test to see what kind of man he was. He showed him
stores of wealth and stores of weapons, and he showed interest in
the weapons and ignored the wealth, and preferring weapons to
wealth is the characteristic of a commander in whom the love of
military life is deeply-rooted. He was the commander of a
squadron of cavalry in the decisive battle of al-Yannook when he
was only twenty-four years old, which indicates that his
leadership abilities appeared early on, when he was still young.
'Umar ibn al-Khattib 4 appointed him over the non-Arabs of alJazeerah as an administrator and a commander. It was not easy
for 'Umar to appoint anybody to such a high position because
'Umar looked for certain characteristics in commanders that are
rarely to be found in man. Finally, 'Umar ibn al-Khattib &
appointed him as govemor of Armenia and Azerbaijan, which
were vast and very important regions, because of the toughness of
their people and their remoteness from the main bases of the
Muslims and even their advance bases.121
He also acted as a commander and governor at the time of
'Uthmh &. He was very brave and courageous. When he went to
fight al-Muriyaan he had six thousand men under his command
whereas al-Muriyaan had seventy thousand. Habeeb said to those
who were with him: If they are steadfast and you are steadfast,
you are more entitled to AllXs support; if they are steadfast and
you are not, then AUgh is with those who are patient. He met
"I When he was appointed as governor and commander of the al-Jazeerah

region he was 28 years old.
I'

He was appointed governor of Armenia and Azerbaijan when he was thutythree years old.

316

' U M n Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

them at night and said: 0 AlEh, make the moon shine upon us
and keep the rain away hom us, protect the blood of my
companions and decree that they become martyrs. And All2h
granted him ~ictory.'~'
One of the reasons for his victory over his
enemy - in addition to the faith factor - was that he attacked at
night which caught the enemy unawares, and they panicked and
fled.['] He was a living example to his men of courage and
bravery; he led his men from the hont and would say to them:
Follow me; and he did not remain in the rear, preferring to stay
safe and sound. When he decided to attack al-Muriyaan at night,
his wife heard him mention that and she said to him:Where will
we meet? He said: In the courtyard of Muriyaan or in Paradise.
Habeeb attacked his enemy at night, killing whoever got in his
way, but when he reached the courtyard he found that his wile
had got there before him.[31But he was not the only hero who set
an example for his men by his heroic deeds; his wife was also a
hero whose example of sacrifice deserves to be followed.[41He
used to consult his men and listen to their opinions, and he did
not take any decision before discussing it with them. Indeed, he
would listen out for his soldiers' conversations so that he could
find the right opinion and do what he thought was right, in
addition to holding consultations before, during and after the
battle. One day he heard one of his troops saying: If I was one of
those whom Habeeb listens to, I would advise him to do
something by means of which All* may grant us victory and a
way out, in sha All&. Habeeb heard to what he said, then his
companions said: What is your advice? He said: I would tell him
to call for the cavalry and send them on ahead, then he could
move on with his troops, following the cavalry, so the horses
would reach the enemy in the middle of the night, and fighting
would break out, then Habeeb and his troops would arrive at
dawn, and they would think that reinforcements had arrived, so
Tahdheeb ibn 'Asaakir, 4/37
Qaadat al-Fafh al-lslamifi Armenin, p. 189
ibid.
14] ibid.
'I

[21

Conquests on the Egyptian front

317

All21 would cause them to be afraid, and their fear would lead to
their defeat.['] So Habeeb called out to the cavalry to set out on a
moonlit rainy night, then he set out behind the cavalry, and he
reached the enemy just before dawn. He and his companions
attacked, and the enemy ran away, and they acquired a great deal
of booty.[21
Habeeb was crafty and smart; he would think and plan, then
consult his troops and find out about the battlefield and obtain
abmdant information about the enemy, then he would base his
battle plan on knowledge and insight.
The jihad of Habeeb was based on well-drafted plans, not just
spontaneous ideas. Hence he was victorious even in the most
dangerous battlefields. Jn addition to these characteristics and
qualities, and indeed first and foremost, Habeeb was a true and
sincere believer. When he met an enemy or besieged a fortress, he
liked to say: There is no power and no strength except with All21
Habeeb was a great leader, who combined the qualities of a
great leader: a N e d nature, acquired knowledge, and practical
experience14' ,as well as trust in Allsh &.
Habeeb ibn Maslamah offered the Islamic conquests
unforgettable services, and he was undoubtedly one of the
greatest leaders at the time of 'Uthmh &. This great commander
died in 42 AH; his age when he died was fifty-four years. His life
was short in terms of number of years, but it was filled with many
good deeds; although he lived only a short time, his life had an
enduring effect that lasted down through the centuries. May
All2h be pleased with the great Sahaabi, the efficient
administrator, the brilliant politician, the conquering
commander, Habeeb ibn Maslamah al-~ihri.[~]
['I Tahdheeb Ibn 'Asaakir, 4/37
[I' Qaadat al-Fath al-Islamifi Armenia, p. 190
[I' Tahdheeb ibn 'Asaakir, 4/3
[41 Qaadat al-Fath al-Islamifi Armenia, p. 192

[I'

op. cit., 187

The greatest
achievement of ' ~ t h m s n
was uniting the ummah with a single
Mus-haf

'stages in the writing down of the Holy Qur'ii
The first stage at the time of the Prophet g
It is definitely proven that the Messenger of AUSh @ enjoined
the writing down of the Qur'Sn that was revealed to him, and it is
proven that he had a scribe or scribes who wrote down the Wnhy
(Revelation).Zayd ibn Tlhsbit acquired the nickname of Knatib alNabi or Scribe of the Prophet %because he specialized in writing
down the Revelation. Al-Bukhaari entitled a chapter in The Book
of the Virtues of the Qur'h (in his Saheeh): Chapter on the Scribes
of the Prophet g,
in which he quoted two hadeeths:
The first narrates that Abu Bakr & said to Zayd: You used to
write down the Revelation for the Messenger of All& @...[ll
The second was narrated from al-Bara' who said: When the
verse

['I al-Bukhaari, Kifaab Fadaa'il al-Qur'tn, no. 4686

'Uthmzn Ibn 'Affin A& Dhun-Nooravn

320

"Not equal are those of the believers who sit (at home). .." (An.
Nisa' 495)
was revealed, the Prophet @ said:
&I
,,

>f '21;
,,
:1;31 LJ.J

A;13;

, .. ,

?!I)

i:1;313
"Call Zayd for me, and let him bring the tablet and inkpot and
(camel's) shoulder-blade, or the (camel's) shoulder-blade and
inkpot."[11
The Prophet @ also used to have the Qur'iin written down in
Makkah, before the Hijrah. One of those who wrote for him was
'Abd-Alliih ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh, then he apostatized, then he
became Muslim again in the year of the Conquest. That is a well
known story that we have discussed elsewhere. It is well known
that the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs were literate men, so
perhaps they used to write down the Qur'iin in Makkah. Another
indication that the Qur'Sn was written down in Makkah is the
story of how 'Umar ibn al-Khattiib became Muslim, when he
entered upon his sister and she had a sheet in her hand on which
Soorat Ta-Ha was written. All31 has stated in the Qur'h that it is
compiled in pages, in the verse

" A Messenger (Muhammad
from Allih, reciting (the
Qur'in) pur$ed pages" (Al-Bayyinah 98:2).
When the Messenger of Alliih @ died, the entire Q n r ' h was
written down, but it was not all put together in one place. It was
written on palm leaves and flat stones, and was memorized in the
hearts of men, but although it was preserved on pages and in
people's hearts, Jibreel still reviewed the Qur'iin once every year,
['I al-Bukhaari, Kitaab Tafieer al-Qur'8~,no. 4593, Ibn Abi Shaybah 4/232 (19511).

The greatest achievement of ' U t h m h was uniting the ummah.. .

321

and he reviewed it with him twice in the year in which he died.[']
It may be that the Prophet &, did not compile the @I!&in a Mushafbecause he was still expecting some abrogation of some of its
rulings or recitation. When the revelation ended with his death,
Allsh guided the Rightly-Guided Caliphs to do that, in fulfilment
of His true promise to this ummah to protect it.[']

The second stage at the time of Abu Bakr &
Among the Muslim martyrs who fell at al-Yamaamah were
. h! @
I
As a result of that,
many of those who had memorized the
Abu Bakr, in consultation with 'Umar ibn al-Khattib, compiled
the Qw'h by collecting it from the skins, bones and palm leaves
on which it was written, as well as from the hearts of men.[3] Abu
Bakr gave this important mission to the great Sahaabi Zayd ibn
Thsbit al-Ansin 4.Zayd ibn Thibit 6narrated: Abu Bakr .& sent
~ ~ ~I
for me because so many had been killed at a l - ~ a m a a r n a h,and
found 'Umar ibn al-Khattib with him too. Abu Bakr said: 'Umar
came to me and said: Too many of the reciters of the Qur'sn were
killed on the day of al-Yamaamah, and I am afraid that many
more reciters will be killed in other battles, and much of the
Qur'h will be lost. I think you should issue orders that the
Qur'in be compiled. I said to 'Umar: How can I do something that
the Messenger of Allsh g did not do?[5J'Umar said: By Allgh,
this is a good thing. He kept pushing the issue until AlEh opened
my heart to that to which He had opened 'Umar's heart, and I
thought of it as 'Umar did. Zayd said: Abu Bakr said: You are a
wise young man, and we trust you.[61 You used to write down
['I

al-Bukhaari, Kitaab Fadaa'il al-Qur'iin, no. 4998

" al-Madinah a-Nabawiyyah Fajr al-Islam wa'l-'Asr al-Rmhidi, p. 240, quoting

from Fath al-Baari, 9/12
[31 Huroob al-Ridduh wa Bina' al-Dawlah al-lslamiyynh, by Ahmad Sa'eed, p. 145

This is referring to the battle of al-Yamaamah against the liar Musaylimah and
his supporters. (Author)
This may be understood as meaning that he did not compile the Qdkin a
Musnaf. (Author)
These are the qualities which made Zayd more suited than others for this task.
(Author)

322

U
'-

Ibn ' A f f h& Dhun-Nooravn

the Revelation for the Messenger of All& 1,,so seek out the
Qur'sn and compile it.['] Zayd said: By Allih, if they had ordered
me to move a mountain it would not have been a heavier burden
than that which they ordered me to do of compiling the Qur'in. I
sought out the Qur'h from the palm-leaves, flat rocks, men's
hearts, animal skins and shoulder blades (on which it had been
preserved), until I found the last part of Soorat at-Tawbah with
Abu Khuzaymah al-Ansiri, and I did not find it with anyone else,

"Verily, there has come unto you a Messenger (Muhammad @J
from amongst yourselves. It grieves him that you should receive
any injury or dificulty. He (Muhammad gj is anxious over
you; for the believers (he g is)full of pity, kind, and merciful"
(At-Tawbah 9128)
until the end of the soorah.
The pages were kept with Abu Bakr during his lifetime, until
he died, then with 'Umar until he died, then with Hafsah bint
'Umar &.121
From this second stage of the compilation of the Qur'h we
may sum up the following:
(a) That the compilation of the Holy Q d hcame about as
the result of fear that it might be lost due to the deaths of
many of the reciters during the Riddah wars (wars of
apostasy). This indicates that the reciters and scholars at
that time were in the forefront of taking action in jihad to
support Islam and the Muslims with their ideas, conduct
and swords, and they were the best nation ever brought
forth for mankind, so all those who come after them
should follow their example.
['I ie., from the things that were with me and with others. (Author)
I2] al-Bukhaari, no. 4986

The ereatest achievement of 'UthmAn was uniting the ummah.. .

323

(b) The compilation of the Qur'an was based on the
principle of al-maslahuh al-mursalah. Nothing is more
indicative of that than the words of 'Umar to Abu Bakr,
when he asked him,How can we do something that the
Messenger of All21 @ did not do? 'Umar said: It is a
good thing. In some reports it is narrated that he said: By
AllSh it is a good thing and it is in the interests of the
Muslims. This is the same answer that Abu Bakr gave to
Zayd ibn Thgbit when he asked the same question.
Whether the report which mentions the interests of the
Muslims is sound or not, describing it as a good thing
implies the same meaning, which is that the Muslims'
best interests in compiling the Qur'h was initially based
on al-maslahah al-mursaluh. Then there was consensus on
this point after they all agreed to it by approving of it
explicitly or by implication. This indicates that almaslahah al-mursalah may used as the basis for
consensus on shar'i rulings, as is established in the
books of usool al-fiqh (basic principles of jurisprudence).
(c) This incident also shows us how the Sahabah used to
discuss matters in a calm atmosphere in which love and
respect prevailed. Their aim was to achieve that which
would serve the interests of all the Muslims, and they
would adopt the correct view and open their hearts to it
after discussing it and reaching the conclusions. Once
they were convinced of the opinion, they would defend
it as if it had been their own opinion from the outset. In
this spirit it was possible to reach consensus about many
rulings that were subject to ijfihaad.I1]
a

What were the basic qualifications that enabled Zayd ibn
Thsbit to undertake this mission?
Abu Bakr & chose Zayd ibn Thgbit for this important mission

''I al-ljtihuad fi'l-Fiqh al-lslami, by 'Abd al-Salaam al-Sulaymaani, p. 127

324

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

because he saw that he had the basic qualities for doing such a
task, namely:
(a) He was young, as his age was 21 years, so he had the
energy to do what was asked of him.

@) He was more qualified, because he had more knowledge
in addition to the wisdom that All& had bestowed upon
him.
(c) He was trustworthy and was not under any kind of
suspicion, so his work would be readily accepted by the
people, as they had confidence in him.
(d) He had been a scribe of the Revelation, so he had prior
experience in this field; he was not a stranger to this
work.[']
(e) In addition to that, he was one of the four who had
compiled the Qur'sn at the time of the Prophet @. It was
narrated that Qataadah said: I asked Anas ibn Maalik &:
Who compiled the Qur'h at the time of the Messenger
@? He said: Four men, all of whom were from among
the Ansar: Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Mu'aadh ibn Jabal, Zayd ibn
Thabit, and Abu 2ayd.['I As for the method that Zayd
followed in compiling the W s n , he did not accept
anything of the Qu'h unless it hadbeen written down
in the presence of the Prophet & and had been
memorized by some of the Sahsbah. He would not
accept memorization unless it had also been written
down, lest there be some mistake or error in the
memorization. Moreover, he did not accept anything
that anyone brought unless he also had two witnesses
who could testlfy that this written material had been
1'

at-Tafawwuq wa'l-Najmbah 'ala Nahj as-Sahtbah by Hamad al-'Ajami, p. 73

I ' [ Siyar A'laam an-Nubala', by Imam al-Dhahabi, 2/431

The greatest achievement of 'Uthman was uniting the ummah.. .

325

written down in the presence of the Messenger of Allah
@ and that it was one of the recitations in which the
Qur'2n had been revealed.'" Based on this method,
Zayd & continued to compile the Qur'an, checking it
with precision and cauti~n.'~]

The difference between that which was written at the time of
the Prophet @jand that which was written at the time of Ahu
Bakr
The difference between that which was written at the time of
the Prophet g$and that which was written at the time of Abu Bakr
is that the Qur'Sn was written down at the time of the Prophet @
but it was scattered on pages, tablets, palm-leaves, stones and
other materials, and the soorahs were not all compiled in one
place. As for that which was done at the time of Abu Bakr, the
Qur'sn was written on pages with every soorah having its verses
put in order, in pages that followed the order of the verses as they
had memorized them from the Messenger of Alliih @. So the
mission of Zayd ibn m b i t was to write what had been written at
the time of the Prophet @$ on pages, putting every soorah on a
page with its verses in the order in which they had been
revealed.C3]
o

The third stage in the compilation of the Qur'iin at the time
of 'Uthmgn ibn 'Afffin &
a The motive for compiling the Qur'iin at the time of 'Uthmin
It was narrated from Anas ibn Maalik that Hudhayfah ibn alYamaan came to 'Uthmiin when he was on campaign with the
people of Syria and the people of Iraq in the conquest of Armenia
and Azerbaijan. Hudhayfah was very alarmed by the differences
in their recitation, so Hudhayfah said to ' U t h m h 0 Ameer alMu'mineen, save this ummah before they differ concerning the
al-Tafawwuq wa'l-Nujaabah 'ala Nahj asSahaabah, p. 74
al-lnshiraah wa Raf al-Deeq bi Seerat Abi Bakr al-Siddeeq, by as-Sallaabi, p. 206
[31 al-Madinah an-Nabawiyyah Fajr al-Islam wa'l-Asr al-Raashidi, 2/241
['I
['I

326

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin 8 Dhun-Noorayn

Book as the Jews and the Christians did. 'Uthmsn sent word to
Hafsah saying, "Send us the manuscript so that we may make
copies of it, then we will return it to you". So Hafsah sent it to
'Uthmh, and he ordered Zayd ibn Thgbit, 'Abd-AllSh ibn azZubayr, Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas and 'Abd ar-Rahmaan ibn al-Haarith
ibn Hishaam to make copies of it. 'Uthmh said to the three
Qurashi men: "If you and Zayd ibn Thgbit differ concerning
anything of the Qur'gn, then write it in the dialect of Quraysh, for
it was revealed in their dialect". So they did that, until they had
made many copies, then 'Uthmh returned the manuscript to
Hafsah, and he sent a copied Mus-haf to every region and ordered
that all other Qur'gnic material, whether it was manuscripts or
entire copies, be burnt.'']
We learn a number of things from this saheeh hdeeth,
including the following:
(a) The reason that motivated 'Uthmtin 4 to compile the
Qur'an, even though it had been compiled in the proper
order in the manuscript of Abu Bakr, was the differences
between the Muslim reciters in their recitations, which
could have led to great confusion about the Book of
Allah, which is the basis of sharee'ah and the pillar of
religion, the social, political, and moral foundation of the
ummah. Some of them even said to one another, My
recitation is better than yours. Hudhayfah was alarmed
by that, and he hastened to speak of his concern to the
caliph and leader of the Muslims, asking him to save the
ummah before the differences among them went out of
control and became very serious, and the Qur'Mc text
got tampered with and distorted, as happened among
the Jews and Christians where each community was
divided against itself with regard to its Book.

@) This saheeh hadeeth definitely states that the Holy
['I al-Bukhaari, Kitaab Fadaa'il al-Qur'tn, no. 4987

The greatest achievement of 'Uthmgn was uniting the ummah.. .

327

Qur'h was compiled in a manuscript that was put
together and sewn with one thread. The ummah was
unanimously agreed that what was in this manuscript
was the Qur'h as it had been received from the Prophet
@ the last time it was reviewed with Jibreel (A), and that
this manuscript had remained in the care of the first
caliph Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq, then after him it passed into
the care of the second caliph 'Umar ibn al-Khattab. Then
when 'Umar knew he was dying, he did not appomt
anyone in particular to become caliph after him, rather
he left the matter to the shoora committee composed of
people with whom the Messenger of AU3h @$, was
pleased when he died, and he left instructions for the
manuscript to be kept with his daughter Hafsah, the
Mother of the Believers 4. 'Uthmh relied on that
manuscript when he compiled the Qur'an, and from it he
transcribed his "official" Mus-ha5 He issued orders to
four of the reciters among the SaMbah who were famous
for their precision in memorizing Qur'in, their
knowledge of the various recitations, their skill in
reciting and their understanding of the Q d Z n and its
language - three Qurashis and one A n s i i who was
Zayd ibn Thibit, who had undertaken the first
compilation at the time of Abu Bakr at the suggestion
of 'Umar. According to some reports, the ones whom
'Uthmh ordered to write the Mus-haf were twelve men,
among them Ubayy ibn Ka'b and others from among
Quraysh and the ~ns2r.[']
(c) We may understand from this that the conquests at the
time of 'Uthm2n were undertaken with the permission
and on the command of the caliph, and that military
decision-making was done in Madihah, and the Islamic
provinces were all subject to the command of the caliph
['I 'Uthmaan ibn 'Afian,by Saadiq 'Arjoon, p. 171

328

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Nooravn

'Uthm3n at that time. Rather there is evidence that there
was consensus among the Sahibah and Taabi'een in all
regions, accepting 'Uthmsn as caliph. The fact that
Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman came to Madinah to sort out
the issue of the people's dispute about the recitation of
Qur'in indicates that the major reference point for shar'i
matters was consultation with the caliph in Madinah,
and that M a d m h was still the centre for the Sunnah and
the place where the fuqaha' of the Sahibah were
concentrated.[''

Consulting t h e Sohahuh with reqard lo tht
compilation of .Uthm;in
'Uthmiin assembled the Muhijircn and Ans& and consulted
them about this matter, among whom were the prominent figures
of the ummah and the leaders and scholars among the SahSbah, at
the head of whom was 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib &. 'Uthmin presented
this issue for discussion to the elite of the ummah and its guided
leaders, and they exchanged views and discussed the matter, until
he was aware of their views and they were aware of his. They
responded frankly to his views and left no room for doubt in
Muslim hearts, and it was clear to people throughout the earth
what was the conclusion of their meeting. No dissent was known
at that time and no one objected to what they agreed to. The status
of the Qur'sn is not something that could be hidden from an
ordinary individual, let alone the scholars and imams."l
'Uthmin .& did not introduce an innovation by compiling the
Qur'in, rather that had been done before him by Abu Bakr alSiddeeq A.Similarly, it was not his own idea, rather he did it after
consulting the Sahsbah (may Allih be pleased with them), when
they approved of this action and said: What a good idea. They also
said: He did well (i.e.,inwhat he did withregard to t h e ~ u s - h ~ f i ) . ' ~ ]
['I

al-MadCnnah an-Nabmiyyah Fair al-Islam wa'l-'Asr al-Raashidi, 2/244

Izl 'Ufhrnaanibn ' A f i n , by Saadiq 'Aqoon, p. 175
'31 Fitnat Maqfal 'Ufhmin ibn 'Affaan, 1/78

The preatest achievement of 'Uthdn was uniting the ummah.. .

329

Mus'ab ibn Sa'd met the companions of the Prophet #, when
'Uthmh burned the mus-ha$, and he saw that they approved of
this action on his part.['] 'Ali & rebuked anyone who criticized
'Uthmtin for that and said: 0 people, do not go to extremes with
regard to 'Uthrngn, and do not say anything but good about him,
for by AU2h he did not do what he did - with regard to the Mushafs - until after he had consulted all of us - i.e., the Sahtibah - and
by All&, if I were the caliph I would have done what he has
done.[']
After this consensus of the part of these virtuous people who
were among the best of creation on this blessed action, it becomes
clear to everyone who is not influenced by whims and desires that
every Muslim must approve of and accept this action done by
'Uthmsn 4, by means of which the Holy Qur'tin was
preserved.[31
Al-Qurtubi said in al-Tafseer: This action was done by
'Uthmh after he had assembled the Muhijiniz and Ans& and
most of the prominent Muslims, and consulted them about that,
and they agreed to compile it on the basis of what was proven to
be sound of the well known recitation that was narrated from the
Prophet @f$$and they dispensed with all others. They approved of
his view, and it was the correct view.I4I

The dgference beheen the compila~onof Abu
Bakr and the compilation of "Uthm2n (&I

Ibn at-Teen said: The difference between the compilation of
Abu Bakr and the compilation of 'Uthmgn is that the compilation
of Abu Bakr came about because he was afraid that something of
the Qur'2n might be lost with the loss of its bearers, because it had
not been compiled in one place. So he compiled it in pages, with
at-TareeWI al-Sagheer by al-Bukhaari, 1/94; its isnid is hasan li ghaynhi (hasan
because of corroborating evidence)
'21 Fath al-Baari, 9/18; its xsnijd is hasan.
[I' Fiinaf Maqtal 'Uthmin ibn 'Affmn, 1/78
al-Jaami' li Ahkaam al-Qur'in, 1/88
['I

"

'UthrnSn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn
the verses of each soorah in the proper order, as dictated by the
Prophet &j. The compilation of ' U M n came about because of
the variety in recitaeons, as each person read it in his own dialect,
of which there were many. That led to each person saying that the
others were wrong, and he was afraid that the matter would get
out of control, so he had these manuscripts copied into a single
Mus-hf, with the soorahs in order, and he adopted the dialect of
Quraysh in exclusion to all others, on the grounds that it had been
revealed in their dialect, even though that was room for reciting it
in other dialects too, so as to ward off hardship from the
beginning, as he saw that there was no longer any need for the
variant readings, so he limited it to one dialect.
Al-Qaadi Abu Bakr al-Baaqilaani said: Abu Bakr did not aim
to put the whole Qur'in together between two covers, rather he
aimed to unite them in following the proven recitations that were
known from the Prophet g and cancel out all others. He forced
them to adopt a Mus-haf in which there was no change in the
order of verses and no commentary written alongside what had
been revealed, and no abrogated verses written alongside what
had not been abrogated, lest that lead to any conuption or
confusion to those who came after them.
Al-Haarith al-Muhaasibi said: What is well known among the
people is that the one who compiled the Qur'h was 'Uthmh, but
that is not the case; rather 'Uthmsnmade the people adhere to one
recitation based on the choice made by him and those of the
Muhijirin and Ansir who were present, when there was the fear
that fitnah might result from differences between the people of
Iraq and Syria with regard to which dialect should be used when
reading Qur'sn. But prior to that, the books containing Qur'h
were readable in all seven dialects in which the Qur'h had been
revealed. The first one to compile it was Abu Bakr, and 'Ali said: If
I were to become caliph, I would adopt the Mus-hdfs that were
written at the time of 'uthmh.[ll
"I 'Uthmaan ibn 'Affaan, by Saadiq 'Aqoon, p. 178

The greatest achievement of 'Uthmb was uniting the ummah.. .

331

Al-Qurtubi said: If it were said: Why did 'Uthmh compel all
the people to adopt his Mus-haf when Abu Bakr had already done
that and finished with it? The answer is that ' U M n did not
intend to compile the Mus-hnj do you not see that he sent word to
Hafsah saying: Send us the manuscript so that we may make
copies of it, then we will return it to you. 'UthmSn only did that
because the people had begun to differ in their recitation due to
the SaKbah spreading through different lands. The matter was
only getting worse and the disputes about recitation were only
becoming more intense. Everyone was adamant that his recitation
was correct, and the incident took place between the people of
Syria and Iraq, as was narrated by Hudhayfah &.'ll

Did the 'Ufhm2ni manu
recitations?

11 seven

Shaykh al-Muhaqqiq Saadiq 'Arjoon (+&) was of the view that
the manuscript of Abu Bakr, which was the original manuscript
that was copied at the time of 'Uthmin according to Muslim
consensus, did not contain all seven recitations in which the
Qur'sn was revealed according to the saheeh hadeeth. Rather it
was written according to one of them, which was the one in which
the last review with Jibreel (A) took place, and the matter was
settled at the end of the Prophet's life. The seven recitations were
initially aimed at making things easy for the ummah, then that
ruling ceased to apply when the Qur'h became well-known and
people of different dialects began to mix and their dialects began
to resemble one another. Imam al-Tahhaawi said: Rather the
dispensation for different dialects was granted because they were
unable to recite in dialects other than their own, because they
were illiterate and only a few of them knew how to read and
write. Because it was so difficult for everyone who spoke a dialect
to adapt to another dialect, allowances were made for different
pronunciations so long as the meaning was close. They continued
like that until the numbers of those who could read and write

332

' U r n Ibn 'Aff2n -?s Dhun-Noorayn

increased, and their dialects became identical to the dialect of the
Messenger of All* g.Thus they became able to memorize the
proper pronunciation, and in that case it was not appropriate to
recite it in any other way. Ibn 'Abd al-Barr said: Thus it became
clear that these seven recitations were only specific to a certain
time due to necessity; when that necessity was no longer there, the
ruling on these seven recitations no longer a lied, and the
Qur'h is not to be recited except in one dialect.
At-Tabari said: Recitation in seven dialects was not obligatory
for the ummah, rather it was a concession that was granted to
them. When the Sahiibah realized that the ummah would become
divided unless they united and agreed on a single recitation, they
agreed on that unanimously, and they were divinely protected
from agreeing on misguidance.[z1 This dialect in which these
pages (at the time of Abu Bakr) were written, and on which there
was definitive consensus, and in which the Mus-haf of 'UthmSn
that was copied from them was written, include the seven
recitations and others, which people used in their recitation and
which were transmitted in mutawaatir reports from the Messenger
of AllZh #y because the dialects mentioned in the hadeeth are
different from these recitati~ns.'~'Al-Qurtubi said: any of our
scholars, such as al-Dawoodi, Ibn Abi Safrah and others said:
These seven recitations that are attributed to these seven reciters
are different from the seven dialects that were known at the time
of the SaMbah. Rather these recitations belong to one of these
seven dialects which is the dialect in which the Mus-haf was
compiled.[41The most correct view in our opinion with regard to
what we mean by the dialect is the view that it is the most
eloquent and most famous of the dialects of the Arabs, namely the
dialect of the Qur'iin. This is the view of al-Qaasim ibn Salaam
and Ibn 'Atiyah among other prominent scholars.[51

@
'

"I 'Uthmun ibn 'Affaan by Saadiq 'Ajoon, p. 180
[I' ibid.
'31 ibid.

14] al-Jaami' li Ahkaam il-Qur'in, 1/79

['I al-Itqun by al-Suyooti, 1/144-148

The meatest achievement of 'Uthmb was unitine the ummah.. . 333

The number of Bus-hafs that 'Uthmgn s

the

regions
When ' U W n finished having the Mus-hafs copied, he sent a
Mus-kaf to every region, and ordered them to burn every Mus-hdf
that was not in accordance with the Mus-haf that he sent out. They
differed as to the number of Mus-hafs that were sent out to the
different regions. It was said that there were four, and this is the
view of the majority of scholars. And it was said that there were
five, or six, or seven, or eight. As for the view that there were four,
it was said that one was left in Madinah and the others were sent
to Syria, Kufah and Basra. A s for the view that there were five, it
was said that one went to each of the places mentioned, and the
fifth was sent to Makkah. As for the view that there were six, it
was said that five were sent to the places mentioned, and they
differed concerning the sixth; it was said that 'Uthmiin kept it for
himself, or that he sent it to Bahrain. As for the view that there
were seven, six went to the places mentioned, and the seventh
was sent to Yemen. As for the view that there were eight, seven
were sent to the places mentioned, and the eighth was 'Uthmh's
copy that he used to read, and it is the one that he was holding
when he was killed.[']
With each Mus-haf 'Uthm2n #& sent teachers to teach the
people how to read it in accordance with the way it is written and
in accordance with recitations that are narrated in sound,
rnutawaatir reports. 'Abd-All* ibn al-Saa'ib went with the Mushdf that went to Makkah; al-Mugheerah ibn Shihaab went with
the Mus-haf that went to Syria; Abu 'Abd al-Rahmaan al-Sulami
went with the Mus-haf that went to Kufah; 'Aamir ibn Qays went
with the Mus-haf that went to Basra, and 'Uthm2n told Zayd ibn
m b i t to teach the people using the Mus-haf that remained in
adi in ah.'^]
[I1 Adwa' ul-Bayaanfi Tareekh al-Qur'tn, p. 77
I['

o p cit., p. 78

334

'Uthrngn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

The attitude of "Abd-Mfgh ibn fbl
the Mas-haf of Wthm2n

s

There is no evidence that Ibn Mas'ood & differed with
'Uthmh concerning that. All that was narrated concerning that
have da'eef (weak) isnud, and these weak reports which mention
that prove that Ibn Mas'ood came back to what the Sah2bah had
agreed on with regard to compilation of the Qur'h; he stood up
before the people and announced that, and told them to come
back to the consensus of the Muslims on this issue.''' He said:
All& does not take away knowledge in any physical sense, rather
He takes it away when the scholars die, and Allsh will not cause
the ummah of Muhammad @ to unite on misguidance, so join
them and agree with whatever they are agreed upon, for the tmth
is in that on which they are unanimously agreed. And he wrote to
'Uthmsn saying that.['] It was narrated from Ibn Katheer that Ibn
Mas'ood came to agree (with the consensus)[31and al-Dhahabi
confirmed that, saying: It was narrated that Ibn Mas'ood agreed
~ ~attention should
and followed ' U t h h , praise be to ~ l l 2 h . INo
be paid to that which was written by Taha Hussein about the
issue of the Mus-haf and the relationship of 'Uthmsn with Ibn
Mas'ood, which he quoted in an obnoxious manner, with ideas
that he took from his Orientalist professors[51, who based their
views on weak reports and Raafidi reports to distort the image of
the decent relationships that the Sahribah had with one another,
may All& be pleased with them all.
Could it be expected that Ibn Mas'ood, who stopped offering
prayers in shortened form in Mina for fear of dissent and fitnah,
and in order to follow the caliph, would ascend the minbar and
Fitnat Muqtal 'Uthrntn ibn 'Ajjkn, 1/78

[I1

" op. cit., 1/79

'31 al-Bidaayah wa'n-Nihaayah, 7/228

Siyar A'lmm an-Nubala', 1/349
"I al-Fiinah al-Kubra, 1/159

The greatest achievement of 'Uthmfin was uniting the ummah.. . 335
incite people to dissent, when he is the one who said: Dissent is
evil?[']
The Raafidi historians fabricated reports and attributed them
to Ibn Mas'ood and his attitude towards 'Uthmh (&), and
through these lies they showed the SahSbah as people who
fought, disputed and hated one another, stubborn people who
engaged in foul speech. These are weak reports that cannot stand
up to any calm and objective examination; they are despicable
and unbelievable. The Raafidis falsely claimed that Ibn Mas'ood
used to criticize 'Uthmh and regard him as a kaafir, and when
'Uthmh became caliph he had him beaten to death. But this is an
obvious lie against Ibn Mas'ood, because the scholars of hadeeth
know that Ibn Mas'ood never declared 'Uthmin to be a kaafir,
rather when allegiance fiay'ah) was sworn to 'Uthmin, 'AbdAUSh ibn Mas'ood travelled from Madinah to Kufah, and when
he reached it, he praised Allih then he said: The ameer
al=mu'mineen 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb has died and we have never
seen any day sadder than that day. We, the companions of
Muhammad, got together and chose the best of us, and we swore
allegiance to ameer al=mu'mineen 'Uthmiin, so swear allegiance to
him.['] These clear words offer the strongest evidence of the high
esteem in which 'Uthmiin ibn 'Affin was held by Ibn Mas'ood
and all the S&bah, those whom All31 praised and was pleased
with, who were the best ones to understand the words of AllSh:

"0 you who believe! Keep your duty to Allih andfear Him, and
speak (always) the truth" (Al-Ahzaab 33:70).

This statement of 'Abd-Alla was the truth and nothing but
the truth, as it was based on conviction and spoken willingly; it
was not said out of fear and he did not say cheap words just to
cheat or deceive, or to acquire a position under the new caliphate.
['I 'Abd-All% ibn Mas'ood, by 'Abd al-Sattaar al-Shaykh, p. 335

Tabaqaaf lbn Sa'd, 6/63

' U h i n Ibn 'AffSn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

336

So it is clear that there was no hatred or resentment in the heart of
either of them towards the other. If anything happened, it was
only for the sake of clarlfylngthe truth and for the best interests of
~ ~ that only happened within the guidelines of
the ~ u s l i m s,' and
offering sincere advice and with the appropriate etiquette, or of
the caliph disciplining his people. As for the claims made by the
Raafidis and those who follow them, that 'Uthmh had Ibn
Mas'ood beaten to death, that is a lie according to scholarly
consensus. Abu Bakr ibn al-'Arabi said: As for his beating Ibn
Mas'ood and withholding his stipend, this is a lie.121The Raafidis
have no justification for attacking 'Uthmgn with this story about
Ibn Mas'ood, because he did not have him beaten or withhold his
stipend, rather he acknowledged his status, and Ibn Mas'ood was
deeply committed to obeying his ruler to whom he had sworn
allegiance, and he believed that he was the best of the Muslims at
the time of swearing allegiance.[31

The Sahabah's
forbid dissent

of the verses which

Allsh says:

"And verily, this is My straight path, sofollm it, and follow
not (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His
path. This He has ordained for you that you may become AlMuftaqoon (the pious" (AI-An'aam 6:153)
The straight path is the Qur'Sn, Islam and the sound human
nature @ah) with which Allsh created mankind, and the (other)
paths are whims and desires, division, innovation and newly'Abd-All& ibn Mas'ood, p. 324
'*I al-'Awaasim min al-Qawansim, p. 63
'Aqeedat Ah1 al-Sunrrah wa'l-Jamaa'nhJi'l-Sah8bahal-Kirnam, 3/1066
'']

The meatest achievement of ' U t h m h was uniting the ummah.. .

337

introduced matters. Mujaahid said: "and follow not (other)
paths" means innovations, specious arguments and
misguidance.''l
Allsh forbade to this ummah that which the previous nations
had fallen into of dissent and division after proof had come to
them and AllSh had revealed the Book to them. All& says:

"And be not as those who divided and differed among themselves
afer the clear proofs had come to them. It is theyfor whom there
is an awful torment" (A1 'Imraan 3:105)
He forbade the members of the ummah to be like the
mushrikeen who split up their religion and became sects, as He
says:

"So set you (0 Muhammad #) your face towards the religion
(of pure Islamic Monotheism) Haneef (worship none but All&
Alone). Allih's Fitrah (i.e. Allih's Islamic Monotheism) with
which He has created mankind. No change let there be in Khnlqillaah (i.e. the religion of Allih f Islamic Monotheism), t h t is
the straight religion, but most of men know not.121 (Tafsir AtTabari) (And remain always) turning in repentance to Him
(only), and be afraid and dutiful to Him; and pevform As-Salaah
(Iqaamat-as-Salaah) and be not of Al-Mushrikoon (the
"I

TaJseerMujaahid, p. 227

I'

(V30:30) See the footnote of (V.10:19).] (Tafsir At-Tabafl

338

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Noorayn

polytheists, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness ofAllih) Of
those who split up their religion (i.e. who left the true Islamic
Monotheism), and became sects, [i .e. they invented n m things
in the religion (Bid'uh), and followed their vain desires], each
sect rejoicing in that which is with it" (Ar-Room 30:3032)

AU2h tells us that the Messenger of All&
has nothing to do
with those who split their religion and become sects and
factions.''] AHih says:

"Verily, those who divide their religion and break up into sects
(all kinds of religious sects),[2] you (0Muhammad @Jhave no
concern in them in the least. Their affair is only with All&,
Who then will tell them what they used to do" (Al-An'aam
6:159)
From the story of the compilation of the Qw/Sn at the time of
'Uthmin, we can clearly see the extent of the Sahibah's
understanding of the verses that forbid dissent, as Allih
forbade dissent and warned against it. Because of their deep
understanding of these verses, Hudhayfah & was alarmed when
'I1

I['

Diraasaaf ji'l-Ahwa' wa'l-Firaq wa'l-Bida', by Naasir d-'Aql, p. 49
(V.6:159) It is said that the Prophet
recited this Verse and said: "lbese
people are those who invent new things (Bid'ah) in religion and the followers
of the vain desires of this Muslim nation, and their repentance will not be
accepted by Allah." (Tafiir Al-Qurtubi, Vol. 7).

[It has been narrated in the Had?th Books (At-Timidhi, lbn MaMajah
and Abu DiwCd) that the Prophet @ said: "The Jews and the
Christians will be divided into seventy-one or seventy-two
religious sects and this nation will be divided into seventy-three
religious sects, all in Hell, except one, and that one is: on which I
and my Companions are today, i.e. following the Qur'in and the
Prophet's Sunnah (legal ways, orders, acts of worship,
statements)."]

The greatest achievement of ' U M n was uniting the ummah.. . 339
he noticed signs of dissent in their recitation of Qur'h, and he
went straight to Madkah and told 'Uthmh & of what he had
seen and heard; 'Uthmh hastened to address the people and
warn them of the consequences of this dissent, and he consulted
about the solution to this problem which had
the Sahlibah (
started to appear. Within a short period of time he put an end to
the problem and closed the door to the dissent which had almost
arisen by compiling the manuscript and copying it into a single
Mus-huf from the most hustworthy sources. With the closing of
this door tofitnah, the Muslims rejoiced whilst the hypocrites who
had been cheered by signs of dissent for which they had been
waiting patiently and shiving to achieve, were upset. When the
problem was solved, and they could not find any way to stir up
this dispute again, their resentment against 'Uthmh increased
and they strove to criticize him and present his good deeds as bad,
and they resorted to arguments that were as weak as a spider's
web to criticize him and justlfy their rebellion against him, trying
to tell the people that this good deed was bad and meant that the
people should rebel against him.[']
The Sahlibah ( &) did not leave every reciter to his own devices
even if his recitation was correct; rather they united them in
following one recitation. This is an important lesson which
inspires us to study the history of the RightlyGuided Caliphs
which is full of lessons and examples.[Z1
The Messenger of Allgh
said:

a)

"Alllih loves three thingsfor you : that you should worship Him
and not associate anything with Him, that you should hold fast,
['I

Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmlin ibn 'Affaan, 1/82

[21 op. cit., 1/83

'Uthrnsn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

340

all ofyou together, to the Rope ofAlllih (i.e. this Qur'lin), and
be not divided among yourselves (cf. Aal 'Imraan 3 :103); and
that you should be sincere to the one whom Alllih appoints in
charge of your affairs.

"'"

The way of adhering to the rope of All& is adhering to the
Ibn Taymiyah
Book of All& and the Sunnah of His Messenger g.
said: This is one of the most basic principles of this great religion
of Islam, which All& emphasized greatly in His Book and
criticized those who abandoned it among the people of the Book
and others. It was also enjoined emphatically by the Prophet in
both public and private gatherings.[21 Hence Allsh, may He be
exalted, and His Messenger
enjoined all that could preserve
unity and harmony among the Muslims, and forbade everything
that could undermine this great principle.
The division, mutual forsaking and fighting that occurred
among the Muslims came about as the result of not paying
enough attention to this principle and its guidelines, which
resulted in division and lack of unity; thus they became sects and
parties, each sect rejoicing in that which is with it.r31
Unity of the Muslims is required by sharee'ah, and is one of
the great aims of sharee'ah; in fact it is one of the most important
means of supporting the religion of Allih, may He be exalted, and
prevailing over our enemies. We are enjoined to come together in
mutual teaching of the truth and mutual enjoining of patience, so
it is essential that the efforts of daa'iyahs, leaders of Islamic
movements, Muslim scholars and seekers of knowledge be united
so as to reconcile Muslims in a real sense, not just superficially,
because half-baked solutions do more damage than good. Shaykh
'Abd ar-Rahmaan al-Sa'di (.&a) said: Jihad is of two types; the first
type is jihad that is aimed at setting straight the affairs of the
Muslims with regard to their beliefs, attitudes and etiquette, and
'I1 Musnad Ahmad, 1/2,26,2/367

'" Majmoo' al-Fafaawa,
I'

22/359

Tabseer al-Mu'mineen fi Fiqh a!-Nasr wa'l-Tamkeen by al-Sallaabi, p. 307

The greatest achievement of 'UthmSn was uniting the ummah.. . 341

all their religious and worldly affairs, and educating them; this
type is the essence of true jihad and the basis for the second type,
which is jihad that is aimed at warding off aggressors who seek to
attack Islam and the Muslims, whether they are kuffaar,
hypocrites, heretics or any other enemies of the faith. These two
types -jihad of proof and argument, and jihad with weapons, are
appropriate at all times and in all places.[11 Then he wrote a
chapter entitled: Jihad that has to do with establishing unity
~ ~ quoting the verses and ahaadeeth
among the ~ u s l i m s . [After
that indicate that it is obligatory for the Muslims to be united, he
said: The greatest form of jihad is skiving to achieve this principle
of uniting the Muslims in following their religion and pursuing
their spiritual and worldly interests.13]
Hence we think that adopting the means that will lead to
uniting the Muslims is one of the greatest forms of jihad, because
this is a very important step towards making the Muslims prevail,
establishing the Islamic state and bringing about sharee'ah rule.
This was the understanding of the ~ i g h z ~ k u i d Caliphs,
ed
which
was demonstrated in the most elegant form when'uthmsn united
the ummah in following one Mus-haf

['I

Wujoob at-Ta'aawaun bayna al-Muslimem by al-Sa'di, p. 5

12] ibid.
[31 ibid.

.. . . .

.

-- - ....-.
.... .. .- .

. . . . ...

[~overnors
. at
.. the time of 'Uthmin

id

---

Regions of the Islamic state at the time
of 'Uthmsn & and his policy with
regard to governors
-

When 'Umar ibn al-KhattZb ib died, his governor in Makkah
was KhZlid ibn al-'Aas ibn HishZm ibn al-Mugheerah al~akhzoomi."] 'Uthmiin left him in this position for a time the
length of which is difficult to determine, then he dismissed him,
but there are no reports that mention the reason for that. It is also
difficult to determine the most important of his actions. After
dismissing him, 'Uthmh appointed 'Ali ibn Rabee'ah ibn 'Abd
al-'Uzza as governor, then after that 'Uthmh appointed a
number of governors over Makkah, but it is difficult to
determine the length of their posts. Among them was 'AbdAllsh ibn 'Amr al-Hadrami, who was one of 'UthmMs governors
'I

Talreed Asma' as-Sahlibah, by Imam al-Dhahabl, p. 151

344

U
' -n

Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Nooravn

in Makkah. The texts also confirm that 'Uthmh 6 appointed
Khiilid ibn al-'Aas ibn Hishsm as governor of Makkah a second
time, and some sources state that when 'Uthmsn died, Khgid was
governor of Makkah, then 'Ali dismissed him and appointed
someone else.['] This report appears to be the strongest of the
reports that say that 'Abd-Alliih ibn al-Hadrami was the governor
of Makkah at the time when 'Uthmiin was killed.['] At the time of
'Uthmh Makkah enjoyed stability and calm despite the events of
fitnah that took place in other regions at the end of 'UthmXs
reign.I3l

al-MaCmh al-Munawwarah is regarded as one of the most
important Islamic cities at the time of 'Uthmiin, as it was the
centre of the caliphate and delegations came there from various
regions, and it was also a military centre. Many of the senior
Sahibah lived there, Muhsjireen and Andr alike, thus it was of
particular importance. Because of his position as caliph, 'Uthmsn
lived there and was able to check on it; he even used to ask about
the prices of food and about how the people were.[41 When
' U t W travelled for Hajj he would appoint one of the Sahgbah
in charge of Madinah in his absence until he returned, and he
often appointed Zayd ibn Thiibit &.['I In Madinah there was a
bayt al-mil and a diwan to keep records of stipends, as in other
cities. Al-Madinah was regarded as one of the quietest and
calmest of cities during the time of 'Uthmh, apart from what
happened during his last days of turmoil after the rebel armies
came and besieged 'Uthmk, and some of the senior Sahiibah left
the
al-MlQuh bla al-Buldrillfi 'Asr al-l(hulafaZal-Rishideen, by Dr. 'Abd-Allgh al'Umari, 1/166
I'[ Nihiyat al-lrbfi Funoon al-Adub by al-Nuwayi, 2/72
['I al-Ml&h 'ala al-Buldin, 1/167
Tareekh al-M?nah, 3/961,962
'I al-Wlciyah 'ala al-Buldcin, 1/168, 169
16] o p cit., 1/169
'I

'"

Governors at the time of 'UthmAn &

345

al-Bahrain and al-~arn2mah~'l
When 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb & died, 'Uthmh ibn Abi'l-'Aas
al-Thaqafi was governor of Bahrain, and ' U t h d n let him
continue in this post for a while. The reports indicate that
'Uthmin ibn Abi'l-'Aas remained the governor of Bahrain for
three years after he swore allegiance to ' U t M , i.e. in 27 AH,
based on the fact that he and his army took part with the army of
Basra in some of the conquests.[21 It seems that the cooperation
between the province of al-Bahrain and the province of Basra that
began during the time of 'Umar grew stronger at the time of
'Uthmh, especially after 'Abd-Alliih ibn 'Aamir ibn Kurayz was
' , governor of al-Bahram
appointed governor of ~ a s r a ~as~ the
became one of the commanders under the leadership of 'AbdAllih ibn 'Aamir the governor of Basra. The historical texts also
show that the province of Bahrain came under the authority of
Basra - to some extent - and became part of it, so that Ibn 'Aamir
One researcher
was the one who appointed agents for ~ahrain.I~I
confirms that this cooperation took place, as he says: At the time
of the caliph 'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh, Bahrain was joined to Basra
when the later became the base for the conquests of Persia and
southern Iran, and its governors became answerable to the
governor of Basra. He reinforced and strengthened this
connection between Basra and ah rain.^^' Other governors
whom 'Uthmin appointed over Bahrain included M a r w h ibn
al-Hakam and 'Abd-All& ibn Suwir al-'Abdi. When 'Uthmin
died, 'Abd-All& was governor of ahr rain.^^] At the time of
al-Bahrain was a name given to the area which includes the Emirates of the
Arabian Gulf and the eastern park of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia apart from
Kuwait. Al-Yamzmah was in the land of al-Najd.
Tareekh Khaleefah ibn Khayytt, p. 159; al-Wldyah 'ala al-Buldtn, 11169
[" at-Tabaqtt by b n Sa'd, 5/44
[" al-Wltyah 'ala d-Buldin, 1/169
[51 al-Bahrain fi Sadr al-Islam, by 'Abd al-Rahmin ibn al-Najm, p. 141
[61 al-Wiliyah 'ala al-Bulddn, 1/170

'"

346

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affk 4s Dhun-Noorayn

'Uthmk, Bahrain played a major role in those conquests.[']
The situation in Bahrain remained stable until the death of
'Uthmsn. As for al-Yamsmah, at the time of 'Umar & it was part
of the province of Bahrain and Oman to a large extent, and the
governor of Bahrain was the one who sometimes appointed its
governors. But at the time of 'Uthmh, it seems that the governors
of al-Yadmah were appointed directly by 'Uthmh. It is also
mentioned with regard to the turmoil that followed the killing of
'Uthmh, as some letters arrived at the time from people who
were angry at the killing of '~thmiin.''~

*emen and Hadra
When 'Umar & died, his governor in Yemen was Ya'la ibn
Munayyah, who was on his way to Madinah at 'Umafs request,
when a letter reached him from 'Uthmsn telling him of the death
of 'Umar and of the people's swearing allegiance to 'Uthmk, and
informing him that 'Uthmh was appointing him as govemor of
San'V. Thus he remained govemor of San'V until 'Uthmh &
died.13] The governor of (the city of) al-Jund was 'Abd-Allsh ibn
Rabee'ah, and he remained its governor throughout the reign of
'Uthmh &.[41 It seems that there were other governors
throughout the rest of Yemen, but the main sources focus
primarily on these two governors. Similarly, the sources do not
speak in detail about events in Yemen during the time of
'Uthmsn, and they are not frequently mentioned in the
correspondence between 'Uthmh and his governors in Yemen
apart from what he mentioned in general instructions sent to all
his
The people of Yemen were well-known at the
time of ' U t M n for their obedience to their governors, as is
indicated in the report which says that 'Uthmh 4 sent a Thaqafi
['I ibid.
[I'

ibid.

Tureekh at-Tabari, 5/442
Tareekh Khaleefah ibn Wlayytt, p. 179
[I' al-Mlriyah 'ala ul-Buldtn, 1/171
["

Governors at the time of ' U h n h &

347
-

man to Yemen, and when he returned, 'Uthmh asked him about
its people and he said: I saw a people who were never asked for
anything but they gave, whether it was right or wrong.I1l
It is well known that numerous Yemeni tribes migrated
during the conquests at the time of 'Umar ibn al-Khattgb to the
new Islamic regions in Iraq, Egypt and Syria. So the connections
between Yemen and its people in other regions lasted throughout
the reign of 'Uthmgn. We find that some of the Jews of Yemen
played a major role in stirring up the jfnnh that began at the end
of 'Uthmcn's reign, when'uthmcn 6was martyred. Chief among
those who were involved in the fitnah was 'Abd-All* ibn Saba'.
After the murder of 'Uthmh, a number of its governors left
Yemen and came to the Hijaz to take part in the events happening
there, including Ya'la ibn Munayyah and 'Abd-Allgh ibn
~abee'ah.~']

The province of Syria
When 'Uthmsn became caliph, Mu'swiyah & was governor
of most of Syria, and 'Uthmsn 4 approved of his position[31as he
approved of others in provinces such as Yemen, Bahrain, Egypt
and elsewhere. Some developments occurred and Mu'gwiyah
added some other areas until he became the absolute governor of
all of (greater)Syria, and became the strongest of all of 'Uthmiin's
governors. At the beginning of ' U M s caliphate there were
other governors, including 'Umayr ibn Sa'd al-Anscri, who was
governor of Homs, who competed with Mu'iwiyah ibn Abi
Sufyiin for status before 'Uthmsn &, but 'Umayr fell sick and was
too ill to continue his gubernatorial duties, so he asked the caliph
'Uthmzn to relieve him of his duties, which he did, and gave his
province to Mu'cwiyah ibn Abi Sufyh. Thus Mu'Swiyah's
authority spread and extended to Homs which had previously
['I

Tareekh al-Yemen al-Siytsifi'l-'Asr al-Islami, by Hasan %lay&,

[I'

Tareekh af-Tabari, 5/442

[31 Tareekh Khuleefak ibn Khuyyif, p. 155

p. 79

I

II
1

348

' U M n Ibn ' A f f h 4%Dhun-Nooravn

been governed by 'Abd ar-Rahmin ibn K h a d ibn al-waleed.['l
When 'Alqamah ibn Mahraz - who had been governor of
Palestine - died, 'Uthmh added his province to the province of
Mu'iwiyah ibn Abi Sufyin &, so all of (greater) Syria came under
Mu'iwiyah's control two years after 'Uthmh A& became caliph,
and he remained absolute governor of the religion for the rest of
'Uthminnscaliphate, until 'Uthmh died, as is well known.[21The
period of Mu'iwiyah's governorship of Syria was filled with
events, as Syria was one of the most important theatres of jzhad.
Even though Syria became internally stable, and Islam prevailed
therein, and the Byzantines ceased trying to stir up trouble there,
Syria was still adjacent to the Byzantine lands, so the way was
open for Mu'iwiyah to engage in jihud in that direction, as we
have discussed above. Mu'iwiyah carried political weight in the
Islamic state at the end of 'Uthmin's caliphate, as he was one of
' -n
summoned to consult with them
the governors whom U
when signs of jitnah began to loom on the horizon, and he
expressed his own opinions to ' U h i n in this gathering[31,as we
shall see below, in sha All&.

The Islamic armies began to head to Armenia for the first time
during the reign of 'Uthmh 4, and the first Muslim army headed
to that region from Syria, which was one of the closest provinces,
consisting of eight thousand warriors led by Habeeb ibn
Maslamah al-Fihri. This army was able to conquer many areas
of Armenia, but it faced danger due to the large numbers of
Byzantines who gathered to support the Armenians in their wars
against the Muslims. He asked the caliph for help, and the caliph
ordered an army of six thousand men, led by Salmh ibn
, to march from Kufah. After that a dispute
Rabee'ah al-~81ili[~]
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/442
I[' op. at., 5/443
13] al-WilZyah 'ala al-Bulan, 11/76
I[' al-Tabaqrit, 6/131
['I

Governors at the hme of ' U i h m h 4

349

arose between Habeeb ibn Maslamah and SalmSn ibn Rabee'ah
and when'Uthm2n found out about it, he wrote to the people and
solved the problem between them.['] It seems that S a l m h ibn
Rabee'ah took over command of the Muslim annies when
'Uthmgn wrote to him appointing him as governor of
Armenia[2], then SalmSn ibn Rabee'ah penetrated into Armenia
as far as the land of al-Khazar13], attaining conquests and
victories until there was a fierce battle between his army of ten
thousand men and the army of the Khazar king, which was three
hundred thousand strong - as the reports say - and SalnGn and all
his troops were killed. 'Uthmin 4 wrote to Habeeb ibn
Maslamah, telling him to march again to Armenia and conquer
it; he set out with his army and conquered one place after another
and established the Muslim presence there, and he made some
treaties with the local people.[41 Then 'Uthmin decided to send
him to the border posts in al-Jazeerah because of his experience
and abilities, and he appointed Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamsn as
governor of Armenia in his stead, in addition to his post as
governor of Azerbaijan. Hudhayfah also undertook a number of
campaigns from Armenia towards the Khazar lands.[51 After
nearly one year, 'UthmSn dismissed him and appointed alMugheerah ibn Shu'bah .L-. as govemor of Armenia, and when
'Uthmin died, al-Mugheerah was governor of both Armenia and
~zerbaijan.[~]
This province is regarded as a new addition that
'Uthmin brought to the Islamic state, that had not been
conquered before, and the Muslims were faced with a great
deal of hardship in conquering it, organizing it and controlling
it.r71
"I ul-Kharrij w a Sina^;?t al-Kitibah by QudSrnah ibn Ja'far, p. 326
al-Futaah by Ibn A'tham, 2/112
al-Khazar: a Turkish region inCentral Asia. It is now in southern Russia
al-Wiltyah 'ala al-Buldtn, 1/177
ibid.
[61 Tareekh al-Ya'qoobi, 2/268; al-Wilriyah 'ahal-Buldtn, 1/177
['I al-Wilriyah 'ala al-Buldtn, 1/177

350

' U M n Ibn 'AffGn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

The province of Egypt
The governor of Egypt during the caliphate of 'Umar ibn alKhattsb 4 was 'Amr ibn al-'Aas, who ruled it for almost four
years[11, and he was its governor at the time of 'Umar's death.
'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn confirmed his appointment for a short while
at the beginning of his caliphate, and he was helped in some of his
~ , had
work in Egypt by 'Abd-Allsh ibn ~ b i ' l - S a r h [ ~who
accompanied 'Amr ibn al-'Aas since the days of his conquests
in Palestine, when he was one of his commanders and
]
participated with him in the conquest of ~ g y p t . [ ~'Umar
appointed him as governor of Upper Egypt after it was
conquered.[41 It seems that there was some difference of
opinion between ' A m ibn al-'Aas and 'Abd-All* ibn Sa'd ibn
Abi'l-Sarh. ' A m ibn al-'Aas went to 'Uthmh after allegiance was
sworn to him as caliph, and asked him to dismiss 'Abd-AllSh ibn
Sa'd from his position as governor of Upper Egypt, but 'UthmSn
refused to do that, and told him that 'Umar was the one who had
appointed Ibn Abi'l-Sarh, and that he had not done anything to
deserve dismissal. But ' A m insisted that he be dismissed, and
'UthmSn insisted on not agreeing to that. As the result of this
insistence on both sides, 'UthmSn decided that it was better to
dismiss 'Amr from his post and to appoint 'Abd-Allsh ibn Abi'lSarh in his stead, and this is what happened in fact.[51 It was in
these circumstances that the Byzantines launched a raid on
Alexandria and took over the city, kiUing all the Muslims there.
The caliph decided to appoint ' A m in command of the Egyptian
Army to re-conquer Alexandria and deal with the Byzantine
army, and he did that.16] We have discussed the conquests in
al-Nujoom al-Zthirahfi Mulook Misr wa'l-Qthirah, by J a d al-Deen Bardi, 1/77
'21 Siyar A'lim an-Nubala', 1/33
[I1

[31 ibid.

W u E t Misr by al-Kindi, p. 33; Futooh Misr ma Akhbimha, p. 173
al-Wiliyah ' a h al-Buldin, 1/178
[61 op. cit., 1/178, 179
[41

Governors at the time of 'Uthmh &.

351

detail above. Then 'Uthnsn decided to reinstate 'Amr as
commander of all the hoops of Egypt, and to put 'Abd-Allsh
ibn Sa'd in charge of the kharij, but ' A m refused that, and there
are hardly any reports about 'Am's governorship during the
reign of 'Uthmsn &, apart from what is narrated about his role in
jihnd, whether that was repelling the Byzantines and driving them
out of Alexandria and establishing security in all regions of Egypt,
or with regard to the difference of opinion concerning kharij
between 'Uthm2n and '~rnr.[l] 'After 'Amr ibn al-'Aas was
dismissed from his post in Egypt a second time - or from the
governorship of Alexandria according to the most correct view and after he rejected 'Uthmsn's suggestion that he be appointed
in charge of the troops and Ibn Abi'l-Sarh be appointed in charge
of the; kharij, 'Uthmh confirmed the appointment of 'Abd-Alliih
ibn Abi'l-Sarh once more as governor of Egypt, and he became its
g the affairs of Egypt and its
official governor, in charge of h
troops, kharij, etc.['] The province of Egypt was initially calm and
stable, until the troublemakers such as 'Abd-Allah ibn Saba'
managed to reach it and stir up the people. They and those who
were influenced by them played a large role in the killing of
'Uthmh &I3] ,which we will discuss in detail below, in sha All&.

The province of Basra
When 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb &was martyred, his governor in
Basra was Abu Moosa 4-Ash'ari. At that time, Basran society had
begun to see some basic social and demographic changes as it
became one of the greatest Islamic military centres. Numerous
tribes migrated there and its troops began to conquer new places,
so it attained special importance at the beginning of 'Uthmk's
caliphate.141Its people became busy with their own affairs as well
as public affairs such as jihad etc, hence governing such a region
al-Williynh 'ala at-Buldrin, 1/179; Futooh al-Buldrin, p. 217
al-Wiliiyah 'alo al-Buldiin, 1/79
'31 op. cit., 1/186
'41 al-Tanzeemrit al-IjtimB'iyyah wa'l-Tqtisidiyyah fi'-Basrah, by Saih alL'Ali, p. 241
"I

i

352

' U W n lbn 'Afftin 4%Dhun-Noorayn

and the other areas under its admitustration was regarded as a
mission that was far from easy and that demanded special
administrative skills. Perhaps 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb felt that Abu
Moosa was particularly able to administer that province, as he left
instructions for the caliph who came after him to leave Abu Moosa
in that post for four years after his death.[" The period of Abu
Moosa's governorship of Basra was one in which the people of
Basra played a prominent role in lzhad, and Abu Moosa himself
played a prominent role in numerous conquests in Persia, in
addition to strengthening the Muslims' position in previouslyconquered regions, where the people were trying to rebel after the
death of 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb 4.Abu Moosa launched campaigns
against them and established Islam in those regions.IZ1In addition
to his role in the conquests, Abu Moosa also played an important
role in setting up an irrigation system and digging channels in
Basra during his governorship at the time of 'Uthmtin. He dug a
channel to bring drinking water to Basra, on which the people
relied for their drinking water afterwards. He also began other
projects to dig other channels, but then he was dismissed from his
post and was unable to complete them, and his successor 'AbdAll21 ibn 'Aamir completed them.I3] Abu Moosa did not remain
governor of Basra for long, as 'Uthmh dismissed him in 29 AH as most reports indicate - and he appointed 'Abd-Allsh ibn 'Aamir
ibn Kurayz in his place.[41 The historians narrated a number of
reports about this dismissal of Abu Moosa, from which we
conclude that there was some problem between Abu Moosa and
the troops of Basra, but there was some difference of opinion as to
its cause. Some of the people of Basra came to 'Uthm2n and urged
him to dismiss Abu Moosa, saying: We do not want you to ask us
everything we know about him; appoint someone else in his place.
'Uthmin said to them: Who do you want? They said: Anyone but
['I

Siyar A'Em an-Ntibalar, 2/391; al-Wiliyah 'ala al-Buldin, 1/186

[21 al-Wiliyah 'ala al-Btildin, 1/187
13] ibid.
[41 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/264

Governors at the time of 'Uthrnh &

353

him; and some people asked 'Uthmh to appoint a Qurashi as
their governor.[ll So 'Uthmsn dismissed Abu Moosa and
appointed 'Abd-AllSh ibn 'Aamir in his place. Here the wisdom
and open-mindedness of Abu Moosa, and his obedience to the
command of the caliph, become clear to us, and we see that he was
not keen to remain govemor as some people think. When the news
of his dismissal and the appointment of 'Abd-All& ibn 'Aamir in
his place reached him, he ascended the minbar and praised 'AbdAllSh ibn 'Aamir, who was a young man of 25 years, and one of
the things that Abu Moosa said in praise of him was: There has
come to you a young man of noble Qurashi descent, who will be
generous to yo~.12]
In these difficult circumstances in Basra, ' U M n &
managed to appoint a new leader to whom the troops would
listen and thus become united in the face of the enemy. Moreover
this dismissal was an honour for Abn Moosa, as it spared him
from humiliation at the hands of the common folk who had been
influenced by the troublemakers and the deviant ideas of the
rebels who bore hatred against him and had started to slander
him and incite people against himM The province of Basra went
through some difficulties when Ibn 'Aamir was appointed
governor, which motivated 'Uthmh to introduce some political
changes in provincial administration; he put the troops of Bahrain
and Oman under the control of Ibn 'Aamir in Basra, so that he
would have stronger authority in facing the threats that he was
facing at that time. His introduction of new troops had the effect
of strengthening the power and authority of Ibn 'Aamir, and it
also had an effect on Basra itself, which became one of the
established Islamic capitals, and the tribes began to migrate to it in
even greater numbers than before.141 Thus the burdens of

I['

ibid.
op. cit., 5/266; Siyar Arliim an-Nubala'. 3/19

I3I al-Mliiyah 'ala al-Buldiin, 1/189
'41

al-Tanzemit al-Ijtim3iyyah warl-lqtisidiyyah fir-Basrah Yl-Qarn al-Awwal alHijri, by S2lih alL'Ali, p. 141

354

' U t M n Ibn ' A f f h+ Dhun-Noorayn

governorship increased with regard to the diwaan and other
administrative, financial, security and other issues.
The province of Basra, the troops and Ibn 'Aamir himself
achieved a great conquest that started straight after he was
appointed as governor, and which ended before the murder of the
This has been discussed above in our
caliph 'Uthmh &.['I
discussion of the conquests of 'UthmSn &. During the days of Ibn
'Aamir, Basra attained a special status among all other Islamic
provinces, and attracted the attention of the caliph 'Uthmh 4as
the result of its conquests and expansion in different fields. It
became a prominent administrative centreL2' from which other
areas were administered. Ibn 'Aamir was responsible for the
appointment of governors in different areas that were under his
authority, by prior agreement with the caliph 'Uthmh &. Hence
his responsibility was great. Ibn 'Aamir began to appoint
governors of those regions as soon as he was appointed,
selecting commanders and governors for appointment in those
regions, among the most important of which were Oman,
Bahrain, Sajistan, Khorasan, Fars and al-Ahwiiz, among other
cities in those vast regions.[31 He used to travel and visit these
governors and agents from time to time, as dictated by public
interests. During his governorship Basra also became famous for
its bayt al-mil, as both income and expenditure increased at that
time. During 'Umar's reign, ZiySd ibn Abi Sufyh was in charge
of its bayt al-mil, and he also took care of some of the channeldigging projects etc. on behalf of Ibn ' ~ a m i r . [ ~During
'
Ibn
'Aamir's governorship, dirhams were minted between 30 and 35
AH in some parts of Persia that belonged to his province, on
which were some Arabic words.[51Ibn 'Aamir was loved by the
people of Basra in general from the time he first came to them,
[I1 al-Wilfiyah 'ala al-Buldin, 1/189

[I1o p cit., 1/193

Nihliyat al-Arab, 19/433 - p. 238 note 2
[41 al-Wiliyah 'ala al-Buldin, 1/194

al-Dariihim al-Islamiyyah by W i d i d 'Ali al-QazzSz, p. 14 (note 4 o n page 238

Governors at the time of 'Uthmsn &

355

despite the rumours that 'Uthmiin had only appointed him
because he was his relative; the people of Basra were happy with
him and kept him.['] From this discussion it is clear that the
governorship of Basra at the time of 'Uthmsn was held by only
two men: Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari and 'Abd-All* ibn 'Aamir, and
each of these two governors played his role in controlling the
affairs of Basra and other regions under its administrati~n.[~I

The province of Kdah
When allegiance was given to 'Uthmiin as caliph, the
governor of Kufah was al-Mugheerah ibn Shy'bah &, who had
become its governor at the end of 'Umafs reign.13] 'Uthm&~&
dismissed al-Mugheerah and appointed Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqiis in
his place. The reason given for this dismissal was that it was done
on 'Umar's instructions, as he advised the caliph who came after
him to appoint Sa'd, since 'Umar had dismissed him from his post
as governor of Kufah at the end of his caliphate. He said: "I did
not dismiss him because of any bad conduct or betrayal on his
part, and I advise the caliph who comes after me to appoint
him."[41 So Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqss became governor of Kufah and
this appointment was shared between Sa'd and 'Abd-All2h ibn
Mas'ood: Sa'd led the prayers and was in charge of the troops,
. [ ~ ~ibn Abi
and Ibn Mas'ood was in charge of the bayt a ~ - r n ~ lSa'd
Waqqiis was very experienced, having been governor of Kulah,
and he had a deep knowledge of its affairs, inhabitants, border
posts and troops, because he had been its founder at the time of
'Umar and had been its governor for a number of years, so he was
the most experienced of people and had the most knowledge
about it.16'
['I al-WilLiyah ' a h al-Buldin, 1/194
[I' op. cit., 1/195
al-MlByah ' a h al-BuldEn, 51239
14' op. cit., 21225
In Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/250; al-Wiliyah ' a h al-Buldin, 11196
[61 'Uthmlin ibn 'Ajjin, by Sgdiq 'Aqoon, 21250; al-WzlEyah 'da al-Buldiin, 1/196

"'

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin a Dhun-Nooravn

356

Among the deeds undertaken by Sa'd when he was governor
of Kufah at the time of ' U r n was visiting some of the border
posts belonging to Kufah, including al-Rayy, and organizing
them. That was in 25 AH.['] He also appointed some new agents
in Hamadhsn and its environs. But it was not long before some
differences arose between Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqgs and 'Abd-All*
ibn Mas'ood. Ibn Mas'ood was in charge of the bayt al-mil, and
Sa'd borrowed something from it, to be repaid at a certain time.
The time for repayment came and Sa'd could not pay that loan.
Ibn Mas'ood came to him and asked him to pay back the loan, and
spoke harshly to him, and people gathered around them.
' U W decided to dismiss Sa'd and leave Ibn Mas'ood in his
post; the punishment for Sa'd was dismissal and the punishment
for Ibn Mas'ood was leaving him in his post, as al-Tabari says.IZ1
This story shows us the piety of both Sahgbis concerned. It
indicates that Sa'd needed money and could not find what he
needed, so he was compelled to borrow from the bayt al-mil; it
also shows us that 'Abd-All& ibn Mas'ood was keen to protect
the Muslims' wealth and he insisted on getting the repayment
from Sa'd who was the governor and ruler of Kufah. Sa'd's
governorship of Kufah lasted for one year and a few months.131
After the dismissal of Sa'd, 'Uthmsn appointed al-Waleed ibn
'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'eet as governor of Kufah, who prior to this
appointment had been the commander of Abu Bakr's army in
Jordan, then had worked for 'Umar as governor of al-~azeerah.'~]
At the end of 'Umar's caliphate and the beginning of ' U M n ' s ,
al-Waleed was one of the commanders of the troops in Kufah, and
he enga ed in phad in a number of places at the head of those
troops.r5 Before he was appointed as governor of Kufah he had
gained a great deal of experience of Kufah and its troops, border

7

[I1 al-Wlriyah 'ala al-Buldin, 1/197
[21 Tareekh at-Tnbari, 5/251

[31 op. cit., 5/250
[41 op. cit., 1/251

al-Willyah 'ala al-Buldln, 1/198

Governors at the time of ' U M 4

357

posts and other affairs. It was the custom of the RightlyGuided
Caliphs to prefer people with experience of the region when they
needed to appoint new governors. So 'Uthmsn chose al-Waleed
ibn 'Uqbah to be governor of Kufah. Many of those who wrote
about 'UthmXs appointment of al-Waleed, both earlier and later
writers, tried to accuse 'Uthmiin with regard to this appointment.
They said that 'Uthmiin appointed his uterine brother al-Waleed
ibn 'Uqbah as governor of ~ufah.['] This is a direct criticism of
'Uthmiin &
. -I[.'
At the beginning of al-Waleed's governorship,
'Abd-Allsh ibn Mas'ood worked with him as he was in charge of
the bayt al-mil, but there was a difference of opinion between alWaleed and 'Abd-All& ibn Mas'ood concerning the wealth that
belongs to the state, and the matter was referred to 'Uthmiin to
decide as he saw fit. 'Uthm2n & thought that the best thing to do
was to give both responsibilities to al-Waleed and to dismiss
'Abd-All& ibn Mas'ood. He thought that this was in the public
interest.[31 Al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah continued to be loved by the
people of Kufah. He had no gate on his house14],and he would
receive people at various times in order to solve their problems
and fulfil his duties towards them, until some incidents took place
in Kufah and he acquired some enemies because of his
determined stance with regard to the case of Ibn al-Haysamiin
al-KhuzVi, who was kiUed by a group of young people in Kufah.
Al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah heeded 'Uthmcn's command that
retaliation (qisis) be carried out against these young
transgressors. From that time, the heirs and relatives of these
criminals began to spread rumours against al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah
and tried hard to seek out al-Waleed's mistakes whenever they
could. These hateful characters managed to fabricate a case
against al-Waleed, which was the claim that he had drunk wine,
which led to the hadd punishment being carried out against him
"I op. cit., 1/198

See the accusations levelled by Taha Hussein inhis book al-Fitnah al-Kubra, 1/94
'Uthmrin ibn 'Affrin, by Sridiq ' Ajoon, p . 108
["

Tareekh at-Tabari, 51251

358

' U W n Ibn 'Man & Dhun-Noorayn

and to his being dismissed from his post as governor of Kufah,
which is what these conspirators wanted.['' The case of alWaleed ibn 'Uqbah being accused of drinking wine will be
discussed in detail when we examine the governors of 'Uthmh
4, in sha Allih.
After al-Waleed was dismissed, 'Uthmih sent a letter to the
people of Kufah in which he said: From the slave of Allsh 'Uthmh,
the ameer al-mu'mzneen, to the people of Kufah. S a l h . To proceed: I
appointed over you al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah and he showed
efficiency and proper conduct, and he was one of the most
righteous of his people. I advised you to be kind to him and him to
be kind to you. But when he had done his best for you and
refrained from hatming you, and you could not find any apparent
faults in him, you shed doubts on his private Me, and All& knows
best about you and about him. I have sent to you Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas
as governor.[2' The Kufans' complaint about al-Waleed and his
dismissal was one in a series of many complaints and dismissals by
some of the people of Kufah against their
Many of
the people of Kufah were angry about the dismissal of al-Waleed.
After 'Uthmih dismissed al-Waleed from his post as governor of
Kufah, he appointed Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas as his successor in 30 AH.
He had been living in Madinah, and he went to Kufah
accompanied by a delegation of Kufans who had come to
'Uthmsn to complain about al-Waleed, among whom were alAshtar al-Nakha'i and others.14' When Sa'eed reached Kufah, he
ascended the minbar and praised All&, then he said: By All& I
have been sent to you unwillingly, but I had no other alternative
but to obey when I was commanded. Fztnah is looming and by
All& I shall certainly suppress it until it is under control; I shall do
that myself from this day. Then he descended from the minbar.[51
'1 al-Williyah 'ala al-Buldiin, 1/201
I'[ Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/280
C31 al-Wiliiyah 'ala al-Buldtn, 1/206
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/280
op. cit., 5/280

Governors at the time of 'Uthman &

359

From this speech it is clear that Sa'eed could see the signs and
beginnings offitnah that had started to appear in Kufah before he
was appointed as governor, and he warned those who wanted to
stir up fitnah that he was determined to put an end to the jtnah
that he sensed was beginning in ~ u f a h . ~ "Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas
managed to organize things in his province and appoint agents
and commanders in the various border posts belonging to Kufah
and to control their affairs.['] He carried out a number of
successful campaigns that we have discussed when speaking of
the conquests during 'Uthmm's reign. Then the fitnnh began to
rear its head in Kufah in 33 AH, as we shall discuss below in
detail, in sha Allsh. Al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i drew up a plot against
Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas and deceived some of the common folk of
Kufah, who went along with al-Ashtar in rejecting the
governorship of Sa'eed and asking 'Uthmh to replace him with
someone else. Sa'eed was only one of the governors whom the
people of Kufah objected to and demanded their dismissal, such
as Sa'd ibn Abi WaqqG, al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah and others. The
request for his dismissal was accompanied by some sort of
rebellion in which the thugs carried weapons, and this set a
dangerous precedent in the history of Kufah and in the history of
the Islamic state as a whole. There was no real reason for it; in fact
the real reason was that circumstances and people had changed
under the influence of those who had been calling forfitnah and
rebellion against 'UthmSn. The caliph 'UthmSn issued orders
appointing Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari as governor of Kufah and
dismissing Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas on the basis of the demands made
by some of the people of Kufah. Abu Moosa started his
governorship with a speech to the people of Kufah in which he
said: 0 people, do not join such troubles and do not do that again;
adhere to the main body of Muslims and obedience, beware of
haste, and be patient, for you now have a new leader. They said:
Lead us in prayer. He said: No, not unless you promise to listen to
'I1

al-Wiiayah ' a h aI-Buldin, 1/207

"I

op. cit., 1/208

360

'Uthmk Ibn 'Affk & Dhun-Noorayn

and obey 'Uthmk ibn 'Affh. They said: We promise to listen to
and obey 'uthmSn.[ll 'UthmSn wrote to the people of Kufah
saying: In the name of Allgh, the Most Gracious, the Most
Merciful. I have appointed over you the one whom you have
chosen, and I have dismissed Sa'eed. By AllSh, I shall be tolerant
with you and I shall be patient with you, and I shall do my best to
set your affairs straight. You will never ask for anything that does
not involve disobedience towards All* but you will be given it,
and there is nothing that you dislike, so long as it does not involve
disobedience towards All*, but you will be exempted from it. So
you will have no excuse (to misbehave).[21
Abu Moosa 4 remained governor of Kufah until 'Uthmgn &
was
Thus we find that the province of Kufah at the time
of 'UthmSn & was ruled by five governors, starting with alMugheerah ibn Shu'bah, and ending with Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari.
Each of these five periods was filled with events that had a direct
effect on the course of the Islamic state. Fitnah emerged in Kufah
and its people became well known for causing trouble for their
governors and rejecting them in many cases, no matter how hard
they tried to please them. They complained about Sa'd ibn Abi
WaqqSs, they complained about al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah, and they
expelled Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas. We may note here that they caused a
great deal of trouble to 'Umar before ' U t W n , to such an extent
that 'Umar said concerning them: Who will sort out the people of
Kufah for me? Some of the people of Kufah played a direct,
leading role in the murder of the caliph 'Uthmh 4.
It is worth noting that there were some satellite provinces
belonging to Kufah, such as Tabaristan, Azerbaijan and some
~ ] supports the view that
other regions to the north of ~ a r s . [ What
they were satellites of Kufah is the fact that the governors of
Kufah - including Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas - were the ones who led the
'I1

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/339
op. cit., 5 / 3 4
ibid.

[41 al-Wiltyah 'ala al-Buldin, 1/213

Governors at the time of ' U t h m b 4&

361

conquests in these regions, and they also disciplined their people
when they rebelled. So these satellite provinces played a role
complementary to that of Kufah to a large extent.'']
From the above discussion about the Islamic provinces at the
time of 'Uthmsn, it is clear that some provinces enjoyed a lengthy
period of stability throughout 'Uthrnh's reign, including the
provinces in the Arabian Peninsula such as Bahrain, Yemen,
Makkah, al-TVif and others. Greater Syria also enjoyed stability
throughout 'Uthmh's caliphate. As for Basra, its people were
engaged in conquest with their governor 'Abd-AllSh ibn 'Aamir.
Egypt and Basra were both affected by problems at the end of
'Uthrnh's caliphate, thus fitnah emerged in those places and
some of their people attacked MaCmah and killed the caliph
'Uthmh A& instead of fighting the enemies of slam![^]

['I ibid.

I['

op. at., 1/214

'Uthmiin's
kith his governorsand their rights and d&es

'Uthm2n1spolicies with his governors
'Uthmiin 4 became caliph at the beginning of 24 AH, when
the governors of 'Umar .& were spread out throughout the Islamic
regions. 'Uthmiin left them in place for an entire year, then after
that he began to dismiss them and appoint governors in these
regions as his authority allowed him to do, and as he thought was
in the best interests of the Muslims. Perhaps by doing so ' U h n h
was following the advice of 'Umar &, who had said: Do not leave
any governor in place for mow than a year, but leave al-Ash'ari in
place for four years.[*1 In his policies with regard to his
governors, 'Uthmiin relied on consultation with the Sahiibah in
many cases, and he also joined some provinces to others when he
thought that this was in the best interests of the Muslims. He
joined Bahrain to Basra, and he joined the provinces of Greater
Syria to one another following the death of some governors, or
when some governors asked to be excused from this task.
'Uthmh 4 was always sincere towards his governors and
['I Siyar A'lrim an-Nubala: 2/391

364

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affsn 6Dhun-Nooravn

showed justice and mercy towards the people. The first thing he
wrote to his governors after allegiance was sworn to him as caliph
of the Muslims was: All21 has enjoined rulers to be shepherds and
He has not enjoined them only to be money-collectors. The early
generation of this ummah was created to be shepherds, not to be
money-collectors, but soon your leaders will become moneycollectors and they will not be shepherds. When they do that,
there will be no modesty, honesty and loyalty. The best conduct is
to examine the Muslims' affairs and see what is due from them,
then give them what is due to them and take what is due from
them; then to look at ah1 al-dhimmnh and give them what is due to
them and take what is due from them; then look at the enemy
with whom you engage in war, and seek victory over them by
means of honesty (not treache~~)."~
From this we can see that 'Uthmh set out guidelines and
policies for his governors to follow, by giving the Muslims their
rights and asking from them the dues that they owed, and by
giving ah1 al-dhimmah their rights and asking from them the dues
that they owed, and by being honest even towards the enemy,
and by being just in all cases; their main concern should not be just
to coUect wealth.[21 'Uthmh 6also wrote to his governors with
some specific instructions concerning new issues that had to do
with administration of the provinces, in addition to his general
letters, in which he issued specific instructions tlmt were binding
on all, such as his command to the people in the provinces to
adhere to the Mush-ha$ that had been written in MadAmhwith
the full knowledge and approval of the Sahibah, when he sent
Mush-ha& to Kufah, Basra, Makkah, Egypt, Syria, Bahrain, Yemen
and al-Jazeerah, in addition to the Mus-haf that was kept in
adi in ah.[^] 'Uthmin ordered that all other Mush-ha$ be
collected and burned, and that was done with the a proval of
the Sahibah in MadEnah, as was narrated from 'Ali &.'4 'Uthmh

P

Tareekh at-Tnbari, 5/244
al-Wl&ah hla al-Buldiin, 1/215
Tareekh al-Madinah by Abu Zayd al-Basri, 3/997
L41 op. cit., 3/995, 996
"I
12'
['I

'Uthdn's policies with his governors and their rights and duties

365

6 was also keen that his commanders should compete with one
another in jihad and conquering new lands. He wrote to 'AbdAllSh ibn 'Aamir in Basra, and Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas in Kufah,
saying: Whoever of you gets to Khorasan first will be its governor,
which motivated Ibn 'Aamir to conquer Khorasan and Sa'eed ibn
al-Aas to conquer ~abaristan.[ll 'Uthmsn stipulated some
conditions for his governors in some cases so that their actions
would be in the best interests of the Muslims. For example,
Mu'swiyah ibn Abi Sufysn wrote to 'Uthmsn, trying to make it
seem to be no serious matter to travel by sea to Cyprus, and
'Uthmh wrote back to him saying: If you travel by sea and take
your wife with you, then do so with our permission, otherwise do
not go. So he travelled by sea and took his wife with him.[']

How 'Uthmsn kept watch on hi
checked on them frequently

and

' U t M n implemented a number of measures to keep watch
on his governors and check on them. These included the following:

His attendance at Hajj
'Uthmh was keen to perform Hajj himself and meet the
pilgrims and listen to their complaints of unjust treatment from
their governors. He also asked the governors to come and meet
him every Hajj season, and he wrote to every region telling the
governors and those who were complaining about them to attend
every Hajj season.[31This was a continuation of the practice at the
time of 'Umar, when there would be an annual meeting between
the caliph, the governors and the people.[41

Questioning those who came from other regions and
provinces
This method is regarded as one of the easiest, as it did not
[I1

I'

Tareekh al-Ya'qoobi, 2/166
al-Williyah 'ala al-Buldin, 1/216; al-Kharij w a S i n r a t al-Kittbah, p. 306
al-Wla^yah ' d a al-Buldin, 1/216, quoting from T m k h at-Tabaii.

'41 Ibid.

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affin .& Dhun-Nooravn

366

involve much effort on the part of the caliphs, and on many
occasions it took place without prior arrangement. It was well
known that the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs did this. The fact
that the first three Rightly-Guided Caliphs lived in Madkah was
a great help to the caliph, because so many people came to
Madinah to visit it, especially during the Hajj season.[']

Presence of people in the regions who wrote to the caliph
'Uthmh L& received the letters sent by some of the common
folk in the regions to Madinah with complaints. He received a letter
sent by the people of Kufah, and a letter sent by the people of Egypt,
and he also received letters sent by some people in Syria. 'Uthmk
would read what was said in these letters and deal with it.[z1

Sending inspectors to the provinces
'Uthmh &. sent a number of inspectors to the provinces to
check on the situation and to find out the truth about the rurnours
that were in circulation about his governors being unjust towards
the people. These inspectors brought back detailed reports about
the governors.[31 He sent 'Amm&r ibn Y&sir to Egypt,
Muhammad ibn Maslamah to Kufah, U s h a h ibn Zayd to
Basra, and 'Abd-All& ibn 'Umar to Syria, in addition to sending
other men to other places.[41

Travelling to some provinces to check on things for himself
'Uthmk & used to visit Makkah during the Hajj and check
on it, and he would meet governors and pilgrims from other
regions there, and ask them how things were (in their provinces).

Asking governors to send delegations from the provinces so
that he could ask them about their commanders and governors
The Rightly-Guided Caliphs often asked the governors to
['I al-Wiiiiyah 'ala al-Buldiin, 2/122
op. cit., 1/217
I' ibid.
[41 ibid.

'"

'UthmAn's ~olicieswith his governors and their rizhts and duties

367

send some of the local people to them so that they could ask them
questions. That happened often with 'Umar, 'UthmSn and 'Ali
( &). As for Abu Bakr &, he was too busy with matters of jihad
which prevented him from doing that, in addition to the fact that
his caliphate was very short.[']
Summoning the govemors and questioning them about the
situation in their lands
This method became well known during the time of the four
Rightly-Guided Caliphs. There was constant communication
between 'Uthmh and his governors, to discuss various affars
of state. Among the most important of these communications was
the meeting that 'UthmSn held with his governors in Madinah,
whence he summoned the governors of Basra, Kufah, Syria,
Egypt and elsewhere, and he summoned the senior Sahsbah and
held a meeting in which he discussed with them the signs offitnah
that had begun to appear, and sought the opinions of those
governors about the jitnah and how to deal with it, and each of
these governors stated his opinion on how to deal with this
phenomenon.[21
Correspondence with the governors
'UthmSn asked the governors for reports on the people and
lands under their rule. His method was well known throughout
the period of the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and it was in fact
the best method at the time of Abu Bakr alsiddeeq and 'Ali ibn
Abi TSlib (&).[31
These are the methods that 'Uthmh followed in checking on
his governors and keeping an eye on them. He was keen that they
should do their duty and in the event of any transgression on their
part, he would discipline them for that mistake if he came to know
of it. If it was proven that (a governor) had committed a
transgression, he would take the decision to punish him
''I op. cit., 2/122

al-Wiltyah 'ala d-Buldtn, 22123
op. cit., 2/122

368

'Uthmin Ibn ' A f f h 4 Dhun-Noorayn

regardless of how well he thought of the governor. For example,
he had al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah flogged, which is the punishment
for drinking alcohol, because the conditions for canying out that
punishment were met, regardless of whether the witnesses were
telling the truth or not1'] ,and after that he dismissed him from his
post as governor of ~ufah.~']'Uthmsn & used to write to the
people of the regions when appointing a new governor, telling
them to be helpful to him and vice versa. He also used to write to
the common folk of different regions, telling them to listen and
obey, so as to make things easier for the governors. For example,
'UthmSn sent a letter to the regions in which it said: I check on the
governors and discuss their work every Hajj season, and since the
time I became caliph I have urged the ummah to enjoin that which
is good and forbid that which is evil. No complaint is brought to
me about me or one of my agents but I check it and respond to it.
Neither I nor my family have any rights that come before the
rights of the people, so for the one who is beaten in secret or
insulted in secret, whoever has any claim of that nature, let him
come to Hajj and settle the score, whether his complaint is against
me or my agent, or let them forgive, for All31 rewards those who
forgive. When this letter was read out in the regions, the people
wept and prayed for ' ~ t h m ~ n . I ~ ]

The rights of governors
At the time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs it was established
that the governors had certain rights, some that had to do with the
people, and some that had to do with the caliph, in addition to
other rights that had to do with the bayt al-mil. AU of these rights,
whether intangible or material, were aimed primarily at helping
the governors to do their duty and serve the people. Among the
most important of these rights were the following:

[I1 op. cit., 2/126

[*I op. cit., 2/217

Tareekh at-Taban', 5/349

' U M s policies with his governors and their rights and duties

369

Obedience as long as it did not involve disobedience
towards Allah
Allgh says:
>
.:,,P

~9
a!

,9

<,,

.>

$3 Jj;Jyl, & & I

.-

3 &I

* a+.,

I+\+

,6, Q*,

31~
., kk+

"0 you who believe! Obey Allth and obey the Messenger
(Muhammad
and those of you (Muslims) who are in
authority. (And) ifyou differ in anything amongst yourselves,
refer it to All& and His Messenger (@), ifyou believe in All&
and in the Last Day. That is better and more suitable for final
detemination" (An-Nisa' 4:59)

s),

Al-Qurtubi said: When AUgh addressed the rulers in the
previous verse and started with them, He enjoined them to render
back the irusts to those, to whom they are due and to judge
between men with justice. In this verse, He is addressing the
people under the care of those rulers, and He commands the
people to obey Him first and foremost, by fulfilling His
commands and heeding His prohibitions, then to obey His
Messenger & secondly, fulfilling his commands and heeding his
prohibitions, then to obey the rulers thirdly, according to the view
of the majority, Abu Hurayrah, Ibn 'Abbgs and others.lll At the
time of the RightlyGuided Caliphs in particular, and in Muslim
society in general, sharee'ah is above all, and both ruler and
people are subject to it, so obedience to the ruler must always be
within the limits of obedience to Allgh and His Messenger, as the
Messenger of All& & said:

"There is no obedience ifit involves sin; rather obedience is only

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affgn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

370

in that which is right and proper."[11
Offering sincere advice to the governors
Based on the principle of enjoining what is good and
forbidding what is evil, which is something on which the entire
ummah is agreed, and which is enjoined in various verses and
ahsdeeth some of which speak of this principle in general, and
others speak of this duty as it applies to governors in general and
enjoin sincerity towards them, the Rightly-Guided Caliphs
always wrote to their governors offering sincere advice. There
are many texts that have been narrated concerning that.[']

The people are required to convey sound information to the
governor
They must be honest and truthful regardless of whether it is
information about what is happening in general or about the
enemy in particular, or about the agents and employees of the
governor. They should hasten to do that as soon as possible,
especially when it has to do with matters of war, information
about the enemy or matters of misconduct by agents, etc, on the
basis of shared responsibility with the governor in taking care of
the general interests of the

Supporting the governor in his view
When $huh broke out and its proponents demanded that
'Uthmh dismiss some of his governors and ' U M n refused to
do so, this support served the interests of the Muslim state and
put a stop to trouble. This does not mean that he should not have
paid attention to the complaints and supported his governors
without investigating the matter, rather this support from the
caliph should come after investigating the complaints and after
examining the situation closely. That may have required sending
['I al-Bukhakhari,
Kittb al-Ahkrim, no. 7257
[21 al-Wiliyah 'ala al-Buldin, 2/56
[31 op. cit., 2/57

' U M s policies with his governors and their rights and duties

371

special committees including some of the Sahtbah to investigate
these issues. Just as the caliph may have been required to support
the governor, that was also required of the people; the people
should respect them and honour them, even though 'Uthmh
dismissed some of the governors because of what he thought was
in the best interests of the people.

Respecting them after their dismissal
An example of that is what ' U W n did with Abu Moosa alAsh'ari and 'Amr ibn al-'Aas (&). We see that 'Uthmh consulted
'Amr ibn al-'Aas with regard to major issues of state after he
dismissed him. This shows tremendous respect on the part of
'Uthmh towards governors whom he had dismissed.

Governors' salaries
Another right of governors was the salaries that they lived on.
The principle of paying regular salaries is something that was
agreed upon by the RightlyCuided Caliphs, following the
example of the Messenger g.Even though the reports only
mention the salaries of some of the workers, it is nevertheless clear
that all workers had salaries at the time of the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs. Most of the reports that have been narrated on this topic
focus primarily on the reign of 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb, as they
mention the amount of the salaries received by some of the
govemors at his time. 'Uthmh and 'Ali (&) followed what the
previous caliphs had done, allocating salaries to their agents and
governors. But it seems that at the hme of 'Uthmsn these stipends
and salaries were more generous, including the salaries of the
governors. That was due to the increased income of the bayt al-mil
as the result of the far-reaching conquests undertaken by
'Uthmsn's governors in the east, Armenia, North Africa and
elsewhere. 'Uthmsn allocated generous bonuses to the governors
in particular. He gave 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh one fifth
of the Wlums as a reward for his conquests in North Africa, as he
said to him: Lf Allsh grants you victory in North Africa tomorrow,
you will have one fifth of the Wlums of the booty that Allsh grants

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Noorayn

1

to the Muslims, as a bonus.['] Whatever the case, giving salaries
to the governors and making them independent of means was a n
Islamic principle enjoined by the Messenger of All*
and
followed by the RightlyGuided Caliphs after him, so that the
governors had no need of the people's wealth and were thus able
to focus their efforts on the interests of the state.12]

j

372

Duties of governors
Establishing Islam was the most important of these duties
Spreading Islamic religion among the people
As that was an era of great conquests, the governors were
required to work at spreading Islam in the conquered lands, with
the help of the Sahibuh who were with them. The governors
undertook this duty with the help of the people who were with
them at the beginning of the conquests in the reign of Abu Bakr &.
Then the reRions began to rely on teachers and firqaha' who came
to them forkis purpose, &ei the state expanded and new cities
were built at the time of 'Umar. There is evidence to prove that
there were teachers in those places during the latter part of
'Umar's reign and the caliphates of 'Uthmsn and 'Ali, because of
the large number of inhabitants in the regions and large numbers
of seekers of knowledge, and because the governors were
preoccupied with other matters and the expansion of the
provinces, so that one province would contain many cities
whose people were in need of fuqaha' and teacher^.'^]
Establishing prayer
Throughout the era of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, the caliph
himself was the one who established and led prayers in
congregation, Jumu'ah prayer and Eid prayers in the city where
he lived, and he would address the people on Jumu'ak, Eid and
Tareekh at-Taban, 5/252
al-Wil&ah ' a h al-Buldrin, 2/64
'31 op. cit., 2/66
[I1

1

'Uthmsn's policies with his governors and their rights and duties

373

other occasions. Similarly, his deputies undertook the same tasks
in their cities. Throughout the era of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs,
the governors addressed the people themselves and led them in
Protecting religion and its principles
After the death of the Prophet @, the RightlyGuided Caliphs
felt a sense of duty with regard to protecting Islam and its sound
principles that had been revealed to the Messenger of AllSh g.
They strove hard to keep alive the Sunnah of the Messenger of
AlEh @ and to ward off innovations, and they strove to maintain
respectfor the religion of All& and for the Messenger of All&
and to ward off plots that tried to insert false ideas into the
teachings of this relipon. 'UthmSn & strove to have the Mus'haf
written out and sent copies of it to the regions, and he ordered his
governors to burn all other mus-ha$ that the people had, in order
to preserve the most important foundation of religion, namely the
Holy ~ u r ' k ~ . '[U~t]M n n sgovernors also strove hard to fight the
Saba'is (followers of 'Abd-All& ibn Saba') who introduced weird
ideas into Islam, putting pressure on them and expelling them.[31
To sum up, protection of Islam was one of the most important
duties with which the governors were entrusted.[41
Planning and building mosques
When the Messenger g reached Quba', he built the first
mosque in Islam, and after he arrived in Madinah, he started to
build his mosque there. When the Messenger @ sent govemors to
other regions, these govemors built mosques there, and after that
the Rightly-Guided Caliphs continued building mosques in the
cities and countries that the Muslims conquered. Even if the
governors did not build all these mosques themselves, they
['I al-Wltyah 'ala al-Buldin, 2/67

Tareekh al-Madinah, 3/996-999
'Abd-All2 ibn Saba'wa Athruhuji Ahdiith nl-Fitnah, by Sulayminal-'Awdah, p.
214
f4]al-Wiliiyah 'ala al-Buldin, 2/69

I'

374

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Aff2n A$ Dhun-Noorayn

played a role in establishing the principal mosques in the cities
belonging to their provinces, especially the Jsmi' mosques.111

Facilitating Hajj
In the early days of Islam the governors were responsible for
facilitating Hajj matters in their provinces and ensuring the safety
of the pilgrims. The governors appointed leaders for the Hajj
caravans and decided the time for them to start their journey,
because the pilgrims could not leave the city without the
permission of the governor; some governors did not limit
themselves only to organizing matters, rather we see that some
of them worked on providing water along the routes travelled by
the pilgrims from their provinces. 'Abd-Alla ibn 'Aamir ibn
Kurayz provided water along the pilgrim route from Basra when
he was its governor for ' U h n i b ibn'Affsn, as he dug wells along
the route from Basra to Makkah.12] After that, the fuqaha' stated
that providing facilities for the pilgrims from his city was one of
the duties of a governor. Al-Mswirdi said: As for providing
facilities for the pilgrims, that is included in the governor's
duties.13]

Carrying out hadd punishments
Carrying out hadd punishments against those who go against
the commands of Alliih and the Sunnah of His Messenger @$ was
a religious obligation borne by the governors, and it was one of
the most important duties that were delegated to them, whether it
had to do with punishment of those who caused damage to public
facilities or those who caused harm to specific individual^.^^]
'Uthmsn 4 and his governors camed out hadd punishments
during his reign, as prescribed in sharee'ah.

['I

ibid.

I['

al-Wiliyah ' a h at-Butdin, 1/192

[31 at-AhEm al-Sulttniyynh by Abu'l-Hasan al-MSwirdi, p. 33

E4] asSiyisah at-Shar'iyyah by Ibn Taymiyah

'Uthmh's policies with his governors and their rights and duties

375

Keeping people safe in their own lands
Preserving security in the province was one of the most
important duties of the governor, and in order to achieve that he
did a number of things, the most important of which was carrying
out hadd punishments on evildoers and immoral people111 ,which
helps to control and limit crimes that threaten people's lives and
property, leading to a reduction in the level of murder, theft,
banditry and other such crimes. It also included punishment for
the rumours that people fabricate against one another with
accusations of adultery and other crimes. Carrying out hadd
punishments in such cases prevents acts of verbal aggression
against people's honour and dignity. The matter is not limited to
protecting people from one another, rather the governors - on the
command of the caliphs - strove to protect their people from
vermin, insects and scorpions etc. al-Balgdhuri said: The governor
of Naseebeen wrote to Mu'gwiyah when he was 'Uthmih's
governor in greater Syria and al-Jazeerah, complaining that some
of the Muslims who were with him had been stung by scorpions.
Mu'gwiyah wrote back to him,telling him to order the people in
every quarter of the city to catch a certain number of scorpions
every night. He did that, and they would bring them to him and
he would issue orders that they be killed.[21

Jihad for the sake of Allah
Generally speaking, at the time of the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs, the governors were the leaders of jihad in those
provinces. The governors at the time of 'Uthmh played a large
role in the conquests, such as 'Abd-Allsh ibn 'Aamir ibn Kurayz,
al-Mugheerah ibn Shu'bah and Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari, who led
the conquests in the east; 'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh who
led the conquests in North Africa; and Mu'iwiyah ibn Abi SufySn
who led the conquests in Armenia and Byzantine territory. Thus
we can see that in addition to their administrative role, the
['I

al-Wiliiyah 'ala d d u l d t n , 2/71

[I'

Futooh al-Buldtn, by al-BalSdhuri, p. 183

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin .& Dhun-Nooravn

376

governors at the time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs were also
mujihideen who were striving against the enemy in different
regions, but that did not prevent them from fulfilling the duties
with which they had been entrusted. Undoubtedly there were
other tasks connected to jihad. The historical sources speak of the
most important of these tasks that were undertaken by the
governors, such as the following:
(a) The governors sent volunteers to fight in jihad. The
governors of Yemen, Bahrain, Makkah and Oman all
sent mujihideen throu hout the caliphates of Abu Bakr,
'Umar and 'Uthmiin.

I8

@) Defending the province against enemies. The governors
of Syria fought off the Byzantines throughout the period
of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and similarly the
governors of Iraq fought off the Persians until they
managed to kill the last of their kings at the time of
'Uthmfin ibn 'Affh &.
(c) Fomfying their lands. 'Uthmfin & issued commands that
the coasts be fortified and troops be stationed there, and
he allocated land to the Muslims who settled there to
help populate those regions.[2]
(d) Seeking information about the enemy. The governors
sought out news about the enemy and directed blows
against them. They managed to penetrate their ranks by
sending spies among them.
(e) Supplying horses to the regions. Horses played an
extremely important role in jihad, and the Muslims had
taken a special interest in the raising and training of
'Umar
horses since the days of the Messenger
introduced a general policy throughout the state for

a.

['I al-Wrliiyah 'ala al-Buldrfn, 2/72
'21 op cit., 2/73

'Uthmh's policies with his governors and their rights and duties

377

supplying the horses that were needed for jihad
throughout the Islamic regions according to need.[']
'Uthmh 4 followed the same policy that had been
introduced by 'Umar with regard to horses. These horses
were kept in a state of readiness for immediate response
to defend the Islamic state.

(4 Teaching children and preparing them for jihad. The
Rightly-Guided Caliphs paid attention to the education
of children and teaching them that which would help
them to engage in jihad in the future.
(g) Keeping records of the troops (diwaan). 'Uthmsn
followed 'Umar's policy in paying attention to the
records of the troops. He made sure that records were
kept in all regions because he believedthat the people of
the regions were in the most need of this record-keeping,
especially those who were close to the enemy; those were
the regions that needed hoops all the time. The
governors were directly responsible for the records of
troops, despite the fact that there were other employees
who could take care of it, because the governors were
also military commanders, so their responsibility with
regard to the diwaan records was like that of the caliph,
because they were his deputies.[21
(h) Upholding treaties. The Islamic conquests at the time of
the Rightly-Guided Caliphs were accompanied by
correspondence with the enemy, and there were many
treaties and peace deals between the Muslims and the
peoples of the conquered lands. As military leaders, the
governors were directly responsible for making and
upholding these
['I op. cit., 2/74
[I' al-Wiltyah ' a h al-Buldin, 2/75
[I'

ibid.

378

'Uthmsn Ibn 'M2n 4 Dhun-Noorayn

Striving to ensure people's livelihood
From the time of Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq &, the RightlyGuided
Caliphs followed a new method of distributing stipends to the
Muslims from the income of the bayt al-mil. Initially that was not
limited to certain times, but at the time of 'Umar that changed
after he set up record-keeping in the various regions. The
distribution of stipends became regular and organized, and this
system was also followed by 'Uthmh. The caliphs and their
governors during the period of the RightlyGuided Caliphs did
not limit themselves to securing the food supply and keeping a n
eye on the markets, rather the issue of accommodation and
sharing it out was also the responsibility of the governors, who
supervised the allocation of houses in the conquered cities.[']

Appointing workers and employees
Appointing workers and employees in the various
departments belonging to the province was often the task of the
governor, because a province was usually composed of a capital
city and other cities and regions belonging to the province, which
needed organization of its affairs. So the governors would
appoint workers and employees in those regions. At the time of
'Uthmh & these employees of the governor took care of large
areas because the provinces increased in size as the result of
conquests and because of the amalgamation of large areas that
were incorporated into provinces that had previously been
limited in size, such as Basra, Kufah, greater Syria and others.
So the appointment and distribution of workers was one of the
important tasks undertaken by the governors.

Taking care of ah1 aLdhimmah
Taking care of ah1 al-dhimmah, respecting the treaties with
them, giving them their rights, asking them for what they owed to
the Muslims, keeping an eye on them, and defending their rights
against those who wronged them, were all among the duties of
1'1 al-Wiliyuh 'ula aldulhin, 2/80

'Uthmsn's policies with his governors and their rights and duties

379

the governor, based on the commands of ~haree'ah.~'~

Consulting wise people in their provinces
The caliphs followed the method of the Prophet &, which
was to consult wise men among the Sahtbah. They used to hold
meetings with the senior Sahtbah and consult them about various
issues.[21 They also told their governors to consult the wise
people in their lands. The governors implemented that and held
meetings with their people to find out their opinions.[31

Checking the province's need for development and
construction
It is well known that the Rightly-Guided Caliphs and their
governors paid attention to the people's needs for development
and agriculture. At the time of 'Uthmsn A, 'Abd-All& ibn
'Aamir, his governor in Basra, dug wells not only in Basra but in
many other places.141

Paying attention to the social situations of the provincial
inhabitants
On the basis of Islamic teachings, the governors paid
attention to these matters, but the governors of that era - on the
orders of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs - did some kinds of social
work that it may be difficult for people in their position to do. The
caliphs were keen to treat people according to their status, and
were also keen for their governors to show special respect to
people of high status and those who had come to Islam first. For
example, 'Uthmh's governor in Kufah wrote to him complaining
that the Bedouin and riffraff were overwhelming the people of
status and those who had come to Islam earlier. ' U t h h wrote
back to him saying: Show preference to the senior Muslims and
those who came first, to whom All21 granted victory in that land,
['I ibid.
I[' op. at., 2/81

c31 al-Wiliiyah 'ala al-Buldrin, 2/82' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/280
c41 al-Wil8yah 'ala al-Buldiin, 2/82

i

I

380

U
'-

Ibn 'Affh
4 Dhun-Noorayn

and let those who came to join them later as the result of their
efforts come second to them, unless they are becoming slow in
following the truth and have ceased to act upon it, and those who
came later have started to do it. Recognize everyone according to
his status, and deal with all of them on the basis of justice and
fairness, because justice may be achieved by acknowledging the
people according to their status.
The governor's working hours
It is well known that 'Uthmh's governor in Kufah, al-Waleed
ibn'uqbah, had no gate on his house, and that he received people
at all times. This indicates that the people had the freedom to
come and see the governor without any problem whenever they
wanted to see him for a reason.r11 The governor had a section
attached to his house that was open to the people whenever they
wanted to come and see him and that was separate from the area
where his wife and children lived.

['I op. cit., 2/82

Who
were the governors
of.'Uthmiin
~:;c?
.
.
. -- - - .
-

The historians talk a great deal about 'Uthmsn's alleged
favouritism towards his relatives and say that they held the reins
of power during his caliphate, to such an extent that they
provoked many people against him and they revolted in protest
at his giving power to his relati~es.~']The relatives of ' U M
whom he appointed to positions of authority were:
1. Mu'tiwiyah

2. 'Abd-Alltih ibn Abi'l-Sarh
3. al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah

4. Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas
5. 'Abd-Alltih ibn 'Aarnir
These five whom 'Uthmh appointed as governors were
related to him, and according to their claims this is cause for
criticism. Let us look first at the names of all the governors of
'Uthmh &. They were: Abu Moosa al-Asha'ri, al-Qa'q3 ibn
'Amr, Jsbir al-Muzani, Habeeb ibn Maslamah, 'Abd al-Rahmsn

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affgn A Dhun-Nooravn

382
~p

ibn Khslid ibn al-Waleed, Abu'l-A'war al-Sulami, Hakeem ibn
Salsmah, al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, Jareer ibn 'Abd-Allsh al-Bajali,
'Uyaynah ibn al-Nahhgs, Maik ibn Habeeb, al-Naseer al'AjaIi,
al-S2ib ibn al-Aqra', Sa'eed ibn Qays, Salmsn ibn Rabee'ah,
Khunays ibn Hubaysh, al-Ahnaf ibn Qays, 'Abd al-Rahmsn ibn
Rabee'ah, Ya'la ibn ~unayyah[", 'Abd-Allsh ibn 'Amr alHadrami and 'ALi ibn Rabee'ah ibn 'Abd alLrUzza. These were
the govemors of 'Uthmh & and if we examine this list for its
statistics, we will find that there were eighteen governors. Would
it not be reasonable to suggest that five men from Banu Umayyah
were qualilied to be governors, especially since we know that the
Prophet @ used to appoint men from Banu Umayyah to do work
for the state more than men from other tribes? Moreover, these
governors were not all appointed at the same time, rather
'Uthmsn & appointed al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah, then he dismissed
him and appointed Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas in his stead, so it was not
the case that all five were appointed at the same time. Before
'Uthmh died, he dismissed Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas too, and when
'Uthmh died there were only three governors who were from
Banu Umayyah: Mu'swiyah, 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh
and 'Abd-All21 ibn 'Aamir ibn Kurayz. 'Uthmh dismissed alWaleed ibn 'Uqbah and Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas, but from which
province did he dismiss them? From Kufah, from which 'Umar
had dismissed Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqss, Kufah which never
approved of any governor. The fact that 'Uthmk &dismissed
these governors does not reflect any criticism of them, rather it is a
criticism of the city over which they had been appointed.121
Banu Umayyah were employed by the Messenger of AUSh
during his lifetime, and subsequently by those who cannot be
accused of favouring them because of blood ties, namely Abu
Bakr and 'Umar (may All* be pleased with them). We do not
know of any tribe of Quraysh that had more people employed by
[I1 His full name was Ya'la ibn Umayyah ibn Abi

A'ltm an-Nubala', 3/100
Hiqbah min at-Tareekh, p. 75

'Ubaydah al-Tameemi. Siyar

I

I

Who were the governors of 'Uthmh d

383

the Messenger of All21 @ than Banu 'Abd Shams, because they
were numerous and they were known to be people of leadership
quality and status. The Prophet @ employed 'ItSb ibn Usayd ibn
Abi'l-'Aas as governor of Makkah, Abu Sufyh ibn Harb over
Najrh, Khaid ibn Sa'eed in charge of the zak& of Banu
Madhjah, and Abin ibn Sa'eed in charge of some campaigns then
as governor of Bahrain. So 'Uthmh only appointed people of the
same nature and clan as the Prophet @$ did, and as Abu Bakr and
'Umar did after him. Abu Bakr appointed Yazeed ibn Abi Sufyin
in charge of the conquests in Syria, and 'Umar left him in that
post, then after Yazeed died he appointed his brother
~u'iwi~ah.["
The question that arises here is: did they prove that they were
suited to the job or not? We will see below the testimony of the
scholars about these governors who were appointed by 'Uthmin
4.
'Uthmh was a Rightly-Guided Caliph whose example is to
be followed, and his actions are a precedent that may be used as
guidelines for the ummah. Just as 'Umar set a precedent for the
caliphs who came after him to refrain from appointing relatives in
the running of affairs, 'Uthmh set a precedent for the caliphs
who came after him to appoint relatives if they are qualified. The
one who studies the life of 'Uthmh will have no doubt that they
were all qualified administrators, and whatever 'Uthmh is
criticized for is in fact within the limits of permissibility.[21
The governors whom 'Uthmh appointed from among his
relatives are proven to have been qualified and capable in running
the affairs of their provinces. AU2h granted many conquests at
their hands, and they treated the people justly and kindly. Some
of them had been appointed as governors previously, during the
reigns of Abu Bakr and 'Umar
Let us look at what the
scholars have to say about these governors.
['I

Minhrij as-Sumah, 3.175, 176

'31

Tahqeeq Mawiqqal-Sahdbahfi'l-Fitnah, 1/417

"' al-As&ji'Sunnah wa Fiqhiha, by Sa'eed Hawa, 4/1675

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affk 8 Dhun-Noorayn

384

Mur2wiyah ibn Abi Sufygn ibn kar$ a i - ~ m a w i
The biographers state that this noble Sahcibi had many good
qualities, of which we will mention a few:

Praise for Mu'Bwiyah in the Holy Qur'Bn
Mu'Swiyah took part in the campaign of Hunayn, and AllSh
says:

<, " ,

4

#,>

, -,;*

<,,

L ~j Y
I>* J N *,dl

,,,
&9

, , ,j,
25T1, J

11,

&d$; & ,d5&

<, ,,/
4 & , $2&;,
>3
LJa

,
,

,,

?$

Gk.

"Then Allih did send down His Sakeenah (calmness,
tranquillity and reassurance) on the Messenger (Muhammad
@), and on the believers, and sent down forces (angels) which
you saw not, and punished the disbelievers. Such is the
recompense of disbelievers" (At-Tawbah 926)
Mu'gwiyah & was one of those who were present at the Battle
of Hunayn, so he was one of the believers upon whom All21 sent
down his Sakeenah, along with the Prophet %.['I

Praise from the Sunnah
The Prophet $gprayed for Mu'gwiyah &, such as when he
said:
,,'b
,.

G1-j C$

,

l&Li

G!
$!I,

"0 Allih, make him a guide[2] and guided[31,and guide others
through him."[41

And he
['I

said:

ManuiyEt Khilifit Mu'iwiyahji Tareekh at-Tabari, by M

d alchayth, p. 23

i.e., a guide for people, or one who directs others to do good
i.e., guided in himself
'41 Saheeh Sunan at-Timidhi, by al-Albhi, 31236 (3842)
[I'

Who were the governors of 'Uthm2n .&

385

"0All&, teach Mu'liwi ah literacy and numeracy, and protect
him from punishment. ,{I

And the Messenger of AU2h .@$ said:

"The jrst army of my ummah that will campaign by sea,
Paradise will be their due."['] Umm Harim said: I said : 0
Messenger ofAllih, will I be among them? He said: "You will
be among them ." Then the Prophet @$ said: "Thefirst army of
my ummah to attack the city of caesarc3]will be forgiven." I meaning Umm Harim - said: Will I be among them, 0
Messenger ofAll&? He said : " N o."[41
al-~uhallab[~]
said: This hadeeth is praising Mur2wiyah,
because he was the first one to lead a campaign by sea.[61

Scholars' praise for Muf&wiyah&
Praise from 'Abd-Allih ibn 'Abb2s &
It was said to Ibn 'Abbiis: Can you speak to the ameer almu'mineen Mu'gwiyah, because he prays Witr with only one
I'[ Mawiind al-Zam'irn, 7/249. Its i s ~ is
d hasan (2278).
"I Fath al-Birn, 6/121
the city of Caesar: i.e., Constantinople
14' al-Bukhirri, no. 2924
al-MuhaUab ibn Ahmad al-Andalusi, the author of Sharh Saheeh al-Bukhin', d.
435 A H .
16] Fa& al-Birri, 6/120

386

' U t h m h Ibn 'Affiin & Dhun-Noorayn

rak'ah? He said: He is a faqeeh.l" There is not enough room to
mention all thefiqhi issues that were narrated from Mu'iiwiyah &,
but there follow a few of them:
m
It was narrated that he prayed Witr with one rak'ah.
m
It was narrated that he prayed for rain (istisqa') by virtue
of someone who appeared to be righteous.[']
m
Half a st' of wheat is sufficient as zakit ~l-fltr.[~l
m
It is mustahabb to perfume the body when wanting to
enter ihrt~n.[~]
m
It is permissible to buy and sell the houses of ~ a k k a h . ' ~ ]
m
A husband and wife may be separated because of
impotence.
e
A divorce uttered by a man who is dnrnk counts as such.
m
A Muslim should not be killed in retaliation (qists) for a
k%ir.
m A killer may be detained until the son of his victim
reaches maturity (and can decide what should be
done).[61

Praise from 'Abd-AU&hibn al-Mubhak for Mur&wiyah&
'Abd-All& ibn al-Mubiirak said: Mu'iiwiyah is a test for us
(i.e., we test people by how they think of Mu'iiwiyah). Whoever
regards him in a disrespectful manner we would accuse of being
against the ~ahiibah.[~

Praise from Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Imam Ahmad was asked: What do you say - may Alliih have
op. cit., 7/130
al-Mughni by ibn Qudhah, 3/346
[31 Zad al-Ma'ad, 2/19
[" al-Mughni, 5/77
['I op. cit., 6/366
[6] Mamiyttt Khiliifat Mu'iwiyahfi Tareekh at-Tabari, by -lid
['I op. cit., p. 29
['I
['I

al-Ghayth p. 28

Who were the governors of U
' -n

L&

387

mercy on you - about one who says: I do not say that Mu'swiyah
is the scribe who wrote down the Revelation and I do not say that
he was the maternal uncle of the believers, because he seized
power by the sword?['] Abu 'Abd-Allsh said: This is a
reprehensible view; the people who hold such a view should be
shunned and the people should be warned against them.[']

Praise from al-Q2di Ibn al-'Arabi for Mu12wiyah &
Ibn al-'Arabi spoke of attributes that were combined in
Mu'swiyah 4, among which he mentioned: Protecting the
Muslim ummah in general, guarding the border posts,
strengthening the army, prevailing over the enemy, and dealing
with people justly and kindly.131 Muhibb al-Deen al-Khateeb
commented on this text by noting: Mu'swiyah's care and concern
from its enemies was so great that he sent
to protect the -ah
word to the king of Byzantium, threatening him, when he was in
the midst of fighting with 'Ali at Siffeen, when he heard that the
king of Byzantium was approaching the border with a huge
army.[41 Concerning that Ibn Katheer said: The king of
Byzantium had great hopes of attacking and defeating
Mu'swiyah after having instilled fear in him and humiliating
him, and routing his troops. When the king of Byzantium saw
that Mu'swiyah was preoccupied with fighting 'Ali, he
approached some cities (on the border) with a huge army, filled
with hope of victory. But Mu'swiyah wrote to him saying: By
All&, if you do not stop and go back to your own land, 0 cursed
one, I shall reconcile with my cousin and we will unite against
you, and I shall certainly expel you from all of your land; I shall
keep pursuing you, and the earth, vast as it is, will be straitened
for you (cf. At-Tawbah 9:25). At that, the king of Byzantium was
&aid, and he sent word seeking a peace treaty.[51
[I1 ibid.
[21

alSunnah by al-KhalEl, ed. by 'Atiyah al-Zahr6ni, 2/434

[31 al-'Awiisim min al-QawBsim, p. 210

MamiyBt Khilifit Mu'cizuiyah, p. 31
al-Bidiyah warn-Nihiyah,8/119

388

'Uthmzn Ibn 'Affzn .& Dhun-Noorayn

Praise from Ibn Taymiyah for Mu'itwiyah &
Ibn Taymiyah said concerning him: It is proven in mutawttir
reports that Mu'gwiyah was appointed to a position of authority
by the Prophet $gas he appointed others, and he fought in jihad
with him. The Prophet g regarded him as honest and
trustworthy; he used to write down the Revelation for him and
he never had any doubts concerning his writing down of the
Revelation. He was appointed as a governor by 'Umar ibn alKhattgb 4, who was one of the best judges of character. All&
caused truth to be uttered on his lips and to fill his heart and he
never accused him of anything with regard to his
Praise from Ibn Katheer
Ibn Katheer said concerning him: All the Muslims
unanimously agreed to swear allegiance to him in 41 AH, and
he remained in charge throughout this period until the year in
which he died. Throughout this period jihad was ongoing in the
lands of the enemies, and the word of All2h remained supreme,
and booty was coming to him from the ends of the earth; the
Muslims were at ease, enjoying justice, tolerance and goodwill.
He also said: He was forbearing1" ,dignified, a leader, prominent
among people, noble, just, and a man of chivalry.i31He also said:
He was a man of good conduct, forgiving, tolerant and
overlooking the mistakes of others, may All& have mercy on
him.i41
His narration of hadeeth
Mu'gwiyah 4 is regarded as one of those who had the honour
of narrating hadeeth from the Messenger of All& @$ the reason
an-Nubala: 3/
129
[21 Ibn Abi'l-Dunya and Abu Bakr ibn Abi 'Aasim wrote books about the
forbearance of Mu'gwiyah.
['I al-Bidiyah warn-Nihtyah,8/118
op. cit., 8/126
['I al-Fatriwa, 4/472; aldidiyah wah-Nihiiyah, 88122; Siyar A'&

Who were the governors of 'UthmSn &

389

being that he stayed close to the Messenger of All*
after the
conquest of Makkah, because he was his brother-in-law and his
scribe. Mu'swiyah narrated one hundred and sixty three (163)
ahideeth from the Messenger of AUSh &, four of which were
narrated by both al-Bukhsri and Muslim; al-Bukhe alone
narrated a further four and Muslim five.['] Mu'swiyah's
conduct towards the people during his governorship was
among the best of any governor, which made the people love
said:
him. It is proven in alSnheeh that the Prophet

"The best of your leaders - or rulers - are those whom you love
and who love you, and you prayfor them and they pray for you;
the worst of your rulers are those whom you hate and who hate
you, and you curse them and they curse you."[21
I will conclude my discussion of Mu'Swiyah by noting what
was said about him by al-QSdi Abu Bakr ibn al-'Arabi: 'Umar
made him the governor of all the provinces of Syria and 'Uthmsn
approved of his governorship. Indeed, Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq
appointed him because he was the heir of his brother Yazeed, and
G e e d had appointed him to succeed him. 'Umar then approved
of his position because he had been a governor during Abu Bakr's
reign, as Yazeed had passed the position on to Mu'swiyah, and
'Uthmh approved of and confirmed 'Umar's decision. Look at
this series of approvals and how strong it is.l3l It was proven that
the Messenger of A E h &$appointed him as a scribe, so he had a
track record of working for the Islamic state that no one else,
before or after him,had. He was appointed by the Messenger of
'I
I['

Manuiyif Khiltfut Mu'iwiyahfi Tareekh at-Tabari, p. 33
Muslim, Kitib al-lmirah, no. 65 (1855)
ul-Xwisim min ul-Qawisim, p. 83

390

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affin 4Dhun-Noorayn

Alliih @ and by the three caliphs who came after him, and alHasan ibn 'Ali, the grandson of the Messenger of Allih @$ made a
peace deal with him and approved of his becoming caliph.[']

'Abd-All2h ibn 'Aamir ibn Kurayz
His full name was 'Abd-Allgh ibn 'Aamir ibn Kurayz ibn
Rabee'ah ibn 'Abd Shams ibn 'Abd Man3 ibn Qusay al-Qurashi
al-'~bshami.[~]
He was born at the time of the Messenger of Allih @$ in 4
AH.[^] When the Messenger @$ performed 'Umrah in 7 AH to
make up for the 'Umrah that he had not been able to complete
previously, he entered Makkah and 'Abd-Allih ibn 'Aamir was
brought to him. Ibn Hajar said: He smacked his lips and yawned,
and the Messenger of Allih @ spat into his mouth and said: "Is
this the son of the Sulami woman?" They said: Yes. He said: "He
looks like us." He spat into his mouth and sought refuge with
All2h for him, and the child swallowed the saliva of the Prophet
g.
He said: He will be a finder of water, and he did not dig in any
land but water appeared to him.[41
'Abd-Allih ibn 'Aamir was not appointed to any
administrative or military post until he became governor of
Basra in 29 AH/649 CE. He was the nephew (son of maternal
because the mother of
uncle) of the caliph 'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn 6,
'Uthmh was Arwa bint Kurayz ibn Rabee'ah, and the mother of
'Abd-AUSh ibn 'Aamir was from Banu ~ u l a ~ r n . [ ~ ]
When he was appointed govemor of Basra, he was twentyfour or twenty-five years old.[61 He remained governor of Basra
until the caliph 'Uthmh & was killed, when he gathered a huge
al-Madfnah m-Nabmzyyah Fajr al-Islam wa'l-Asr al-Rishidt, 2/216
I[' a1 Blayah wa'n-N~hiyah,8/91
I ' [ Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, 5/272
[41 Siyar A ' l h an-Nubalar, 3/19; Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, 5/273; Asad al-Ghibah, 31
293, no. 3031.
['I

Who were the governors of ' U t h h &

391

army and took whatever wealth he had with him, and marched to
Makkah where he joined az-Zubayr. Then he came back to Basra
and was present at the Battle of the Camel, but he was not present
at the battle of Siffeen, even though al-Qalqashandi said that he
was on Mu'2wiyah's side in the arbitration at ~dfeen.['I During
the caliphate of Mu'swiyah he was appointed as governor of
Basra for three years, then he was dismissed. He settled m
Madinah, and died there in 57 AH.['] According to a report
narrated by Ibn Qutaybah, he died in Makkah and was buried in
'Araf2t in 59 AH.I~]Ibn Sa'd praised him, saying: 'Abd-All* was
noble and generous; he had a lot of wealth and children and he
loved development.[*] lbn Hajar said concerning him: He was
very generous, brave and courageous.151He was regarded as one
] as one of the most
of the most generous peo le of ~ a s r a ' ,~and
generous of the Muslims. 'Abd-All& ibn 'Aamir left his mark
during the conquests; he managed to dash the hopes of the
Persians completely, when he demolished the last hopes of
ancient Persian aspirations. That was when he finished off the last
of their kings, Yazdagird ibn Shahriyh ibn Kisra and KharazSd
Mahr the brother of Rustam, who led the Persian opposition
against the Muslims.
In addition to his genius in military matters, 'Abd-All21 ibn
'Aamir also took an interest in Islamic knowledge. It is narrated
that he narrated a hadeeth from the Prophet g.Ibn Qutaybah
said: He only narrated one hadeeth from the Messen er of All*
@Is1,but it was not narrated in any of the six books.19 As for the

K

B

['I Mujaliat al-Mu'driWI alLrArabi, no. 21, p. 128

Siyar A'ltm an-Nubalar, 3/21
[31 al-Ma'zrif by lbn Qutaybah, p. 321

no. 21, p. 129
Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, 5/272
Is'al-'Aqd al-Fareed, 1/293,294
[I' Subh al-A'shifi S i d a t al-Insha' by Abu'l-'Abbb al-Qalqashandi, 1/450,451
[I' al-Mu'&$ p. 321
'91 ibid.
'41 Mujallat al-Mu'drikh alLrArabi,

[I'

392

'Uthmzn Ibn ' A f f h4i Dhun-Nooravn

hadeeth which he narrated, it was narrated by Ibn Q2ni' and Ibn
Mandah via Mus'ab az-Zubayri: My father narrated to me from
my grandfather Mus'ab ibn Thsbit, from Hanzalah ibn Qays,
from 'Abd-AUSh ibn az-Zubayr and 'Abd-Allsh ibn 'Aamir, that
the Messenger of All& @ said:

"Whoever is killed defending his wealth is a martyr."[I1

His economic developments in Bas
A number of economic developments in Basra are connected
to the name of 'Abd-All21 ibn 'Aamir, and they are no less
important than his brilliant military achievements that are
represented in his numerous victories over the Magians, his
pursuit of their remnants and his destruction of all Yazdagird's
hopes. His economic reforms are represented in his concern about
the market of Basra, as he bought (the land for) this marketplace
with his own wealth and gave it to the people of the city.['] The
market was in the middle of Basra, based on the evidence
mentioned by Khaleefah ibn KhayySt, that the market stood on
the banks of the river which is in the middle of Basra. This was an
excellent choice, because it made the market an important centre
in the middle of the city.
Perhaps the most important of his developments in Basra was
in the field of irrigation, as Ibn'Aamir was deeply concerned with
this issue. Ibn Qutaybah stated that Ibn 'Aamir dug two channels
in Basra, one in the east and another that was known as Umm
'Abd-AllCh and was named after the mother of 'Abd-AU2h ibn
' ~ a m i r . [ ~'Abd-All&
]
ibn 'Aamir ordered Ziy:d ibn Abi S u f y h
al-Htkim in al-Mustadrak, 3/639 (6753). Its isniid is da'eef (weak), but there is
supporting evidence on this topic.
[21 At-Tubaqtt al-Kubra, 5/73; Mujallat al-Mu'iirikh al-'Arabi is the main source for
my biography of 'Abd-AllSh ibn 'Aamir, where 1benefited from the work of
Professor Muhammad Ham$&, may A l l a reward him with good.
['I Majallat al-Mu'trikh nl-'Arabi, no. 21, Muhammad H a d d i , p. 134
['I

Who were the governors of ' U t h m h 6

393

to dig a channel in Abillah, as ZiyZd had been appointed in charge
of the diwan and the bayt al-mil by 'Abd-Alliih ibn 'Aamir, and he
would leave him in charge of Basra in his stead when he went out
on conquests.['] Khaleefah ibn Khayyiit stated that Ziysd dug the
channel in Abillah until it reached the foot of the mountain, and
the one who dug it for ZiySd was 'Abd ar-Rahmin ibn Abi
~akrah.['' When the water began to flow, 'Abd al-Rahmiin
spurred on his horse (racing the water) until the water nearly beat
him.[31 'Abd-All31 ibn 'Aamir also dug a cistern that was named
after his mother, which was the cistern of Umm 'Abd-Alla ibn
]
mentioned that 'Abd-Allsh ibn
'Aamir in ~ a s r a . I ~Al-BalSdhuri
'Aamir dug a channel, and he appointed his freed slave Nifidh to
dig it, so it was named after him and became known as Nahr
NSidh (the channel of ~ & d h ) . [ ~There
]
was also the channel of
Murrah, which Ibn 'Aamir ordered Murrah, the freed slave of
Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq & to dig, so it was named after himr6]And
there was the channel of al-Asswirah which 'Abd-AllSh ibn
'Aamir dug for them. Al-BalSdhuri mentions the bridge of Qurrah
in Basra, and said: The bridge of Qurrah was named after Qurrah
ibn Hayyin al-BShili. There was an ancient channel there, then it
was bought by the mother of 'Abd-Allzh ibn ' ~ a m i r ,[who
~ gave
it in charity as a source of water for the people of ~asra.[']
From the above it is clear that 'Abd-Alla ibn 'Aamir was
concerned with digging channels so that agriculture, which is the
foundation of economic life, would flourish, in addition to Basra's
strategic location with regard to trade routes and its military
importance as a base for the Islamic conquests in the east. We may
['I Futooh al-Huldiin by al-BalHdhuri, p. 351
[I'

Tareekh Khaleefah ibn Khayyiif, 1/142

13] Fufooh al-BuI&n, p. 351

Majallat al-Mu'iirikh alL'Arabi, no. 21, 'Abd-All% ibn Aamir, p. 134
Majallaf al-Muriirikh al-'Arabi, no. 21, p. 135; Fufooh al-Bulhin, p. 354
[61 Majallaf al-Mu'iirikh al-'Arabi, no. 21, p. 136; Fufooh al-Buldiin, p. 354
[71 Majallat al-Mu'Lirikh al-'Arabi, no. 21, p. 136
Futooh al-Buldiin, p. 353,354

394

' U W n Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Nooravn

note how keen 'Abd-All* ibn 'Aamir was to implement reforms
from his words: If I had the opportunity, I would develop the land
to such an extent that a woman could go out on her mount,
coming to water and a market every day until she reached
~akkah.~']
In fact his developments were no less important than the
conquests that he achieved in the east. Basra was the caliphate's
military base in its conquests of the east. Dr. Siilih al-'Ali noted
that the widespread conquests led to an increase in income for
Basra and the spread of economic prosperity in the city, which
encouraged merchants and businessmen to flock there, thus civil
life developed quickly in ~asra.~']
The financial situation in the province of Basra was in very
good shape as the result of the far-reaching conquests in the east,
plus the economic and trade activity in Basra and its stability and
security. 'Abd-All& ibn 'Aa~nirwas a humble man whose door
was open to all people, to such an extent that he rebuked his
gatekeeper and told him not to lock the gate by night or by day.r31
In fact Ibn 'Aamir became very well known in Basra. Ibn Sa'd
said: The people used to say: Ibn 'Aamir said such and such, and
Ibn 'Aamir did such and suchE4]
,as the result of his developments
and his good conduct, so the people loved him more and more.[5'
Ibn 'Aamir remained governor of Basra until the caliph 'UthmSn
&was murdered.@]
'Abd-All* ibn 'Aarnir was one of the governors of 'Uthmsn.
He is the one who dug the channels of Basra, and was the first one
to build cisterns in 'ArafSt and bring water to them.P1 He is the
I" al-Ma'cirif by Ibn Qutaybah, p. 321

al-Tanzeemtt al-Ijtimriyyah ma?-lqtisidiyyah, p. 30, 31
Mujallat al-Mu'irikh al-'Arabi, no. 21, 'Abd-AIEh ibn 'Aamir, Muhammad
Hamsdi, p. 138
I['
al-Tabaqijt, 5/33
[51 Majullat al-Mu'cirikh al-'Arabi, no. 21, 'Abd-All& ibn 'Aamir, Muhammad
Hamsdi, p. 138
al-Bidiyuh warn-Nihtyah, 8/91
[71 ibid.
['I
['I

Who were the governors of ' U W n &

395

man who did so many good deeds and was so loved by the
people that no one can deny it, as Ibn Taymiyah said.['' AlDhahabi said concerning him: He was one of the great Arab
leaders and one of the most courageous and generous, and he was
kind and forbearing.[21

al-waleed ibn "Uqbah
His full name was al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'eet ibn
Abi 'Amr ibn Umayyah ibn 'Abd Shams ibn 'Abd M d f , the
ameer Abu Wahb aI-Umawi. He was a companion of the Prophet
g
g but not for long.[31 He was the half-brother of 'Uthmh
through his mother.
Al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah was one of the men employed by the
Islamic state at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, who chose
trustworthy and qualified men to work for the state. That was one
of the main causes for the rapid and large-scale spread of Islam
during their reigns. He was regarded as trusted and reliable by
both of these two caliphs, one of those to whom important tasks
could be entrusted, because they saw that he was qualified and
that his faith was sincere.14] The first task he undertook during
the caliphate of Abu Bakr was when he was entrusted with secrets
in the exchange of correspondence between the caliph and his
commander Kh2lid ibn al-Waleed during the battle of al-MadKr
against the Persians in 12 AH.['] Then he sent him with
reinforcements to his commander 'IyCd ibn Ghanam al-~ihri.~~]
In 13 AH, al-Waleed was appointed by Abu Bakr to collect zak2h
from the tribe of QadVah, then when Abu Bakr decided to
conquer Syria, al-Waleed was equal in his view to 'Amr ibn al'Aas in respect, trustworthiness and honour. He wrote to 'Amr
[I1 Minhtj ulSunnuh, 3/189,190
[I'

Siyar A'kim an-Nubalar, 3/21

[31 Siyar A'ltm an-Nubular, 31412,413

Fasl al-Khitabfi Muwriqifal-AsMb, by Muhammad S3lih al-Gharsi, p. 78
Is] Tareekh at-Tubari, 4/168
16' op. cit., 4/194
[41

396

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

ibn al-'Aas and al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah calling them to lead the
troops in jihad. Ibn al-'Aas marched under the banner of Islam to
Palestine, and al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah led his troops to the east of
~ordan.['l Then in 15 AH, during the caliphate of 'Umar, we see
al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah serving as governor of the tribe of Banu
Taghlib and the Arabs of al-fazeerah.['I During this governorship
he guarded the backs of the rnujaideen in Syria lest an attack come
from behind. When he was appointed governor of that region
which was still full of Christians, al-Waleed took the opportunity
as part of his jihad effort and administrative work to call people to
All& using wisdom and beautiful preaching, to encourage the
Christians of Iyid and Taghlib to enter slam.^^^ It is this
remarkable past that al-Waleed brought to the caliphate of
'Uthmin, so he appointed him as governor of Kufah and he was
one of its best governors, ruling it with justice and kindness.
During the period of his governorship of Kufah, his armies would
march to the eastern horizons, conquering the land, as was
testified in his absence by one of the greatest of Muslim judges
that history has ever known in terms of his knowledge, virtue and
fairness, the great Tibi'i Imam al-~ha'bi.'~]He praised his
military campaigns and his governorship when he said, when
the campaigns of Maslamah ibn 'Abd a l - ~ a l i k ~
were
~ ] mentioned
to him: If only you had seen al-Waleed and his campaigns and his
governorship, for he would go out on campaign and reach such
and such a place, and he never fell short or was accused of falling
short by anyone until he was dismissed from his post.[61 AlWaleed was one of the most beloved of people to the people, and
one of the kindest to them. For five years there was no gate at his
['I Fasl al-Khitlib bfi Mawliqqal-Ashab, p. 7 8

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/28, 29
Fasl nl-Khittibj Mawiq2qifal-Ashdb, p. 78
14' Fasl al-Khittibbfi Mawiqiqifal-Ashdb, p. 78
['I Maslamah ibn 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwgn, one of the leaders of conquest, d.
120 AH
at-Tamheed wa'l-Bayiin, p. 40
[I'

Who were the governors of ' U r n 4

397

house.''] 'Uthmin said: I did not appoint al-Waleed because he is
my brother, rather I appointed him because he is the son of Umm
Hakeem al-Bayda', the paternal aunt of the Messenger of All21
g,and the twin sister of his father. Appointing someone as a
governor is done at the discretion of the caliph. 'Umar dismissed
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqss and appointed someone of lesser status in
his place.[21
The one who studies the life of this great Sahibi and hero of
Islam who was trnsted by these three Rightly-Guided Caliphs will
have no doubt that he was definitely qualified to be a governor.
Rather the doubts were stirred up because of what was said
concerning the reason for the revelation of a verse in which they
alleged that he was described as an evildoer @siq) and because of
the accusation that he was a wine-drinker. These are matters
which need further discussion, and we shall examine these two
issues here.I3]

Is it proven that the verse 'If a Eiisig (liar - evil person)
comes to you' was revealed concerning him?
All2h says:

"0you who believe! Ifa Fisiq (7iar - evil person) comes to you
with any news, verih it, lest you should harm people in
ignorance, and afterwards you become regret&l for what you
have done" (Al-Hujurzt 49:6)
The narrators transmitted a story concerning this verse which
says that the Messenger of All31 @ sent al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah to
Banu'l-Mustaliq to collect zakih, and he reported that they had
apostatized and refused to pay the z a m . That was because they
[I1 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/251

al-'Awrisim min al-Qawam, p. 86
Fasl al-Khitribji Mawriq'qifal-Ashrib, p. 79

398

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

had come out to meet him and he grew alarmed and did not know
what they were up to, so he left and reported that they had
apostatized. The Messenger of AllSh & sent KhSlid ibn al-Waleed
to them and told him to find out what they were doing. They told
him that they were adhering to Islam, and this verse was
revealed.['] There are numerous reports concerning this but the
The
~ ]least
story has no sound, mazosool (uninterrupted) i s n ~ . ~
that can be said about the isnid of this story is that it is da'eef
(weak). Even if they accept weak isntds with regard to
encouraging good deeds that do not make a forbidden thing
permissible or make a permissible thing forbidden, we cannot
accept a weak isniid in the story of al-Waleed, because that is
making a forbidden thing permissible, which is describing a man
who was a companion of the Messenger - if only for one day as an evildoer ftsiqsiq).How can we accept the weak isntd when the
verse itself enjoins establishing proof before accepting reports?
This verse forms the foundation for the entire science of collecting
and ver$nng reports.[3]
The story of al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah and what they attributed
to him cannot be accepted unless it is sound in both isnlid and
matn (text), because they are describing him as an evildoer, and
this is an accusation which cannot be easily accepted even if it is
made against an ordinary man in the modem age, fifteen hundred
years later, so how can we take these reports lightly if they are
accusing a man who lived at the time of the Prophet & and the
time of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and they entrusted important
tasks to him?
This story represents part of the early history of Islam and
parts of the story have to do with matters of 'aqeedah. Such
reports of Islamic history cannot be taken lightly, as may be the
case with reports on civil developments. Moreover, al-Waleed ibn
'Uqbah was one of those who became Muslim after the conquest
[I1 al-Madinah an-Nabawiyyah Fajr a/-Islam, 2/176

al-Madinah an-Nabawiyyah Fajr a/-Islam, 2/176
'31 o p cit., 2/182

Who were the governors of ' U W n &
of Makkah, and aspersions are often cast on the Islam of this
.group. Some historians claim that they became Muslim
reluctantly and that faith did not t d y enter their hearts. This is
a claim that is undoubtedly false.['] The narrators added things to
the story of al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah, motivated by political or
sectarian whims and desires, and they inboduced fabricated
material into this story. The narrators competed in proving their
ability to fabricate material and demonstrate their talents in the
area of fiction.[']
What undermines the report about al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah
being sent to collect the z a k a of Banu'l-Mustaliq and contradicts
it is the hadeeth which has a sound, uninterrupted isn2d
composed of trustworthy men, which states that at the time of
the conquest of Makkah al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah was a young man,
and the Prophet @ would not have sent a man of his age as an
agent. It was narrated from Fay2d ibn Muhammad al-Raqqi, from
Ja'far ibn Barq2n from ThSbit ibn al-Hajjiij al-Kilibi, from 'AbdAU2h al-HamadhSni (Abu Moosa) that al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah
said: When the Messenger of All2h @ conquered Makkah, the
people of Makkah started to bring their children to him and he
patted their heads and prayed for them. I was brought to him, and
I had been perfumed with khulooq, and he did not pat me on the
head, and the only thing that stopped him from doing that was
the fact that my mother had perfumed me with khulooq, so he did
not touch me because of the khu~oo~.[~]
This story was taken too far due to sectarian whims and
desires. Al-Waleed was Umawi, a relative of 'Uthmh. The one
who inserted the name of al-Waleed into the story about the
reason for the revelation of the verse was a Shi'i Rzidi by the
name of Muhammad ibn al-S2ib al-Kalbi, of whom Ibn Hajar
said: He is regarded as one of the Shi'ah of Kufah. Ibn Hajar said:
There were two liars in Kufah, one of whom was al-Kalbi, and the
['I op. dt., 2/173
"I ibid.

Musnad Ahmnd, 4/32

400

'Uthmin Ibn 'AffCn & Dhun-Noorayn

other was al-~addi.~ll
He chose him for this story because it had
to do with the collection of zak% and al-Waleed collected zak*
from the tribe of QudVah at the time of Abu Bakr, and he
collected z a m from the tribe of Taghlib in al-Jazeerahat the time
of 'Umar. The books of the Shi'ah criticize ' U t h d n ibn 'AffSn on
~ ] do not deny that the
the basis of the story of a l - ~ a l e e d . ~We
verse was revealed in the context of the story of Banu'l-Mustaliq,
but what we do deny is that al-Waleed is the one who is described
as a fSsiq in the verse, because the wording "If a Fisiq (liar - evil
person) comes to you" is indefinite, which indicates that it is
general in meaning and does not refer to a specific case, because if
the indefinite is used in a conditional phrase, it is general in
meaning.

The hadd punishment of al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah for drinking
wine
With regard to the hadd punishment of al-Waleed for drinking
wine, it is proven in al-Saheehayn that 'Uthmsn punished him thus
after the witnesses testified against him. But this is not a reason to
pick on 'Uthmh, rather it is one of the virtues of ' U t M n that he
carried out the hadd punishment on him and dismissed him from
his post in Kufah. Al-Bukhsri narrated this incident under the
chapter heading The Virtues of 'Uthmin. 13] 'Ali .& said: When you
criticize 'UthmSn, it is like someone who stabs himself in order to
kill someone behind him.141What fault is it of 'UthmSn's if he
carried out the hadd punishment on a man because of his deeds
and dismissed him from his post? What fault is it of ' U t M n for
what he did following our advice?[51 Moreover, this did not
happen only during the reign of ' U t M ; there was a precedent
at the time of 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb +, as it was stated that
['I

al-Mudinah al-Munawwarak Fujr al-lslum, 2/179

[21 op. cit., 2/180

[I'

ul-Bukhakhari,
Kiftb ManQih 'Uthmin
Tareekk at-Tahari, 5/278
Takqeeq MmQifas-Sakihuh~l-Fiqh,1/421

Who were the governors of ' U t h m h &

401

Q u d h a h ibn Maz'oon, who had met the Prophet @, drank
alcohol when he was 'Umar's governor in Bahrain, and he carried
out the hadd punishment on him and dismissed him.[']
Some historians stated that there was no proof that al-Waleed
ibn 'Uqbah drank wine. Al-Hifiz said in al-Isibah: It was said that
some of the people of Kufah ganged up on him and testified
against him unlawfully.[21 This was also referred to by Ibn
Khaldoon who said: Rumours - against the agents of 'Uthm2n stirred up by the troublemakers continued to spread, and alWaleed ibn 'Uqbah, who was the governor of Kufah, was accused
of drinking wine, and a number of them bore witness against him,
so 'Uthmh imposed the hadd punishment on him and dismissed
him.[31 At-Tabari narrated some further details: the sons of Abu
Zaynab, Abu Muwarra' and Jundub ibn Zuhayr broke into the
house of Ibn al-Haysamh and killed him. The Sahibi Abu
Shurayh al-Khuz2i and his son, who were neighbours of Ibn alHaysamh, testified against them concerning that and al-Waleed
executed them in retaliation (qisiis). Their fathers took it upon
themselves to plot against al-Waleed, so they started to watch his
movements. Abu Zubayd the poet came to visit him; he was a
(former) Christian, one of his maternal uncles from Banu Taghlib,
who had become Muslim at the hands of al-Waleed. The guest
was accused of drinking wine, and some of the foolish people
started accusing al-Waleed because he was very close to Abu
Zubayd. Thus Abu Zaynab and Abu Muwarra' found their
opportunity; they went to MaCmah and came to 'Uthmh,
t e s e i n g that al-Waleed had drunk wine and that they had seen
him vomiting the wine. 'Uthmh said: He would not have
vomited the wine unless he had drunk it. Al-Waleed was brought
from Kufah and he swore an oath to 'Uthmin and told him about
them, but 'Uthmin said: We will cany out the hadd punishment
['I al-'Awtsim min al-Qawisim, p. 93

Tareekh lbn Khaldoon, 2/473; Fasl nl-Kkifibfi Mawriqifal-Ashib, p. 81

402

'UthmSn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

(enjoined by) All* and let the one who bears false witness dwell
in Hell; be patient, 0 my brother.Ill
Muhibb al-Deen al-Khateeb said: As for the additional
material that is narrated in the report of Muslim, that someone
came to al-Waleed when he had prayed Fair with two rak'ahs and
he said: Do you want more? -and according to some of the reports
narrated by Ahmad, he had prayed four rak'ahs - nothing was
proven from the testimony of witnesses. These are the words of
Hudayn the narrator of the story, but Hudayn was not one of the
witnesses and he did not narrate it from any witness or from any
known person. He was not in Kufah at the time of the alleged
incident and this part of the report carries no weight.[']
This was 'Uthmiin's governor in Kufah, al-Waleed ibn
'Uqbah, the mujrihid and conqueror, the just man who was
wronged, who did all he could for the ummah of good works, then
he saw with his own eyes how the evildoers mistreat the
righteous and how their false accusations affect them. So after the
' -n
he isolated himself from the hustle and bustle
murder of U
of society in a piece of land that had been allocated to him, fifteen
miles from the city of al-Riqqah in al-Jazeerah where he had
striven in jihad and called people to Islam during the caliphate of
' ~ r n a r .He
~ ~kept
~ away from all the wars that took place during
the times of 'Ali and Mu'swiyah (&) until he died in his land, and
was buried there in 61 AH. And it was said that he died during
Mu'iiwiyah's reign.[41

His full name was Sa'eed ibn alL'Aas ibn Umayyah ibn 'Abd
Abu
~ ' Hstim said:
Shams ibn 'Abd Mans, al-Qurashi a l - ~ m a w i . ~
and he was governor of
He was a companion of the Prophet
[I1 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/277

["

al-'Awisim min al-Qawiisim, p. 96, 97
op. cit., p/ 94
al-Bid&& warn-Nihdyah,8/216
al-Bida^y& wa'n-Nihriyah, 8/87

Who were the governors of 'Uthmiin 8

403

Kufah after al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah. He was one of the most
eloquent men of Quraysh, hence 'Uthmh chose him as one of
those whom he appointed to write down the Qur'h. It was
narrated that Anas ibn Maik said:... 'Uthmh ordered Zayd ibn
Thiibit, 'Abd-All31 ibn az-Zubayr, Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas and 'Abd arR a h m h ibn al-Hkith ibn HisKm to make copies of it (the
manuscript) in Mush-ha$. 'Uthmin said to the three Qurashi men:
If you and Zayd ibn Thtibit differ concerning anything in the
Qur'tin, write it in the dialect of ~ui-a~sh.~']
The Arabic of the
Qur'h was based on the dialect of Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas, because it
was the closest to the speech of the Messenger of Allih &$.He was
a companion for seven years. His father was killed as a mushrik at
the battle of Badr by 'Ali ibn Abi til lib.[^]
Let us read these reports which point to the strength of his
faith: it was narrated that 'Umar ibn al-Khattzb said to Sa'eed ibn
al-'Aas: I did not kill your father; rather I killed my maternal uncle
al-'Aas ibn HisMm. Sa'eed said: Even if you had killed him, you
would have been in the right, and he would have been in the
wrong. 'Umar was amazed at his response. During the days of his
governorship in Kufah, he attacked Tabaristan and conquered it,
and he attacked Jajh; in his army were Hudhayfah and other
~ a h i b a h . [ ~He
' was famous for his kindness and generosity, to
such a point that a beggar asked him for something at a time
when he did not have anything, but he wrote down what he
wanted to give him,and put it in writing.[41He loved to unite the
Muslims and hated fitnak, from which he would flee. 'Uthmtin
appointed him governor of Kufah after al-Waleed ibn 'Uqbah. He
came to Madimah on one occasion, and when he returned, the
troublemakers had rallied their troops and prevented him from
entering the city, so he went back and stayed in Madbah. Among
those who prevented him from returning to his province were the
['I a l - B u r n , Kitab Fadt'il al-Qur'in, no. 4987
l2]al-Madfnah al-Munawwarah Fajr al-lslam, 2/211

I3l ibid.
l4] a1-Isibah, 3268

404

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

killers of 'Uthmk, but despite that he stayed away from the
Battle of the Camel and Siffeen, and he urged those who were
involved in the Battle of the Camel not to go out and fight.['] This
was his manner of conduct: generosity, courage, righteousness,
jihad, and eloquence that was most akin to the eloquence of the
Messenger of All21 @. He dictated to Zayd ibn Thsbit this Mushaf that we still read today. Think about these attributes that are
proven in saheeh reports, and compare them with the bad
qualities that are mentioned in reports that have no basis. Thii
about those who fabricated and spread those bad reports, and
you will realize that they are fabrications, because they combine
contsadictory qualities in one man: generosity and miserliness,
righteousness and evildoing, knowledge and ignorance, going
out for jihad and reluctance to go out. It is impossible for these
characteristics to be combined in one person.121The reporters
claim, without any i s n i d , that when Sa'eed was appointed
governor of Kufah after al-Waleed, some of the slaves said in rajaz
verse:
Woe to us! Al-Waleed has been dismissed
And Sa'eed, who is going to starve us, has been appointed
He will decrease our stipends and not increase them.13]
This is a fabrication, an undoubtedly made-up story.141
Because the slaves in 30 AH - i.e., the prisoners of war who had
become slaves - could not speak Arabic well, let alone compose
poetry, and because Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas was well known for his
generosity and righteousness, and he could not be described as
someone who would starve people. If the people and poets
praised al-Waleed for his generosity, then Sa'eed set an example
by his generosity.151He was described as a vessel of honey, and
al-Farazdaq wrote poetry praising the generosity of Sa'eed.
['I

al-Tahaqtt, 5/34

[21 al-Madinah al-Munumarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/212
[I'

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/279

[41 al-Madinah al-Munamarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/212

"I

TareeWI at-Tahari, 5/279

Who were the governors of 'Uthmh +

405

If the slaves came up with these lines of rajaz verse at the
beginning of Sa'eed's governorship in Kufah, how could they
have known his policies or whether he had come to starve the
people or give them their fill? What is strange is that the narrators
mention thisreport in a context that contradictsitself, as they said:
'Uthm2n appointed Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas as govemor of Kufah and
he came to them and was fair to them, but some of the slaves said
(these lines of rajaz verse).['' How could he be fair and yet be
described as causing the slaves to starve? There was an
abundance of food with enough for everyone and more, and his
fair governorship would ensure that this goodness reached
everyone.['] May All& have mercy on the classical historians,
for they thought highly of their readers and they compiled
contradictory reports in their books, thinking that their readers
throughout the ages would be able to distinguish the sound
reports from the suspect ones. Their excuse was that they were
writing for the people of their own era, and they did not realize
that the coming centuries would be filled with people who would
not be able to distinguish between reports.[31In his biography of
Sa'eed, Ibn Sa'd narrated without an isnid: They said: When
Sa'eed came to Kufah as a govemor, he came as a young man who
had lived a life of luxury and had no prior experience. He said: I
will not ascend the minbar until it has been purified, and he
issued orders that it be washed. Then he said from the minbar: All
of this Sawfid is a garden belonging to some young men of
Quraysh, and they complained to '~thmiin.[~]
This report is not
sound because it has no isnfid, and because Sa'eed ibn alL'Aas,
who led armies of jihad and conquest, was not as they described.
Moreover, Ibn Sa'd narrated this alleged statement of Sa'eed £rom
al-Ashtar Mfilik ibn al-Hkith when he prevented Sa'eed ibn al'Aas from entering Kufah after many years of his being its
"I

al-Madinah al-Munmzuarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/213
al-Madinah al-Munawwarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/213; al-Tabaqtf, 5/32
op. cit, 22214
op. cit., 2/214

406

' U M n Ibn 'Aff* 4 Dhun-Nooravn

governor, when al-Ashtar said: This Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas had come
to you claiming that this SawSd is a garden belonging to some
young men of Quraysh, but al-Sawid is the place where you were
born the place where you settled and the place where you and
your fathers acquired fay' (booty).[*'
MSlik ibn al-Hirith, who was known as al-Ashtar, was a man
of fitnah. He was one of the leaders of the rebels who besieged
'Uthmh and killed him. It is no wonder that these people
fabricated words to stir up hatred. Even if these words were
uttered, those who said them were those who rebelled against the
caliphate, because they understood it in this negative manner
because the governors in Iraq - especially Kufah - were all from
Quraysh, and tribalism is obvious in these words.L21Imam alDhahabi said concerning him: He was a noble and generous
governor, praiseworthy, forbearing, dignified, decisive and wise,
a man who was fit to be a governor.[31As for the rebels and those
who criticized 'Uthmh & for appointing Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas as
governor of Kufah and claimed that he behaved in such a way
that it led the people of Kufah to expel himL4],the mere fact that
the people of Kufah expelled him is not indicative of any fault that
would kstlfy such an action. The one who knows anything about
Kufah and its ways will be aware of its constant complaints
against its governors with no shar'i justification, complaints that
were made for the silliest reasons. 'Umar ibn al-KhattSb & said of
them: I am very tired and no longer know what to do with the
people of Kufah; they are not pleased with anyone and no one is
pleased with them; they are not good to any governor and no
governor could be good for them.[51According to another report
he said: I am tired of the people of Kufah. If I appoint a lenient
man over them they will take advantage of him, and if I appoint a
"I

op. cit., 2/214

" ibid
[31 Siyar A'lrim an-Nubala', 3/M7
'41 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/279

Laal-Ma'rifuh wn'l-Tnreekh by al-Fasawi, 2/754

Who were the zovemors of U
' -n

&

407

strict man over them they will complain about him.['] In fact, he
prayed against them and said: 0 Allzh, they have made me
confused so make them confused.tz1
Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas was a wise man who said: My visitor has
three rights over me: when he comes in, I should welcome him;
when he sits down I should make room for him; and when he
speaks I should listen to him. And he said to his son: 0 my son, do
favours for the sake of Allzh, if you initiate it without being asked,
but if a man comes to you blushing or one who is uncertain comes
to you, not knowing if you will give him anything or not, by
All&, even if you gave him all of your wealth, you would not be
able to suffice him.And he also said: 0 my son, do not joke with a
noble man lest it cause him to despise you, or with an ignoble man
lest it cause him to lose respect for you. One day a righteous
woman entered upon him when he was the governor of Kufah,
and he showed her respect and treated her kindly. She said: May
A l l h cause you never to need any ignoble man, for a noble man
always remembers the favours of others, and if a blessing is taken
away from a noble man, may He make you the cause of it being
restored to him.
When Sa'eed was dying, his sons gathered and he said to
them: Let my companions not miss anything except my presence,
and uphold ties with them as I used to do. Keep giving them what
I used to give them, and give them enough so that they have no
need to ask from others, for when a man needs something he will
be in a state of anxiety and will ii-emble for fear that his request
may be rejected. By AUsh if a man is tossing and tuming in his
bed, thinking of you as the one who could fulfil his need, that is a
greater favour to you than what you give him (i.e.,he is doing you
the greater favour by thinking positively of you). Then he gave
them a great deal of other advice. He died in58 AH, or it was said
that he died in 57 AH or 59 AH.[^]
Tahqeeq Mawliqifas-Sahtbahp-Fimah, 1/423
a[-Minhij by fin Taymiyah, 31188
'31 al-Bid2yah warn-Nihriyah,8/90
"I

408

"bd-All2h

U
'-

Ibn 'Affh 4 Dhun-Noorayn

ibn ~ a "ibn Abiq-Sarh

When mentioning the name of 'Abd-All81 ibn Abi'l-Sarh and
'Uthdn's appointing him as governor of Egypt, the historians
usually say: 'Uthmsn appointed as governor of Egypt 'Abd-All&
ibn Abi'l-Sarh, his brother through breastfeeding.['] What is
meant by the phrase "his brother through breastfeeding" is an
implicit accusation on the part of some historians that 'Uthmsn
appointed him as governor of Egypt because of this bond of
brotherhood. But what this historian said is not correct. In order to
refute these people and their implicit criticism against the caliph
'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn &, we will discuss the conduct of this knight
of the tribe of Banu 'Aamir ibn
,'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd. He
had a great deal of experience and was very familiar with Egypt
and the surrounding countries because he had taken part in the
conquest of those regions with the army of 'Am, and because he
had been appointed governor of some of those provinces at the
[ ~was
]
time of 'Umar, when he was governor of Upper ~ g y ~ t .He
also its governor at the beginning of 'UthmSn's caliphate. This
qualified him to become the governor of all of Egypt, as he was
the best of the candidates for that post after ' A m ibn al-'Aas, due
to his experience. It seems that 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd was able to
control the kharij of Egypt until it became greater than the !&art]
that had been collected at the time of ' A m ibn al-'Aas. The reason
for that may be that 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd followed a different
strategy of expenditure than 'Amr, so the kharij money that was
available in Egypt increased.14'
During his governorship, 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd engaged in
jihad in a number of places and achieved conquests that were of
great importance. Among his campaigns was his campaign of
conquest in North Africa in 27 AH, during which he killed its king
['I al-Ktmil by Ibn al-Atheer, 3/88
[21 Fasl al-Khitibji Mawiq$'al-Ashfib,

p. 77

[31 Tdqeeq Mawqiqifal-SahLibah fi'l-Fitnah, p. 418
'41 al-Wiliyah hla al-Buldtn, 1/180

Who were the eovemors of 'Uthman &

409

Jarjeer. He was accompanied by a number of Sahibah during
those conquests, such as 'Abd-All* ibn az-Zubayr, 'Abd-Allih
ibn 'Umar, 'Abd-All21 ibn ' A m ibn al-'Aas and others. The
campaign ended with a peace treaty with the Patriarch of North
l Abi'l-Sarh
Africa who agreed to pay jlzyah to the ~ u s l i m s . [ ~Ibn
retumed to North Africa and laid a strong foundation for Islam in
the region in 33 AH.['] Another of the most important actions of
'Abd-Allgh ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'l-Sarh was his campaign in Nubia
which was known as Ghazwat al-Asiwiwldah or Ghazwaf al-Habashah
by some historians. This campaign took place in 31 AH, during
which there was intense fighting between the Muslims and the
Nubian troops, and a number of the Muslims were killed due to
the Nubians' skill in archery. This campaign ended with a peace
treaty which 'Abd-All21 ibn Sa'd signed with the Nubians, and
imposed a limited form of llzyah on them.13] 'Abd-All2h ibn Sa'd
is rightfully regarded as the first Muslim leader who was able to
penetrate Nubia, fight its people and impose the jizyah on them,
and during his governorship relations between the Nubians and
the Muslims remained stable.
Another of the most important military achievements of
'Abd-All2h ibn Sa'd was the campaign of Dh2t al-Saw&i', in
which the Muslims defeated the Byzantines. The governorship of
'Abd-All2h ibn Sa'd in Egypt was generally well thought of by the
Egyptians, and they did not see anything that they disliked. AlMaqreezi says of him: He remained governor throughout the
caliphate of 'Uthmin 4 and was well thought of as a
Al-Dhahabi said of him: He never transgressed any limits or did
anything for which he could be criticized. He was one of the
wisest and most generous of menC5]The province of Egypt was
initially quiet and stable, until the troublemakers such as 'AbdFutooh Misr zua Akhbtmha, p. 183; al-Wiltyah bla uI-Buldtn, 1/180
an-Nujoom al-Zahirah, 1/80
[31 ul-Wiltyah 'ala al-Buldiin, 1/181; Futooh Misr wu Akhbtruha, p. 188
al-Khatat, 1/299
Siyar A'lrim an-Nubala', 3/34
['I

i

410

'UthmZn Ibn 'MSn .& Dhun-Nooravn

AUCh ibn Saba' managed to get there and start to incite the people.
They and those who were influenced by them played a major role
in the murder of 'UthmSn, and the situation in Egypt itself became
very unstable as the result of the expulsion of its legitimate
governor and the usurpation by others in illegitimate ways.
During that period they managed to spread hatred in people's
hearts against their caliph 'UthmSn as the result of the plots that
they fabricated based on the lies that they spread!']
We shall
discuss this below, in sha Allih. WhenFtnah emerged as the result
of 'UthmMs murder, 'Abd-All& ibn Sa'd withdrew and settled
in 'AsqallSn or Ramlah in Palestine. Al-Baghawi narrated with a
saheeh isnM that Yazeed ibn Abi Habeeb said: Ibn Abi'l-Sarh went
to al-Ramlah in Palestine, and one day he said at dawn: 0 Allih,
make the last of my deeds Fajr (prayer). He did wudoo' and
prayed, then he said the saltm to his right and was about to say
the salim to his left when Allih took his soul.[21

Marwsn ibn al-Hakam and his father
Marwin ibn al-Hakam was one of the closest of 'Uhn2n's
relatives to him, and one of those who had the strongest
connection to the centre of the caliphate and was in the midst of
the events that led to the destruction of Muslim unity at the time
of 'UthmSn. He was like the keeper of state secrets, or the ringbearer of the king.[31 Mamiin was certainly not the only advisor
of the caliph, as he used to consult the senior and junior Sahibah,
and he was not isolated from the wisest people in Muslim society.
Moreover, MarwSn was not the advisor who had control of the
state in his hand, rather he was no more than a scribe of the caliph,
a job whose importance is based on closeness to the caliph and his
seal. The claim that he was the cause of 'Uthmiin getting into
trouble and inciting people against him so that the caliphate
would pass to Banu Umayyah is an assumption for which there is
1'1 al-[/\illayah'ala al-Buldtn, 1/186

al-lsibah no. 4711; Siyar A'lim an-Nubala', 3/35
131 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin, by S d i q 'Aqoon, p. 117

Who were the governors of 'Uthman

+

411

no evidence. The caliphate did not pass to Banu Umayyah until
after a great deal of irouble in which Marwh played no major
role. Moreover, ' U t M n was not a weak character who could be
controlled by a scribe to the extent that some narrators
imagined.['] Marwh ibn al-Hakam is not to be blamed for the
fact that he did not reach puberty during the lifetime of the
Messenger of All31 @, according to scholarly consensus; at most
he was ten years old or thereabouts, but he was a Muslim who
used to read Qur'h and learn his religion. Before the turmoil
arose, he was not known for anything for which he could be
criticized, and 'Uthmh is not to be blamed for appointing him as
his scribe. As for getting caught up in the turmoil, that happened
to others who were better than ~ a r w h . [ ' ' Moreover, the report
about the Prophet &$ expelling his father is da'eef (weak) in both
isnid and text. It was examined by Shaykh al-Islam IbnTaymiyah,
who explained why it is weak.13] It is known that Marwfin ibn alHakam was very knowledgeable and just. He was one of the
leaders of the youth of Quraysh and he became prominent at the
time of 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh. Imam M%k testified that he was a
faqeeh, and quoted his judgements and fatwas as evidence in
many places in al-Muwatta', as is narrated in other books of
Sunnah that were in circulation among the imams of the Muslims
who followed those
Imam Ahmad said: It was said
that Marwh was a good judge, and he used to base his opinions
MarwSn was one of
on cases judged by 'Umar ibn al-~hatt2b.'~]
the most knowledgeable of people about the Qur'fin, and he also
narrated some hadeeth, as he narrated from some of the most
famous SaMbah, and some of them narrated from him, as did
He was keen to learn the Sunnah and act
some of the ~Sbi'een.'~]
upon it. Al-Layth ibn Sa'd - the faqeeh of Egypt - narrated with his
a/-Dm/& al-Umawiyyah al-Muftara 'alayha, by Hamdi Shaheen, p. 160
Minhij asSunnah, 3/197
[31 Minhij alSuunah, 3/195,196
al-Dmuluh al-Umawiyyah al-Mufara 'alayha, p. 169
Isl al-Bid&& warn-Nihtyah, 8/260
['I
["

[61 ibid.

412

' U W n Ibn 'AffSn & Dhun-Nooravn

isnid: M a r w h attended a funeral, and when the funeral prayer
had been offered, he departed. Abu Hurayrah said: He has
acquired one qirit and been deprived of one qirit (i.e., of reward,
as stated in a hadeeth).[ll Marwsn was told about that and he
came running such that his knees became uncovered, and he sat
until he was given permission to enter.[']
In the Introduction to Fafh al-Bin' it says: Marwsn ibn alHakam ibn Abi'l-Aas ibn Umayyah, the paternal cousin of
'Uthmh ibn 'Affsn; it was said that he had a dream in which he
saw the Messenger @
; if it is proven, no attention should be paid
to those who spoke against him.[31 Ibn Katheer said: He is a
Sahsbi according to many, because he was born during the
lifetime of the Prophet &.[41 Marw2n was governor of Madinah
for Mu'gwiyah ibn Abi Sufysn, and he was very strict towards
evildoers, waging war against all signs of extravagance and
promiscuity.[51 He was just towards his people, and was very
careful to avoid showing favouritism towards his relatives or
those among them who tried to take advantage of his position.
His brother 'Abd ar-Rahmiin slapped a freed slave of the people
of Madinah who was working as a wheat-seller during the period
when Marwsn was governor of M a d A d ,and the wheat-seller
complained to Marwh. He had his brother 'Abd al-Ralunh
brought to him, and he made him sit before the wheat-seller and
said to him: Slap him. The wheat-seller said: By All*, I did not
want this, all I wanted was to tell him that he has a governor over
him who will support me against him; I forgive you. He said: I
will not accept that from you; take your right. He said: By AEh, I
will not slap him,but I give it to you; by All&, I will not slap him.
M a r w h said: By All*, I will not accept that. If you want to
'I1 ibid; al-Musnad no. 4453- 4650
!2L al-Dmlah al-Umamiyyah al-Mufara 'alayha, p. 200; al-Bidriyah wah-Nihiyah, 8/

[I'

260
Fath al-Bdn', 2/164; Abiteel yajib an tuhma min at-TareeWI, p. 254
al-Bidtyah warn-Nihiyah,8/259
al-Dmlah al-Umawiyyah al-Muffara 'alayha, p. 200

Who were the governors of ' U t h h &

413

forgive him, either forgive him as a favour to him or for the sake
of Allih. He said: I forgive him for the sake of All&. 'Abd alRahmh spoke words of poetry criticizing his brother M a r w h for
that.[']
This bright picture of Marwsn's knowledge, justice,
understanding and religious commitment is very different from
the hateful picture presented by most historians and narrators
who tried hard to distort the image of this man's life. When he
was dying they also tried to distort it, and claimed that his wife
Umm KhZd ibn Yazeed ibn Mu'iwiyah suffocated him with a
pillow or poisoned him because he had insulted her son - as they
claim - in front of a number of people. This story - in addition to
containing some contradictory elements - seems at first glance to
be a myth fabricated by some old woman, but people started
repeating it, either for the sake of empty talk or to try to damage
the reputation of a noble family out of envy because of the high
level of glory that they had achieved.[21Was his death natural or
did he die of the plague, or was he suffocated by his wife? The
contradiction between the reports indicates that the truth is not
known. The reports which state that his wife is the one who killed
him, either directly or by delegating someone else to do it (namely
her slave woman) is not acceptable or reasonable, because this
wife was a noble woman from the tribe of 'Abd Shams, and her
husband was related to her, and he was a caliph. So she was the
wife of a caliph and the mother of a caliph (namely Mu'swiyah
ibn Yazeed ibn Mu'swiyah), and this is something that a noble
woman would never do. Moreover, we do not see any
consequences of this assassination - there was no internal fight
in the family, no demand for vengeance, and Khaid retained his
status before 'Abd al-Malik. So there was no sufficient motive for
the crime of murder.13] It was narrated from several scholars that
he said: The last words that M a r w h spoke were: Paradise is due
['I

al-Dawlah al-Umm'yyah al-Muftara 'alayha, p. 200

[21 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwdn, by Dr. al-Rees, p. 12
[31 al-Dawlah al-Ummiyyah a/-Muftara 'alayha, p. 201

414

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Aff2n4%Dhun-Noorayn

to the one who fears the Fire. Engraved on his ring were the words
Glory be to All&; or it was said: I believe in the Almighty, the
Ibn al-Qayyim said: The reports which criticize
Most ~erciful.'~]
al-Waleed and Marwsn ibn al-Hakam are false.[']

'Did "UthmSn show favbwitism to any of his
relatives at the expense of the Muslims?
If 'Uthmsn had wanted to show favouritism to any of his
relatives at the expense of the Muslims, his stepson Muhammad
ibn Abi Hudhayfah would have been the most likely candidate
for favouritism, but the caliph refused to appoint anyone to any
position for which he was not qualified.131That was not because
he disliked him, otherwise he would not have helped him out at
his own expense or provided him with a mount and supplies
~
~
when he asked for his permission to go to ~
As for appointing young men, 'Uthmk &
had
i
the best
example in the Messenger of Allih g.
He prepared an army to
fight the Byzantines at the end of his life, and appointed Ussmah
ibn Zayd 4 in charge of itF5]When the Messenger g died, Abu
Bakr insisted 4 that the army continue, but some of the Sahsbah
wanted to replace Ussmah with an older leader, and they asked
'Umar to speak to Abu Bakr about that. Abu Bakr got angry when
he heard this suggestion and said to 'Umar: 0 'Umar, the
Messenger of Allsh @ appointed him and you are telling me to
dismiss him?I6] 'Uthmk himself responded to this issue in front
of a group of the Sahsbah, when he said: I have not appointed
anyone but one who is mature, adult and qualified. These are the
people for whom they worked, so ask them about them; these are
the people of the city from which they came. Those who come
a l - B w a k warn-NMyak, 8/262
al-Manfir a ~ - M u n e ep.~ 117; Fasl al-Khiflibfi Mawiiqifal-Ashdb, p. 77
13] Tahqeeq Mawfiq$ffi-Saklibakfl-Fimah,
1/247
[" op. cit., 1/247; Tareekk at-Tabari, 5/416
r51 Tahqeeq Mawiqqffi-Sahiibahfi'l-Fikuk, 1/427; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/416
[61 TareeWl at-Tabari, 5/46
['I
['I

~

Who were the governors of 'Uthman &

415

before me appointed people who were younger than them. People
said about the Messenger of Alliih @ what they said about me
when he appointed U s h a h , is it not so? They said: Yes; the people
do not know what they are talking about.''] 'Ali & said: 'Uthmh
did not appoint anyone but men who were of good character and
just, and the Messenger of AU2h @ appointed 'Itiib ibn Usayd as
governor of Makkah when he was twenty years old.12'
At the time of 'Uthmb, the governors of the regions were not
ignorant about matters of sharee'ak, and they were not negligent
about Islam. Even if they committed some sins, they still did a
great job, and their sins are a personal matter which affected them
only and had no effect on the Muslim society. We have studied
the legacy of these governors and their deeds, and we have found
that it is of great benefit for Islam and the Muslims. Hundreds and
thousands of people were guided to Islam at the hands of
'UthrnMs governors, and because of their conquests huge swaths
of land were added to the Muslim state. Even if they had not had
religious commitment and courage that motivated them to
engage in jihad, they would not have led their armies to jihad in
which there is the possibility of death and leaving behind a
worldly life of ease and pleasure. We have studied the
biographies of these governors, and we have found that each
one of them had one or more conquests to his name in the regions
neighbouring his province, in addition to the virtues that
qualified them for these positions of
The one who examines the sound reports about the events of
history and studies the biographies of the men whose help 'Uthmh
sought and the beautiful legacy of their jihad in the history of
da'wah, and the results of their good management in the prosperity
and tranquillity of this ummah cannot but express his admiration
and pride the more he examines this era of Islamic hi~tory.'~'
I" op. cit., 51355

al-Bidiyah wah-NiMyah, 8/178
'31 al-Madinah al-Munawwarah Fajr a/-Islam, 2/112
Htshiyat d-Muttaqi min Minhij a/-I'tidLil, p. 390
[21

' U M n and his governors were preoccupied with fighting
the enemy, striving against them and repelling them, but that did
not prevent them from expanding the territory of the Islamic state
and carrying its influence into new lands. The governors had a
direct impact on the events of turmoil, as accusations were made
against them saying that they had transgressed against the
people, but there was no proof for these accusations. 'Uthtnsn
was accused of appointing his relatives, but we have refuted this
accusation. Thus we can see that ' U M n did not spare any effort
to do that which was in the best interests of the ummah bv
,
appointing those who were qualified. Nevertheless, ' U t M and
his governors were not spared the accusations made against them
by troublemakers at thattime, just as ' U M n was noispared the
unfair accusations of many researchers whose research methods
are poor, especially modem researchers who have issued
judgements based on poor research or specific events for which
they did not rely on authentic sources, and quoted weak R&di
reports and reached false and unfair conclusions about the
RightlyGuided Caliph 'UthmCn ibn 'Affh, such as Taha Hussein
in his book al-Fitnah al-Kubra, Rsdi 'Abd al-Raheem in al-Nizim alIdiri wa'l-Harbi, Subhi alS2lih in al-Nuzum al-Islamiyyah,
Mawlawi Husayn in al-Idirah al-'Arabiyyah, Subhi Mahmashi in
Turifh al-Khulafa' al-Rishideen fi'l-Fiqh wa'l-Qada', Tawfeeq
Yuzbaki in Dirisit fi'l-Nuzum al-'Arabiyah wa'l-lslarniyyah,
Muhammad al-Mulhim in Tareekh al-Bahrain 3'1-Qam al-Awwal
al-Hijri, Badawi 'Abd al-Lateef in al-Ahzib al-Siyisiyyah fi Fajr nlIslam, Anwar al-RifS'i in al-Nuzum al-lslamiyyah, Muhammad alRayyis in al-Nazaviyit al-Siyisiyyah, 'Ali Husni al-Kharbooti in alIslam wa'l-Khilifah, Abu'l-A'la alMawdoodi in al-Mulk wa'lKhilifah and Sayyid Qutb in al-'Adilah al-Ijtimi'iyyah.
'Uthm2n was indeed the caliph who was wronged, as his
earliest opponents fabricated lies against him and later historians
did not deal fairly with him.[']

between Abu Dharr al-Ghifsri and

Summary- of' th
Those who hated 'Uthrnh ibn 'Affsn criticized him for
banishing Abu Dharr to al-Ribdhah, and some historians claim
that Ibn al-Sawda' ('Abd-AllCh ibn Saba') met Abu Dharr in Syria
and convinced him to follow the path of asceticism and kindness
to the poor, believing it to be obligatory to give in chanty
whatever was surplus to one's needs, and he led him to criticize
Mu'swiyah. 'Ubsdah ibn al-Ssmit took him to Mu'swiyah and he
said to him: This by AUgh is the one who sent Abu Dharr to you.
So Mu'gwiyah expelled him from Syria.['] Ahmad Ameen tried
to find similaritiesbetween the view of Abu Dharr and the view of
the Persian Mazdak, and he said that the similarity was that Ibn
Saba' had lived in Yemen and visited Lraq, and the Persians had
been in Yemen and Iraq before Islam, so it was possible that he
had taken this idea from the followers of Mazdak in Iraq, and Abu
Dharr had embraced these ideas with good intentions.[21
'I

al-Madinah d-Munawwarah Fajr aI-Islam, 2/216,217

Izl Fajr al-Islam, p. 110

418

' U t h h n Ibn 'Affsn &. Dhun-Noorayn

AU that is said in the story of Abu Dharr that 'UthmSn ibn
'Min is criticized for, is false and is not based on any sound
report. AU that is said about Abu Dharr's contact with Ibn Saba' is
undoubtedly false.['] The truth of the matter is that Abu Dharr 4
went to al-Ribdhah voluntarily and that was based on his
understanding of a verse which differed from the understanding
of other SahSbah, but he insisted on his view and no one else
agreed with him,so he asked for permission to go and live in all7ibdhahIZ1,which he used to frequent at the time of the Prophet
g.His settling there was not an enforced exile or a form of house
arrest, and the caliph did not force him to recant his view, because
it had some merit, but he did not oblige the Muslims to follow
it.13]
The soundest report about the story of Abu Dharr & is that
which was narrated by al-Bd&iri in his Saheeh from Zayd ibn
Wahb who said: I passed by al-Ribdhah and there I saw Abu
Dharr &. I said to him: Why did you settle here? He said: I was in
Syria, and Mu'Swiyah and I disagreed concerning the verse,

"0 you who believe! Verily, there are many of the (Jewish)
rabbis and the (Christian) monks who devour the wealth of
mankind in falsehood, and hinder (them)fi-om the way of Alllih
(i.e. Allih's religion of Islamic Monotheism). And those who
hoard up gold and silver (Al-Kanz : the money, the Zakih of
which has not been paid) and spend them not in the way of
Allih, announce unto them a painfil toment" (At-Tawbah
9:34).

[I1 al-Madinah al-Munawuarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/217
I[' al-Ribdhah was a station on the road between Iraq and Makkah
[I' Al-Madinah al-Munawuarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/217

The true nature of the relationshiv between Abu Dharr alGhif2ri... 419
Mu'awiyah said: this was revealed concerning the people of
the Book; but I said: it was revealed concerning us and them.
There was a debate between me and him concerning that, and he
wrote to ' U M n complaining about me. 'Uthman wrote to me
telling me to come to Madhah, so I came, and the people gathered
around me as if they had never seen me before. I mentioned that
to 'Uthmh and he said to me: If you want to move (outside
Madkah) but still be near us, that is fine. That is why I settled
here, and even if they appointed an Abyssinian over me I would
hear and obey.[']
This report points to a number of important issues:
1- Zayd ibn Wahb asked him to verlfy what was rumoured by
those who hated ' U t h m h did 'Uthmh banish him or did
Abu Dharr choose this place? The context shows that he left
after the people crowded around him asking him about the
reason why he had left Syria. The text of the hadeeth did not
say that 'Uthmh told him to go to al-Ribdhah, rather he
chose it himself. This is supported by what Ibn Hajar said,
narrating that 'Abd-All& ibn a l 6 h t said: I entered with
Abu Dharr upon ' U t h d n and he uncovered his head and
said: By Allsh, I am not one of them - meaning the rebels and he said: We only sent for you so that you could be near
us in Madhah. He said: I have no need of that; let me go to
al-Ribdhah. And he said: yes.[']
2- He said: I was in Syria. The reason why he was living in
Syria is that which was narrated by Abu Ya'la via Zayd ibn
Wahb: Abu Dharr told me: The Messenger of Allah &$ said to
me:

'Wen construction in Madinah reaches Sal', leave for Syria."
al-BukMri, Kitib al-Zakih, Bib ma ada zakltuhu, no. 1406
'21 Fath al-Biri, 3/274
'I1

420

' U W n Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

When construction reached Sal', I came to Syria and lived
there.['] According to another report, Umm Dharr said: By
All%, ' U t h m h never told Abu Dharr to go to al-Ribdhah
but the Messenger of All%
said:

'When construction in Madinah reaches Sal', leave (the
city) .""1
3- The story of Abu Dharr with regard to wealth stems from his
understanding of the verse:

"0 you who believe! Verily, there are many of the (Jewish)
rabbis and the (Christian) monks who devour the wealth of
mankind in falsehood, and hinder (them)f/om the way of Allih
(i .e . Allih's religion of Islamic Monotheism). And those who
hoard up gold and silver (Al-Kanz : the money, the Z&ih of
which has not been paid) and spend them not in the way of
All&, announce unto them a painfit1 torment. On the Day
when that (Al-Kanz: money, gold and silver, the Zak& of
which has not been paid) will be heated in the )re of Hell and
with it will be branded their foreheads, theirflanks, and their
backs, (and it will be said unto them :) 'This is the treasure
which you hoardedfor yourselves. Now taste ofwhat you used
to hoard."' (At-Tawbah 93435)
[I1 al-Madinah d-Munaunuarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/219
[21 Siyar Arliim an-Nubala', 2/72. Its isniid is saheeh

The true nature of the relationship between Abu D h m al-GhifSri... 421
al-Bukhsri narrated a report which indicates that Abu Dharr
focused on the punishment mentioned - "On the Day when that
(Al-Kanz:money, gold and silver, the Zakiih of which has not been
paid) will be heated ..." - and he used to tell people about that to
make them fear the punishment. It was narrated that al-Ahnaf ibn
Qays said: I sat with some people of Quraysh and there came a
man with dishevelled hair and clothing, who came and sat with
them, then he said: Give bad news to the hoarders of heated
stones that will be heated for them in the Fire of Hell, then they
wiU be placed on the breast of one of them until they come out
from his back, and they will be placed on his back until they come
out from his front, and he will be trembling. Then he went away
and sat by a pillar, and I followed him and sat with him, and I did
not know who he was. I said to him: I think that the people did
not Like what you said. He said: They do not understand
anything.
Abu Dharr quoted as evidence the words of the Messenger of
All& @:

"I would not like to have the equivalent ofMounf Uhud in old,
but I would spend it (in charity) all except three dinars.

41

4- The majority of the Sahabah disagreed with Abu Dharr and
interpreted the warning as applying to the withholding of
zak2h. They quoted as evidence for that the hadeeth narrated
by Abu Sa'eed al-Khudri who said: The Prophet @ said:

"There is no zakih on less thanfive uqiyahs, there is no zakth on
['I al-Bukhdn, Kittb aaI-Zakrih, no. 1408

422

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin 4%Dhun-Noorayn

less than jive camels, there is no zakiih on less than five
zuasqs ."['I
Al-HSfiz Ibn Hajar said: What is understood from the
hadeeth is that anything more than five is subject to zaksh,
which implies that any kind of wealth in which zakgh is paid is
not included in this warning, and whatever wealth is left after
paying zaksh is not regarded as kanz.[" Ibn Zayd said: Anything
less than five is not subject to zaksh, and nothing is due on it, so it
is definitely not kanz. All21 praises those who give zakilh, and the
one who is praised for giving that which is due from his wealth
cannot be condemned for keeping what is left of his wealth.[31 AlH3iz said: We can sum it up by saying: That which is not subject
to zakgh cannot be called kanz, because it is forgiven. The same
applies to the wealth on which z a k a has been paid, because it is
permissible to keep what is left after paying zaksh and it is not
regarded as kanz.I4]
Ibn 'Abd al-Barr said: The majority are of the view that the
blameworthy kind of kanz is that on which zak& has not been
paid. This is indicated by the marfoo' hadeeth of Abu Hurayrah:
"If you have paid the zak2h on your wealth, you have done your
duty," and no one disagreed with that except a group of ascetics
such as Abu ~ h a r r . [ ~ '

5- Perhaps Abu Dharr's attitude towards spending may be
explained by the report narrated by Imam Ahmad from
Shaddgd ibn Aws who said: Abu Dharr would hear ahiideeth
from the Messenger of All21 & in which there was some
strictness, then he would go back to his people and convey
what he had heard with some strictness, then the Messenger
of Alliih g would grant a concession later on, but Abu Dharr
al-Bukh8ri, Kit& al-Zakaakah,
no. 1405
Fath al-Bin, 3/272
13' Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthdn, 1/107
I'' ibid.
I' Fath d - B i n , 3/273
'I1

The m e nature of the relationship between Abu Dharr alGhifari... 423
did not hear of it, so he continued to adhere to the strict
in~tructions.'~]

6- The words "If you want to move (outside Madfnah) but still
be near us, that is fine" indicate that 'Uthman =ked Abu
Dharr to move outside Madinah in a kind manner, but he
did not order him to do so or tell him where to go. If Abu
Dharr had refused to move, 'Uthman would not have forced
him to do so, but Abu Dharr was obedient to the caliph
because he said at the end of the hadeeth: "even if they
appointed an Abyssinian over me I would hear and
obey."['] Another indication that he hated fitnah and
rebellion against the ruler to whom allegiance had been
sworn is the report narrated by ibn Sa'd, which says that
some of the people of Kufah said to Abu Dharr when he was
in al-Ribdhah: This man did such and such to you - why
don't you fight him? He said: No; even if 'Uthmb asked me
to march from the east to the west, I would obey him.[31

7- The reason why Abu Dharr moved to a place outside
Madinah, or 'Uthmh asked him to do that, was that &ah
(turmoil) had began to rear its head in various regions, and
those who bore grudges had begun to spread false rumours,
and they wanted to make use of Abu Dharr's condemnation
of accumulation of wealth, as he insisted on his views.
'UthmSn did not want Abu Dharr to go far away, and he
thought it better to give precedence to warding off
something bad rather than seeking some benefit, because
Abu Dharr's staying near Madinah served the important
interest of conveying his knowledge to the seekers of
knowledge, but ' U t W n nevertheless thought it better to
ward off the bad consequences that he thought would result
from people following his strict views on this issue.

424

' U r n Ibn 'MSn e% Dhun-Nooravn

8- Abu Bakr ibn alJArabi said: Abu Dharr was an ascetic who
thought that the people were acquiring too much of mounts
and clothing when they started being able to afford them, so
he denounced them; he wanted people to give all their
wealth in charity and distribute it to the poor, but that is
something that is not obligatory. There was some
disagreement between Abu Dharr and Mu'swiyah in Syria,
so Abu Dharr left and went to Madhah, where people
gathered around him, and he started to propagate his views.
' U t h m h said to him: It is better to keep away from people,
meaning: you are following views that make you unfit to mix
with people. Whoever was following a view like that of Abu
Dharr was required to isolate himself and not mix with
people, and everyone was allowed to keep and enjoy that
which is not forbidden in sharee'ah. So he left as a pious
ascetic, leaving behind a group of pious people, and both
were good and blessed. Abu Dharr's way was better, but not
everyone can attain that, because if they did that life could
not continue. Glory be to the One Who has made people of
different statuses and positions.[11
Ibn al-'Arabi said: There was also some disagreement
between Abu'l-Darda' and Mu'iiwyah, as Abu'l-Darda' was an
ascetic and also a judge in Syria. When he became very strict in
adhering to the path of truth, and he wanted to apply the way of
'Umar ibn al-KhatGb to people who could not put up with that,
they dismissed him, and he left and went to Madinah. All of that
served interests that did not undermine the religious commitment
of anyone and did not affect the status of anyone at all. Abu'lDarda' and Abu Dharr were free from any faults, and 'Uthmh
was the most free from any faults and was the most honest.
Whatever reports say that Abu Dharr was banished and mention
a reason for that are all false.121
'1 al-'AwLfsim min al-Qawiisim, p. 77
l2]
ibid.

The true nature of the relationship between Abu Dharr al6hif &
425
i...

9- None of the Sahtibah told Abu Dharr that he was wrong,
because his view was praiseworthy for those who are able to
follow it. 'Uthmh did not tell Abu Dharr to recant his views,
rather he asked him to refrain from denouncing people for
what they had accumulated of permissible wealth. The
reports which say that 'Uthmtin forbade Abu Dharr to issue
fatwas altogether did not reach the level of saheeh.[ll The
saheeh report narrated by al-Bukhtui states that Abu Dharr
said: If you were to put the sword here - and he pointed to
the back of his neck - and I thought that I could convey
something that I heard from the Prophet g before you killed
me, I would do so.121 There is no report in al-Bukhtiri that
suggests that 'Uthmh forbade Abu Dharr to issue fatwas,
because forbidding a Suhibi to issue fatwas without stating a
reason is no easy matter.13'
10- If 'Uthmtin had forbidden him to issue fafuwu altogether, he
would have chosen for him a place where people would not
see him, or imprisoned him in Macmah, or barred him from
entering Madinah. But he gave him permission to settle in a
place through which many people passed, because alRibdhah was one of the halting places for Iraqi pilgrims.
Abu Dharr used to come to MaCmah frequently and pray in
the Prophet's Mosque. U
'said to h k If you want to
move (outside MadAmh)but still be near us, that is fine, and
al-Ribdhah was not far from MaCmah. It was close to the
pasture of al-Ribdhah where the zakih camels grazed. Hence
it is narrated that 'Uthmin allocated a herd of the zak*
camels to him, and he gave him two slaves and a stipend. AlAfter
]
Ribdhah was the best stop on the road to ~ a k k a h . [ ~
quoting the reports which say that Abu Dharr isolated
himself on his own initiative, Imam at-Tabari said: As for the
al-Madinah al-Munmowarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/223
I[' al-Bukhiri, Kitib al-'Ilm, Bab al-'Ilm qabl al-Qawl wa'l-'Aml, 1/29
al-Madinah al-Munawwarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/224
" Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/286
"I

426

' U h n & n Ibn 'M2n + Dhun-Noorayn

others, they narrated many things about the reason for that,
and tenible things that I do not want to mention.[']
The historical truth is that 'UthmSn 4 did not banish Abu
Dharr +, rather Abu Dharr asked him for permission and hc gave
it. But the enemies of 'Uthmh spread the rumour that he
banished him, hence when G h a b al-Qatth asked al-Hasan alBasri: Did 'Uthmh banish Abu Dharr? Al-Hasan said: No, AUSh
forbid.['] All the reports which say that 'Uthmh banished him to
al-Ribdhah have weak isnSds and are not free of serious faults,
and their texts contain odd things that go against the saheeh and
hasan reports, which show that Abu Dharr asked for permission
to go to al-Ribdhah and 'Uthmh gave him permission.[31 In fact,
'Uthmh sent for him to come from Syria so that he would be
dose to him in Madinah. When he came from Syria, he said to
him:We sent for you for a good reason, so that you would be close
to us in m ad in ah.[^] He also said to him: Stay with me and you
will find the she-camel (with milk) coming to you morning and
evening.[51Would the one who said that to him banish him?[61
There is no report that says he banished him except one report
narrated by Ibn Sa'd, but its i s d d includes Buraydah ibn Su€y&~
al-Aslami, of whom al-H%iz Ibn Hajar said: He is not strong, and
he has some R2fidi ideas. Can the report of a R z d i that
contradicts the saheeh and hasan reports be accepted?[71 The
R2fidis took full advantage of this incident and spread the rumour
that 'UthmSn 4 banished Abu Dharr to al-Ribdhah, and that is
something for which the rebels criticized him or used as a
justification for their rebellion against him.['] The REdi Ibn alI'[ op. cit., 5/288
TareeWl al-Winah, b y Ibn Shibh, p. 1037. Its isnsd is saheeh.
'31 Fitnat Maqtnl 'Uthmiin, 1/110
14] Tareekh nl-Madinah, p. 1036,1037. Its isntd is hasan.
At-Tabaqit by Ibn Sa'd, 4/226, 227
I6] Fitnat Mnqtal 'Uthm2n, 1/111
ibid.
[I' ibid.

'"

The true nature of the relationship between Abu Dharr al-Ghifgri... 427

Mutahhar al-Hilli (d. 726 AH) criticized 'Uthmgn & for that, and
he added that 'UthmSn beat Abu Dharr severely.['] This was
~ ~ early
effectively refuted by Shaykh al-Islam Ibn ~ a y m i y a h . [The
generations of the ummah knew this fact. When al-Hasan al-Basri
was asked whether 'Uthmh had expelled Abu Dhan; he said:
No, All& forbid.[31 If it was said to Ibn Sireen that 'UthmSn
forced Abu Dharr to leave, he would get very angry and say: He
went of his own accord, and 'Uthmh did not force him to
leave.14' It is also narrated in a report which has a saheeh i s d d
that when Abu Dharr saw that the people were crowding around
him, he was afraid ofjtnah, and he mentioned that to 'Uthmh as
if asking permission to leave. Then'Uthmh responded by saying
to him: If you want to move (outside MaCmah) but still be near us,
that is fine.15]

Proving fa1
Abu Dharr

rt that Ib

Sa'eed a l - A f g M wrote in his book 'Aa'ishah wa'l-Siylisah that
Ibn Saba' played a major role in the fitnah, and he attributes to
him all the conspiracies, turmoil and battles that happened
among the SahSbah. He thinks that these well-planned
conspiracies were the work of experienced devils who steered
them and nurtured them until they came to fruition in all regions.
Hence he wrote this heading: Ibn Saba', the feared, hidden
hero.[61 It seems that al-AfghSni exaggerated about Ibn Saba'
when he described him as a man of brilliance and deep insight,
farsighted and crafty, who had a great impact on the masses.[71
He insists that he was one of the heroes of a Talmudic secret
society whose aim was to bring about the downfall of the Islamic
['I

i21
['I

Minhaj asSunnah by Ibn Taymiyah, 66183
op. cit., 6/271355
Tareekh al-Madinah, 1037; its isnid is ssaheeh.

['I ibid.
'51

ibid.

["

'AaSshah wa'l-Siya^sah,Sa'eed d-Afghini, p. 60

iil ibid.

' U r n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

428

state.['] He almost suggests that he was working in the interests
of the Byzantine state from which the Muslims had recently
seized two important regions, namely Egypt and Syria, apart
from other areas in the Mediterranean, and he finds it strange that
Ibn Saba' was active in many fields, including religion, politics
and war.'']
He thinks that Ibn Saba' was very lucky in meeting Abu
Dharr, and he tailored his views to the inclinations of the latter,
and he suggests that the one who helped him to do that had a
good understanding of people's moods and inclinations and had
the help of an organized spy network. But this claim - that Ibn
Saba' had an influence on Abu Dharr - has no basis in truth for a
number of reasons:
(a) When Mu'awiyah sent word to ' U W 6 complaining
about Abu Dhan; he made no reference to the influence
of Ibn Saba'; he only said: I cannot deal with Abu Dharr
any more, he has done such and such.[31

@) Ibn Katheer mentioned the dispute that took place
between Abu Dharr and Mu'awiyah in Syria in more
than one place in his book, but he does not mention Ibn
Saba' in any of them.[41
(c) In Sukeeh al-BuWlrin' there is a hadeeth which points to the
basis of the dispute between Abu Dharr and Mu'iiwiyah,
and it makes no reference at all to Ibn saba'.15]
(d) In the most famous books of biography of the Sahsbah
there is mention of Mu'awiyah's dispute with Abu
Dhan; but there is no mention of Ibn Saba' having any
['I ibid.
"I ibid.
13] Tareek at-Taban, 5/285

al-Bid8yak warn-NihQak, 7/170-180
[I'

Ibid.

The true nature of the relationshiu between Abu Dharr alGhif2ri ... 429
influence on Abu ~ h a r r . ~ ' ]
(e) The report to that effect is mentioned in al-Tabari thus ...
As for those who jusbfy Mu'gwiyah's action of sending
Abu Dharr to Madinah, they mention the story of Ibn alSawda's coming to Syria and meeting Abu Dharr, etc.[']
But this report which was narrated by al-Tabari is flawed
and false, as it contradicts the historical facts, for the
following reasons:
They say that Ibn Saba' became Muslim at the time of
'Uthmh, and that he was a Jew from Yemen, and he
started his destructive activities in the Hijaz, but they do
not say that he met anyone in the Hijaz.
o
He first appeared in Basrah three years after 'Abd-Allih
ibn 'Aamir was appointed as its governor. 'Abd-Allih ibn
'Aamir came after Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari in 29 AH, thus
he must have appeared in Basra in 32 AH, and Ibn'Aamir
expelled him from Basra on the day of 'Arafah.
o
They said that he went to Kufah where he spread false
ideas and gathered followers, and incited him (Abu
Dharr) against Mu'Swiyah, but he must have spent some
time in Syria in order to have known about its people and
lay his plans to spread his cause among them. If we
assume for argument's sake that it was known what he
was up to in Syria at the end of 33 AH, then what would
you say if you knew that according to the saheeh reports,
Abu Dharr's debate with Mu'Swiyah took place in 30 AH
and he went back to Madinah and died in al-Ribdhah in
31 or 32 AH? What this means is that Ibn Saba' appeared
in Basra at the time when Abu Dharr was already dead,
so how and where could he have met him?[31
Abu Dharr &was not influenced at all by the views of the Jew
o

'Abd-Alliih ibn Saba' wa A f h r u h u j Ahdiifk d-Fitnah, S u l a y m h al-'Awdak p. 51
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/285
I ' [ 11-Madinak al-Munawwarah Fajr al-Islam, 2/225
I'[

'Uthmik Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

430

'Abd-All* ibn Saba'; he remained in al-Ribdhah until he died
and was not involved at all in any of the turmoil that took
place.[11 Moreover, he narrated one of the ahiideeth which forbid
indulging i n ~ t n a h . [ ~ ~

*he death of Abu Dham

and "Uthmin's adding

his family to his own
During the campaign to al-Tabook it was said to the
Messenger of Alliih g:Abu Dharr has fallen behind and his
camel is going slow. He said:

"Let him be; ifthere is any good in him, Alllih will cause him to
catch up with you, and iffhere is no good in him, Alllih will
relieue you of him ."
Abu Dharr urged his camel to speed up, and when it was too
slow for him, he took his luggage and carried it on his back, then
he set out on foot, following the footsteps of the Messenger of
Alliih @. The Messenger of All.!ih
made a stop, and the
Muslims kept a look out. The Messenger of Allih @j said:

"Be Abn Dharr."[31
When the people looked, they said: 0 Messenger of AUiih, by
AUsh it is Abu Dharr. The Messenger of Alliih @ said:

Ahdrith al-Fitnah al-Oola baym al-Sahiibahfi Daw' Qawi'id al-Jark wa'l-Ta'deel, by
Dr. 'Abd al-'Azeer D a n , p. 174
[*I op. cit., p. 174
'31 This sentence appears in imperative form but is meant as a du12', hoping that
All& would cause it to be Abu D h m . Al-Hakim 3/50
['I

The true nature of the relationship between Abu Dharr al-Ghifari... 431

"May Allih have mercy on Abu Dharr; he is walking alone and
he will die alone and be raised alone."[']
Time passed and the caliphate of 'Uthmk came, and Abu
Dharr settled in al-Ribdhah. When he was dying, he told his wife
and his slave: When I die, wash me and shroud me, and put me at
the side of the road, and when the first caravan passes by you,
say: This is Abu Dharr. When he died, they did that for him,and a
caravan appeared but they did not notice it until the mounts
nearly stepped on his bier. But Ibn Mas'ood was among the
people who had come from Kufah, and he said: What is this? It
was said: The bier of Abu Dharr. Ibn Mas'ood started weeping
and said: The Messenger of All21 @ spoke the truth:

"May Allih have mercy on Abu Dharr; he is walking alone and
he will die alone and be raised alone."[21
They washed him, shrouded him, offered the funeral prayer
for him and buried him, then when they wanted to move on, his
daughter said to them: Abu Dharr conveys salgms to you and
adjures you not to leave until you have eaten. So they did that,
then they took them with them and brought them to Makkah,
where they gave news of (Abu Dharr's) death to 'Uthmgn, and he
added his daughter to his family.[31 In one report it says: When
we had buried him, his daughter invited us to eat and we wanted
to take her with us, and Ibn Mas'ood said: The ameer al-mu'mineen
is close by, let us consult him.So we went to Makkah and told him
the news, and he said: May Allih have mercy on Abu Dharr and
forgive him for staying in al-Ribdhah. On the way back, 'Uthmih
went with them and travelled via al-Ribdhah, and he added (Abu
Dhan's) family to his own, then he headed for Madabah and we
headed for lraq.[*]
['I

as-Seerah nn-Nabawiyyah by Ibn Hishsm, 4/178 Al-Hakim 3/50

[21 op. cit., 4/478, Al-Hakim 3/50
[31 at-Tamheed wa'l-BayLinfi Maqtal dShaheed 'Uthmin, p. 87,88
[41 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/314

-.

led to
the murder of 'Uthman
The importance of studying the
turmoil that led up to the murder of
'Uthmiin, and its consequences, and the
Prophet's wisdom in telling him what
would happen

The most important events of the fitnah that led up to the
murder of 'Uthmsn, and their consequences, such as the
Battle of the Camel, Siffeen, etc
It was narrated that many of the salaf and scholars enjoined
refraining from indulging in detailed discussion of the things that
happened among the Sahzbah, and referring their affairs to Allsh,
the Most Just Judge, whilst thinking positively of them and
believing that they were in the position of mujtahids who will be
rewarded in sha All&; we should avoid criticizing them and
impugning their honour, because that leads to undermining
sharee'ah, as they were its bearers who conveyed it to us. For

434

' U W Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Nooravn

example, it was narrated that 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Azeez was
asked about the people of Siffeen and he said: That is blood that
Allsh protected us from shedding and I do not want to
contaminate my tongue with it.['] One of them was asked
about that and he responded by quoting the words of Alliih,

"That was a nation who has passed away. They shall receive the
reward of what they earned and you of what you earn. And you
will not be asked of what they used to do" (Al-Baqarah2134).
There is a reason for this prohibition, which is the fear that it
may lead to criticism and impugning their honour, which in turn
could lead to incurring the wrath and anger of Allsh. But if this
reason no longer applies, then it seems that there is no problem
with it, so long as discussing the details of what happened will not
lead to criticizing them at all. In that case, there is nothing wrong
with studying this matter in depth, examining its causes, motives,
precise details, results and consequences for the society of the
Sahsbah and for those who came after them. Some of the scholars,
such as Ibn Katheer, al-Tabari and others, wrote about the events
of that critical period of Islamic history, and discussed in detail
many of the issues that have to do with thefitnah. Some of them
even went so far as to suggest that one or both parties were
wrong, based on many reports and texts in which saheeh material
is mixed with other kinds.['] There are reasons why ah1 alSunnah and the seekers of knowledge should probe the depths
with regard to the$tnah that arose at the beginning of Islam, and
examine its details. These reasons include the following:

(1) Contemporary writers who deal with the turmoil that
occurred among the Sahzbah fall into three groups:
['I Hilyaf al-Awliyaz, 9/114; 'Awn al-Ma'bood, 12/274
IZ1
Ahdath wa M d e e f h Fifnaf al-Hay, by Dr. 'Abd al-'Areez Dukhsn, p. 79

Reasons for the fibzah that led to the murder of 'Uthmgn

435

(a) Books written by authors who the product of a western
way of thinking that is hostile towards Islamic history or
is ignorant of Islamic history and does not see any good
in it, so they carried on criticizing the Sahribah and
Tibi'een in such a way that served the goals of the
enemies of Islam who studied the events of the turmoil
in detail and interpreted it in a way that condemns all of
the Sahibah and shakes the foundations of Islam. They
presented these events as a political conflict for position
and power, in which the Sakibah forgot about faith, piety
and sincerity towards All&, and suggested that they
turned into people who were seeking worldly gains and
leadership without caring whether blood was shed,
people were killed, wealth was stolen or sanctities were
violated, so long as it led to the power and leadership
that they wanted.
Among the worst of these fabricators is Taha Hussein (alFitnah al-~ubra)['I which indeed caused the greatest
confusion in the minds of the new generation of
Muslims. Taha Hussein went on condemning the
Sahribnh, casting aspersions on their intentions and
directing accusations against them to serve the interests
Many
]
were
of the enemies of Islam and the ~ u s l i m s . [ ~
influenced by his approach. It seems that writers such as
this relied on historical reports narrated by historians
such as al-Tabari, Ibn 'As&r and others, in which bad is
mixed with good and lies with truth. He took the reports
without paying attention to the way in which they
compiled the reports in their books, and this is a serious
mistake.[31 The Rsfidis tried hard in their books to
distort Islamic history, as in the reports of a l - ~ a l b i [,~ ]
"I See al-Fitnah al-Kubra: 'Uthmtn, and 'Ali wa Banuhu ('AX and his sons)
[I' Ahdtth wa Ahtdeeth Fitnat al-Ha j, p. 80

ibid.
Muhammad ibn al-Sib al-Kalbi. Ibn H i b b h said: He was a Saba'i (follower

436

' U W n Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

Abu ~ a k h n a f ~ and
l ' Nasr ibn Maz2bim a l - ~ u n ~ a r. i ~ ~ ]
This is also seen even in the history of al-Tabari, but alTabari mentions the reporters by name, so that people of
knowledge will realize the status of these reports.13] This
also applies to the writing of al-Mas'oodi in Murooj alDhahab and of al-Ya'qoobi in his TareeW1. Professor
Muhibb al-Deen al-Khateeb indicated in his commentary
on al-'Awisim that the writing of history only began after
the end of the Umayyad state, and the Bgtinis and
Shu'oobis who presented themselves as Shi'ah played a
role in concealin the beauties of history and blackening
its bright pages.

fi

This plot will become apparent to anyone who studies al'Awisim min al-Qawisim by Ibn al-'Arabi, along with its
commentary written by the great scholar Muhibb alDeen al-Khateeb. The R%di Shaykhs wrote thousands of
pages slandering the best generation ever known to
mankind, and they devoted their time and effort to
~ ~ ~huge
distorting the history of the ~ u s l i m s . This
amount of Rsfidi material is to be found in the books of
history written by the Rzidis or in the books that quoted
some of their reports, and you can see it in their books of
hadeeth such as al-Kij and al-Bihir, and in the books
oi t\b.l.t\ll.~h ibn Llh.~'],ant, 01 lhcht, wha, 3.1tJ t(1.11'All J I not
~
.ilt! ,and t l t s i t
Ilk, !\,ill rc,lurn 1111. t i t ~ r l dI. It, dl<*J131 1 lh .\I I. A1i:ijz .tl-I ti.1.11, 3/55A, I l ~ .\bi
i
Hstim, al-Jarh wa'l-Ta'deel, 7/270, 271).
[I1 Loot ibn Yahya ibn Sa'eed ibn Makhnaf al-Azdi, from Kufah. ibn 'Adiyy said:
He was a fanatical Shi'i and a fabricator of their reports. He died in 157 AH.
He wrote many books, including: al-Riddah, al-Jamal, Sifien and others.
12] Nasr ibn M a z h ibn Sayyh al-Munqari al-Kufi. Al-Dhahabi said: He is a
fanatical R3fidi whose report should be ignored. He died in 212 AH. His
books include Waq'nt Sifien, which is available in printed form, a l - J a d and
Maqtal al-Hussein. Miztn al-l'tidal, 4/253
[31 Usml hladhhab al-Shi'ah al-lmnmiyyah, by N2sir aJGhifiri, 3/1457
[41 op. at., 3/1458
'51 op. at., 3/1459

Reasons for the fihzah that led to the murder of U
'-

437

written by their Shaykhs in the past, such as ihqiq alHaqq, and in hadeeth such as Kitib al-Ghadeer. This
hateful, distorted material is the reference point for
everything written by the enemies of Muslims, such as
the Orientalists and others. Then came that morally
defeated generation which sees the west as its example
and ideal, and those pro-westem elements seized
everything that was written by the Orientalists and
took it as their source of knowledge, adopting those
views and spreading that confusion throughout the
Muslim lands, which had a serious effect on Muslim
thinking and culture. The RCfidis were the basic source
for all this evil. The views of the Orientalists and their
connection with Shi'ism is a subject that deserves to be
studied and examined. The ksir enemy started to
benefit from the doubts and lies of the Rtifidis and
their fabrications against Islam and the Muslims from
the t h e of Ibn Hazm (d. 456 AH).[']

@) Books written by some of the contemporary scholars of
this ummah. These are useful in general, but the way in
which they discuss and interpret the attitude of some of
the Sahibah and Tgbi'een is in many - or some - cases
unfair, such as what was written by Abu'l-A'la
Mawdoodi (may Alltih have mercy on him) in alKhillifh wa'l-Mulk, and what was written by Shaykh
Muhammad Abu Zahrah (may Alltih have mercy on
him) in TareeWl al-Umam al-Islamiyyah, and by Imam
Zayd ibn 'Ali. These two books are filled with much that
undermines the position of the SaEbuh and criticizes the
caliphs of Banu Umayyah (the Umayyads), condemning
them and denying that they had any good qualities or
did any righteous deeds.['] It seems that scholars such
['I ibid.
12] Ahdith wa Ahibeth Fitnat al-Haij, p. 81

'Uthmsn Ibn ' A f f h A$ Dhun-Nooravn

438

as these did not examine the historical reports, rather
they adopted Rifidi Shi'i reports and based their
analysis and conclusions on them. May Allih forgive
them and us.
(c) Books whose authors tried to follow the methods of aljarh wa'l-ta'deel (impugnment and validation, i.e.
criticism of hadeeth) in examining historical reports
and subjecting them to the methods of the Muhadditheen
with regard to the isnid and the text, in order to
distinguish the sound reports from the weak.
These books represent a good attempt to resist these
fabrications and explain the events in a proper manner
which does not contradict what is known of the virtue,
faith and jihad of the ~ahcibah.['l These books include that
written by Dr. Yusuf al-'Ishsh entitled Tareekh al-Dawlah
al-Umawiyyah, and Muhibb al-Deen al-Khateeb's
commentary on al-'Awisim min al-Qawisim by Abu
Bakr ibn al-'Arabi, as well as 'Uthmiu ibn 'Affin by
SSdiq 'A joon, 'Abd-All& ibn Saba' wa Athruhu fi A h z t h
al-Fitnah fi Sadr al-Islam by Dr. Sulaymin ibn Hamad al'Awdah, Tahqeeq Mawiqif al-Sahibah fi'l-Fitnah by
Muhammad al-Amhazoon, al-Khilifah nl-Rashidah by
Dr. Akram a l - ' ~ m a r i [ Hiqbah
~'
min al-Tareekh by
'Uthmtin al-Khamees, al-Madinah al-Nabawiyyah Fajr alIslam wa'l-Asr al-Rishidi by Dr Muhammad Hasan
Sharib, the commentaries by Muhibb al-Deen on al'Awlisim min al-Qawisim and al-Muntaqa, and other
books, studies and essays that follow the same method.
From this discussion it is clear that there is a great need
for books that refute these false claims. These
misrepresentations of Islamic history and the status of
"I

I['

op. cit., p. 81
op. cit., p. 82

Reasons for the fitnuh that led to the murder of ' U t M

439

the Sahibah cannot be refuted except by means of a
detailed study of these events and critical examination of
the reports using the standards of al-jarh wu'l-ta'deel,
determining which are saheeh and which are weak.['] It
was narrated that Ibn Taymiyah said: But if there is an
innovator who criticized them on the basis of falsehood,
they should be defended and his false argument should
be refuted on the basis of knowledge and fairness.[z1
Imam al-Dhahabi (may AUgh have mercy on him) was of
a different view; he called for the buming of all books
that contained such lies and which undermined the
position of the Sahlibah. He (.&) said: As it is stated that
one should refrain from discussing what happened
among the Sahlibah and their fighting, may All31 be
pleased with them all. We still come across this in
various books, but most of the reports are fabricated or
weak, and some of them are lies. Whatever is in our
hands and in the hands of our scholars should be hidden
away, or rather destroyed so that our hearts will be pure
and we will be united in love and praise of the
~uha^bah.[~'
We learn something very important from
al-Dhahabi, which is his statement that most of what is
to be found in those books is fabrications and lies that
undermine the position of the Sahlibah ( &), but his
suggestion that those books be burned is no longer
feasible, because these books are widely circulated and
many publishing houses and many of those who have
ulterior motives have printed them, so we have no
option but to subject them to critical examination and
explain the faults, lies and mistakes that are contained in
them, so as to protect the Muslim community from
deviating in its beliefs and ways.14]
"I op. cit., p. 83

MinEj as-Sunnah, 3/192
Ahfith wa Ahideeth al-Fitnah al-Oola, p. 84
'41 op. cit., p. 83
'21

[I'

' U M n Ibn ' A f f k 6 Dhun-Noorayn

440

(ii) It is important to study the jitnah of 'Uthmws murder
and its consequences in order to know the real causes
and whether they were internal or external, the extent to
which each cause contributed to what happened.

The one who reads a little of what has been written
about this jtnah will sense that there was a major
conspiracy behind it, and that the Magians, Christians,
Jews and hypocrites co-operated in executing the plan. It
is the matter of the enemies conspiring against the
Muslim ummah at every stage of its lengthy history.P1
But this conspiracy could not have succeeded were it not
for an internal element of weakness that contributed to
its success. So should not studying the era of the SahBbah
become obligatory for the purpose of discovering the
reasons for the weakness of the Muslim ummah, noting
the weak points through which the enemy was able to
enter and benefiting from this information in order to
direct the ummah of this time and protect it from similar
slip-ups in the future.

-

'I1

The major events that led up to the killing of 'Uthmh 4
and the consequences of that require deep and
painstaking study so that we may derive lessons from
that period of history that will p d e us in the present
day and help us in our serious efforts to restore the
rightly-guided caliphate, following the path of the
; thus mankind may find happiness and be
Prophet @
brought out of its misery and wretchedness that are
caused by its being far astray from the laws of All&,
may He be exalted.

op. cit., p. 85

Reasons for the fitnah that led to the murder of 'Uthmsn

The wisdom of the I'rophet
of what would happen

441

in telling 'Uthinan

In many ahideeth the Prophet @$ foretold that this ummah
would be affected by division and fighting, which is mentioned in
brief and in detail in various reports which speak of the causes
and consequences of turmoil, or some of the events that would
come to pass, who would be behind it, and so on. Many of the
explanations that the Prophet @ gave were answers to questions
posed by the Sahiibah, who were enjoying the great blessing that
AllCh had bestowed upon them, which was the blessing of
brotherhood and unity.They started asking whether this blessing
would last or come to an end. Because the Prophet @had learned
via the Revelation that it would not last as it was, he wanted to
prepare them for this turmoil so that they would know how to
respond on the day when All& decreed that it should come to
pass. By examining the ah2deeth which speak of the turmoil, we
can sense the following wisdom1'] :
1- When the Prophet &$spoke of thisfitnah and turmoil, he
wanted to prepare the ummah so that it would be ready
to cope on the day when these events came to pass, and
would deal with them effectively at that time.

2- These ahgdeeth contain hints about who would stir up
this turmoil, and that sometimes they would be people
who appeared to be believers and be very shict in their
religious commitment, but their understanding would be
deviant and their hearts would be twisted, and in
general they would be lacking in understanding and
knowledge.
3- This turmoil would expose the hypocrites and cleanse
the hearts of the believers and increase them in faith;
they would be motivated to enjoin that which is good

' U W n Ibn 'Aff&n4 Dhun-Noorayn

and forbid that which is evil. It would be a kind of test
which purifies hearts and makes people strive, so that
good would be enjoined and evil forbidden.[']

4- The reports about this turmoil carry an implicit warning
against falling into it or playing any part in it, because
when the believers of this ummah - the Sahibah and
others - heard the Prophet &$ foretelling that some of
them would be involved in murder, and some would be
attached to this world, and some would abandon jihad,
and so on, this stirred in their hearts the feeling of
wanting to confront this fitnah and each one of them
would hope to be saved from that. Thus their attitude
would be one of constant fear of falling into this peril
unawares and fear in this sense is one of the greatest
means of attaining salvation.[21
Ibn Taymiyah (may All* have mercy on him) said, after
narrating a number of maufoo' ahideeth which speak of
this division in the ummah: This idea was narrated from
the Prophet @ in many reports, which indicates that
division is inevitable in this ummah, so he warned his
ummah so that whomever All21 wished would be safe
from that.I3]

5- Informing the ummah about this turmoil is the best way
of ensuring that they would be safe from it, because no
matter how much you warn a man about a danger that is
threatening him, if you do not describe the danger to
him or explain how he may fall into it, he may never
figure out how it could happen and he may not be able
to discern the nature of the problem that is facing him, so
he may fall into that danger without realizing that this is
op. cit., p. 136, 137
AhdCth wa Ahijdeeth at-Fitnah at-Oola, p. 69
'3' op. cit., p. 70; Iqtida' al-Siriit, 1/127
['I

Reasons for the fihzah that led to the murder of U
'-

443

the danger that he was warned about.111

6- The foretelling of this turmoil is accompanied, in some
ahadeeth, with the mention of its causes or results, or
what the Muslim's attitude towards it should be. This is
beneficial to the Muslim and to the ummah as a whole,
as it will help them to stay away from the causes of
turmoil or enable them to judge specific events by their
outcomes or to adopt a sound attitude in the first place.
7- These aklideetk also offer clear evidence of the
truthfulness of the message and Prophethood of
Muhammad &, which increased the faith of the
Sahlibah who heard the hadeeth and then saw it being
fulfilled later on. And it increases the faith of any
believer in any time or place who lives through the
reality of jbz& and division that was foretold by the
Prophet &.[21

Dr. 'Abd al-'Azeez Sagheer D u k h h has compiled and
examined the ahideeth that speak of jbzah, and explained which
are saheeh and which are da'eef, in his book Ahdith wa Ahlideetk alFitnah al-Oola. Then he drew certain conclusions from the saheeh
ahideetk, including the following:

1- Fitnah or turmoil is the decree of AUgh in all nations, and
in this ummah until the Hour begins. It is turmoil like
pieces of dark night, blind, deaf and dumb, and those
who indulge in it are doomed in this world and in the
Hereafter, but those who stay away from it will succeed.
Hardly anyone could ever know where he stands with
regard to it, except those on whom AlEh bestows
knowledge and piety and guides to the truth in matters
of dispute by His leave.13]
['I Ahdtth wa Ahiideeth al-Fitnah al-Oola, p. 70
I[' ibid.
[I' Ahdiith wa Ahsdeeth al-Fitnah al-Oola, p. 345

444

' U M n Ibn 'Affin d s Dhun-Nooravn

2- These ahadeeth indicate that the fitnah of fighting
amongst Muslims is inevitable and there is no way
that it can be regarded as something strange, starting
with the events that happened between the Sahibah and
the Tsbi'een, and throughout the eras of Islamic history
until the present day. But what we have to do is to
understand the causes of this fighting in order to avoid
them, and strive to extinguish the flames of fitnah
whenever it flares up among the Muslims; the Muslim
should not just stand there watching

3- By the mercy of Allah to this ummah, He causes their
sins to be expiated in this world. The fighting and
turmoils that befall them are a means of expiation for
their sins.

4- In some of these ahadeeth there is a clear indication that
most of these turmoils would originate in the east, and
this is what indeed happened. The first jtnah started in
Kufah and Basra, and the battle of the camel took place
there.
5- At times offitnah, some people may sell their religion for
some hifling worldly gain, and the situation is controlled
by whims and desires and confusion, and those who
follow true Islam become strangers in their attitude and
conduct. Then the one who adheres to his religious
commitment is Like one who is holding on to a live coal
or a thorn, patiently seeking reward through his pain
and hardship for the sake of his religion which he
believes to be true.
6- By means of fitnah All31 protects some people so that
they will not indulge in the turmoil and their hands will
not be stained with Muslim blood, and they strive to
bring about reconciliation and promote the sound

Reasons for the fitnah that led to the murder of ' U t M

445

Islamic principles of compassion and brotherhood. Their
attitude indeed appears strange in the midst of madding
crowds and overwhelming whims and desires.[ll
7- In cases of fitnah, the tongue plays a greater role than the
sword, and indeed the tongue is one of the main causes
of fitnah and turmoil. A poisonous word of evil that is
uttered may start a fire in the heart, making people
angry and stirring u p emotions, thus causing
overwhelming turmoil.[21

8- At times offitnah, knowledge decreases, either due to the
death of the scholars or because they keep quiet and
isolate themselves from society, or because people are no
longer interested in them for some reason. Then
ignorance prevails and the people take ignorant
versons as their leaders. who issue fatwas without
knowledge, going astray and leading others astray. Thus
insigruficant people become prominent and the foolish

.-.

9- In these ahsdeeth it says that All% $92has promised His
Messenger @$ that He will not destroy this ummah by
drought and famine, and He would not send an enemy
against them who would prevail over them forever, no
matter how strong and powerful this enemy. But the
thing that All% did not promise His Prophet @ was that
this ummah would not be divided, and this would be the
door through which external enemies could enter. If the
ummah became divided and they killed one another,
then they would become weak and the enemy would be
able to dominate them, steal their resources and control
their affairs, and they would never find relief from that
op. cit., p. 346-348
['I Ahdtth wa AMdeeth al-Fitnah al-Oola, p. 348
[31 op. cit., p. 349, 350
['I

' U W n Ibn 'Affgn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

446

unless they became strong again by means of unity and
referring for judgement to that which Allsh has
revealed.[''

10- These ahtideeth show that the emergence and
continuation of fitnah is the cause of the appearance of
groups that deviate from Islamic guidance, and of the
prevalence of those who follow falsehood.
11- Fitnah changes people's attitudes, until they are no
longer interested in doing righteous deeds and good
works; it creates enmity, resentment and hatred among
people and they become confused.

12- The ahadeeth indicate that thisjtnah would be preceded
by a period of peace, stability, material prosperity and
security, such that a traveller would be able to go from
Iraq to Makkah, not fearing anything but stray animals
on the road. This in fact happened during the caliphate
of 'Uthmin &, which was a time of peace and stability
during which there was an accumulation of wealth, then
came the turmoil of killing and all of that disappeared,
turning from security to fear.
13- During times of fitnah, the best and most wise of people
are killed, and all that are left are the riffraff who do not
appreciate any good deed or denounce any evil.
These are some of the meanings derived from the ahideeth
about turmoil.

[I1 ibid.

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the
killing of 'Uthmiin &

Imam al-Zuhri said: 'Uthmh ruled for twelve years as caliph,
during the first six years of which the people did not criticize him
for anything, and he was more beloved to Quraysh than 'Umar
ibn al-Khattgb &, because 'Umar had been very strict with them,
but 'Uthmh was lenient and generous towards them. Then the
turmoil began after that. The Muslim historians call the events
that happened in the second half of 'Uthmiin's reign (30-35 AH)
the fitnah (turmoil), which ended in the martyrdom of 'Uthmiin
.
During the caliphates of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and the first
part of 'Uthmsn's caliphate, the Muslims were united and there
were no disputes among them. Then at the end of ' U M n ' s
caliphate there were some events that resulted in some kind of
division, and some evildoers killed 'Uthmh, then the Muslims
became divided after the murder of ' ~ t h m s n . [ ~ ]
Muslim society during the caliphates of Abu Bakr and 'Umar,
and the first part of 'Uthmxs caliphate had the following
characteristics:

448

'Uthmtin Ibn 'Affh 4 Dhun-Nooravn

1- In general terms, it was a Muslim society in the full sense
of the word, with deep faith in All* and belief in the
Last Day, following the teachings of Islam in apparent
seriousness and with clear commitment, with the least
amount of sin ever known in any society in history. In
this society religion was life itself, not something
marginal that people turned to from time to time;
rather it was the life and soul of the people, not just
rituals that they tried to do properly. Religion guided
their attitudes, opinions, interests, values, social
connections, family ties, relationships with neighbours,
buying and selling, travelling for business, efforts to earn
a living and honesty in business. It meant that those who
were able sponsored those who did not have any means,
people enjoined that which is good and forbade that
which is evil, and watched over the deeds of their rulers
and governors. Naturally, this does not mean that every
individual in this society was as described, as that is
something that cannot be achieved in this life or in any
human society. Even in the society of the Messenger of
- as it says in the Book of All* - there were
Allah
hypocrites who pretended to be Muslim when deep
down they were enemies of Islam; there were people
whose faith was weak, and those who tried to
discourage others, or were slow to do good, or who
were treacherous. But all of these people carried no
weight in that society and they had no ability to divert its
course, because those who were directing its flow were
the sincere believers who were striving for the sake of
Allah with their wealth and their selves and adhering to
the teachings of this religion.[''
2- It was the society that achieved the highest level of the
concept of the ummah, for the ummah is not just a group
[I1 Kuyfa naktub al-Tireekh aI-lsiarni? By Muhammad Qutb, p. 100

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthman +

449

of people who share a common language, land and
interests, which were the bonds that united people
during the Jahiliyyah. If a nation is formed on such bases
then it is a nation of Jihiliyyah. But the ummah as A E h
wants it to be is a nation that is united by the bond of
faith, regardless of language, race, colour or worldly
interests. This has never been achieved in history as it
was achieved in the Muslim ummah. The Muslim
ummah is a nation that is not based on bonds of land,
race, colour or worldly interests, rather it is bound by
ties of faith which united Arabs, Abyssinians, Byzantines
and Persians, and united the peoples of the conquered
lands with the conquerors on a basis of complete
brotherhood in faith. If the concept of ummah was
achieved by this ummah for the longest period in
history, then the early period of Islam was the best
ever, when Islam was manifested in the most complete
way, including the concept of ummah which was
achieved in an unprecedented fashion.[''

3- It was a moral society that was based on sirong moral
foundations that were derived from the commandments
and teachings of Islam. This moral base was not limited
to guiding relationships between the sexes, even though
this is one of the most prominent features of this society,
which was free from wanton display and the chaos of
free mixing and free from any deeds, words or gestures
that might go against modesty, and free from immorality
except a little from which no society is ever entirely free;
but its moral foundation went much further than
governing relationships between the sexes. It included
politics, economics, society, thought and expression. The
political system was based on the morals of Islam; the
relationships between people in society were based on
['I op. cit., p. 101

450

' U W n Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

honesty, trustworthiness, sincerity, cooperation and
love, with no treachery, malicious gossip or impugning
of people's honour.[']
4- It was a serious society, one that was preoccupied with
serious issues, not trivial matters. Seriousness does not
necessarily mean frowning and harshness, rather it is the
inspiration that creates energy in people and encourages
vibrancy, work and action. The issues in which this
society is interested are far and above these physical
realities, so it has none of the characteristics of idle,
hedonistic societies in which people hang about in their
homes and on the streets, looking for ways to kill time
because they have too much free time.[21

5- It was a society that was striving in all areas where
sacrifice might be involved, not only on the battlefield
for the sake of Allah -even though fighting for the sake of
Allah occupied a great space in the life of this society but also all other areas. Everyone was prepared to work
at any time he was requested to do so, so there was no
need for any military or civil mobilization, because the
society was already mobilized, motivated by faith and
ready to act.[31
6- It was a worshipping society, in which the spirit of
worship was clear in all its activities, not only in
performing obligatory and supererogatory acts of
worship, seeking the pleasure of All&, but also in
doing all kinds of deeds. For them, all deeds were
worship, so they did work in the spirit of worship. The
ruler ruled people in the spirit of worship; the teacher
who taught people the Qur'an and the teachings of Islam
op. cit., p. 102
'21 Kay@ nakhrb al-T81eekh al-Islami?, p. 102
op. cit., p. 103
"I

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of ' U t h m h &

451

taught in the spirit of worship; the merchant who
remembered that AU2h was watching him as he bought
and sold did that in the spirit of worship; the husband
took care of his household in the spirit of worship and
the wife took care of her household in the spirit of
worship, following the guidance of the Messenger of
All2h &:

"Each of you is a shepherd and each ofyou is responsiblefor his
jock. "['I
These are the most important characteristics of the era of Abu
Bakr and the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, but these characteristics
were stronger the closer they were to the time of the Prophet @,
and they grew weaker the further away we get from that time.
These characteristics made it a Muslim society of the highest
order, and they are what made that time an exemplary era in the
history of Islam. They are also the factor that helped this religion
to spread so astonishingly quickly. The conquests themselves
were among the fastest in history; within f&y years they reached
from the Atlantic in the west to India in the east. This is a
phenomenon which in itself deserves to be recorded and
highlighted. Similarly, the people in the conquered lands
embraced Islam with no force or pressure, and the
characteristics of the Muslim society are the real cause of this
phenomenon. The people came to love Islam when they saw it
being applied in this wonderful manner and they wanted to be
among its followers.r21
Studying this period of history should leave an impression
that cannot be erased from the mind of the researcher, an
impression that Islam is a realistic religion that is applicable with
"I At-Tirmidhi (1705)

"' Kayfa nktub al-Tireekh al-lslami?, p. 103

452

'Uthmsn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Noorayn

all its ideals in the real world, because these ideals are not
something suspended in space for mere pondering and wishing,
rather they are realistic ideals that can be implemented if people
try as seriously as they should and give it enough effort.
Moreover there is another impression, that what happened
before could happen again, because people are people, and
people are always able to rise once more when they are
determined, and they can attain that victory and power again.
Allsh says:

"All& has promised those among you who believe and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the land, as He granted it
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority
to practise their religion which He has chosen for them (i.e.
Islam). And He will surely, give them in exchange a safe
security after theirfear (provided) they (believers) worship Me
and do not associate anything (in worship) with Me. But
whoever disbelieved after this, they are the Fcisiqoon (rebellious,
disobedient to All&)" (An-Noor 24:55)
One of the things that will help the Muslims to restore the
RightlyGuided Caliphate is knowledge of the factors and causes
that led to its decline and disappearance, so that we can strive to
avoid them and follow the means that All2h has ordained as
means to honour this ummah. Hence we need to discuss in detail
the causes of the fitnah that ended with 'Uthmsn's murder,
because they are important. There follow the most important of
these causes:

I

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'UthmAn &

453

Prosperity and its effect on society
The Messenger of All& @ saw what his companions were
going through of hardship and poverty, so he told them to be
patient, then he told them that this situation would not last for
long before the treasures of this world would be opened up for
them, but he warned them against letting that distract them from
doing righteous deeds and striving in jihad for the sake of Allsh,
and what that might lead them into of fighting for worldly gains
and their transient
'Umar ibn al-Khattsb understood
this warning and it was part of his policy to protect the Muslims
against the temptations of wealth and worldly pleasures. He
strove hard to prevent the Muslims from spreading in the nonArab lands. Were it not that the emergence of another, stronger
interest dictated spreading further, his ban would have
continued. But this relenting on 'Umar's part did not extend to
the senior Snhibah, both Muhijiveen and Ansir, who were in
Madinah; his ban still applied to them.['] Undoubtedly 'Umar's
attitude is indicative of his fears about Muslims spreading to
lands that were filled with all kinds of goodness and provisions,
lest they become too interested in worldly gains and that cause
them loss in the erea after.^^] When the reign of Uthmsn came
and the conquests spread east and west, and wealth started
pouring in to the bayt al-mil from the booty that was acquired,and
the people's hands were filled with all kinds of good
provisions[41, it is obvious that these blessings and this income
from the conquests would have a great impact on society, because
of the coming of prosperity and the resulting preoccupation with
wealth. Moreover it would also become a cause of competition
and hatred, especially among those whose faith was not strong
enough to punfy their hearts and who were not disciplined by
['I Ahdiith wa Ahadeeth al-Fit&
[I'

al-Oola, p. 559
op. cit., p. 565
op. cit., p. 565
Ahdith wa Ahlideeth al-Fitnah ol-Oola, p. 566

454

' U M n Ibn 'Affsn .& Dhun-Noorayn

piety, such as the desert Arabs and other riffraff, those who
converted as the result of conquest and the members of
prosperous nations who entered Islam at a superficial level,
who had been living a life of luxury and competing in those
things. 'Uthmh understood this phenomenon and warned how
this ummah would change in his letter to the people: The affairs of
this ummah will drift into innovation after three things happen to
you: when prosperity becomes widespread, when your children
from female prisoners of war reach pube
and when the
Bedouin and non-Arabs start to read Qur'Sn.
As for widespread prosperity, al-Hasan al-Basri - who was an
eyewitness -spoke of the state of society, the abundance of goods
and the accumulation of wealth, and how the people changed and
became extravagant and ungrateful. He said: I understand why
people got upset with 'Uthmh. When a time comes when there is
hardly a day when provision is bemg shared out among the
people, it will be said to them: 0 Muslims, come and take your
stipends, and they would take a lot. Then it would be said to
them: Come and take ghee and honey. The stipends were regular,
the provisions were plentiful, the enemy was defeated,
relationships were good and there was plenty. What is more,
the sword was never unsheathed against the people of Islam, then
they unsheathed it against themselves, and by All& it has
remained unsheathed until today, and by AlEh it will continue
like that until the Day of ~esurrection.[~]
As for the Muslims' children from the female prisoners of war
reaching puberty, this manifested itself in their lifestyle of ease
and luxury. The first evil that appeared in Madinah when
prosperity became widespread was when the people started to
keep pigeons and fly them. 'Uthmih appointed a man from Banu
Layth in the eighth year of his caliphate to clip their wings.[31
People began to feel "high" from drinking nabeedk, so 'Uthmh

P

'I1

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/245

IZ1
nl-BidLiyah wuh-NihLiyah, 7/224

"I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/415

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of U
' -n

&

455

sent a man to go around among the people with a stick to prevent
that. When it got worse, 'Uthmsn complained to his advisors, and
they agreed to flog people for drinking nabeedk. He caught some
of them and they were flogged. Then if 'Uthmh caught anyone
doing evil or unsheathing his weapon, he would banishhim from
Madfnah, and their fathers started complaining about that.[']
'Uthmsn stood up in Madinah and said: I am hearing news about
wrongdoing that the people are committing, and I am not going
to be the first one to open the door to fitnah or initiate it. I am
reining myself in and reskaining myself. Whoever follows me, I
will lead him in the path that he knows, and whoever does not
follow me, for every soul there is a Day of Resurrection and an
angel to drive and an angel to bear witness (cf. Q350:Zl).
Whoever seeks the pleasure of AllSh, let him be of ood cheer, but
whoever seeks worldly gain will be a loser.12 Thus when
'Uthmh, the pious man and Rightly-Guided Caliph, carried out
his duties, and introduced disciplinary actions against the sons of
the rich who had started to lead a life of luxury and corruption,
those deviants joined with others who resented him.
With regard to the Bedouin and non-Arabs studying the
Qur'h, this emerged clearly with the formation of a class in the
Muslim society which learned Qur'h not for the sake of reward
in the Hereafter, but for the payments offered by the caliph as
encouragement and to soften people's hearts.r31It is worth noting
that the effects of this change began to appear first at the edges of
the Islamic state, then they moved towards the capital of the
caliphate, which led 'Uthmin to remind the Muslims in his
khutbahs to be careful not to indulge in worldly matters. In one of
his khutbahs he said:
Allsh has given you these worldly conveniences so that you
may seek reward in the Hereafter; He has not given them to you
so that you may be content with them. This world will fade, but

7

456

' U M n Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Nooravn

the Hereafter wiU abide forever, so you should not be tempted by
these temporary conveniences or let them distract you from that
which is eternal. Fear AllSh, adhere to the main body (of Muslims)
and do not divide into groups and factions.['' Then he recited:

"And hold fast, all ofyou together, to the Rope ofAllih (i .e. this
Qur'in), and be not divided among yourselves, and remember
Allthis Favour on you, for you were enemies one to another but
He joined your hearts together, so that, by His Grace, you
became brethren (in Islamic Faith), and you were on the brink of
a pit of Fire, and He saved you from i t . Thus All& makes His
Ay2t (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,
etc. ,) clear to you, that you may be guided. Let there arise out of
you a group of people inviting to all that is good (Islam),
enjoining Al-Ma'roof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that
Islam orders one to do) and forbidding Al-Munkar (polytheism
and disbelief and all that Islam has forbidden). And it is they
who are the successful" (A1 'Imrtn 3~103,104)
In circumstances such as these, when prosperity w a s
widespread and the Muslims were living a life of ease and
plenty, and the people had free time after conquering the regions
and they felt safe and secure, they started to criticize and feel
resentment against their caliph.[21
Hence we can see the effect of prosperity in creatingfitnak,

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthmk Q

457

and we can understand the advice that 'Uthmsn & gave to 'Abd
al-Rahmin ibn Rabee'ah - who had spent a short time with the
: Many of the people
Prophet @ - when he was besieging al-~iib~ll
have become heavy (from eating too much), so take it easy with
them and do not expose the Muslims to risk, for I am worried lest
they be tested.[']
At the end of a khutbah in which 'Uthmh exhorted the
Muslims after they had accumulated a great deal of wealth and
property, he said:
Do not let this transient life tempt you and do not let it
distract you from that which is eternal. Beware of what may
happen to you, adhere to the main body (of Muslims) and do not
be divided not groups and factions.[31

'The nature of social change at the time of 'Uthmin
Profound social effects had taken place, which started to
work quietly but forcefully in a way that not many people
noticed, until they emerged in a violent and explosive manner
that started in the second half of 'UthmMs caliphate and reached
its peak in the rebellion that led to the martyrdom of 'Uthm2n
When the Islamic state expanded by means of conquest, there
came about a change in the structure of society and some defects
appeared in the social structure, because when this state
expanded in area and number of inhabitants, it inherited a vast
area filled with different races, colours, languages, cultures,
customs, systems, ideas, beliefs, literature, architecture and other
aspects of life. On the surface of this society there appeared some
''1 What is meant by al-BCb is a region in Azerbaijan which is called al-Dun al-

Bund. Mu'jam al-Buldin, 1/303
Tahqeeq Mawiiyfal-Snhcibahfi'l-Fihah,
1/361
op. cit., 1/36>
[41 al-Dawlah al-Umawyyah al-Muflara 'alayha, p. 166

458

'Ut!xnSn Ibn 'Affk & Dhun-Nooravn

troubling features of instability and areas that were not in
harmony with one another. Thus society became disharmonious,
especially in the 13rge provinces. Because of their strategic
location and importance, they were used as bases to send
conquering armies and received them on their way back, thus
their numbers decreased because of death and killing. Thus to
replace those who had died, they received even greater numbers
of people from the conquered lads, Persians, Turks, Byzantines,
Kurds and Berbers, most of whom were Persians, Arab
Christians, other Christians or ~ews."] Most of the inhabitants
of these large provinces were those who had taken part in the
Islamic conquests then settled in those regions, and most of them
came from Arab bibes from the south, north and east of Arabia.
They were not, in most cases, from among the Sahibah, or more
precisely, they were not among those who had been taught and
disciplined by the Messenger of All31 &$or by the first generation
of the Sahibah, either because the Sahibah were preoccupied with
conquests or because the number of Sahibah was too few. Thus
there were many changes in the structure of this human society
which consisted of the early generation of Muslims and the
inhabitants of the conquered lands, the Bedouin, those who had
previously apostatized and Jews and Christians. There were also
changes in the cultural structure of society, its standard of living,
the emergence of new types of deviation and its readiness to
accept rumo~rs.[~'

Changes in the demographics of society
The social fabric was composed of a number of groups
(a) Those who remained of the early generation of the
Sahibah and those who had learned to some extent from
the Sahibah.
But these two types continued to decrease either as a result of
[I1

DirisitJi 'Akd al-fibuwwah wa'l-Khilifuh al-Rddkisak, p. 379
Dirisitfi 'Ahd al-Nubuwwuh wa'l-Khilifah al-Rn^dkisah,p. 380

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthdn &

459

death or being killed in battle, or due to their dispersing
throughout the regions. This reduced the impact of their
presence as they scattered throughout the conquered lands,
large provinces, newly-built cities such as Basra and Kufah, Syria
and Egypt. Some of them left Arabia then came back to it.[']

@) The original inhabitants of the conquered regions.
They formed the majority in comparison to the newcomers
who arrived during the conquests. The newcomers remained a
minority even though they played a main role in running affairs
and affecting behaviour, morals, ideas and language. But despite
that, they are still regarded as a minority. This section - the
original inhabitants of the conquered regions - mostly stayed
where they were, but some of them moved to other regions in the
Islamic state, some of them settling in the major provinces and
some in the capital of the state, who were either female prisoners
who became slaves, meaning that they settled wherever they
followed their masters, or they moved for the purpose of trade, to
seek knowledge or to work in the state administration, as there
was no law that prevented them from doing that; rather they may
have been encouraged and supported to do so.'21 The non-Arabs
who came from the conquered lands were among the quckest of
people to engage in jitnah, because most of them came from
nations and people that bore a great resentment at having been
defeated, so they were quick to engage injtnah for many reasons,
including the following:

/,

Their ignorance and the fact that they had only recently
become Muslim, and recently lost the power that they
used to have.

,/ Their lack of understanding of Islam, due to the
language barrier and other factors.

11' ibid.

" ibid.

' U t h s n Ibn 'Affsn + Dhun-Noorayn

460

/,
/,

Nationalism and hatred of the Arabs
Some p u p s among them entered Islam outwardly for
fear of the sword or jizyah, but they harboured feelings
of ill-will towards Islam and the Muslims, and they
hastened to engage in all kinds of fitnuh.

,/ People of whims and desires were relying on these
groups to stir u p trouble, and incited them
accordingly.["
(c) The Bedouin who were known as desert-dwellers
Like other people, some of them were pious Muslims and
some were k2firs and hypocrites, but they were as Allih says:
,,' *, ,,>
a\J
;j\ L >>b
-+\

><A

5'
,,
yf
,sf;

kk$YS
3 ,$$%$

*

4"g ,, -A?">,,,Lk,,

"The Bedouins are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy, and
more likely to be in ignorance of the limits (Alllih's
Commandments and His Legal Laws) which Allrih has
revealed to His Messenger. And All& is All-Knower, AllWise" (At-Tawbah 997).

That is because they were hard-hearted, harsh-natured and
coarse in speech, and due to these characteristics they were more
inclined to have no knowledge of the limits that All21 had
revealed, namely laws, rulings and jihad.['] So they were among
the quickest of people to engage infihah, and there are several
reasons for that, including the following:

J Lack of understanding of Islam.

/,

One of them would be quick to develop self-admiration

['I

Dirtsritfi'l-Ahwa' wa'l-Firq wa'l-Bida', by NCsk al-'Aql, p. 161

"I

D i r M t f i 'Ahd al-Nubuwwah wa'l-KhilLifh al-ahidah, p. 380, quoting from aiShawEni, Fath al-Qadecr, 2/395397

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthmh &

461

as soon as he learned anything of the QLII'~, believing
that he had become a scholar when he acquired a little
knowledge.

J Their disrespect towards the scholars and reluctance to
leam from them or follow their example.

,/ Their deeply rooted tribalism.
J The people of whims and desires took advantage of
them and their naivete and ignorance

/,

Their hot-tempered nature, aversion to cities and
mixing with their inhabitants, and their suspicion of
people whom they do not know. This is the nature of
the Bedouin in all times and places.

,/ Their strictness in religious observance and their
stubbornness with no knowledge. Hence most of the
rebels came from this group.[']
From these Bedouin emerged men who were known as ulqurrt' (lit.the readers or reciters), but in this case what was meant
by qurru' was different from the usual meaning. What is usually
meant is a group of people who specialized in reciting the Qur'h,
but the word came to mean something else. Some of them
followed the path of the rebels, who understood the Q u f h in
their own way; some of them were ascetics who did not
understand the meaning of what they read and could not adjust
to the reality of society.['] These ignorant readers hastened to
become involved in fitnah for several reasons, including the
following:

,/ Strictness in religious practice in addition to their lack
of proper understanding of Islam, which made them
feel enthusiasm and protective jealousy with regard to
[I1 DirMt fi'l-Akwa' wa'l-Firaq wa'l-Bida', p. 161

12]

Dirfsitj? 'Ahd al-l\iubuwwah wa'l-r(hi1ifik al-Rfskidah, p. 381

462

' U t h h Ibn 'Affin

+ Dhun-Nooravn

religion, but without knowledge or insight. Hence they
got carried away with their whims and desires in the
name of protective jealousy towards their religon,
with no attention paid to the consequences and no
understanding of basic principles of sharee'ah, such as
warding off evil or serving the interests of the ummak.

,' Self-admiration which one of them would develop as
soon as he learned a few verses or ahideeth, without
understanding them properly, so he would imagine
that he had become one of the scholars who are able to
determine what is in the best interests of the Muslims.

J Looking down on the scholars and imams, and
thinking that they had reached a point where they
had no need of them or their understanding and
knowledge, thinking "they are just men and we are
just men."

J Taking ignorant people as their leaders instead of the
scholars and imams, because the people of whims and
desires and the leaders of innovation andfitnah - most
of whom were crafty individuals - always sought out
these qurra' and tempted them, leading them step by
step and exploiting their love of religion and
provoking their protective jealousy, without proper
insight.

J Their ignorance of the rules on how to use the evidence
and understand the texts with regard to rulings on
fitnak.[l]
(d) Those who had previously apostatized
They had not been Muslim for long, and their joining Islam
was out of necessity. We do not deny that some of them became
"I

Diristtfi'l-Ahwa' wa'l-Firaq wa'ldida', p. 163

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthmk

463

righteous and good, and were among the virtuous, but some of
them had not tasted the sweetness of Islam and even though they
claimed to be Muslim, they retained their previous mentality and
continued as they had been before Islam, motivated by tribalism
as if Islam had never penetrated deeply into their hearts or as if
they believed that there was no contradiction between Islam as
they knew it and tribalism.[']
These groups of former apostates formed an element that
contributed to setting the stage forfitnah. The apostates were there
at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar (A);
the only difference was
that 'Uthm2n's policy towards them was different from the policy
of the two caliphs who came before him. Abu Bakr &
had
i written
to his commanders telling them never to seek the help of a former
apostate in jlhad against the enemy, and he emphasized to Kh2lid
ibn al-Waleed and 'Iytid ibn Ghanam that they were not to bring
on any military campaign anyone who had apostatized, until
further notice. So during his era, no former apostate played any
role.12] Al-Shu'bi said: In his wars, Abu Bakr never sought the
help of any of those who had apostatized, until he died.[31Hence
some of those who had apostatized but then became good
Muslims felt too shy to meet Abu Bakr. For example, Tulayhah
ibn Khuwaylid went to Makkah for 'Umrah, but he was never
able to meet Abu Bakr, until he died.14] During the caliphate of
'Umar 4, he started to ease off on this policy towards the former
apostates, and he urged them to go and join the fighting in Syna
and 1raq.I5l In the army of Sa'd ibn Abi Waqq2s that went to alQ2disiyyah there were Qays ibn Makshooh al-Mur2di and ' A m
ibn Ma'di Yakrib, who used to urge the people to fight. This all
came about after 'Umar gave the former apostates permission to
[I1 Dirisdffi 'Ahd al-Nubuwwah war1-l(hi1Tuhal-Rishidah, p. 381

'Abd-Allih ibn Saba' wa Athmhufi Ahdith al-Fiind~,by SulaymSn al-'Awdah, p.
155
al-Bidiyah wah-Nihiyah, 6/347
14] at-Tareekh al-Islami, 9/59
'51 'Abd-All& ibn Saba' wa Afhruhufi Ah&h al-Fitnah, p. 156

1

'UthnGn Ibn ' A f f h g Dhun-Noorayn

464

go and fight.['] But this easing off on Abu Bakr's policy at the
time of 'Umar was accompanied by a kind of caution; there were
always conditions and guidelines before they were allowed to
join, and a former apostate could never be appointed over a
company of one hundred men. Hence Sa'd had to send Qays ibn
al-Makshooh with seventy men only to pursue the non-Arabs
who attacked them on the night of al-hareer.'" Then 'Uthmsn
came and waived all these restrictions that had been imposed by
the two previous caliphs on the former apostates. He thought that
enough time had elapsed since the time of apostasy for anyone to
have gotten rid of any of its influence, and he even decided to
appoint some of the former apostates to do work for the state as a
means of strengthening their faith, but that had no such effect on
them, rather it made them even more corrupt.
The result of 'UthmMs allowing former apostates to go to
Kufah and join the army there was that the people of Kufah
changed, and the army commander in Kufah, 'Abd al-Rahmh
ibn Rabee'ah, was injured in the campaign against the Turks - he
was the one who had fought them at the time of 'Umar, when they
were scared of him and used to say: This man would never have
dared to come and fight us unless he had angels with him,
protecting him from death.[31These effects can clearly be seen in
thejtnah that resulted in the murder of 'Uthmh. When we look
at the names of those who were accused of 'Uthmh's murder, we
see men who belonged to tribes that were among the former
apostates, such as Sawdsn ibn Hamrzn al-Sakooni, Qutayrah ibn
Fulsn al-Sakooni and Hakeem ibn Jablah al-'~bdi.[~]
(e) The Jews and Christians
Some of them - in fact many - had left or been expelled from
the Arabian Peninsula and had settled in the large provinces, such
"I ibid.

Tareekh at-Tabari, 4/382
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/146
'41 'Abd-All& ibn Soba' zua Athruhufi Ahdiith al-Fitnah, p. 157

I['

'31

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthman &

465

as Kufah and Basra. The Jews in particular - as is their nature stayed in those regions that adjoined the areas under conquest,
engaging in their well-known dual mission of financial control by
various means and conspiring to bite the hand that was feeding
them.['] We will discuss the role of the Jews below, in sha All&.

The cultural fabric of society
In addition to this human mix, there was another mix of no
less sigtuhcance, if not of greater sigmficance, namely the cultural
mix. Cultures, ideas, systems and beliefs flowed with these huge
numbers of people that joined the Muslim society, forming a
heavy burden on its shoulders. What made matters worse was the
fact that despite the Muslims' integration into the conquered
lands, as they Lived in their midst and intermamed with them,
learning their languages, adopting their dress and following their
traditions, their influence on the conquered peoples was limited at
that early stage.['] And the people of the conquered lands did not
get a big share of Islamic education and did not become infused
with the Islamic spirit as had been the case with the SahaAbuh,the
Muhlijireen k d Anslir; the same was also true of the Arab tribes
who mixed with the people of the conquered lands. Islam had
managed to fuse many tribes in a single melting-pot for a while.
But it should be taken into account that the process of teaching
and education that was led by a solid base of the Muhlijireen and
Ansir was not able to encompass these huge numbers of people,
so the non-Arabs were unable to get rid of all the ideas and
customs that they had followed during their jahiliyyuh. This was
due to a lack of balance between the horizontal expansion of the
conquests and the vertical expansion in teaching people and
enabling them to understand the Book of AllSh and the Sunnah of
His Messenger g, even though the jihad was invariably
accompanied by dt'iyuhs and teachers who sought to teach the
people their religion so as to keep pace (with the conquests) and
"I
"I

Dirtsftfi 'Ahd al-Nubuwwah wa'l-Khilqah nl-Rashidah, p. 381
ibid.

466

'Uthmiin Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

avoid any weakness in the Muslim ranks and avoid any widening
of the gap between the conquerors and the inhabitants of the
conquered lands, which would result in many negative
consequences and affect the political and ideological unity of
the Muslim ranks.['' It was not possible to avoid these negative
consequences despite the enthusiastic efforts in the field of
teaching Islam, the reason being that the spread of Islam was so
swift and far-reaching. Iraq and the regions beyond it, as well as
Syria, were conquered within a few short years, and it was not
humanly possible for education efforts to reach and encompass
the huge numbers of people in those regions.t21 Among the
reasons for that was the fact that most of the Sahib& who could
have carried out this mission were killed in the battlefield, and
there were only a few of them left, scattered in different regions.
Those Muslims who wanted to learn gathered around them,
which led to the emergence of the Tgbi'een, most of whom were
sincere and were in the forefront of jihad, and some of them were
killed too.131Similarly, there was not enough time to consolidate
the teachings of Islam in the hearts of many people which, along
with other factors, led to confusion and negative consequences.
This was clearly manifested in the last years of 'UthmWs
reign.[4l
Emergence of a new generation
An even greater change took place in society, which was the
emergence of a new generation of people who started to take up
positions in society. They were different from the generation of
the Saktbah, living in a different era and with different
characteristics. This is a generation'51 which in general is
regarded as being of a lesser quality than the first generation
that had borne on its shoulders the burden of building and
Tuhqeeq Muwiiqqal-Sabuh fi'l-Fitnah, 1/358
ibid.
[31 al-Yemenfi Sadr al-Islam by Shujl, p. 334
[41 Tahqeeq Mawliq$al-SuhaAbahfi'l-Fimah,
1/359
'51 al-Dmlah a l - U m i y y u h by Yoosuf alL'Ishsh p. 132
['I
['I

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killiig of 'Uthman &

467

establishing the state. The first generation of Muslims was
distinguished by its strength of faith and sound understanding
of the essence of Islamic belief and its complete readiness to
submit to the system of Islam as embodied in the Qur'cn and
Sunnah. These characteristics were less apparent in the new
generation that was the product of far-reaching conquests, in
which individualism and selfishness appeared, along with the
tribalism of different races and peoples, some of whom still bore
the legacy of the Jlihzliyyah that they had once followed. They did
not gain from an education in sound Islamic belief what the first
generation of the Sahlibak ( &) had gained at the hands of the
Messenger of All& &. That was because they were so great in
number, and the conquerors were so preoccupied with war and
new conquests.['] So the Sahdbah were less involved in differences
and divisions than those who came after them; the later a period
was from the time of the Prophet @$the greater the differences
and divisions.[2]
The new generation did not accept the way of the previous
generation, and were accustomed to a different way. Thus a new
mentality and a new outlook on life emerged, which was a
concept that drifted away from the outlook that had prevailed at
the time of the first two Rightly-Guided Caliphs. The new
generation could not understand that mentality or accept it, or
surrender to its rule.13] Hence the deviants of the new generation
joined those who were promotingfibzah.

Society's readiness to accept rumours
From this heterogeneous mix we can understand that society
was susceptible to turmoil and receptive to rumours and
hearsay.[41 This was expressed clearly by Ibn Taymiyah who
said: Because the people at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar,
Tahqeeq Mawiqifal-Sahibah fi'l-Fitmh, 1/356
Dhuin-Noorayn, 'Uthmtn iibn ' A m n by Muhammad h4%-All&, p. 99
al-Dawlah al-Umawiyyah, by Yoosuf al-'Ishsh, p. 133
[$ Dir(iSLitji 'Ahd al-Xubuwwah wa'l-Khilifah al-Rishidah, p. 382

I'[
I'[

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

468

whose example the Muslims were enjoined to follow as the
g said:
Messenger of AUSh y

"Follow the example of the two who come after me, Abu Bakr
and 'Umar. ..",[I1
were closer in time to the Message and were stronger in faith
and more righteous, their leaders were doing a better job and the
society was more stable, and no fitnah occurred because society
was dominated by people of strong faith. But at the end of
'Uthmh's rule and during 'Ali's caliphate, the third type (i.e.,
people with self-reproaching souls who mixed good deeds with
bad) grew greater innumbers, and were influenced by whims and
desires and by confusion as well as by faith and religious
commitment. That happened to some of the governors and some
of the people. Then this type (whose good deeds were mixed with
bad) increased even more, and fitnah emerged because of that of
which we have spoken above, namely the lack of piety and
obedience on both sides, who were both under the influence of
some whims and desires and sins. Both found explanations for
their actions and believed that they were enjoining what is good
and forbidding what is evil, and following truth and justice, but
along with that justification there was a kind of whims and
desires and confusion, even though one was closer to the truth
than the other.12' This may be explained more precisely by the
dialog that took place between the caliph 'Ali ibn Abi TSlib and
one of his followers. The man said: Why did the Muslims differ
concerning you when they did not differ concerning Abu Bakr
and 'Umar? 'Ali said: Because Abu Bakr and 'Umar were rulers
over people like me, and today I am a ruler over people like
you.[31 The caliph 'UthmSn ibn 'AffSn understood what was
['I At-Timidhi 3662
[I'
[I'

Majmoo' Fatba Ibn Tuymiyah, 28/148,149
Muqaddimat Ibn IUlaldoon, p. 189

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of ' U t h m h 4

469

going on in society, as he said in his letter to his commanders: The
people are scattered far and wide, and selfishness is becoming
widespread among them. I see three reasons for that: love of this
world, whims and desires and too many grudges. Soon it will
lead to turmoil.[']

'Uthiin's corning after *@mar(A)
The fact that 'Uthmh & came directly after 'Umar 4 and the
differences in their natures led to changes in the way in which
people were dealt with. Whereas 'Umar was a strong character
who was strict both with himself and with those who were under
his authority, 'UthnGn was softer in nature and kinder in his
dealings with others, and he was not as strict with himself or
others as 'Umar was. 'Uthmh himself said: May All& have
mercy on 'Umar; who can do what 'Umar used to do?[21
Although the people were happy with 'Uthmh during the first
part of his reign, because he was lenient with them where 'Umar
'became widespread, later on
had been strict, and love of U
they began to criticize him. This had to do with 'Uth&s
upbringing, as he was kind, easy-going, soft-natured, tactful and
diplomatic, which influenced the way things developed and
changed during his reign from how they had been during the
reign of his predecessor 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb. 'Uthm2n
understood that when he said to some people whom he
imprisoned: Do you know why you are daring to challenge me?
Nothing made you dare to challenge me but my f~rbearance.~~]
When the intentions of some of the rebels became apparent, after
'Uthmsn had proven them to be wrong with evidence that refuted
all the criticisms they presented to him in front of a group of
Sahtbah and other people, the Muslims insisted on killing them
but 'Uthmiin insisted on letting them go because of his
forbearance and gentleness, saying: We shall pardon and not
''I al-Tumheed wu'l-Bayin, p. 64
"I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/418
op. at., 2/250

470

'UthnGn Ibn 'Affzn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

kill; we will try to explain to them and we will not punish anyone
unless he commits an offence that requires a hadd punishment or
makes a blatant show of kufr."i

Departure of the senior Sahkbail. horn Madinah
'Umar 4 had prevented the prominent people of Quraysh,
the Muhijireen, from leaving to other countries, except with
permission for a short period. They complained about him and
news of that reached him, so he stood up and said: I liken Islam to
the ages of a camel; it starts out as a jadha' (one year old camel),
then it becomes a thaniyy (two year old), then a rabri'iyy (four year
old), then a sadisiyy (six year old), then a btzil (nine year old). Is
there anything left for the bizil but the onset of its decline (as it has
reached its peak)? Now Islam is Like a bizil (i.e., it has reached its
peak). So long as Ibn al-Khattib is alive, I will be standing at the
mountain pass of al-Harrah, holding Quraysh by their chests to
~~
prevent them from throwing themselves into the ~ i r e . 1'Umar
was afraid for these Sahibah if they scattered in the conquered
lands and acquired property and wealth. If one of the Muhlijireen
whom 'Umar was keeping in Madinah came to 'Umar and asked
him for permission to leave, 'Umar would answer: In your having
campaigned with the Messenger of All21 @j is that which will
take you to Paradise; what is better for you today than going out
on campaign is not seeing any worldly temptations.[31 But
'~thmGnallowed them to go out and was easy-going with them.
al-Sha'bi said: When 'Uthmh became caliph, he let them go and
they went all over, and the people gathered around them, so he
was dearer to them than mar.^^] As a result of that expansion,
some of Quraysh gained wealth and property in the regions, and
people gathered around them.[51 According to one report, when
Tuhqeeq Mmoa^~~al-Saha^buh$'l-Fitnah,
1/364
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/413
['I op. cit., 5/414
[41 op. cit., 5/414
[51 op. cit., 5/413

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of ' U t h m h &

471

'Uthmh proved not to be strict with them as 'Umar had been,
they spread all over. When they saw this world and the people
saw them, those who had no virtue and nothing to offer Islam and
were not known among the people at all gathered around them,
and thus different groups formed. That was the first weakness
that ap eared in Islam, and the first fitnah that affected the
masses.

11

Ibn Khaldoon said: When the conquests were complete and
the Muslims gained full control and power, and the Arabs settled
in the regions on the border between them and other nations, in
Basra, Kufah, Syria and Egypt, there were those who had been
companions of the Messenger of AU& & and were adhering to
his guidance, the Muhipreen, Anstr, Quraysh and people of the
Hijaz, as well as others who were like them. As for the rest of the
Arabs, such as the tribes of Banu Bakr ibn WcYil, 'Abd al-Qays,
Rabee'ah, al-Azd, Kindah, QudcYah and others, only a few of
them attained that level, but they played a major role in the
conquests so they saw themselves as deserving of respect, but the
people of wisdom showed greater respect to the earlier generation
and recognized their rights, as they were still in a state of awe at
the issue of Prophethood and the coming of the Revelation and
the angels. But when the influence of that awe waned, and when
the enemy was humiliated and the Muslims' power grew
stronger, j s l i ideas began to re-emerge. When they realized
that their leaders were from among the Muhipreen and Ansir,
from Qni-aysh and other tribes, they began to resent that, and this
happened to be at the time of 'Uthmh. They started to criticize
the governors openly in the various regions, picking on
everything they did and blaming them for that. They made
unfair demands for governors to be dismissed and replaced, and
they started to criticize 'Uthmiin a great deal, and this criticism
became widespread among their followers, along with rumours
['I

op. cit., 5/414

472

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affh 4 DhuniVooravn

that spoke of injustice in various areas. News of that reached the
Sahibah in Madkah, so they grew suspicious and began to speak
of dismissing ' U t M n or telling him to dismiss his governors. He
sent people to the regions to check on this news, and they came
back to him and said: We did not find anything to be denounced
and neither the prominent Muslims not the ordinary Muslims
denounced the governors.[11

The cessation of c~nquest
When the conquests came to an end at the end of ' U W s
reign, because of insurmountable natural or human barriers,
especially in Persia, northern Syria and North Africa, and the
booty stopped as a result, the Bedouin started wondering where
the previous booty and the conquered lands that they regarded as
their due had gone.[21 False rumours began to spread, accusing
'Uthmh 4 of having disposed of the lands that had been given as
waqfs to the Muslims according to his own whims and desires,
and having allocated them to whomever he wanted. These
rumours upset and disturbed the Bedouin specially since most of
them had no work and were spending half of their time eating
and sleeping, and the other half discussing the policies of the state
and t a l h g about 'Uthm2n's conduct, which the followers of
'Abd-All& ibn Saba' were exaggerating about. One of 'Uthmih's
governors - 'Abd-All2h ibn 'Aamir - understood what was going
on and he advised the caliph, when he sought the advice of his
workers, governors and advisors, that he should tell the people to
engage in jihad and send them away from their wives on
campaign for lengthy periods, so that the main concern of any
one of them would be dealing with the lice on his head and taking
care of his
In this atmosphere, where people who were used to going out
on campaign but did not have much understanding of Islam were
I'[ Tareekh Ibn Knhldmn, 2/477
Tnhqeeq Mawiiq$al-Sahiibah ji'-Fihzah, 1/344
"I Tareekh at-Tubari, 2/340

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthm2n .&

473

talking about serious matters, bad consequences were possible
and it was sufficient to stir up these Bedouin and manipulate
them into revolting and causing ii-oubles and turmoil. And this is
what actually happened. Due to the cessation of conquest, the
Bedouin played a role in the emergence of the firstfitnah, and they
were one of its main causes.[']

Mistaken concep
In Islam, piety is regarded as a good thing; it means giving up
something that is permissible for fear of falling into something
wrong. In principle it means giving up permissible things for the
sake of Alltih. Piety (wara') is a personal matter which a person
may expect of himself, but it is not right for him to expect it of
others. One of the most dangerous types of piety (wara') is
ignorant piety which regards a permissible thing as either
forbidden or obligatory, and this is what happened to those
who were involved in thefifnak.[21 The enemies of Islam at that
time exploited their emotions and stirred them up, so they
regarded 'UthmXs actions which were permissible and served
the interests of the ummah as drifting away Islam and from the
path of those who had come before, and these ignorant people
regarded those actions as very serious, to such a degree that they
thought it permissible to shed the blood of the Rightly-Guided
Caliph 'Uthmh 6 or to help those who regarded that as
permissible. Thus the door of fitnah was opened to the Muslims
and has remained open until today. This ignorant type of piety
may be seen today in the actions of some Muslims who insist of
shaping the d i n g s of Islam in accordance with their own likes
and dislikes, or their customs and traditions.[31

Ambitions ~f ambitious peopie
In the second generation of the children of the Sahib& ( &)
[I1 Tahqeeq Mawiqifal-Sahcibah fi'l-Fitnah, p. 353

al-AsLisj5'1-Sunnah, 4/1676
[31 Ah&
wa AMdeeth Fitnah ul-Huq, p. 517
[I'

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn
there were those who regarded themselves as qualified to rule
and be in positions of leadership, but they found that the way to
that was blocked. Usually when there are ambitious people who
cannot find a way to fulfil their ambitions, they get involved in
any movement that is aimed at changing the status quo. Dealing
with such people is an extremely important matter.I1]

T h e eonspkacy of the hater
Hate-filled hypocrites entered Islam, whose combined
resentment, smartness and craftiness enabled them to
understand the weak points through which they could create
jtnah, and they found people who would listen to them eagerly,
and that led to whatever it led to.[" We have seen previously that
there were Jews, Christians and Persians whose motives for
hating Islam and the Islamic state are well known. But here we
may add those who were subjected to ta'zeer punishments for
offences that they had committed, and who had been punished by
the caliph or his governors in some regions, especially Basra,
Kufah, Egypt and Madinah. These Jewish, Christian and Persian
haters, and criminals (who had been given hadd punishments)
exploited groups of people, most of whom were Bedouin who did
not understand this religion as it really is, and they all formed a
group which was described by all those who met them as evil,
and as troublemakers from the provinces and the dregs of the
;the dregs of mankind who
tribesr3];the wolves of the
were united in evil['] ;fools with no understandingr6];the worst
thugs of the tribesr7]; they were rabble and ruffians, the
troublemakers of the tribes, the lowest of the low'81;they were
[I1 al-Asisji'l-Sunnnk,

4/1676

ibid.
Dirffiitfi 'Akd al-Nubuwwak wa'l-KhiEfA al-Rishidah, p. 392
14] ibid.
at-Tabaqat, 3/71. These are the words of Ibn Sa'd.
16] Diriisitfi 'Ahd al-Nubuwwah wa'l-Kkilzfak al-Rishidah, p. 392
17] Shadharit al-Dkahab, 1/40. These are the words of Ibn a l - ' W d .
I ' [ Shark Sahcch Muslim, 15/148,149
I['

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthmgn &

475

the tools of the shayt2n.[" The sources constantly mention the
name of the Jew 'Abd-AU2h ibn Saba' al-San'sni among these
hate-filled persons. They say that he was a Jew who became
Muslim, but no one checked on his intentions, and he was able to
move among the Muslim provinces because he was regarded as
one of the Muslims.[" We will discuss him in a separate section,
in sha All2h.

'Fqans to stir up boubie against "Uthiirnrzra 4%
Society was primed to accept rumours and talk due to a
number of internal factors, and the social fabric was susceptible to
penetration. Those who wanted to stir up turmoil decided to
criticize the rulers and governors on the grounds of enjoining
what is good and forbiddingwhat is evil until they got the people
on their side and the criticism began to reach ' U t M n ibn ' A f f h
& himself, because he was the ruler of the state. If we list the
criticisms that were levelled against the caliph and used against
him, we will see that they fall into five categories.
1- Personal issues from the time before he was caliph (h~s
absence from some battles and other events)
2- His financial policies - stipends and lands set aside for
grazing
3- His executive administrativepolicies: appointment of his
relatives and his way of selecting governors

4- Fiqhi matters based on his ijtihlid or the interests of the
ummah (offering the prayer in full in Mina, compiling
the Qur'sn, expanding the mosque)
5- His dealings with some of the Sahlibah: 'Ammsr, Abu
Dharr, Ibn ~ a s ' o o d . [ ~ ~

I have explained 'Uthmin's stance regarding these
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 51327
[21 Dirisitfi 'Ahd al-Nubumah wa'l-l(hiliifah al-Riishiduh p. 33

Dirisdtfi 'Ahd a l - N u b u d wa'l-l(hilifuh al-Rishidah, p. 394

476

' U M n Ibn 'Affzn & Dhun-Nooravn

accusations in the appropriate places, except for 'Ammk, which I
will discuss below in sha Allsh. There were some other
accusations against 'Uthmin L& either during his reign, with
which they confronted him and he refuted them then, or things
that were fabricated against him later on by some narrators and
writers, which were not valid and which did not reach a level that
would jusbfy killing him.[']
The criticisms referred to above, which are mentioned in
Tareekk al-Tabari and other books of history, and which was
narrated via unknown narrators and weak storytellers, especially
among the Rsidis, were and still are a major problem with regard
to facts about the lives of the caliphs and imams, especially at
times of tibulation and turmoil. Unfortunately the biography of
'Uthmin has the greatest share of that; his biography has been
subjected to fabrications, distortions and exaggerations produced
by these deviants so as to incite people against him and give him a
bad image. 'Uthmh himself realized that when he wrote to his
governors saying: The people have spread all over and become
inclined towards evil, with three types of motives for that: love of
this world, whims and desires, or hatred and grudges.[21Ibn al'Arabi said of that criticism: They said unfairly, based on the
reports of liars, that 'Uthmiin committed many evils and injustices
during his caliphate. All of that is false, both is isnid and text.r3]
Ibn Taymiyah stated that 'Uthmsn & was not infallible, and
said: The basic principle is that we do not believe that anyone was
infallible after the Prophet gdrather the caliph or anyone else may
make mistakes and commitsins, but they may repent or their sins
may be expiated by their many good deeds, or they may be faced
with calamity by means of which All& will expiate their sins, or
they may be expiated in other ways. Everything that has been
'may at worst be a sin or a mistake, but
narrated from U
'Uthmh achieved the means of attaining forgiveness in many
['I

op. cit., p. 400

[21 al-Tamheed wa'l-Bayin, p. 64

C31

alL'Awisim min al-Qmohirn, p. 61-63

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'UthmSn g

477

ways, such as his having come to Islam early, his faith and jihad,
and other good deeds that he did. It is proven that the Prophet gg
testified in his favour and gave him the glad tidings of Paradise
for a calamity that would befall him.I1] Moreover, he repented
from most of the things for which they criticized him, and he met
with a great calamity by means of which AUSh expiated his sins
and he bore it with patience until he was killed wrongfully as a
martyr, which is one of the greatest means of expiation.[']

Using means to stir up the people
The most important of these meaw were: spreading rumours
until they became widespread; stirring up debates and arguments
against the caliph before the people; criticizing the governors;
fabricating forged letters which were attributed to the Snha^bah
(&), 'Aa'ishah, 'Ali, Talhah and az-Zubayr; spreading the
rumour that 'Ali ibn Abi TSlib was more entitled to the
caliphate and that the Messenger of Allih @ had left
instructions that he should be the caliph after him; organizing
groups in Basra, Kufah and Egypt, with four groups in each
province, which is indicative of prior planning. They gave the
people of M a d h h the false impression that they had only come
at the invitation of the Sahib&, and things escalated until they
reached the level of murder.[31 In addition to these means, they
also used a number of slogans, including takbeer and the claim
that their jihad was against injustice, or that they were only
enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil, or making
demands to change and dismiss governors, but then the demand
turned into a demand for the dismissal of 'Uthmsn, until they got
canied away in their audacity and hastened to kill the caliph,
especially when they heard that the people of the provinces were
coming to support the caliph; that made them more eager to
corner the caliph and kill him by any means.14]
"I Muslim, Kitib Fadi'il dSahibuh, 4/1867,1869
'21 Dhu'n-Noo~ayn,'Uthmdn ibn 'Affin, by Muhammad Ma-AllSh, p. 63

I'
[41

D i ~ t s t t j i'Ahd al-Nubuwwuh wa'l-ailrifah al-Rdshiduk, p. 401
Diltsdtji 'Ahd al-Nubuwwuh wa'l-Khiltfah al-Rdshidak, p. 402

478

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Aff2n 4 Dhun-Nooravn

Idluenee of the Saba'is (followers of "Abd-All2h
ibn Saba" on the fifilnah
The Saba'is were a real group, not a figment of the
imagination
The early scholars were unanimously agreed that the Saba'is
existed, with no exception. A few modern scholars, most of whom
are Shi'is, &sagreed with that, and their claim is based on the
view that this was a product of the imagination of Sayf ibn 'Umar
al-Tameemi, because some of the scholars of biography criticized
this Sayf in the field of hadeeth narration, but the scholars regard
him as acceptable in the field of historical reports. Moreover, there
are many reports narrated by Ibn 'Asskir which mention 'AbdAUSh ibn Saba' of which Sayf ibn 'Umar is not one of the
narrators. Al-Albhi ruled that some of these reports were saheeh
even though they were narrated by the Shi'ah in their books of
sects, biographies or hadeeth, and there is no mention of this Sayf
ibn 'Umar at all in them. This is discussed in detail by Dr.
SulaymSn al-'Awdah in his book 'Abd-All& zbn Saba' wa Athruhu
fi Ahdifh al-Fitnah fi Sadr al-Islam.
Some researchers doubted the existence of 'Abd-All& ibn
saba'[ll and said that he was an imaginary figure. But they
denied his existence without offering any proof or evidence.
Those who denied the existence of Ibn Saba' were groups of
Orientalists and Arab researchers, most of whom were modern
Shi'ah. It is strange that these Orientalists and their lackeys
among the Rsfidis and westernized Muslims of our time deny the
existence of 'Abd-All& ibn Saba' and claim that he is an
imaginary figure. How ignorant and audacious it is to suggest
[I1 'Abd-All&

ibn Saba', who is also known as Ibn al-Sawda', was a Jew from
San'V who appeared outwardly to have become Muslim at the time of
'Uthmgn ibn 'Affgn. He was noticeably active in Syria, Iraq and Egypt in
particular. He drew up plans and produced destructive ideas to divert the
Muslims from their religion and stop them obeying their caliph and create
division among them. Tahqeeq MawiiqqaI-Sahiibahfi'l-FiM, 1/284

Reasons for the m o i l that led to the killing of 'Uthm8n &

479

such a thing when the books of history and sects are filled with his
biography and the narrators transmitted reports of his deeds that
were well known throughout the region. The historians, scholars
of hadeeth and authors of books on sects and groups, biography,
literature and genealogy who discussed the Saba'is were all
unanimously agreed that 'Abd-AllCh ibn Saba' who appears in
the books of Sunni writers as well as in Shi'i books was a real
historical character. Hence the reports of thejitnah and Ibn Saba's
role in it are not limited to Tareekh al-Tubari and are not based only
on the reports of Sayf ibn 'Umar al-Tameemi contained therein,
rather there are widespread reports in the narrations of earlier
scholars and throughout the books that record the events of
Islamic history and discuss the views of different sects during that
period. But the advantage that Imam al-Tabari had over others is
that he had more abundant material and more details than others.
Hence shedding doubts on these events without any evidence
implies a rejection of all these reports and labelling those narrators
and scholars as foolish, and distorting the historical facts. Since
when does an academic methodology based on pure rational
thinking form a basis for rejection as opposed to texts and
corroborating reports? Is this methodology based on overlooking
and ignoring all the sources, both earlier and later, which prove
that Ibn Saba' was a real person?[11Ibn Saba' is mentioned in
many books of ahl al-sunnah, including the following:
a The Saba'is are mentioned by A'sha ~ a m a d h [ ' ] (d. 83
AH). He lampooned al-Mukht2 ibn Abi 'Ubayd alThaqafi and his supporters from Kufah, after he fled with
the nobles of the tribes of Kufah to Basra, by saying:
"I

Tahqeeq Mawiqif alSah2bak fl-Fitnak (1/70); Da'iwa al-InqLidh li'l-Tareekh alIslami- Radd 'ala Hasan Farhit al-Msliki, by Dr Sulaymh ibn Hamad al'Awdah. In his refutation he mentiom the isnids which al-Albgni (may All&
have mercy on him) examined and classified.
His name was 'Abd al-RdmGn ibn 'Ahd-AlEh ibn al-Hgrith a1-Hamadhi,
who was known as A'sha Hamadh. He was a Persian poet and one of the
jiqaha' of the qurra', but he composed poetry and was known for it. AlDhahahi said: a famous eloquent poet, who was a devoted worshipper and
man of virtue. He was killed in 83 AH.

480

'Uthrngn Bn ' A f f h4 Dhun-Nooravn

I bear witness that you are Saba'is, and I am aware of you, 0
guardians of kufr.[ll
There is a report f?om al-Sha'bi (d. 103 AH/721 CE) which
says that the first one who told lies was 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'."]
Ibn Habeeb13] (d. 245 AH/860 CE) mentioned Ibn Saba' and
regarded him as one of the children of the Ethiopian women.[41
Abu 'Aasim Khushaysh ibn Asram (d. 253 AH) narrated a report
about 'Ali 4 burning some of the companions of Ibn Saba', in his
~ l - ~ & i h i z(d.
I ~255
~ AH) is regarded as one of
book al-~sti~iirnah.[~~
~ his report is not
the first to refer to 'Abd-Alliih ibn ~ a b a ' ,[ but
the first, as Dr. Jawgd 'Ali thinks.[81
The story of 'Ali ibn Abi Tiilib 4 bbuming a group of heretics is
mentioned in saheeh reports that are narrated in the Saheehs,
Sunans and Musnads (books of hadeeth).[91 There is nothing
strange about using the word heretic with regard to 'Abd-All&
ibn Saba' and his group. Ibn Taymiyah said: The Riifidi ideas
started with the heretic 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'.IIO1 Al-Dhahabi
said: 'Abd-Allsh ibn Saba' was one of the extreme heretics; he was
misguided and misled others.["] Ibn Hajar said: 'Abd-All& ibn
Saba' was one of the extreme heretics... he had followers who
were called Saba'is, who believed in the divinity of 'Ali ibn Abi
[I1 Diwin ASha Hamadin, p. 148

Tareekh Dimashq, by Ibn ' A s k , 9/331
[31 Muhammad ibn Habeeb ibn Umayyah al-Hisbimi,

a scholar of genealogy,
historical ~ p o r t s language
,
and poetry, d. 245 AH. Tareekh Baghdad, 2/277
al-Muhbar by Ibn Habeeb, p. 308; 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'by alL'Awdah, p. 53
[51 His name was Khushaysh ibn Asram ibn al-Aswad al-NasVi, whose
biography was written by al-Dhahabi. Tadhkirat al-Hufftz, 2/551; Shadhartt
al-Dhahab, 2/129
[61 His name was 'Amr ibn Bahr ibn Mahbooh al-KinSbi, one of the leading
scholars of literature and knowledge, d. 255 AH. Wafiyit al-A'yin, 33/40
al-Bayin wa'l-Tabyeen, 3/81
Tahqeeq Mawiyif al-SaMbah (1/290); 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'by al-'Awdah, p. 53
[91 Tahqeeq &iq$al-Sahribah
(1/290); 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'by al-'Awdah, p. 53
[Io1 Majmoo' al-Fa@wa, 28/483
[''I Mizin al-l'tidil by al-Dhahabi, 2/462
'

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthman &

481

TClib. 'Ali burned them with fire during his caliphate.r11Ibn Saba'
is also mentioned in the books of al-jarh wa'l-fa'deel (hadeeth
criticism). Ibn Hibbh (d. 354 AH) said: al-Kalbi - Muhammad ibn
al-SVib al-Ikhbiiri - was a Saba'i, one of the followers of 'AbdA l l a ibn Saba', one of those who said that 'Ali did not die and
that he will come back to this world before the Hour begins. If
they saw a cloud, they would say: The ameer al=mu'mineen (i.e.,
'Mi) is in it.[21The books of genealogy also confirm that the Saba'i
group is named after 'Abd-AUCh ibn Saba' such as, for example alAnsiib by al-~am'ini~~]
(d. 562 AH).[^] Ibn 'AsCkir (d. 571 AH)
described Ibn Saba' as follows: 'Abd-All& ibn Saba', after whom
the Saba'is ware named, who are a group of extreme afidis. He
ally from Yemen, a Jew who apparently became a
2
~
2Sayf. ibn ~'Umar was not the only source for reports
about 'Abd-AllCh ibn Saba'. In his Tareekh, Ibn 'AsCkir narrated
reports which have no connection to Sayf, which confirm the
Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyah (d. 728
existence of Ibn ~aba'.[~]
AH) stated that the origins of the R3idi sect lay with the
hypocrites and heretics, and that it was the invention of the
heretic Ibn Saba', who exaggerated about 'ALi and claimed that he
should have been caliph and that he was appointed by a clear text,
~ l - ~ h Z t i b i (d.
[ ~ I790 AH)
and he claimed that he was
pointed out that the innovation of the Saba'is was one that had to
do with belief in the existence of another god besides Ml2h exalted be All& - and this was an innovation that differed from
others.[91 In al-l(hutat by al-Maqreezi (d. 845 AH) it says that
I'[ List% at-Mizin by Ahmad ibn Hajar, Hyderubad Deccan, 3/360
al-Mujrooheen min al-Muhaddifheen, by Abu mtim al-Tameemi, 2/253
1'1 'Abd al-Kareem ibn Muhammad al-Sam'sni, d. 562 AH; Tadhkirat al-Hufffz, 4/
1316
[41 al-Ansib by Abu Sdeed al-Tameemi, 7/24
Tareekh Dirnashq, by Ibn 'Asski?, 9/328, 329
c61 Tahqeeq Muwiq~al-SahBbah,11298; 'Abd-Allah ibn Saba' by al-'Awdah, p. 54
[I' hlajmooiat al-Fati2wa by Ibn Taymiyah, 4/435
['I Forsheern ibn Moosa, Muhammad alGhamsti, d. 790 AH
[91 al-I'tisim, by Abu Ishiq al-lakhmi, 2/197

482

'Uthmgn Ibn ' A f f h4%Dhun-Noorayn

'Abd-Alliih ibn Saba' appeared at the time of 'Ali, saying that 'Ali
was the wnsiy (caliph appointed by the Prophet &) and would
return, and promoting belief in the transmigration of souls.[ll
The Shi'ah sources which mention Ibn Saba' include the
following:
Al-Kushshi narrated that Muhammad ibn Qawlawiyyah
said: Sa'd ibn 'Abd-Alliih told me: Ya'qoob ibn Yazeed and
Muhammad ibn 'Eesa told me, from 'Ali ibn Mahziyk, from
Faddiilah ibn Ayyoob al-Azdi, that Ab2n ibn ' U t M n said: I
heard Abu 'Abd-AUCh say: May Alliih curse 'Abd-Alliih ibn Saba'
for he claimed that ['Ali] was divine, but by All2h, ['Ali] was an
obedient slave. Woe to the one who tells lies about us. If people
say of us things that we do not say about ourselves, we disavow
' isngd of this report is
ourselves of them before ~ l l i i h . [ ~The
~aheeh.[~l
In al-Khisil, al-Qommi narrated the same report, but in
connection with a different isniid. The author of Rawdtt al-Jannit
mentioned Ibn Saba' in a quotation from Imam al-S2diq who
cursed Ibn Saba' and accused him of lying, fabricating,
broadcasting secrets and misinterpreting.I4] In his book, Dr.
Sulaymiin al-'Awdah mentioned a number of texts with which the
Shi'ah books are filled, and their reports from 'Abd-All& ibn
Saba', which are more akin to recorded documents that condemn
anyone among the later Shi'ah who tries to deny the existence of
'Abd-Alliih ibn Saba' or shed doubt on the reports that refer to
him on the basis of paucity or weakness of the reports.[51
Ibn Saba' was a real historical figure concerning whom there
is no confusion in either the Sunni or Shi'i sources, earlier or later.
This is also the view of most of the orientalists such as Julius
['I

al-Mawi'iz marl-l'tibir bi Dhikr al-Khutat wa'l-Athir, by al-Maqreezi, 2/256,257

12] Rijil al-Kushshi, 1/324
[31 'Abd-All&

ilm Sabaf- aI-Haqeeqah al-Majhoolah, by Muhammad 'Ali alMu'allim, p. 30
[41 'Abd-Allih ibn Saba' by Sulaymi5n al-'Awdah, p. 62
['I ibid.

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killhz of 'Uthmiin &

483

~ a l h a u s e n [ l ] ,Van ~ o u l t o n ~Levi
~ ~ ,d e la v i d a r 3 ] ,
~ o l d s c h i e h e r [ ,~ ]Ronald ~ i c h o l s o n ,~ and
~ ] Dwight
~onaldson.[~]
At the same time, Ibn Saba' remains a doubtful
figure or no more than a myth for a few Orientalists such as
~ , Fred Lander who remains
Caetani and Bernard ~ e w i s [and
uncertain.Isl But we should remember that we do not rely on
these authors with regard to our history.
The one who studies these sources, ancient and modem,
Sunni and Shi'ah, will be certain that 'Abd-AUSh ibn Saba' really
existed and that his existence is supported by the historical
reports. The books of 'aqeedah, hadeeth, biography, genealogy,
literature and language also mention him a great deal. This idea
was accepted by modem scholars and researchers. It seems that
the first ones who shed doubt on the existence of Ibn Saba' were
some of the Orientalists, then this denial was supported by the
majority of modern Shi'ah, and some of them denied his existence
altogether. Among modern Arab researchers there were some
who admired the ideas of the Orientalists and were influenced by
the books of the modem Shi'ah, but none of them have anything
to support their suspicions and denials except doubt itself, which
is based on speculations and assumptions.[91Whoever wishes to
find out more about the Sunni, Orientalist and Shi'i references
which mention Ibn Saba' may refer to Tahqeeq Mawtqifal-Sahibuh
fi'l-Fitnah by Dr. Muhammad Amhazon, and 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'
wa Atharuhu ji Ahdtth al-Fitnuh ji Sadr al-Islam, by Dr. SulaymSn
ibn Hamad al-'Awdah.
The KhHrijis and the Shi'ah, by Julius Falhuasen, p. 170
al-Siysdah d-'habiyyah wa'l-Shi'ah wa'l-Isra'eeliyyHt, p. 80. by Van Foulton
[31 Tuhqeeq Mmuiqifal-Sak8bak, 1/312
[41 al-Xqeedak wa'l-Sharee'ih al-lslamiyyak, by Goldschieher, p. 229
Literary History of the Arabs during the JHhiliyyah and early Islam, p. 235
'Aqri'id al-Ski'uh, p. 58
[71 Origins of Ismailism, p. 86
Tuhqeeq Maw8qiJal-Sahtbah, 1/312
[91 ibid.

['I
I['

484

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Min & Dhun-Nooravn

The role of 'Abd-All& ibn Saba' in stirring upfitnah
In the last years of 'Uthmin's caliphate, signs of trouble in the
Muslim society began to loom on the horizon, due to the changes
that we have mentioned. Some of the Jews seized this opportunity
to stir up trouble by pretending to be Muslim and using the tactic
of taqiyah (dissimulation).Among them was 'Abd-Allih ibn Saba'
who is also known as Ibn al-Sawda'. Whilst we should not
exaggerate about his role in the fitnah as some have doneL1',we
should not cast doubts on it either, or think little of the role that he
played as one of several factors. Rather his role was the most
prominent and the most dangerous. Just as the atmosphere of
fitnah paved the way for him,there were other factors that helped
him too. All Ibn Saba' did was to spread views and beliefs that he
fabricated himself, that reflected his hateful nature, and
propagated them for his own purposes, namely introducing
new things into the Muslim society to destroy its unity and stir up
fitnah. So he planted seeds of division among the people. That was
one of several factors that led to the murder of the caliph'uthmin
& and the division of the ummah into factions and parties.[21
To sum up his ideas, he quoted true ideas but leapt to wrong
conclusions that found acceptance among the simple-minded,
extremists and those who were swayed by whims and desires. He
followed convoluted ways whereby he deceived those who
gathered around him. He started quoting Qur'in and
misinterpreting it in accordance with his false claims, when he
said: It is strange that people believe that 'Eesa is coming back, but
they do not accept that Muhammad is coming back, when Allih
says

"Verily, He Who has given you (0Muhammad gJthe Qur'lin
(i .e. ordered you to act on its laws and to preach it to others) will
I'[ Such as Sa'eed al-Afghsni in his book 'Aa'ishah wa'sSiytsuk

Tuhqeeq Maw8qifal-SaMbah,
1/327

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the k i l l i n ~of 'Uthm2n 4

485

surely, bring you back to Ma'id (place of return)" (Al-Qasas
28:85),
and Muhammad is more deserving of coming back than
'~esa.~"He also resorted to false analogy in trying to claim that
'Ali &. was the wasiy or true heir appointed by the Prophet @ to
succeed him, when he said: There were one thousand Prophets,
and each Prophet had a wasiy (heir), and 'Ali was the wasiy of
Muhammad. Then he said: Muhammad was the seal of the
Prophets and 'Ali was the seal of the heirs.['] When this idea had
become entrenched in the hearts of his followers, he moved on to
his ultimate aim, which was making the people rebel against the
caliph 'Uthm2n &. That happened to coincide with the whims
and desires of some of the people when he said to them: Who does
more wrong than the one who did not fulfil the final wishes of the
Messenger of All2h @+j3 who pushed aside 'Ali the true heir
(wasiy) of the Messenger of All& jg and took control of the
ummah? Then after that he told them: 'UthmSn took it
unlawfully; here is the true heir of the Messenger of All31 gj get up and do something about it. Start by criticizing your
governors, and pretend that you are enjoining what is good and
forbidding what is evil, so that people will be inclined towards
you, and call them to this matter.I3]
He sent out his agents and wrote to people in the regions who
were corrupted by his ideas, and they wrote to him and
propagated their views in secret, pretending to enjoin what is
good and forbid what is evil. They started writing to the regions,
mentioning the faults of their governors, and corresponding with
their counterparts in other regions, telling them of what they were
doing. They even sent letters to MaCmh and spread their false
propaganda all over, aiming for something other than what they
appeared to be seeking. The people in the regions said: We are
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/347
I['

ibid.

['I

op. cit., 5/348

486

' U t M n Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Noorayn

free of what others are suffering from. But the people of Madkah
received letters from all over and said: we are better off than the
rest of the people.[11
From this text we can see the methods followed by f i n Saba'.
He wanted to give the impression that there was a rift between
two of the Sahibah by showing that one of them, 'Ali, had been
deprived of his rights, whereas the other, 'Uthmh, was a
usurper. Then he tried to stir up the people, especially in Kufah,
against their governors in the name of enjoining what is good and
forbiddmg what is evil. So they started to revolt against their
governors for the slightest reasons. In this campaign of his he
focused on the Bedouin because he found them to be suitable
material for canying out his plan. He gained the support of the
religious people among them by using the idea of enjoining what
is good and forbidding what is evil, and he gained the support of
those who had worldly ambitions by means of false rumours
against 'Ufhmiin, such as the claim that he was biased in favour of
his relatives and was spending money from the bayt al-mil of the
Muslims on them, or that he had allocated grazing land for
himself only, and other accusations and criticisms by means of
which b n Saba' managed to rally the thugs against 'Uthmiin &.
Then he started inciting his followers to send letters with terrible
news about their cities to other provinces, so that people in all
regions would think that the situation had got so bad that it could
not get any worse. Those who benefited from this situation were
the Saba'is, because when the people believed that, they would be
able to light the spark offihrah in the Muslim society.lzl ' U h h
4 realized that there were plots in other provinces, and that the
ummah was facing a bad time. He said: By All&, the millstone (of
jitnah) will soon start turning, and it will be better for 'Uthmgn if
he dies and does not set it in motion.[31
['I bid.
I''

Al-Dawlah al-Ummiyyah by Yoosuf al-'Ishsh, p. 168; Tahqeeq Mmlu'qq asSahlibah, 1/331
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/350

Reasons for the turmoil that led to the killing of 'Uthman &

487

But the place where Ibn Saba' found his niche was in Egypt,
where he started to organize his campaign against 'Uthmh 4,
urging the people to go to Madkah and stir upjtnah on the basis
that ' U M n had become caliph unlawfully and snatched it from
'Ah,the true heir of the Messenger of Allih @.['I He deceived
them by means of the letters which he claimed to have received
from the senior Sahibah, but when the Bedouin came to Madinah
and met with the Sahtbah, they did not receive any
encouragement from them and they denied any letters that had
been attributed to them, inciting the people against '~thmiin.[~l
They found that 'Uthmgn paid attention to the dues of others and
he debated with them concerning that which was attributed to
him, refuting their lies and explaining that his deeds were based
on sincere intentions, until one of these Bedouin - Mslik ibn alAshtar al-Nakha'i - said: Perhaps it is a plot that has been drawn
Al-Dhahabi is of the view that 'Abdup against him and
Allgh ibn Saba' started thejtnah in Egypt, where he planted the
seeds of grudges and criticism against the governors, then against
the ruler ' ~ t h m 2 n . [But
~ ~Ibn Saba' was not alone; his agents were
at work among the network of conspirators, using their craftiness
and trickery to recruit the religious Bedouin and others. Ibn
Katheer narrated that among the causes of the incitement against
'Uthmh was the emergence of Ibn Saba', and his going to Egypt
and spreading rumours among the people that he fabricated
himself, and many people in Egypt were deceived.15]
The famous historians and scholars of both the earlier and
later generations of this ummah are agreed that Ibn Saba'
appeared among the Muslims with ideas, plans and plots aimed
at diverting the Muslims from their faith and from obeying their
ruler, and spreading division and disputes among them. The
[I1 Tahqeeq Mawtqifas-Sah8bah, 1/330; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/348

Tahqeeq Mawiqqas-Sahtbah, 1/330; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/365
'31 Tahqeeq Mawiqqas-Sahtb, 1/331
Tahqeeq Mawiqifas-Sahtbk, 1/338
['I al-Bihfyak warn-NiEyah, 7/167,168

I'[

488

' U W n Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Nooravn

thugs rallied around him which led to the formation of the Saba'i
group which formed one of the factors in thefitnah which ended
with the murder of the caliph 'UthmSn ibn 'AffSn &. It seems that
the Saba'i plots were very well organized as they were very
skilled in directing their "missionaries" and spreading their ideas
because they had the means of propaganda and influencing the
thugs and dregs of society. They were also active in fonning
branches in Basra, Kufah and Egypt, exploiting tribalistic
sentiments and exploiting the weak points of the Bedouin and
slaves based on knowledge of what they wanted to hear.'']

['I Tahqeeq Mazuu'qJas-SahLibuhFl-Fimah, p. 339

--

-

--

The svread of fitnah (turmoil)

The hate-filled liars succeeded in removing al-Waleed ibn
'Uqbah from his post as governor of Kufah, and 'Uthmsn (4)
appointed Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas as the new governor in Kufah. When
Sa'eed reached his province he ascended the minbar and after
praising and glorlfylng AUsh he said: By All&, I have been sent to
you and I was reluctant, but when 'Uthmin ordered me to come, I
had no choice but to accept. Fitnah (turmoil) has raised its head
among you and by All& I shall shike it on the face until I
suppress it or it defeats me, and I shall start from today.[ll Sa'eed
examined the situation in Kufah and found out about the people's
attitudes. He realized how deeply rootedfitnuh was there, and he
found out that groups of rebels, hate-filled bearers of grudges and
enemies of Islam were conspiring and plotting and that the view
of the thugs and Bedouins was the prevalent view."'
['I

Tareekh at-Taburi, 5/280

1''

al-Khulafii' al-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 122

490

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn g Dhun-Nooram

Sa'eed wrote a letter to the caliph 'Uthmiin telling him about
the deteriorating situation in Kufah. Among other things, he said:
The people of Kufah are in a bad way and the people of honour
and those who became Muslim early on and served Islam are
suppressed. Those who are prevailing in this land are the lowest
class of people and the ignorant Bedouin so you hardly see
anyone there who is noble or who has a history of Islam andlihad.
'Uthmk (&) responded with a letter in which he asked him to
rearrange things in Kufah, to list the people in order of seniority in
Islam and contribution to jthad, and to give precedence to those
who were knowledgeable and sincere and had a history of jihad
over others. Among other things he said: Give precedence to
those who became Muslim early on and served Islam, at whose
hands ALliih caused that land to be conquered. Make the Bedouin
who came to the land after it was conquered followers of the
mujaahideen who preceded them, unless those who preceded them
have become slow and have started to neglectithad and support of
the truth, and those who came later have taken on that mission.
Recognize the position of each man there and give them all their
dues fairly, for knowledge of the people will ensure fairness
among them.['] Sa'eed carried out the instruction of 'Uthmh (4)
and told the caliph what he had done. 'Uthmiin assembled the
decision-makers in MaCmah and told them of the situation in
Kufah and how deeply-rootedfitnuh was and the steps that Ibn al'Aas had taken to confront it. They said: You did the right thing;
do not help the people of fitnah in any way and do not let them
become leaders of the people, and do not appoint them to
positions to which they are not entitled, for if you appoint one
who is not qualified he will not do a good job, rather he will
spread mischief. 'Uthmh said to them: 0 people of Madkah, the
people are already planning to start fitnah so be prepared to
confront it. Adhere to the truth and I shall inform you of the latest
developments as they come.121
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/280
[21 Tmeekh at-Tabari, 5/281

The Murder of 'UthmSn ibn 'AffSn &

The followers of wh
with the reforms

491

d

upset

The thugs and rough Bedouin were upset with the preference
that was shown in gatherings and with regard to being given
positions of leadership and being consulted, to those who had
come to Islam earlier, had contributed to jihad and who were
knowledgeable and pious. They began to criticize their governors
for showing preference to those people and consulting them in
exclusion to them, and they regarded that as favouritism, bad
treaiment and exclusion. Those who bore grudges exploited this
and started to instil hatred of the caliph and the state and a refusal
to accept the reforms of the governor Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas, and they
spread rumours against him among the people. The common folk
of Kufah rejected the words of the hate-filled rebels so the latter
began to keep quiet and keep their specious arguments to
themselves and not discuss them openly, because most of the
Muslims rejected them. But they discussed them with the Bedouin
and thugs who supported them, and those who had been
subjected to ta'zeer punishments.'11
The enemies of Islam, the Jews, Christians and Magians, were
conspiring against Islam and the Muslims, spreading false
rumours against the caliph and the governors, and making the
most of mistakes committed by some of them to incite the
common folk against them, adding a lot of lies and forged letters
to it. Their aim in doing so was to spread chaos and deepen
divisions between the Muslims, thus satisfying their hatred of
Islam which had put an end to their false religions and destroyed
their states and armies. In order to achieve these aims, these
enemies recruited the thugs, fools and hooligans, and those who
bore grudges at having been disciplined or punished by the caliph
or one of his governors rallied around them. They formed an evil
secret society whose members were the ones who responded to
their call. So they gained followers in many major cities and other

492

' U W n Ibn 'Affiin .& Dhun-Nooravn

regions, and formed a secret communications network. The most
important branches of this evil network were in Kufah, Basra and
Egypt, and there were also some elements in Madkah and
Syria.[']

n

head of the

Ibn Saba' told his criminal followers in his evil secret society,
who were spread throughout the Muslim lands: Start executing
the plan now. Stir up trouble and start criticizing your rulers and
governors who have been appointed by the caliph. Pretend to be
enjoining that which is good and forbidding that which is evil so
that ou can win people over to your side and call them to join
'Abd-All& ibn Saba' sent his envoys to all regions, and
sent letters to his followers whom he had managed to corrupt and
make them join him, and they wrote to him. His followers in
different regions began to take action, calling their followers in
secret to begin the planned rebellion against the governors and
the caliph, and to work towards the dismissal of ' U t M n from
the position of caliph. They pretended to enjoin that which is good
and forbid that which is evil, so that they could influence the
people and deceive them and win them over. The followers of Ibn
Saba' began to fabricate lies about the faults of their governors
and rulers, and they spread them by means of letters that they
sent to one another in different regions. So the people in each
region began to send letters filled with lies to the people in other
regions, and the people of each region read those falsified letters
to the people who were with them. Thus the people heard about
the faults of governors in other provinces and they said: We are
safe from the problems that Muslims are facing in that land, and
they believed what they heard. Thus the followers of Ibn Saba'
were able to spread mischief among the Muslims throughout the
land and create division among them, shattering the bonds of

yo^^^

['I

al-l<hulafar al-Raashidem by al-Khaal~d~,
p 124
TareeWl at-Taban, 5 / 3 4

The Murder of 'Uthmfin ibn 'Man 4

493

brotherhood and unity and inciting the people against their
governors and rulers, and spreading lies against the caliph
'Uthmh himself. They carried out these well-planned crimes in a
skilful manner, aiming at something other than what they seemed
to want, which was to dismiss 'Uthmh and put an end to the
Islamic state.[']
Ibn Saba' went to Syria to corrupt and influence some of its
people, but he did not succeed in his devilish aim, because
Mu'gwiyah (+) was watching him.['] He went to Basra to recruit
his followers from among the evil-doers, grudge-bearers,
hooligans and thugs. The governor of Basra was 'Abd-Alliih ibn
'Aamir ibn Kurayz, who was a man of resolve, just and righteous.
When Ibn Saba' reached Basra, he stayed with an evil man who
lived there, a ruthless thief by the name of Hakeem ibn ~ a b l a h . ~ ~ l
'Abd-Allih ibn 'Aamir heard that there was a stranger
staying with Hakeem ibn Jablah, and Hakeem ibn Jablah was a
thief. When the armies of jihad returned to Basra, Hakeem would
stay behind to spread mischief in the Persian lands and raid the
lands of ah1 al-dhimmah and the Muslims, taking from them
whatever he wanted. The ah1 al-dhimmah and the Muslims
complained to 'Uthmiin about him, and 'Uthmin wrote to
'Abd-All21 ibn 'Aamir, telling him: Detain Hakeem ibn Jablah
in Basra and do not let him leave the city until you think that he
has come to his senses. So Ibn 'Aamir put him under house arrest
and he could no longer leave Basra. Whilst the thief Ibn Jablah
was under house arrest, the Jew 'Abd-Allgh ibn Saba' came and
stayed with him. Ibn Saba' took advantage of the fact that Ibn
Jablah was a mean, hate-filled thug and recruited him for his
cause, and Ibn Jablah became his man in Basra, introducing Ibn
Saba' to other deviants like him. Ibn Saba' instilled his ideas in
their hearts and recruited them into his secret society. When Ibn
'Aamir found out about Ibn Saba', he summoned him and said to
['I al-Bulufa' al-Ramhideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 126

I['

ibid.

[31 al-Khulafa'

al-Raashideen b y al-Khaalidi, p. 129

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

him: Who are you? He said: Ibn Saba'; I am a man from among the
people of the Book who liked Islam and became Muslim, and I
wanted to be close to you and settle near you. Ibn 'Aamir said:
What is this talk that I have heard about you? Get away from me.
So Ibn 'Aamir expelled him from Basra and Ibn Saba' departed,
leaving behind some of his followers there and having established
a branch of his party there.
Ibn Saba' went to Kufah where he found deviant types who
were prepared to accept him, so he recruited them for his group.
When Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas found out about him, he expelled him
from Kufah, and he headed for Egypt, where he settled and put
down roots, spreading corruption and mischief. He attracted a
following of thugs and fools, those who bore grudges and sinners
and evildoers. Ibn Saba' organized secret communications
between his base in Egypt and his followers in Madinah, Basra
and Kufah, and his men moved between these regions.r11 Ibn
Saba' and his followers continued their efforts for six years, so
their fiendish efforts began in 30 AH and finally succeeded at the
end of 35 AH in killing the caliph 'Uthmh, and their mischief
continued throughout the caliphate of 'Ali (4).The Saba'is
decided to start theirfitnah in ~ufah.["

Mischief-makers causing trouble in the majlis of
Sa'eed ibn d-"as
One day in 33 AH, Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas was sitting in his public
majlis with ordinary people around him, talking and conversing
with one another. These Saba'i rebels slipped into the majlis and
tried to cause trouble and stir up fitnah.
There was a debate going on in the majlis between Sa'eed ibn
al-'Aas and one of those present, a man by the name of Khunays
ibn Hubaysh al-Asadi, who disagreed concerning some matter.
Seven of the rebels and mischief makers were sitting there, among
"I op. cit., p. 129
'21 op. cit., p. 130

The Murder of ' U t h d n ibn 'Affsn &

495

whom was Jundub al-Azdi, whose thieving son had been
executed because of his involvement in a case of murder, along
with al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i, Ibn al-Kawa' and Sa'sa'ah ibn
Sawhaan. The troublemakers took advantage of the opporhmity
and started hitting Khunays d-Asadi. When his father got up to
help him, they hit him too. Sa'eed tried to stop the beating but
they would not stop. The man and his son lost consciousness
because the beating was so severe. Banu Asad came to avenge
their people and it almost led to war between the two sides, but
Sa'eed was able to sort things out.['] When 'Uthmin found out
about the incident, he asked Sa'eed ibn d-'Aas to deal with it
wisely, and to suppress thejtnah as much as he could.
The hate-filled rebels went home and spread rumours and Lies
against Sa'eed and 'Uthmin, and against the people of Kufah and
its prominent figures. The people of Kufah got upset with them
and asked Sa'eed to punish them. Sa'eed said to them: ' U t w
has forbidden me to do that, but if you want you can tell him
about it. The nobles and righteous people of Kufah wrote to
'UthmZn telling him about that group, and asking him to expel
them and banish them from Kufah, because they were causing
mischief in the city. 'Uthmh told his governor Sa'eed ibn al'Aas
to expel them from Kufah. There were more than ten men, and
Sa'eed sent them to Mu'iwiyah in Syria on the orders of 'Uthmh.
'Uthmh wrote to Mu'iwiyah telling him about them, and said:
The people of Kufah have expelled some people for whomjtnah
is second nature, and sent them to you; threaten them, instil fear
in them, discipline them and punish them, then if you feel that
they have come to their senses, accept that from them.[" Among
those who were banished to Syria were: al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i,
Jundub al-Azdi, Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhaan, Kameel ibn Ziyaad,
'Umayr ibn Daabi' and Ibn al-~awa'.[~]

['I TareeWl at-Tabari, 5/323
"I

op. cit., 5/324

['I al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen, p. 131

496

'Uthmin Ibn 'AffSn

Dhun-Noorayn

The exiles irom Kufah with Mu'gwiyah
When they came to Mu'iwiyah he welcomed them and let
them stay in a church called Maryam, and he supplied them with
provisions on 'Uthmin's orders, as he had supplied them with
provisions in Iraq, and he ate lunch and dinner with them every
day. One day he said to them: You are Arab people who have
teeth and tongues; you have been honoured with Islam and you
prevailed over other nations, inheriting their wealth and
positions. I have heard that you bear a grudge against Quraysh
but if it were not for Quraysh you would have remained in a low
position as you were before.[']
'Uthmh understood that Mu'iwiyah was able to deal with
them, because he was eloquent, patient and smart enough to
confront the Ftnah. Because of that, as soon as there was a
problem, 'Uthmh was able to send them to Mu'gwiyah so that he
could solve it. Indeed, Mu'iwiyah (&) did his utmost to convince
these people. First of all, he treated them well, sitting with them
and mixing with them in order to find out what was in their hearts
before he passed judgement on them on the basis of what he
heard. After they began to feel relaxed with him and let down
their guard, he realized that tribalism and the desire for power
were their motives, so he had no choice but to highlight two issues
to them:
1- How Islam had honoured the Arabs

2- The role of Quraysh in spreading Islam
If Islam had had any impact on them, they would have
appreciated what he said. After that, he told them what the Arabs
used to be, and how Islam had turned them into a single nation
with a single leader, and they had left behind a lile of chaos,
bloodshed and foul tribali~m.~~'
[I1 Tare& at-Tabari, 5/324
I ' [ Mu'8wiyah ibn Abi Sufyin by Muneer al-Ghadbaan, p. 101

The Murder of 'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h .&

497

Mu'gwiyah followed that by saying: Your leaders are a shield
for you, so do not abandon your shield. Your rulers today treat
you with patience and take care of you. By All;h, you should stop
or else Alliih will punish you with rulers who will mistreat you,
then you will not be praised for your patience, then you will be
their partners in sin for the injustice that you will have brought
upon the people, during your Life and after your death. One of the
people said: As for what you have said about Quraysh, they were
never the most numerous or strongest of the Arabs during the
Jaahiliyyah, such that you could scare us with them. As for what
you have said about a shield, if the shield is breached, then we
could get hurt. Mu'gwiyah said: I know you now. I know that
what has led you to this attitude is a lack of maturity. You are the
spokesman of the people but you do not make any sense to me. I
am trying to remind you of the greatness of Islam and you remind
me of the Jaahiliyyah? I am exhorting you and you claim that the
shield that is protecting you can be breached? Even if it is
breached, it is not the fault of the shield.[''
Mu'swiyah realized that mere hints would not convince
them; he had no choice but to explain in detail about Quraysh first
of all. So he said: Try to understand, although I do not think that
you will understand. Quraysh was never raised in status during
the Jaahiliyyah or in Islam except by AEh, may He be glorified
and exalted. They were never the greatest or the strongest of the
Arabs, but they were the noblest in descent and the purest in
lineage, the best in character and attitude. They were not in a
position of safety during the Jaahiliyyah when the people were
killing one another, except by the help of Allgh; no one can be
humiliated whom He honours. Do you know of any people, Arab
or non-Arab, black or red, whose land was stricken with calamity
and violated at the same time, except for Quraysh? No one ever
plotted against them but Allgh brought him low, then when All*
wanted to save those whom He had honoured and who had
followed His religion from humiliation in this world and a bad
'I1

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/324

498

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn &
Dhun-Noorayn
i

end in the Hereafter, He chose for that mission the best of His
creation, then He chose for him companions the best of whom
were Quraysh, then He built this great kingdom on that
foundation and established this caliphate among them, and no
one could be fit for that except them. So Allsh was taking care of
them as they were following His religion, and He protected them
against the kings who were subjugating you during the
Jaahiliyyah. Woe to you and your companions! I wish that
someone else had spoken instead of you, but you rushed to
speak first. As for you, 0 Sa'sa'ah, your town is the worst of Arab
towns, with the least produce, the deepest valleys, the most
familiar with evil and the meanest to its neighbours. No one,
noble or lowly, stayed there but he was reviled and mistreated.
Moreover, they are the worst in using offensive nicknames, the
worst sons-in-law, the dregs of the nations. You are on the border
and you were controlled by the Persians when the call of the
Prophet (g)reached you. But you were not there with your
people; you were in Oman, not in Bahrain, so the call of the
did not include you, and you are the worst of your
Prophet (g)
people. When Islam made you prominent and made you prevail
over nations that used to rule you, now you aim to distort the
religion of Allsh and you demonstrate your meanness. This does
not affect Quraysh in the slightest and it will never harm them or
prevent them from doing their duty. The Shaytaan is not unaware
of you; he knew that you are the most evil of your people and he
has misled the people through you. He is going to be the cause of
your doom. He knows that he will not be able to change the
decree by means of you, or change any decree of All&. There is
nothing that you can achieve by means of evil actions but All&
will punish you with something more evil or more humiliating
than it. Then he stood up and left, and they started muttering
amongst them~elves.'~~
Thus Mu'swiyah did his utmost to convince them on an
intellectual and political level.
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/326

I

The Murder of 'UthmSn ibn ' A f f h .&

499

First of all he highlighted to them the position of Quraysh in
the Jahiliyyah and in Islam.
e He discussed the tribes that these people came from and their
position during the Jaahiliyyah, as they lived in an area with a
bad climate and poor vegetation from a natural point of view,
then their humiliation and subjugation to the Persians from a
political point of view, until AUGh honoured them with Islam
and raised them in status after they had been humiliated.
0
Mu'iiwiyah spoke of the track record of their spokesman
Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhaan, who had been very slow in responding
to the call of Islam after his people had become Muslim, then
he came back and joined Islam, and Islam raised him in status
after he had been brought low.
0
Mu'iiwiyah (4) exposed the plots of Sa'sa'ah and his
companions, how they were seeking to stir up turmoil and
in fact wanted to damage the religion of Alliih.
The Shaytaan was the mastermind behind this evil plot, thus
Mu'swiyah made the connection between the history of this
ummah and the help of Allsh, then Islam and true faith ('aqeedah).
Then he exposed the spurious nature of this group and he
exposed every single one of them and their plots, and
demonstrated that the motive behind the plots was tribalism.[']
0

Another meeting
Then Mu'swiyah came to them the next day and talked to
them at length, then he said: 0 people, respond to me in a good
manner, or else keep quiet and think; think of that which will
benefit you, your families, your tribes and all of the Muslims. Seek
that and you could live and we could live happily with you.
Sa'sa'ah said: You have no right to say that, and there is no
way that you should be obeyed when it involves disobedience
towards AUiih. Mu'2wiyah said: Is it not the case that the first
thing I did was enjoin you to fear Alliih and obey Him, and obey
['I Mu'iiwiyah ibn Abi Sufyn, p. 111

500

'Uthmsn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

His Prophet (@), and hold fast, all of you together, to the Rope of
Alliih, and be not divided among yourselves (cf. Aal 'Imraan
3:103)? They said: No, you ordered us to be divided and you told
said. He said: I
us something different from what the Prophet (g)
am ordering you now, if I did that, then I repent to All& and I
order you to fear Him and obey Him and obey His Prophet (g),
and adhere to the main body of Muslims and avoid division, and
show respect to your leaders and guide them to what is good as
much as you can, and exhort them kindly and gently if they make
a mistake. Sa'sa'ah said: And we enjoin you to give up your post,
for among the Muslims there is one who is more qualified for it
than you. Mu'iiwiyah said: Who is that? They said: One whose
father has more seniority in Islam than your father, and he himself
has more seniority in Islam than you. Mu'2wiyah said: By M2h, I
have seniority in Islam and there are others who have more
seniority than me, but there is no one in my time who is more able
to do what I am doing than me. This was the opinion of 'Umar ibn
al-Khattzb concerning me. If someone else was more able than
me, 'Umar would not have compromised with me or with anyone
else. I have not done anything wrong for which I should be
dismissed from my post. If the caliph and the community had
thought that, he would have written with his own hand and I
would have given up my post. If All& decreed that he should do
that, I would hope that his decision would be the right one. Be
careful, for what you are doing is what the shaytaan wishes and
tells others to do. By All&, if matters were canied out as you
wish, then nothing would be done in the right way to the people
of Islam by day or by night. But MSh decrees and arranges and
whatever He decrees is what comes to pass. But they persisted
and said: You are not qualified for that. Mu'iiwiyah said: By
All&, All2h is Severe in punishment and I fear that if you
continue to obey the shaytaan, your obedience to the shaytaan
and your disobedience of the Most Merciful will expose you to the
vengeance of All& in this world and eternal humiliation in the
Hereafter. They pounced on him and grabbed him by the head
and beard, and he said to them: Stop it! This is not Kufah. By

The Murder of ' U W n ibn ' A f f b 4%

501

Allsh, if the people of Syria see what you have done to me when I
am their leader, I would not be able to stop them from killing you.
Then he got up and left, and said: By Alliih, I will never meet with
them again so long as I live.[']
Mu'swiyah, the governor of Syria, put all his effort into this
final attempt, tackling the problem with patience, knowledge and
self-control in order to divert them fromfitnah. He called on them
to fear All31 and obey Him, and to adhere to the main body of
Muslims and avoid division, but they responded with all
arrogance saying: You have no right to be obeyed in
disobedience to ~llsh.['] But he responded with extreme
patience, reminding them that he was not enjoining anything
but obedience to All&, and even if what they said was true, he
declared his repentance to Alliih from the sin, if it had happened.
Then he called them once again to obey AUSh and adhere to the
main body of Muslims, and to keep away from creating division
in the ummah. If exhortation could have had any effect on them,
then their hearts should have been touched by this kind and
patient treatment, but they viewed it as weakness and negligence,
especially since he was telling them to use kind and peaceful
means when exhorting and giving advice. Now they found an
opportunity to expose what was in their hearts and they said: We
enjoin you to give up your post, for among the Muslims there is
one who is more qualilied than you. Suddenly Mu'gwiyah
realized what they were hiding, and he wanted to know more
about that mysterious side of them, in hopes of finding out what
was motivating them and instilling these false notions in their
minds. But they concealed it, and all they did was indicate that
they wanted him to give up his job to someone better, one whose
father was better than his father. He continued to be even more
patient with them, despite their rudeness towards him and their
telling him to give up his position. Here we see how Mu'gwiyah
gave them a detailed answer describing his view on ruling,
'I1

Tareekh at-Taban, 5/330-331

12] op. at., 5/330

502

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Nooravn

governorship and leadership. Mu'swiyah summed up his answer
in six basic, important points:
1- That he had seniority in Islam and he had been guarding
the borders of Syria since the death of his brother Yazeed
ibn Abi SufyAn (&).

2- There were among the Muslims those who were better
than him, who were more senior and who had made
more sacrifices, but he was the most qualified to protect
this important Muslim border region (Syria). Since his
appointment he had been able to rule it and control it,
and he understood the psychology of its people, so they
loved him.
3- The standard by which governors were to be measured
was 'Umar ibn al-Khattab (4))who fought in the way of
Allah, and never feared the blame of the blamers (alMaa'idah 5:54). If he had seen any misconduct, deviance
or weakness in Mu'awiyah, he would have dismissed
him and would not have kept him even for a single day.
He worked for him throughout his caliphate; before that
had appointed him for some
the Messenger of Allah (g)
tasks, including appointing him as a scribe to write
down the Revelation, and Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq had also
appointed him, and no one had questioned his abilities.
4- If he were to give up his post, there should be a good
reason for him having to do so. What evidence did those
who promoted turmoil have that Mu'awiyah should
give up his post?
5- It was not up to these agitators to decide whether he
should be dismissed from his post or remain as
governor. That was the right of the caliph 'Uthmtin
(&), who had the right to appoint and dismiss
governors.

The Murder of ' U t h m h ibn 'Afftln

+

503

6- If 'Uthmh (&) decided to dismiss Mu'awiyah some day,
he was confident that it would all work out well in the
end, and he would take no offence at that, because he
was a governor who was under the authority of the
caliph of the ~ u s l i m s . ' ~ ]
The end of this meeting was regrettable and sad, because he
wanted to warn them against the wrath and punishment of All&
and against the temptation of the shaytaan and the slippery slope
to which it would lead, and against division and disobeying the
ruler, and against giving in to their whims and desires and being
arrogant. And what was their response? They pounced on him
and grabbed him by the head and beard, and at some point he
rebuked them and said harsh words that carried an implied
threat. He realized that these people would never follow the right
about them and the
path, so he had to tell the caliph 'Uthmgn (6)
real danger that they posed, so that he could decide about
them.[']

Mu'Swiyahls letter
bropblemakers in Kufa
Mu'iwiyah wrote to 'Uthmin (A)
saying: In the name of
AJlih, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. To the slave of Allih
'Uthmh, the Ameer al-Mu'mineen, from Mu'gwiyah ibn Abi
Sufyin. 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, you sent to me some people who
speak with the tongues of devils and say what these devils wants
them to say. They come to the people and support their
arguments with the Qur'h, as they claim, and they confuse the
people. Not everyone realizes what they are up to. All they want
is to create division andfitnah. They are fed up with Islam and the
shaytaan has h l l control of their hearts. They have corrupted
many people among whom they lived in Kufah, and I am worried
that if they stay among the people of Syria they may mislead them
['I Mu'cizuiyah ibn Abi Sufiin, S h b i Kabeer wa Malik Mujaahid, p. 114117

Mu'tiwiyuh ibn Abi Sufiin by Ghadbaan, p. 117,118

' U h i n Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

504

with their influence and immorality. It is better to send them back
to their own region and let them live in the place where their
hypocrisy started.[''

E. Rebrn of the troublemakers to
by their expulsion to al-Jazeerah

wed

'Uthmh wrote to Sa'eed ibn al-Aas and sent them back to

him, but they only became more active in evildoing when they
returned. Sa'eed wrote to 'Uthmsn complaining about them, and
'Uthmtin wrote to Sa'eed telling him to send them to 'Abd alRahmaan ibn Khaalid ibn al-Waleed - who was the governor of
Horns. When they reached 'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn Khaalid ibn alWaleed he summoned them and spoke sternly to them, saying to
them, among other things: 0 tools of the shaytaan, you are not
welcome here. The shaytaan went back defeated and lost, but you
are still active in falsehood. May 'Abd al-Rahmaan be doomed if
he does not discipline and humiliate you. 0 people who I do not
know whether you are Arabs or Persians, you will never be able
to speak to me as you spoke to Sa'eed or Mu'swiyah. I am the son
of Khaalid ibn al-Waleed, I am the son of one who was toughened
by his experiences, I am the son of the one who defeated apostasy,
and by AllCh I shall humiliate you. 'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn Khaalid
let them stay with him for a whole month, during which he
treated them with the utmost strictness and harshness, and was
not soft with them as Sa'eed and Mu'swiyah had been. If he
walked, they walked with him; if he rode, they rode with him; if
he went out on a military campaign, they went out with him.He
did not miss any opportunity to humiliate them. Every time he
met their leader, Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhaan, he said to him: 0 son of
sin, do you know that if a person cannot be disciplined by good
means, he will be disciplined by bad means, and if he cannot be
disciplined by a soft approach he will be disciplined by a hard
approach? And he told them: Why are you not answering back as
you used to answer back to Sa'eed in Kufah and Mu'Swiyah in
'I1

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/331

The Murder of 'Uthmh ibn ' A f f h

505

Syria? Why do you not address me as you used to address them?
The method of 'Abd ar-Rahmaan ibn Khaalid worked with
them. His harshness silenced them and they showed repentance
and regret. They said to him: We repent to AUsh and ask His
forgiveness. Forgive us and pardon us, may Allsh forgive you
and pardon you. The people stayed in al-Jazeerah with 'Abd arRahmaan ibn Khaalid, and 'Abd al-Rahmaan sent one of their
leaders - al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i - to 'Uthmh, to tell him of their
repentance and reform, and that they had ceased their
troublemaking. 'Uthmin said to al-Ashtar: Go and live
wherever you want, you and those who are with you, for I
have forgiven you. Al-Ashtar said: We want to stay with 'Abd arRahmaan ibn Khaalid ibn al-Waleed, and he told him about the
vlrtue and resolve of 'Abd ar-Rahmaan. So they stayed with 'Abd
al-Rahmaan in al-Jazeerah for a while, appearing outwardly to
have repented and to have mended their ways.['' The
troublemakers in Kufah were quiet for a while. This lasted for a
few months in 33 AH, after the leaders of turmoil had been
banished to Mu'swiyah in Syria, then to 'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn
Khaalid. The troublemakers in Kufah decided that it was in their
best interests to keep quiet for a while.[21

The troublemakers in Basra fabricate lies against Ashajj
'Abd al-Qays
The troublemakers in Basra, under the leadership of Hakeem
ibn Jablah, were against the people of virtue in the city. They
conspired against them and told lies about them. One of the best
and most pious of the people of Basra was Ashajj 'Abd alQays,
whose real name was 'Aamir ibn 'Abd al-Qays. He was a leader of
his people who had come to the Messenger of All31 (@) and
learned from him, and the Messenger of AlEh (@) had praised
him when he said:

506

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

"You have two characteristics that Allth loves :forbearance and
deliberation .['I
'Aamir ibn 'Abd al-Qays was one of the leaders of jihad in alQaadisiyyah and elsewhere. He lived in Basra and he was a man
of great righteousness and piety. The rebels told lies about him
and made false accusations against him, so 'Uthm2n told him to
go to Mu'swiyah in Syria. When Mu'awiyah spoke to him, he
realized that he was innocent and sincere, and that the rebels were
fabricating lies against him. The architect of these lies against
'Aamir ibn 'Abd al-Qays was Hamraan ibn Abaan, who was a
sinful man with no religious commitment. He had married a
woman during her 'iddnh, and when 'Uthmsn found out about
that, he separated them and beat him as discipline for having
sinned, and banished him to Basra, where he met the leader of the
Saba'is in that city, the thief Hakeem ibn ~ablah.[~]

Ibn Saba' designated the year 34 AH for action
In 34 AH - the eleventh year of 'Uthm2n's caliphate - 'AbdAll21ibn Saba' finalized his plans and made arrangements with
his followers to begin the rebellion against the caliph and his
governors. From his den of conspiracy in Egypt, Ibn Saba' got in
touch with his devilish followers in Basra, Kufah and Madinah,
and agreed with them on the details of the rebellion, and they
corresponded with one another concerning that. Among his
correspondents were the Saba'is in Kufah. There were more than
ten men, some of whom had been exiled to Syria, then to alJazeerah where they stayed with 'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn Khaalid
ibn al-Waleed. After the exile of these rebels, the hateful Saba'i
In 34 AH, Kufah was
leader in Kufah was Yazeed ibn
devoid of prominent figures because they were all out on
Saheeh as-Seerah an-Nabmui~yah,p. 635, At-Tirmidhi (2011)
"I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/333,334
L31 al-Khulafa' aI-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 135
['I

The Murder of ' U W ibn 'Affk 4

507

campaign, fighting in jihad for the sake of All$h, and there was no
one left in the city but the hooligans and thugs who were
influenced by the deviant Saba'is, who filled their minds with
their evil ideas and incited them against 'Uthmas governor in
Kufah, Sa'eed ibn al-'~as.['l

The situation in Kufah when the troublemakers made their
move
al-Tabari said of the situation in Kufah in 34 AH. Sa'eed ibn
al-'Aas went to 'Uthmh in the eleventh year of 'Uthmsn's rule,
and before he left, he sent al-Ash'ath ibn Qays to Azerbaijan,
Sa'eed ibn Qays to al-Rayy, al-Nusayr alL'Ajali to Hamadhaan, alSaa'ib ibn al-Aqra' to Asbahaan, Maalik ibn Habeeb to Maah,
Hakeem ibn Salaamah to Mosul, Jareer ibn 'Abd-Allsh to
Qarqeesa, Salmaan ibn Rabee'ah to al-Baab, and 'Utaybah ibn
al-Nahhaas to Hdwaan. He appointed al-Qa'qaa' ibn ' A m alTameemi as commander-inchief, and he appointed 'Amr ibn
Hurayth as his deputy after he left. Thus Kufah became empfy of
prominent figures and no one was left there except those who
were insignheant or who were among the troublemaker^.^^] It
was in this atmosphere that the Saba'i leader in Kufah, Yazeed ibn
Qays, emerged with the agreement of the devilish Ibn Saba' in
Egypt, accompanied by the troublemakers who had joined the
secret society of Ibn Saba', and the thugs who were influenced by
this

al-Qa'qaal ibn ' A m al-Tameemi put an end to the first
action
Yazeed ibn Qays emerged in Kufah, aiming to depose
'Uthmk. He entered the mosque and sat there, and the Saba'is
to whom Ibn as-Sawda' had written from Egypt joined him in the
mosque. When the rebels gathered in the mosque, al-Qa'qaa' ibn
'Amr, the commander-inchief, came to know of them, so he
[I'

ibid.

['I

Tareekk at-Tabari, 5/337

[31 ul-Khulufa' al-Raaskideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 136

I

508

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affitn & Dhun-Nooravn

arrested them along with their leader Yazeed ibn Qays. When
Yazeed saw how tough and alert alLQa'qaa' was, he did not
disclose their plan of rebelling against the caliph 'Uthmh and
deposing him. He pretended that all he and his group wanted to
do was to bring about the dismissal of the governor Sa'eed ibn al'Aas and ask for another governor in his place. So al-Qa'qaa' let
the group go when he heard the words of Yazeed, then he said to
Yazeed: Do not gather for this purpose in the mosque, and do not
meet with anyone; stay in your house. Seek what ou want from
the caliph and you will achieve what you want.

r9

Yazeed ibn Qays wrote to the troublemakers who were with
'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn Khaalid
Yazeed ibn Qays stayed in his house, and he was forced to
change his plans for rebellion and turmoil. This Saba'i - Yazeed
ibn Qays -hired a man, giving him money and a mule, and told
him to quickly and in secret go to the Saba'is from Kufah whom
'Uthm2n had exiled to Syria, then to al-Jazeerah, who were
staying with 'Abd ar-Rahmaan ibn Khaalid ibn al-Waleed, and
who had made a show of having repented and regretted their
actions. Yazeed said in his letter to his devilish brethren: When
this letter of mine reaches you, do not let it fall from your hands
before you come to me, for we have corresponded with our
brothers in Egypt - the Saba'is in that land - and we have agreed to
launch the rebellion. When al-Ashtar read the letter of Yazeed, he
immediately left for Kufah, joined by other rebels. 'Abd arRahmaan ibn Khaalid noticed that they were missing and he
could not find them, then he sent a group to look for them, and
they could not find them either. Yazeed ibn Qays got in touch
with his group once again, and his group contacted the hooligans
and thugs in Kufah, and they gathered in the mosque. al-Ashtar
al-Nakha'i entered upon them in the mosque, and started stirring
them up and motivating them to rebel. Among other things, he
said to them: I have come to you from the caliph 'Uthmgn, and I
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/337

The Murder of ' U W n ibn 'AffSn &

509

left your governor Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas with him. 'Uthmh and
Sa'eed have agreed to reduce your stipends from two hundred
dirhams to one hundred. Al-Ashtar was telling lies, because
'Uthmh and Sa'eed had not discuss that, but the plan of the
Saba'is was to spread lies and provoke the masses. Al-Ashtar
stirred up the people in the mosque, and the hooligans and thugs
became excited, and there was a great deal of noise in the mosque.
The wise Muslims, those who were prominent people and
righteous, began speaking to him, such as Abu Moosa alAsh'ari, 'Abd-Allih ibn Mas'ood and al-Qa'qaa' ibn 'Am, but
he did not listen to them or respond to them.['' Yazeed ibn Qays
shouted to the hooligans and thugs inside and outside the
mosque: I am going to go out to the road to MadAmh,to prevent
Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas from entering Kufah. Whoever wants to go out
with me to prevent Sa'eed from entering and to demand a new
governor, let him do so. The Saba'is and thugs responded to his
call, and nearly one thousand of them went out with him.[21

al-Qa'qaa' ibn 'Amr thought that the leaders of the
troublemakers should be executed
When the Saba'is and thugs went out, seeking to rebel and
stir up turmoil and trouble, the prominent Muslims and people of
deliberation and wisdom stayed in the mosque. The governor's
deputy, ' A m ibn Hurayth, ascended the minbar and asked the
Muslims to remain united and told them not to be divided, and he
called on them not to respond to the rebels.[31 Al-Qa'qaa' ibn
' A m said: Can you stop the flood or divert the Euphrates from its
course? No way. No, by Allih, nothing will stop these thugs but
the sword, and soon all the blessings that they are enjoying will
vanish, and they will wish to have them back but they will never
be able to. So be patient. He said: I will be patient. Then he left and
went back to his house.[41
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/338; al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 138
I[' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/338
["

I['

11-fiulafa' al-Raashideen by d-Khaalidi, p. 139
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/338

510

' U M n Ibn 'Aff2n & Dhun-Noorayn

The troublemakers prevented Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas from
entering Kufah
Yazeed ibn Qays and al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i led thousands of
rebels to a place on the road to MadAmahthat was called al-Jara'ah.
Whilst they were camping in al-Jara'ah, Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas saw
them as he was returning from his meeting with 'Uthmsn. They
said to him: Go back from whence you came, for we have no need
of you and we will not let you enter Kufah. Tell 'UthmCn that we
do not want a governor, and we want 'Uthm2n to give us Abu
Moosa al-Ash'ari as a governor instead of you. Sa'eed said to
them: Why have a thousand of you come to tell me this, when it
would have been sufficient for you to send one man to the caliph,
and send one man to stand on the road to tell me this. Do you
think that one thousand men with any sense would come out to
confront one man?[']
Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas thought it wise not to confront them or fan
the flames of turmoil (fitnah),rather he tried to extinguish it or at
least delay it. This was also the view of Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari,
' A m ibn Hurayth and al-Qa'qaa' ibn ' A m in ~ufah.['] Sa'eed
ibn al-'Aas went back to 'Uthmh and told him about the rebels,
and 'Uthmtin said to him: What do they want? Are they refusing
to obey? Have they rebelled against the caliph and declared their
refusal to obey him? Sa'eed said to him: No. What they said is that
they do not want me as their governor, and they want someone
else instead of me. 'UthmCn said to him: Who do they want as a
governor? Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas said: They want Abu Moosa alAsh'ari. 'UthmCn said: Then we will appoint Abu Moosa as their
governor. By A U a , we will never give anyone any excuse, and
we shall certainly be patient with them as is expected of us, until
we find out what they really want. And 'Uthmh wrote to Abu
Moosa appointing him as governor of ~ u f a h . [ ~ ]
ibid.
['I al-Kkulnfa' al-Raaskideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 104
[31 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/339
['I

I

The Murder of 'Uthrnsn ibn 'AffSn &

511

Before the letter appointing Abu Moosa as governor arrived,
there were some of the companions of the Messenger of All& (@)
in the mosque of Kufah who tried to calm things down, but they
were not able to do that, because the Saba'is and haters had
gained control over the hooligans and thugs and stirred them up,
and they would no longer listen to any voice of reason or logic. At
the time of the rebellion and turmoil there were two of the
companions of the Messenger of All* (B)in the mosque of
Kufah, Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamaan and Abu Mas'ood 'Uqbah ibn
'Aamir al-Anss al-Badri. Abu Mas'ood was very angry about
this rebellion of the hooligans and their going out to al-Jara'ah,
dismissing the governor Sa'eed and disobeying him, which was
the first time this had happened. Hudhayfah, on the other hand,
was more far-sighted and he dealt with the incident objectively
and wisely.[" Abu Mas'ood said to Hudhayfah: They will not
come back safe from al-Jara'ah; the caliph will send an army to
discipline them and many of them will be killed. Hudhayfah
replied: By All&, they will come back to Kufah and there will be
no fighting and no bloodshed. There is nothing I am learning
about this but I already learned it from the Messenger of AllSh
(@) when he was still alive, because he told us about these
turmoils that we are seeing today before he died. The Messenger
of AllZh (&) told us that a man would be a Muslim in the morning
then when evening came he would have nothing of Islam left in
him, then he would fight the Muslims and apostatize, and his
heart would be turned upside down, and AllSh would cause him
to die the next day, and that will happen later on.[21Hudhayfah
ibn al-Yamaan specialized n knowledge of turmoil (al-fitan) and
he dealt with the turmoil of the Saba'is in Kufah and elsewhere on
the basis of what he had heard and learned from the Messenger of
All* (@), bearing in mind what he had memorized of those
ahaadeeth. He understood the reality of what was going on

around him and did not find it odd at all, but he tried to sort it out
as much as he could.[']

Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari tried to calm things down and tell the
people not to rebel
Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari (4)tried to calm things down and told
the people not to be disobedient. He said to them: 0 people, do
not rebel any more and do not disobey any more. Adhere to your
community (jamaa'ah) and be obedient. Beware of haste; be
patient and soon you will have a new govemor. They said: Lead
us in prayer. He said: No, not unless you confirm your obedience
to 'UthmSn ibn 'Affh. They said: We pledge to Listen to and obey
'~thmh.[~]
But they did not say that with any sincerity, rather they were
concealing their bue aims from others. Abu Moosa led the people
in prayer until the letter of 'Uthmh came, appointing him as
govemor of Kufah. When things calmed down in Kufah for a
while - in 34 AH - Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamaan went back to
Azerbaijan, leading the armies of jihad there, and the agents and
governors went back to their work in ~ersia.[~I

'Uthm2nfs letter to the rebels in Kufah
'UthmSn ibn 'Affh wrote a letter to the rebels in Kufah in
which he explained the reason why he had responded to their
demands to dismiss Sa'eed and appoint Abu Moosa in his place.
This is a letter of great sigruficance which explains the way in
which 'Uthmh confronted the turmoil and how he tried to delay
its outbreak as much as he could, even though he was certain that
it was inevitable and he would not be able to stop it. This is what
he had learned from the Messenger of AllSh (@). ' U r n said to
them in his letter: I have appointed over you the one whom you
have chosen, and I have dismissed Sa'eed. By All&, I shall do my
I'[ Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamaan by Ibraaheem al-'Ali, p. 86; al-fiulafa' al-Raashideen
by d-Khaalidi, p. 141
I2I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/339
I ' [ al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen by al-Khadidi, p. 142

The Murder of 'Uthman ibn 'Affan .&

513

utmost and I shall be very patient with you, and I shall do what is
in your best interests as much as I can. Ask me for everything that
you want, so long as it does not involve any disobedience towards
All&, and I will grant you it. Tell me about all that you dislike so
long as it does not involve any disobedience towards All:h, and I
will let you off. I shall go along with what you want so that you
will have no excuse to go against me. He also wrote similar letters
to other provinces.[11 May AllCh be pleased with the caliph
'Uthmih; how good he was and how open-hearted, and how
greatly was he wronged by the Saba'is, rebels and haters who told
lies against him.l2'

From the historical texts in a number of sources it is clear that
'Uthmh confronted the turmoil in a number of ways, as follows:

Some of the Smhrihah thought that .LTthmanshould
send committees to imestigaie the rnattc.~.
Muhammad ibn Maslamah, Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-All& and
others were shocked by what they heard of the rumours spread
by 'Abd-AllCh ibn Saba' in the regions. They entered upon the
caliph 'Uthmh in haste and said: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, have
you heard what we have heard from the people? He said: No, by
All&, I have only heard good things. They said: We have heard
such and such, and they told him what they had heard about
turmoil spreading throughout the Muslim provinces, and about
the vicious attacks on the governors in every place. He said: You
are my partners and witnesses for the believers; advise me. They
said: We advise you to send men whom you trust to the provinces
so that they may find out what is going on.['' 'Uthmgn took a
wise decision and did what had to be done. He chose a group of
the SahBbah whose piety and sincerity no one could dispute. He
[I1 Tareekh

at-Tuburi, 51348

chose Muhammad ibn Maslamah whom 'Umar used to entrust
with checking on his governors and the provinces they were
ruling; Usaamah ibn Zayd, the beloved of the Messenger of All*
(g)
and the son of his beloved, the commander of the army which
the Messenger of Allih (s)had insisted should cany on its
mission at the end of his life, saying, Let the mission of Usaamah
go ahead; 'Ammaar ibn Yaasir, the great mujaahid who had come
to Islam early on; and 'Abd-Alla ibn 'Umar, the piousfaqeeh. He
sent Muhammad ibn Maslamah to Kufah, Usaamah to Basra,
'Ammaar to Egypt and Ibn'Umar to Syria, and each of them took
a group of people with him. He sent them to those major
provinces, and each of them went about their difficult, exhausting
and dangerous work. Then they all came back, except 'Ammaar
ibn Yaasir, who stayed longer in Egypt, then he returned. They
presented their findings to the caliph, telling him what they had
seen and heard and asked the people about.111 What they
reported was the same for all provinces. They said: 0 people, we
have not seen anything reprehensible and the Muslims did not
complain about anything. All that we found is that the governors
have been fair to them and are taking care of them.['] As for that
which was narrated about 'Ammaar ibn Yaasir inciting the people
against 'Uthmiin, the isnaads of these reports are da'eef(weak) and
are not free of faults, and their texts are also weird.[31
The inspectors came back from the provinces, and it became
clear that there was no reason for the caliph to dismiss any
governor; the people were fine, being treated justly and living in
an atmosphere of goodness, compassion and tranquillity. The
caliph himself was being just, sharing out wealth fairly and
paying heed to the dues of All* and the dues of the people. The
rumours were no more than speculation and lies that were
fabricated by those who bore grudges in dark corners so that no
one would know their source. But the great, righteous, rightly'Uthmin ibn 'Affmil, al-Khalepfuh al-Shaakir al-Saabir, p. 120
['I Tureekh at-Tabari, 5/348
'31 Fitnat M q f u l 'Uthmtn, 1/117
[']

'UthmSn's policy in dealing with the turmoil @tnah)

517

guided caliph did not stop there; rather he wrote to the people of
the provinces.[ll

He mote a letter to all the
general announcement to all M

w

I check on my governors and workers every time I meet them
during Hajj. Since I was appointed caliph, the ummah has been
encouraged to enjoin that which is good and forbid that which is
evil. No complaint is made about me or any of my workers but I
will deal with it, and my family and I have no rights before any of
the people but I will give them up to them. The people of MaCmah
complained to me that there were some people who were insulted
and others who were beaten. 0 you who were beaten in secret
and insulted in secret, whoever has any claim of that nature, let
him come to Hajj and take his rights wherever they are, from me
or from my workers, or else give charity (i.e., forgive) and All21
will reward those who give charity.
When this letter was read out in the provinces, the people
wept and prayed for 'Uthmsn, and said: This ummah is headed
for trouble.[']
Does anyone in the whole world want to hear someone with
more resolve and determination than this resolve and
determination of a man who had passed the age of eighty-two,
yet he still had the energy and strength to follow up and check on
allegations of mistreatment? Could the people find any justice
more sublime than his fairness and justice, in which the caliph
gave up his own personal rights so long as the rights of All21
were preserved and Ilis sacred limits were not transgressed?
Indeed, ' U t M n did not stop there. He did not only send
trustworthy people to check on the people's situation and write to
the people of the provinces telling them to come to Hajj to present
their complaints - if they had any - before all the pilgrims. That
was not enough; rather he sent word to the governors of the
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 1/349
[2'

ibid.

518

' U t h m h Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Noorayn

provinces themselves, telling them to meet the people when they
brought their complaints - if there were any - then let them ask the
caliph about what the people were talking about, and offer him
sound and sincere advice.'']

'tfthgn's advise to the governors of the provinces
' U W n (A) sent for the governors of the provinces,
summoning them to come at once: 'Abd-All?& ibn 'Aamir,
Mu'iiwiyah ibn Abi Sufyin and 'Abd-All2h ibn Sa'd, and he
included with them in the consultation Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas and
'Amr ibn al-'Aas - who were both former governors. It was a
closed, serious meeting in which the following issues were
discussed and in which a new plan was developed in light of the
news that had reached Madhah, the capital of the Islamic state.121
'Uthmin said: Woe to you, what are these complaints? What are
these rumours? By All&, I am afraid that they may be true about
you and it is my responsibility to deal with it. They said to him:
Didn't you send people to find out? Didn't they come back with
news of what is really going on? Didn't they come back and say
that no one had complained to them about anything? By All%,
the rumours are not true and they are suspicious. We do not know
of any basis for what is happening and you cannot hold anyone
responsible on this basis. It is no more than rumours that it is not
permissible to believe or accept. He said: Advise me. Sa'eed ibn
al-'Aas said: This is a plot that is being drawn up in secret;
rumours are being fabricated and transmitted to the people with
no knowledge, then they take them and talk about them in their
gatherings. He said: What is the remedy for that? He said: Look
for these people and kill those who are behind these fabrications.
'Abd-All2h ibn Sa'd said: Take from the people what they
owe when you give them what is due to them, for that is better
than leaving them like that. Mu'iiwiyah said: You appointed me
as a governor over people and you have not heard anything but
['I
I['

'Utkmin ibn 'Affaan, al-Khaleefah al-Skaukir al-Saabir, p. 212
Mu'iiwiyah i h Abi Sufitn, p. 126

'UthmWs policy in dealin~with the turmoil (fihah)

519

good from them, and these two men know best about their
provinces. He said: What do you think, 0 'Amr? He said: I think
that you have been too gentle with them and too kind, you have
been more generous with them than 'Umar was. I think that you
should follow the way of your companion ('Umar) and be strict
when strictness is appropriate and be gentle when gentleness is
appropriate. Strictness should be employed with one who wants
to do harm to people and gentleness should be employed with
one who is sincere towards people, but you have been persistently
gentle. 'Uthm2n stood up and praised AllSh, then he said: I
understand all the advice that you have given me. There is a time
for everything. What we fear may befall the ummah is inevitable
and the barrier that is keeping it from happening must be
reinforced by kind and gentle means, except when it has to do
with the sacred limits of AllSh, in which there is no room for
compromise. If anything can close this door to turmoil, it is
kindness, but by All2h it will inevitably open. No one has any
reason to blame me when All& knows that I have done my best
for the people, but the wheels of turmoil will turn. Glad tidings for
'Uthmh if he dies without having set them in motion. Calm the
people down and give them their dues and pardon them, but if
the sacred limits of All& are transgressed do not compromise.[11
'Uthmh (&) disagreed with his brother 'Amr's view that
strictness should be employed, but he did not disagree with the
idea of following his two predecessors. The wheels of turmoil
were already turning but it could not be dealt with by means of
violence, because violence is what usually fuels it. He did not
want to be the one to start it ("Glad tidings for 'Uthmh if he dies
without having set them in motion.") But he was very clear that
the area in which there could be no compromise was the sacred
limits of Allsh. There could be no compromise in that case, but in
other areas kindness and forgiveness were better, and it was
essential to respect the rights of all.[''
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/351
I[' 'Amr ibn alL'Aas - al-Ameer al-Mujaahid, by al-Ghadbaan, p. 447

520

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

There are reports with some weakness and unknown
narrators in their isnaads which misrepresent the relationship
between ' A m ibn alLrAas and 'Uthmh (&). These worthless
reports contributed to the distortion of the image of 'Amr ibn al'Aas (A)
and change his relationship with 'Uthmih (&) into that
of a murderer who planned to kill his leader and then, in a spirit of
opportunism, demand qzsaas.[ll This report is weak and was
rejected by the historians and scholars of hadeeth.[" There is
another report whose isnaad also contains weak and unknown
narrators which says that ' A m ibn al-'Aas said: 0 'Uthmsn, you
have controlled the people by appointing Banu Umayyah. You
said and they said; you drifted away and they drifted away. Sort
yourself out or else resign; decide what you want to do and go
ahead with it.[31 In the same report it says that 'Abd-AllSh ibn
'Aamir said: I think that you should send them away from their
wives on these campaigns so that the only concern of any of them
will be dealing with the lice on his head and taking care of his
mount, and that will distract them from causing you trouble.[41
'UthmSn (&) prevented the governors from punishing these
troublemakers by imprisoning or executing them, and he decided
to treat them with kindness and gentleness.[51 He asked his
governors to return to their work in accordance with the way that
he announced of dealing with the turmoil which everyone with
insight realized was ine~itable.'~]

Two suggestions from Mu'awiyah that were rejected by
'Uthmlin (6)
Before Mu'Swiyah ibn Abi Sufyh headed back to Syria, he
went to ' U t M n and said to him: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, come
''I op. cit., p. 448
Izl ibid.
['I

Taveekh at-Tabari, 5/340

14] ibid.

Khilaafat 'Uthrnu'n, by Dr. al-Sulami, p. 77
[6] al-Khulafi' d-hashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 151
['I

'UthmMs policy in dealing with the turmoil @ M )

521

with me to Syria before the situation gets worse and you will not
be able to handle it.
'Uthmgn said: I will not trade being close to the Messenger of
AlEh (&) for anything, even if it leads to the cutting of my neck.
Mu'awiyah said to him: Then I will send an army to you from
Syria, to stay in Madkah and confront the expected dangers and
protect you and the people of Madkah. 'Uthmh said: I do not
want to reduce the provision of the neighbours of the Messenger
with these soldiers coming to live amongst them, and
of Allsh (g)
I do not want conditions to become crowded for the Muhliliniz and
Anszr. Mu'iwiyah said to him: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, you wilI be
assassinated or an army will come and invade Madinah. ' U M n
said: Allgh is sufficient for me and He is the best disposer of
affairs.[''
It is as if 'Uthmh knew that behind all the turmoil and
rumours there were evil people who were planning to achieve a
terrible goal, which was no less than toppling the caliph and
undermining the caliphate. But the rightly-guided caliph
'Uthmh had a different opinion, because he wanted to go
along with these people all the way, so that he could leave them
with no excuse before Alliih or before the people, thus exposing
them in this world and in the Hereafter. This was a patient way of
dealing with the situation on the part of the great and just ruler.["

'Uthmiin's spies penetrate the ranks of the conspirators after
they come to Madinah
The caliph 'Uthmh had sufficient alertness to ensure that his
spies penetrated the ranks of conspirators, by sending two men
who had been disciplined and punished so that the conspirators
would feel at ease with them. 'Uthmh sent two men, a
Makhzoomi and a Zuhri, and said: Go and find out what they
are up to, and bring me news of them. The punishment they
received from 'Uthmh was aimed at disciplining them, so they
'IJ

Tareekh at-Tabari, 51353

"I

'Uthmrin ibn 'Affaan - al-hleefah alShaakir alSaabir, p. 214

522

U
'-

Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn
-

had borne it with patience and did not bear any grudges. When
the conspirators saw them they told them what their aims were.
They said: Who is with you in this aim among the people of
Macmah? They said: Three men. They said: Is that all? They said:
No. They said: What do you want to do? They explained to the
two men the full extent of the conspiracy and the plans that had
been drawn up. They said: We want to confront him with the
things that we have told the people about, then we will go back to
the people and tell them that he admitted it, but he did not want
to give it up or repent. Then we will come back again as if we are
going for Hajj, but we will come to Madinah and besiege him and
depose him; if he resists we will kill him and let it be. The two men
went back to 'Uthmh and he smiled and said: 0 Alliih, guide
these people for if You do not guide them, they will be doomed.
He sent word to the people of Kufah and Basra and the call went
out: As-salaatu jaami'ah (prayer is about to begin), and they were
with him at the base of the minbar. The companions of the
came and surrounded them, and he
Messenger of Alliih (g)
praised and glorified All21and told them what these people were
up to, and that they were seeking to promote the lies about him in
order to pave the way for rebellion and then depose or kill him.
The two men who had spoken to the Saba'is stood up and bore
witness to what they had told them. The Muslims inside the
mosque all said: Kill them, 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, for they want
to rebel against the caliph and divide the Muslims. But 'Uthmiin
refused the call of the Sahlibah to kill them, because they were
outwardly Muslims who were under his care, and he did not
want it to be said that 'Uthmin killed the Muslims who disagreed
with him. Hence 'Uthmh ibn'Affh rejected that call saying: We
will not kill them, rather we will forgive them and pardon them,
and we will try to show them the right way as much as we can
We will not kill any of the Muslims unless he commits an offence
which is subject to the hadd punishment of execution or he shows
himself to be an apostate or kanfr.[ll
'I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/345,355

' U t M s policy in dealing with the tunnoil fjitnah)

523

Establishing proof against the rebels
Then 'Uthmh called on the Saba'is to explain what they were
confused about and to make a list of the mistakes and
transgressions that they thought 'Uthmh had committed, in a
meeting in the mosque in which things were to be discussed
frankly in front of the Sah6buh and the Muslims. So the Saba'is
spoke and explained the mistakes that 'Uthmsn had made according to their allegations - and 'Uthmsn explained,
eloquently and clearly, his position and the basis for his actions.
The Muslims who were fair-minded listened to this frank
discussion and transparent accounting. 'Uthmin mentioned the
alleged grievances, explained how things really were, and
defended his good conduct, and asked the Sahtbah who were
sitting in the mosque to tes* to that.[']

1- He said: They say that I offer the prayer in full when I
travel, and that the Messenger of All& (s),
Abu Bakr
and 'Umar did not do that before me. But I offered the
prayer in full when I travelled from Madinah to Makkah,
and Makkah is a town in which I have a family, so I am
staying with my family and I am not a traveller, is that
not so? The Sahib& said: By All&, yes.
2- They said that I have allocated grazing land for myself,
and caused hardship for the Muslims, and set aside a
vast area of land for my camels. Before my time, grazing
land was allocated for the camels that were given in
zakaah and used in jihad, and the Messenger of All31
&), Abu Bakr and 'Umar all allocated land for grazing. I
had to add to it because the number of camels given in
zakaah and used in jihad increased. Moreover, I did not
prevent the livestock of the poor Muslims from grazing
on that land. I never allocated it for my own livestock.

U
'-

524

Ibn ' A f f k & Dhun-Noorayn

When I was appointed caliph, I was one of the richest of
the Muslims in camels and sheep, but I have spent it all
and I have no livestoclc at all now except two camels
which I keep for Hajj. Is that not so? The Sahtbah said: By
Alliih, yes.
3- They say that I kept only one copy of the Mush-ha$ and
burned all the rest, and I united the people in reading
one Mus-haf: But the Qur'h is indeed the word of AllSh,
which came from All&, and it is all one, and all I did
was to unite the Muslims behind the Qx'h,and forbid
them to differ concerning it. By doing that I followed in
the footsteps of Abu Bakr, who compiled the Qur'h. Is
that not so? The S d b n h said; By AllZh, yes.
4- They said that I allowed al-Hakam ibn al-'Aas to return
to Madinah when the Messenger of Allah (B)had
banished him to al-Taa'if. Al-Hakam ibn al-'Aas is a
Makkan, not a Madeenan, and the Messenger of Allah
(g)
exiled him from Makkah to al-Taa'if, and the
Messenger
let him return to Makkah after he was
pleased with him. The Messenger of Allah (g)sent him
to al-Taa'if and he is the one who let him come back to
Makkah. Is that not so? The Sahlibah said: By AllSh, yes.

(a)

5- They said that I employed young people and appointed
youngsters as governors, but I have never appointed
anyone but a man who was just and kind and of good
character. These are the people over whom they were
appointed - go and ask them about them. Those who
came before me appointed some who were even younger
than these. The Messenger of Allah (@) appointed
Usaamah ibn Zayd when he was younger than those
whom I appointed, and they spoke more harshly to the
than they spoke to me. Is that
Messenger of Allah (g)
not so? The Sahibah said: By AUSh, yes, these people

'UthmAn's policy in dealing with the turmoil @&ah)

525

criticize others but they do not understand what is
happening.

6- They said that I gave to 'Abd-All* ibn Sa'd ibn Abi'lSarh what Allah had granted of booty, but I only gave
him one-fifth of the Wlums - which was one hundred
thousand -when he conquered North Africa, as a reward
for his efforts. I said to him: If All* enables you to
conquer North Africa, you will have one-fifth of the
Wlums as a reward. Abu Bakr and 'Umar (may All* be
pleased with them both) did that before me, yet despite
that the mujauhideen hoops said to me: We object to you
giving one-fifth of the khums, although they had no right
to object. But I took the one-fifth of the Wzums from Ibn
Sa'd and gave it to the hoops, so in fact Ibn Sa'd did not
take anything. Is that not so? The Sahibuh said: By Allih,
yes.

7- They said that I love my family and am generous to
them. As for my love for my family, that did not make
me biased towards them or make me support them in
cases of injustice or mistreatment of others. Rather they
have duties like everyone else and I take their dues from
them. As for giving to them, I gave to them from my
own wealth, not from the wealth of the Muslims,
because I do not regard the wealth of the Muslims as
permissible for me, and no one has the right (to take the
wealth of the Muslims). I used to give generously from
my own wealth at the time of the Messenger of Allah
(g)
and Abu Bakr and 'Umar (may Allah be pleased
with them both). At that time I was very car& in
spending. But now I am the oldest of my family and am
approaching the end of my life, and I have given my
wealth to my family and relatives. Let the evildoers say
what they say. By All*, I I d not take any wealth or
surplus from any Muslim province. I let those provinces

526

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affk & Dhun-Nooravn

keep their wealth and I did not bring anything to
Madinah except the khums (one-fifth) of the war booty.
The Muslims took care of dividing the other four-fifths
and gave it to those who were entitled to it. By All&, I
did not take even a penny or anything else from that
booty. I only eat from my own wealth and I only give to
my family from my own wealth.

8- They said that I gave the conquered land to certain men,
and that the Muhijirill and Anstr, and other mujaahideen,
took part in conquering these lands. When I divided
these lands among the conquerors, some of them settled
there, and some came back to their families in Madinah
or elsewhere, but that land remained in their possession,
and some sold the land and kept its price with them.
Thus ' U t h m h answered the main objections that had been
raised against him; he clarified his position and highlighted the
true facts.I1' From this strong defence presented by ' U t h m h ibn
'Affh (&), which he discussed with the Sakibah, we get an idea of
the harsh criticism that was directed against him and the foul
rumours and fabricated falsehoods that the Saba'is spread about
him. ' U t h m h (4)summed up the objections that they had
against him and highlighted the facts about his actions. He
explained that he knew what he was doing and that he had a
clear, shar'i basis for all his actions. But they had ulterior motives
and were not interested in seeking guidance or setting things
straight. His approach in this debate was that of a sincere man to
one who is watching him and looking for his faults, aiming to
achieve his goals of stirring up people against him. Such a one
cannot be convinced by any proof or guided by any evidence, and
whomsoever AlEh leaves astray, no one can guide.[21
'I1

'"

al-'Awausim min al-Qawaasim, p. 61-111;Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/355, 356; alKhulafi' al-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 158;a1-Fitnah by Ahmad ' h o o s h , p.
10-14.
Tu~eekha/-Jadalby Muhawnad Abu Zahrah, p. 98, 99

'UthmSn's policy in dealing with the turmoil (fitnah)

527

The leaders of the troublemakers who were beside the minbar
heard his explanations, as did the noble Sahibah and the Muslims
and righteous men who were with them. The Muslims were
moved by 'Uthmin's words and believed what he said, and it
increased their love for him. As for the Saba'is who were
promoting turmoil and division, they were not moved at all, and
they did not retract their views, because they were not looking for
truth or seeking the good, rather their aim was to create trouble
and plot against Islam and the Muslims. The Sahibah and
Muslims suggested to 'Uthmin that he execute those Saba'is
and leading troublemakers because of their lies, fabrications and
hatred that had become apparent; rather they insisted that he
should kill them and rid the Muslims of their evil and bring
stability by putting an end to the turmoil that had been stirred up
by them and their followers. But 'UthmSn had a different opinion;
he preferred to leave them alone and he thought that they should
not be killed, in an attempt to delay the onset of turmoil. So
'Uthmin did not take any steps against the Saba'is who had come
from Egypt, Kufah and Basra, even though he knew what they
were plottin and he let them leave Madkah and go back to their
own lands.

8

Responding to some of their requests
'Uthmin responded to some of their requests by dismissing
some governors and appointing those they asked for. These steps
could have been sufficient to deal with the situation and ensure
truth and justice, if the situation had been normal. But the fact of
the matter is that there were hidden aims and jaahili hatred behind
these complaints and provocations, and there was an effort to
provoke turmoil and disunity among the Muslims, and the
fulfilling of what the Prophet (&) had foretold about the
martyrdom of 'Uthmh (&).I2'

528

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

'Uthmgn's

for. dealing with furmoil

Anyone who studies the way in which 'Uthmh dealt with
the turmoil that occurred during his reign may discern some of
the guidelines that will help the Muslim to confront turmoil.
These guidelines include the following:

Verification.
'Uthmiin sent inspection committees to the regions to listen to
the people and he managed to penetrate the Saba'i group and find
out what they were really up to, and he did not hasten to pass
judgement.

Adhering to justice and fairness
This guideline was manifested in the letter that he sent to the
regions, in which he asked anyone who claimed to have been
insulted or beaten by the governors to come to Hajj and settle his
score with the caliph or any of the governors.[11

Forbearance and deliberation.
This guideline is manifested in his letter to the people of
Kufah, when they asked him to dismiss Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas and
appoint Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari. In this letter it says: "By All&, I
shall do my utmost and I shall be very patient with you, and I
shall do what is in your best interests as much as I can. Ask me for
everything that you want, so long as it does not involve any
disobediencetowards All&, and I will grant you it. Tell me about
all that you dislike so long as it does not involve any disobedience
towards All&, and I will let you off."121

Keenness for that which unites people and shunning that
which causes division among the Muslims
Hence 'Uthmh united the people on one Muchafas we have
seen. When al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i gave him three options - which

I

'Uthm2n's policy in dealing with the turmoil fih?nh)

529

we will discuss in detail below, in sha Allih - 'Uthmsn said: If you
kill me, I have not done anything that deserves kiUing. By Allsh, if
you kill me you will never love one another after I am gone, and
you will never pray together after I am gone, and you will never
fight the enemy together after I am gone.[4

Keeping quiet and not speaking too much
From the biography of 'Uthmsn it is clear that he was
someone who did not speak too much unless it included
beneficial knowledge, advice, or refutation of false accusations.
He was very quiet and spoke little.

Consulting knowledgeable people
'Uthm6n (&) consulted the scholars among the Sahibah, such
as 'Ali, Talhah, az-Zubayr, Muhammad ibn Maslamah, Ibn
'Aamir and 'Abd-All31 ibn Salaam ( &). The scholars are the
key to security and a refuge at times of calamity and tribulation,
because they have the most insight into turmoil and know where
it is heading. The one who t u r n to them will find sound
understanding, the correct view and the proper Islamic
attitude.[21

Seeking guidance from the ahaadeeth of the Messenger of
All2h (&) concerning turmoil
'Uthm&fs method during the turmoil and in dealing with the
rebels was not dictated by the unfolding of events or the pressures
of reality, rather it was based on the guidance of the Prophet (g),
as the Messenger of Allsh (B)had instructed him to be patient
and seek reward, and not to fight back, until All& decreed what
He willed. 'Uthmsn (&) fulfilled his promise to the Messenger of
Allsh (g)
throughout his caliphate, until he fell as a martyr
stained with his own pure blood.[31
Muhibb al-Deen al-Khateeb said: What is indicated by a
' I a/-Bidaayah warn-Nihaayah,7/184
I['

Ahdaath wn Ahaadeeth Fihuat al-Harj, p. 728
Istishhaad 'Uthmin ma Waq'at a/-Jamal,p. 116

530

'Uthmh Ibn ' A f f h& Dhun-Nooravn

number of reports about 'Uthmgn's attitude about defending
himself or surrendering to the decree of AllSh is that he hated
turmoil and feared All* with regard to shedding Muslim blood,
but in the end he wished that he had enough power to scare the
transgressors so that they would be deterred from their deeds
with no need to use weapons in order to reach this outcome.
Before matters got out of hand, Mu'iiwiyah offered to send hroops
from Syria to him, to be under his command, but he refused lest
that cause hardship to the people of Madinah due to the soldiers
being stationed among them. He did not think that audacity
would reach such a level that his Muslim brothers would shed the
blood of the first Muhanjzr who had migrated for the sake of AUa
and His religion. Even when the evildoers besieged him and
surrounded him,he realized that defendinghimself would lead to
futile bloodshed, so he urged everyone who was supposed to hear
and obey to refrain from fighting or engaging in any violence. The
reports about his attitude are abundant in the sources of both
those who loved him and of those who hated him. But if there had
been an organized force available that had the power to
withstand this rebellion and put limits on this arrogance and
tribalism, then ' U W n would have been content and at ease
with that, and he would have still been reassured that he would
not die but as a martyr.Ill

['I al-'Awaasim min al-Quwaasim, p. 138

-

The rebels' occuvation of

ad in ah-

&rival of the rebels &om the regi
The rebels agreed among themselves to carry out the final
stage of their plot to attack 'Uthmh in MaCmah and force him to
give up the caliphate or be killed. They decided to come from their
three centres: Egypt, Kufah and Basra, at the time of Hajj, leaving
their lands with the pilgrims; they would present themselves as
pilgrims and tell others that they were going for Hajj. When they
reached Madimh, they let the pilgrims go on to Makkah to
perform the Hajj rituals, and they took advantage of the fact that
most of the people of Madimah had also left for Hajj, and the
besieged 'Uthmh with the aim of deposing him or killing him.
In Shawwaal of 35 AH, the rebels were on the outskirts of
adi in ah.[^'
The rebels from Egypt came in four groups, each of which
had a leader, and these four leaders in furnhad a leader. They had
with them their devil 'Abd-All31 ibn Saba' and the leaders of the
four groups, whose names were: 'Abd ar-Rahmaan ibn'udays alBalawi, Kinaanah ibn Basheer al-Tujaybi, Sawdaan ibn Hamraan

Ii"

['I nl-Khulafa' al-Raashidem by al-Khaalidi, p. 159
12] op. cit., p. 159

532

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affzn & Dhun-Nooravn

al-Sukooni and Qateerah ibn Fulaan as-Sukooni. Their
commander-in-chief was al-Ghaafiqi ibn Harb al-'Aqqi. The
four groups totalled one thousand men in all.
The rebels from Kufah also numbered one thousand men in
four groups. The leaders of their groups were: Zayd ibn Sawhaan
d-'Abdi, al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i, Ziyaad ibn al-Nadar al-Haarithi
and 'Abd-Alliih ibn al-Asamm. The leader of the Kufan rebels was
'Amr ibn d-Asamm.
The rebels from Basra also numbered one thousand men in
four groups. The leaders of their groups were: Hakeern ibn
Jabalah al-'Abdi, Dhuray' ibn 'Abbaad, Bishr ibn Shurayh alQaysi and Ibn al-Muharrish ibn 'Abd d-Hanqi. The leader.of the
Basran rebels was Harqoos ibn Zuhayr al-Sa'di.
'Abd-All* ibn Saba' travelled with these people, feeling
happy and proud at the success of his devilish plan. The rebels
from Egypt wanted 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib as caliph, the rebels from
Kufah wanted az-Zubayr ibn alL'Awwaam as caliph, and the
rebels from Basra wanted Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-All21 as caliph.'ll
The reason for that was to create division among the Sahibah (may
AU* be pleased with them). This is what al-Aajurri suggested
when he said: All& (may He be glorified and exalted) saved 'Ali
ibn Abi Taalib (&), Talhah and az-Zubayr from getting involved
with these groups, who only claimed to support them in order to
confuse the people and create bouble among the Sakiibdz, but
All& protected the Sahribah from that.l2'
News of their approach reached 'Uthmsn before they arrived,
when he was in a village outside Madinah. When they heard that
he was there, they went there and he received them there. The
reports do not tell us the name of this village, but al-Madaa'ini put
the date of their anival as a Wednesday night at the beginning of
~ h u ' l - ~ a ' d a hThe
.~~
first
~ to arrive were the Egyptians, who said
[I1 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/357

Istishhaad 'Uthmcin wa Waq'at al-Jamal by Khaalid il-Ghayth, p. 148
Fitnat hlaqtal 'Uthmtn by Dr. Muhammad al-dbaan,
1/127

The rebels' occupation of Madhh

533

to ' U t h m h Call for the Mus-ha$ So he called for it and they said:
Open the seventh soorah - which was what they called Soorat
Yoonus. He read until he reached this verse:
">

I
,
,
,

$. %.

cp

,,<
<,*,
- &,$.I, J
s
lL w-+Ji &*
>

G
-I:>

,>:

v,

4
1

"Say [O Muhammad (@J to these polytheists] :'Tell me, what
provision Allcih has sent down to you! And you have made of it
: 'Has Allih
lawful and unlawful .' Say [O Muhammad (SJJ
permitted you (to do so), or do you invent a lie against Allih?"'
(Yoonus 10:59).
They said to him: Stop. What do you think about the land that
you set aside for grazing?Has All21 permitted you (to do that), or
do you invent a lie against AUSh? He said: I will tell you. This
verse was revealed concerning such and such. As for the grazing
land, 'Umar allocated it before me for the zakaah camels. When I
became caliph, the number of zakaah camels increased so I added
to the grazing land because of this increase in the numbers of
zakaah camels. What else? They started quoting verse after verse,
and he kept saying: It was revealed concerning such and such.
Then they did not say any more, and they made a deal with him.
They stipulated conditions for him and he stipulated the
condition that they should not rebel or split from the main
body of Muslims so long as he fulfilled their conditions. Then they
went away content.'''
0
' U t h d sent 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib to negotiate with the rebels
from the provinces
The people stayed in Dhu'l-Marwah for about a month and a
half before his murder. 'Uthmh sent 'Ali (&), and another man
who is not named in the sources, to meet with them. 'Mi met with
them and said to them: If I quote to you from the Book of AllSh,
will you accept it and settle all the issues that you are complaining
['I

op. cit., 1/128

' U r n Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

534

about on that basis? They agreed to that.['] According to one
report they argued with him and he argued with them two or
three times, then they said: He is the cousin of the Messenger of
Alltih (g)
and the envoy of the caliph; he is asking you to accept
the Book of All21 (as a reference point), so they agreed to deal
with him.['] They agreed to five things: that the one who was
banished could return home, the one who was deprived of a
stipend would be given it, the fay' would be shared out, he would
be fair in dividing the spoils, and he would employ people of
honesty and ability. They wrote that down in a document, and
also stipulated that Ibn'Aamir would be reinstated as governor of
Basra and Abu Moosa would remain as governor of ~ u f a h . I ~ ]
Thus 'Uthmiin made a deal with each group on its own, then
each party set off for its own land.141
0
Fabricated letter giving orders to kill the Egyptian delegation
After this treaty had been drawn up and the people of the
regions started heading for home feeling content with what they
had achieved, it became clear to the instigators of turmoil that
their plans had failed and their evil goals had not been reached. So
they came up with a new plan to revive the turmoil and destroy
all the deals that had been made between the people of the regions
and 'Uthmtin (4).This plot took the following form: As the
Egyptian delegation was travelling homeward, they saw
someone riding a camel who repeatedly approached them then
moved away, as if he was fleeing from them and saying, come
and catch me. So they caught him and said to him: What is the
matter with you? He said: I am the envoy of the caliph to his agent
in Egypt. They examined him and found a letter that bore
'Uthmiin's seal but was a forgery, addressed to his governor.
When they opened it, they found that it contained orders to
'I

Tareekh Dimashq, biography of 'Uthmcn, p. 328; Tareekh Khaleefah, p. 169,170.
Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmlin, 1/129

i31 op.

cit., 1/129

'41 Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmlin, 1/129

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

535

crucify them or kill them, or cut off their hands and feet. They
went back to ~admah['l,but 'Uthmsn (4)denied ever writing
this letter. He said to them: There are two ways you can prove me
guilty; either bring two Muslim men to testify or accept my oath
by Alliih, besides Whom there is no other god, that I did not write
it or dictate it or have any knowledge of it. A letter may be
attributed to a man and a seal may be put on it. But they did not
believe him.[21
This letter which the hateful rebels claimed was from
'Uthman, bearing his seal and canied by his slave on one of the
zakaah camels to his governor in Egypt, Ibn Abi'l-Sarh, ordering
him to kill these rebels, was a forged letter that was falsely
attributed to 'Uthm2n. That is clear for a number of reasons:
1- The carrier of the forged letter approached those Egyptians
then ran away, and he did that repeatedly. He only did that
to attract their attention and make them suspicious, as if he
was saying: I have something important concerning you. If
the letter carrier had really come from 'UthmSn he would
have been scared of them and would have kept away from
them, and he would have hastened to reach the governor of
Egypt and hand over the instructions so that he could cany
them out.

2- How did the Iraqis know about this matter when they had
set out for their own country and were separated hom the
Egyptians - who intercepted this fabricated letter - by a huge
distance? The Iraqis were in the east and the Egyptians were
in the west, yet they all came back at the same time, as if they
had an appointment. That could not have happened unless
those who fabricated the letter and hired someone to cany it
and play his role in al-Buwayb with the Egyptians had hired
another rider to go and tell the Iraqis that the Egyptians had
discovered a letter sent by 'UthmSn with instructions to kill
['I
[I'

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/379
Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmtn (5/132); al-Bidmyah wa'n-Nihaayah, 7/191

!

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

536

the Egyptian rebels. This is what 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib (&)
thought when he said: 0 people of Kufah and Basra, how did
you know what had happened to the people of Egypt, when
you had travelled a long distance, then you came back?['] In
fact 'Ali was certain about that and said: By ALl3h, this was a
plan that was drawn up in adi in ah.'.']

3- How could ' U t M n have written to Ibn Abi'l-Sarh telling
him to kiU these rebels, when after the rebels had left Egypt
heading for Madhah, Ibn Abi'l-Sarh had written to the
caliph asking for permission to come to him, when
Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah seized control of Egypt?
In fact, Ibn Abi'l-Sarh left Egypt and went to al-'Areesh and
Palestine, then to al-'Aqabah, so how could 'Uthman have
written to him, telling him to kill them, when he had
received a letter from him asking for permission to come to
him?

4- 'Uthmh forbade kiUing the rebels when they besieged him
and refused to let the Sahlibibah defend him, and he did not
give any instruction to fight the rebels in sell-defence, as we
shall see in detail below in sha Alllih, so how could he write
something like this fabricated letter when they had left
MadAmahmaking a show of repentance?
5- The fact that Hukaym ibn Jablah and al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i
stayed behind in Madinah after the rebels had left clearly
indicates that they were the ones who fabricated the letter,
because they had nothing to do in Madinah and they only
stayed there for that purpose. They were the ones who had a
stake in the matter.131 That may have been on the
instructions of 'Abd-All& ibn Saba', because 'Uthmh had
nothing to gain from that and neither did Marwaan ibn alHakam. Those who accuse Mamaan with regard to that are
["

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/359
ibid.

[31 'UtkmEn ibn 'Affmn al-Khaleefah al-Skaakir alSaabir, p. 277

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

537

in fact accusing the caliph of being negligent in his duties
and suggesting that in the caliph's court there were people
who were doing things without his knowledge, and thus
they attempt to clear those traitors of any blame. Moreover, if
Mamaan had forged the letter, he would have advised the
camer to stay away from those rebels and not approach
them on the road lest they capture him, otherwise he would
be one of the conspirators against 'Uthmh, and that is not
possible.

6- This cursed letter was not the first letter fabricated by
these rebels, rather they also fabricated letters that were
attributed to the Mothers of the Believers, and also 'Ali,
Talhah and az-Zubayr. 'Aa'ishah
was accused of
having written to the people, telling them to rebel
against 'Uthmh, but she denied it and said: No, by the
One in Whom the believers believe, and in Whom the
disbelievers disbelieve, I never wrote anything to them
until I sat here where I am.[']

(a)

Al-A'mash commented: They thought that it had been falsely
attributed to her.['] The delegates accused 'Ali of having written
to them, telling them to come to Madinah, but he denied that and
swore: By AllCh, I did not write any letter to you.[31 Letters to
people in other regions, telling them to come to Madinah because
the religion of Muhammad had been corrupted and abandoned,
and jihad in MadAmhwas better than staying in remote outposts,
Ibn Katheer commented on
were also attributed to the ~ahibah.~~]
this report by saying: This is a lie against the Sahlibah, and the
letters were fabrications against them. Fabricated letters that were
Talhah and az-Zubayr, which they denied, were
attributed to 'Ali,
sent to the rebels - the killers of 'Uthmiin. This letter was also
Tuhqeeq Mmuaaqif al-Sdbah, 1/334
Tare& Kahleefah ibn al-Khayyaaf,p. 169
Tuhqeeq Mawmqif d-Sahfbah, 1/335
'4' ibid.

[I1

538

'Uthmin a n 'Affin

Dhun-Nooravn
- 2-

falsely attributed to 'Uthmh; he did not tell anyone to write it for
him and he was not aware of it.['] The words of Ibn Katheer are
confirmed by the report of al-Tabari, as quoted by Khaleefah,
which says that the senior Snhibah themselves - 'Ali, 'Aa'ishah
and az-Zubayr - denied these letters, according to the most sound
reports.IZ1 The criminals who fabricated these letters and
attributed them falsely to the Sahib& are the same ones who
fanned the flames of tunnoil from beginning to end and stirred up
all that far-reaching corruption. They are the ones who fabricated
and propagated all these lies against ' U M n and tried to spread
them among the people, until the hooligans began to accept them.
Then they forged that letter which they attributed to 'Uthmh, so
that 'Uthm2n would end up as a victim and thus become a
blessed martyr. But the martyr 'Uthmiin was not the only victim
of this Saba'i conspiracy, rather Islam itself was a victim before
that, and the many generations who learned that distorted history
were also victims of this evil Jew and his helpers who were
motivated by greed, whims and desires, and grudges. Is it not
time for the Muslims to learn the truth about their history and its
great men? Rather, is it not time for contemporary Muslim writers
to fear All& and not have the audacity to criticize the innocent
before examining the reports and investigating thoroughly, so
that they do not fall into the same trap as others?[31

The beginning of the siege, and 'Uthmin's opinion
on praying behind the leaders of the troublemakers
The sound reports do not describe in detail how the siege
began, but perhaps the events that preceded it shed some light on
how it began. Whilst 'Uthmh (&) was addressing the people one
[~]
interrupted him, saying: 0
day, a man called ~ ' ~ u n suddenly
['I al-Bidaayah warn-Nihaayah, 7/175
I['

Tahqeeq Mawaaqifal-Sahibah, 1/335
'Uthm-n i h 'Affaan - -1-Khaleefah al-Shaakir al-Saabir, p. 228, 229
A'yun ibn Daba'iyah ibn Naajiyah ibn Ghaffaal d-Tameemi al-Hanzali alDharami.

The rebels' occupation of Madhah

539

~a'thil['' , you have changed. 'Uthmh (&) said: Who is this?
They said: A'yun. 'Uthmh said: Rather you have changed, 0
slave. The people leapt on A'yun and a man from Banu Layth
started trying to push them away from him until he let him in his
house.['] Then the rebels came back again, and before the siege
got worse, 'Uthmiin was able to go out to pray, and admit
whoever he wanted to his house. Then he was prevented from
leaving the house, even for the obligatory prayers.[31 One of the
leading rebels who were besieging 'Uthmsn led the prayers, until
'Ubayd-All& ibn 'Adiyy ibn al-Khayyaar felt uneasy about
praying behind him, so he consulted 'Uthmh about that, and
'Uthmk told him to pray behind him. He said to him: Prayer is
the best deed that the people do, so i f the people are doing good,
then join them, and if they do bad then stay away from them.14'
According to some weak reports, the one who was leading the
[ ~ ] report
people in prayer was their leader a l - ~ h a a f i ~ i . The
narrated by al-Waaqidi, which says that 'Ali told Abu Ayyoob alAnssri to lead the people in prayer, and he led them in prayer at
the beginning of the siege, then'Ali led them in prayer on Eid and
after that, is not sound.[61In addition to the fact that the lsnaad of
this report is weak, i f 'Ali or Abu Ayyoob had been the one who
was leading the prayers, 'Ubayd-Alliih ibn 'Adiyy ibn alKhayyaar would not have felt uneasy about praying behind
them.l71

Negotiations befvveen "Uthm2n and the besiegers
After the siege was complete and the rebels had surrounded
['I An insulting nickname given by the rebels to ' U M n

Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmrjn, 1/143; Tareekh Dimnshq Tatjamat 'Uthmh, p. 247 - its
isn8d is hasm.
L31 Tareekh Dimashq Tatjamat 'Uthmin, p. 341,342 - its isnid is hasan.
Al-Bukhaari, Kitaab al-Salaah, no. 192
['I Fitnat Muqtal 'Uthmin, 1/145
[61 T m k h at-Tabari, 5/444 (al-Waaqidi himself is known to report fabricated
narrations). prmslator)
[/1 Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmh, 1/145

540

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn .& Dhun-Noorayn

'Uthm2n in the house, they asked him to give up the caliphate, or
they would kill him.[*] But 'Uthmin (&) refused to give it up, and
said: I will never take off the garment that All* has given me to
wear12' ,referring to the advice that the Messenger of Allih (B)
had given him.However, a few of the Saktbah had a different
opinion and some of them, including al-Mugheerah ibn alAkhnas (&), suggested to him that he should give up the caliphate
to save his life, but he refused to do that.[31

1. Ibn 'Uma urges 'Uthmin not to give up the position of

caliph
Ibn 'Umar entered upon 'Uthmh (mayAll* be pleased with
them both) during the siege and said to him: Look at what these
people are saying. They are saying: Give it up and do not kill
yourself. Ibn 'Umar (&) said: If you give it up, are you going to
live forever in this world? 'Uthm2.n (&) said: No. He said: If you
do not give it up, can they do any more than kill you? 'Uthmh
said: No. He said: Are they the ones to decide whether you go to
Paradise or to Hell? He said: No. He said: I do not think that you
should take off a garment that All* had given you to wear,
otherwise that will become a precedent and every time a people
dislikes their caliph or ruler they will kill
May Allsh be pleased with 'Abd-All& ibn 'Umar - how farsighted he was. He did not want 'Uthm2n to set a bad precedent
for the caliphs who came after him, and 'Uthm2n is far above
doing such a thing. If 'Uthm2n gave in to these Saba'i rebels and
gave up the caliphate, the caliphate would have become a
plaything in the hands of evildoers and those with ulterior
motives, and thus the position of caliph would become unstable
and have no respect among the people. But 'Uthm2n set a good
precedent for those who came after him by consulting Ibn 'Umar
at-Tabaqaat by lbn Sa'd, 3/66; Tareekh Khaleefah, p. 171
&Tamheed, p. 46,47
[I' Fimat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 1/147
[" Fadaa'il alSah8bah, 1/473. Its isnid is saheeh.

[I1

I

The rebels' occupation of Mad&

541

and other Sahibah ( &), and he bore it with patience, seeking
reward (with All&); he did not give up the caliphate or cause the
blood of Muslims to be shed.[']
If he had responded to the demands of the rebels, who were a
small group among the ummah and not among the decisionmakers, prominent figures or leading scholars, that would have
had serious consequences for the ummah, the position of the
caliph and the relationship between the rulers and the people. The
price he paid for averting these negative consequences was his
life; he was certain of his fate but he surrendered to it even though
that is something that was disliked, but he gave precedence to the
best interests of the ummah over his own personal interests,
which demonstrates his strength, resolve and courage, and
refutes the accusation made against him, that he was weak of
was able, by A l l a s leave, to rein in the
character. 'Uthmiin (6)
turmoil, but he thought that it would lead to evil consequences
that outweighed the interests achieved by resisting it. So he
decided not to resist it so as to avoid negative consequences. Thus
it is clear that al-'Aqqaad was mistaken when he said that the
murder of 'Uthmin can only be described as troublemaking on
the part of some thugs with no one who could contain itIZ1,
because that implies some criticism of the character and courage
It was indeed turmoil caused by thugs, but not
of 'Uthmh (4).
resisting it is something for which 'Uthmk (4)is to be praised,
because that was a sacrifice he made for the sake of Allgh, hoping
to do that which was in the best interests of the ummah and acting
on the advice of the Messenger of AU& (g).131

2. The besiegers threaten to kill him
Whilst 'Uthmiin (4)was in his house, and the people were
outside the house besieging him, 'Uthmk went to the entrance of
the house one day and heard the besiegers threatening to kill him.
1'

Al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 179

" Dhu'n-Noorayn 'Ufhmrinibn 'Affaan, p. 122
131 Fitnaf Maqtal 'Uthmtn, 1/149

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Nooravn

542

He went away from the entrance and entered upon those who
were with him in the house, his face drained of colour. He said:
They were threatening to kill me just now. They said to him: All*
will suffice you, 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen. He said: Why would they
kill me, when I heard the Messenger of All* (@) say:

"It is not permissible to shed the blood of a Muslim except in
three cases :a man who disbelieved after having believed, or who
committed zina after having been married, or who killed a soul
unlaw&lly ."
By Allgh, I never committed zina during the Jaahiliyyah or in
Islam, and I never wished to change my religion after AU%h
guided me, and I never killed anyone, so why would they kill
me?''' Then he looked out over the people who were besieging
him and tried to calm them down and stop their rebelion against
their leader by refuting the criticisms they made against him and
explaining the things that had been distorted, in the hope that
they would come to their senses. He asked the besiegers to send
him a man to speak to him, and they sent a young man called
Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhaan, and 'Uthmgn asked him to explain to him
what they were angry about.[']

3. 'UthmSn established proof against Sa'sa'ah's
misquotation of Qur'in
Sa'sa'ah said: We were expelled from our homes unjustly
only because we said, Our Lord is Allgh (cf. al-Hajj 22:40).
'Uthmgn (4said
) to him: Quote the Qur'k. So he recited:

[I1 nl-Musnad, 1/63. Ahmad Shaakir (452) said: Its isntd is saheeh

Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmiin, 11150

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

543

"Permission to fight (against disbelievers) is given to those
(believers) who are fought against, because they have been
wronged; and surely, Alldh is Able to give them (believers)
victoy" (Al-Hajj 2239).
'Uthmh said: This does not apply to you and your
companions; rather it applies to me and my companions. Then
'Uthmh recited the verse that Sa'sa'ah had quoted as evidence
and that which comes after it, which showed that Sa'sa'ah was
misquoting it. He recited:

"Permission to fight (against disbelievers) is given to those
(believers) who are fought against, because they have been
wronged; and surely, Allth is Able to give them (believers)
victoy Those who have been expelledfiom their homes unjustly
only because they said :"Our Lord is Alldh ." For had it not been
that All& checks one set of people by means of another,
monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, wherein the
Name of All& is mentioned much would surely, have been
pulled down. Verily, All& will help those who help His
(Cause). Truly, Alldh is All-Strong, All-Mighty . Those
(Muslim rulers) who, if We give them power in the land,
(they) enjoin Iqaamat-as-Salaah [i .e. to perform the five
compulsoy congregational Salaah (prayers) (the males in
mosques)], to pay the Zakaah and they enjoin Al-Ma'roof (i.e.
Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam orders one to do), and
forbid Al-Munkar (i .e . disbelief, polytheism and all that Islam

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affh .& Dhm-Nooravn

544

has forbidden) 1i.e. they make the Qur'iu as the law of their
c o u n t y in all the spheres of lifel .And with Allth rests the end of
(all) matters (of creatures) ." (Al-Haji 22:39-41)
'Uthm2n (&) explained to the people the correct meaning of
these verses as they were revealed, the reason why they were
revealed and concerning whom they were revealed, and what
they meant, so that the people would not be confused by one who
read the Qur'h to them but did not know what it meant and used
it as evidence for the opposite of what it meant.111 Moreover,
when 'Uthmk banished those whom he banished, he did so in
accordance with the verse which follows the verse that was
misquoted by Sa'sa'ah, which instructs those to whom Alliih
gives power in the land to enjoin what is good and forbid what is
evil; 'Uthmh was the caliph and he banished them by way of
enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil, because of
what they did of transgressing against some of the Muslims and
their attempts to stir ~ ~ f i t n a h . ' ~ ]

4. 'Uthman reminds the people of his virtues
After refuting these people, 'Uthmh reminded the people of
his status and of some of his virtues, urging those who knew of
them or had heard them from the Messenger of All* (@) to
testify to the people. He said: I adjue by Alliih whoever heard the
Messenger of Allsh (B)on the mountain of Hira', when the
mountain shook and he kicked it with his foot and said:

"Calm down, Hira', for there is no one on you but a Prophet or a
Siddeeq or a martyr,"
and I was with him. Some men testified to that, then he said: I
adjure by All& whoever heard the Messenger of AUsh (S)
on the
day of the oath of allegiance of al-Radwaan, when he had sent me
'I1

Fihat Maqfal 'Uhrnin, 1/151

12] op. cit., 1/152

The rebels' occu~ationof Madfnah

545

to the mushrikeen, to the people of Makkah, and he said:
O>

1 1 L b

4 ?$;

$4 &ill

"This is my hand and this is the hand of 'Uthmin,"
and he swore allegiance on my behalf. Some men testified to
that, then he said: I adjure by A E h whoever heard the Messenger
say:
of All&

(s)

'Who will incorporate his house into the mosque in return for a
house in Paradise?"
so I bought it with my own wealth and incorporated it into
the mosque. Some men testified to that, then he said: I adjure by
All& whoever heard the Messenger of All& (B)
on the day of
Tabook when he said:

"Who will spend today and his charity will be accepted?"
So I equipped half of the army from my own wealth. Some
men testified to that, then he said: I adjure by All2h whoever saw
the water of the well of Roomah being sold to wayfarers, and I
bought it with my own wealth and made it free for wayfarers. He
said: And some men testified to that.'']
It was narrated that Abu Thawr al-Fahmi said: I came to
'Uthmh, and whilst I was staying with him I went out and saw
that the delegation from Egypt had returned. I entered upon
'Uthmh and told him about that, and he said: How do you see
them? I said: I see evil in their faces, and Ibn 'Udays al-Balawi is in
charge of them. Ibn'Udays ascended the minbar of the Messenger
of All2h
and led the people in praying Jwnu'ah, and he

(e)

[I1 al-Musnad, 1/59; Ahmad Shaakir said (420): Its isnid is ssaheeh.

546

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

criticized 'Uthmh in his khutbah. I entered upon 'Uthmh and
told him what he had said concerning them, and he said: Ibn
'Udays is lying, by AllSh. If he had not said that, I would not
mention this. I was the fourth person to enter Islam. The
gave his daughter to me in maniage,
Messenger of Allsh (g)
then she died and he gave his other daughter to me. I did not
commit zina or steal during the Jaahiliyyah or in Islam. I have not
told lies since I became Muslim and I have not touched my private
part with my right hand since I swore allegiance to the Messenger
I compiled the Qur'h at the time of the Messenger
of AllSh (g).
of All* (&), and since I became Muslim, no Friday ever came but
I set free a slave, unless I could not find a slave that Friday, in
which case I would set two free the following Friday.[']
When 'Uthrnh realized that the rebels were insisting on
killing him, he warned them against that and against the
consequences thereof. He looked out at them through a hole in
the wall and said to them: 0 people, do not kill me; rather talk to
me, for by Allsh, if you kill me you will never be united in a fight
against your enemy, rather you will be divided until you become
like that - and he interlaced his fingers.[21 According to another
report he said: 0 people, do not kill me, for I am a ruler and a
Muslim brother. By AllSh, all I wanted was to do what was best
for the ummah as much as I could, whether I was right or wrong.
If you kill me, you will never pray together or go on campaign
together again, and you will never share your booty among
you.[3J He also said: If you kill me, you will never love one
another again after I am gone, and you will never fight anyone
together after I am gone.[41And what he warned them of came to
pass; after he was killed, everything he said happened.
['I Al-Marefah wa'l-Tareekh, 2/488; Khilaafat 'Uthmin ibn 'Afffan by al-Sulami, p.

91
"I at-Tabaqaat, 3/71; Tareekk Ibrr I(hayaaf, p. 171. Its isnid is snkeeh.
13' At-Tabaqaaf, 3/67, 68; Fitnat Maqtal 'Utkmrin, 1/157; its ~ s r u i dis hasan.
I''

Tareekh Ibn Khayuut, p. 171; Fitnaf Maqtal 'Uthrnin, 1/157; its isnid is hasan

i

The rebels' occu~ationof Madinah

547

Concerning that, al-Hasan al-Basri said: By Allgh, even when the
people pray together, their hearts are divided. ['I

The Sah&bah9s oBer to defend 'Uthmgn and his
rejection &ereof
'Uthmh (&) sent word to the Sahibah ( &) consulting them
about the besiegers and their threats to kill him. Their attitudes
were as follows:

1. 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib (&)
Ibn 'Asaakir narrated from Jaabir ibn 'Abd-All*(&) that 'Ali
sent word to 'Uthmiin saying: I have five hundred men with
shields; give me permission to protect you against the people, for
you have not done anything that would make it permissible to
shed your blood. He said: May you be rewarded with good, I do
not want blood to be shed for my sake.121

2. Az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam (&)
It was narrated that Abu ~ a b e e b a h ' ~said:
'
Az-Zubayr sent
me to 'Uthmh when he was being besieged and I entered upon
him on a summer day. He was sitting on a chair and al-Hasan ibn
'Ali, Abu Hurayrah, 'Abd-AU2h ibn 'Umar and 'Abd-ALEh ibn
az-Zubayr were with him. I said: az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam has
sent me to you. He sends greetings of salaam to you and says to
you: I am still loyal to you and I have not changed or retracted. If
you wish, I will join you in your house, and will be one of the
people there, or if you wish, I will stay where I am, because Banu
'Amr ibn 'Awf have promised to come to my place, then they will
follow whatever instructions I give them. When 'Uthmh heard
the message, he said: Allihu akbar, praise be to All* Who has
protected my brother. Convey salaams to him and tell him: I
I'' Fitnat Maqtal ' U f h m i ~1/157
,
Tareekh Dzmashq, p. 403
Abu Habeebah was the freed slave of az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam who
narrated from al-Zubayr and met Abu Hurayrah when 'Uthmin was being
besieged.

548

' U W n Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Noorayn

appreciate what you said; may AU2h ward off harm from me by
you. When Abu Hurayrah read the message he stood up and said:
Shall I not tell you what my ears heard from the Messenger of
AU2h (g)?
They said: Yes. He said: I bear witness that I heard the
Messenger of All2h (g)say:

"After I am gone there will be turmoil and other things."
We said: Where should we turn to for safety, 0 Messenger of
Allsh? He said:

"To Al-Arneen (the trushvorthy one) and his group,"
and he pointed to 'Uthmsn ibn 'Affh. The people stood up
and said: Now we know what we should do. Give us permission
to fight in jihad. But 'Uthmh said: I urge anyone who is supposed
to obey me not to fight.[']

2. Al-Mugheerah ibn Shu'bah &
It was narrated that al-Mugheerah ibn Shu'bah (&) entered
upon 'Uthmsn when he was being besieged, and said: You are the
ruler of the people and there has befallen you what you see. I
advise you of three options; choose one of them.
go out and
fight them, for you have the numbers and strength, and you are in
the right and they are in the wrong; or make a door other than the
door where they are, and sit on your mount and go to Makkah, for
they will not dare to attack you there; or go to Syria, for among the
people of Syria is Mu'swiyah. 'Uthm2n said: As for going out and
fighting them, I will not be the first one after the Messenger of
All& (g)to rule the ummah by shedding its blood. As for going
out to Makkah because they would not dare to attack me there, I
say:
heard the Messenger of All* (g)
I'[ Fadua'il al-Sahtbah, 1/511,512. Its isntd is saheeh

The rebels' occu~ationof Madinah

549

"A man of Quraysh who visits Makkah with the aim ofprofanity
or wrongdoing will have the punishment of half of mankind,"

and I will never be that one; and as for going to Syria because
among the people of Syria is Mu'iiwiyah, I will never leave the
place to which I migrated and where I am close to the Messenger
(%).[ll

4. 'Abd-All&hibn az-Zubayr (&)
The Sahib& ( &) decided to defend 'Uthmh, and some of
them entered the house, but 'Uthm2n urged them strongly to
refrain from fighting in his defence, which prevented them from
fulfilling their sincere desire to defend him. Among them was
'Abd-All& ibn az-Zubayr (A)who said to 'Uthmiin: Fight them,
for by Alliih, Alliih has permitted you to fight them. But ' U t M n
said: No, by All&, I will never fight them.[']
According to another report he said: 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen,
we are with you in the house, a group with strong faith, and AUSh
may give victory to a smaller group than us, so give us permission
to fight. But 'Uthmin said: I adjure you by Allfih that no man
should shed his blood for my sake.[31 Then he appointed him in
charge of the house and said: Whoever was obliged to obey me,
let him obey 'Abd-Alliih ibn az-zubay~!~]

5. Ka'b ibn Maalik al-Ans%riand Zayd ibn Thibit al-Ans&i

(4%)
Ka'b ibn Maalik (&) urged the Ans& to support 'Uthmh (4)
and said to them 0 Ansir, be supporters of Al1iih twice. So the
'I1 AI-Bidaayuk wa'n-iiihaayah,

7/211
Tabaqaat Ibn Sa'd, 3/70. Its i s d d is sakeek.

Op. cit., 3/70; Tareekh Ibn Khayaat, p. 173
[41 Tabaqaat Ibn Sa'd, 3/70; its iszcid going back to 'Abd-AU2h ibn al-Zubayr is
saheek.

['I

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

550

An& came to 'Uthmgn and stood at his door, and Zayd ibn
m b i t entered and said to him:The Ansgr are at your door; if you
wish we will be supporters of All21 twice.['' But 'Uthm2n
refused to fight and said: There is no need for that; do not do it.12]
6. al-Hasan ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib (&)
al-Hasan ibn 'Ali (&) came and said to him: Should I
unsheathe my sword? He said to him: I will never be able to
jushfy the shedding of your blood before All&; put your sword
back in its sheath and go back to your father.[31

7. 'Abd-All* ibn 'Umar ibn al-Khatt2b (A)
When the Sahibah realized that the situation was getting out
of hand, some of them decided to defend him without consulting
him, so some of them entered the house and prepared to fight. Ibn
'Umar was with him in the house, with his sword in his hand and
his shield on his arm, ready to fight in defence of 'Uthmgn (&),
but 'Uthmgn urged him to leave the house lest he fight with the
people when they entered the house and be killed.14'

8. Abu Hurayrah (&)
Abu Hurayrah entered the house and said to ' U t h m h 0
Ameer al-Mu'mineen, now it is time to fight. He said to him: 0 Abu
Hurayrah, would you be happy to kill all the people and me? He
said: No. He said: By Allsh, if you killed a single man it would be
as if you had killed all the people. So he went back and did not
fight. According to another report, Abu Hurayrah had his sword
in his hand, until 'Uthmh told him not to fightC5]

9. Sulayt ibn Sulayt
He said: 'Uthmh forbade us to fight them, and if he had
Tubaqaat fin Sa'd, 3/70; Fitnat Maqkal 'Uthmcin, 1/162
Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 11162
[31 Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmtn, 11162; al-Musannaf by Ibn Abi Shaybah, 152/224
Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 1/163
Tareekk Kahleefah ibn Khayaat, p. 164
['I
['I

The rebels' occuoation of Madinah

551

given us permission we would have driven them out of the
city.[']
Ibn Sireen said: There were seven hundred men with
'Uthmh in the house; if he had let them and if All2h had
willed, they would have driven them out of the city. Among them
were Ibn 'Umar, al-Hasan ibn 'Ali and 'Abd-Alliih ibn az-Zubayr.
He also said: On the day when ' U W n was killed, the house was
crowded with people, including Ibn 'Umar and al-Hasan ibn 'Ali,
who had his sword around his neck, but ' U r n told them not to
Thus it is clear that the accusation that the Sakibibah, both
Muhijijirin and Ansir, let 'Uthmh down, is false, and none of the
reports which say that are free of serious faults in the isnaad or
text or both.r31

10. Offer of some of the Sahribah to help 'Uthmh leave and
go to Makkah
When some of the Sahtbah saw that ' U W n (&) was
insisting on refusing to fight the besiegers, and that the besiegers
were insisting on killing him, they could find no other way to
protect him but to offer to help him to leave and go to Makkah, to
escape from the besiegers. It was narrated that 'Abd-Alliih ibn azZubayr, al-Mugheerah ibn Shu'bah and Usaamah ibn Zayd all
suggested that to him separately, each of them making the
suggestion by himself, but 'Uthmh (A) refused all of these
offers.[4]
e
The reasons why 'Uthm2n told the Sahibak not to fight
From the reports of the turmoil, researchers have found five
reasons for that, which are:
1- Following the advice of the Messenger of Allah (@)
['I Fltnat Maqtal 'UthmLin, 1/165

Tareekh Dimashq by Ibn 'Asaakir, Tajamat 'Uthmh, p. 395
'31 Fihzat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 1/166

Fitnat MaqtaI 'Uthmlin, 1/166

i

552

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn
which he told him in secret and which 'Uthmin
announced on the day of the siege, which is a promise
that he made to him, that he would bear it with
patience.[']
2- 'UthmSn's words: I will never be the first of the
successors of the Messenger of Alltih (g)to shed blood
among his ummah. He did not want to be the first of the
to shed the
successors of the Messenger of All& (g)
blood of the ~ u s l i m s . ~ ~ ~

3- He knew that the rebels were not after anyone else, and
he did not want to use the believers as a shield to protect
himself, rather he wanted to be a shield to protect
them.L31
4- He knew that this turmoil would involve his being
killed, from what the Messenger of All2h (g)
had told
him when he gave him the glad tidings of Paradise for a
calamity that would befall him, and that he would be
killed when adhering patiently to the truth. The evidence
indicated that the time for that had come, and that was
supported by a dream which he saw the night before he
was killed, in which he saw the Messenger of Allah (g)
and he said to him:

"Break your fast with us tomorrow."
From that 'Uthmh (4)understood that the time of his
martyrdom was at hand.

['I Fadaa'il al-Sahibah, 1/605; its isntd is ssaheh.

" Fitnat Maqtal 'UthmLin, 1/167; al-Musnud, (1/396), Ahmad Shaakir.
Ii1 Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmlin; there is some weakness in the isnlid of the report.

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

553

5- Acting on the advice of Ibn Salaam (&) who said to him:
Refrain from fighting, for that will give you a stron er
position against them (on the Day of Resurrection).[I?
The Prophet's foretelling that ' U W n would be killed was
~'
fulfilled, as it was narrated by 'Abd-AUih ibn ~ a w a a l a h ~(&A)
that the Prophet (g)said:

'Whoever is savedfrom three is indeed saved - three times - :my
death, the Dajjaal and the murder of a caliph who is killed
adhering to the truth andfilfilling his duty."[31
From the above we can see how calm ' U t h d (&) was in his
thinking, for the severity of the calamity did not prevent him from
thinking clearly and taking the right decisions. So many reasons
came together to make him take a peaceful position with regard to
fighting those who had rebelled against him.Undoubtedly he (&)
was in the right in all his stances that he took, because it was
narrated in sound reports that the Prophet (&) had referred to this
and his companions
turmoil, and had testified that 'Uthmh (6)
would be in the right.[41
Ibn Taymiyah (-$) said: It is known through mutawaatir
reports that ' U t M n was among the most car& of people to
avoid bloodshed and among the most patient towards those who
impugned his honour and those who plotted to shed his blood, so
they besieged him and sought to kill him. He knew of their
intention to kill him, and the Muslims came to defend him and
['I

At-Tabaqnat, 3/71; its isnid is hasan.

"I Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmtn, 1/168; its isntd is hasan or saheeh.
[31 Musnad Ahmad, 4/106, no. 16973.
[$

Fitnat Maqfal 'Uthmtn, 1/168; see the saheeh ahdeeth to which I have referred
in the sections on his virtues and on the Prophet's foretelling of his killing in
this book.

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhm-Noorayn

advised him to fight them, but he told the people to refrain from
fighting and ordered those who should obey him not to fight
them. It was said to him: Will you go to Makkah? And he said: I
will not be one of those who cause the sanctuary to be violated. It
was said to him: Will you go to Syria? He said: I will not leave the
land to which I migrated. It was said to him: Then fight them, but
he said: I will not be the first of the successors of Muhammad to
rule his ummah by the sword. The patience that 'Uthmgn showed
until he was killed is among the greatest of his virtues in the eyes
of the ~ u s l i m s . ~ ]

The attitude of
some of the fernal
Umm Habeebah bint Abi Sufyan (&)
The stance taken by Umm Habeebah, the Mother of the
Believers, concerning these events was a very serious one, as she
was nearly killed for 'UthmMs sake. When 'Uthmgn (+) was
besieged and water was withheld from him,' U M n sent a son
of 'Amr ibn Hazam al-AnsS -who was one of his neighbours -to
'Ali to tell him: They are withholding water from us; if you can,
send us some of your surplus water. He also sent word to Talhah,
az-Zubayr, 'Aa'ishah and the other wives of the Prophet (g).
The
first ones to come to his aid were 'Ali and Umm ~abeebah."]
Umm Habeebah was very concerned about ' U W , as Ibn
'Asaakir said, and this was entirely natural on her part, as they
shared a common lineage and were from the same tribe (Banu
Umayyah). Umm Habeebah came and they struck the face of her
mule, and she said: The wills of Banu Umayyah are all with this
man; I want to meet him and ask him about that so that the wills
of the widows and orphans will not be lost. They said: You are
lying; and they struck out at her with their swords, and cut the
rope of her mule, which started running away with Umm

D m r al-Marruh asSiyaasi, by Asma' Muhammad, p. 340

The rebels' occupation of Madfhah
Habeebah. The people tried to stop it, and the saddle tilted, so
they grabbed hold of it and stopped the mule, but Umm
Habeebah was nearly killed. Then they took her back to her
house.[ll It seems that she (h)
told her freed slave Ibn al-Jarraah
to stay close to 'Uthmh (&), and the events that took place in the
house (of 'Uthmsn) happened when Ibn al-Jarraah was
present.[']

Safiyyah the wife of the Messenger of Allah (g)
Safiyyah ($) did something similar to what Umm Habeebah
did. It was narrated that ICinaanahC3] said: I was leading
Safiyyah's mule when she went and tried to defend 'Uthmiin,
and she was met by a1L~shtar.l~'
He struck the face of her mule
until the saddle tilted, and she said: Let me go back for I do not
want this to expose me. Then she put a piece of wood from her
house to 'UthmMs, and transported food and water on it.[51

'Aa'ishah the Mother of the Believers (&)
When that happened to Umm Habeebah, the people were
very upset and 'Aa'ishah (&) left Madinah filled with anger
against the rebels. Marwaan ibn al-Hakam came to her and said:
0 Mother of the Believers, if you had stayed they would have
shown some respect towards this man. She said: Do you want to
happen to me what happened to Umm Habeebah? And there is
no one there to defend me. No, by All&, I do not want to be in
such a humiliating situation. I do not know where this matter will
end.16] She (%) thought that by leaving it might help to disperse
the crowds as may be explained by a second report, so the
Mothers of the Believers prepared to flee from the turmoil, but
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/402; quoted in Dawr al-Mar'ah al-Siyaasi, p. 340
" Tareekh al-Madinah, 2/298
'31 Kinaanah ibn 'Adiyy ibn Rabee'ah ibn 'Abd al-'Uzza ibn 'Abd Shams ibn
'Abd Manaaf alL'Abshami
Dawr al-Mar'ah asSiyaasi, p. 340
['I Siyar A'laam al-Nibala', 2/237
'61 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/401

"

556

'Utbm;m Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Noorayn

their departure was not aimed only at escaping the turmoil, so it
was not merely an escape; rather it was an attempt to save
' U t h m h from the hands of those who were deceived, among
whom was Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, the brother of 'Aa'ishah
(%), who had tried to get him to follow her to Hajj, but he had
refused. What led to this attempt on her part to get him to follow
her and his refusal to do so, was so obvious that Hanzalah the
scriberll was surprised when Muhammad refused to follow
'Aa'ishah. He compared this refusal with his following of the
people from the regions and said: 0 Muhammad, the Mother of
the Believers is calling you but you do not follow her, and the
wolves[21 of the Arabs are calling you to something that is not
permissible, and you follow them. But he refused.
'Aaishah (%) said: By Allih, if I could stop them, I would do
it.[31 These words of hers, which she said after trying to persuade
her brother, indicate that she had begun her attempt to make the
rebels disperse from besieging 'Uthmh and to stir up public
opinion against them from the time they first started to think of
going to Makkah. T h ~ sis what was confirmed by Imam Ibn al'Arabi, who said: It was narrated that their leaving - i.e., the
leaving of the Mothers of the Behevers with a number of the
SaEbak -was meant as a means to put an end to the turmoil, in the
hope that the people would follow their mothers, the Mothers of
[ ~ 'listen to
the Believers, respect the sanctity of their ~ r o ~ h e tand
their words, as they used to come from the furthest horizons to
listen to them.15] In other words, their leaving for Makkah was an
attempt to disperse these crowds, because it was the custom of the
people to ask then opinion and consult them, and they - may
All31 be pleased with them all - never imagined that it would
['I Hanzalah ibn Rabee' al-Tameemi, who used to write down the Revelation for

the Messenger of AUgh (B),m d was called the scribe (al-kaatib).
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/401
[I' ibid.
[41 al-'Awamim m i n al-Qawaasim, p. 156
[" Dmor al-Ahr'ah dSiyaasi, p. 342

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

557

reach a point where these people would kill the caliph (&).I1]

How the female Sahtah dealt with the situation
(a) Asma' bint 'Umays $+
Asma' bint 'Umays hied to do the same thing as the Mother
of the Believers 'Aa'ishah had done. She sent word to her two
sons, Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr and Muhammad ibn ~a'far['l ,
saying: The lamp consumes itself in order give light to the people,
so do not indulge in sin for something that will benefit someone
else. The thing that you are trying to achieve now will end up
being for someone else later on, so beware lest your actions today
lead to regret. But they would not listen and they left angrily,
saying: We will never forget what 'Uthmh did to us. And she
said: All he did to you was command you to adhere to the way of
All~h.'~
And
~ it was said that this conversation took place
between Layla bint Asma' and her two brothers.141
In this case, she was referring to when the people of the
regions had come to Madinah then come back again after they
had debated with 'Uthmgn (&), and he had debated with them
and established proof against them, then they pretended that they
were returning to their homelands, then they soon came back,
claiming that 'Uthmh had sent a man with instructions that the
people be killed, including - or so they claimed - Muhammad ibn
~ ] is probably what Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was
Abi ~ a k r . [ This
referring to when he said: We will never forget what 'Uthmgn did
to us. But 'Uthmh denied having anything to do with this letter
and he said: Either bring two men to witness against me, or I will
give you my oath that I never wrote (the letter) or told anyone else
op. dt., p. 343
Muhammad ibn Ja'far ibn Abi Taalib, whose mother was Asma' bint 'Umays
al-Khash'amiyyah. He was born in Abyssinia, and was present at Siffeenwith
'AIi, and was with his brother Muhammad in Egypt when he was killed.
[31 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/202
[41 op. cit., 5/202
['I Dawr al-Mar'uh alSiyaasi, p. 343
['I

'Uthsn Ibn 'M%n
4 Dhun-Noorayn

i

to write (it). It is possible that a letter could be forged and falsely
attributed to a man, or his signature or seal could be forged.['l
Asma' (+) was aware of what as happening, namely plots to
shake the foundation of the Islamic state and depose 'Uthmh ibn
'Affsn (&) from the caliphate. Hence her attitude towards her two
sons and her clear understanding of the matter caused her not to
be influenced by the fact that she was a mother, and she took the
right stance with regard to this clear situation. This attitude is
undoubtedly very significant and gives a clear image of the
dignity and good character of the noble ~ahiibah.~~~

i

558

(b) al-Sa'bah bint al-Hadrami
When the siege intensified, al-Sa'bah bint al-Hadrami asked
her son Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-All& to speak to ' U t h h and make
him change his mind about exposing himself to danger and not
allowing the Sdbah to come to his defence or seeking help from
the governors of other provinces. Al-Sa'bah bint al-Hadrami went
out and said to her son Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-All&: The siege of
'Uthmh has intensified; why don't you speak to him and make
him change his mind?[31This report clearly shows that al-Sa'bah
was concerned about 'Uthmh (41, and that Umm 'Abd-All& ibn
Raafi' was also concerned about the matter and was following
developments as the turmoil progressed; r41 as she is the one who
narrated this incident from al-Sa'bah bint al-~adrami.~~]
This was the attitude of the Muslim women in general, a
balanced attitude that was able to see things as they really were,
despite the clouds that were surrounding the scene. Whatever the
case, this was the attitude of all the Sahiibah ( &),r6s

[I1 alL'Awaasim min ai-Qawaasim, p. 120

I'

Dawr al-Mar'ah al-Siyaasi, p. 544
p. 345

'31 Dawr nl-Mar'ah aI-Siyaasi,

ibid.
lil op. cit., p. 345
16] op. cit., p. 345, 346.

I['

I

I

The rebels' ocm~ationof Madinah

559

'VVAo led the peopfe in Hajj &at year? Did Wthm&n
ask the governors for help?
Who led the people in H a j in 35 AH?
'Uthmh summoned 'Abd-AllSh ibn 'Abbaas and told him to
lead the people in Hajj that year. Ibn 'Abbaas said to him: Let me
stay with you and be by your side, 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, to
confront these people, for by All&, fighting in jihad against these
rebels is dearer to me than Hajj. 'Uthmsn said to him: I insist that
you lead the Muslims in Hajj. So Ibn 'Abbaas had no choice but to
obey the caliph. 'Uthmh wrote a letter that he sent with Ibn
'Abbaas to be read out to the Muslims on Hajj, in which he
explained what was going on with those who had rebelled
against him, his attitude towards them, and their demands on
him.['' This is what was said in the letter of 'Uthmh addressed to
the Muslims on the occasion of Hajj in 35 AH:
In the name of All&, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
From the slave of AllSh, 'Uthmsn the Ameer al-Mu'mineen to the
believers and Muslims. Peace be upon you. I praise Allih besides
Whom there is no other god. To proceed: I remind you of Allah,
may He be glorified and exalted, Who has blessed you and guided
you to Islam, and has saved you from misguidance and disbelief,
and has shown you clear signs, bestowed abundant provision
upon you, granted you victory over your enemy and bestowed
His blessings upon you. AllSh
says, and His word is true:

"And Hegave you ofall that you askedfor, and ifyou count the
Blessings ofAllLh, never will you be able to count them. Verily,
man is indeed an extreme wrongdoer, a disbeliever (an extreme
ingrate who denies Allih's Blessings by disbelief, and by

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

worshipping others besides All&, and by disobeying All& and
(Ibraaheem 14:34)
His Prophet Muhammad g)''

"0 you who believe! Fear Allih (by doing all f h t He has
ordered and by abstaining from all that He h s forbidden) as
He should be feared. (Obey Him, be thankful to Him, and
remember Him always,) and die not except in a state of Islam
[as Muslims (with complete submission to Alliih)]. And hold
fast, all ofyou together, to the Rope of Allih (i.e. this Qur'iin),
and be not divided among yourselves, and remember Allih's
Favour on you, for you were enemies one to another but He
joined your hearts together, so t h t , by His Grace, you became
brethren (in Islamic Faith), and you were on the brink of a pit
of Fire, and He saved you from it. Thus Allth makes His
Ayaat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,
etc.,) clear to you, that you may be guided. Let there arise out
of you a group of people inviting to all that is good (Islam),
enjoining Al-Ma'roof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that
Islam orders one to do) and forbidding Al-Munkar
(polytheism and disbelief and all that Islam has forbidden).
And it is they who are the successful. And be not as those who
divided and differed among themselves after the clear proofs
had come to them. It is they for whom there is an awful
torment" (A1 'Imraan 3:102-105)

The rebels' o c a ~ a t i o nof Madinah

561

"And remember Alllih's Favour to you and His Covenant with
which He bound you when you said: 'We hear and we obey.'
And fear Allrih. Verily, Allrih is All-Knower of that which is in
(the secrets of your) hearts" (Al-Maa'idah 57)

"0 you who believe! I f a Faasiq (liar - mil person) comes to you
with any news, verify it, lest you should h a m people in
ignorance, and afterwards you become regretful for what you
have done. And know that among you there is the Messenger of
Ifhe
. were to obey you (i.e.follow your opinions and
Allrih (g)
desires) in much of the matter, you would surely be in trouble.
But Allrih has endeared the Faith to you and has beauti$ied it in
your hearts, and has made disbelief, wickedness and
disobedience (to Allrih and His Messenger @j hateful to you.
Such are they who are the rightly guided. (This is) a Gracefrom
All& and His Favour. And All& is All-Knowing, All-Wise"
(Al-Hujuraat 496-8)

*;

,
,

,5 r <

g
&Lll
,
,,,,,>,*,
<*. .
$3 ;
a
;> j$', gY, 21 & 4;*Yl
4
-,

,.&,f>,

I ,
r

>
*

d Pd ,1.11- 6

/'

->'I
A
3

"Verily, those who purchase a small gain at the cost ofAll&'s

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affh & Dhun-Noorayn

562

I

Covenant and their oaths, they shall have no portion in the
Hereafter (Paradise).Neither will All& speak to them nor look
at them on the Day of Resurrection nor will He purify them, and
they shall have a painful torment" (A1 'Imraan 3:77)

"So kep your duty to All& andfear Him as much as you c m ;
listen and obey, and spend in charity; that is better for
yourselves. And whosoever is savedfvom his m n covetousness,
then they are the successful ones" (At-Taghaabun6416)

., +
,-,
. << ?I3
,I -+
&Yi-.%&,I
,,i.

2; G*3
J

'.

? -',
I$ 4+& k4b$

,I

@A&

,

.

,

- ",
; $ "'
;.. &$$ %$-cl 61 a GJ & 3 .&
'
,>
.
u
,
+

> I CI,',

,

5

,,

,*

;9*&L4>-4f
Ell

i

+

,

&,3

;&$ji+3qL&,J rol,*L;5;1;oj & 2 k- j,
sc
I-@- y,.5: SO ;G +
&$< 2 :*
GLP' &*3 , , . - ,
J
'
-.
"

"'3

"8,

$
,'

,*'

+
,

*/,

,

,
, ,<,
,..,,., r,<
'&,
. S>*p
q 4 1 G333 kv:
r.U 3 3 *.

el-?

+

,/

LP

c
4,

<;:

.> *
.,

-4

.", .c

1-11

S16>

IU

.,
*
!'"
M
., J ~ L $ ~ ~ ~ & ~ $ ; O & , I
' 5,';

.LY&,9..ii

1.1

" , 5.

.,'W

,

,.

J+

. &GO

(>,**

4dA

a,,

,I

$ /'

fu,

5s* dig
,",>,*$

!+&
L y-\

,,~
+
,

b&

,3 ,
~ $ 1

"And fulfil the Covenant of Allih (Bay'ah : pledge for Islam)
when you have covenanted, and break not the oaths after you
have confirmed them - and indeed you have appointed Alllih
your surety. Verily, Allih ?mows what you do. And be not like
her who undoes the thread which she has spun, after it has
become sfrmg, by taking your oaths as a means of deception
among yourselves, lest a nation should be more numerous than

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

563

another nation. Alllih only tests you by this (i.e. who obeys
All& andfulfils All&'s Covenant and who disobeys Alllih and
breaks Allcih's Covenant). And on the Day of Resurrection, He
will certainly make clear to you that wherein you used to differ
(i .e . a believer confesses and believes in the Oneness ofAlllih and
in the Prophethood of Prophet Muhammad
which the
disbeliever denies and that is their difference amongst them in
the life of this world). And had Alllih willed, He could have
made you (all) one nation, but He sends astray whom He wills
and guides whom He wills. But you shall certainly be called to
account for what you used to do. And make not your oaths, a
means of deception among yourselves, lest a foot should slip
afer beingfirmly planted, and you may have to taste the evil
(punishment in this world) of having hindered (men)from the
path of Alllih (i.e. belief in the Oneness of Alllih and His
Messenger, Muhammad @), and yours will be a great torment
(i .e. tkefire of Hell in the Hereafter).And purchase not a small
gain at the cost ofAlllihrs Covenant. Verily, what is with All%
is betterfor you ifyou did but know. Whatever is with you, will
be exhausted, and whatever is with Alllih (of good deeds) will
remain. And those who are patient, W e will certainly pay them
a reward in proportion to the best of what they used to do" (AnNakl16:91-96)

"0 you who believe! Obey All% and obey the Messenger
(Muhammad @J, and those of you (Muslims) who are in
authority. (And) i f you differ in anything amongst yourselves,
f you believe in Alllih
refer it to Alllih and His Messenger (g)i,
and in the Last Day. That is better and more suitableforfinal
determination" (An-Nisa' 459)

564

'Uthmsn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

"Alllih has promised those among you who believe and do
righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them
succession to (the present rulers) in the land, as He granted it
to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority
to practise their religion which He has chosen for them (i.e.
Islam). And He will surely, give them in exchange a safe
security after their fear (provided) they (believers) worship Me
and do not associate anything (in worship) with Me. But
whoever disbelieved after this, they are the Faasiqoon
(rebellious, disobedient to Alliih)" (An-Noor 2455)

"Verily, those who give Bay'ah (pledge) to you (0 Muhammad
@j they are giving Bay'ah (pledge) to All&. The Hand of All&
is over their hands. Then whosoever breaks his pledge, breaks it
only to his own harm; and whosoever &lfils what he has
covenanted with Alllih, He will bestow on him a great reward"
(Al-Fath 48:lO)
To proceed: AU2h wants you to hear and obey, and to be
united, and He warns you against disobedience, division and
dissent. He has told you about the behaviour and attitude of those
who came before you, and He has told you of that so that you will
have no excuse if you disobey Him. So accept the advice of Allsh,
may He be glorified and exalted, and beware of His punishment,

The rebels' occuvation of Madfhah

565

for you will never find any nation that was doomed but that came
about after they were divided, unless they had a leader to rally
behind. When you are divided, you are not going to pray all
together, All2h will give your enemies power over you and you
will violate the sanctity of one other. When that happens, then
Islam will no longer be strong and will be broken up into sects.
All2h says:

"Verily, those who divide their religion and break up into sects
(all kinds of religious sects), you (0 Muhammad @) have no
concern in them in the least. Their affair is only with Allih,
Who then will tell them what they used to do" (Al-An'aam
6:159).

I advise you to pay heed to what Allsh has enjoined upon you
and to beware of His punishment. Shu'ayb (!@) said to his people:
*,<
3
,r

' > ,-:
/ /'
-,>-

31

4,

,322, 2 *
$$
;
LL+,+J$C;&$;$~~$

p9 "bi L 'g $=&2
,- A *I&

,>. ::/,

i-,-;

4>, ,
w 5I

I>

3-;

, " .<,a < *
LL 3CJL \y*

"And 0 my people! Let not my ~ h i ~ a a cause
~ ~ l 'you to suffer
thefate similar to that of the people of Noh (Noah) or of Hood or
of Saalih (Saleh),and the people of Loot c o t ) are not far offfrom
you! And askforgiveness of your Lord and turn unto Him in
repentance. Verily, my Lord is Most Merciful, Most Loving"
(Hood 1139, 90).
To proceed: These people who were involved in this matter
[I1 (V.11:89) i.e. separation, enmity,

anger and opposition, because of your
disbelief in the Oneness of AlEh (Monotheism), and your worship of the idols,
and your defrauding of the people (in their things), and y o u giving of short
measure and weights to the people.

566

' U W n Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

presented themselves to others as calling them to the Book of
All& and the h t h , and claimed that they were not seeking
worldly gains or competing in worldly matters. But when the
truth was presented to them, they responded in different ways.
Some accepted the truth and were content with it when it was
shown to them; some turned away from the truth and ignored it,
wanting their own way with no right (to do that). I have lived too
long for them and they are rushing to seize a position of authority,
so they are trying to hasten my death. They wrote to you and told
you that they were content with the deal that I had given them,
and I am not aware that I changed my mind or went against the
deal that I had made with them. They claimed that they want
justice to be done (hadd punishments), and I said: Cany out the
hadd punishment against anyone who you know deserves a hadd
punishment and against anyone who has wronged you, whether
he is a relative or a stranger. They said: The Book of AllSh is being
recited. I said: Anyone may recite it without misinterpreting it in a
way different than what was revealed. They said: The one who has
been deprived should given provision and wealth should be given
to those who deserve it, and there should be no transgression with
regard to the khums or the zakaah; people of ability and honesty
should be appointed as governors and the rights of those who
have been wronged should be restored to them. I accepted that
and showed patience towards them. I am writing to you when
those who are involved in this matter are seeking to hasten my
death and they have prevented me from praying; they have
stopped me from going to the mosque and have confiscated
whatever they could in Madkah. I have written this letter to you
when they are giving me three choices: either they will settle the
score with me regarding every man I have dealt with, whether I
was right or wrong, without leaving anyone out; or I should give
up the caliphate and they will appoint someone else; or they will
send word to the troops and people of Madinah who will obey
them and they will disown the one whom All* enjoined them to
hear and obey. I said to them: As for settling the scores with me,
the caliphs who came before me sometimes got things wrong and

The rebels' occupation of Madihah

567

someiimes got them right, but there were no scores to be settled
with any of them. I am'certain that they want to kill me. As for me
giving up my position, for them to beat me with an iron stirrup is
dearer to me than my giving up what I am doing for the sake of
AllSh and the caliphate. As for them saying that they will send
word to the troops and people of Madinah so that they will no
longer obey me, I am not in charge of what you do and I did not
force them before to hear and obey, rather they offered their
obedience willingly, seeking the pleasure of AllSh and harmony
among the Muslims. Whoever among you is seeking worldly gain
will not get anything but that which AllSh has decreed for him,
and whoever is seeking the Countenance of AllSh and the
Hereafter, the interests of the ummah, the pleasure of A U a and
and the
following the good ways of the Messenger of All& (g)
two caliphs who came after him ( &), it is only All& Who gives
reward for that and I have no reward for you. Even if I gave you
the whole world, it would not be the price for your religious
commitment and it would not help you in any way. So fear AllSh
and seek reward with Him. If anyone among you is content to turn
back on his heels, that is not what I want for him, and A%h does
not want you to break your covenant with Him. As for the choices
that you are giving me, they are all about dismissing me from my
position and appointing someone else. I have controlled myself
and those who are with me. I thought of the decree of All& and
blessings can only be bestowed and taken away by All&, may He
be glorified. I did not want to set a precedent that would lead to
division and bloodshed. I adjure you by All& and by Islam to
only follow the truth and direct me to follow the truth; do not
wrong the people of tmth. Let justice rule between us as All& has
commanded you. I adjure you by All& Who has enjoined you to
follow His commandments, for All& says and His Word is true:

"And come not near to the orphan's property except to improve

'Uthm2n Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

568

it, until he attains the age of full strength. And fulfil (evey)
covenant. Verily, the covenant will be questioned about" (AlIsra' 17:34).
Thus I seek to be free of guilt before All& (cf. Al-A'raaf
7:164), and perhaps you may heed this reminder. To proceed: I do
not free myself from blame.

"And I free not myself (fvm the blame). Verily, the (human)
selfis inclined to evil, except when my Lord bestows His Mercy
(upon whom He wills). Verily, my Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful" (Yoosuf 1253).
If I punished some people, I only did it for a good reason, and
I repent to Alliih .% for everything that I have done. I seek His
forgiveness, for no one forgives sins but Him. The mercy of my
Lord encompasses all things, and no one despairs of the mercy of
Allsh but those who have gone astray. He accepts repentance
from His slaves and forgives bad deeds, and He knows what you
are doing. I ask All& .% to forgive me and you, and to reconcile
this ummah and make evil abhorrent to them. Peace be upon you
and the mercy of Allsh and His blessings, 0 believers and
Muslims.
Ibn 'Abbaas said: I read this letter to them in Makkah one day
before al-~arwi~ah.[']

Did 'Uthmh ask the governors to support him?
Sayf ibn 'Umar claimed in his report narrated by al-Tabari
that when 'Uthmk was besieged, he wrote to his governors in the
regions asking them for help, and Mu'gwiyah sent Habeeb ibn
Maslamah al-Fihri at the head of an army; 'Abd-Allsh ibn Sa'd in
''1 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/425-431

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

569

Egypt did likewise, sending Mu'swiyah ibn Hudayj; and alQa'aa' ibn ' A m came from Kufah leading his forces.['' But this
claim is not in accordance with the attitude of 'Uthmcn who dealt
with the turmoil by erring on the side of caution and refraining
from taking action; neither is it in accordance with his certainty
that he would be killed. It is contrary to his attitude of turning
away those of the senior Sahib& and their sons who wanted to
defend him. He even emphatically forbade his slaves and freed
slaves to fight; rather he promised manumission to those of them
who refrained from fighting, as we shall see. But it can be
imagined that just as some of the Sahibak hastened to defend him
without him asking them to, and despite his many attempts to
turn them away, so many large groups of Muslim soldiers in the
other regions hastened to defend the wronged caliph on their own
initiative, or on the instructions of their commanders. We should
not think that a man such as Mu'swiyah, who was so close to
'Uthmih, would be content to sit down and do nothing and not
send an army of troops to defend him. We cannot assume that
men such as 'Uthmsn's supporters in Egypt - led by Mu'swiyah
ibn Hudayj, Maslamah ibn Mukhallad and other Muslim heroes would sit and wait until the caliph was killed before making a
move to avenge him and expose themselves to being killed in that
way. Rather what we can imagine and assume is that troops from
the regions were on the move, coming to Madinah to support the
caliph without him asking them to do that.12]

The last khutbah delivered by 'Uthmsn (&)
The last public meeting that 'Uthm2n had with the Muslims
was several weeks into the siege, when he summoned the people
and they all gathered in response, both the Saba'i rebels and the
peaceful residents of Madinah, foremost among whom were 'Ali,
Talhah and az-Zubayr. When they sat before him, he said to them:
Allsh, may He be glorified and exalted, has given you this world
['I

Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/379,380
al-Dawlah al-Islarn~yyahji'Asr al-Khulafa' al-Raashzdeen, p. 278, 279

570

' U t h d n Ibn 'Affiin 4 Dhun-Nooravn

as a means of seeking the Hereafter; He has not given you this
world for you to be content with it. This world is transient but the
Hereafter will abide forever, so do not let that which is transient
distract you from that which will abide forever. Show preference
to that which will abide forever over that which is transient. This
world will come to an end and your destiny will be with Alliih.
Fear All&, may He be glorified and exalted, for fear of Him is a
protection and a shield against His wrath and punishment.
Adhere to the main body of the Muslims and do not break into
factions. AllSh says:

"And hold fast, all ofyou together, to the Rope ofAll& (i.e. this
Qur'lin), and be not divided among yourselves, and remember
Alllih's Favour on you, for you were enemies one to another but
He joined your hearts together, so that, by His Grace, you
became brethren (in Islamic Faith), and you were on the brink of
a pit of Fire, and He saved you from it. Thus Alllih makes His
Ayaat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,
etc.,) clear to you, that you may be guided" (A1 'Imraan 3:103).
Then he said to the Muslims: 0 people of Madinah, I bid you
farewell, and I ask Allsh to appoint a good caliph for you after I
am gone. By All&, I shall never enter upon anyone again after
this day until AllSh lets His decree come to pass. I shall leave these
rebels outside the door and I shall not give them anything that
they might use against you in religious or worldly terms, until
All* decrees whatever He wills. He commanded the people of
Madkah to leave and swore an oath urging them to do so, so they
left except for al-Hasan, Muhammad, Ibn az-Zubayr and others
like them, who sat at 'UthmSn's door on their fathers' orders, and

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

571

many people gathered around them. And 'Uthmgn stayed in the
house until he met his fate.'']

The anarvdorn of "UthmSn (44
In addition to the armies coming from the regions to support
the caliph, the days of Hajj had ended quickly and scores of
pilgrims were now marching towards Madinah to support the
caliph too, especially since 'Abd-All* ibn 'Abbaas, 'Aa'ishah and
others were coming to defend 'Uthmgn. News reached the rebels
that the pilgrims wanted to come to support ' U M n . When they
heard that news, along with news of the hatred that the people of
the regions felt towards them, the Shaytaan whispered to them
and tempted them, and they said: Nothing can save us from what
we have let ourselves in for but killing this man, and that will
distract the people from us.[']

The last day of the siege and the dream that 'Uthman saw
On the last day of the siege -which is the day on which he was
killed - 'Uthmiin (&) fell asleep and that morning he told the
people: They are going to kill me today.13] Then he said: I saw the
Prophet (@) in my dream. Abu Bakr and 'Umar were with him,
and the Prophet (g)
said: 0 'Uthmiin, break your fast with us. He
was fasting, and he was killed that day.[41

How he was killed
The rebels attacked the house and were confronted by alHasan ibn 'Ali, 'Abd-AU2h ibn az-Zubayr, Muhammad ibn
Talhah, Marwaan ibn al-Hakam and Sa'eed ibn al-'Aas, and other
sons of the Sahibah who stayed with them. Fighting broke out and
' U t h d n called to them: AU6h AEh; I don't want you to defend
['I Tareel& at-Taban, 5/399,400
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/402
I'[ at-Tabaqaaf by Ibn Sa'd, 3/75; Fitnat Maqtal 'Uihrnin, 1/172

at-Tabaqaat, 3/75. The report is hasan because of corroborating evidence.
Fitnaf Maqtal 'UthmLin, 1/175

572

' U h n h Ibn 'Affsn 4 Dhun-Nooravn

me. But they insisted, and 'UthmWs slaves came in to defend

him,but he told them not to do that, rather he announced that
whoever among them refrained from fighting would be a free
man.['] 'Uthmtin said clearly and decisively, as the caliph who
was to be obeyed: I insist that everyone who believes that he is
obliged to hear and obey should restrain himself and refrain from
fighting.[21 The only justification for saying that was that
'Uthmh was certain that he would become a martyr, based on
Hence he did not want blood to
the testimony of the Prophet (B).
be shed on his account or division to arise among the Muslims
because of him.I3]
Al-Mugheerah ibn al-Akhnas was among those who had
done Hajj, then hastened to leave Mina after two days instead of
three, along with a group who had performed Hajj with him. He
managed to come to 'Uthmh before he was kiIled; he entered the
house to protect him and said: What excuse will we have before
All* if we leave you when we are able to stop them until we die?
The rebels came and wanted to burn down the door and portico,
but the people in the house leapt up to stop them, whilst 'Uthmh
was praying. Al-Mugheerah ibn al-Akhnas, al-Hasan ibn 'Ali,
Muhammad ibn Talhah, Sa'eed ibn alL'Aas, Mamaan ibn alHakam and Abu Hurayrah fought and did their utmost, but
'Uthmh sent word to them telling them to leave and not fight,
then he went back to his prayer. He started to read:

"Ta-Ha. [These letters are one of the miracles of the Quv'in, and
none but Allih (Alone) knows their meanings]. W e have not
sent down the Qur'in unto you (0~uhamrnad@) to cause you
distress, But only as a Reminder to those who fear (Allih)" (Ti-

al-Dawlah nl-lslamiyyahfi 'Asr al-Khulafa'al-Raashideen, p. 282; al-Bidmyah wahNihmyah, 7/190
al-'Awaasim min al-Qmaasim, p. 133
[31 al-Dmlah al-lslamiyyahfi 'Asr al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen, p. 283
['I

The rebels' occuuation of Madinah

573
-

He was a fast reader, and he was not disturbed by what he
heard. He carried on reading and did not make any mistake or
stumble, until he came to the end of the soorah before they
reached him. Then he recited a du'aa' and sat down and recited
the verse

"Many similar ways (and mishaps of life) werefaced by nations
(believers and disbelievers) that have passed away before you (us
you have faced in the battle of Uhud), so travel through the
earth, and see what was the end of those who disbelieved (in the
Oneness of Allih, and disobeyed Him and His Messengers)"
(A1 'Imrmn 3:137).
On that day, four young men of Quraysh were injured: alHasan ibn 'Ali, 'Abd-AUSh ibn az-Zubayr, Muhammad ibn
Haatib and Marwaan ibn al-~akam.['] Al-Mugheerah ibn d Akhnas, Niyaar ibn 'Abd-AUSh d-Aslamir2' and Ziyaad al-Fihri
were killed. 'Uthmh managed to persuade the defenders to leave
the house and leave him alone with the rebels. So no one was left
in the house except 'Uthmh and his family, and there was no
defender or guard between him and the people, then he (a)
opened the door of the house.13]
After those who had wanted to defend him had left the house,
'Uthmh spread the Mus-haf before him and began to read from it,
and at that time he was fasting. Then one of the besiegers, whose
name is not mentioned in the reports, entered upon him.When
'Uthmh (4)saw him he said to him: Between me and you there
So the man went out and left him alone.
is the Book of AU~I.[~]
['I Fimat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 1/169; Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/404. A saheeh report.
12] Al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 184,185; al-Biduayuh wa'n-Nihaayah,

7/196
13' Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 1/188
I'[ Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/405,406

1

' U W n lbn 'Aff2n 4 Dhun-Nooravn

574

But no sooner had he left but another one came in. He was a man
from Banu Sadoos who was called al-Mawt al-Aswad (the Black
Death). He strangled him before striking him with the sword. He
said: By Alliih, I never saw anything more soft when strangling. I
strangled him until I felt that his soul was moving in his body like
a jinni[ll. Then he struck him with his sword, and 'UthmSn tried
to protect himself with his hand, but he cut it off. 'Uthmiin said:
That was
By AllSh, it was the first hand to write al-~ufassal.~~~
because he was one of the scribes who wrote down the
Revelation, and he had been the first one to write the Mus-kaf
as dictated by the Messenger of All& (g).
'Uthmiin (&) was
killed when the Mus-kaf was in front of him, and when his hand
was cut off, the blood spilled onto the Mus-kaf that was in front of
him, and it fell upon the verse:

"So All% will suficefor you against them. And He is the AllHearer, the All-Knower" (Al-Baqarah 2:137).[~'
According to another report, the first one to strike him was a
man who was called Rumaan al-Yamaani, who struck him with a
short, hooked staff.
When they surrounded him, his wife Naa'ilah bint alFaraafisah said: Whether you kill him or spare him, he used to
stay up all night, reciting the entire Qur'k in a single rak'ah.14]
Naa'ilah defended her husband 'Uthm2n and shielded him, and
she received several blows of the sword on her hands. Sawdaan
ibn Hamraan went to her and struck her fingers, and cut them off.
She turned away and he poked her in the hips.[51
[I1

Tnreekh Ibn Khayaat, p. 174,175. Its isnrid is saheeh or hasan.

" Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/398

op. cit., 5/398. The report has numerous isntds, which when taken together
bring it to the level of hasan due to corroborating evidence.
'41 at-Tabaqaat, 3/76; Fitnat M q t a l 'Uthmtn, 1/191
[I' Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/406,407
"I

The rebels' occuvation of Madinah

575

When one of the slaves of 'Uthmh, whose name was Nujayh,
saw what was happening, he was distressed by the killing of
'Uthmh. Nujayh attacked Sawdaan ibn Hamraan and killed him,
and when Qutayrah ibn Fulaan al-Sakooni saw that Nujayh had
killed Sawdaan, he attacked Nujayh and killed him.Then another
slave of 'Uthmh, whose name was Subayh, attacked Qutayrah
ibn Fulaan and killed him.So there were four who were kiUed in
the house, two martyrs and two criminals. The martyrs were
'Uthmh and his slave Nujayh, and the criminals were Sawdaan
and Qutayrah, who were both from the tribe of Sakoon. When
'Uthmgn (6had
) been killed, a caller from among the Saba'is
cried out: It cannot be the case that the man's blood is permissible
for us and his property is forbidden for us; his property is
permissible for us too. So they ransacked the house, and the Saba'i
thugs did a lot of mischief in the house. They ransacked
everything, even taking the jewellery that the women were
wearing. One of the Saba'is whose name was Kultkoom al-Taleebi
attacked 'UthmWs wife Naa'ilah and took the abayah that she
was wearing, then he poked her in the hips and said to her: Woe
to your mother, what a perfect backside. 'UthmSs slave Subayh
saw that and heard the ugly words he said to Naa'ilah, so he
attacked him with a sword and killed him.['] Then one of the
Saba'is attacked the slave and killed him. After the Saba'is had
finished ransacking the house of 'Uthmiin, they called out: Let us
go and raid the bayf al-maul before anyone else gets there, and take
whatever is in it. The guards of the bayt al-maul heard their voices,
but there was nothing in it except two containers of food, so they
said: Save yourselves, for these people are after worldly gains.
The Saba'is attacked the bayt al-maal and ransacked it.[21
The Saba'i rebels achieved their aim of killing the caliph. But
after that, many of the thugs and hooligans who had followed
them stopped and thought. They had never thought that it would
'I1

op. cit., 5/407

'*I

ibid

576

' U M n Ibn ' A f f k 4 Dhun-Nooravn

end with them killing him, but the devilish Saba'is had fooled
them and used them to stir up trouble against 'Uthmh. But
killing him was something that they found abhorrent and could
not accept. These thugs regretted it, and there happened to them
the same as happened to the Children of Israel when they
worshipped the calf: some of them regretted it as All& says:

"And the people of Moosa (Moses) made in his absence, out of
their ornaments, the image of a calf @r worship). It had a
sound (as if it was mooing}. Did they not see that it could
neither speak to them nor guide them to the way? They took it
(for worship) and they were Zaalimoon (wrongdoers). And
when they regretted and saw that they had gone astray, they
(repented and) said: 'If our Lord have not merq upon us and
forgive us, we shall certainly be ofthe losers"' (Al-A'raaf 7:148149).'l'
The righteous people in Madfmh were grieved by the murder
of their caliph, and they began to say Inna Lillaahi wa inna ilayhi
raaji'oon (Truly, to Allih we belong and truly, to Him we shall
return), and wept. But what could they do when the rebel Saba'i
armies were occupying MadAmhand spreading mischief and
preventing its people from doing anything? The de facto ruler of
Madinah was the leader of the Egyptian rebels, alchaafiqi ibn
Harb al-'Akki, and they had with them the architect of their
devilish plans, 'Abd-All& ibn Saba', who was rejoicing greatly at
the achievement of his fiendish aims.

The rebels' occuuation of Madhah

577

The senior Sahabah commented on the murder of
'~thmiin~"
, as follows.
(a) az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam (&). When he learned of the
murder of 'Uthman, he said: May Allah have mercy on
'Uthman. Truly, to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we
shall return. It was said to him: The people are regretting it.
He said: They planned it for a long time, but it is as All&
says:

"And a barrier will be set between them and that which they
desire 1i.e. At-Tawbah (turning to Alllih in repentance) and the
accepting of Faith], as was done in the past with the people of
their kind. Verily, they have been in grave doubt" (Saba'34:54).
@) Talhah ibn 'Ubayd-Allah (&). When he learned of the
murder of 'Uthmh, he said: May All* have mercy on
'Uthman. Truly, to All& we belong and truly, to Him we
shall return. It was said to him: The people are regretting it.
He said: May they perish! And he recited the words of All&

"They await only but a single Sayhah (shout) which will seize
them while they are disputing! Then they will not be able to
make bequest, nor they will return to their family" (Ya-Seen
36:49, 50).
(c) 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib (&). When he learned of the murder of
'Uthman, he said: May Allah have mercy on 'Uthmh. Truly,
''I

al-Khulafa' al-Raashideen by al-Khaalidi, p. 190; al-Bidaayah warn-Nihaayah, 7 /
197

578

' U W n Ibn ' A f f h 4 Dhun-Noorayn

to Allah we belong and tnrly, to Him we shall return. It w a s
said to him: The people are regretting it. He recited the verse:

"(Their allies deceived them) like Shaytaan (Satan), when he
says to man : 'Disbelieve in All&.' But when (man) disbelieves
i n Allih, Shaytaan (Satan) says : ' I amfree of you, I fear All&,
the Lord of the 'Aalameen (mankind, jinn and a11 that exists)!'
So the end of both will be that they will be i n the Fire, abiding
therein. Such is the recompense of the Zaalimoou (i.e.
polytheists, wrongdoers, disbelievers i n All& and i n His
Oneness)" (Al-Hashr 5916, 17).
(d) Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqaas (4).
When Sa'd learned of that he
said: May Allah have mercy on 'Uthmh. Then he recited the
verse:

"Say (0Muhammad @) :'Shall W e tell you the greatest losers
in respect of (tlzeir) deeds?. 'Those whose efirts have been
wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring
good by their deeds. 'They are those who deny the Ayaat (proofs,
evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of their Lord
and the Meeting with Him (in the Hereaper). So their works are
i n vain, and on the Day of Resurrection, W e shall assign no
weight for them. 'That shall be their recompense, Hell; because
they disbelieved and took M y Ayaat (proofs, evidences, verses,

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

579

lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and My Messengers by way of
jest and mockery"' (Al-Knkf 18:103-106).
Then Sa'd said: 0 Allgh, make them regret it and make them
grieve, humiliate them then seize them.['] And Allgh answered
the prayer of Sa'd - who was a man whose prayers were answered
- and He seized everyone who had taken part in the murder of
'Uthmih, such as 'Abd-All31 ibn Saba', al-Ghaafiqi, al-Ashtar,
Hakeem ibn Jablah and Kinaanah al-Tajeebi, as they were all
killed later on.[']

The date of his murder, hi
martyred, his funeral and bur
The date of his murder
There is virtual consensus among historians as to the date of
'Uthmtin's murder. There is no dispute that it took place in
35 AH, apart from the report narrated from Mus'ab ibn
'Abd-Allah which says that it happened in 36 AH.[^] This is
an odd view which differs from the consensus. Those who
were of the first view are a large number, including 'AbdAll& ibn ' A m ibn 'Uthman, 'Aamir ibn Shurahbeel alSha'bi, Naafi' the freed slave of Ibn 'Umar, Makhramah ibn
Sulaymaan and many others.[41The historians did not differ
concerning the month in which he was killed, which was
Dhu'l-Hijjah. But after that, they differed as to the day and
hour. Of the many scholarly points of view, it seems most
likely to me is that he was martyred on the 18* of Dhu'lHijjah 35 AH.[^] As for the particular day of the week on
which he was killed, there are three views; the one which
seems most likely to me is the view of the majority, which is
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/407,408; al-Bidaayah warn-Nihaayah, 7/189
al-l(hulafh' al-Raashidoon by al-Khaalidi, p. 192
Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/435,436
14] Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmtn, 1/193,194
Is] Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/435

I'[

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Nooravn

580

that it was a Friday, because there is no stronger view that
contradicts the view of the majority.''] The time of his killing
was the morning. This is the view of the majority and there is
no stronger view that contradicts this majority view.IZ1

His age when he was martyred
There are conflicting reports about his age when he was
martyred, and this is an old dispute. At-Tabari palz) said: The
early generation before us differed as to how old he was.131 I
am inclined to think that he was eighty-two (82) years old
when he died. This is the view of the majority and is more
likely to be correct for a number of reasons, including the
following:
(a) This is the result of comparing the year of his birth with the
year of his martyrdom. He was born in the sixth year after
the Year of the Elephant, and he was martyred in 35 AH.
Subtracting the date of his birth from the date of his
martyrdom shows us his age at the time he was martyred.

@) It is the view of the majority and is not contradicted by any
stronger view.

His funeral and burial
On the day that he was killed, a number of the Sakibah
washed him, shrouded him and carried him, including
Hakeem ibn Hizaam, Huwaytib ibn 'Abd al-'Uzza, Abu'lJahm ibn Hudhayfah, Niyaar ibn Makram al-Aslami, Jubayr
ibn Mut'im, az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam, 'Aliibn Abi Taalib,
and a number of his companions and womenfolk, including
his two wives Naa'ilah and Umm al-Baneen bint 'Utbah ibn
Husayn, and two boys. Jubayr ibn Mut'im offered the
funeral prayer for him, or it was said that this was done by
['I op. cit., 5/436
"I op. cit., 5/437
'31

op. cit., 5/438

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

581

az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam, Hakeem ibn Hizaam, Marwaan
ibn al-Hakam or al-Miswar ibn ~akhramah!'] What seems
most likely in my view is that the one who offered the
funeral prayer for him was az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam,
because of the report narrated by Imam Ahmad in his
Musnad. This report states that az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwaam
(4)offered the funeral prayer for 'Uthmh and buried him,
and that was in accordance with 'Uthman's wishes.[21 I-Ie
was buried at night; this is supported by the report narrated
by Ibn Sa'd and al-Dhahabi, as they said that he was buried
between Maghrib and '1sha'.13' As for the report narrated by
al-Tabaraani via 'Abd al-Malik ibn al-Maajashoon who said:
I heard Maalik say: 'Uthmiin (A)was killed and was left
thrown on the garbage heap of Banu Fulaan for three
daysL4]
,the isnaad of this report is weak (da'eef)and its text
is false. Its zsnaad has two faults:
(a) The weakness of 'Abd al-Malik ibn Maajashoon who used to
narrate munkar (weird) reports from Imam Maalik.

@) This report is rnursal, because Imam Maalik was not alive at
the time of the murder of 'Uthmh (41, as he was not born
until 93 AH.'^^
As for the text of this report, it is false. Ibn Hazm said
concerning it: Whoever says that 'Uthman (&) was left
thrown on a trash heap for three days is lying. This is the
fabrication of one who has no shame. The Messenger of
All& (B)ordered that the bodies of the kuffkzr who had
been slain at Badr be thrown into a dry well, and he threw
dirt on top of them even though they were the worst of
' I al-Bidaayah wa'n-Nihaayah, 7/199

al-Mmusoo;?hal-Hudeethiyyah, Musnad al-Imam Ahmad, 1/555. The men of its
LsniLi are thiqaat (trustworthy), but it is munqati'.
11-Tabaqaat, 3/78; TareeWl al-Islam ('Ahd al-Khulufa'), p. 481
I' al-Mu'jam al-Kabeer, 1/78; Istishhaad 'Uthmtn, p. 194
d-Tahdheeb b y Tbn Hajar, 6/408

'Uthmgn Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooravn

582

Allsh's creation. And he ordered that ditches be dug for the
slain Jews of Qurayzah, who were the worst of those who are
buried in the ground. Burying believers and disbelievers
alike is obligatory for the Muslims. So how could anyone
who has any sense of shame claim that 'Ali, who was the
most prominent figure and those of the Snhibah who were in
Madimah, would leave a dead man on a garbage heap for
three days without burymg him?[']
It would not occur to any man of sound reason who is free
from Raafih influences that they would leave their leader like
that without burying him for three days, no matter how strong
those evildoers were who had come to besiege him and kill him.
The Sahibah, as their Lord described them, strove in the way of
All* and h d not fear the blame of the blamers (al-Maa'idah
5:54). Rather these reports are fabrications which were inserted
into the history books by the ~aafidis.'~'

The innocence of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr (&) with regard
to the murder of 'UthmBn (4)
The one who killed 'Uthmh (6
was
) an Egyptian man. The
reports do not clearly state his name, but they say that he
was originally from the tribe of Sadoos and was black
skinned. He was nicknamed Jabalah because of the blackness
of his skin, and he was also known as al-Mawt al-Aswad (the
Black Death). Muhibb al-Deen al-Khateeb was of the view
that the killer was 'Abd-AllSh ibn Saba' himself, as he said: It
is proven that Ibn Saba' was with the Egyptian rebels when
they came from al-Fustaat to Madinah, and in all similar
events he was keen to work behind the scenes. Perhaps alMawt al-Aswad was a nickname that he wanted to h d e
behind in order to continue his plots to destroy slam.[^]
What supports this is the fact that Ibn Saba' was also black
[I1 al-Fad, 4/239,

240
'Aqeednt Ah1 al-Sunnah, 3/1091
13' al-'Awaasim mix al-Qawaasim, quoted from Fitnat Maqtal 'Uthmin, 1/207

The rebels' occupation of Madinah

583

skinned. It is narrated in a saheeh report that 'Ali described
him as evil and black skinned.[']
As for the accusation that Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr killed
' U M n with his arrow head, this is false. There are weak reports
which mention that, as well as texts which are regarded as odd
because they contradict the saheeh report which states that the
killer was an Egyptian man.r21 Dr. Yahya al-Yahya lists a number
of reasons why Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr is innocent in the
murder of ' U t W n , including the following:
went out to Basra to demand retaliation for the
(a) 'Aa'ishah (h)
killing of 'Uthmh. If her brother had been one of them she
would not have grieved for him when he was killed later on.
We will discuss that in detail when we speak of 'Ali ibn
Taalib (4)in sha Alllih.
(b) 'Ali (4)cursed the killers of 'Uthmh and disavowed them,
which implies that he did not let them become close to him
and did not appoint them to any position. But he appointed
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr as governor of Egypt. If
Muhammad had been one of them, 'ALi would not have
done that.
(c) The report narrated by Ibn 'Asaakir with his isnaad from
Muhammad ibn Talhah ibn Musarrif who said: I heard
Kinaanah the freed slave of Safiyyah bint Huyayy say: I was
present when 'Uthmsn was killed and I was fourteen years
old (at that time), She said: Was Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
involved in his killing at all? He said: AlIsh forbid. He
entered upon him and U
'said: 0 son of nly brother,
you cannot be the one who kills me; then he went out, and he
was not invalved in his killing at all.[31
This is supported by the report narrated by Khaleefah ibn
['I

Lisaail al-Mizaan, 3/290

12] Fimat Maqtal 'Uthrnh, 1/209

I'[ Manuiyaat Abi Makhnafji Tareekh at-Tabari, p. 243

584

'Uthmth Ibn ' A f f k & Dhun-Noorayn

Khayyaat and al-Tabari with isnaads whose men are trustworthy,
from al-Hasan al-Basri -who was one of those who were present
on the day of the siege1'] -which says that Ibn Abi Bakr took hold
of 'Uthmsn's beard and 'Uthmsn said: You are holding me in a
way that your father would not do. Then he went out and left
him.L2l
Thus it is clear that Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was innocent in
the murder of 'Uthmsn, just as the wolf was innocent of the blood
of Yoosuf. It is also clear that the reason for this accusation was
that he had entered upon him before the murder took place.L3]
Ibn Katheer (.&) stated that when 'Uthmsn (&) spoke to him, he
felt ashamed and went back, and he regretted his actions and
covered his face, and he tried to defend him, but to no avail.[4]

op. cit., p. 244; Tahdheeb al-Kamaal, 6/97
Mamiyalrt Abi Makhnaf, p. 244
'31 Fitnat Maqtal 'Ufhmin, 1/209
14] al-Biduayah warn-Nihaayah,7/193

['I
I''

--.-.

-

Attitude of the Sahdbah towards the
murder of 'Uthmsn (4)
-- --

Some history books have distorted the attitude of the Sahibah
towards the murder of 'Uthmgn. That is due to the Raafidi reports
that are quoted by many historians. The one who studies the
events of the turmoil mentioned in Tareekh al-Tabari and other
books of history through the reports of Abu Makhnaf, al-Waaqidi,
Ibn A'tham and other narrators may get the impression that the
Sahibah were the ones who were behind the conspiracy and
provoking turmoil. Abu Makhnaf had Shi'i inclinations and did
not refrain from accushg 'Ut$m&iof being the caliph who made
so many mistakes that he deserved what he got. In his reports,
Talhah appears as one of those who rebelled against ' U M n and
incited the people against him. The reports of al-Waaqidi are no
different from those of Abu Makhnaf, as they suggest that 'Amr
ibn al-'Aas came to Madinah and started to criticize 'Uthmh.
There are many Raafidi reports which accuse the Sahibah of
conspiring against 'Uthmh (4)and say that they are the ones
who stirred up turmoil and incited the people. These are all lies
and fabrication^.'^'
In contrast to the fabricated and weak Raafidi reports, the

586

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

books of the Muhadditheen (scholars of hadeeth) have, praise be to
Allfi, preserved for us the saheeh reports which show the Sahibah
as supporting and defending 'UthmZn, as having nothing to do
with his murder and seeking vengeance for him after he was
killed. Thus it is very far-fetched to imagine that they would have
anything to do with stirring up turmoil or provoking it.'''
The Saluibah ( &) are all innocent of shedding the blood of
'Uthmk. If anyone says otherwise, his words are false and no
evidence can be presented that reaches the level of being saheeh.
Hence Khaleefah narrated in his Tareekh from 'Abd al-A'la ibn alHaytham that his father said: I said to al-Hasan: Was there anyone
of the MuhijiriM or Ansir among those who killed 'Uthmh? He
said: No, they were thugs from Egypt. Imam al-Nawawi said:
None of the Sahibah took part in his killing; rather he was killed
by thugs and hooligans from the vile, low-class dregs of the tribes.
They ganged up against him and came from Egypt, and the
Sahiibah who were there were unable to ward them off, so they
besieged him until they killed him.[']
Al-Zubayr described them as thugs from the re 'ons
'Aa'ishah (&) described them as the dregs of the tribes.13 Ibn
Sa'd described them as the scum of the people who were united in
evil.[41 Ibn Taymiyah described them as evil rebels and
transgressors who had gone astray.151 Al-Dhahabi described
them as the essence of evil and cruelty.[61 Ibn al-'Imaad alHanbali described them in al-Shadharnut as evil people from the
trash of the tribes.I7]
These descriptions are borne out by the conduct of these
thugs from the time they began the siege until they killed the

T .

['I op. cit., 2/18
[*I

Shaheed al-Daar 'Uthmtn zbn 'Affaan by Ahmad al-Khuroof, p. 148

[31 Sharh al-Nmawi 'ala Saheeh Muslim, 5/148, Kitmb Fadaail alSaEbnh

Tahqeeq Mawaaqfal-Sahtbah, 1/481; Tabaqaat fin Sa'd, 3/71
Minhaq al-Sunnnh, 3/189-206
[q Duwal al-Islam b y al-Dhahabi, 1/12
Tdzqeeq Mmuaaqlfal-Sahtbah, 1/482, S h a h r a a t al-Dhahab, 1/40

[I'

i

I

Athtude of the Sahibah towards the murder of ' U M 4

587

caliph (&) unlawfully. How could they withhold food and water
from him when he was the one who had often paid from his own
pocket to supply water to the Muslims for free''] and he was the
one who had had spent a great deal of money on the people at
times of famine or calamity?i21'Ali mentioned this when he was
rebuking the besiegers and told them: 0 people, what you are
doing is nothing like the deeds of the believers or the disbelievers.
Do not withhold water or food from this man, for even the
Byzantines and Persians, when they take prisoners, give them
food and water.[31 The saheeh reports and the events of history
confirm that the Suhlibuh are innocent of inciting people against
'Uthmh or taking any part in the turmoil against him.I4I There
follow comments of the Sahibuk which show that they are
innocent of shedding the blood of 'Uthmh.

Praise of ah1 al-Bayt for 'Uthmh
innocence of shedding his blood

ir

The attitude of 'Aa'ishah the Mother of the Believers (&)
(a) It was narrated from Faatimah bint 'Abd al-Rahmaan alYashkuriyyah from her mother that she asked 'Aa'ishah, at
the request of her paternal uncle, saying: One of your sons
sends you greetings of sulanm and is asking you about
'Uthmin ibn 'Affh, as the people are talking a great deal
about him. She said: Whoever curses 'Uthmh, may All2h
curse him. By All&, he was sitting with the Prophet of Allih,
and the Messenger of All* (@) was leaning his back against
me, and Jibreel (A) was revealing Qur'h to him, and he was
saying, "Write, 'UthmSn." By AUih he would not have

['I Tahqeeq Mawaaq~al-Sahibah,1/482; al-Bukhaari, Kitaab Manaaqib 'Uthmrin, 4/

202
'31 Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/400

[41 Tahqeeq Mawaaqifal-SahaAbah,2/18

'Uthmsn Ibn 'Affsn & Dhun-Nooravn

588

reached such a status unless he was dear to All31 and His
~essen~er.~']

@) It was narrated from Masrooq that 'Aa'ishah said, when
'Uthm2n was killed: You left him like a clean garment, then
you decided to slaughter him like a ram. Masrooq said to
her: This is your doing; you wrote to the people telling them
to rebel against him. 'Aa'ishah said: No, by the One in Whom
the believers believe and the disbelievers disbelieve. I have
never written anything to them up till now.['] We have
already seen how the Saba'is told lies and wrote letters to the
people of the regions that they fabricated and falsely
attributed to 'Aa'ishah ($).
(c) When she heard of the death of 'UthmAn on her way back
from Makkah to Madinah, she went back to Makkah and
entered al-Masjid al-Haraam, and she went and hid behind
the Hijr, and the people gathered around her. She said: 0
people, the thugs from the various regions and the slaves of
Made enah got together because some thugs criticized this
one who has been slain for being wise and smart and for
appointing those who were young, even though people of
the same age had been appointed before him. (And they
criticized him) for increasing the area of the grazing lands,
although that had been done before and there was no
alternative. 'Uthmin debated with them and explained to
them, but when they could find no excuse they got upset and
hastened to attack him, so their actions proved to be different
from their words. They shed haraam blood and violated the
sanctity of the holy land, they took haraam wealth and
violated the sacred month. By Allgh, one finger of 'Uthmin is
better than an earthful of people like them. Protect
"I Tukqeeq Mmu'"aqifal-S&8buh, 1/378; al-Musnad, 6/205-261; al-Bidaayah wa'n-

Nihaayak, 7/219
Fitnat Muqtal ' U t h d n , 1/391; Tareekh Khaleefak, p. 176. Its isnM to 'Aa'ishah is
suheeh.

i

Attitude of the Sahiibah towards the murder of ' U t M &

589

yourselves by going after them so as to make an example of
them for others. By All&, if there was any wrongdoing on
'Uthmsn's part that led them to kill him, that wrongdoing
could be taken away from him like dross from gold or like
dirt from a garment when it is washed.[']
In contrast to the good picture that may be drawn from these
sound reports of the relationship between the Mother of the
Believers 'Aa'ishah and 'Uthmiin, there are still other reports
narrated by al-Tabari and others which depict the relationship
between 'Aa'ishah and 'Uthmzn as contrary to what we have
seen, and they distort the image of the positive role that she
played in defending the sacred limits of Allih and defending
'Uthmh (&), and her understanding of the games played by the
sabaris.["
The reports that were narrated in al-'Aqd al-Fareed, al-Aghaani,
Tareekh al-Ya'qoobi. Tareekh al-Mas'oodi and Ansaab al-Ashraaf and
the conclusions they reached concerning the political role played
by 'Aa'ishah during the era of 'Uthmik ibn 'Affh, may lead one
to criticize the political stance taken by 'Aa'ishah but they are not
to be relied on because they contradict the saheeh reports and
because they are based on weak reports.[31 Most of the reports
have no isnaad and those that do have isnaads have faulty
isnaads so they cannot be taken as evidence. This is in addition to
the fact that their texts are corrupt when compared to other
reports that are more sound and closer to the truth.14' Asma'
Muhammad Ahmad Ziyaadah has undertaken a study of the
isnaads and texts of the reports which speak of the political role
played by 'Aa'ishah in the events of the turmoil, and she criticized
the reports which speak of a difference of political opinion
between 'Aa'ishah and 'Uthmh, as narrated by at-Tabari and
['I Tareekh at-Tabari, 5/473,474

"' Dawr al-Marr& al-Siyaasifi 'Ahd al-Nabi wa'l-Khulafa' al-Raashideen, p. 352

13' See also concerning these false conclusions: al-Siddeeqah bint al-Siddeeq by al-

'"

'Aqqaad, p. 116-124
Dawr al-Mar'al? al-Siyaasi, p. 370

U
'-

590

Ibn 'Affh 4 Dhun-Noorayn

others, and she demonstrated that they are false. Then she said: It
would be more appropriate for us to ignore all of these reports - as
mentioned above - because they have not reached us through
proper channels, rather the way in which they have reached us is
via narrators who are accused of being Shi'is, liars and Raafidis.
But we examined them because they are widely known in most
modem studies, and in order to prove that they are worthless
reports. These reports -as is clear to us - try to create a history that
never happened at all, of conflict and enmity between 'Uthmh
and 'Aa'ishah, and between 'Uthmsn and all the ~ahibah.['l If it is
proven that 'Aa'ishah agreed with the rebels to incite the people
against 'Uthmh (&), one would expect her to give some
justification to the rebels, but there are no sound reports at all
to that effect. If any of these reports which speak of 'Aa'ishah's
attitude towards the killing of 'Uthmsn were sound, they would
take away the credibility of 'Aa'ishah (&) and the Sahibah who
took the same stance as her. This is something that we cannot
accept because of the true texts from All* and His Messenger
which confirm their credibility, which on its own would be
sufficient to refute these reports. But we have examined these
reports just to confirm that they are worthless and that all
conclusions based on them are worthless, so that all evidence
based on religious texts and scientdic and historical evidence
comes together and supports one another.[']

'Ali ibn Abi Taalib (&)
'Ali (&) and the Ah1 al-Bayt respected ' U W and
acknowledged his rights.
(a) The first one to swear allegiance to ' U t M n after 'Abd alRahmaan ibn 'Awf was 'Ali ibn Abi ~ a a l i b . [ ~It] was
narrated that Qays ibn 'Abbaad said: I heard 'Ali say, when
op. cit., p. 370
Damr al-Mar'ah alSiyaasi, p. 371
'31 al-BuWlaari, Kitanb Fadaa'il al-Sahtbah, no. 3700

['I

Attitude of the Sahibah towards the murder of 'Uthmsn &

591

'Uthmh (&) was mentioned: He is a man of whom the
Messenger of AlI* (@) said:

"Should I not feel shy before the one before whom the angelsfeel
shy?'r[ll
(b) He testified that he had been given glad tidings of Paradise.
It was narrated that al-Nazzaal ibn Saburah said: I asked 'Ali
about 'Uthmh and he said: He is a man who is called DhuizNoorayn by the exalted assembly (angels). He was the son-inlaw of the Messenger of All21
and was married to two of
his daughters, and he was guaranteed a l~ousein ~aradise.[~]

(e)

(c) 'Ali (4)was obedient to 'Uthmh and acknowledged his

position as leader and caliph, and he did not disobey any
command. lbn Abi Shaybah narrated with his isnaad from
Ibn al-Hanafiyyah that 'Ali said: If ' U t h m h told me to
march to Siraar, I would hear and obey.[31 This is indicative
of the extent of his willingness to follow and obey 'Uthmh
(may AH* be pleased with them both).14'
(d) When 'Uthman united the people in reading one recitation of
the Qur'h, after consulting the Suhlibah ( &) and reaching
consensus on that, 'Ali (4)said: If I were in his position I
would have done the same as he has done.[']
(e) Hence 'Ali (4)denounced the killing of 'Uthmsn and
declared his innocence of shedding his blood. He swore
"I Muslim, Kitaab Fadaa'il al-Sahibah, no. 2401 (Al-Hakim 3/95)

fi Ah1 al-Bayt bayna al-lfaat wa'l-Tapeet, p. 227; al-Mukhtasar min
Kitnab al-Muwaafaqah bayna Ah1 al-Bayt wa'i-Sah8bah by al-Zamakhshari - MS in
the library of the Islamic Univasality. This book has been printed by Dar alHadeeth.
aE-Sunan by al-Khallaal, 1/325, no. 416. Its isnzd is salzeeh.
'41 al-'AqeedahF Ah1 al-Bayt bayna al-lfraat wa'l-Tafeet, p. 227
alSunan by al-Bayhaqi, 2/42

12' al-'Aqeedah

592

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Nooravn

oaths in his khutbahs and at other times stating that he did
not kill him and that he did not order his killing or support it
or approve of it. That has been proven from him in definitive
reports['] , contrary to what the Raafidis claim, that he
approved of the murder of 'Uthman (&).[" After
mentioning some of the reports that speak of his murder,
al-Haakim said: As for that which is claimed by some of the
innovators, that the Ameer al-Mu'mineen 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib
helped (in the killing of 'Uthmsn), that is a lie and a
fabrication. The mutawaatir reports say otherwise.[31 Ibn
Taymiyah said: This is all a lie against 'Ali (4)and a
fabrication against him. 'Ali (&) did not take part in the
murder of 'Uthmik, nor did he order it or approve of it. That
was narrated from him and he was truthful and honest.[41
'Ali said: 0 Allsh, I declare my innocence before You of
~~~
narrated with
shedding the blood of ' ~ t h m 2 n .Al-Haakim
his zsnaad from Qays ibn'Abbaad that he said: I heard 'Ali on
the day of the Camel saying: 0 AEh, I declare my innocence
before You of shedding the blood of 'Uthmik; I was beside
myself with grief on the day when 'Uthmin was killed, and I
felt very distressed when they came to swear allegiance to
me. I said: By Alliih, I feel ashamed before AUih to accept the
allegiance of people who killed a man of whom the
Messenger of All31
said:

(e)

"Should I not feel shy before the one before whom the angels feel
shy?r' I61
al-Bidaayah wa'n-Nihaayak, 7/202
al-'Aqeedahji Ah1 al-bayt b q n a al-lfmt wa'l-Tafieet, p. 229; Haqq al-Yaqeen by
'Abd-Allrih Shibr, p. 189
[3' al-Mustadrak, 3/103
Minhaaj al-Sunnah, 4/406
alLfAqeedakfi Ah1 aldayt, p. 230. Its isntd is hasan.
'61 Al-Hakim 3/95
['I

"

i

1I
I

j

1

I

Attitude of the Saluibah towards the murder of 'Uth-n

&

593

I feel ashamed before AU&h to accept allegiance when
'Uthmsn is lying slain on the ground and has not yet been
buried. So they went away, but when 'Uthmtin had been
buried, the people came back and asked me to accept their
allegiance, and I said: By Allsh, I am worried about what to
do. Then I decided to go ahead and accept their oaths of
allegiance. When they said, 0 Ameer al-Mu'mineen, it was as
if it gave me a shock, and I said: 0 All&, take (hasanaat)from
me and give them to 'Uthmiin until You are pleased.r11
Imam Ahmad narrated with his isnaad from Muhammad ibn
21-Hanafiyyah that he said: 'Ali heard that 'Aa'ishah was
cursing the killers of 'UthmSn in al-~irbad.['l He raised his
hands until they reached his face, then he said: And I also
curse the killers of 'Uthmh may All& curse them in the
plains and in the mountains. He said it two or three times.I3]
Ibn Sa'd narrated with his isnaad from Ibn 'Abbaas that 'Ali
said: By AllSh, I did not kill 'Uthmein and I did not order that
he be killed, rather I tried to stop it. By All*, I did not kill
'Uthmh and I did not order that he be killed, but I was
overpowered. He said it three times.[41It was also narrated
that he said: Whoever disavows the religion of 'Uthmh has
disavowed faith. By AUSh, I did not help with his murder
and I did not order it or approve of it.[']

(9 And 'Ali said of 'UthmSn (4):He was the one among us who
upheld ties of kinship the most, and he was the one who
feared the Lord the most."[61

AI-Mustadrak, 3/95; a saheeh hadeeth according to the conditions of alBukhaari and Muslim, although they did not narrate it; and al-Dhahabi
agreed with him.
12] A place near Basra, approximately three miles away.
13' Fadaa'il al5aluibah, 1/555, no. 733, its isntd is saheeh.
Al-Tabaqmt, 3/82; al-Biduayah warn-Nihaayah, 77202
al-Riyaadh al-Nadrah, p. 543
S i f i t alSafwah, 1/306
'I'

594

' U t M Ibn 'Affib 4 Dhun-Noorayn

(g) It was narrated that Abu 'Awn said: I heard Muhammad ibn
Haatib say: I asked 'Ali about 'Uthman and he said: He was
one of those who believed and feared Alltth, then believed
and feared Allah. But he did not complete the verse. (AlMaa'idah 5:93).[11
(h) It was narrated that 'Umayrah ibn Sa'd said: We were with
'Ali on the banks of the Euphrates, when a ship passed by
with its sails raised. 'Ali said: All* says:

"And His are the ships going and coming in the seas, like
mountains" (Ar-Rahmaan 55:24).
By the One Who caused them to sail in one of His seas, I did
not kill 'Uthmh and I did not support anyone in killing
him.[''
(i) Imam Ahmad narrated in his Musnad that Muhammad ibn
Haatib said: 1heard 'Ali say:

"Verily, those for whom the good has preceded from Us, they
will be removed far therefrom (Hell)" (AI-Anbiya' 21:lOl)

- 'UthmAn is one of them.[31And 'Ali said: I became ill on the
day 'Uthmh was
Al-Haafiz ibn 'Asaakir compiled
all the reports from 'Ali (&) in which he declared his
innocence of the murder of 'Uthman. He would swear oaths
to that effect in his khutbahs and on other occasions,
swearing that he did not kill him or approve of that. This
Fadaalil dSaEbah, 1/580. Its isntd is saheeh.
IzlOp. cit., 1/559,560. Its isndd has corroborating evidence.
L31 op. cit., 1/580, no. 771. Its isnrid is saheeh.
Al-Muntaznmfi Tareekh al-Mulook wa'l-Umam, 5/61
"I

r

1

Attitude of the Sahibnh towards the murder of ' U t M .&

595

is proven from him in reports that are regarded as definitive
by many of the imams of hadeeth.[ll

'Abd-Allah ibn 'Abbaas (&)
Imam Ahmad narrated with his isnuud from Ibn 'Abbaas that
' -,
they
he said: If all the people had gathered to kill U
would have been stoned the way the people of Loot were
stoned.['] And he (4) said, praising 'Uthmiin and
condemning those who criticized him: May All& have
mercy on Abu 'Amr. He was, by All*, the noblest and most
righteous of men, who prayed a great deal at the time before
dawn, shed many tears when he remembered the Fire, the
first to do righteous deeds and to offer help at the time of
calamity, beloved, confident and loyal, the one who
equipped the army of Tabook, the son-in-law of the
Messenger of All& (@). May AUZh punish those who
curse him with the curse of those who curse until the Day of
~udgement.~~~

Zayd ibn 'Mi (.@)
Ibn 'Asaakir narrated with his isnaad from al-Saddi that he
said: I came to him - i.e., Zayd - when he was in Baariq, one
of the quarters of Kufah, and I said to him: You are our
leader and are in charge of our affairs. What do you say
about Abu Bakr and 'Umar? He said: You should love them.
And he used to say that disavowing Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
' U W n was disavowing 'Ali, and that disavowing 'Ali was
disavowing Abu Bakr, 'Umar and '~thmZn.[~'

'Mi ibn al-Husayn (.&)
It is proven that 'Ali ibn al-Husayn disavowed the Raafidi
al-Bidaayah wa'l-N~haayah,7/193
Fadan'il alSahiibah, 1/563, no. 746.
[31 Al-'Aqeedahji Ah1 al-Bayt, p. 234; Murooj al-Dhahab b y al-Mas'oodi, 3/64
al-'Aqeedahfi Ah1 al-Bayt, p. 335; Tahdheeb Tareekh Dimashq, 6/21
['I

["

596

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin 4 Dhun-Noorayn

view about Abu Bakr, 'Umar and U
' -n
( &). Abu Nu'aym
narrated with his isnaad from Muhammad ibn 'Ali that his father
'Ali ibn al-Husayn said: Some people of Iraq sat together and
spoke of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and they criticized them, then they
started criticizing 'Uhn2n. He said to them: Tell me, are you
among the first Muhlijin^n

"who were expelledfrom their homes and their property, seeking
Bounties from Allih and to please Him, and helpin2 Allih (i.e.
helping His religion - lslarnic Monotheism) and H& Messenger
(Muhammad @J" (Al-Hashr 59:8)?
They said: No. he said: Are you among those who

"Before them, had homes (in Al-Madinah) and had adopted the
Faith, love those who emigrate to them" (Al-Hashr 599)?
They said: No. He said to them: You have confirmed and
testified against yourselves that you are neither from this group
nor that, and I bear witness against you that you are not of the
third group of whom All21 says:.

.

"And those who came afer them say: "Our Lord! Forgive us
and our brethren who have preceded us in Faith, and put not in
our hearts any hatred against those who have believed" (AlHashr 5910)
Go away and leave me; may All& not bless you and may He

Attitude of the Sahiibah towards the murder of ' U W n &

597

keep you away from us. You are mocking Islam and you are not
of its followers.[11

The attitude of ' A m a a r ibn Yaasir Idel
In the historical reports that may contain sound or fabricated
material, it says that there had been a dispute between 'Ammaar
and 'Uthm2n. Some of these reports have isnaads and some have
no isnaad at all. I have not come across anyone who examined and
analyzed these reports except a few, therefore it is not possible to
leave these reports, which undermine the dignity of the S&b&
without examining them.[']

The beating of 'Ammaar ibn Yaasir
The reports which speak of ' U M s beating 'Ammaar are
regarded as the most famous and numerous of these reports
(which undermine the dignity of the S d b a h ) . The fabricators of
these reports mentioned the different methods supposedly used
by 'UthmCn (&) in beating 'Ammaar and the different
consequences that followed, but in addition to their isnunds
being cormpt, the texts themselves are weird and incredible.131
Al-Qaadi Abu Bakr ibn al-'Arabi says in alL'Awaaszm, when
discussing the lies that are attributed to 'Uthm2n (&): With regard
to his beating Ibn Mas'ood and withholding his stipend, this is
false, and his beating of 'Ammaar is also a fabrication. If he had
disembowelled him he would not have lived at all. Some scholars
tried to find an acceptable way of interpreting this report, but no
attention should have been paid to it in the first place, because it is
all false and no truth can be based on falsehood. We should not go
along with the ignorant because it is a waste of time.[41' U t W s
age, faith, modesty, gentleness, kindness, soft nature, seniority m
al-'Aqeedahji Ah1 a/-Bayt, p. 236; al-Bidayah warn-h'ihqah, 9/112; al-Jonmi' li
Ahkaam al-Qur'aan, 18/31,32
"I ' A m m r i h Yaasir, by Usaamah Ahmad Sultaan, p. 122
'31 'Ammllur i h Yaasir, by Usaamah Ahmad Sultaan, p. 122
'41 al-'Abaasim min al-Qawaasim, p. 82-84

[I1

598

' U t h m h Ibn 'Affin & Dhm-Noorayn

Islam and status all put him far above sinking to this level in
attitude towards a man who was one of the most senior of the
companions of the Prophet (@), whose seniority and virtue
'Uthmh recognized despite the differences in opinion that arose
between them. Would 'Uthmh be able to do that when he was
insisting that the people should not fight to defend him and was
content to die, patiently seeking reward and to protect Muslim
blood from being shed and prevent widespread turmoil? Would
he accept to do to 'Ammaar - when he was well aware of his
seniority and virtue in Islam - what is mentioned in the false
reports, namely ordering his slaves to beat him until he lost
consciousness, then stepping on his stomach when he was in that
state? Would the character and modesty of 'Uthmsn allow him to
demonstrate the Jaahili attitude of insulting 'Ammaar by
slandering his mother Sumayyah, who was one of the earliest
Muslims and a woman of great virtue, when 'Uthmh knew of the
honour that accrued to 'Ammaar by virtue of his being the son of
his mother Sumayyah (%), the first martyr in Islam?
No, this is not true at all, because in the sound reports there is
no indication at all that 'Uthmh could sink to such a low level in
rebuking and disciplining. Moreover, his attitude, nature and
character make that very unlikely. There is no doubt that
examining these fabricated reports against what is known of the
attitude and character of these prominent figures, and taking into
account the standards of the era, is the best way to expose the
fabrication and the fabricators.[']

Accusation against 'Anunaar of taking, part in the turmoil
and stinring up trouble againkt 'Uthm&n
In attributing these fabrications to 'Ammaar (41, the
historians relied on reports none of which were free of
weakness in their imaads or texts. Different accusations were
levelled against 'Ammaar (&) about his stirring up turmoil,
"I

al-l(hakefahal-Muftara 'alnyhi 'Ufhnuinibn 'Affaan, p. 1441; 'Ammaar ibn Yaffiir,
p. 137

Attitude of the Sahibah towards the murder of 'Uthmsn &.

599

inciting people against 'Uthmsn and inciting them to rebel against
sent word to him
him. Some of these reports say that 'Uthmh (6)
in E,yrpt to find out what was happening with regard to what
they had heard about the people rebelling, and that the Saba'is
had managed to influence 'Ammaar. The isnaad of this report,
which was narrated by al-~abari~'],includes Shu'ayb ibn
Ibraaheem al-Tameemi al-Kufi, the narrator of the books of
Sayf, about whom there is some ambiguity. A-Raawi said
concerning him: He is not known, although he has some
ahaadeeth and reports in which there is some weirdness and
they contain a lot of bias against the salaf.['] It was also narrated
by 'Umar ibn Shabbah in Tareekh al-Madinah, where its isnaad
includes the Shaykh of 'Umar, 'Ah ibn 'Aasim, of whom Ibn alMadeeni said: 'Ali ibn 'Aasim made a lot of mistakes, and when
corrected, he would not retract. He was known for narrating
Yahya ibn Ma'een
hadeeth and he narrated weird nhu~deeth.~~'
said: He is worthless.[41And on one occasion he said: He is a liar
and worthless.[51Al-Nasaa'i said: His hadeeth is to be ignored.'61
A-Bukhaari said: He is not sound according to them, and they
criticized him.m And there were some who tried to be tactful
about him. Ibn Hajar said concerning him: He is sadooq but he
makes mistakes and insists on them, and he was accused of being
a ~hi'i.['] A report whose isnmd is like this cannot be easily
accepted, especially when it is known that 'Ammaar was a pious
man whose piety would prevent him from indulgmg in such
things. We do not know of anyone who would indulge in such
dirty work except a hate-filled Saba'i Jew. All31 forbid that a
Sahaabi, one of the companions of the Prophet (&), could sink to
TnreeWI at-Taba~,5,348
Istishhaad 'Uthmin ma Waq'ah a l - J m l , p. 30
13] Siyar A'laam an-Nubda', 9/253
'"I op. at., 9/255
['I op. cit., 9/257
[I' op. cit., 9/255
I ' [ op. cit.. 9/255
Taqreeb al-Tahdheeb, p. 403
[I1

600

'UthmSn Ibn 'AtfSn & Dhun-Noorayn

such a low level. Khaalid al-Ghayth says: This report contradicts
what has been proven of the dignity of the Sahibuh ( $1, in
addition to the fact that it was not narrated via any sound
isnaad.[ll
Among the false reports that have been narrated concerning
this matter is that which was attributed to Sa'eed ibn alMusayyab, in which it says that the Sahibah in general were
upset with 'Uthmsn (4)in addition to others who were also
upset, and they got angry with him, especially Abu Dhan; Ibn
The problem with this
Mas'ood and 'Ammaar ibn Yaasir ( &).['I
report is that it contains a kind of deception (tadlees)that cannot be
approved or overlooked, because the name of a narrator who is
accused of fabricating and telling lies was dropped from the
isnaad, namely Isma'eel ibn Yahya ibn 'Ubayd-AUSh. Hence the
scholars of hadeeth determined that this report is weak and stated
that it is a false report, when they discussed the biography of
Muhammad ibn 'Eesa ibn Samee', the one who narrated this
report from Ibn Abi Dhi'b. Imam al-Bukhaari said concerning Ibn
Samee': It was said that he did not hear this hadeeth from Ibn Abi
Dhi'b, meaning this hadeeth from al-Zuhri about the murder of
'Uthmh. Ibn Hibbaan said: Ibn Samee' did not hear this hadeeth
from Ibn Abi Dhi'b, rather he heard it from Ismaa'eel ibn Yahya,
so he resorted to tadlees (deception) p y dropping the name of
Ismaa'eel]. Al-Haakim said: Abu Muhammad - meaning Ibn
Samee' - narrated a weird (munkar) hadeeth from Ibn Abi Dhi'b,
which is the hadeeth about the murder of 'Uthmsn. It was said in
his book: From Ismaa'eel ibn Yahya from Ibn Abi Dhi'b, but he
dropped the name of Ismaa'eel ibn Yahya, and Ismaa'eel is
worthless when it comes to hadeeth.[31 Dr Yoosuf al-'Ishsh said:
The report that is attributed to Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyab must be
ignored, because upon examination it is obviously fabricated. Allstishhaad 'Uthmiin wa Waq'at al-Jumal,p. 86
I[' Tareekh Dimashq, 39/415; 'Ammanr ibn Yansir, p. 144
'31 Tahqeeq Mauluaqif al-Suhtbah, 2/16-18; at-Tareekh al-Kabeer by al-Bukhaari, 1/
203; al-Tahdheeb, 9/391; Tahdheeb al-Tuhdheeb, 9/392
['I

Attitude of the Sahibah towards the murder of ' U t M &

601

Haakim al-Nisaboori stated that one of the men in its isnaad
dropped the name of another man who was worthless, and it is
odd (munkar). The fact of the matter is that this report does not
show any of the respect that Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyab showed to
the Sahiibah in his other, sound reports.I1l

'Ammaar's innocence of the murder of 'Uthmsn (&)
The report about Masrooq and Abu Moosa (A)accusing
'Ammaar of that when he came with al-Hasan to incite the people
of Kufah is regarded as weak because of Shu'ayb, who is
unknown, and Sayf who is very weak. The report in Saheeh alBukhaari does not say anything about that, so this extra material
cannot be accepted, especially since it casts aspersions upon a
Sahaabi such as 'Ammaar ibn Yaasir, whom the Prophet (B)
prayed would be protected a ainst the ~haytaan'~]
and who was
filled to the brim with faith.
The scholars explained that this accusation, which is not
limited only to 'Ammaar but also included other Suhibah, is false.
Ibn Katheer said: As for what was said by some people, that some
of the Sahiibah let 'Uthmiin down and were pleased when he was
killed, this is not narrated in any sound report from any of the
Sahiibah, rather all of them objected to it and cursed the ones who
did it.[41al-Qaadi Abu Bakr ibn al-'Arabi said: This is the best that
was narrated concerning this issue, thus it becomes clear - and in
order to reach the right conclusion we must follow the people of
truth - that none of the Sukibah ever incited anyone against
'Uthmiin or forsook him. If 'Uthmsn had sought the help of
others, one thousand or four thousand strangers would not have
been able to overwhelm twenty thousand or more locals, but he
let himself into this calamity.[51And he said: The evildoers and
the ignorant started saying that the virtuous Sahiibah had caused

4

al-Dmulah al-Umawiyyah, 39.

'" Al-Bukhaaxi, no. 3743

'Ammaar ibn Yaasir, p. 147
al-Bidaayah wa'n-Nihaayah, 7/207
['I al-'Awaasim min al-Qmuaasim, p. 129

[I'
I['

602

' U W n Ibn 'Aff2n 4 Dhun-Nooravn

trouble to him and had incited people against him, and that they
were pleased about what had happened to him.These evildoers
and ignorant people fabricated in their books letters in which
there was some eloquence and which were supposedly written by
'Uthmh, which show him seeking the support of 'Ali. But this is
all a fabrication, aimed at damaging the image of the salaf and the
Rightly-Guided Caliphs in the minds of the Muslims. The
conclusion we may reach is that 'Uthmh was killed unlawfully
and was accused with no evidence, and that all of the Sahibah are
innocent of shedding his blood, because they did what he wanted
them to do and they fulfilled his wish to be left to face his fate.[']

'Am's innocence of the murder of 'Othrn2n
When 'Uthmiin was surrounded, 'Amr ibn al'Aas left
MadA& and headed for Syria. He said: By AUSh 0 people of
Madinah, no one will stay in MadAmhuntil the time when this
man is killed, but All& will humiliate him. Whoever cannot
support him,let him flee. So he left and his two sons 'Abd-Alliih
and Muhammad left with him. Hassaan ibn Thiibit left after him,
and they were followed by others whom Alliih d e d should
go.[2i When the news of 'Uthmh's murder and the people's
swearing allegiance to 'Ali came to him, 'Amr said: I am Abu
'Abd-Alliih (i.e., I know what is going on); there will be war and
whoever takes part in it will make it worse. May Allgh have
mercy on 'Uthmh and may AU5h be pleased with him and
forgive him. Salaamah ibn Zanbaagh al-Judhaamisaid: 0 Arabs,
there was a door between you and the Arabs; now set up a new
door if the fist door is broken. ' A m said: That is what we want, a
ruler who deals with the people on the basis of equality.
Then he started weeping and saying: 0 ' U t M n , true
modesty and religious commitment have departed with him,
until he reached ~ a m a s c u s . ~ ~ ]
'I1

I'[

op. cit., p. 132
Tareekh nt-Tabari, quoting from 'Amr ibn al-'Aas by al-Ghadbaan, p. 464
Tareekh at-Tabari, quoting from 'Amr ibn alL'Aas by alGhadbaan, p. 481

Attitude of the Sahibah towards the murder of 'Uthmh &

603

This is the true image of 'Am (&), which is in harmony with
' -.
As for the
his character, attitudes and closeness to U
distorted image that was presented of him as an ambitious
opportunist and seeker of worldly gains, this is a report which is
weak and is to be rejected, the report of al-Waaqidi from Moosa
] number of writers and historians were
ibn ~ a ' ~ o o b . [ lA
influenced by these weak reports, so they presented 'Amr in a
very negative manner, such as that which was written by
Mahmoud Sheet ~hattaab~'],'Abd al-Khaaliq Sayyid Abu
~ a a d i ~ a hand
[ ~ l 'Abbaas Mahmoud al-'Aqqaad who refuses to
look at the isnaad and thinks little of his readers' intelligence, and
presents an image of Mu'Swiyah and ' A m as opportunists and
seekers of worldly gains. The fact that all the historical critics
agreed that all the reports that he used to reach this conclusion are
false means nothing to alL'Aqqaad. After quoting these weak
reports on which no conclusion can be based, he said: Let the
historical critics say what they like with regard to how true this
debate was and how sound these words are and what is proven
and not proven with regard to the isnaad and text. What we have
no doubt about, even if all the books of history come together to
reject it, is that the agreement between the two men was based on
an agreement that each of them would have his share and would
cooperate to attain the position of rulers and governors, otherwise
there would be no deal at all.14]
The true character of ' A m ibn al-'Aas (4)was that he was a
man of principle who left Madinah when he felt unable to defend
' U h n h , and he wept bitterly for him when he was killed. He
was one of the closest of his companions, friends and consultants
and he was included in the shoora council at the time of 'Uthmh
even though he was not the governor of any province. He went to
Mu'swiyah (&) to cooperate with him in fighting the murderers
'Amr ibn alLrAasby G h a d b a a n , p. 481
Sufara' al-Nabi (gJby Mahmoud Sheet Khattaab, p. 508
13' 'Amr ibn alL'Aas by 'Abd al-Khaaliq Sayyid Abu Raabiyah, p. 316
'Am1 ibn al-'Am by al-'Aqqaad, p. 231, 232
"I

604

'Uthmk Ibn ' A f f k & Dhun-Nooravn

of 'UthmSn and avenging the slain caliph.['] The murder of
'Uthm2n was sufficient to create anger in the hearts of both men
against the criminals who had shed blood and they had no option
but to select a place other than Madhah to take revenge on those
and
who had violated the sanctity of the Messenger of Allih (g)
slain his caliph in front of the people. What is so sbange about
'Amr being angry for the sake of 'UthmSn? If anyone has any
doubt about this matter, this doubt is based on false reports which
depict 'Amr as a man whose main aim was power and
authority.121

Corhmenfs of the Sahkbah about &eJit~ah
Anas ibn Maalik (&)
It was said to Anas ibn Maalik: No one can love both 'Ali and
'Uthmh. Anas said: They are lying. We love both of them.13]

Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamaan (&)
It was narrated that Khaalid ibn al-Rabee' said: We heard that
Hudhayfah was sick, so Abu Mas'ood al-Ansiri (&) went to him
with a number of people in al-Madaa'in. Then mention was made
of 'Uthrnin's murder and he said: I was not present and I did not
kill him or approve of that.14] Ahmad ibn Hanbal narrated from
Ibn Sireen that Hudhayfah said, when news of 'Uthmh's murder
reached him: 0 Allih, You know that I am innocent of the blood
of 'Uthmh. Even if those who killed him did the right thing, I
have nothing to do with them, and if they did the wrong thing,
You know that I am innocent of his blood, and the Arabs will
know that if his murder was the right fhing things would improve
and if it was the wrong thing there would be bloodshed. But all
they got was bloodshed, and war and killing have not stopped
"I 'Amr ibn al-'Aas by alGhadbaan, p. 489,490

I'[ op. cit., p. 492
I'

Tahqeeq b m @ f al-SahBbuh, 2/25; al-Tahdheeb by Ibn Hajar, 7/141
op. cit., 2/27

Attitude of the Sahlibah towards the murder of 'Uthmsn &

605

since then.['] Ibn 'Asaakir narrated from Jundub ibn 'Abd-Alliih who met the Prophet (B)- that he met Hudhayfah and mentioned
the case of the caliph ' U W n to him, and he said: They will kill
him. He said: I said: Where will he be? He said: In Paradise. I said:
Where will his killers be? He said: In h ell.[']

Umm Sulaym al-Anshiyyah (h)
Umm Sulaym al-Anscriyyah ($) said, when she heard of the
killing of 'Uthmh %; they will not get anything after this but
bloodshed."'

Abu Hurayrah (&)
It was narrated that Abu Maryam said: I saw Abu Hurayrah
on the day when 'Uthmiin was killed, with two braids, and he
was holdin onto them and saying: By All&, 'Uthmh was killed
unlawfully.741

Abu Bakrah (9)
Ibn Katheer narrated in al-Bidaayah wa'l-Nihmynh that Abu
Bakrah (4)said: To be thrown from heaven to earth would be
dearer to me than having any part in the murder of ' ~ t h m & ~ . [ ~ ]

Abu Moosa al-Ash'ari (a$)
It was narrated from Abu ' U t M n al-Nahdi that Abu Moosa
al-Ash'ari (A&) said: If the killing of 'Uthmh (4)was guided, then
sincerity would have brought something good out of this action,
but it was misguided so it brought bloodshed.[61

Samurah ibn Jundub (&)
Ibn 'Asaakir narrated with his isnaud that Samurah ibn
['I

Tahqeeq Mawaaqifal-Sahibah, 2/28; Tareekh Dimashq, p. 388

I['

ibid.

al-Bidaayuh warn-Nihaayah, 7/195
Tuhqeeq Mawaaqifal-Sahibah, 2/31; Tareekh Dimashq, p. 493
[I' Tahqeeq Mawaaqifal-Shah, 2/31; Tareekh Dimashq, p. 493
[61 TareeWl al-mdinah, 4/1245
[I'

I['

'Uthmin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

Jundub (6
said:
) Islam was in a strong fortress, but they breached
this defence by killing 'Uthmiin and damaged it in many places,
and they will not be able to repair the gaps or fill them until the
Day of Resurrection. The caliphate was among the people of
Madinah but it was taken out and it is no longer among them.[''

'Abd-Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'Aas (&)
Abu Nu'aym narrated in Ma'rifat al-Sahibah with his isnaad
that 'Abd-AUsh ibn ' A m ibn al-'Aas said: ' U M n ibn 'Affh
Dhu'n-Noorayn was killed unlawfully and he will be given a
double reward.["

'Abd-All* ibn Salaam (&)
He (A) said: Do not kill 'Uthmh, for if you kill him you will
never pray together again.13] According to another report: By
All&, you will not shed even a little of his ('Uthmsn's) blood but
that will push you further away from All&.[41

al-Hasan ibn 'Ali (&I
It was narrated that Talq ibn Khashshaaf said: We went to
Madtnah and Qart ibn Khaythamah was with us. We met alHasan ibn 'Ali and Qart said to him: Why was the ameer nlmu'mineen 'Uthmh killed? He said: He was killed unlawfully.[5]

Salamah ibn al-Akwa' (&)
It was narrated that Yazeed ibn Abi 'Ubaydah said: When
'Uthmh was killed, Salamah ibn al-Akwa' - who had been
present at Badr - left M a d W and headed for al-Ribdhah, and he
stayed there until just before he died.16]

Tuhqeeq Mawuqifal-Sahiibuh, 2/31; Tareekh Dimashq, p. 493
Ma'rifat al-Sahabah, 1/245; al-Mu'jam al-Kabeer, 1/46
[31 Tuhqeeq Mawuqifal-Sah8bnh, 2/34; Fadaa'il al-Sahabah. Its is&
'41 Al-Tabaqaaf, 3/81
[x Tnreekh al-Madinah, 44145
[q op. cit., 4/14?.
['I

is saheeh.

Attitude of the SaEbah towards the murder of 'Uthmsn Z&

607

'Abdullaah ibn 'Umar (&)
It was narrated that Abu Haazim said: I was with 'Abd-All&
ibn 'Umar ibn al-Khattsb and he mentioned 'Uthmh and his
virtues, his aihibutes and his relationship through marriage to the
so that he depicted him as purer than glass. Then he
Prophet (g)
mentioned 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib and mentioned his virtues, his
seniority in Islam and his relationship through marriage to the
until he depicted him as purer than glass. Then he
Prophet (s)
said: Whoever wants to talk about these two, let him talk about
them in this manner or else not speak at all.['' Ibn'Umar (&) also
said: Do not revile 'Uthmh, for we used to regard him as one of
the best of

The effect of "Uthm2in's murder in creaIing fa&her
turmoil and division
The turmoil of ' U M n ' s murder was the cause of a great
deal of further turmoil and it cast its shadow on the events that
followed it. People's hearts changed and lying became
widespread, and deviation from the laws and teachings of
Islam began from that point.[31 The murder of 'Uthmh was
one of the greatest causes offitnah among people; because of it the
ummah became divided and has remained so until today.141
Hatred was created against one another and there were many
calamities; evildoers prevailed and the righteous were
humiliated, those who had previously been unable to create
division now became active and those who loved good were
unable to do good. They swore allegiance to 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib
(&), who was the most entitled to become caliph at that point, and
was the best of those who remained, but people were divided and
the fire ofjtnah had been lit. There was no unity and no discipline,
and the caliph and the best of the ummah were not able to achieve
['I Tahqeeq Mawaaqifal-Sddbah,
[I' Tahqeeq Mizwaaqifal-S&bah,
[I' Op. cit., p. 590

Majmoo' al-Fataawa, 25/162

1/379
1/379; Fadaa'il al-Sahribah. Its isnrid is saheeh

608

'Uthmin Ibn ' A f f h & Dhun-Nooram

all they wanted of goodness, and many people took part in
spreadingfitnah and division.[ll
The conquest movement grew gradually weaker in the last
few years of 'Uthdn's caliphate, when the turmoil began in the
Muslim lands and the centre of the caliphate. Then it ceased when
'Uthmh was killed. That continued to be the case, and there was
even some loss of conquered lands, until the beginning of
Mu'iiwiyah's reign, w k n the Muslims' affairs stabilized and the
conquests began in the east, west and north.[21

Wronging and transgressing against others are
causes of d o o m in this world and in the Hereafter
Wronging and transgressing against others unlawfully are
causes of doom in this world and in the Hereafter, as Alliih says:

,,-.,

+;--" -9 ,,, ,z
; fj4,a p t , 42$
*-,:-,

*

,

"And these towns (population, 'Aad, Thamood) We destroyed
them when they did wrong. And We appointed afixed time for
their dairnction" (Al-Kahf18:59).
The one who researches what happened to those who
rebelled against 'Uthmh (&) and transgressed against him will
find that Allkh did not give them respite rather He humiliated
them and wreaked vengeance on them, and none was spared.13]
Khaleefah ibn Khayyaat narrated in his Tareekh with a saheeh
isnaad that 'Imraan ibn al-Hudayr said: 'Abd-Allsh ibn Shaqeeq
told me that the first drop of 'Uthmin's blood fell on the words

43TW$
,.
"So Allih will sufice for you against them" (Al-Baqarah2:137),
As Abu Hurayth mentioned that he and Suhayl al-Numayri
"I

op. cit., 25/163
Ahdaath wa Ahaadeeth Fitnat al-Haraj, p. 591
Tahqeeq Mawaaqgal-S&a^bahfirl-FiM, 1/483

Attitude of the Sahribah towards the murder of ' U m &

609

went and took out theMus-haf, and the drop of blood on (thewords)

"So All& will sufficeforyou against them" (Al-Baqarah 2137)

is still in the Mus-haf and has not been erased. In Tareekh ibn
'Asaakir it is narrated that Muhammad ibn Sireen said: I was
circumambulating the Ka'bah and I saw a man saying: 0 All&,
forgive me, but I don't think You will forgive me. I said: 0 slave of
Allgh, I have never heard anyone saying what you are saying. He
said: I promised Allgh that if I could slap 'Uthmh on the face I
would do so. When he was killed and placed on the bier in the
house, and the people were coming to pay their last respects, I
entered as if I wanted to pay my last respects, and I found myself
alone with him. I lifted the cloth from his face and slapped his
face, then I covered him again. Now my right arm is paralyzed.
Muhammad ibn Sireen said: I saw it, like a piece of wood.['] Were
it the case that nothing resulted from the wrongdoing of these
haters except the Muslims unsheathing their swords against them
until the Day of Resurrection, that would be a sufficient deterrent
to them and everyone who joined them. al-Qaasim ibn
Muhammad said: 'Ali passed by two men in MadAmah,after
'Uthm2n had been killed and before allegiance was sworn to him,
and they were saying: Ibn al-Bayda' (i.e., 'Uthm2n) has been
killed and his seniority in Islam and position among the Arabs
was well known, but by Allgh no one is seeking to avenge him.
'Ali said: What did you say? He repeated it and 'Ali said: No, by
All&, a lot of men will be killed and there will be a great deal of
fighting, until the son of Maryam appears.[21

The M@slirns' sonrow at the murder of 'Uthman
The calamity had a great impact on the believers; they were
Siyar alShuhada', Duroos wa 'Bur by al-Suhaybaani, p. 67; Tareekh Dimashq, p.
458; Tahqeeq Muwaa+f al-Sahribah, 1/485
[21 Tahqeeq Mmuaq~al-Sahibah, 1/485; al-Tamheed wa'l-Bayaan, p. 223
['I

610

' U r n Ibn ' A f f h .& Dhun-Nooravn

overwhelmed with grief and their eyes filled with tears; they
spoke in praise of 'Uthmiin and prayed for mercy for him. Hassaan
ibn Thiibibit (&) eulogized the caliph and lamented his killing a
great deal, condemning the murderers and their actions.[']
Ka'b ibn Maalik also lamented the murder of 'Uthmh in
verse:
Then he restrained his hands and closed his door,
And he was certain that AU2h is not forgetiul,
He said to the people of the house, Do not kill them!
May All& pardon every man who does not fight.
So how have you seen All2h pour out upon them
Enmity and hatred after harmony with each other!
And how you have seen the good turning back from people
After him, the way the driving winds turn (the clouds) back!
And the close of our request is: All praise be to All& the Lord
of the Worlds.

I
r
-Conelusion
--

-

I)

--

1- During the Jaahiliyyah, 'Uthmin was one of the best among
his people. He was of prominent status, wealthy, very
modest and well spoken, and his people loved him dearly
and respected him. He never prostrated to any idol during
the Jaahiliyyah and he never committed any immoral action;
he never drank wine during the Jaahiliyyah.
2- 'Uthmh was thirty-four years old when Abu Bakr alSiddeeq called him to Islam and he did not hesitate at all, He
was among the first and was quick to respond to the call of
Abu Bakr, thus he was among the earliest Muslims.

3- The Muslims rejoiced greatly when 'Uthman became
Muslim, and the bonds of love and brotherhood grew
strong between him and them, and Allah honoured him with
marriage to the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (B),
Ruqayyah.

4- Testing with calamity is something that comes to all
individuals, communities, peoples, nations and states. This
rule applied to the Sahlibah as well, and they bore immense
calamities that even huge mountains would not be able to
bear. They gave their wealth and shed their blood for the
sake of Allsh, and went through a great deal of hardship, the
trne extent of which only All31 knows. The prominent
'was
Muslims were not spared these hardships. U
persecuted and tortured for the sake of All21 by his paternal
uncle al-Hakam ibn Abi'l-'Aas.
5- Since the day 'Uthmh became Muslim, he stayed close to
wherever he was, and he did not leave him
the Prophet (g)
except when he migrated with his permission or went on a

612

'UthrnGn Ibn 'Affgn 9 Dhun-Nooravn
mission on which he sent him, which no one else could do as
well as him. In this regard he was like all of the RightlyGuided Caliphs, as it was a special characteristic of theirs
which made them better candidates for the caliphate one
after another.

6- 'Uthmh was strongly involved in this great call from the
first year, and he did not miss any of the important events,
private or public, in the life of the Prophet (&), or any of the
important news in the lives of the two caliphs. In other
words, he did not miss anything of that which we would call
nowadays the laying of the foundations of the Islamic state.

7- The education and training that 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh - and all
the Sahibah -received was the Holy Qur'Sn that was revealed
from the Lord of the Worlds.
8- The strongest factor that influenced the character of 'Uthman
ibn 'Afftin and honed his talents and unleashed his potential
and purified his soul was his keeping company with the
Messenger of Allah (g)and taking him as his teacher.
'Uthrnh stayed close to the Messenger of All& (g)
- in
Makkah after he became Muslim, and in Madinah after he
migrated. 'Uthmh organized his life and was keen to attend
all lessons and acquire various branches of knowledge from
the teacher and guide of mankind, to whom Allsh had
taught good manners and taught him well.
9- 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh was not one of those who stayed away
from Badr because he was reluctant to go or he wanted to get
out of it, as the followers of whims and desires claim and
criticize him for being absent from Badr. He did not intend to
because the virtue attained by
disobey the Messenger (g),
the people of Badr who were present at Badr was attained by
means of obeying and following the Messenger (g).
'Uthmh came out with the people who came out with the
but he (g)
sent him back to look
Messenger of All& (g),
after his daughter. So he was doing the greatest mission by

Conclusion

613

obeying the Messenger of Allah (g)
and staylng behind in
accordance with his instructions. A share of the booty and
reward was given to him, so he shared the booty, virtne and
reward with them because of his obedience to All* and His
Messenger and following their commands.

10- With regard to al-Hudaybiyah, al-Muhibb al-Tabari
mentioned some virtues that were unique to ' U t M n , such
as the fact that he was the only one for whom the Prophet
(g,
put
) his hand to represent the hand of 'Uthman when the
Sahibah gave their oath of allegiance and 'Uthmin was
absent. He was also the only one to convey the message of
the Messenger of AUih (B)to the Muslim prisoners in
Makkah, and the Prophet (B)stated that he agreed with
'Uthmh's decision not to perform tawaaf when he was sent
on that mission.
11- The Messenger of All& (g)accepted the intercession of
'Uthmh ibn 'Affh for 'Abd-Allah ibn Abi'l-Sarh at the
conquest of Makkah.

12- Social aspects of 'Uthman's life in Madinah include his
marriage to Umm Kulthoom, the daughter of the Messenger
of All& (&), after the death of Ruqayyah the daughter of the
Messenger of All& (&); the death of 'Abd-All& ibn
' U t M ; then the death of Umm Kulthoom (%).
13- Among his economic contributions to the building of the
state were: his purchasing the well of Bi'r Roomah for twenty
thousand dirhams, which 'Uthmh (&) donated for the use
of rich and poor and wayfarers; expanding the Mosque of the
and spending a great deal on the army of
Prophet (g);
Tabook.
14- Many ahaadeeth were narrated about the virtues of 'Uthmk,
some of which refer to his virtue alongside others and some
refer to his virtue alone. The Messenger of AUih (@) foretold
thejtnah (turmoil) during which 'Uthmk would be killed.

'Uthmsn lbn 'Affzn4 Dhun-Noorayn

614

15- ' U M n (A) was one of the Sah3bnh and consultants whose
opinion was sought with regard to important matters during
the time of Abu Bakr. He was the second of two favoured by
Abu Bakr: 'Umar ibn al-Khattzb for his resolve and
shicbess, and 'Uthmh for his kindness and deliberation.
'Uthmiin played the role of a secretary, confidante and scribe.

16- ' U W n was held in high esteem by 'Umar. When the
people wanted to ask 'Umar about anything, they would
approach 'Uthm2n and 'Abd al-Rahmaan ibn 'Awf. 'Uthmh
was known as al-Radeef, and radeef in Arabic refers to one
who rides behind a man; the Arabs used this word to refer to
one who they hoped would become the leader later on. If
these two men could not do anything, they would bring in
al-'Abbaas as the third.

17- One of the best good deeds that 'Abd ar-Rahmaan ibn 'Awf
did was withdrawing from the race at the time of the shoora
council and choosing for the ummah the one suggested by
the decision-makers. He did the most perfect job on behalf of
the ummah by choosing 'Uthmh.
18- There are false Shi'i and Raafidi reports that have been
inserted into Islamic history and the story of the shoora
process and appointment of 'UthmSn as caliph. The
Orientalists seized upon them and circulated them further,
and many historians, thinkers and modem writers have been
influenced by them. They did not examine these reports or
check their isnnnds and texts, and thus they became
widespread among the Muslims.
19- There is a great deal of evidence which indicates that
' U W n (&) was more entitled to the caliphate, and there is
no dispute among those who adhere to the Q u f h and
Sunnah concerning that. The companions of the Messenger
and those who came after them and followed
of Alltth
their way, Ah1 al-Sunnah wa'l-Jamaa'ah, are unanimously
agreed that 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh was the most deserving of

(a)

Conclusion

615

the people to succeed as caliph after 'Umar ibn al-Khatt2b
(4%).

20- When allegiance was sworn to 'Uthmh as caliph, he stood
up to address the people and announced his policies, stating
that he would adhere to the Qur'an and Sunnah and the way
of the two Shaykhs (i.e., Abu Bakr and 'Umar). He also
indicated in his speech that he would run the affairs of the
people on the basis of forbearance and wisdom, except in
cases where a hadd punishment was deserved. He warned
them against being content with this world and being
tempted by its vanities, for fear that competition would lead
to mutual hatred and envy, which would lead the ummah to
division.
21- The character of 'Uthmh is regarded as that of a leader. He
had the qualities of a guided leader, such as knowledge,
ability to direct and teach people, forbearance, tolerance,
gentleness, forgiveness, humility, modesty, temperance,
generosity, courage, resolve, patience, justice, devotion to
worship, fear of Allah, weeping, examination of conscience,
asceticism, gratitude, checking on people, defining
specialties and making use of qualified people.

22- Learning the attributes of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs and
trying to follow in their footsteps is a sound step towards
finding the qualities of leaders who are devoted to Allah,
who will be able to lead the ummah steadily towards its
defined goals.
23- 'Uthmh's financial policy was based on the following
foundations: applying the general Islamic financial policy,
creating a balance between collecting money from people
and taking care of them, taking what was due from the
Muslims for the bayt al-maul of the Muslims, taking what was
due from ah1 al-dhimmak for the bayf al-maul of the Muslims,
giving them what they were entitled to and not wronging
them, ensuring the kharaaj collectors were honest and

616

'Uthmiin Ibn 'Affin & Dhun-Noorayn

trustworthy, and avoiding any financial corruption - so that
all people could enjoy the blessings.

24- The expenditure at the time of 'Uthmsn was spent on salaries
for governors and troops, the navy, moving the port from alShu'aybah to Jeddah, digging wells, spending on the
muezzins, and other things.
25- 'Uthmh (&) was accused by the thugs and rebels of
spending the wealth of the bayt al-maul extravagantly and
giving most of it to his relatives. These accusations were
supported by a false propaganda campaign led by the
Saba'is and maintained by the Raafidi Shi'ah until today. It
was inserted into the books of history and dealt with by the
thinkers and historians as if it was true, when in fact it is false
and unproven because it is fabricated.

26- The reign of 'Uthmh is regarded as a continuation of the
Rightly-Guided era, whose importance is based on its being
a continuation of the Prophetic era and its closeness to that
time. The era of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs in general terms,
and with regard to judicial matters in particular, is regarded
as a continuation of the Prophetic era, with its complete
adherence to and preservation of all that was established at
the time of the Prophet (@), applying it thoroughly in letter
and spirit.

27- 'UthmMs plan of conquest was characterized by firmness
and resolve, and had the following aims: subduing the
Persian and Byzantine rebels, restoring Islamic rule to these
lands, continuing jihad and conquests beyond those regions
to cut off their supply lines, establishing bases where Muslim
troops could be stationed to guard the Muslim lands, and
establishing a naval force because the Muslims needed it and
did not have it.
28- The military camps and borders of Islam at the time of
'Uthmh were the capitals of the major provinces. The camps

Conclusion

617

of Iraq were in Basra and Kufah, the camp of Syria was in
Damascus after all of Syria came under the governorship of
Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyh, the camp of Egypt was alFustaat. These camps were established to protect the Islamic
state, continue the conquests and spread Islam.

29- The most famous leaders of conquests at the time of 'Uthmk
(4)were: al-Ahnaf ibn Qays, Sulaymaan ibn Rabee'ah, 'Abd
al-Rahmaan ibn Rabee'ah and Habeeb ibn Maslamah.
30- The battle of Dhaat al-Sawaari was clear proof that sound
belief ('aqeedah) may prevail over military experience and
superiority in numbers and equipment. The Byzantines had
been masters of the sea since ancient times, and they had
lengthy experience in naval warfare, whereas the Muslims
were new to travelling and fighting on the sea.
31- Among the most important lessons that we learn from the
conquests of 'Uthmh ibn 'Affh are: the fulfilment of AU3h's
promise to grant victory and cause the believers to prevail;
developments in the arts of war and politics; the Muslims
began to wage campaigns by sea; gathering intelligence
about the enemy; and keenness to be united in the face of the
enemy.
32- From the story of the compilation of the Qur'h at the time of
' U W , we can see the extent to which the Saktbah ( &)
understood the verses which forbid differing, as All21
forbade dissent and warned against it. Because of their
deep understanding of the verses, Hudhayfah (a&) was very
distressed when he heard signs of difference in the recitation
of Qur'Sn. He went straight to Macmah and told 'Uthmk of
what he had seen and heard, and within a short period of
time 'Uthmh took the right decision and put an end to the
differences.
33- Employing the measures to create harmony among the
Muslims and unite them is one of greatest forms of jihnd. This

618

'Uthmh Ibn 'Affin .& Dhun-Noorayn

is an important step in strengthening the Muslims and
establishing their state and the rule of sharee'ah. This is the
understanding of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and was
manifested most clearly in 'Uthmsn's uniting the ummah
in reading one Mus-haf.

34- The regions of the Islamic state at the time of 'Uthmtm (&)
included: Makkah, Madinah, Bahrain, Yamaamah, Yemen,
Hadramawt, Syria, Armenia, Egypt, Basra and Kufah.
35- ' U W employed various means of keeping an eye on his
workers and finding out how they were doing. These
included: attending Hajj, asking those who came from
other regions and provinces, sending inspectors to the
provinces, summoning the governors and questioning
them, and other methods.

36- The rights of governors at the time of the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs included: obedience so long as it did not involve
disobedience towards Allsh, offering sincere advice to the
governors, conveying sound news to them, respecting them
after they were dismissed, and giving them their salaries.
37- The duties of governors at the time of the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs included: establishing the rules of Islam, ensuring
security in their lands, jihad for the sake of All&, ensuring
that provisions were available to the people, appointing
workers and employees, taking care of ahl al-dhimmah,
consulting the wise people in their provinces, looking at
the province's needs for development and paying attention
to the social needs of the inhabitants.

38- The Rightly-Guided Caliph 'Uthmh is an example to be
followed and his actions set a constitutional precedent for
this ummah. Just as 'Umar set an example for those who
came after him of keeping relatives away from positions of
authority, 'Uthmh set a precedent for those who came after
him of bringing relatives close and giving them positions of

Conclusion

619

authority if they were qualified for that. Everything that
'UthmSn was criticized for is within the bounds of
permissibility.

39- Those relatives whom 'Ut(&) appointed as governors
had proven that they were qualified and had the ability to
run the affairs of their provinces, and AUah granted the
conquest of many lands at their hands. They ruled the people
on the basis of justice and kindness. Some of them had
worked for the state at the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar (&).
40- The one who studies the correct historical facts and the
biographies of the men whose help 'Uthmh sought, and
learns how their jihad had a great impact on he call of Islam
and how their good management of affairs brought
tremendous results that led to prosperity and success for
this ummah, will not be able to stop himself from expressing
out loud his admiration and pride, the more he studies this
period of Islamic history.

41- 'Uthmh (4)was not safe from attack by many researchers
on heir unfair books which are based on unexamined reports
about the era of 'Uthmsn, because many of them quoted
wealc and Raafidi reports, and based on these reports they
made unfair judgements against 'Uthmh, such as Ta-Ha
Hussein in al-Fitnah al-Kubra, Raadi 'Abd al-Raheem in alNuzum al-Islarniyyah, Muhammad al-Rayyis in al-Nazariyaat
alSiyaasiyyah, 'Ali Husayn al-Kharbutli in al-Islam wa'lKhilaafah, Abu'l-A'la al-Mawdoodi in al-Mulk wa'l-Khilaafah,
Sayyid Qutub in al-'Adaalah al-Ijtimaa'iyyah, and others.
Indeed 'Uthmiin is the caliph who has been wronged; his
early opponents fabricated Lies about him and the later
Muslims were not fair towards him either.
42- The historical facts state that ' U W n (&) did not banish
Abu Dharr (&), rather Abu Dharr asked him for permission
(to leave Madinah) and he gave him permission but the
enemies of 'Uthman (&) spread false rumours that he had

'Uthmgn Ibn 'AffGn & Dhun-Noorayn

620

banished him.
43- Abu Dharr (A)
was not influenced at all by the views of the
Jew 'Abd-All& ibn Saba'. He settled in al-Ribdhah and
remained there until he died, and he was not involved in any
of the j t n a h (turmoil).

44- There were numerous causes for the turmoil which led to the
murder of 'Uthmh (A), including: prosperity and its effect
on society; the nature of social change at the time of
'Uthmh; the fact that ' U W (A)came after 'Umar (4);
the departure of the senior Sahibah from Madimah; jaahill
tribalism; the cessation of conquests; piety that was based on
ignorance; the conspiracy of those who bore grudges against
Islam; precise plans to stir up trouble against 'Uthmh; use of
different means to incite the people; and the role played by
'Abd-Allgh ibn Saba' in the j t n a h .
45- The turmoil initially flared up in Kufah, then its instigators
were banished to Syria, then they settled with 'Abd arRahmaan 'ibn Khaalid ibn al-Waleed in al-Jazeerah. Then
they returned to Kufah after they received a letter from
Yazeed ibn Qays telling them to come to Kufah.
46- 'UtMn's policy in dealing with the turmoil was based on
forbearance, deliberation and justice. He employed measures
to confront it such as: sending inspection committees; writing
a comprehensive letter to the people of the regions which
was like a general announcement to all the Muslims;
consulting the governors of the regions; establishing proof
against the rebels; and responding to some of their demands.

47- The one who contemplates the way in which ' U m n (4)
dealt with the turmoil that occurred during his reign will be
able to derive guidelines which will help the Muslim to deal
with turmoil. These guidelines include: venfying claims,
adhering to justice, being fair, forbearance and deliberation,
paying attention to that which benefits the Muslims,

Conclusion

621

avoiding that which creates division among the Muslims,
keeping quiet and not speaking too much, consulting sincere
scholars, and seeking guidance from the ahaadeeth of the
Messenger of All* ( g ) about fitnnh (turmoil).

48- It seems that there are many reasons why 'Uthmh did not
allow the Sahibah to fight. They are: following the advice of
the Messenger ( g ) who had told him in private about the
day of the siege; the promise that he had made to him and
his patience in adhering to it; and the fact that he did not
to
want to be the first caliph after the Messenger of All* (g)
shed the blood of the Muslims. Moreover, the evildoers were
not after anyone else, so he did not want to use the believers
as shields to protect himself, rather he wanted to sacrihce
himself in order to save them, knowing that this turmoil
would lead to his murder. That was in accordance with what
the Messenger of All* (@) had told him when he gave him
the glad tidings of Paradise in return for a calamity that
would befall him and that he would be killed adhering to the
tmth. That was in accordance with the advice of Ibn Salaam
(ab)when he told him to refrain (from fighting) because it
would give him a stronger stance against the rebels (on the
Day of Judgement).
49- The killer of 'UthmAn was a n Egyptian man, but the sources
do not give his name. As for the accusation that Muhammad
ibn Abi Bakr killed 'Uthmh with his arrow head, this is false
and the reports concerning that are weak, in addition to their
texts being odd because they go against the saheeh reports
which state that the killer was an Egyptian man.
50- The Sahlibah ( &) are all innocent of the blood of 'Uthmh
(4).The saheeh reports and historical events confirm that the
Sahlibah were innocent of inciting the people against 'Uthmh
or taking part in the turmoil against him, as we have quoted
the saheeh reports.
51- ' U M n was well aware of the conspiracy and its aims.

622

'Uthmgn Ibn 'Affgn & Dhun-Noorayn

Indeed, he managed to penetrate the ranks of the
conspirators and find out about all their plans, and he
faced the events with great courage, but he did not want to
be the first one to unsheathe the sword against the Muslims,
and he preferred to save the ummah by sacrificing himself,
which is the pinnacle of selflessness.

52- The turmoil of 'Uthmh's murder was the cause of a great
deal of further turmoil and it cast its shadow on the events
that followed it. People's hearts changed and lying became
widespread, and deviation from the laws and teachings of
Islam began from that point.
53- Wronging and transgressing against others unlawfully are
causes of doom in this world and in the Hereafter, as All2h
says:

"And these towns (population,f 'Aad, Thamood)We destroyed
them when they did wrong. And We appointed ajxed timefor
their destuuction" (Al-Kahf18:59).
The one who studies the situation of those who rebelled
against 'Uthmh (I&) and transgressed against him will find
that All& did not give them respite rather He humiliated
them and wreaked vengeance on them, and none was
spared.

54- The calamity had a great impact on the believers; they were
overwhelmed with grief and their eyes filled with tears; they
spoke in praise of 'Uthmh and prayed for mercy for him.
Hassaan ibn Thsbit (&) eulogized the caliph and lamented
his killing a great deal, condemning the murderers and their
actions in lines of moving verse that history has preserved
for us and which are not hidden away from us by the
barriers of time.

Conclusion

623

55- This is what AU8h has enabled me to compile and analyze in
this book: 'Uthmin ibn 'Affin, his lye and times. Whatever in it
is correct is by the grace of Allsh to me, and whatever is
incorrect, I seek the forgiveness of All&, may He be exalted,
and repent to Him, and All& and His Messenger have
nothing to do with it. It is sufficient for me that I was keen to
state the truth and present the proof and evidence which
indicates that 'Uthmk ibn 'Affgn was entitled to the
caliphate. I ask Allsh to benefit my Muslim brothers by
means of this book, and cause those who read it to remember
me in their du'aa's, for the prayer of a man for his brother in
his absence will be answered, in sha Allih. I end this book
with the words of Allih:

"And those who came after them say : Our Lord! Forgive us a ~ ~ d
our brethren who have preceded us in Faith, and put not in our
hearts any hatred against those who have believed. Our Lord!
Yon are indeed full of kindness, Most Merczful" (Al-Hashr
5910)
And the close of our request is: All praise be to All*
Lord of the Worlds.

the

