-5–

AL-'AQIDAH AL-WASITIYAH
Introduction

In the name of Allah the Compassionate, the Merciful1 The praise belongs to Allah2 Who sent
His Messenger3 with guidance and the religion of truth (i.e., Islam) making it incumbent on all
religions. Allah is the best of witnesses4, and I testify that there is no god but Allah alone and
that He has no partner5; I admit and believe in the oneness of Allah. And I testify that
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger6; May Allah greatly bless him, his family, and his
companions.
This is the belief of the saved group7, the victorious ones to the Day of Judgment, the people
of the Sunnah and the Jama'ah8 (i.e., The belief in Allah, His angels, His books, His
messengers, the resurrection after death, the belief in Divine Decree (qadar), be it good or
bad)9.
Part of the belief in Allah is the belief in how He has described Himself in His Book (the Qur'an)
and in how His Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) has described Him. Believe without
distorting or denying and without questioning or shaping; Rather, believe in Allah, The Exalted:
"There is none like Him; He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer." [EMQ 42:11]
Do not deny Him the way He has described Himself; Do not change words from their context;
Do not disbelieve the names of Allah and His Signs; Do not exemplify His Attributes with the
attributes of His creatures because Allah, The Exalted, has no likeness: There is none
comparable to Him; There is none equal to Him; The Exalted, the Supreme, is not measured by
His creatures; Indeed, He best knows Himself and others; He is All-Truthful; and His Speech
prevails over the speech of His creatures.
Moreover, His messengers are truthful and thus speak the truth. This is opposite to those who
speak about Him what they themselves know not. About this, The Exalted, The Supreme has
said:
"Glorified be your lord, the Lord of Majesty, from that which (the unbelievers) attribute
(unto Him). And peace be upon the messengers. And praise be to Allah the Lord the
Universe." [EMQ 37:180-182]
He glorified Himself with what the opponents of the messengers said of Him; And He greeted
the messengers because what they said was free from defect.
He (the Glory is His) combined what He described Himself as between negation and
affirmation10. Consequently, the people of the Sunnah and Jama'ah must not deviate from
what the messengers brought forth; verily, it is the right path, the path of those upon whom
Allah bestowed His grace, the path of the prophets, saints, martyrs, and righteous people.

www.islambase.tk

-6–

ALLAH'S NAMES AND ATTRIBUTES IN THE QUR'AN
Chapter One

The following is included in this idea of how Allah describes Himself in Surat al-Ikhlas, (chapter
112) which equals a third of the Qur'an11, where He says:
"Say He is Allah The One, Allah The Eternal. He never begot, nor was begotten. There is
none comparable to Him." [EMQ 112:1-3]
And He described Himself in the greatest Ayah (verse) in His Book (i.e., Ayat al-Kursi):
"Allah, there is no god save Him, The Living, The Eternal. Neither slumber nor sleep
overtakes Him. Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. Who is he
who intercedes with Him except by His permission? He knows that which is before them
and that which is behind them, while they encompass nothing of His Knowledge except
what He wills. His seat (kursi) contains the heavens and the earth, and He is never weary of
preserving them. He is The Sublime, The Great." [EMQ 2:255]
Therefore, Allah protects whoever reads this Ayah at night and no devil can get close to him
until morning. Allah has also said:
"Depend on The Living One, He Who will never die." [EMQ 25:58]
And He, the Glorified, has said:
"He is The First (al-Awwal) and The Last (al-Akhir), The Outward (as-Zahir) and The Inward
(al-Batin); He is The Knower of All Things." 12 [EMQ 57:3]

Knowledge:
"He knows that which goes down into the earth and that which comes out from it, and that
which descends from the heavens and that which ascends into it. He is The Merciful, The
Forgiving." [EMQ 34:2]
"With Him are the keys of the unknown (mafatih al-ghaib), none but He knows them. He
knows what is in the land and the sea; not a leaf falls but He knows it; not a grain amid the
darkness of the earth, naught of wet or dry but (it is recorded) in a clear record." [EMQ
6:59]
He has said:
"No female conceives or gives birth except with His Knowledge." [EMQ 35:11]
And He has said:
"That you may know that Allah is able to do all things, and that Allah knows all things."
[EMQ 65:12]

Might:
And He has said:
"Indeed, Allah is the One Who gives livelihood, The Lord of Unbreakable Might." [EMQ
51:58]

www.islambase.tk

-7–

Hearing, Seeing:
And He has said:
"Nothing is like Him; and He is The Hearer, The Seer." [EMQ 42:11]
And He has said:
"Lo! Comely is this which Allah admonishes you to be. Lo! Allah is ever Hearer, Seer." [EMQ
4:58]

Will:
And He has said:
"If only, when you entered your garden, you had said: That which Allah wills is; There is no
strength save in Allah." [EMQ 18:39]
And He has said:
"If Allah had so willed it, those who followed after them would not have fought one with
the other after clear proofs had come unto them. But they differed, some of them
believing and some disbelieving. And if Allah had so willed it, they would not have fought
one with the other; But Allah does what He wills." [EMQ 2:253]
And He has said:
"The beast of cattle is made lawful unto you [for food], except that which is announced
unto you [herein], hunting being unlawful when you are on pilgrimage; Indeed, Allah
ordains that which He wills." [EMQ 5:51]
And He has said:
"Of whomsoever it is Allah's will to guide, his heart He expands into Islam; And of
whomsoever it is His will to send astray, his heart He made closed and narrow as if he were
engaged in sheer ascent." [EMQ 6:125]

Love:
He has said:
"And do good; Indeed, Allah loves those who do good."[EMQ 2:195]
And He has said:
"Act equitably; Indeed, Allah loves the equitable."[EMQ 49:9]
And He has said:
"So long as they are true to you, be true to them; Indeed, Allah loves those who keep their
duty." [EMQ 9:7]
And He has said:

www.islambase.tk

-8–

"Truly, Allah loves those who repent, and loves those who care for cleanliness."[EMQ
2:222]
And He has said:
"Say, [O Muhammad, to mankind]: If you love Allah, follow me; Allah will love you." [EMQ
3:31]
And He has said:
"Allah will redeem a people whom He loves, and who love Him." [EMQ 5:54]
And He has said:
"Indeed, Allah loves those who fight in ranks for His cause, as if they were a solid
structure." [EMQ 61:4]
And He has said:
"He is The Forgiving, The Loving." [EMQ 85:14]

Mercy:
And His saying:
"In the name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful."
He has said:
"Our Lord! You comprehended all things in mercy and Knowledge." [EMQ 40:7]
And He has said:
"He is Merciful to the believers." [EMQ 33:43]
And He has said:
"My Mercy has embraced all things." [EMQ 7:156]
And He has said:
"Your Lord has prescribed for Himself Mercy." [EMQ 6:54]
And He has said:
"He is The Forgiving, The Merciful." [EMQ 10:107]
And He has said:
"Allah is better [than any one] at guarding, and He is The Most Merciful of those who show
mercy." [EMQ 12:64]

Pleasure and Anger:
He has said:
"Allah takes pleasure in them and they in Him."[EMQ 5:119]

www.islambase.tk

-9–

And He has said:
"Whoever slays a believer intentionally, his reward is Hell for ever. Allah's wrath is against
him and He has cursed him." [EMQ 4:93]
And He has said:
"That will come to be because they followed that which angered Allah, and shunned that
which pleases Him." [EMQ 47:28]
And He has said:
"When they angered Us, We punished them." [EMQ 43:55]
And He has said:
"But Allah was adverse to their being sent forth and held them back." [EMQ 9:46]
And He has said:
"It is most hateful in the Sight of Allah that you say that which you do not." [EMQ 61:3]

Coming:
He has said:
"Will they wait until Allah comes to them in canopies of clouds, with the angels? Then the
case will have been already judged." [EMQ 2:210)
And He has said:
"Are they waiting to see if the angels come to them? Or your Lord [Himself]? Or some of the
Signs of your Lord? That Day Signs of your Lord will come." [EMQ 6:158]
And He has said:
"Nay! When the earth is pounded to powder, then your Lord will come and the angels will
come rank upon rank." [EMQ 89:21-22]
And He has said:
"A day will come when the heaven and the clouds will be rent asunder and the angels will
be sent down in a grand descent." [EMQ 25:25]

Face and Hand:
He has said:
"Only the Face of your Lord of Might and Glory will remain." [EMQ 55:27]
And He has said:
"Everything will perish save His Face." ([EMQ 28:88]
And He has said:

www.islambase.tk

- 10 –

"What kept you (Iblis) from falling prostrate before that which I have created with My
Hands."[EMQ 38:75]
And He has said:
"The Jews said: Allah's Hand is tied.' May their hands be tied and may they be accursed for
the [blasphemy] they utter. Rather, both His Hands are widely outstretched; He gives and
spends as He pleases." [EMQ 5:64]

Eyes:
He has said:
"Wait patiently for the Command of your Lord, [O Muhammad], for verily you are in Our
Eyes." [EMQ 52:48]
And He has said:
"We carried him [Nuh] on an [ark] made of planks and nails; It floats under Our Eyes, as a
reward for him who was rejected." [EMQ 54:13-14]
And He said:
"I have maintained you [Musa] with My Love that you might be reared under My Eye." [EMQ
20:39]

Hearing:
He has said:
"Allah has indeed heard her who argued with you [O Muhammad] concerning her husband,
and who complained unto Allah; Allah hears the argument between both of you; Indeed,
Allah is Hearer,Seer." [EMQ 58:1]
And He has said:
"Verily, Allah heard the saying of those [the Jews] who said: Allah is poor and we are rich."
[EMQ 3:181]
And He has said:
"Do they think that We do not hear their secrets and their private counsels? Indeed [We
do], and Our Messengers are by them to record all." [EMQ 43:80]

Seeing and Hearing:
He has said:
"Indeed, I will be with you [Musa and Harun], Hearing and Seeing." [EMQ 20:46]
And He has said:
"Is he then unaware that Allah sees?"[EMQ 96:14]
And He has said:

www.islambase.tk

- 11 –

"Who Sees you when you stand up [to pray]? And [sees] your movements among those who
fall prostrate [in worship]? Indeed, He, and only He, is The Hearer, The Knower." [EMQ
26:218-220]
And He has said:
"Say [unto them]: Act! Allah will see your actions, and [so will] His Messenger and the
Believers." [EMQ 9:105]
Power of Planning: He has said:
"He is, in His Power, Supreme." [EMQ 13:13]
And He has said:
"They [the unbelievers] plotted and planned, and Allah planned too; Allah is The Best of
Planners." [EMQ 3:54]
And He has said:
"So they devised a plot: and We devised a plot while they perceived not." [EMQ 27:50]
And He has said:
"Indeed, they devise a plot [against you O Muhammad] and I devise a plot [against them]."
[EMQ 86:15-16]

Forgiveness:
He has said:
"If you do good openly or conceal it, or if you forgive evil, indeed, Allah is Forgiving and
Powerful." [EMQ 4:149]
And He has said:
"Let them forgive and disregard [the transgressions of others]. Do you not wish that Allah
forgive you? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful." [EMQ 24:22]

Might:
He has said:
"And the might belongs to Allah and to His Messenger." [EMQ 63:8]
And He has said about Iblis (the Satan):
"[Iblis] said: Then by Your might, I will lead all of them astray'." [EMQ 38:82]
And He has said:
"Blessed be the Name of your Lord, Full of Majesty, and Honor." [EMQ 55:78]

www.islambase.tk

- 12 –

Oneness:
He has said:
"Therefore, worship you Him and be you steadfast in His Service; Do you know of anyone
who can be named along with Him?" [EMQ 19:65]
And He has said:
"There is none comparable to Him." [EMQ 112:4]
And He has said:
"Do not set up rivals to Allah when you know [The Truth]." [EMQ 2:22]
And he has said:
"Yet there are some people who take (idols as] rivals to Allah, loving them with a love like
(that which is the due) of Allah (only), but those who believe overflow in their love of
Allah." [EMQ 2:165]
And He has said:
"Say: Praise be to Allah, Who begets no son, Who has no partner in [His] dominion and Who
[needs] none to protect Him from humiliation;' And Magnify Him with all
magnificence."[EMQ 17:111]
And He has said:
"All that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth glorifies Allah; To Him belongs
Dominion; To Him belongs Praise; He is Able to do all things." [EMQ 64:1]
And He has said:
"Blessed is He Who sent down the Criterion [al-Furqan] to His Servant [Muhammad], that
He may warn all creatures. He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the
earth, no son has He begotten; Nor has He any partner in His Dominion. It is He Who
created all things and ordered them in due proportions." [EMQ 25:1-2]
And He has said:
"Allah did not beget a son; Nor is there any god along with Him; Otherwise each god would
have taken away what he had created and some of them would have lorded over others.
May Allah, Be Glorified above all that they allege. He knows what is hidden and what is
exposed. May He Be Exalted over all that they ascribe as partners [to Him]."[EMQ 23:91-92]
And He has said:
"Do not invent similitude’s for Allah; Indeed, Allah knows and you know not." [EMQ 16:74]
And He has said:
"Say: My Lord forbids only indecencies whether open or secret, sin and wrongful
oppression. You're associating with Allah that for which no Revelation has been given, and
you're saying things about Allah of which you have no knowledge." [EMQ 7:33]

www.islambase.tk

- 13 –

Settling on the Throne:
(Al-Istiwa' A'la Al-'Arsh)
He has said:
"The Beneficent One, Who is Settled on the Throne (al-Arsh)." and "Then He Mounted the
Throne."
Allah repeated this theme six times in the Qur'an.
He has said:
"Verily! Your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six days; Then He
Mounted the Throne." [EMQ 7:54]
And He has said:
"Verily! Your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six days; Then He
Established Himself on the Throne." [EMQ 10:3]
And He has said:
"Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see; Then He Mounted
the Throne." [EMQ 13:2]
And He has said:
"The Beneficent One, Who is established on the Throne." [EMQ 20:5]
And He has said:
"Then He Mounted the Throne, The Beneficent One." [EMQ 25:59]
And He has said:
"Allah created the heavens, the earth and all that is between them in six days; Then He
Mounted the Throne." [EMQ 32:4]
And He said:
"He it is Who created the heavens and earth in six days; Then He Mounted the Throne."13
[EMQ 57:4]

Highness:
And He has said:
"Behold! Allah has said; 'Oh Jesus! I am taking you and raising you up to Me." [EMQ 3:55]
And He has said:
"Rather, Allah raised him up to Him." [EMQ 4:158]
And He has said:
"To Him good words ascend, and He elevates the pious deed."14 [EMQ 35:10]

www.islambase.tk

- 14 –

And He has said:
"O Haman! Build me a tower, that I may reach the roads, - the roads of heavens, and that I
may climb up to the God of Moses, though verily I think he [Moses] is a liar." [EMQ 40:3637]
And He has said:
"Do you feel secure that He Who is in Heaven will not cause you to be swallowed up by the
earth when it shakes? Or do you feel secure that He Who is in Heaven will not send against
you a wind casting down pebbles from the sky? That is that you may know the manner of
My Warning." [EMQ 67:16-17]
And He has said:
"He created the heavens and the earth in six days; Then He Mounted the Throne. He knows
all that enters the earth and all that emerges there from and all that comes down from the
sky and all that ascends therein; He is with you wherever you may be. And Allah is Seer of
what you do." [EMQ 57:4]

Omnipresence:
And He has said:
"There is no secret conference of three but He is their fourth, nor of five but He is their
sixth, nor of less or more but He is with them wherever they be: And afterward, on the Day
of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did. Indeed, Allah is Knower of All
Things." [EMQ 58:7]
And He has said addressing Abu Bakr in the cave during the Hijrah:
"Grieve not. Indeed, Allah is with us." [EMQ 9:40]
And He has said:
"Indeed, I will be with you, Hearing and Seeing." [EMQ 20:46]
And He has said:
"Indeed, Allah is with those who protect themselves and with those who do good." [EMQ
16:128]
And He has said:
"Be patient and persevering, for Allah is with those who patiently persevere.”15 [EMQ
8:46]
And He has said:
"How often a small company overcame a big one by Allah's Help! Allah is with those who
steadfastly persevere." [EMQ 2:249]

Speech:
He has said:
"Whose words (hadith) can be truer than Allah's?" [EMQ 4:87]

www.islambase.tk

- 15 –

And He has said:
"Whose utterance (qil) can be truer than Allah's?" [EMQ 4:122]
And He has said:
"When Allah said (qala): O Jesus, son of Mary" [EMQ 5:116]
And He has said:
"Perfected is the Word (kalimatu) of your Lord in Truth and Justice." [EMQ 6:115]
And He has said:
"To Moses Allah spoke (kallama) directly." [EMQ 4:164]
And He has said:
"And of whom (messengers) there are some unto whom Allah spoke (kallama)."[EMQ 2:253]
And He has said:
"When Moses came to Our appointed place, and his Lord spoke (kallama) unto him." [EMQ
7:143]
And He has said addressing Musa:
"We called him (nadainahu) from the right side of [Mount] at-Tur and made him draw near
to Us for communion." [EMQ 19:52]
And He has said:
“When your Lord called (nada) Moses: Go unto the wrong-doing folk'." [EMQ 26:10]
And He has said:
"And their Lord called both of them (nadahuma) [Adam and Hawwa']: Did not forbid you
That Tree, and tell you (wa-aqul): Lo! Satan is an open enemy to you?" [EMQ 7:22]
And He said:
"On The Day He will call unto them (yunadihim) and say: Where are My partners who you
fabricated?" [EMQ 28:62]
And He has said:
"On The Day He will call unto them (yunadihim) and say: What answer gave you to the
messengers?" [EMQ 28:65]
And He has said:
"If anyone of the pagans seeks your protection, grant it to him so that he may hear the
Words (kalam) of Allah." [EMQ 9:6]
And He has said;
"A party of them used to listen to the Words (kalam) of Allah, then used to distort it
knowingly after they understood it." [EMQ 2:75]

www.islambase.tk

- 16 –

And He has said :
"They wish to change God's Words (kalam); Say: You shall not follow us.' Thus Allah said
(qala) before hand." [EMQ 48:15]
And He has said:
"Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of your Lord; None can change His
Words (kalimatihi)." [EMQ 18:27]
And He has said:
"Verily this Qur'an narrates (yaqussu) unto the Children of Israel most of the matters which
they dispute." [EMQ 27:76]
And He has said:
"This is a Blessed Book (kitabun mubarakun) which We have sent down." [EMQ 6:92]
And He has said:
"Had We send down this Qur'an on to a mountain, verily you would have seen it humbled
and rent asunder for fear of Allah." [EMQ 59:21]
And He has said:
"When We substitute one Verse (Ayah) for another and Allah knows best what He revealsthey say: You are but a fabricator; But most of them know not. Say: The Trustworthy Spirit
(i.e., Gabriel) has brought it (The Qur'an) from your Lord in Truth, in order to strengthen
those who believe, and as Guidance and Good Tidings for Muslims. We know well that they
say: It is a man who teaches him; The language of him they falsely point to is notably
foreign, while this is Arabic, pure and clear." [EMQ 16:101-103]

Looking at Allah:
He has said:
"Some faces, That Day, will beam (in brightness and beauty), looking toward their Lord."
[EMQ 75:22-23]
And He has said:
"(Relaxing) on couches looking (at their Lord)." [EMQ 83:35]
And He has said:
"For those who do good, is the best (reward given) and more (thereto). [EMQ 10:26]
And He has said:
"There they have all they desire; And there is still more with Us." [EMQ 50:3]
And the Qur'an is full of Verses which deal with this topic; whoever studies the Qur'an carefully
searching for guidance from it, the truthful path will be clear to him.

www.islambase.tk

- 17 –

ALLAH'S NAMES AND ATTRIBUTES IN THE SUNNAH
Chapter Two

The Sunnah16 of the Messenger of Allah (saw) interprets the Qur'an and clarifies it, and leads
to it, and expresses its meaning. We must accept and believe in the sound Ahadith in which the
Messenger (saw) described his Lord, The Almighty, The Exalted,17 such as the hadith:
"Our Lord descends during the last third of each night to the lower heaven, and says: 'Is there
anyone who calls on Me that I may respond to him? Is there anyone who asks Me that I may
give unto him? Is there anyone who requests My Forgiveness that I may forgive him?"' (Agreed
upon it by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"Indeed, Allah is happier with the repentance of his 'abd (worshipper) than any one of you is
with finding his lost riding camel." (Agreed upon it by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"Allah laughs about two men who kill each other but both enter paradise18." (Agreed upon it
by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"Allah marvels about the despair of His creatures ('ibad), while the changing of their situation
from bad to good is very near, He looks at you, and you are very desperate, so He keeps
laughing, because He knows that your relief is very close." (Its isnad is good; reported by
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and others)
And the hadith:
"(On the Day of Judgment) when a group of unbelievers is thrown into Hell, Hell asks for more
until the Lord Almighty puts His foot into it; then it folds up saying: Enough, enough'." (Agreed
upon it by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"Allah The Exalted, says: 'Adam!' And Adam answers: 'Here I am, at Your service!' Then a voice
calls: 'Verily! Allah orders you to send a delegate from your offspring to Hell'." (Agreed upon it
by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"Allah will talk to each person directly without a mediator between them." (Agreed upon it by
al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the saying of the Prophet (saw) on curing the ill:
"Our Lord Allah Who is in heaven, may Your name be sanctified, Your law is in heaven and on
earth; As Your Mercy is in heaven so make Your Mercy on earth. Forgive our faults and our
sins. You are the Lord of the good people, bestow some of Your Mercy, and some of Your Cure
on this pain that the sick may be cured." (This hadith has good isnad, reported by Abu Dawud
and others)

www.islambase.tk

- 18 –

And the hadith:
"Do you not trust me, while I have the trust of Him Who is in Heaven?" (Sound hadith; reported
by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"The Throne is above the water, and Allah is on the Throne; He knows what you are up to."
(Good hadith, reported by Abu Dawud and others.)
And the saying of the Prophet (saw) to the maid:
"Where is Allah?" And she answering: "In heaven." And he saying: "Who am I?" And she saying:
"You are the Messenger of Allah." And he saying "Free her; She is a believer." (Muslim)
And the hadith:
"When any one of you stands up for prayer, you must not spit in front of you nor to your right,
because Allah is in front to you; But you may spit to your left, or under your foot." (Agreed
upon it by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And the hadith:
"My Lord! The Lord of the Seven Heavens, and The Lord of the great Throne, our Lord and The
Lord of all, The Creator of plants and trees, The Revealer of the Tawrah (Old Testament), the
Injil (New Testament) and the Qur'an: I seek refuge in You from the evil of myself and from
the evil of all creatures; You are The First; Nothing is before You. You are The Last; Nothing is
after You. You are the Outward; Nothing is over You. You are the Inward; Nothing is inside of
You. Help me to pay my debt and keep poverty from me." (Muslim)
And the saying (of the Prophet, saw), when his companions raised up their voices in invocation
(Dhikr):
"0 people, restrain yourselves. Indeed, you are not calling One Who is deaf or absent; Rather,
you are calling a Hearer, One very close by; The One Who you are calling is closer to each one
of you, closer even than the neck of your riding animal." (Agreed upon it by al-Bukhari and
Muslim)
And the saying (of the Prophet, saw):
"You will see your Lord as you see the full moon; Nothing will impair your view of Him; And if
you are able to keep the dawn prayers and the mid afternoon prayers, do it." (Agreed upon it
by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And many more of these ahadith in which the Messenger of Allah (saw) relates of his Lord
whatever he relates.
The Saved Group (al-firqah an-najiyah), The people of the Sunnah and the Community believe
these things, as they believe what Allah revealed in His Precious Book (i.e., the Qur'an); (They
believe) without distorting or denying and without asking how (takyif) or shaping (tamthil);
Rather, they comprise the center of the groups of the Ummah (the Muslim nation), as the
Ummah comprises the center of all nations.
With regard to the Attributes of Allah, The Glorified, The Exalted, they comprise the center
between the denying Jahmiyah19 and the people who shape and create likenesses (ahl at-

www.islambase.tk

- 19 –

tamthil al-mushabbihah); And they comprise the center between the Qadariyah20 and the
Jabriyah21 with regard to [the acts of Allah the Exalted], and between the Murji'ah22 and the
Wa'idiyah23 of the Qadariyah and others without regard to [Allah's threat], and between the
Haruriyah24 and the Mu'tazilah25 and between the Murji'ah and the Jahmiyah with regard to
[the names of faith and religion], and between the Rawafid26 and the Khawarij27 with regard
to the (Prophet's Companions).

Allah is Above Everything
What we mentioned of belief in Allah included belief in what Allah has revealed in His Book
(the Qur'an), and what has been continuously reported from His Messenger (saw), and what the
early generation of the Ummah unanimously agreed upon: That Allah, The Glorified, is above
His heavens on His Throne, exalted above His creatures, and that He, The Glorified, is with
them wherever they be and knows whatever they do. He summed it up in His saying:
"He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six days; Then He Settled on the
Throne. He knows what goes into the earth and what comes out of it and what descends
from heavens and what ascends into it; He is with you wherever you are; Allah sees all
what you do." [EMQ 57:4]
His saying "He is with you" does not mean that He is commingled with the creatures: The
language does not indicate this and it is against what the early generation of the Ummah
agreed upon, and contrary to Allah's creation of all things; For example, the moon is one of
Allah's Signs to be found amongst the smallest of his creatures; It is placed in the skies where it
is at the same time with both the traveler and the non-traveller, wherever they are; and He,
The Glorified, is on the Throne, watching over His creatures, ruling over them; This is, as well
as other Signs of His Lordship.
All that Allah The Glorified mentioned-that He is on the Throne (al-'Arsh) and that He is with
us-true in itself does not warrant distortion but should be protected from false conjectures,
such as thinking that the apparent meaning of His saying "In Heavens" means that heavens
contain Him. This is invalid according to the consensus of all the people of knowledge and
faith.
"Indeed, His Seat (Kursi) encompasses heavens and earth, and it is He Who holds heavens
and earth so they do not perish and He Who holds heaven so that it not fall on earth except
by His Permission.” It is among His Signs that heaven and earth stand fast by His Order."
[EMQ 30:25]

The Closeness of Allah to His 'Ibad
Included in this is the belief that He is very close to His creatures, responding, as He has
summed it up in His saying:
"If My 'ibad (worshipers) ask you about Me; (say that) I am very close, answering the caller
when he calls on Me." [EMQ 2:186]
And the Prophet (saw) said to his Companions when they raised their voices in invocation of
Allah:
"0 people! Restrain yourselves. Verily, you are not calling One Who is deaf or absent, the One
you call is nearer to each of you than is the neck of your riding animal."

www.islambase.tk

- 20 –

What has been revealed in the Book (i.e.,the Qur'an) and in the Sunnah - of His Closeness and
His Concomitance - does not contradict what has been told of His Exaltation and Highness.
Indeed, Glory be to Him, there is none like Him in all His Attributes, and He is High in His
Nearness and Near in His Highness.

The Qur'an is the Word of Allah
Part of the belief in Allah and His Books28 is the belief that the Qur'an is Allah's Word revealed,
not created29, that in Him it originated and unto Him it returns, that Allah truly uttered it,
that this Qur'an which He revealed to Muhammad (saw) is truly the Word of Allah not the word
of any other, that it is not allowable to say it is a narrative of the Word of Allah or an
interpretation of it. That if the people read it or write it in books does not mean it is not the
true Word of Allah, The Exalted, because speech is attributed to the one who spoke it initially,
not to the one who narrated it. It is the Word of Allah, its letters and its meaning. The Word of
Allah is not the words only, without meaning, and not the meaning only, without words.

Seeing Allah on the Day of Judgment
What we referred to of belief in Him, in His Books, and in His Messengers includes also belief
that those who believe will see Him with their eyes, just as they see the sun on a day free of
clouds; Just as they see the full moon without obstacle, they will see Him, The Glorified, while
they are in the Courts of Judgment; And they will see Him after entering Paradise. This is as
Allah, The Glorified, The Exalted, wills.

www.islambase.tk

- 21 –

BELIEF IN THE HEREAFTER
Chapter Three

The Trial of the Grave and Resurrection
The belief in the Last Day is a belief in all that the Prophet (saw) told of what will happen after
death, belief in the grave trial, in the grave punishment and in the grave delight.
As for the trial, people will be tried in their graves30 Every one will be asked: "Who is your
God? What is your religion? Who is your Prophet?" Allah will affirm the believers with the true
words in this life and in the Hereafter, so the believers will say: Allah is my Lord, Islam is my
religion, and Muhammad (saw) is my Prophet."
But the doubtful will say: "What? What? I don't know. I heard the people say something, so I
said it." Thence will he be beaten with an iron bar until he sends out a loud scream which all
but human beings will hear, because if they would hear it, they would faint.
This trial will be followed either by delight or punishment, until the Big Resurrection (alQiyamah al-Kubra) will take place. The souls will be returned to their bodies and the
Resurrection, which Allah has told of in His Book (the Qur'an) and through His Prophet, and
about which all Muslims agree, will occur. The people, naked, barefoot, uncircumcised31, will
rise from their graves to face The Lord of The Universe, while the sun moves nearer to them
and their own sweat overwhelms them. Then the scales will be set so that people's deeds may
be weighed.
"Those whose scales are heavy (with good deeds) will be successful and those whose scales
are light (lacking sufficient good deeds), will lose their souls eternally to Hell."[EMQ 23:102103)

The Records of the People's Deeds
The records will be distributed-the records of deeds. Some will receive theirs in their right
hands, and some in their left or behind their backs32.
For The Glorified, The Exalted, has said:
"Every person is held responsible for his [or her] deeds. On the Day of Resurrection We
shall bring out for him a scroll which he will see spread open. (He will be ordered): Read
your own record; It is sufficient that you judge yourself today." [EMQ 17:13-14]
Allah will remind the people of their deeds, talk privately to His faithful 'abd (worshipper) and
remind him of all his faults. So it has been described in the Book (the Qur'an) and in the
Sunnah.
As for non-believers, they will not be reminded in the manner of the one whose good deeds and
bad deeds are balanced, because they will have no good deeds. Rather their (evil) deeds will
be counted, verified and presented so that they admit to them, and will be punished for them.

www.islambase.tk

- 22 –

Al-Hawd (The Prophet's Pool)
In the Court of Judgment is the Prophet's Pool (Hawd) with its water whiter than milk and
sweeter than honey, its drinking vessels as numerous as the stars, and its length a (travel for) a
month and its width a (travel for) a month. Whoever drinks from it will never thirst.

As-Sirat (The Bridge Over Hell)
The Sirat is stretched over Hell. It is the bridge between Paradise and Hell. People cross it in
accordance with their deeds. Some cross as quickly as the eye winks; Some cross as if a flash of
lightening; Some cross as if wind; Some cross as a noble horse would; Some cross as a camel
rider might; Some cross it running, some walking; Some cross it crawling; And some are
snatched and thrown into Hell. The bridge has hooks to snatch the people according to their
deeds. Whoever passes over it enters Paradise. If they cross the Sirat, they will be halted over
a bridge between Paradise and Hell to settle accounts between themselves; If they are cleared
and purified, they are permitted to enter Paradise.

Ash-Shafa'ah (The Prophets Intercession)
The first to knock at the gate of Paradise will be Muhammad (saw); And the first Ummah to
enter Paradise will be his Ummah.
And he (Muhammad) (saw) has three intercessions to perform on the Day of Resurrection:
His first intercession will be on behalf of the people still held for judgment, after all Prophets,
Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, the son of Mary, have passed over intercession and it
reaches him (Muhammad).
His second intercession will be on behalf of the people of Paradise in order that they may enter
it. These two intercessions are unique to him.
His third intercession is to be on behalf of those who warrant Fire. This intercession is for him
(Muhammad), for all prophets and saints and for others, so that they may intercede on behalf
of those who deserve Fire, preventing them from entering it, and on behalf of those who have
entered into the Fire, taking them from it. Allah, The Exalted, out of His Generosity and Mercy,
sends some people out from the Fire without intercession. Space will be left unfilled in
Paradise, so Allah will create more people for it, and bring them into it.
The Hereafter includes judgment, reward, punishment, Paradise and Hell. These are
mentioned in detail in the Revealed Books from heavens, in the tradition of the prophets, and
in the inherited knowledge from Muhammad (saw) what is sufficient and satisfactory (in this
regard), and whoever wishes to seek it can find it.

Al-Qadar (Divine Decree)
The Saved Group-the people of the Sunnah and of the Community- believe in Qadar (Divine
Decree) whether good or bad. Belief that fate has two parts, each part includes two things:
The first part is belief that Allah ,The Exalted, knows what the creatures will do in accordance
with His Ancient Knowledge, which He described as being of Eternity; He has known all their
states of obedience and disobedience, all their sustenance and their life span.
Allah wrote in al-Lawh al-Mahfuz (the Preserved Tablet) the fate of creatures:

www.islambase.tk

- 23 –

"The first thing He created is the pen (al-Qalam), He said to it: 'Write'. It said: 'What shall I
write?' He said: 'Write what will take place until the Day of Judgment.' Whatever is to
strike a human being will never miss him, and whatever is to miss him will never strike
him. The pens had been dried and the scrolls had been folded as Allah, The Glorified, The
Exalted, said: "Did you not know that Allah knows (all) what in heaven and earth? Verily, all
put down in a record. Indeed, that is very easy of Allah." [EMQ 22:70]
And He said:
"No disaster befalls earth but it is in a record before We created it. Indeed, it is easy of
Allah." [EMQ 57:22]
This predestination which belongs to His Knowledge-may He be Glorified-is in some places
summarized and in others detailed. He has written in the Pre- served Tablet whatever He has
willed: When He creates the body of the fetus and before blowing the soul into it, He sends an
angel to it and orders him to write four words, his livelihood, his life span, his deeds, and if he
is happy or miserable and so forth. This kind of predestination was rejected by extremist
Qadariyah of the past. But these days very few reject it.
The second step is the executed Will of Allah and His Inclusive Ability. The belief in that
whatever Allah wills, will come to pass and whatever He does not will, will never occur, that
whatever motion or silence is in heaven or earth is by the will of Allah, The Glorified. Nothing
takes place in His dominion except what He wills, and He, The Glorified, The Exalted, is
capable of all that exists and all that does not exist.
There is no creature on earth or in heaven except Allah The Glorified, is his Creator. There is
no creator beside Him and there is no Lord other than Him.
With all that, He ordered the creatures to obey Him and His messengers, and He forbade them
to disobey Him.
He, The Glorified, loves the pious, the doers of good and the just. He is pleased with those who
believe and do good deeds; He does not like unbelievers; He is displeased with transgressors;
He does not ordain immorality; He does not wish disbelief for His creatures; And He does not
like corruption.
Creatures are the performers in reality, but Allah is the Creator of their deeds; The 'abd
(human being) is the believer and the unbeliever, the righteous and the wicked, the praying
and the fasting; The 'ibad (human beings) have power over their actions and they have their
own will; But Allah is their Creator and the Creator of their power and their will, as He, The
Exalted, has said:
"To whomever of you wills it, follow the Straight Path. You have no will unless Allah ,The
Lord of the Universe, so wills." [EMQ 81:28-29]
This degree of predestination is rejected by most of the Qadariyah - those whom the Prophet
(saw) called the Fire Worshipers (Majus) of this Ummah (Islam). Others who affirm this
Attribute of Allah exaggerate it to the extent of stripping the human being of his power and his
choice, taking the wisdom and advantage from Allah's acts and rules.

www.islambase.tk

- 24 –

Iman (Faith)
Among the fundamentals of the people of the Sunnah is that religion and faith are utterance
and action - the utterance of the heart and the tongue and the action of the heart, the tongue
and the limbs - and that faith increases with obedience and decreases with disobedience.
In spite of this, Ahl al-Qiblah (Muslims) are not to be considered unbelievers as a result of their
committing faults and sins (Ma'asi and Kaba'ir) as the khawarij consider them. Rather,
brotherhood in faith remains firm despite faults, just as Allah, The Exalted, has said in the
punishment Verse:
"If the heir of a murdered person forgives his brother (in faith)33, it is preferred that he
follow his forgiveness with leniency (in collecting the blood-money"34 [EMQ 2:178]
And He has said:
"If two groups of believers fight each other, try to make peace between them. However, if
one of them attacks the other (and refuses to make peace), fight the attackers until they
return to the Ordinance of Allah; Then, if they return, make peace between them justly,
and act equitably. Indeed, Allah loves the equitable. Believers are indeed brothers,
therefore make peace between your brothers." [EMQ 49:9]
The people of the Sunnah do not completely strip the Muslim transgressor from the faith. And
they do not believe that he will stay in Hell forever as the Mu'tazilah claim. Rather (they
believe that) the transgressor enters under the name of the faith just as Allah has said:
"And liberate a slave who is a believer." [EMQ 4:92]
He may not enter under the name of absolute faith as Allah, The Exalted, has said:
"Indeed, the believers are those whose hearts, when Allah is mentioned (in their
presence), fill with piety, and whose faith, when His Words are recited to them, increases."
[EMQ 8:2]
As the Prophet (saw) said:
"The adulterer is stripped of faith while committing adultery, the thief is stripped of faith
while stealing, the drinker is stripped of faith while he is drinking and anybody who puts a
show of greatness to attract the people's eyes is stripped of faith." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)
And it is said: He is a believer with incomplete faith; Or he is a believer by his faith and
transgressor by his sin. So he is not given absolutely the name (of faith), nor is he stripped
completely of the name.

www.islambase.tk

- 25 –

AHL AL-BAIT, 'UMMAHAT AL-MU'MININ AND AS-SAHABAH
(The Prophet's Family, the Prophet's Wives and the Companions of the Prophet)
Chapter Four

As-Sahabah (The Prophets Companions)
Among the fundamentals of the people of the Sunnah and the community is purity of heart and
tongue toward the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (saw) just as Allah has described
them:
"Those who came after them (the Sahabah) say: 'Our Lord forgive us. Forgive our brethren
who preceded us in faith. Purify our hearts of any rancor toward the believers. Our Lord,
You are Gentle, Compassionate." [EMQ 59:l0]
Obey the saying of the Prophet (saw):
"Do not revile my companions. By (Allah) in Whose Hand my soul is!, if any one of you spends
gold (piled up) like (mount) 'Uhud it will not equal a pint of any one of them, nor its half." (AlBukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, at-Tirmidhi Ibn Majah, Ibn Hanbal)
(The people of the Sunnah) accept what the Qur'an, the Sunnah, and the consensus brought
them of the Sahabah's virtues and high ranks; So they prefer those who spent (their wealth)
and fought before the victory -which is the treaty of al-Hudaybiyah35 - over those who spent
and fought after it. They prefer the Muhajirun (Immigrants) over the Ansar (Helpers). They
believe that Allah said to the people of Badr - they were over three hundred-: "Do whatever
you wish, I have already forgiven you." (Abu Dawud)
And "they believe that no one who pledged allegiance to the Prophet (saw) under the tree36
will enter Hell" (Muslim), as the Prophet (saw) had declared; but that Allah was pleased with
them and they with Him - and they were more than one thousand and four hundred.
They assign to Paradise whoever the Messenger of Allah (saw) assigned there such as the ten,
and Thabit Ibn Qays Ibn Shammas, and others of amongst the Sahabah.
They accept what has been reported continuously from the Prince of the Believers, 'Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (may Allah be pleased with him), and from others, that the best men of this 'Ummah
after its Prophet are: Abu Bakr; then 'Umar; third, 'Uthman, and fourth, 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib (may
Allah be pleased with them all). All Traditions have indicated, and all Sahabah (may Allah be
pleased with them all) have agreed upon giving priority to 'Uthman out of regard for his
allegiance (al-Bay'ah), although some of the people of the Sunnah are disputing over whether
'Uthman or 'Ali (may Allah be pleased with both of them) has the priority, after they (the
people of the Sunnah) had agreed upon giving priority to Abu Bakr and 'Umar. Some people
gave the priority to 'Uthman and kept silent and considered 'Ali to be the fourth. However,
some people preferred 'Ali. And some remained neutral. But the people of the Sunnah settled
on preferring 'Uthman, even though this matter - the matter of 'Uthman and 'Ali - is not of the
fundamentals. The majority of the people of the Sunnah do not consider disagreeing in this
matter as being misled. Rather, it is in the matter of the "Question of the Caliphate" where
they consider the disagreeing person to be misled.
Ahl as-Sunnah believe that the Caliph after the Messenger of Allah (saw) is Abu Bakr; then
'Umar; then 'Uthman, then 'Ali, and that whoever contests the Caliphate of any one of these
Imams is indeed more lost than an ass
Ahl as-Sunnah should not deal with what happened between the Sahabah of the disagreement,
and they must say: Part of the Traditions which are narrated about their faults are untrue, and

www.islambase.tk

- 26 –

some of them added to or omitted from, or distorted; The part of them which is true, they are
excused from, because either they expressed their personal opinion and were right, or they
expressed their personal opinion and were wrong.
Ahl as-Sunnah do not think that each of the Sahabah is infallible of committing grave sins or
light sins, but that they are liable to commit general offenses. Nevertheless, to them belongs
priority in accepting Islam
And in doing good deeds which qualify them for forgiveness of what they may have committed,
to the extent that their offenses are forgiven. The same offenses will not be forgiven of those
who come after them because they (as-Sahabah) have a credit of good deeds which erase the
bad deeds, a credit the generations after them do not have. It has been confirmed by the
saying of the Messenger of Allah (saw):
"That they are the best of all generations," (al-Bukhari and Muslim) and: "That the pint of
charity any one of them might have given is better than a pile of gold the size of Mount 'Uhud
if it is given by anyone who comes after them." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)
Moreover, if anyone of them (as-Sahabah) committed any act of offense, without doubt he
repented from it, or he did good deeds which wiped that offense from him, or he has been
forgiven for the virtue of accepting Islam from its start or by intercession of Muhammad (saw)
since they are deserving most his intercession, or a calamity inflicted upon him in this world
which covered for that offense. But if this is the case in actual offenses, what about matters in
which they were mujtahids (formulating independent decision in legal or theological matters)?
If they were correct in their ijtihad they will receive double reward and if they missed they will
receive one reward and the missing is forgiven for them.
Furthermore, the objectionable amount of their deeds is negligible in comparison to their
virtues; their merit is in belief in Allah and His Messenger, the jihad in His Path, the Hijrah
(emigration) from Makkah to al-Madinah, the support for the Prophet and the faith, the
valuable knowledge and the good deeds. Whoever studies the life of the Sahabah objectively,
with insight and with what Allah bestowed upon them of virtues, will no doubt discover that
they are the best of all people after the Prophet (saw), that there never was and never will be
their like and that indeed they are the choicest of the generations of the 'Ummah which is in
itself the best of all nations and the most honorable in the eyes of Allah,The Exalted.
Ahl Al-Bait (The Prophets Family)
Ahl as-Sunnah should love the Prophet's family, give them support, and honor the Prophet's will
in regard to them, as he said at Ghadir al-Khum: "I ask you by Allah to take care of my family I
ask you by Allah to take care of my family." (Muslim)
[The Prophet] (saw) said to his uncle al-Abbas when he complained to him that some men of
Quraysh resent Banu Hashim (the Prophet's clan):
"By (Allah) in Whose Hands my soul is! They will never be believers until they love you for the
sake of my relationship to you." (Reported by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and others)
The Prophet (saw) said:
"Indeed, Allah chose the sons of Isma'il, and from them He chose Kinanah, and from Kinanah
He chose Quraish, and from Quraish he chose Banu Hashim, and from Banu Hashim He chose
me." (Reported by Muslim and Ibn Hanbal)

www.islambase.tk

- 27 –

'Ummahat Al-Mu'minin (The Prophets Wives)
[Ahl as-Sunnah] should give support to the wives of the Messenger of Allah (saw), the Mothers
of the Believers, and they should believe that they will be his wives in the Hereafter, especially
Khadijah (may Allah be pleased with her) the mother of most of his children, and the first
person to believe in him and give him support, and he respected her very highly.
And [A'ishah], as-Siddiqah, the daughter of [Abu Bakr] as-Siddiq (may Allah be pleased with her
and her father), of whom the Prophet (saw) said:
"A'ishah's superiority over women is like the superiority of ath-Tharid (a dish of sopped bread,
meat and broth) over the rest of the food." (Reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
[Ahl as-Sunnah] should forsake the Rawafid doctrine, those who hate the Prophet's
Companions and revile them.
They should forsake the Nawasib37 doctrine (those who harm the Prophet's Family verbally or
actually).

Karamat Al-Awliya' (The Miracles of the Saints)
Among the fundamentals of the people of the Sunnah and the Community is the belief in the
miracles of the saints (Karamat al- Awliya): Allah created supernatural acts through them in all
aspects of life, revelations (Mukashafat), power, and impressions. This is known of ancient
nations in Surat al-Kahf (chapter 18) and in other Qur'anic chapters and is known of the early
men of this 'Ummah amongst the Sahabah and the Tabi'un and amongst the rest of the
generations of this 'Ummah. It will be with them to the Day of Resurrection.
Some traditionalists believe the victory (al-Fat-h) is the liberation of Makkah. (See Tafsir Ibn
Kathir, VIII, pp.37-39 in his commentary on verse 10 of Suratal-Hadid 57.)
They are: Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, 'Ali, Talhah, Az-Zubair, Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas, Sa'id ibn
Zayd, 'Abd ar-Rahman Ibn 'Awf and Abu 'Ubaidah Ibn al-Jarrah.

www.islambase.tk

- 28 –

THE PATH OF AHL US-SUNNAH WAL-JAMA'AH
Chapter Five

The path of the people of the Sunnah and the Jama'ah is following the Prophet's Tradition both
inwardly and outwardly, and following the foot- steps of the early Muslims, both the Muhajirun
(Emigrants) and the Ansar (Helpers), and following the Prophet's recommendation:

"Hold on to my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the Rightly Guided Caliphs after me. Hold on to it
firmly. And beware of heretical innovations (bida') because each heretical innovation (bid'ah)
is a falsehood and each false- hood is a deviation from the right path." (Reported by Ahmad
Ibn Hanbal Abu Dawud, at-Tirmidhi who said it is a good and sound hadith and Ibn Majah)
The people of the Sunnah know that the most truthful words are Allah's Words over the words
of all people, and they put the guidance of Muhammad (peace be upon him) ahead of the
guidance of all people. Because of all this they are called the People of the Book and the
Sunnah. They are called the People of the Community because community means unity and its
opposite is disunity. The term Jama'ah became a name for the unified people themselves and
al-Ijma' (consensus) is the third pillar on which people depend for 'ilm (knowledge) and din
(faith).
By these three pillars (Qur'an, Sunnah, and Ijma') is measured all that people follow of inward
or outward words and acts which have any relation to din (faith) and to the controlled ijma' of
the righteous ancestors since after them the disagreement increased, and the 'Ummah
dispersed.

www.islambase.tk

- 29 –

BROTHERHOOD AMONG MUSLIMS
Chapter Six

By these fundamentals, then, they bid good deeds and forbid objectionable deeds in
accordance with what the Shari'ah ordains. And they believe in practicing Hajj (pilgrimage) and
Jihad (struggle for the cause of Allah), in attending Friday communal prayers and the holidays
with the leaders, be they pious or wicked, and in observing the community prayers. They
believe in advising the 'Ummah, and they indoctrinate themselves with the Prophet's saying:
"A believer is for a believer just as all the parts of an edifice support each other." (Reported
by al-Bukhari and Muslim)
The Prophet (saw) inter-mixed his fingers while saying this.
And [they indoctrinate themselves with] the saying of [the Prophet] (saw): "The example of
the believers in their affection and compassion and benevolence is like the body; If one part of
it becomes ill the whole body comes to its aid with fever and sleeplessness." (Reported by alBukhari and Muslim)
[Ahl us-Sunnah] bid people persevere when calamity strikes, and are thankful in the time of
life's ease, and are accepting in the fulfillment of Allah's Irreversible Decree. They call on
people to practice noble manners and good deeds, and to indoctrinate themselves with the
Prophet's saying:
"A perfect faith belongs to a believer with good manners." (Reported by Ibn Hanbal and atTirmidhi who said it is good and sound hadith)
[Ahl as-Sunnah] Urge people to mend the relations with those who have broken with them, to
give to those who have deprived them, and to forgive those who have done injustice to them.
They order people to keep filial piety, to be good to other relatives, to be good neighbors, to
treat orphans, wayfarers and the poor kindly and to be gentle and humane to the slave. They
forbid bragging, arrogance and transgression. They prevent people from feeling superior over
others, rightly or wrongly. And they bid people use high manners and prohibit them from
pursuing trifles. All that they say or do of the above, or of other than it, in all of it they follow
the Book (The Qur'an) and the Sunnah. Their "path" is the religion of Islam, for which Allah sent
Muhammad (saw).
But for all this, the Prophet (saw) foretold:
"That his 'Ummah will split into seventy-three factions, all of them in Hell except one: The
Jama'ah (the Community)." (Reported by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal)
And (the Prophet) (saw) said in another hadith:
"They are those who will follow what I am and what my companions are today." (At-Tirmidhi)
Those referred to in this saying, those who hold firmly to pure, unadulterated Islam, became
the people of the Sunnah and the Jama'ah. Amongst them are the Siddiqs, the martyrs, the
righteous, included in them are the cairns of guidance, the lamps for darkness, the masters of
memorable merits, the ever-remembered virtues; Among them are the Abdal38 the Imams
about whose judgment and understanding all Muslims agree. These are the victorious ones
about whom the Prophet (saw) said:

www.islambase.tk

- 30 –

"A group of my 'Ummah will continue to follow the truth prominently. Whoever betrays them
or opposes them can never harm them to the Day of Judgment." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)
Thus, we ask Allah, The Great "to make us part of them, and not to let our hearts swerve after
He has guided us and to bestow on us Mercy from Him. Indeed, He is, The Generous. Allah
knows best."
May Allah's many blessings and greetings be upon Muhammad (saw), his family (ra), and his
companions (ra).

www.islambase.tk

